the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Henry VIII And His Court
A Historical Novel

by Louise Muhlbach


TRANSLATED FROM GERMAN, BY
Rev. H. N. PIERCE, D. D.


CONTENTS.


    I.   Choosing a Confessor
   II.   The Queen and her Friend
  III.   King Henry the Eighth
   IV.   King by the Wrath of God
    V.   The Rivals
   VI.   The Intercession
  VII.   Henry the Eighth and his Wives
 VIII.   Father and Daughter
   IX.   Lendemain
    X.   The King's Fool
   XI.   The Ride
  XII.   The Declaration
 XIII.   "Le Roi s'ennuit"
  XIV.   The Queen's Friend
   XV.   John Heywood
  XVI.   The Confidant
 XVII.   Gammer Gurton's Needle
XVIII.   Lady Jane
  XIX.   Loyola's General
   XX.   The Prisoner
  XXI.   Princess Elizabeth
 XXII.   Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey
XXIII.   Brother and Sister
  XIV.   The Queen's Toilet


CHAPTER I.

CHOOSING A CONFESSOR.


It was in the year 1543. King Henry the Eighth of England that day
once more pronounced himself the happiest and most enviable man in
his kingdom, for to-day he was once more a bridegroom, and Catharine
Parr, the youthful widow of Baron Latimer, had the perilous
happiness of being selected as the king's sixth consort.

Merrily chimed the bells of all the steeples of London, announcing
to the people the commencement of that holy ceremony which sacredly
bound Catharine Parr to the king as his sixth wife. The people, ever
fond of novelty and show, crowded through the streets toward the
royal palace to catch a sight of Catharine, when she appeared at her
husband's side upon the balcony, to show herself to the English
people as their queen, and to receive their homage in return.

Surely it was a proud and lofty success for the widow of a petty
baron to become the lawful wife of the King of England, and to wear
upon her brow a royal crown! But yet Catharine Parr's heart was
moved with a strange fear, her cheeks were pale and cold, and before
the altar her closely compressed lips scarcely had the power to
part, and pronounce the binding "I will."

At last the sacred ceremony was completed. The two spiritual
dignitaries, Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, and Cranmer, archbishop
of Canterbury, then, in accordance with court etiquette, led the
young bride into her apartments, in order to bless them, and once
more to pray with her, before the worldly festivities should begin.

Catharine, however, pale and agitated, had yet sustained her part in
the various ceremonies of the day with a true queenly bearing and
dignity; and, as now with head proudly erect and firm step, she
walked with a bishop at either side through the splendid apartments,
no one suspected how heavy a burden weighed upon her heart, and what
baleful voices were whispering in her breast.

Followed by her new court, she had traversed with her companions the
state apartments, and now reached the inner rooms. Here, according
to the etiquette of the time, she must dismiss her court, and only
the two bishops and her ladies of honor were permitted to accompany
the queen into the drawing-room. But farther than this chamber even
the bishops themselves might not follow her. The king himself had
written down the order for the day, and he who swerved from this
order in the most insignificant point would have been proclaimed
guilty of high treason, and perhaps have been led out to death.

Catharine, therefore, turned with a languid smile to the two high
ecclesiastics, and requested them to await here her summons. Then
beckoning to her ladies of honor, she withdrew into her boudoir.

The two bishops remained by themselves in the drawing-room. The
circumstance of their being alone seemed to impress them both alike
and unpleasantly; for a dark scowl gathered on the brows of both,
and they withdrew, as if at a concerted signal, to the opposite
sides of the spacious apartment.

A long pause ensued. Nothing was heard save the regular ticking of a
large clock of rare workmanship which stood over the fireplace, and
from the street afar off, the rejoicing of the people, who surged
toward the palace like a roaring sea.

Gardiner had stepped to the window, and was looking up with his
peculiar dark smile at the clouds which, driven by the tempest, were
sweeping across the heavens.

Cranmer stood by the wall on the opposite side, and sunk in sad
thoughts, was contemplating a large portrait of Henry the Eighth,
the masterly production of Holbein. As he gazed on that countenance,
indicative at once of so much dignity and so much ferocity; as he
contemplated those eyes which shone with such gloomy severity, those
lips on which was a smile at once voluptuous and fierce, there came
over him a feeling of deep sympathy with the young woman whom he had
that day devoted to such splendid misery. He reflected that he had,
in like manner, already conducted two wives of the king to the
marriage altar, and had blessed their union. But he reflected, too,
that he had also, afterward, attended both these queens when they
ascended the scaffold.

How easily might this pitiable young wife of the king fall a victim
to the same dark fate! How easily might Catharine Parr, like Anne
Boleyn and Catharine Howard, purchase her short-lived glory with an
ignominious death! At any time an inconsiderate word, a look, a
smile, might be her ruin. For the king's choler and jealousy were
incalculable, and, to his cruelty, no punishment seemed too severe
for those by whom he fancied himself injured.

Such were the thoughts which occupied Bishop Cranmer. They softened
him, and caused the dark wrinkles to disappear from his brow.

He now smiled to himself at the ill-humor which he had felt shortly
before, and upbraided himself for having been so little mindful of
his holy calling, and for having exhibited so little readiness to
meet his enemy in a conciliating spirit.

For Gardiner was his enemy; that Cranmer very well knew. Gardiner
had often enough showed him this by his deeds, as he had also taken
pains by his words to assure him of his friendship.

But even if Gardiner hated him, it did not therefore follow that
Cranmer was obliged to return that hatred; that he should denominate
him his enemy, whom he, in virtue of their mutual high calling, was
bound to honor and love as his brother.

The noble Cranmer was, therefore, ashamed of his momentary ill-
humor. A gentle smile lighted up his peaceful countenance. With an
air at once dignified and friendly, he crossed the room and
approached the Bishop of Winchester.

Lord Gardiner turned toward him with morose looks, and, without
advancing from the embrasure of the window in which he was standing,
waited for Cranmer to advance to him. As he looked into that noble,
smiling countenance, he had a feeling as if he must raise his fist
and dash it into the face of this man, who had the boldness to wish
to be his equal, and to contend with him for fame and honor.

But he reflected in good time that Cranmer was still the king's
favorite, and therefore he must proceed to work against him with
great caution.

So he forced these fierce thoughts back into his heart, and let his
face again assume its wonted grave and impenetrable expression.

Cranmer now stood close before him, and his bright, beaming eye was
fixed upon Gardiner's sullen countenance.

"I come to your highness," said Cranmer, in his gentle, pleasant
voice, "to say to you that I wish with my whole heart the queen may
choose you for her confessor and spiritual director, and to assure
you that, should this be the case, there will not be in my soul, on
that account, the least rancor, or the slightest dissatisfaction. I
shall fully comprehend it, if her majesty chooses the distinguished
and eminent Bishop of Winchester as her confessor, and the esteem
and admiration which I entertain for you can only be enhanced
thereby. In confirmation of this, permit me to offer you my hand."
He presented his hand to Gardiner, who, however, took it reluctantly
and but for a moment.

"Your highness is very noble, and at the same time a very subtle
diplomatist, for you only wish in an adroit and ingenious way to
give me to understand how I am to act should the queen choose you
for her spiritual director. But that she will do so, you know as
well as I. It is, therefore, for me only a humiliation which
etiquette imposes when she compels me to stand here and wait to see
whether I shall be chosen, or contemptuously thrust aside."

"Why will you look at matters in so unfriendly a light?" said
Cranmer, gently. "Wherefore will you consider it a mark of contempt,
if you are not chosen to an office to which, indeed, neither merit
nor worthiness can call us, but only the personal confidence of a
young woman?"

"Oh! you admit that I shall not be chosen?" cried Gardiner, with a
malicious smile.

"I have already told you that I am wholly uninformed as to the
queen's wish, and I think it is known that the Bishop of Canterbury
is wont to speak the truth."

"Certainly that is known, but it is known also that Catharine Parr
was a warm admirer of the Bishop of Canterbury; and now that she has
gained her end and become queen, she will make it her duty to show
her gratitude to him."

"You would by that insinuate that I have made her queen. But I
assure your highness, that here also, as in so many other matters
which relate to myself, you are falsely informed."

"Possibly!" said Gardiner, coldly. "At any rate, it is certain that
the young queen is an ardent advocate of the abominable new doctrine
which, like the plague, has spread itself from Germany over all
Europe and scattered mischief and ruin through all Christendom. Yes,
Catharine Parr, the present queen, leans to that heretic against
whom the Holy Father at Rome has hurled his crushing anathema. She
is an adherent of the Reformation."

"You forget," said Cranmer, with an arch smile, "that this anathema
was hurled against the head of our king also, and that it has shown
itself equally ineffectual against Henry the Eighth as against
Luther. Besides, I might remind you that we no longer call the Pope
of Rome, 'Holy Father,' and that you yourself have recognized the
king as the head of our church."

Gardiner turned away his face in order to conceal the vexation and
rage which distorted his features. He felt that he had gone too far,
that he had betrayed too much of the secret thoughts of his soul.
But he could not always control his violent and passionate nature;
and however much a man of the world and diplomatist he might be,
still there were moments when the fanatical priest got the better of
the man of the world, and the diplomat was forced to give way to the
minister of the church.

Cranmer pitied Gardiner's confusion, and, following the native
goodness of his heart, he said pleasantly: "Let us not strive here
about dogmas, nor attempt to determine whether Luther or the pope is
most in the wrong. We stand here in the chamber of the young queen.
Let us, therefore, occupy ourselves a little with the destiny of
this young woman whom God has chosen for so brilliant a lot."

"Brilliant?" said Gardiner, shrugging his shoulders. "Let us first
wait for the termination of her career, and then decide whether it
has been brilliant. Many a queen before this has fancied that she
was resting on a couch of myrtles and roses, and has suddenly become
conscious that she was lying on a red-hot gridiron, which consumed
her."

"It is true," murmured Cranmer, with a slight shudder, "it is a
dangerous lot to be the king's consort. But just on that account let
us not make the perils of her position still greater, by adding to
them our own enmity and hate. Just on that account I beg you (and on
my part I pledge you my word for it) that, let the choice of the
queen be as it may, there may be no feeling of anger, and no desire
for revenge in consequence. My God, the poor women are such odd
beings, so unaccountable in their wishes and in their inclinations!"

"Ah! it seems you know the women very intimately," cried Gardiner,
with a malicious laugh. "Verily, were you not Archbishop of
Canterbury, and had not the king prohibited the marriage of
ecclesiastics as a very grave crime, one might suppose that you had
a wife yourself, and had gained from her a thorough knowledge of
female character."

Cranmer, somewhat embarrassed, turned away, and seemed to evade
Gardiner's piercing look. "We are not speaking of myself," said he
at length, "but of the young queen, and I entreat for her your good
wishes. I have seen her to-day almost for the first time, and have
never spoken with her, but her countenance has touchingly impressed
me, and it appeared to me, her looks besought us to remain at her
side, ready to help her on this difficult pathway, which five wives
have already trod before her, and in which they found only misery
and tears, disgrace, and blood."

"Let Catharine beware then that she does not forsake the right way,
as her five predecessors have done!" exclaimed Gardiner. "May she be
prudent and cautious, and may she be enlightened by God, that she
may hold the true faith, and have true wisdom, and not allow herself
to be seduced into the crooked path of the godless and heretical,
but remain faithful and steadfast with those of the true faith!"

"Who can say who are of the true faith?" murmured Cranmer, sadly.
"There are so many paths leading to heaven, who knows which is the
right one?"

"That which we tread!" cried Gardiner, with all the overweening
pride of a minister of the church. "Woe to the queen should she take
any other road! Woe to her if she lends her ear to the false
doctrines which come ringing over here from Germany and Switzerland,
and in the worldly prudence of her heart imagines that she can rest
secure! I will he her most faithful and zealous servant, if she is
with me; I will be her most implacable enemy if she is against me."

"And will you call it being against you, if the queen does not
choose you for her confessor?"

"Will you ask me to call it, being for me?"

"Now God grant that she may choose you!" exclaimed Cranmer,
fervently, as he clasped his hands and raised his eyes to heaven.
"Poor, unfortunate queen! The first proof of thy husband's love may
be thy first misfortune! Why gave he thee the liberty of choosing
thine own spiritual director? Why did he not choose for thee?"

And Cranmer dropped his head upon his breast, and sighed deeply.

At this instant the door of the royal chamber opened, and Lady Jane,
daughter of Earl Douglas, and first maid of honor to the queen, made
her appearance on the threshold. Both bishops regarded her in
breathless silence. It was a serious, a solemn moment, the deep
importance of which was very well comprehended by all three.

"Her majesty the queen," said Lady Jane, in an agitated voice, "her
majesty requests the presence of Lord Cranmer, archbishop of
Canterbury, in her cabinet, in order that she may perform her
devotions with him."

"Poor queen!" murmured Cranmer, as he crossed the room to go to
Catharine--"poor queen! she has just made an implacable enemy."

Lady Jane waited till Cranmer had disappeared through the door, then
hastened with eager steps to the bishop of Winchester, and dropping
on her knee, humbly said, "Grace, your highness, grace! My words
were in vain, and were not able to shake her resolution."

Gardiner raised up the kneeling maiden, and forced a smile. "It is
well," said he, "I doubt not of your zeal. You are a true handmaid
of the church, and she will love and reward you for it as a mother!
It is then decided. The queen is--"

"Is a heretic," whispered Lady Jane. "Woe to her!"

"And will you be true, and will you faithfully adhere to us?"

"True, in every thought of my being, and every drop of my heart's
blood."

"So shall we overcome Catharine Parr, as we overcame Catharine
Howard. To the block with the heretic! We found means of bringing
Catharine Howard to the scaffold; you, Lady Jane, must find the
means of leading Catharine Parr the same way."

"I will find them," said Lady Jane, quietly. "She loves and trusts
me. I will betray her friendship in order to remain true to my
religion."

"Catharine Parr then is lost," said Gardiner, aloud.

"Yes, she is lost," responded Earl Douglas, who had just entered,
and caught the last words of the bishop. "Yes, she is lost, for we
are her inexorable and ever-vigilant enemies. But I deem it not
altogether prudent to utter words like these in the queen's drawing-
room. Let us therefore choose a more favorable hour. Besides, your
highness, you must betake yourself to the grand reception-hall,
where the whole court is already assembled, and now only awaits the
king to go in formal procession for the young queen, and conduct her
to the balcony. Let us go, then."

Gardiner nodded in silence, and betook himself to the reception-
hall.

Earl Douglas with his daughter followed him. "Catharine Parr is
lost," whispered he in Lady Jane's ear. "Catharine Parr is lost, and
you shall be the king's seventh wife."

Whilst this was passing in the drawing-room, the young queen was on
her knees before Cranmer, and with him sending up to God fervent
prayers for prosperity and peace. Tears filled her eyes, and her
heart trembled as if before some approaching calamity.


CHAPTER II

THE QUEEN AND HER FRIEND


At last this long day of ceremonies and festivities drew near its
close, and Catharine might soon hope to be, for the time, relieved
from this endless presenting and smiling, from this ever-renewed
homage.

At her husband's side she had shown herself on the balcony to
receive the greetings of the people, and to bow her thanks. Then in
the spacious audience-chamber her newly appointed court had passed
before her in formal procession, and she had exchanged a few
meaningless, friendly words with each of these lords and ladies.
Afterward she had, at her husband's side, given audience to the
deputations from the city and from Parliament. But it was only with
a secret shudder that she had received from their lips the same
congratulations and praises with which the authorities had already
greeted five other wives of the king.

Still she had been able to smile and seem happy, for she well knew
that the king's eye was never off of her, and that all these lords
and ladies who now met her with such deference, and with homage
apparently so sincere, were yet, in truth, all her bitter enemies.
For by her marriage she had destroyed so many hopes, she had pushed
aside so many who believed themselves better fitted to assume the
lofty position of queen! She knew that these victims of
disappointment would never forgive her this; that she, who was but
yesterday their equal, had to-day soared above them as queen and
mistress; she knew that all these were watching with spying eyes her
every word and action, in order, it might be, to forge therefrom an
accusation or a death-warrant.

But nevertheless she smiled! She smiled, though she felt that the
choler of the king, so easily kindled and so cruelly vindictive,
ever swung over her head like the sword of Damocles.

She smiled, so that this sword might not fall upon her.

At length all these presentations, this homage and rejoicing were
well over, and they came to the more agreeable and satisfactory part
of the feast.

They went to dinner. That was Catharine's first moment of respite,
of rest. For when Henry the Eighth seated himself at table, he was
no longer the haughty monarch and the jealous husband, but merely
the proficient artiste and the impassioned gourmand; and whether the
pastry was well seasoned, and the pheasant of good flavor, was for
him then a far more important question than any concerning the weal
of his people, and the prosperity of his kingdom.

But after dinner came another respite, a new enjoyment, and this
time a more real one, which indeed for a while banished all gloomy
forebodings and melancholy fears from Catharine's heart, and
suffused her countenance with the rosy radiance of cheerfulness and
happy smiles. For King Henry had prepared for his young wife a
peculiar and altogether novel surprise. He had caused to be erected
in the palace of Whitehall a stage, whereon was represented, by the
nobles of the court, a comedy from Plautus. Heretofore there had
been no other theatrical exhibitions than those which the people
performed on the high festivals of the church, the morality and the
mystery plays. King Henry the Eighth was the first who had a stage
erected for worldly amusement likewise, and caused to be represented
on it subjects other than mere dramatized church history. As he
freed the church from its spiritual head, the pope, so he wished to
free the stage from the church, and to behold upon it other more
lively spectacles than the roasting of saints and the massacre of
inspired nuns.

And why, too, represent such mock tragedies on the stage, when the
king was daily performing them in reality? The burning of Christian
martyrs and inspired virgins was, under the reign of the Christian
king Henry, such a usual and every-day occurrence, that it could
afford a piquant entertainment neither to the court nor to himself.

But the representation of a Roman comedy, that, however, was a new
and piquant pleasure, a surprise for the young queen. He had the
"Curculio" played before his wife, and if Catharine indeed could
listen to the licentious and shameless jests of the popular Roman
poet only with bashful blushes, Henry was so much the more delighted
by it, and accompanied the obscenest allusions and the most indecent
jests with his uproarious laughter and loud shouts of applause.

At length this festivity was also over with, and Catharine was now
permitted to retire with her attendants to her private apartments.

With a pleasant smile, she dismissed her cavaliers, and bade her
women and her second maid of honor, Anna Askew, go into her boudoir
and await her call. Then she gave her arm to her friend Lady Jane
Douglas, and with her entered her cabinet.

At last she was alone, at last unwatched. The smile disappeared from
her face, and an expression of deep sadness was stamped upon her
features.

"Jane," said she, "pray thee shut the doors and draw the window
curtains, so that nobody can see me, nobody hear me, no one except
yourself, my friend, the companion of my happy childhood. Oh, my
God, my God, why was I so foolish as to leave my father's quiet,
lonely castle and go out into the world, which is so full of terror
and horror?"

She sighed and groaned deeply; and burying her face in her hands,
she sank upon the ottoman, weeping and trembling.

Lady Jane observed her with a peculiar smile of malicious
satisfaction.

"She is queen and she weeps," said she to herself. "My God, how can
a woman possibly feel unhappy, and she a queen?"

She approached Catharine, and, seating herself on the tabouret at
her feet, she impressed a fervent kiss on the queen's drooping hand.

"Your majesty weeping!" said she, in her most insinuating tone. "My
God, you are then unhappy; and I received with a loud cry of joy the
news of my friend's unexpected good fortune. I thought to meet a
queen, proud, happy, and radiant with joy; and I was anxious and
fearful lest the queen might have ceased to be my friend. Wherefore
I urged my father, as soon as your command reached us, to leave
Dublin and hasten with me hither. Oh, my God! I wished to see you in
your happiness and in your greatness."

Catharine removed her hands from her face, and looked down at her
friend with a sorrowful smile. "Well," said she, "are you not
satisfied with what you have seen? Have I not the whole day
displayed to you the smiling queen, worn a dress embroidered with
gold? did not my neck glitter with diamonds? did not the royal
diadem shine in my hair? and sat not the king by my side? Let that,
then, be sufficient for the present. You have seen the queen all day
long. Allow me now for one brief, happy moment to be again the
feeling, sensitive woman, who can pour into the bosom of her friend
all her complaint and her wretchedness. Ah, Jane, if you knew how I
have longed for this hour, how I have sighed after you as the only
balm for my poor smitten heart, smitten even to death, how I have
implored Heaven for this day, for this one thing--'Give me back my
Jane, so that she can weep with me, so that I may have one being at
my side who understands me, and does not allow herself to be imposed
upon by the wretched splendor of this outward display!'"

"Poor Catharine!" whispered Lady Jane, "poor queen!"

Catharine started and laid her hand, sparkling with brilliants, on
Jane's lips. "Call me not thus!" said she. "Queen! My God, is not
all the fearful past heard again in that word? Queen! Is it not as
much as to say, condemned to the scaffold and a public criminal
trial? Ah, Jane! a deadly tremor runs through my members. I am Henry
the Eighth's sixth queen; I shall also be executed, or, loaded with
disgrace, be repudiated."

Again she hid her face in her hands, and her whole frame shook; so
she saw not the smile of malicious satisfaction with which Lady Jane
again observed her. She suspected not with what secret delight her
friend heard her lamentations and sighs.

"Oh! I am at least revenged!" thought Jane, while she lovingly
stroked the queen's hair. "Yes, I am revenged! She has robbed me of
a crown, but she is wretched; and in the golden goblet which she
presses to her lips she will find nothing but wormwood! Now, if this
sixth queen dies not on the scaffold, still we may perhaps so work
it that she dies of anxiety, or deems it a pleasure to be able to
lay down again her royal crown at Henry's feet."

Then said she aloud: "But why these fears, Catharine? The king loves
you; the whole court has seen with what tender and ardent looks he
has regarded you to-day, and with what delight he has listened to
your every word. Certainly the king loves you."

Catharine seized her hand impulsively. "The king loves me,"
whispered she, "and I, I tremble before him. Yes, more than that,
his love fills me with horror! His hands are dipped in blood, and as
I saw him to-day in his crimson robes I shuddered, and I thought,
How soon, and my blood, too, will dye this crimson!"

Jane smiled. "You are sick, Catharine," said she. "This good fortune
has taken you by surprise, and your overstrained nerves now depict
before you all sorts of frightful forms. That is all."

"No, no, Jane; these thoughts have ever been with me. They have
attended me ever since the king selected me for his wife."

"And why, then, did you not refuse him?" asked Lady Jane. "Why did
you not say 'no' to the king's suit?"

"Why did I not do it, ask you? Ah, Jane, are you such a stranger at
this court as not to know, then, that one must either fulfil the
king's behests or die? My God, they envy me! They call me the
greatest and most potent woman of England. They know not that I am
poorer and more powerless than the beggar of the street, who at
least has the power to refuse whom she will. I could not refuse. I
must either die or accept the royal hand which was extended to me;
and I would not die yet, I have still so many claims on life, and it
has hitherto made good so few of them! Ah, my poor, hapless
existence! what has it been, but an endless chain of renunciations
and deprivations, of leafless flowers and dissolving views? It is
true, I have never learned to know what is usually called
misfortune. But is there a greater misfortune than not to be happy;
than to sigh through a life without wish or hope; to wear away the
endless, weary days of an existence without delight, yet surrounded
with luxury and splendor?"

"You were not unfortunate, and yet you are an orphan, fatherless and
motherless?"

"I lost my mother so early that I scarcely knew her. And when my
father died I could hardly consider it other than a blessing, for he
had never shown himself a father, but always only as a harsh,
tyrannical master to me."

"But you were married?"

"Married!" said Catharine, with a melancholy smile. "That is to say,
my father sold me to a gouty old man, on whose couch I spent a few
comfortless, awfully wearisome years, till Lord Neville made me a
rich widow. But what did my independence avail me, when I had bound
myself in new fetters? Hitherto I had been the slave of my father,
of my husband; now I was the slave of my wealth. I ceased to be a
sick-nurse to become steward of my estate. Ah! this was the most
tedious period of my life. And yet I owe to it my only real
happiness, for at that period I became acquainted with you, my Jane,
and my heart, which had never yet learned to know a tenderer
feeling, flew to you with all the impetuosity of a first passion.
Believe me, my Jane, when this long-missing nephew of my husband
came and snatched away from me his hereditary estate, and, as the
lord, took possession of it, then the thought that I must leave you
and your father, the neighboring proprietor, was my only grief. Men
commiserated me on account of my lost property. I thanked God that
He had relieved me of this load, and I started for London, that I
might at last live and feel, that I might learn to know real
happiness or real misery."

"And what did you find?"

"Misery, Jane, for I am queen."

"Is that your sole unhappiness?"

"My only one, but it is great enough, for it condemns me to eternal
anxiety, to eternal dissimulation. It condemns me to feign a love
which I do not feel, to endure caresses which make me shudder,
because they are an inheritance from five unfortunate women. Jane,
Jane, do you comprehend what it is to be obliged to embrace a man
who has murdered three wives and put away two? to be obliged to kiss
this king whose lips open just as readily to utter vows of love as
sentences of death? Ah, Jane, I speak, I live, and still I suffer
all the agonies of death! They call me a queen, and yet I tremble
for my life every hour, and conceal my anxiety and fear beneath the
appearance of happiness! My God, I am five-and-twenty, and my heart
is still the heart of a child; it does not yet know itself, and now
it is doomed never to learn to know itself; for I am Henry's wife,
and to love another is, in other words, to wish to mount the
scaffold. The scaffold! Look, Jane. When the king approached me and
confessed his love and offered me his hand, suddenly there rose
before me a fearful picture. It was no more the king whom I saw
before me, but the hangman; and it seemed to me that I saw three
corpses lying at his feet, and with a loud scream I sank senseless
before him. When I revived, the king was holding me in his arms. The
shock of this unexpected good fortune, he thought, had made me
faint. He kissed me and called me his bride; he thought not for a
moment that I could refuse him. And I--despise me, Jane--I was such
a dastard, that I could not summon up courage for a downright
refusal. Yes, I was so craven also, as to be unwilling to die. Ah,
my God, it appeared to me that life at that moment beckoned to me
with thousands of joys, thousands of charms, which I had never
known, and for which my soul thirsted as for the manna in the
wilderness. I would live, live at any cost. I would gain myself a
respite, so that I might once more share happiness, love, and
enjoyment. Look, Jane, men call me ambitious. They say I have given
my hand to Henry because he is king. Ah, they know not how I
shuddered at this royal crown. They know not that in anguish of
heart I besought the king not to bestow his hand upon me, and
thereby rouse all the ladies of his kingdom as foes against me. They
know not that I confessed that I loved him, merely that I might be
able to add that I was ready, out of love to him, to sacrifice my
own happiness to his, and so conjured him to choose a consort worthy
of himself, from the hereditary princesses of Europe. [Footnote: "La
vie d'Elizabeth, Reine d'Angleterre, traduite de l'Italien de
Monsieur Gregoire Leti," vol. ii. Amsterdam, 1694] But Henry
rejected my sacrifice. He wished to make a queen, in order to
possess a wife, who may be his own property--whose blood, as her
lord and master, he can shed. So I am queen. I have accepted my lot,
and henceforth my existence will be a ceaseless struggle and
wrestling with death. I will at least sell my life as dearly as
possible; and the maxim which Cranmer has given me shall hereafter
be my guide on the thorny path of life."

"And how runs this maxim?" asked Jane.

"Be wise as serpents and harmless as doves," replied Catharine, with
a languid smile, as she dropped her head upon her breast and
surrendered herself to her painful and foreboding reflections.

Lady Jane stood opposite to her, and gazed with cruel composure upon
the painfully convulsed countenance and at times violently trembling
form of the young queen for whom all England that day kept festival,
and who yet was sitting before her so wretched and full of sorrow.

Suddenly Catharine raised her head. Her countenance had now assumed
an entirely different expression. It was now firm, resolute, and
dauntless. With a slight inclination of the head she extended her
hand to Lady Jane, and drew her friend more closely to her.

"I thank you, Jane," said she, as she imprinted a kiss upon her
forehead--"I thank you! You have done my heart good and relieved it
of its oppressive load of secret anguish. He who can give his grief
utterance, is already half cured of it. I thank you, then, Jane!
Henceforth, you will find me calm and cheerful. The woman has wept
before you, but the queen is aware that she has a task to accomplish
as difficult as it is noble, and I give you my word for it, she will
accomplish it. The new light which has risen on the world shall no
more be dimmed by blood and tears, and no more in this unhappy land
shall men of sense and piety be condemned as insurgents and
traitors! This is the task which God has set me, and I swear that I
will accomplish it! Will you help me in this, too, Jane?"

Lady Jane responded faintly in a few words, which Catharine did not
understand, and as she looked up to her, she noticed, with
astonishment, the corpse-like pallor which had suddenly overspread
the countenance of her maid of honor.

Catharine gave a start, and fixed on her face a surprised and
searching look.

Lady Jane cast down her eyes before that searching and flashing
glance. Her fanaticism had for the moment got the better of her, and
much as she was wont at other times to hide her thoughts and
feelings, it had, at that moment, carried her away and betrayed her
to the keen eye of her friend.

"It is now a long while since we saw each other," said Catharine,
sadly. "Three years! It is a long time for a young girl's heart! And
you were those three years with your father in Dublin, at that
rigidly popish court. I did not consider that! But however much your
opinions may have changed, your heart, I know, still remains the
same, and you will ever be the proud, high-minded Jane of former
days, who could never stoop to tell a lie--no, not even if this lie
would procure her profit and glory. I ask you then, Jane, what is
your religion? Do you believe in the Pope of Rome, and the Church of
Rome as the only channel of salvation? or do you follow the new
teaching which Luther and Calvin have promulgated?"

Lady Jane smiled. "Would I have risked appearing before you, if I
still reckoned myself of the Roman Catholic Church? Catharine Parr
is hailed by the Protestants of England as the new patroness of the
persecuted doctrine, and already the Romish priests hurl their
anathemas against you, and execrate you and your dangerous presence
here. And you ask me, whether I am an adherent of that church which
maligns and damns you? You ask me whether I believe in the pope, who
has laid the king under an interdict--the king, who is not only my
lord and master, but also the husband of my precious and noble
Catharine? Oh, queen, you love me not when you can address such a
question to me."

And as if overcome by painful emotion, Lady Jane sank down at
Catharine's feet, and hid her head in the folds of the queen's robe.

Catharine bent down to raise her and take her to her heart. Suddenly
she started, and a deathly paleness overspread her face. "The king,"
whispered she, "the king is coming!"


CHAPTER III.

KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.


Catharine was not deceived. The doors were opened, and on the
threshold appeared the lord marshal, with his golden mace.

"His majesty the king!" whispered he, in his grave, solemn manner,
which filled Catharine with secret dread, as though he were
pronouncing the sentence of death over her.

But she forced a smile and advanced to the door to receive the king.
Now was heard a thunder-like rumble, and over the smoothly carpeted
floor of the anteroom came rolling on the king's house equipage.
This house equipage consisted of a large chair, resting on castors,
which was moved by men in the place of horses, and to which they
had, with artful flattery, given the form of a triumphal car of the
old victorious Roman Caesars, in order to afford the king, as he
rolled through the halls, the pleasant illusion that he was holding
a triumphal procession, and that it was not the burden of his heavy
limbs which fastened him to his imperial car. King Henry gave ready
credence to the flattery of his truckle-chair and his courtiers, and
as he rolled along in it through the saloons glittering with gold,
and through halls adorned with Venetian mirrors, which reflected his
form a thousandfold, he liked to lull himself into the dream of
being a triumphing hero, and wholly forgot that it was not his
deeds, but his fat, that had helped him to his triumphal car.

For that monstrous mass which filled up the colossal chair, that
mountain of purple-clad flesh, that clumsy, almost shapeless mass,
that was Henry the Eighth, king of merry England. But thae mass had
a head--a head full of dark and wrathful thoughts, a heart full of
bloodthirsty and cruel lusts. The colossal body was indeed, by its
physical weight, fastened to the chair. Yet his mind never rested,
but he hovered, with the talons and flashing eye of the bird of
prey, over his people, ever ready to pounce upon some innocent dove,
to drink her blood, and tear out her heart, that he might lay it,
all palpitating, as an offering on the altar of his sanguinary god.

The king's sedan now stopped, and Catharine hastened forward with
smiling face, to assist her royal husband in alighting.

Henry greeted her with a gracious nod, and rejected the proffered
aid of the attendant pages.

"Away," said he, "away! My Catharine alone shall extend me her hand,
and give me a welcome to the bridal chamber. Go, we feel to-day as
young and strong as in our best and happiest days, and the young
queen shall see that it is no decrepit graybeard, tottering with
age, who woos her, but a strong man rejuvenated by love. Think not,
Kate, that I use my car because of weakness. No, it was only my
longing for you which made me wish to be with you the sooner."

He kissed her with a smile, and, lightly leaning on her arm,
alighted from his car.

"Away with the equipage, and with all of you!" said he. "We wish to
be alone with this beautiful young wife, whom the lord bishops have
to-day made our own."

At a signal from his hand, the brilliant cortege withdrew, and
Catharine was alone with the king.

Her heart beat so wildly that it made her lips tremble, and her
bosom swell high.

Henry saw it, and smiled; but it was a cold, cruel smile, and
Catharine grew pale before it.

"He has only the smile of a tyrant," said she to herself. "With this
same smile, by which he would now give expression to his love, he
yesterday, perhaps, signed a death-warrant, or will, to-morrow,
witness an execution."

"Do you love me, Kate?" suddenly said the king, who had till now
observed her in silence and thoughtfulness. "Say, Kate, do you love
me?"

He looked steadily into her eyes, as though he would read her soul
to the very bottom.

Catharine sustained his look, and did not drop her eyes. She felt
that this was the decisive moment which determined her whole future;
and this conviction restored to her all her self-possession and
energy.

She was now no longer the shy, timid girl, but the resolute, proud
woman, who was ready to wrestle with fate for greatness and glory.

"Do you love me, Kate?" repeated the king; and his brow already
began to darken.

"I know not," said Catharine, with a smile, which enchanted the
king, for there was quite as much graceful coquetry as bashfulness
on her charming face.

"You know not?" replied Henry, astonished. "Now, by the Mother of
God, it is the first time in my life that a woman has ever been bold
enough to return me such an answer! You are a bold woman, Kate, to
hazard it, and I praise you for it. I love bravery, because it is
something I so rarely see. They all tremble before me, Kate--all!
They know that I am not intimidated by blood, and in the might of my
royalty I subscribe a death-warrant with the same calmness of soul
as a love-letter."

"Oh, you are a great king," murmured Catharine. Henry did not notice
her. He was wholly buried in one of those self-contemplations to
which he so willingly surrendered himself, and which generally had
for their subject his own greatness and superbility.

"Yes," continued he, and his eyes, which, in spite of his corpulency
and his extremely fleshy face, were yet large and wide open, shone
more brightly. "Yes, they all tremble before me, for they know that
I am a righteous and powerful king, who spares not his own blood, if
it is necessary to punish and expiate crime, and with inexorable
hand punishes the sinner, though he were the nearest to the throne.
Take heed to yourself, therefore, Kate, take heed to yourself. You
behold in me the avenger of God, and the judge of men. The king
wears the crimson, not because it is beautiful and glossy, but
because it is red like blood, and because it is the king's highest
prerogative to shed the blood of his delinquent subjects, and
thereby expiate human crime. Thus only do I conceive of royalty, and
thus only will I carry it out till the end of my days. Not the right
to pardon, but the right to punish, is that whereby the ruler
manifests himself before the lower classes of mankind. God's thunder
should be on his lips, and the king's wrath should descend like
lightning on the head of the guilty."

"But God is not only wrathful, but also merciful and forgiving,"
said Catharine, as she lightly and shyly leaned her head on the
king's shoulder.

"Just that is the prerogative of God above kings; that He can, as it
pleases Him, show mercy and grace, where we can only condemn and
punish. There must be something in which God is superior to kings,
and greater than they. But how, Kate, you tremble, and the lovely
smile has vanished from your countenance! Be not afraid of me, Kate!
Be always frank with me, and without deceit; then I shall always
love you, and iniquity will then have no power over you. And now,
Kate, tell me, and explain to me. You do not know that you love me?"

"No, I do not know, your majesty. And how should I be able to
recognize, and know, and designate by name what is strange to me,
and what I have never before felt?"

"How, you have never loved, Kate?" asked the king with a joyful
expression.

"Never. My father maltreated me, so that I could feel for him
nothing but dread and terror."

"And your husband, child? That man who was my predecessor in the
possession of you. Did you not love your husband either?"

"My husband?" asked she abstractedly. "It is true, my father sold me
to Lord Neville, and as the priest had joined our hands, men called
him my husband. But he very well knew that I did not love him, nor
did he require my love. He needed a nurse, not a wife. He had given
me his name as a father gives his to a daughter; and I was his
daughter, a true, faithful, and obedient daughter, who joyfully
fulfilled her duty and tended him till his death."

"And after his death, child? Years have elapsed since then, Kate.
Tell me, and I conjure you, tell me the truth, the simple, plain
truth! After the death of your husband, then even, did you never
love?"

He gazed with visible anxiety, with breathless expectation, deep
into her eyes; but she did not drop them.

"Sire," said she, with a charming smile, "till a few weeks past, I
have often mourned over myself; and it seemed to me that I must, in
the desperation of my singular and cold nature, lay open my breast,
in order to search there for the heart, which, senseless and cold,
had never betrayed its existence by its stronger beating. Oh, sire,
I was full of trouble about myself; and in my foolish rashness, I
accused Heaven of having robbed me of the noblest feeling and the
fairest privilege of any woman--the capacity of loving."

"Till the past few weeks, did you say, Kate?" asked the king,
breathless with emotion.

"Yes, sire, until the day on which you, for the first time,
graciously afforded me the happiness of speaking with me."

The king uttered a low cry, and drew Catharine, with impetuous
vehemence, into his arms.

"And since, tell me now, you dear little dove, since then, does your
heart throb?"

"Yes, sire, it throbs, oh, it often throbs to bursting! When I hear
your voice, when I behold your countenance, it is as if a cold
tremor rilled through my whole being, and drove all my blood to the
heart. It is as though my heart anticipated your approach before my
eyes discern you. For even before you draw near me, I feel a
peculiar trembling of the heart, and the breath is stifled in my
bosom; then I always know that you are coming, and that your
presence will relieve this peculiar tension of my being. When you
are not by me I think of you, and when I sleep I dream of you. Tell
me, sire, you who know every thing, tell me, know you now whether I
love you?"

"Yes, yes, you love me," cried Henry, to whom this strange and
joyous surprise had imparted youthful vivacity and warmth. "Yes,
Kate, you love me; and if I may trust your dear confession, I am
your first love. Repeat it yet again; you were nothing but a
daughter to Lord Neville?"

"Nothing more, sire!"

"And after him have you had no love?"

"None, sire!"

"And can it be that so happy a marvel has come to pass? and that I
have made, not a widow, but a young maiden, my queen?"

As he now gazed at her with warm, passionate, tender looks,
Catharine cast down her eyes, and a deep blush covered her sweet
face.

"Ah, a woman's bashful blushes, what an exquisite sight!" cried the
king, and while he wildly pressed Catharine to his bosom, he
continued: "Oh, are we not foolish and short-sighted men, all of us,
yes, even we kings? In order that I might not be, perhaps, forced to
send my sixth wife also to the scaffold, I chose, in trembling dread
of the deceitfulness of your sex, a widow for my queen, and this
widow with a blessed confession, mocks at the new law of the wise
Parliament, and makes good to me what she never promised."
[Footnote: After Catharine Howard's infidelity and incontinency had
been proved, and she had atoned for them by her death, Parliament
enacted a law "that if the king or his successors should intend to
marry any woman whom they took to be a clean and pure maid--if she,
not being so, did not declare the same to the king, it should be
high treason: and all who knew it; and did not reveal it, were
guilty of misprision of treason."--"Burnet's History of the
Reformation of the Church of England." London, 1681 (vol. i, p.
313)]

"Come, Kate, give me a kiss. You have opened before me to-day a
happy, blissful future, and prepared for me a great and unexpected
pleasure. I thank you for it, Kate, and the Mother of God be my
witness, I will never forget it."

And drawing a rich diamond ring from his own finger, and putting it
upon Catharine's, he continued: "Be this ring a remembrancer of this
hour, and when you hereafter present it to me, with a request, I
will grant that request, Kate!"

He kissed her forehead, and was about to press her more closely in
his arms, when suddenly from without was heard the dull roll of
drums, and the ringing of bells.

The king started a moment and released Catharine from his arms. He
listened; the roll of drums continued, and now and then was heard in
the distance, that peculiar thundering and yet sullen sound, which
so much resembles the roar and rush of the sea, and which can be
produced only by a large and excited mob.

The king, with a fierce curse, pushed open the glass door leading to
the balcony, and walked out.

Catharine gazed after him with a strange, half-timid, half-scornful
look. "I have not at least told him that I love him," muttered she.
"He has construed my words as it suited his vanity. No matter. I
will not die on the scaffold!"

With a resolute step, and firm, energetic air, she followed the king
to the balcony. The roll of drums was kept up, and from all the
steeples the bells were pealing. The night was dark and calm. All
London seemed to slumber, and the dark houses around about stood up
out of the universal darkness like huge coffins.

Suddenly the horizon began to grow bright, and on the sky appeared a
streak of fiery red, which, blazing up higher and higher, soon
illuminated the entire horizon with a crimson glow, and even shed
its glaring fiery beams over the balcony on which stood the royal
pair. Still the bells clanged and clamored; and blended with their
peals was heard now and then, in the distance, a piercing shriek and
a clamor as of thousands and thousands of confusedly mingled voices.

Suddenly the king turned to Catharine, and his countenance, which
was just then overspread by the fire-light as with a blood-red veil,
had now assumed an expression of savage, demoniacal delight.

"Ah," said he, "I know what it is. You had wholly bewildered me, and
stolen away my attention, you little enchantress. I had for a moment
ceased to be a king, because I wished to be entirely your lover. But
now I bethink me again of my avenging sovereignty! It is the fagot-
piles about the stake which flame so merrily yonder. And that
yelling and clamor indicate that my merry people are enjoying with
all their soul the comedy which I have had played before them to-
day, for the honor of God, and my unimpeachable royal dignity."

"The stake!" cried Catharine, trembling. "Your majesty does not mean
thereby to say that right yonder, men are to die a cruel, painful
death--that the same hour in which their king pronounces himself
happy and content, some of his subjects are to be condemned to
dreadful torture, to a horrible destruction! Oh, no! my king will
not overcloud his queen's wedding-day with so dark a veil of death.
He will not wish to dim my happiness so cruelly."

The king laughed. "No, I will not darken it, but light it up with
bright names," said he; and as, with outstretched arm, he pointed
over to the glaring heavens, he continued: "There are our wedding-
torches, my Kate, and the most sacred and beautiful which I could
find, for they burn to the honor of God and of the king. [Footnote:
"Life of King Henry the Eighth, founded on Authentic and Original
Documents." By Patrick Fraser Tytler. (Edinburgh, 1887, p. 440.)]
And the heavenward flaring flames which carries up the souls of the
heretics will give to my God joyous intelligence of His most
faithful and obedient son, who, even on the day of his happiness,
forgets not his kingly duty, but ever remains the avenging and
destroying minister of his God."

He looked frightful as he thus spoke. His countenance, lit up by the
fire, had a fierce, threatening expression; his eyes blazed; and a
cold, cruel smile played about his thin, firmly-pressed lips.

"Oh, he knows no pity!" murmured Catharine to herself, as in a
paroxysm of anguish she stared at the king, who, in fanatical
enthusiasm, was looking over toward the fire, into which, at his
command, they were perhaps hurling to a cruel, torturing death, some
poor wretch, to the honor of God and the king. "No, he knows no pity
and no mercy."

Now Henry turned to her, and laying his extended hand softly on the
back of her slender neck, he spanned it with his fingers, and
whispered in her ear tender words and vows of love.

Catharine trembled. This caress of the king, however harmless in
itself, had in it for her something dismal and dreadful. It was the
involuntary, instinctive touch of the headsman, who examines the
neck of his victim, and searches on it for the place where he will
make the stroke. Thus had Anne Boleyn once put her tender white
hands about her slender neck, and said to the headsman, brought over
from Calais specially for her execution: "I pray you strike me well
and surely! I have, indeed, but a slim little neck." [Footnote:
Tytler, p. 382] Thus had the king clutched his hand about the neck
of Catharine Howard, his fifth wife when certain of her infidelity,
he had thrust her from himself with fierce execrations, when she
would have clung to him. The dark marks of that grip were still
visible upon her neck when she laid it on the block. [Footnote:
Leti, vol. i, p. 193]

And this dreadful twining of his fingers Catharine must now endure
as a caress; at which she must smile, which she must receive with
all the appearance of delight.

While he spanned her neck, he whispered in her ear words of
tenderness, and bent his face close to her cheeks.

But Catharine heeded not his passionate whispers. She saw nothing
save the blood-red handwriting of fire upon the sky. She heard
nothing save the shrieks of the wretched victims.

"Mercy, mercy!" faltered she. "Oh, let this day be a day of
festivity for all your subjects! Be merciful, and if you would have
me really believe that you love me, grant this first request which I
make of you. Grant me the lives of these wretched ones. Mercy, sire,
mercy!"

And as if the queen's supplication had found an echo, suddenly was
heard from the chamber a wailing, despairing voice, repeating loudly
and in tones of anguish: "Mercy, your majesty, mercy!" The king
turned round impetuously, and his face assumed a dark, wrathful
expression. He fastened his searching eyes on Catharine, as though
he would read in her looks whether she knew who had dared to
interrupt their conversation.

But Catharine's countenance expressed unconcealed astonishment.
"Mercy, mercy!" repeated the voice from the interior of the chamber.

The king uttered an angry exclamation, and hastily withdrew from the
balcony.


CHAPTER IV.

KING BY THE WRATH OF GOD.


"Who dares interrupt us?" cried the king, as with headlong step he
returned to the chamber--"who dares speak of mercy?"

"I dare!" said a young lady, who, pale, with distorted features, in
frightful agitation, now hastened to the king and prostrated herself
before him. "Anne Askew!" cried Catharine, amazed. "Anne, what want
you here?"

"I want mercy, mercy for those wretched ones, who are suffering
yonder," cried the young maiden, pointing with an expression of
horror to the reddened sky. "I want mercy for the king himself, who
is so cruel as to send the noblest and the best of his subjects to
the slaughter like miserable brutes!"

"Oh, sire, have compassion on this poor child!" besought Catharine,
turning to Henry, "compassion on her impassioned excitement and her
youthful ardor! She is as yet unaccustomed to these frightful
scenes--she knows not yet that it is the sad duty of kings to be
constrained to punish, where they might prefer to pardon!"

Henry smiled; but the look which he cast on the kneeling girl made
Catharine tremble. There was a death-warrant in that look!

"Anne Askew, if I mistake not, is your second maid of honor?" asked
the king; "and it was at your express wish that she received that
place?"

"Yes sire."

"You knew her, then?"

"No, sire! I saw her a few days ago for the first time. But she had
already won my heart at our first meeting, and I feel that I shall
love her. Exercise forbearance, then, your majesty!"

But the king was still thoughtful, and Catharine's answers did not
yet satisfy him.

"Why, then, do you interest yourself for this young lady, if you did
not know her?"

"She has been so warmly recommended to me."

"By whom?"

Catharine hesitated a moment; she felt that she had, perhaps, in her
zeal, gone too far, and that it was imprudent to tell the king the
truth. But the king's keen, penetrating look was resting on her, and
she recollected that he had, the first thing that evening, so
urgently and solemnly conjured her to always tell him the truth.
Besides, it was no secret at court who the protector of this young
maiden was, and who had been the means of her obtaining the place of
maid of honor to the queen, a place which so many wealthy and
distinguished families had solicited for their daughters.

"Who recommended this lady to you?" repeated the king, and already
his ill-humor began to redden his face, and make his voice tremble.

"Archbishop Cranmer did so, sire," said Catharine as she raised her
eyes to the king, and looked at him with a smile surpassingly
charming.

At that moment was heard without, more loudly, the roll of drums,
which nevertheless was partially drowned by piercing shrieks and
horrible cries of distress. The blaze of the fire shot up higher,
and now was seen the bright flame, which with murderous rage licked
the sky above.

Anne Askew, who had kept respectful silence during the conversation
of the royal pair, now felt herself completely overcome by this
horrible sight, and bereft of the last remnant of self-possession.

"My God, my God!" said she, quivering from the internal tremor, and
stretching her hands beseechingly toward the king, "do you not hear
that frightful wail of the wretched? Sire, by the thought of your
own dying hour, I conjure you have compassion on these miserable
beings! Let them not, at least, be thrown alive into the flames.
Spare them this last frightful torture."

King Henry cast a wrathful look on the kneeling girl; then strode
past her to the door, which led into the adjoining hall, in which
the courtiers were waiting for their king.

He beckoned to the two bishops, Cranmer and Gardiner, to come
nearer, and ordered the servants to throw the hall doors wide open.

The scene now afforded an animated and singular spectacle, and this
chamber, just before so quiet, was suddenly changed to the theatre
of a great drama, which was perhaps to end tragically. In the
queen's bedchamber, a small room, but furnished with the utmost
luxury and splendor, the principal characters of this scene were
congregated. In the middle of the space stood the king in his robes,
embroidered with gold and sparkling with jewels, which were
irradiated by the bright light of the chandelier. Near him was seen
the young queen, whose beautiful and lovely face was turned in
anxious expectation toward the king, in whose stern and rigid
features she sought to read the development of this scene.

Not far from her still knelt the young maiden, hiding in her hands
her face drenched in tears; while farther away, in the background,
were the two bishops observing with grave, cool tranquillity the
group before them. Through the open hall doors were descried the
expectant and curious countenances of the courtiers standing with
their heads crowded close together in the space before the doors;
and opposite to them, through the open door leading to the balcony,
was seen the fiery, blazing sky, and heard the clanging of the bells
and the rolling of the drama, the piercing shrieks and the yells of
the people.

A deep silence ensued, and when the king spoke, the tone of his
voice was so hard and cold, that an involuntary shudder ran through
all present.

"My Lord Bishops of Winchester and Canterbury," said the king. "we
have called you that you may, by the might of your prayers and the
wisdom of your words, rid this young girl here from the devil, who,
without doubt, has the mastery over her, since she dares charge her
king and master with cruelty and injustice."

The two bishops drew nearer to the kneeling girl; each laid a hand
upon her shoulder, and bent over her, but the one with an expression
of countenance wholly different from that of the other.

Cranmer's look was gentle and serious, and at the same time a
compassionate and encouraging smile played about his thin lips.

Gardiner's features on the contrary bore the expression of cruel,
cold-hearted irony; and the smile which rested on his thick,
protruding lips was the joyful and merciless smile of a priest ready
to sacrifice a victim to his idol.

"Courage, my daughter, courage and prudence!" whispered Cranmer.

"God, who blesses the righteous and punishes and destroys sinners,
be with thee and with us all!" said Gardiner.

But Anne Askew recoiled with a shudder from the touch of his hand,
and with an impetuous movement pushed it away from her shoulder.

"Touch me not; you are the hangman of those poor people whom they
are putting to death down yonder," said she impetuously; and as she
turned to the king and extended her hands imploringly toward him,
she cried:

"Mercy, King Henry, mercy!"

"Mercy!" repeated the king, "mercy, and for whom? Who are they that
they are putting to death down there? Tell me, forsooth, my lord
bishops, who are they that are led to the stake to-day? Who are the
condemned?"

"They are heretics, who devote themselves to this new false doctrine
which has come over to us from Germany, and who dare refuse to
recognize the spiritual supremacy of our lord and king," said Bishop
Gardiner.

"They are Roman Catholics, who regard the Pope of Rome as the chief
shepherd of the Church of Christ, and will regard nobody but him as
their lord," said Bishop Cranmer.

"Ah, behold this young maiden accuses us of injustice," cried the
king; "and yet, you say that not heretics alone are executed down
there, but also Romanists. It appears to me then that we have justly
and impartially, as always, punished only criminals and given over
the guilty to justice."

"Oh, had you seen what I have seen," said Anne Askew, shuddering,"
then would you collect all your vital energies for a single cry, for
a single word--mercy! and that word would you shout out loud enough
to reach yon frightful place of torture and horror."

"What saw you, then?" asked the king, smiling. Anne Askew had stood
up, and her tall, slender form now lifted itself, like a lily,
between the sombre forms of the bishops. Her eye was fixed and
glaring; her noble and delicate features bore the expression of
horror and dread.

"I saw," said she, "a woman whom they were leading to execution. Not
a criminal, but a noble lady, whose proud and lofty heart never
harbored a thought of treason or disloyalty, but who, true to her
faith and her convictions, would not forswear the God whom she
served. As she passed through the crowd, it seemed as if a halo
encompassed her head, and covered her white hair with silvery rays;
all bowed before her, and the hardest natures wept over the
unfortunate woman who had lived more than seventy years, and yet was
not allowed to die in her bed, but was to be slaughtered to the
glory of God and of the king. But she smiled, and graciously
saluting the weeping and sobbing multitude, she advanced to the
scaffold as if she were ascending a throne to receive the homage of
her people. Two years of imprisonment had blanched her cheek, but
had not been able to destroy the fire of her eye, or the strength of
her mind, and seventy years had not bowed her neck or broken her
spirit. Proud and firm, she mounted the steps of the scaffold, and
once more saluted the people and cried aloud, 'I will pray to God
for you.' But as the headsman approached and demanded that she
should allow her hands to be bound, and that she should kneel in
order to lay her head upon the block, she refused, and angrily
pushed him away. 'Only traitors and criminals lay their head on the
block!' exclaimed she, with a loud, thundering voice. 'There is no
occasion for me to do so, and I will not submit to your bloody laws
as long as there is a breath in me. Take, then, my life, if you
can.'

"And now began a scene which filled the hearts of the lookers-on
with fear and horror. The countess flew like a hunted beast round
and round the scaffold. Her white hair streamed in the wind; her
black grave-clothes rustled around her like a dark cloud, and behind
her, with uplifted axe, came the headsman, in his fiery red dress;
he, ever endeavoring to strike her with the falling axe, but she,
ever trying, by moving her head to and fro, to evade the descending
stroke. But at length her resistance became weaker; the blows of the
axe reached her, and stained her white hair, hanging loose about her
shoulders, with crimson streaks. With a heart-rending cry, she fell
fainting. Near her, exhausted also, sank down the headsman, bathed
in sweat. This horrible wild chase had lamed his arm and broken his
strength. Panting and breathless, he was not able to drag this
fainting, bleeding woman to the block, or to lift up the axe to
separate her noble head from the body. [Footnote: Tytler, p. 430]
The crowd shrieked with distress and horror, imploring and begging
for mercy, and even the lord chief justice could not refrain from
tears, and he ordered the cruel work to be suspended until the
countess and the headsman should have regained strength; for a
living, not a dying person was to be executed: thus said the law.
They made a pallet for the countess on the scaffold and endeavored
to restore her; invigorating wine was supplied to the headsman, to
renew his strength for the work of death; and the crowd turned to
the stakes which were prepared on both sides of the scaffold, and at
which four other martyrs were to be burnt. But I flew here like a
hunted doe, and now, king, I lie at your feet. There is still time.
Pardon, king, pardon for the Countess of Somerset, the last of the
Plantagenets."

"Pardon, sire, pardon!" repeated Catharine Parr, weeping and
trembling, as she clung to her husband's side. "Pardon!" repeated
Archbishop Cranmer; and a few of the courtiers re-echoed it in a
timid and anxious whisper.

The king's large, brilliant eyes glanced around the whole assembly,
with a quick, penetrating look. "And you, my Lord Bishop Gardiner,"
asked he, in a cold, sarcastic tone, "will you also ask for mercy,
like all these weak-hearted souls here?"

"The Lord our God is a jealous God," said Gardiner, solemnly, "and
it is written that God will punish the sinner unto the third and
fourth generation."

"And what is written shall stand true!" exclaimed the king, in a
voice of thunder. "No mercy for evil-doers, no pity for criminals.
The axe must fall upon the head of the guilty, the flames shall
consume the bodies of criminals."

"Sire, think of your high vocation!" exclaimed Anne Askew, in a tone
of enthusiasm. "Reflect what a glorious name you have assumed to
yourself in this land. You call yourself the head of the Church, and
you want to rule and govern upon earth in God's stead. Exercise
mercy, then, for you entitle yourself king by the grace of God."

"No, I do not call myself king by God's grace; I call myself king by
God's wrath!" exclaimed Henry, as he raised his arm menacingly. "It
is my duty to send sinners to God; may He have mercy on them there
above, if He will! I am the punishing judge, and I judge
mercilessly, according to the law, without compassion. Let those
whom I have condemned appeal to God, and may He have mercy upon
them. I cannot do it, nor will I. Kings are here to punish, and they
are like to God, not in His love, but in His avenging wrath."

"Woe, then, woe to you and to all of us!" exclaimed Anne Askew. "Woe
to you, King Henry, if what you now say is the truth! Then are they
right, those men who are bound to yonder stakes, when they brand you
with the name of tyrant; then is the Bishop of Rome right when he
upbraids you as an apostate and degenerate son, and hurls his
anathemas against you! Then you know not God, who is love and mercy;
then you are no disciple of the Saviour, who has said, 'Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you.' Woe to you, King Henry, if
matters are really so bad with you; if--"

"Silence, unhappy woman, silence!" exclaimed Catharine; and as she
vehemently pushed away the furious girl she grasped the king's hand,
and pressed it to her lips. "Sire," whispered she, with intense
earnestness, "Sire, you told me just now that you loved me. Prove it
by pardoning this maiden, and having consideration for her
impassioned excitement. Prove it by allowing me to lead Anne Askew
to her room and enjoin silence upon her."

But at this moment the king was wholly inaccessible to any other
feelings than those of anger and delight in blood.

He indignantly repelled Catharine, and without moving his sharp,
penetrating look from the young maiden, he said in a quick, hollow
tone: "Let her alone; let her speak; let no one dare to interrupt
her!"

Catharine, trembling with anxiety and inwardly hurt at the harsh
manner of the king, retired with a sigh to the embrasure of one of
the windows.

Anne Askew had not noticed what was going on about her. She remained
in that state of exaltation which cares for no consequences and
which trembles before no danger. She would at this moment have gone
to the stake with cheerful alacrity, and she almost longed for this
blessed martyrdom.

"Speak, Anne Askew, speak!" commanded the king. "Tell me, do you
know what the countess, for whose pardon you are beseeching me, has
done? Know you why those four men were sent to the stake?"

"I do know, King Henry, by the wrath of God," said the maiden, with
burning passionateness. "I know why you have sent the noble countess
to the slaughter-house, and why you will exercise no mercy toward
her. She is of noble, of royal blood, and Cardinal Pole is her son.
You would punish the son through the mother, and because you cannot
throttle the cardinal, you murder his mother."

"Oh, you are a very knowing child!" cried the king, with an inhuman,
ironical laugh. "You know my most secret thoughts and my most hidden
feelings. Without doubt you are a good papist, since the death of
the popish countess fills you with such heart-rending grief. Then
you must confess, at the least, that it is right to burn the four
heretics!"

"Heretics!" exclaimed Anne, enthusiastically, "call you heretics
those noble men who go gladly and boldly to death for their
convictions and their faith? King Henry! King Henry! Woe to you if
these men are condemned as heretics! They alone are the faithful,
they are the true servants of God. They have freed themselves from
human supremacy, and as you would not recognize the pope, so they
will not recognize you as head of the Church! God alone, they say,
is Lord of the Church and Master of their consciences, and who can
be presumptuous enough to call them criminals?"

"I!" exclaimed Henry the Eighth, in a powerful tone. "I dare do it.
I say that they are heretics, and that I will destroy them, will
tread them all beneath my feet, all of them, all who think as they
do! I say that I will shed the blood of these criminals, and prepare
for them torments at which human nature will shudder and quake. God
will manifest Himself by me in fire and blood! He has put the sword
into my hand, and I will wield it for His glory. Like St. George, I
will tread the dragon of heresy beneath my feet!"

And haughtily raising his crimsoned face and rolling his great
bloodshot eyes wildly around the circle, he continued: "Hear this
all of you who are here assembled; no mercy for heretics, no pardon
for papists. It is I, I alone, whom the Lord our God has chosen and
blessed as His hangman and executioner! I am the high-priest of His
Church, and he who dares deny me, denies God; and he who is so
presumptuous as to do reverence to any other head of the Church, is
a priest of Baal and kneels to an idolatrous image. Kneel down all
of you before me, and reverence in me God, whose earthly
representative I am, and who reveals Himself through me in His
fearful and exalted majesty. Kneel down, for I am sole head of the
Church and high-priest of our God!"

And as if at one blow all knees bent; all those haughty cavaliers,
those ladies sparkling with jewels and gold, even the two bishops
and the queen fell upon the ground.

The king gazed for a moment on this sight, and, with radiant looks
and a smile of triumph, his eyes ran over this assembly, consisting
of the noblest of his kingdom, humbled before him.

Suddenly they were fastened on Anne Askew.

She alone had not bent her knee, but stood in the midst of the
kneelers, proud and upright as the king himself. A dark cloud passed
over the king's countenance.

"You obey not my command?" asked he.

She shook her curly head and fixed on him a steady, piercing look.
"No," said she, "like those over yonder whose last death-groan we
even now hear, like them, I say: To God alone is honor due, and He
alone is Lord of His Church! If you wish me to bend my knee before
you as my king, I will do it, but I bow not to you as the head of
the holy Church!

A murmur of surprise flew through the assembly, and every eye was
turned with fear and amazement on this bold young girl, who
confronted the king with a countenance smiling and glowing with
enthusiasm.

At a sign from Henry the kneelers arose and awaited in breathless
silence the terrible scene that was coming.

A pause ensued. King Henry himself was struggling for breath, and
needed a moment to collect himself.

Not as though wrath and passion had deprived him of speech. He was
neither wrathful nor passionate, and it was only joy that obstructed
his breathing--the joy of having again found a victim with which he
might satisfy his desire for blood, on whose agony he might feast
his eyes, whose dying sigh he might greedily inhale.

The king was never more cheerful than when he had signed a death-
warrant. For then he was in full enjoyment of his greatness as lord
over the lives and deaths of millions of other men, and this feeling
made him proud and happy, and fully conscious of his exalted
position.

Hence, as he now turned to Anne Askew, his countenance was calm and
serene, and his voice friendly, almost tender.

"Anne Askew," said he, "do you know that the words vou have now
spoken make you guilty of high treason?"

"I know it, sire."

"And you know what punishment awaits traitors?"

"Death, I know it."

"Death by fire!" said the king with perfect calmness and composure.
A hollow murmur ran through the assembly. Only one voice dared give
utterance to the word mercy.

It was Catharine, the king's consort, who spoke this one word. She
stepped forward, and was about to rush to the king and once more
implore his mercy and pity. But she felt herself gently held back.
Archbishop Cranmer stood near her, regarding her with a serious and
beseeching look.

"Compose yourself, compose yourself," murmured he. "You cannot save
her; she is lost. Think of yourself, and of the pure and holy
religion whose protectress you are. Preserve yourself for your
Church and your companions in the faith!"

"And must she die?" asked Catharine, whose eyes filled with tears as
she looked toward the poor young child, who was confronting the king
with such a beautiful and innocent smile.

"Perhaps we may still save her, but this is not the moment for it.
Any opposition now would only irritate the king the more, and he
might cause the girl to be instantly thrown into the flames of the
fires still burning yonder! So let us be silent."

"Yes, silence," murmured Catharine, with a shudder, as she withdrew
again to the embrasure of the window.

"Death by fire awaits you, Anne Askew!" repeated the king. "No mercy
for the traitress who vilifies and scoffs at her king!"


CHAPTER V.

THE RIVALS.


At the very moment when the king was pronouncing, in a voice almost
exultant, Anne Askew's sentence of death, one of the king's
cavaliers appeared on the threshold of the royal chamber and
advanced toward the king.

He was a young man of noble and imposing appearance, whose lofty
bearing contrasted strangely with the humble and submissive attitude
of the rest of the courtiers. His tall, slim form was clad in a coat
of mail glittering with gold; over his shoulders hung a velvet
mantle decorated with a princely crown; and his head, covered with
dark ringlets, was adorned with a cap embroidered with gold, from
which a long white ostrich-feather drooped to his shoulder. His oval
face presented the full type of aristocratic beauty; his cheeks were
of a clear, transparent paleness; about his slightly pouting mouth
played a smile, half contemptuous and half languid; the high, arched
brow and delicately chiselled aquiline nose gave to his face an
expression at once bold and thoughtful. The eyes alone were not in
harmony with his face; they were neither languid like the mouth, nor
pensive like the brow. All the fire and all the bold and wanton
passion of youth shot from those dark, flashing eyes. When he looked
down, he might have been taken for a completely worn-out,
misanthropic aristocrat; but when he raised those ever-flashing and
sparkling eyes, then was seen the young man full of dashing courage
and ambitious desires, of passionate warmth and measureless pride.

He approached the king, as already stated, and as he bent his knee
before him, he said in a full, pleasant voice:

"Mercy, sire, mercy!"

The king stepped back in astonishment, and turned upon the bold
speaker a look almost of amazement.

"Thomas Seymour!" said he. "Thomas, you have returned, then, and
your first act is again an indiscretion and a piece of foolhardy
rashness?"

The young man smiled. "I have returned," said he, "that is to say, I
have had a sea-fight with the Scots and taken from them four men-of-
war. With these I hastened hither to present them to you, my king
and lord, as a wedding-gift, and just as I entered the anteroom I
heard your voice pronouncing a sentence of death. Was it not
natural, then, that I, who bring you tidings of a victory, should
have the heart to utter a prayer for mercy, for which, as it seems,
none of these noble and proud cavaliers could summon up courage?"

"Ah!" said the king, evidently relieved and fetching a deep breath,
"then you knew not at all for whom and for what you were imploring
pardon?"

"Yet!" said the young man, and his bold glance ran with an
expression of contempt over the whole assembly--"yet, I saw at once
who the condemned must be, for I saw this young maiden forsaken by
all as if stricken by the plague, standing alone in the midst of
this exalted and brave company. And you well know, my noble king,
that at court one recognizes the condemned and those fallen into
disgrace by this, that every one flies from them, and nobody has the
courage to touch such a leper even with the tip of his finger!"

King Henry smiled. "Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley, you are now, as
ever, imprudent and hasty," said he. "You beg for mercy without once
knowing whether she for whom you beg it is worthy of mercy."

"But I see that she is a woman," said the intrepid young earl. "And
a woman is always worthy of mercy, and it becomes every knight to
come forward as her defender, were it but to pay homage to her sex,
so fair and so frail, and yet so noble and mighty. Therefore I beg
mercy for this young maiden!"

Catharine had listened to the young earl with throbbing heart and
flushed cheeks. It was the first time that she had seen him, and yet
she felt for him a warm sympathy, an almost tender anxiety.

"He will plunge himself into ruin," murmured she; "he will not save
Anne, but will make himself unhappy. My God, my God, have a little
compassion and pity on my anguish!"

She now fixed her anxious gaze on the king, firmly resolved to rush
to the help of the earl, who had so nobly and magnanimously
interested himself in an innocent woman, should the wrath of her
husband threaten him also. But, to her surprise, Henry's face was
perfectly serene and contented.

Like the wild beast, that, following its instinct, seeks its bloody
prey only so long as it is hungry, so King Henry felt satiated for
the day. Yonder glared the fires about the stake, at which four
heretics were burned; there stood the scaffold on which the Countess
of Somerset had just been executed; and now, within this hour, he
had already found another new victim for death. Moreover, Thomas
Seymour had always been his favorite. His audacity, his liveliness,
his energy, had always inspired the king with respect; and then,
again, he so much resembled his sister, the beautiful Jane Seymour,
Henry's third wife.

"I cannot grant you this favor, Thomas," said the king. "Justice
must not be hindered in her course, and where she has passed
sentence, mercy must not give her the lie; and it was the justice of
your king which pronounced sentence at that moment. You were guilty,
therefore, of a double wrong, for you not only besought mercy, but
you also brought an accusation against my cavaliers. Do you really
believe that, were this maiden's cause a just one, no knight would
have been found for her?"

"Yes, I really believe it," cried the earl, with a laugh. "The sun
of your favor had turned away from this poor girl, and in such a
case your courtiers no longer see the figure wrapped in darkness."

"You are mistaken, my lord; I have seen it," suddenly said another
voice, and a second cavalier advanced from the anteroom into the
chamber. He approached the king, and, as he bent his knee before
him, he said, in a loud, steady voice: "Sire, I also beg mercy for
Anne Askew!"

At this moment was heard from that side of the room where the ladies
stood, a low cry, and the pale, affrighted face of Lady Jane Douglas
was for a moment raised above the heads of the other ladies. No one
noticed it. All eyes were directed toward the group in the middle of
the room: all looked with eager attention upon the king and these
two young men, who dared protect one whom he had sentenced.

"Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey!" exclaimed the king; and now an
expression of wrath passed over his countenance. "How! you, too,
dare intercede for this girl? You, then, grudge Thomas Seymour the
pre-eminence of being the most discreet man at my court?"

"I will not allow him, sire, to think that he is the bravest,"
replied the young man, as he fixed on Thomas Seymour a look of
haughty defiance, which the other answered by a cold, disdainful
smile.

"Oh," said he, with a shrug of his shoulders, "I willingly allow
you, my dear Earl of Surrey, to tread behind me, at your
convenience, the path, the safety of which I first tested at the
peril of my life. You saw that I had not, as yet, lost either my
head or my life in this reckless under taking, and that has given
you courage to follow my example. That is a new proof of your
prudent valor, my Honorable Earl of Surrey, and I must praise you
for it."

A hot flush suffused the noble face of the earl, his eyes shot
lightning, and, trembling with rage, he laid his hand on his sword.
"Praise from Thomas Seymour is--"

"Silence!" interposed the king, imperatively. "It must not be said
that two of the noblest cavaliers of my court have turned the day,
which should be one of festivity to all of you, into a day of
contention. I command you, therefore, to be reconciled. Shake hands,
my lords, and let your reconciliation be sincere. I, the king
command it!"

The young men gazed at each other with looks of hatred and smothered
rage, and their eyes spoke the insulting and defiant words which
their lips durst no longer utter. The king had ordered, and, however
great and powerful they might be, the king was to be obeyed. They,
therefore, extended their hands to each other, and muttered a few
low, unintelligible words, which might be, perhaps, a mutual
apology, but which neither of them understood.

"And now, sire," said the Earl of Surrey, "now I venture to
reiterate my prayer. Mercy, your majesty, mercy for Anne Askew!"

"And you, Thomas Seymour, do you also renew your petition?"

"No, I withdraw it. Earl Surrey protects her; I, therefore, retire,
for without doubt she is a criminal; your majesty says so, and,
therefore, it is so. It would ill become a Seymour to protect a
person who sinned against the king."

This new indirect attack on Earl Surrey seemed to make on all
present a deep but very varied impression. Here, faces were seen to
turn pale, and there, to light up with a malicious smile; here,
compressed lips muttered words of threatening, there, a mouth opened
to express approbation and agreement.

The king's brow was clouded and troubled; the arrow which Earl
Sudley had shot with so skilful a hand had hit. The king, ever
suspicious and distrustful, felt so much the more disquieted as he
saw that the greater part of his cavaliers evidently reckoned
themselves friends of Henry Howard, and that the number of Seymour's
adherents was but trifling.

"These Howards are dangerous, and I will watch them carefully," said
the king to himself; and for the first time his eye rested with a
dark and hostile look on Henry Howard's noble countenance.

But Thomas Seymour, who wished only to make a thrust at his old
enemy, had at the same time decided the fate of poor Anne Askew. It
was now almost an impossibility to speak in her behalf, and to
implore pardon for her was to become a partaker of her crime. Thomas
Seymour had abandoned her, because, as traitress to her king, she
had rendered herself unworthy of his protection. Who now would be so
presumptuous as to still protect the traitress?

Henry Howard did it; he reiterated his supplication for Anne Askew's
pardon. But the king's countenance grew darker and darker, and the
courtiers watched with dread the coming of the moment when his wrath
would dash in pieces the poor Earl of Surrey.

In the row of ladies also, here and there, a pale face was visible,
and many a beautiful and beaming eye was dimmed with tears at the
sight of this gallant and handsome cavalier, who was hazarding even
his life for a woman.

"He is lost!" murmured Lady Jane Douglas; and, completely crushed
and lifeless, she leaned for a moment against the wall. But she soon
recovered herself, and her eye beamed with bold resolution. "I will
try and save him!" she said to herself; and, with firm step, she
advanced from the ladies' ranks, and approached the king.

A murmur of applause ran through the company, and all fares
brightened and all eyes were bent approvingly on Lady Jane. They
knew that she was the queen's friend, and an adherent of the new
doctrine; it was, therefore, very marked and significant when she
supported the Earl of Surrey in his magnanimous effort.

Lady Jane bowed her beautiful and haughty head before the king, and
said, in her clear, silvery voice: "Sire, in the name of all the
women, I also beseech you to pardon Anne Askew, because she is a
woman. Lord Surrey has done so because a true knight can never be
false to himself and his ever high and sacred obligation: to be the
protector of those who are helpless and in peril is enough for him.
A real gentleman asks not whether a woman is worthy of his
protection; he grants it to her, simply because she is a woman, and
needs his help. And while I, therefore, in the name of all the
women, thank the Earl of Surrey for the assistance that he has been
desirous to render to a woman, I unite my prayer with his, because
it shall not be said that we women are always cowardly and timid,
and never venture to hasten to the help of the distressed. I,
therefore, ask mercy, sire, mercy for Anne Askew!"

"And I," said the queen, as she again approached the king, "I add my
prayers to hers, sire. To-day is the feast of love, my festival,
sire! To-day, then, let love and mercy prevail."

She looked at the king with so charming a smile, her eyes had an
expression so radiant and happy, that the king could not withstand
her.

He was, therefore, in the depths of his heart, ready to let the
royal clemency prevail for this time; but he wanted a pretext for
this, some way of bringing it about. He had solemnly vowed to pardon
no heretic, and he might not break his word merely because the queen
prayed for mercy.

"Well, then," said he, after a pause, "I will comply with your
request. I will pardon Anne Askew, provided she will retract, and
solemnly abjure all that she has said. Are you satisfied with that,
Catharine?"

"I am satisfied," said she, sadly.

"And you, Lady Jane Douglas, and Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey?"

"We are satisfied."

All eyes were now turned again upon Anne Askew, who, although every
one was occupied by her concerns, had been entirely overlooked and
left unnoticed.

Nor had she taken any more notice of the company than they of her.
She had scarcely observed what was going on about her. She stood
leaning against the open door leading to the balcony, and gazed at
the flaming horizon. Her soul was with those pious martyrs, for whom
she was sending up her heart-felt prayers to God, and whom she, in
her feverish exaltation, envied their death of torture. Entirely
borne away from the present, she had heard neither the petitions of
those who protected her, nor the king's reply.

A hand laid upon her shoulder roused her from her reverie.

It was Catharine, the young queen, who stood near her.

"Anne Askew," said she, in a hurried whisper, "if your life is dear
to you, comply with the king's demand."

She seized the young girl's hand, and led her to the king.

"Sire," said she, in a full voice, "forgive the exalted and
impassioned agony of a poor girl, who has now, for the first time,
been witness of an execution, and whose mind has been so much
impressed by it that she is scarcely conscious of the mad and
criminal words that she has uttered before you! Pardon her, then,
your majesty, for she is prepared cheerfully to retract."

A cry of amazement burst from Anne's lips, and her eyes flashed with
anger, as she dashed the queen's hand away from her.

"I retract!" exclaimed she, with a contemptuous smile. "Never, my
lady, never! No! as sure as I hope for God to be gracious to me in
my last hour, I retract not! It is true, it was agony and horror
that made me speak; but what I have spoken is yet, nevertheless, the
truth. Horror caused me to speak, and forced me to show my soul
undisguised. No, I retract not! I tell you, they who have been
executed over yonder are holy martyrs, who have ascended to God,
there to enter an accusation against their royal hangman. Ay, they
are holy, for eternal truth had illumined their souls, and it beamed
about their faces bright as the flames of the fagots into which the
murderous hand of an unrighteous judge had cast them. Ah, I must
retract! I, forsooth, am to do as did Shaxton, the miserable and
unfaithful servant of his God, who, from fear of earthly death,
denied the eternal truth, and in blaspheming pusillanimity perjured
himself concerning the holy doctrine. [Footnote: Burnet, vol. i, p.
341] King Henry, I say unto you, beware of dissemblers and
perjurers; beware of your own haughty and arrogant thoughts. The
blood of martyrs cries to Heaven against you, and the time will come
when God will be as merciless to you as you have been to the noblest
of your subjects! You deliver them over to the murderous flames,
because they will not believe what the priests of Baal preach;
because they will not believe in the real transubstantiation of the
chalice; because they deny that the natural body of Christ is, after
the sacrament, contained in the sacrament, no matter whether the
priest be a good or a bad man. [Footnote: Ibid.] You give them over
to the executioner, because they serve the truth, and are faithful
followers of the Lord their God!"

"And you share the views of these people whom you call martyrs?"
asked the king, as Anne Askew now paused for a moment and struggled
for breath.

"Yes, I share them!"

"You deny, then, the truth of the six articles?"

"I deny them!"

"You do not see in me the head of the Church?"

"God only is Head and Lord of the Church!"

A pause followed--a fearful, awful pause.

Every one felt that for this poor young girl there was no hope, no
possible escape; that her doom was irrevocably sealed.

There was a smile on the king's countenance.

The courtiers knew that smile, and feared it yet more than the
king's raging wrath.

When the king thus smiled, he had taken his resolve. Then there was
with him no possible vacillation or hesitation, but the sentence of
death was resolved on, and his bloodthirsty soul rejoiced over a new
victim.

"My Lord Bishop of Winchester," said the king, at length, "come
hither."

Gardiner drew near and placed himself by Anne Askew, who gazed at
him with angry, contemptuous looks.

"In the name of the law I command you to arrest this heretic, and
hand her over to the spiritual court," continued the king. "She is
damned and lost. She shall be punished as she deserves!"

Gardiner laid his hand on Anne Askew's shoulder. "In the name of the
law of God, I arrest you!" said he, solemnly.

Not a word more was spoken. The lord chief justice had silently
followed a sign from Gardiner, and touching Anne Askew with his
staff, ordered the soldiers to conduct her thence.

With a smile, Anne Askew offered them her hand, and surrounded by
the soldiers and followed by the Bishop of Winchester and the lord
chief justice, walked erect and proudly out of the room.

The courtiers had divided and opened a passage for Anne and her
attendants. Now their ranks closed again, as the sea closes and
flows calmly on when it has just received a corpse. To them all Anne
Askew was already a corpse, as one buried. The waves had swept over
her and all was again serene and bright.

The king extended his hand to his young wife, and, bending down,
whispered in her ear a few words, which nobody understood, but which
made the young queen tremble and blush.

The king, who observed this, laughed and impressed a kiss on her
forehead. Then he turned to his court; "Now, good-night, my lords
and gentlemen," said he, with a gracious inclination of the head.
"The feast is at an end, and we need rest."

"Forget not the Princess Elizabeth," whispered Archbishop Cranmer,
as he took leave of Catharine, and pressed to his lips her proffered
hand.

I will not forget her," murmured Catharine, and, with throbbing
heart and trembling with inward dread, she saw them all retire, and
leave her alone with the king.


CHAPTER VI.

THE INTERCESSION.


"And now, Kate," said the king, when all had withdrawn, and he was
again alone with her, "now let us forget everything, save that we
love each other."

He embraced her and with ardor pressed her to his breast. Wearied to
death, she bowed her head on his shoulder and lay there like a
shattered rose, completely broken, completely passive.

"You give me no kiss, Kate?" said Henry, with a smile. "Are you then
yet angry with me that I did not comply with your first request? But
what would you have me do, child? How, indeed, shall I keep the
crimson of my royal mantle always fresh and bright, unless I
continually dye it anew in the blood of criminals? Only he who
punishes and destroys is truly a king, and trembling mankind will
acknowledge him as such. The tender-hearted and gracious king it
despises, and his pitiful weakness it laughs to scorn. Bah! Humanity
is such a wretched, miserable thing, that it only respects and
acknowledges him who makes it tremble. And people are such
contemptible, foolish children, that they have respect only for him
who makes them feel the lash daily, and every now and then whips a
few of them to death. Look at me, Kate: where is there a king who
has reigned longer and more happily than I? whom the people love
more and obey better than me? This arises from the fact that I have
already signed more than two hundred death-warrants, [Footnote:
Tytler, p. 428. Leti, vol. i, p. 187.] and because every one
believes that, if he does not obey me, I will without delay send his
head after the others!"

"Oh, you say you love me," murmured Catharine, "and you speak only
of blood and death while you are with me."

The king laughed. "You are right, Kate," said he, "and yet, believe
me, there are other thoughts slumbering in the depths of my heart,
and could you look down into it, you would not accuse me of coldness
and unkindness. I love you truly, my dear, virgin bride, and, to
prove it, you shall now ask a favor of me. Yes, Kate, make me a
request, and, whatever it may be, I pledge you my royal word, it
shall be granted you. Now, Kate, think, what will please you? Will
you have brilliants, or a castle by the sea, or, perhaps, a yacht?
Would you like fine horses, or it may be some one has offended you,
and you would like his head? If so, tell me, Kate, and you shall
have his head; a wink from me, and it drops at your feet. For I am
almighty and all-powerful, and no one is so innocent and pure, that
my will cannot find in him a crime which will cost him his life.
Speak, then, Kate; what would you have? What will gladden your
heart?"

Catharine smiled in spite of her secret fear and horror. "Sire,"
said she, "you have given me so many brilliants, that I can shine
and glitter with them, as night does with her stars. If you give me
a castle by the sea, that is, at the same time, banishing me from
Whitehall and your presence; I wish, therefore, for no castle of my
own. I wish only to dwell with you in your castles, and my king's
abode shall be my only residence."

"Beautifully and wisely spoken," said the king; "I will remember
these words if ever your enemies endeavor to send you to a dwelling
and a castle other than that which your king occupies. The Tower is
also a castle, Kate, but I give you my royal word you shall never
occupy that castle. You want no treasures and no castles? It is,
then, somebody's head that you demand of me?"

"Yes, sire, it is the head of some one!"

"Ah, I guessed it, then," said the king with a laugh. "Now speak, my
little bloodthirsty queen, whose head will you have? Who shall be
brought to the block?"

"Sire, it is true I ask you for the head of a person," said
Catharine, in a tender, earnest tone, "but I wish not that head to
fall, but to be lifted up. I beg you for a human life--not to
destroy it, but, on the contrary, to adorn it with happiness and
joy. I wish to drag no one to prison, but to restore to one, dearly
beloved, the freedom, happiness, and splendid position which belong
to her. Sire, you have permitted me to ask a favor. Now, then, I beg
you to call the Princess Elizabeth to court. Let her reside with us
at Whitehall. Allow her to be ever near me, and share my happiness
and glory. Sire, only yesterday the Princess Elizabeth was far above
me in rank and position, but since your all-powerful might and grace
have to-day elevated me above all other women, I may now love the
Princess Elizabeth as my sister and dearest friend. Grant me this,
my king! Let Elizabeth come to us at Whitehall, and enjoy at our
court the honor which is her due." [Footnote: Leti, vol. i. p. 147.
Tytler. p. 410.]

The king did not reply immediately; but in his quiet and smiling air
one could read that his young consort's request had not angered him.
Something like an emotion flitted across his face, and his eyes were
for a moment dimmed with tears. Perhaps just then a pale, soul-
harrowing phantom passed before his mind, and a glance at the past
showed him the beautiful and unfortunate mother [Footnote: Ann
Boleyn] of Elizabeth, whom he had sentenced to a cruel death at the
hands of the public executioner, and whose last word nevertheless
was a blessing and a message of love for him.

He passionately seized Catharine's hand and pressed it to his lips.
"I thank you! You are unselfish and generous. That is a very rare
quality, and I shall always highly esteem you for it. But you are
also brave and courageous, for you have dared what nobody before you
has dared; you have twice on the same evening interceded for one
condemned and one fallen into disgrace. The fortunate, and those
favored by me, have always had many friends, but I have never yet
seen that the unfortunate and the exiled have also found friends.
You are different from these miserable, cringing courtiers;
different from this deceitful and trembling crowd, that with
chattering teeth fall down and worship me as their god and lord;
different from these pitiful, good-for-nothing mortals, who call
themselves my people, and who allow me to yoke them up, because they
are like the ox, which is obedient and serviceable, only because he
is so stupid as not to know his own might and strength. Ah, believe
me, Kate, I would be a milder and more merciful king, if the people
were not such an utterly stupid and contemptible thing; a dog, which
is so much the more submissive and gentle the more vou maltreat him.
You, Kate, you are different, and I am glad of it. You know, I have
forever banished Elizabeth from my court and from my heart, and
still you intercede for her. That is noble of you, and I love you
for it, and grant you your request. And that you may see how I love
and trust you, I will now reveal to you a secret: I have long since
wished to have Elizabeth with me, but I was ashamed, even to myself,
of this weakness. I have long yearned once again to look into my
daughter's large deep eyes, to be a kind and tender father to her,
and make some amends to her for the wrong I perhaps may have done to
her mother. For sometimes, in sleepless nights, Anne's beautiful
face comes up before me and gazes at me with mournful, mild look,
and my whole heart shudders before it. But I could not confess this
to anybody, for then they might say that I repented what I had done.
A king must be infallible, like God himself, and never, through
regret or desire to compensate, confess that he is a weak, erring
mortal, like others. You see why I repressed my longing and parental
tenderness, which was suspected by no one, and appeared to be a
heartless father, because nobody would help me and make it easy for
me to be a tender father. Ah, these courtiers! They are so stupid,
that they can understand only just what is echoed in our words; but
what our heart says, and longs for, of that they know nothing. But
you know, Kate; you are an acute woman, and a high-minded one
besides. Come, Kate, a thankful father gives you this kiss, and
this, ay, this, your husband gives you, my beautiful, charming
queen."


CHAPTER VII.

HENRY THE EIGHTH AND HIS WIVES.


The calm of night had now succeeded to the tempest of the day, and
after so much bustle, festivity, and rejoicing, deep quiet now
reigned in the palace of Whitehall, and throughout London. The happy
subjects of King Henry might, without danger, remain for a few hours
at least in their houses, and behind closed shutters and bolted
doors, either slumber and dream, or give themselves to their
devotional exercises, on account of which they had that day,
perhaps, been denounced as malefactors. They might, for a few hours,
resign themselves to the sweet, blissful dream of being freemen
untrammelled in belief and thought. For King Henry slept, and
likewise Gardiner and the lord chancellor had closed their watchful,
prying, devout, murderous eyes, and reposed awhile from the
Christian employment of ferreting out heretics.

And like the king, the entire households of both their majesties
were also asleep and resting from the festivities of the royal
wedding-day, which, in pomp and splendor, by far surpassed the five
preceding marriages.

It appeared, however, as though not all the court officials were
taking rest, and following the example of the king. For in a
chamber, not far from that of the royal pair, one could perceive,
from the bright beams streaming from the windows, in spite of the
heavy damask curtains which veiled them, that the lights were not
yet extinguished; and he who looked more closely would have observed
that now and then a human shadow was portrayed upon the curtain.

So the occupant of this chamber had not yet gone to rest, and
harassing must have been the thoughts which cause him to move so
restlessly to and fro.

This chamber was occupied by Lady Jane Douglas, first maid of honor
to the queen. The powerful influence of Gardiner, Bishop of
Winchester, had seconded Catharine's wish to have near her the dear
friend of her youth, and, without suspecting it, the queen had given
a helping hand to bring nearer to their accomplishment the schemes
which the hypocritical Gardiner was directing against her.

For Catharine knew not what changes had taken place in the character
of her friend in the four years in which she had not seen her. She
did not suspect how fatal her sojourn in the strongly Romish city of
Dublin had been to the easily impressible mind of her early
playmate, and how much it had transformed her whole being. Lady
Jane, once so sprightly and gay, had become a bigoted Romanist, who,
with fanatical zeal, believed that she was serving God when she
served the Church, and paid unreserved obedience to her priests.

Lady Jane Douglas had therefore--thanks to her fanaticism and the
teachings of the priests--become a complete dissembler. She could
smile, while in her heart she secretly brooded over hatred and
revenge. She could kiss the lips of those whose destruction she had
perhaps just sworn. She could preserve a harmless, innocent air,
while she observed everything, and took notice of every breath,
every smile, every movement of the eyelashes.

Hence it was very important for Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, to
bring his "friend" of the queen to court, and make of this disciple
of Loyola an ally and friend.

Lady Jane Douglas was alone; and, pacing up and down her room, she
thought over the events of the day.

Now, that no one was observing her, she had laid aside that gentle,
serious mien, which one was wont to see about her at other times;
her countenance betrayed in rapid changes all the various sad and
cheerful, tempestuous and tender feelings which agitated her.

She who had hitherto had only one aim before her eyes, to serve the
Church, and to consecrate her whole life to this service; she whose
heart had been hitherto open only to ambition and devotion, she felt
to-day wholly new and never-suspected feelings springing up within
her. A new thought had entered into her life, the woman was awakened
in her, and beat violently at that heart which devotion had overlaid
with a hard coating.

She had tried to collect herself in prayer, and to fill her soul so
entirely with the idea of God and her Church, that no earthly
thought or desire could find place therein. But ever and again arose
before her mind's eye the noble countenance of Henry Howard, ever
and again she fancied that she heard his earnest, melodious voice,
which made her heart shake and tremble like a magical incantation.
She had at first struggled against these sweet fancies, which forced
upon her such strange and undreamed-of thoughts; but at length the
woman in her got the better of the fanatical Romanist, and, dropping
into a seat, she surrendered herself to her dreams and fancies.

"Has he recognized me?" asked she of herself. "Does he still
remember that a year ago we saw each other daily at the king's court
in Dublin?"

"But no," added she mournfully," he knows nothing of it. He had then
eyes and sense only for his young wife. Ah, and she was beautiful
and lovely as one of the Graces. But I, am not I also beautiful? and
have not the noblest cavaliers paid me homage, and sighed for me in
unavailing love? How comes it, then, that where I would please,
there I am always overlooked? How comes it, that the only two men,
for whose notice I ever cared, have never shown any preference for
me? I felt that I loved Henry Howard, but this love was a sin, for
the Earl of Surrey was married. I therefore tore my heart from him
by violence, and gave it to God, because the only man whom I could
love did not return my affection. But even God and devotion are not
able to entirely fill a woman's heart. In my breast there was still
room for ambition; and since I could not be a happy wife, I would at
least be a powerful queen. Oh, everything was so well devised, so
nicely arranged! Gardiner had already spoken of me to the king, and
inclined him to his plan; and while I was hastening at his call from
Duma, hither, this little Catharine Parr comes between and snatches
him from me, and overturns all our schemes. I will never forgive
her. I will find a way to revenge myself. I will force her to leave
this place, which belongs to me, and if there is no other way for
it, she must go the way of the scaffold, as did Catharine Howard. I
will be Queen of England, I will--"

She suddenly interrupted her soliloquy, and listened. She thought
she heard a slight knock at the door. She was not mistaken; this
knock was now repeated, and indeed with a peculiar, significant
stroke.

"It is my father!" said Lady Jane, and, as she resumed again her
grave and quiet air, she proceeded to open the door.

"Ah, you expected me, then?" said Lord Archibald Douglas, kissing
his daughter's forehead.

"Yes, I expected you, my father," replied Lady Jane with a smile. "I
knew that you would come to communicate to me your experiences and
observations during the day, and to give me directions for the
future."

The earl seated himself on the ottoman, and drew his daughter down
by him.

"No one can overhear us, can they?"

"Nobody, my father! My women are sleeping in the fourth chamber from
here, and I have myself fastened the intervening doors. The anteroom
through which you came is, as you know, entirely empty, and nobody
can conceal himself there. It remains, then, only to fasten the door
leading thence into the corridor, in order to be secure from
interruption."

She hastened into the anteroom to fasten the door.

"Now, my father, we are secure from listeners," said she, as she
returned and resumed her place on the ottoman.

"And the walls, my child? know you whether or no the walls are safe?
You look at me with an expression of doubt and surprise! My God,
what a harmless and innocent little maiden you still are! Have I not
constantly reiterated the great and wise lesson, 'Doubt everything
and mistrust everything, even what you see.' He who will make his
fortune at court, must first of all mistrust everybody, and consider
everybody his enemy, whom he is to flatter, because he can do him
harm, and whom he is to hug and kiss, until in some happy embrace he
can either plunge a dagger into his breast wholly unobserved, or
pour poison into his mouth. Trust neither men nor walls, Jane, for I
tell you, however smooth and innocent both may appear, still there
may he found an ambuscade behind the smooth exterior. But I will for
the present believe that these walls are innocent, and conceal no
listeners. I will believe it, because I know this room. Those were
fine and charming days in which I became acquainted with it. Then I
was yet young and handsome, and King Henry's sister was not yet
married to the King of Scotland, and we loved each other so dearly.
Ah, I could relate to you wonderful stories of those happy days. I
could--"

"But, my dear father," interrupted Lady Jane, secretly trembling at
the terrible prospect of being forced to listen yet again to the
story of his youthful love, which she had already heard times
without number, "but, my dear father, doubtless you have not come
hither so late at night in order to relate to me what I--forgive me,
my lord--what I long since knew. You will rather communicate to me
what your keen and unerring glance has discovered here."

"It is true," said Lord Douglas, sadly. "I now sometimes become
loquacious--a sure sign that I am growing old. I have, by no means,
come here to speak of the past, but of the present. Let us, then,
speak of it. Ah, I have to-day perceived much, seen much, observed
much, and the result of my observations is, you will be King Henry's
seventh wife."

"Impossible, my lord!" exclaimed Lady Jane, whose countenance, in
spite of her will, assumed an expression of delight.

Her father remarked it. "My child," said he, "I observe that you
have not yet your features entirely under your control. You aimed
just now, for example, to play the coy and humble, and yet your face
had the expression of proud satisfaction. But this by the way! The
principal thing is, you will be King Henry's seventh wife! But in
order to become so, there is need for great heedfulness, a complete
knowledge of present relations, constant observation of all persons,
impenetrable dissimulation, and lastly, above all things, a very
intimate and profound knowledge of the king, of the history of his
reign, and of his character. Do you possess this knowledge? Know you
what it is to wish to become King Henry's seventh wife, and how you
must begin in order to attain this? Have you studied Henry's
character?"

"A little, perhaps, but certainly not sufficiently. For, as you
know, my lord, worldly matters have lain upon my heart less than the
holy Church, to whose service I have consecrated myself, and to
which I would have presented my whole being, my whole soul, my whole
heart, as a sacrifice, had not you yourself determined otherwise
concerning me. Ah, my father, had I been allowed to follow my
inclination, I would have retired into a convent in Scotland in
order to spend my life in quiet contemplation and pious penances,
and close my soul and ear to every profane sound. But my wishes have
not been regarded; and, by the mouth of His venerable and holy
priests, God has commanded me to remain in the world, and take upon
myself the yoke of greatness and regal splendor. If I then struggle
and strive to become queen, this is done, not because the vain pomp
and glory allure me, but solely because through me the Church, out
of which is no salvation, may find a fulcrum to operate on this weak
and fickle king, and because I am to bring him back again to the
only true faith."

"Very well played!" cried her father, who had stared her steadily in
the face while she was speaking. "On my word, very well played.
Everything was in perfect harmony, the gesticulation, the play of
the eyes, and the voice. My daughter, I withdraw my censure. You
have perfect control over yourself. But let us speak of King Henry.
We will now subject him to a thorough analysis, and no fibre of his
heart, no atom of his brain shall remain unnoticed by us. We will
observe him in his domestic, his political, and his religious life,
and get a perfectly clear view of every peculiarity of his
character, in order that we may deal with him accordingly. Let us,
then, speak first of his wives. Their lives and deaths afford you
excellent finger-posts; for I do not deny that it is an extremely
difficult and dangerous undertaking to be Henry's consort. There is
needed for it much personal courage and very great self-control.
Know you which, of all his wives, possessed these in the highest
degree? It was his first consort, Catharine of Aragon! By Heaven,
she was a sensible woman, and born a queen! Henry, avaricious as he
was, would gladly have given the best jewel in his crown, if he
could have detected but a shadow, the slightest trace of
unfaithfulness in her. But there was absolutely no means of sending
this woman to the scaffold, and at that time he was as yet too
cowardly and too virtuous to put her out of the way by poison. He,
therefore, endured her long, until she was an old woman with gray
hairs, and disagreeable for his eyes to look upon. So after he had
been married to her seventeen years, the good, pious king was all at
once seized with a conscientious scruple, and because he had read in
the Bible, 'Thou shalt not marry thy sister,' dreadful pangs of
conscience came upon the noble and crafty monarch. He fell upon his
knees and beat his breast, and cried: 'I have committed a great sin;
for I have married my brother's wife, and consequently my sister.
But I will make amends for it. I will dissolve this adulterous
marriage!'--Do you know, child, why he would dissolve it?"

"Because he loved Anne Boleyn!" said Jane, with a smile.

"Perfectly correct! Catharine had grown old, and Henry was still a
young man, and his blood shot through his veins like streams of
fire. Hut he was yet somewhat virtuous and timid, and the main
peculiarity of his character was as yet undeveloped. He was not yet
bloodthirsty, that is to say, he had not yet licked blood. But you
will see how with each new queen his desire for blood increased,
till at length it has now become a wasting disease. Had he then had
the system of lies that he now has, he would somehow have bribed a
slanderer, who would have declared that he was Catharine's lover.
But he was yet so innocent; he wanted yet to gratify his darling
lusts in a perfectly legal way. So Anne Boleyn must become his
queen, that he might love her. And in order to attain this, he threw
down the glove to the whole world, became an enemy to the pope, and
set himself in open opposition to the holy head of the Church.
Because the Holy Father would not dissolve his marriage, King Henry
became an apostate and atheist. He constituted himself head of his
Church, and, by virtue of his authority as such, he declared his
marriage with Catharine of Aragon null and void. He said that he had
not in his heart given his consent to this marriage, and that it had
not consequently been properly consummated.[Footnote: Burnet, vol.
i, p. 37.] It is true, Catharine had in the Princess Mary a living
witness of the consummation of her marriage, but what did the
enamored and selfish king care about that? Princess Mary was
declared a bastard, and the queen was now to be nothing more than
the widow of the Prince of Wales. It was strictly forbidden to
longer give the title and to show the honor due to a queen, to the
woman who for seventeen years had been Queen of England, and had
been treated and honored as such. No one was permitted to call her
anything but the Princess of Wales; and that nothing might disturb
the good people or the noble queen herself in this illusion,
Catharine was banished from the court and exiled to a castle, which
she had once occupied as consort of Arthur, Prince of Wales. And
Henry likewise allowed her only the attendance and pension which the
law appoints to the widow of the Prince of Wales.[Footnote: Burnet,
vol. i, p. 120.]

"I have ever held this to be one of the most prudent and subtle acts
of our exalted king, and in the whole history of this divorce the
king conducted himself with admirable consistency and resolution.
But this is to say, he was excited by opposition. Mark this, then,
my child, for this is the reason why I have spoken to you of these
things so much at length. Mark this, then: King Henry is every way
entirely unable to bear contradiction, or to be subjected to
restraint. If you wish to win him to any purpose, you must try to
draw him from it; you must surround it with difficulties and
hinderances. Therefore show yourself coy and indifferent; that will
excite him. Do not court his looks; then will he seek to encounter
yours. And when finally he loves you, dwell so long on your virtue
and your conscience, that at length Henry, in order to quiet your
conscience, will send this troublesome Catharine Parr to the block,
or do as he did with Catharine of Aragon, and declare that he did
not mentally give his consent to this marriage, and therefore
Catharine is no queen, but only Lord Neville's widow. Ah, since he
made himself high-priest of his Church, there is no impediment for
him in matters of this kind, for only God is mightier than he.

"The beautiful Anne Boleyn, Henry's second wife, proved this. I have
seen her often, and I tell you, Jane, she was of wondrous beauty.
Whoever looked upon her, could not but love her, and he whom she
smiled upon felt himself fascinated and glorified. When she had
borne to the king the Princess Elizabeth, I heard him say, that he
had attained the summit of his happiness, the goal of his wishes,
for the queen had borne him a daughter, and so there was a regular
and legitimate successor to his throne. But this happiness lasted
only a brief time.

"The king conceived one day that Anne Boleyn was not, as he had
hitherto believed, the most beautiful woman in the world; but that
there were women still more beautiful at his court, who therefore
had a stronger vocation to become Queen of England. He had seen Jane
Seymour, and she without doubt was handsomer than Anne Boleyn, for
she was not as yet the king's consort, and there was an obstacle to
his possession of her--the Queen Anne Boleyn. This obstacle must be
go out of the way.

"Henry, by virtue of his plentitude of power, might again have been
divorced from his wife, but he did not like to repeat himself, he
wished to be always original; and no one was to be allowed to say
that his divorces were only the cloak of his capricious lewdness.

"He had divorced Catharine of Aragon on account of conscientious
scruples; therefore, some other means must be devised for Anne
Boleyn.

"The shortest way to be rid of her was the scaffold. Why should not
Anne travel that road, since so many had gone it before her? for a
new force had entered into the king's life: the tiger had licked
blood! His instinct was aroused, and he recoiled no more from those
crimson rills which flowed in the veins of his subjects.

"He had given Lady Anne Boleyn the crimson mantle of royalty, why
then should she not give him her crimson blood? For this there was
wanted only a pretext, and this was soon found. Lady Rochfort was
Jane Seymour's aunt, and she found some men, of whom she asserted
that they had been lovers of the fair Anne Boleyn. She, as the
queen's first lady of the bed-chamber, could of course give the most
minute particulars concerning the matter, and the king believed her.
He believed her, though these four pretended lovers of the queen,
who were executed for their crime, all, with the exception of a
single one, asseverated that Anne Boleyn was innocent, and that they
had never been in her presence. The only one who accused the queen
of illicit intercourse with him was James Smeaton, a musician.
[Footnote: Tytler.] But he had been promised his life for this
confession. However, it was not thought advisable to keep this
promise, for fear that, when confronted with the queen, he might not
have the strength to sustain his assertion. But not to be altogether
unthankful to him for so useful a confession, they showed him the
favor of not executing him with the axe, but the more agreeable and
easier death of hanging was vouchsafed to him.[Footnote: Burnet,
vol. i, p. 205.]

"So the fair and lovely Anne Boleyn must lay her head upon the
block. The day on which this took place, the king had ordered a
great hunt, and early that morning we rode out to Epping Forest. The
king was at first unusually cheerful and humorous, and he commanded
me to ride near him, and tell him something from the chronique
scandaleuse of our court. He laughed at my spiteful remarks, and the
worse I calumniated, the merrier was the king. Finally, we halted;
the king had talked and laughed so much that he had at last become
hungry. So he encamped under an oak, and, in the midst of his suite
and his dogs, he took a breakfast, which pleased him very much,
although he had now become a little quieter and more silent, and
sometimes turned his face toward the direction of London with
visible restlessness and anxiety. But suddenly was heard from that
direction the dull sound of a cannon. We all knew that this was the
signal which was to make known to the king that Anne Boleyn's head
had fallen. We knew it, and a shudder ran through our whole frames.
The king alone smiled, and as he arose and took his weapon from my
hand, he said, with cheerful face, 'It is done, the business is
finished. Unleash the dogs, and let us follow the boar.' [Footnote:
The king's very words. Tytler, p. 383. The oak. under which this
took place is still pointed out in Epping Forest, and in fact is not
less remarkable as the oak of Charles II.]

"That," said Lord Douglas, sadly, "that was King Henry's funeral
discourse over his charming and innocent wife."

"Do you regret her, my father?" asked Lady Jane, with surprise. "But
Anne Boleyn was, it seems to me, an enemy of our Church, and an
adherent of the accursed new doctrine."

Her father shrugged his shoulders almost contemptuously. That did
not prevent Lady Anne from being one of the fairest and loveliest
women of Old England. And, besides, much as she inclined to the new
doctrine, she did us essential good service, for she it was who bore
the blame of Thomas More's death. Since he had not approved her
marriage with the king, she hated him, as the king hated him because
he would not take the oath of supremacy. Henry, however, would have
spared him, for, at that time, he still possessed some respect for
learning and virtue, and Thomas More was so renowned a scholar that
the king held him in reverence. But Anne Boleyn demanded his death,
and so Thomas More must be executed. Oh, believe me, Jane, that was
an important and sad hour for all England, the hour when Thomas More
laid his head upon the block. We only, we gay people in the palace
of Whitehall, we were cheerful and merry. We were dancing a new kind
of dance, the music of which was written by the king himself, for
you know the king is not merely an author, but also a composer, and
as he now writes pious books, so he then composed dances. [Footnote:
Granger's "Biographical History of England," vol. I, p. 137. of
Tytler, p. 354.] That evening, after we had danced till we were
tired, we played cards. Just as I had won a few guineas from the
king, the lieutenant of the Tower came with the tidings that the
execution was over, and gave us a description of the last moments of
the great scholar. The king threw down his cards, and, turning an
angry look on Anne Boleyn, said, in an agitated voice, 'You are to
blame for the death of this man!' Then he arose and withdrew to his
apartments, while no one was permitted to follow him, not even the
queen. [Footnote: Tytler, p. 354] You see, then, that Anne Boleyn
had a claim on our gratitude, for the death of Thomas More delivered
Old England from another great peril. Melanchthon and Bucer, and
with them several of the greatest pulpit orators of Germany, had set
out to come to London, and, as delegates of the Germanic Protestant
princes, to nominate the king as head of their alliance. But the
terrible news of the execution of their friend frightened them back,
and caused them to return when half-way here. [Footnote: Tytler, p.
357. Leti, vol. I, p. 180. Granger, vol. I, p. 119.]

"Peace, then, to the ashes of unhappy Anne Boleyn! However, she was
avenged too, avenged on her successor and rival, for whose sake she
was made to mount the scaffold--avenged on Jane Seymour."

"But she was the king's beloved wife," said Jane, "and when she died
the king mourned for her two years."

"He mourned!" exclaimed Lord Douglas, contemptuously. "He has
mourned for all his wives. Even for Anne Boleyn he put on mourning,
and in his white mourning apparel, the day after Anne's execution,
he led Jane Seymour to the marriage altar! This outward mourning,
what does it signify? Anne Boleyn also mourned for Catharine of
Aragon, whom she had pushed from the throne. For eight weeks she was
seen in yellow mourning on account of Henry's first wife; but Anne
Boleyn was a shrewd woman, and she knew very well that the yellow
mourning dress was exceedingly becoming to her."

"But the king's mourning was not merely external," said Lady Jane.
"He mourned really, for it was two years before he resolved on a new
marriage."

Earl Douglas laughed. "But he cheered himself during these two years
of widowhood with a very beautiful mistress, the French Marchioness
de Montreuil, and he would have married her had not the prudent
beauty preferred returning to France, because she found it
altogether too dangerous to become Henry's consort. For it is not to
be denied, a baleful star hovers over Henry's queens, and none of
them has descended from the throne in a natural way."

"Yet, father, Jane Seymour did so in a very natural way; she died in
childbed."

"Well, yes, in childbed. And yet by no natural death, for she could
have been saved. But Henry did not wish to save her. His love had
already grown cool, and when the physicians asked him whether they
should save the mother or the child, he replied, 'Save the child,
and let the mother die. I can get wives enough.' [Footnote: Burnet.]
Ah, my daughter, I hope you may not die such a natural death as Jane
Seymour did, for whom, as you say, the king mourned two years. But
after that period, something new, something altogether extraordinary
happened to the king. He fell in love with a picture, and because,
in his proud self-conceit, he was convinced that the fine picture
which Holbein had made of him, was not at all flattered, but
entirely true to nature, it did not occur to him that Holbein's
likeness of the Princess Anne of Cleves might be somewhat flattered,
and not altogether faithful. So the king fell in love with a
picture, and sent ambassadors to Germany to bring the original of
the portrait to England as his bride. He himself went to meet her at
Rochester, where she was to land. Ah, my child, I have witnessed
many queer and droll things in my eventful life, but the scene at
Rochester, however, is among my most spicy recollections. The king
was as enthusiastic as a poet, and deep in love as a youth of
twenty, and so began our romantic wedding-trip, on which Henry
disguised himself and took part in it, assuming the name of my
cousin. As the king's master of horse, I was honored with the
commission of carrying to the young queen the greeting of her ardent
husband, and begging her to receive the knight, who would deliver to
her a present from the king. She granted my request with a grin
which made visible a frightful row of yellow teeth. I opened the
door, and invited the king to enter. Ah, you ought to have witnessed
that scene! It is the only farcial passage in the bloody tragedy of
Henry's married life. You should have seen with what hasty
impatience the king rushed in, then suddenly, at the sight of her,
staggered back and stared at the princess. Slowly retiring, he
silently thrust into my hand the rich present that he had brought,
while at the same time he threw a look of flaming wrath on Lord
Cromwell, who had brought him the portrait of the princess and won
him to this marriage. The romantic, ardent lover vanished with this
look at his beloved. He approached the princess again--this time not
as a cavalier, but, with harsh and hasty words, he told her he was
the king himself. He bade her welcome in a few words, and gave her a
cold, formal embrace. He then hastily took my hand and drew me out
of the room, beckoning the rest to follow him. And when at length we
were out of the atmosphere of this poor ugly princess, and far
enough away from her, the king, with angry countenance, said to
Cromwell: 'Call you that a beauty? She is a Flanders mare, but no
princess.' [Footnote: Burnet, p. 174. Tytler, p. 417.] Anne's
ugliness was surely given her of God, that by it, the Church, in
which alone is salvation, might be delivered from the great danger
which threatened it. For had Anne of Cleves, the sister, niece,
granddaughter and aunt of all the Protestant princes of Germany,
been beautiful, incalculable danger would have threatened our
church. The king could not overcome his repugnance, and again his
conscience, which always appeared to be most tender and scrupulous,
when it was farthest from it and most regardless, must come to his
aid.

"The king declared that he had been only in appearance, not in his
innermost conscience, disposed to this marriage, from which he now
shrank back, because it would be, properly speaking, nothing more
than perfidy, perjury, and bigamy. For Anne's father had once
betrothed her to the son of the Duke of Lorraine, and had solemnly
pledged him his word to give her as a wife to the young duke as soon
as she was of age; rings had been exchanged and the marriage
contract already drawn up. Anne of Cleves, therefore, was virtually
already married, and Henry, with his tender conscience, could not
make one already married his wife. [Footnote: Burnet.] He made her,
therefore, his sister, and gave her the palace at Richmond for a
residence, in case she wished to remain in England. She accepted it;
her blood, which crept coldly and quietly through her veins, did not
rise at the thought of being despised and repudiated. She accepted
it, and remained in England.

"She was rejected because she was ugly; and now the king selected
Catharine Howard for his fifth consort, because she was pretty. Of
this marriage I know but little to tell you, for, at that time, I
had already gone to Dublin as minister, whither you soon followed
me. Catharine was very beautiful, and the king's heart, now growing
old, once more flamed high with youthful love. He loved her more
warmly than any other of his wives. He was so happy in her that,
kneeling down publicly in the church, with a loud voice he thanked
God for the happiness which his beautiful young queen afforded him.
But this did not last long. Even while the king was extolling it,
his happiness had reached its highest point, and the next day he was
dashed down into the abyss. I speak without poetical exaggeration,
my child. The day before, he thanked God for his happiness, and the
next morning Catharine Howard was already imprisoned and accused, as
an unfaithful wife, a shameless strumpet.[Footnote: Tytler, p. 432.]
More than seven lovers had preceded her royal spouse, and some of
them had accompanied her even on the progress through Yorkshire,
which she made with the king her husband. This time it was no
pretence, for he had not yet had time to fall in love with another
woman, and Catharine well knew how to enchain him and ever to kindle
new flames within him. But just because he loved her, he could not
forgive her for having deceived him. In love there is so much
cruelty and hatred; and Henry, who but yesterday lay at her feet,
burned to-day with rage and jealousy, as yesterday with love and
rapture. In his rage, however, he still loved her, and when he held
in his hand indubitable proof of her guilt, he wept like a child.
But since he could no longer be her lover, he would be her hangman;
since she had spotted the crimson of his royal mantle, he would dye
it afresh with her own crimson blood. And he did so. Catharine
Howard was forced to lay her beautiful head upon the block, as Anne
Boleyn had done before her; and Anne's death was now once more
avenged. Lady Rochfort had been Anne Boleyn's accuser, and her
testimony had brought that queen to the scaffold; but now she was
convicted of being Catharine Howard's assistant and confidante in
her love adventures, and with Catharine, Lady Rochfort also ascended
the scaffold.

"Ah, the king needed a long time to recover from this blow. He
searched two years for a pure, uncontaminated virgin, who might
become his queen without danger of the scaffold. But he found none;
so he took then Lord Neville's widow, Catharine Parr. But you know,
my child, that Catharine is an unlucky name for Henry's queens. The
first Catharine he repudiated, the second he beheaded. What will he
do with the third?"

Lady Jane smiled. "Catharine does not love him," said she, "and I
believe she would willingly consent, like Anne of Cleves, to become
his sister, instead of his wife."

"Catharine does not love the king?" inquired Lord Douglas, in
breathless suspense. "She loves another, then!"

"No, my father! Her heart is yet like a sheet of white paper: no
single name is yet inscribed there."

"Then we must write a name there, and this name must drive her to
the scaffold, or into banishment," said her father impetuously. "It
is your business, my child, to take a steel graver, and in some way
write a name in Catharine's heart so deep and indelibly, that the
king may some day read it there."


CHAPTER VIII.

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.


Both now kept silent for a long time. Lord Douglas had leaned back
on the ottoman, and, respiring heavily, seemed to breathe a little
from the exertion of his long discourse. But while he rested, his
large, piercing eyes were constantly turned to Jane, who, leaning
back on the cushion, was staring thoughtfully into the empty air,
and seemed to be entirely forgetful of her father's presence.

A cunning smile played for a moment over the countenance of the earl
as he observed her, but it quickly disappeared, and now deep folds
of care gathered on his brow. As he saw that Lady Jane was plunging
deeper and deeper into reverie, he at length laid his hand on her
shoulder and hastily asked, "What are you thinking of, Jane?"

She gave a sudden start, and looked at the earl with an embarrassed
air.

"I am thinking of all that you have been saying to me, my father,"
replied she, calmly. "I am considering what benefit to our object I
can draw from it."

Lord Douglas shook his head, and smiled incredulously. At length he
said solemnly: "Take care, Jane, take care that your heart does not
deceive your head. If we would reach our aim here, you must, above
all things, maintain a cool heart and a cool head. Do you still
possess both, Jane?"

In confusion she cast down her eyes before his penetrating look.
Lord Douglas noticed it, and a passionate word was already on his
lips. But he kept it back. As a prudent diplomat, he knew that it is
often more politic to destroy a thing by ignoring it, than to enter
into an open contest with it. The feelings are like the dragons'
teeth of Theseus. If you contend with them, they always grow again
anew, and with renewed energy, out of the soil. Lord Douglas,
therefore, was very careful not to notice his daughter's confusion.
"Pardon me, my daughter, if, in my zeal and my tender care for you,
I go too far. I know that your dear and beautiful head is cool
enough to wear a crown. I know that in your heart dwell only
ambition and religion. Let us, then, further consider what we have
to do in order to attain our end.

"We have spoken of Henry as a husband, of Henry as a man; and I hope
you have drawn some useful lessons from the fate of his wives. You
have learned that it is necessary to possess all the good and all
the bad qualities of woman in order to control this stiff-necked and
tyrannical, this lustful and bigoted, this vain and sensual man,
whom the wrath of God has made King of England. You must, before all
things, be perfect master of the difficult art of coquetry. You must
become a female Proteus--today a Messalina, to-morrow a nun; to-day
one of the _literati_, to-morrow a playful child; you must ever seek
to surprise the king, to keep him on the stretch, to enliven him.
You must never give way to the dangerous feeling of security, for in
fact King Henry's wife is never safe. The axe always hangs over her
head, and you must ever consider your husband as only a fickle
lover, whom you must every day captivate anew."

"You speak as though I were already queen," said Lady Jane, smiling;
"and yet I cannot but think that, in order to come to that, many
difficulties are to be overcome, which may indeed perhaps be
insuperable."

"Insuperable!" exclaimed her father with a shrug of the shoulders.
"With the aid of the holy Church, no hinderance is insuperable.
Only, we must be perfectly acquainted with our end and our means. Do
not despise, then, to sound the character of this king ever and
again, and be certain you will always find in him some new hidden
recess, some surprising peculiarity. We have spoken of him as a
husband and the father of a family, but of his religious and
political standing I have as yet told you nothing. And yet that, my
child, is the principal point in his whole character.

"In the first place, then, Jane, I will tell you a secret. The king,
who has constituted himself high-priest of his Church--whom the pope
once called 'the Knight of the Truth and the Faith'--the king has at
the bottom of his heart no religion. He is a wavering reed, which
the wind turns this way to-day, and that way to-morrow. He knows not
his own will, and, coquetting with both parties, to-day he is a
heretic, in order to exhibit himself as a strong, unprejudiced,
enlightened man; to-morrow a Catholic, in order to show himself an
obedient and humble servant of God, who seeks and finds his
happiness only in love and piety. But for both confessions of faith
he possesses at heart a profound indifference; and had the pope at
that time placed no difficulties in his way, had he consented to his
divorce from Catharine, Henry would have always remained a very good
and active servant of the Catholic Church. But they were imprudent
enough to irritate him by contradiction; they stimulated his vanity
and pride to resistance; and so Henry became a church reformer, not
from conviction, but out of pure love of opposition. And that, my
child, you must never forget, for, by means of this lever, you may
very well convert him again to a devout, dutiful, and obedient
servant of our holy Church. He has renounced the pope, and usurped
the supremacy of the Church, but he cannot summon up courage to
carry out his work and throw himself wholly into the arms of the
Reformation. However much he has opposed the person of the pope,
still he has always remained devoted to the Church, although perhaps
he does not know it himself. He is no Catholic, and he hears mass;
he has broken up the monasteries, and yet forbids priests to marry;
he has the Lord's supper administered under both kinds, and believes
in the real transubstantiation of the wine into the Redeemer's holy
blood. He destroys the convents, and yet commands that vows of
chastity, spoken by man or woman, must be faithfully kept; and
lastly, auricular confession is still a necessary constituent of his
Church. And these he calls his six articles, [Footnote: Burnet, vol.
I, p. 259. Tytler, p. 402. Mioti, vol. I, p. 134.] and the
foundation of his English Church. Poor, short-sighted and vain man!
He knows not that he has done all this, only because he wanted to be
the pope himself, and he is nothing more than an anti-pope of the
Holy Father at Rome, whom he, in his blasphemous pride, dares call
'the Bishop of Rome.'"

"But, for this audacity," said Jane, with looks of burning rage,
"the anathema has struck him and laid a curse upon his head, and
given him up to the hatred, contempt, and scorn of his own subjects.
Therefore, the Holy Father has justly named him 'the apostate and
lost son, the blaspheming usurper of the holy Church.' Therefore,
the pope has declared his crown forfeited, and promised it to him
who will vanquish him by force of arms. Therefore, the pope has
forbidden any of his subjects to obey him, and respect and recognize
him as king."

"And yet he remains King of England, and his subjects still obey him
in slavish submission," exclaimed Earl Douglas, shrugging his
shoulders. "It is very unwise to go so far in threats, for one
should never threaten with punishment which he is not likewise able
to really execute. This Romish interdict has rather been an
advantage to the king, than done him harm, for it has forced the
king into haughtier opposition, and proved to his subjects that a
man irny roally be under an interdict, and yet in prosperity and the
full enjoyment of life."

"The pope's excommunication has not hurt the king at all; his throne
has not felt the slightest jar from it, but the apostasy of the king
has deprived the Holy See at Rome of a very perceptible support;
therefore we must bring the faithless king back to the holy Church,
for she needs him. And this, my daughter, is the work that God and
the will of His holy representative have placed in your hands. A
noble, glorious, and at the same time profitable work, for it makes
you a queen! But I repeat, be cautious, never irritate the king by
contradiction. Without their knowing it, we must lead the wavering
where salvation awaits them. For, as we have said, he is a waverer;
and in the haughty pride of his royalty, he has the presumption to
wish to stand above all parties, and to be himself able to found a
new Church, a Church which is neither Catholic nor Protestant, but
Ms Church; to which, in the six articles, the so-called 'Bloody
Statute' he has given its laws.

"He will not be Protestant nor Catholic, and, in order to show his
impartiality, he is an equally terrible persecutor of both parties.
So that it has come to pass that we must say, 'In England, Catholics
are hanged, and those not stich are burned.' [Footnote: Leti, vol.
I, p. 144. f Tytler, p. 38.] It gives the king pleasure to hold with
steady and cruel hand the balance between the two parties, and on
the same day that he has a papist incarcerated, because he has
disputed the king's supremacy, he has one of the reformed put upon
the rack, because he has denied the real transubstantiation of the
wine, or perhaps has dispiited concerning the necessity of auricular
confession. Indeed, during the last session of Parliament, five men
were hanged because they disputed the supremacy, and five others
burned because they professed the reformed views! And this evening,
Jane--this, the king's wedding-night--by the special order of the
king, who wanted to show his impartiality as head of the church,
Catholics and Protestants have been coupled together like dogs, and
hurried to the stake, the Catholics being condemned (is traitors,
and the others as heretics!)

"Oh," said Jane, shuddering and turning pale, "I will not be Queen
of England. I have a horror of this cruel, savage king, whose heart
is wholly without compassion or love.

Her father laughed. "Do you not then know, child, how you can make
the hyena gentle, and the tiger tame? You throw them again and again
a fresh prey, which they may devour, and since they love blood so
dearly, you constantly give them blood to drink, so that they may
never thirst for it. The king's only steady and unchanging
peculiarity is his cruelty and delight in blood; one then must
always have some food ready for these, then he will ever be a very
affectionate and gracious king and husband.

"And there is no lack of objects for this bloodthirstiness. There
are so many men and women at his court, and when he is precisely in
a bloodthirsty humor, it is all the same to Henry whose blood he
drinks. He has shed the blood of his wives and relatives; he has
executed those whom he called his most confidential friends; he has
sent the noblest men of his kingdom to the scaffold.

"Thomas More knew him very well, and in a few striking words he
summed up the whole of the king's character. Ah, it seems to me that
I see now the quiet and gentle face of this wise man, as I saw him
standing in yonder bay-window, and near him the king, his arms
around the neck of High-Chancellor More, and listening to his
discourse with a kind of reverential devotion. And when the king had
gone, I walked up to Thomas More and congratulated him on the high
and world-renowned favor in which he stood with the king. 'The king
really loves you,' said I. 'Yes,' replied he, with his quiet, sad
smile, 'yes, the king truly loves me. But that would not for one
moment hinder him from giving my head for a valuable diamond, a
beautiful woman, or a hand's breadth of land in France.' [Footnote:
Leti, vol. i, p 194.] He was right, and for a beautiful woman, the
head of this sage had to fall, of whom the most Christian emperor
and king, Charles V., said: ' Had I been the master of such a
servant, of whose ability and greatness we have had so much
experience for many years; had I possessed an adviser so wise and
earnest as Thomas More was, I would rather have lost the best city
of my realm, than so worthy a servant and counsellor.' [Footnote:
Tytler, p. 354.]

"No, Jane, be that your first and most sacred rule, never to trust
the king, and never reckon on the duration of his affection and the
manifestations of his favor. For, in the perfidy of his heart, it
often pleases him to load with tokens of his favor those whose
destruction he has already resolved upon, to adorn and decorate with
orders and jewels to-day those whom to-morrow he is going to put to
death. It flatters his self-complacency, like the lion, to play a
little with the puppy he is about to devour. Thus did he with
Cromwell, for many years his counsellor and friend, who had
committed no other crime than that of having first exhibited to the
king the portrait of the ugly Anne of Cleves, whom Holbein had
turned into a beauty. But the king took good care not to be angry
with Cromwell, or to reproach him for it. Much more--in recognition
of his great services, he raised him to the earldom of Essex,
decorated him with the Order of the Garter and appointed him lord
chamberlain; and then, when Cromwell felt perfectly secure and
proudly basked in the sunshine of royal favor, then all at once the
king had him arrested and dragged to the tower, in order to accuse
him of high treason. [Footnote: Ibid, p. 423.] And so Cromwellwas
executed, because Anne of Cleves did not please the king, and
because Hans Holbein had flattered her picture.

"But now we have had enough of the past, Jane. Now let us speak of
the present and of the future, my daughter. Let us now first of all
devise the means to overthrow this woman who stands in our way. When
she is once overthrown, it will not be very difficult for us to put
you in her place. For you are now here, near the king. The great
mistake in onr earlier efforts was, that we were not present and
could work only through go-betweens and confidants. The king did not
see you, and since the unlucky affair with Anne of Cleves he
mistrusts likenesses; I very well knew that, for I, my child,
confide in no one, not even in the most faithful and noblest
friends. I rely upon nobody but ourselves. Had we been here, you
would now be Queen of England instead of Catharine Parr. But, to our
misfortune, I was still the favorite of the Regent of Scotland, and
as such, I could not venture to approach Henry. It was necessary
that I should fall into disgrace there, in order to be again sure of
the king's favor here.

"So I fell into disgrace and fled with you hither. Now, then, here
we are, and let the fight begin. And you have to-day already taken
an important step toward our end. You have attracted the notice of
the king, and established yourself still more securely in the favor
of Catharine. I confess, Jane, I am charmed with your prudent
conduct. You have this day won the hearts of all parties, and it was
wonderfully shrewd in you to come to the aid of the Earl of Surrey,
as you at the same time won to you the heretical party, to which
Anne Askew belongs. Oh, it was indeed, Jane, a stroke of policy that
you made. For the Howard family is the most powerful and greatest at
court, and Henry, Earl of Surrey, is one of its noblest
representatives. Therefore we have now already a powerful party at
court, which has in view only the high and holy aim of securing a
victory for the holy Church, and which quietly and silently works
only for this--to again reconcile the king to the pope. Henry
Howard,Earl of Surrey, like bis father, the Duke of Norfolk, is a
good Catholic, as his niece Catharine Howard was; only she, besides
God and the Church, was a little too fond of the images of God--
fine-looking men. It was this that gave the victory to the other
party, and forced the Catholic to succumb to the heretical party at
court. Yes, for the moment, Cranmer with Catharine has got the
better of us, but soon Gardiner with Jane Douglas will overcome the
heretics, and send them to the scaffold. That is our plan, and, God
permitting, we will carry it out."

"But it will be a difficult undertaking," said Lady Jane, with a
sigh. "The queen is a pure, transparent soul; she has a shrewd head
and a clear glance. She is, moreover, guileless in her thoughts, and
recoils with true maidenly timidity from every sin."

"We must cure her of this timidity, and that is your task, Jane. You
must despoil her of these strict notions about virtue. With
flattering voice you must ensnare her heart, and entice it to sin."

"Oh, that is an infernal plot!" said Lady Jane, turning pale. "That,
my father, would be a crime, for that would be not only destroying
her earthly happiness, but also imperilling her soul. I must entice
her to a crime; that is your dishonorable demand! But I will not
obey you! It is true, I hate her, for she stands in the way of my
ambition. It is true I will destroy her, for she wears the crown
which I wish to possess; but never will I be so base as to pour into
her very heart the poison by which she shall fall. Let her seek the
poison for herself; I will not hold back her hand; I will not warn
her. Let her seek the ways of sin herself: I will not tell her that
she has erred; hut I will, from afar, dog her, and watch each step,
and listen for every word and sigh, and when she has committed a
crime, then I will betray her, and deliver her up to her judges.
That is what I can and will do. I will be the demon to drive her
from paradise in God's name, but not the serpent to entice her in
the devil's name to sin."

She paused, and, panting for breath, sunk back upon the cushion; but
her father's hand was laid upon her shoulder with a convulsive grip,
and pale with rage and with eyes flashing with anger, he stared at
her.

A cry of terror burst from Lady Jane. She, who never had seen her
father but smiling and full of kindness, scarcely recognized that
countenance, distorted with rage. She could scarcely convince
herself that this man, with eyes darting fire, scowling eyebrows and
lips quivering with rage, was really her father.

"You will not?" exclaimed he, with a hollow, threatening voice. "You
dare rebel against the holy commands of the Church? Have you, then,
forgotten what you promised to the Holy Fathers, whose pupil you
are? Have you forgotten that the brothers and sisters of the Holy
League are permitted to have no other will than that of their
masters! Have you forgotten the sublime vow which you made to our
master, Ignatius Loyola? Answer me, unfaithful and disobedient
daughter of the Church! Repeat to me the oath which you took when he
received you into the holy Society of the Disciples of Jesus! Repeat
your oath, I say!"

As if constrained by an invisible power, Jane had arisen, and now
stood, her hands folded across her breast, submissive and trembling
before her father, whose erect, proud, and wrathful form towered
above her.

"I have sworn," said she, "to subject my own thought, and will, my
life, and endeavors, obediently to the will of the Holy Father. I
have sworn to be a blind tool in the hands of my masters, and to do
only what they command and enjoin. I have vowed to serve the holy
Church, in which alone is salvation, in every way and with all the
means at my command; and I will despise none of these means,
consider none trifling, disdain none, provided it leads to the end.
For the end sanctifies the means, and nothing is a sin which is done
for the honor of God and the Church!"

"Ad majorem Dei gloriam!" said her father, devoutly folding his
hands. "And you know what awaits you, if you violate your oath?"

"Earthly disgrace and eternal destruction await me. The curse of all
my brethren and sisters awaits me--eternal damnation and punishment.
With thousands of torments and tortures of the rack, will the Holy
Fathers put me to death; and as they kill my body and throw it as
food to the beasts of prey, they will curse my soul and deliver it
over to purgatory."

"And what awaits you if you remain faithful to your oath, and obey
the commands given you?"

"Honor and glory on earth, besides eternal blessedness in heaven."

"Then you will be a queen on earth and a queen in heaven. You know,
then, the sacred laws of the society, and you remember your oath?"

"I remember it."

"And you know that the holy Loyola, before he left us, gave the
Society of Jesus, in England, a master and general, whom all the
brethren and sisters must serve and submit to, to whom they owe
blind obedience and service without questioning?"

"I know it."

"And you know, likewise, by what sign the associates may recognize
the general?"

"By Loyola's ring, which he wears on the forefinger of his right
hand."

"Behold here this ring!" said the earl, drawing his hand out of his
doublet.

Lady Jane uttered a cry, and sank almost senseless at his feet.

Lord Douglas, smiling graciously, raised her in his arms. "You see,
Jane, I am not merely your father, but your master also. And you
will obey me, will you not?"

"I will obey!" said she, almost inaudibly, as she kissed the hand
with the fatal ring.

"You will be to Catharine Parr, as you have expressed it, the
serpent, that seduces her to sin?"

"I will."

"You will beguile her into sin, and entice her to indulge a love
which must lead her to destruction?"

"I will do it, my father."

"I will now tell you whom she is to love, and who is to be the
instrument of destruction. You will so manage the queen that she
will love Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey."

Jane uttered a scream, and clung to the back of a chair to keep from
falling.

Her father observed her with penetrating, angry looks. "What means
this outcry? Why does this choice surprise you?" asked he.

Lady Jane had already gained her self-possession. "It surprised me,"
said she, "because the earl is betrothed."

A singular smile played about the earl's lips. "It is not the first
time," said he, "that even a man already married has become
dangerous to a woman's heart, and often the very impossibility of
possession adds fuel to the flames of love. Woman's heart is ever so
full of selfishness and contradiction."

Lady Jane cast down her eyes, and made no reply. She felt that the
piercing and penetrating look of her father was resting on her face.
She knew that, just then, he was reading her soul, although she did
not look at him.

"Then you no longer refuse?" asked he, at length. "You will inspire
the young queen with love for the Earl of Surrey?"

"I will endeavor to do it, my father."

"If you try, with a real and energetic determination to succeed, you
will prevail. For, as you said, the queen's heart is still free; it
is, then, like a fruitful soil, which is only waiting for some one
to sow the seed in it, to bring forth flowers and fruit. Catharine
Parr does not love the king; you will, then, teach her to love Henry
Howard."

"Yet, my father," said Lady Jane, with a sarcastic smile, "to bring
about this result, one must, before all things, be acquainted with a
magic spell, through the might of which the earl will first glow
with love for Catharine. For the queen has a proud soul, and she
will never so forget her dignity as to love a man who is not
inflamed with an ardent passion for her. But the earl has not only a
bride, but, as it is said, a mistress also."

"Ah! you consider it, then, perfectly unworthy of a woman to love a
man who does not adore her?" asked the earl, in a significant tone.
"I am rejoiced to hear this from my daughter, and thus to he certain
that she will not fall in love with the Earl of Surrey, who is
everywhere else called 'the lady-killer.' And if you have informed
yourself in so surprising a manner as to the earl's private
relations, you have done so, without doubt, only because your
sagacious and subtle head has already guessed what commission I
would give you with respect to the earl. Besides, my daughter, you
are in error: and if a certain high, but not on that account the
less very unfortunate lady, should happen to really love the Earl of
Surrey, her lot will, perhaps, be the common one--to practise
resignation."

An expression of joyful surprise passed over the countenance of Lady
Jane, while her father thus spoke; but it was forced to instantly
give way to a deathly paleness, as the earl added: "Henry Howard is
destined for Catharine Parr, and you are to help her to love so
hotly this proud, handsome earl, who is a faithful servant of the
Church, wherein alone is salvation, that she will forget all
considerations and all dangers."

Lady Jane ventured one more objection. She caught eagerly at her
father's words, to seek still for some way of escape.

"You call the earl a faithful servant of our Church," said she, "and
yet you would implicate him also in your dangerous plot? You have
not, then, my father, considered that it is just as pernicious to
love the queen as to be loved by her? And, without doubt, if love
for the Earl of Surrey bring the queen to the scaffold, the head of
the earl will fall at the same time, no matter whether he return her
love or not."

The earl shrugged his shoulders.

"When the question is about the weal of the Church and our holy
religion, the danger which, thereby, it may be, threatens one of our
number, must not frighten us back. Holy sacrifices must be always
offered to a holy cause. Well and good, then, let the earl's head
fall, provided the only saving Church gains new vigor from this
blood of martyrs. But see, Jane, the morning already begins to dawn,
and I must hasten to leave you, lest these courtiers, ever given to
slandering, may in some way or other take the father for a lover,
and cast suspicion on the immaculate virtue of my Jane. Farewell,
then, my daughter! We both, now, know our rôles, and will take care
to play them with success. You are the friend and confidante of the
queen, and I the harmless courtier, who tries, now and then, to gain
a smile from the king by some kind and merry jest. That is all.
Good-morning, then, Jane, and good-night. For you must sleep, my
child, so that your cheeks may remain fresh and your eyes bright.
The king hates pining pale-faces. Sleep, then, future Queen of
England!"

He gently kissed her forehead, and left the room with lingering
step.

Lady Jane stood and listened to the sound of his footsteps gradually
dying away, when she sank on her knees, wholly crushed, utterly
stunned.

"My God, my God!" murmured she, while streams of tears flooded her
face, "and I am to inspire the queen with love for the Earl of
Surrey, and I--I love him!"


CHAPTER IX.

LENDEMAIN.


The great levée was over. Sitting beside the king on the throne,
Catharine had received the congratulations of her court; and the
king's smiling look, and the tender words which, in undertone, he
now and then addressed to the queen, had manifested to the prudent
and expert courtiers that the king was to-day just as much enamored
of his young consort as he had been yesterday of his bride.
Therefore, every one exerted himself to please the queen, and to
catch every look, every smile, which she let fall, like sunbeams,
here and there, in order to see for whom they were intended, so that
they might, perchance, by this means, divine who were to be the
future favorites of the queen, and be the first to become intimate
with them.

But the young queen directed her looks to no one in particular. She
was friendly and smiling, yet one felt that this friendliness was
constrained, this smile full of sadness. The king alone did not
notice it. He was cheerful and happy, and it seemed to him,
therefore, that nobody at his court could dare sigh when he, the
king, was satisfied.

After the grand presentation, at which all the great and noble of
the realm had passed in formal procession before the royal pair, the
king had, according to the court etiquette of the time, given his
hand to his consort, led her down from the throne and conducted her
to the middle of the hall, in order to present to her the personages
in waiting at her court.

But this walk from the throne to the centre of the hall had greatly
fatigued the king; this promenade of thirty steps was for him a very
unusual and troublesome performance, and the king longed to change
to something else more agreeable. So he beckoned to the chief master
of ceremonies, and bade him open the door leading into the dining-
room. Then he ordered his "house equipage" to be brought up, and,
seating himself in it with the utmost stateliness, he had the sedan
kept at the queen's side, waiting impatiently till the presentation
should at last conclude, and Catharine accompany him to lunch.

The announcements of the maids of honor and female attendants had
been already made, and now came the gentlemen's turn.

The chief master of ceremonies read from his list the names of those
cavaliers who were, henceforth, to he in waiting near the queen, and
which names the king had written down with his own hand. And at each
new appointment a slight expression of pleased astonishment flitted
across the faces of the assembled courtiers, for it was always one
of the youngest, handsomest, and most amiable lords whom the master
of ceremonies had to name.

Perhaps the king proposed to play a cruel game at hazard, in
surrounding his consort with the young men of his court; he wished
to plunge her into the midst of danger, either to let her perish
there, or, by her avoiding danger, to be able to place the
unimpeachable virtue of his young wife in the clearest light.

The list had begun with the less important offices, and, ever
ascending higher, they now came to positions the highest and of
greatest consequence.

Still the queen's master of horse and the chamberlain had not been
named, and these were without doubt the most important charges at
the queen's court. For one or the other of these officers was always
very near the queen. When she was in the palace, the lord of the
chamber had to remain in the anteroom, and no one could approach the
queen but through his mediation. To him the queen had to give her
orders with regard to the schemes and pleasures of the day. He was
to contrive new diversions and amusements. He had the right of
joining the queen's narrow evening circle, and to stand behind the
queen's chair when the royal pair, at times, desired to sup without
ceremony.

This place of chief chamberlain was, therefore, a very important
one; for since it confined him a large part of the day in the
queen's presence, it was scarcely avoidable that the lord
chamberlain should become either the confidential and attentive
friend, or the malevolent and lurking enemy of the queen!

But the place of master of horse was of no less consequence. For as
soon as the queen left the palace, whether on foot or in a carriage,
whether to ride in the forest or to glide down the Thames in her
gilded yacht, the master of horse must be ever at her side, must
ever attend her. Indeed, this service was still more exclusive,
still more important. For, though the queen's apartments were open
to the lord chamberlain, yet, however, he was never alone with her.
The attending maids of honor were always present and prevented there
being any têtes-à-têtes or intimacy between the queen and her
chamberlain.

But with the master of horse it was different--since many
opportunities presented themselves, when he could approach the queen
unnoticed, or at least speak to her without being overheard. He had
to offer her his hand to assist her in entering her carriage; he
could ride near the door of her coach; he accompanied her on water
excursions and pleasure rides, and these last were so much the more
important because they afforded him, to a certain extent,
opportunity for a tête-à-tête with the queen. For only the master of
horse was permitted to ride at her side; he even had precedence of
the ladies of the suite, so as to be able to give the queen
immediate assistance in case of any accident, or the stumbling of
her horse. Therefore, no one of the suite could perceive what the
queen said to the master of horse when he rode at her side.

It was understood, therefore, how influential this place might be.
Besides, when the queen was at Whitehall, the king was almost always
near her; while, thanks to his daily increasing corpulency, he was
not exactly in a condition to leave the palace otherwise than in a
carriage.

It was therefore very natural that the whole company at court
awaited with eager attention and bated breath the moment when the
master of ceremonies would name these two important personages,
whose names had been kept so secret that nobody had yet learned
them. That morning, just before he handed the list to the master of
ceremonies, the king had written down these two names with his own
hand.

Not the court only, but also the king himself, was watching for
these two names. For he wished to see the effect of them, and, by
the different expression of faces, estimate the number of the
friends of these two nominees. The young queen alone exhibited the
same unconcerned affability; her heart only beat with uniform
calmness, for she did not once suspect the importance of the moment.

Even the voice of the master of ceremonies trembled slightly, as he
now read, "To the place of high chamberlain to the queen, his
majesty appoints my Lord Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey."

An approving murmur was heard, and almost all faces manifested glad
surprise.

"He has a great many friends," muttered the king. "He is dangerous,
then!" An angry look darted from his eyes upon the young earl, who
was now approaching the queen, to bend his knee before her and to
press to his lips the proffered hand.

Behind the queen stood Lady Jane, and as she beheld thus close
before her the young man, so handsome, so long yearned for, and so
secretly adored; and as she thought of her oath, she felt a violent
pang, raging jealousy, killing hatred toward the young queen, who
had, it is true, without suspecting it, robbed her of the loved one,
and condemned her to the terrible torture of pandering to her.

The chief master of ceremonies now read in a loud solemn voice, "To
the place of master of horse, his majesty appoints my Lord Thomas
Seymour, Earl of Sudley."

It was very well that the king had at that moment directed his whole
attention to his courtiers, and sought to read in their appearance
the impression made by this nomination.

Had he observed his consort, he would have seen that an expression
of delighted surprise flitted across Catharine's countenance, and a
charming smile played round her lips.

But the king, as we have said, thought only of his court; he saw
only that the number of those who rejoiced at Seymour's appointment
did not come up to that of those who received Surrey's nomination
with so much applause.

Henry frowned and muttered to himself, "These Howards are too
powerful. I will keep a watchful eye upon them."

Thomas Seymour approached the queen, and, bending his knee before
her, kissed her hand. Catharine received him with a gracious smile.
"My lord," said she, "you will at once enter on service with me, and
indeed, as I hope, in such manner as will be acceptable to the whole
court. My lord, take the fleetest of your coursers, and hasten to
Castle Holt, where the Princess Elizabeth is staying. Carry her this
letter from her royal father, and she will follow you hither. Tell
her that I long to embrace in her a friend and sister, and that I
pray her to pardon me if I cannot give up to her exclusively the
heart of her king and father, but that I also must still keep a
place in the same for myself. Hasten to Castle Holt, my lord, and
bring us Princess Elizabeth."


CHAPTER X.

THE KING'S FOOL.


Two years had passed away since the king's marriage, and still
Catharine Parr had always kept in favor with her husband; still her
enemies were foiled in their attempts to ruin her, and raise the
seventh queen to the throne.

Catharine had ever been cautious, ever discreet. She had always
preserved a cold heart and a cool head. Each morning she had said to
herself that this day might be her last; that some incautious word,
some inconsiderate act, might deprive her of her crown and her life.
For Henry's savage and cruel disposition seemed, like his
corpulency, to increase daily, and it needed only a trifle to
inflame him to the highest pitch of rage, rage which, each time,
fell with fatal stroke on him who aroused it.

A knowledge and consciousness of this had made the queen cautious.
She did not wish to die yet. She still loved life so much. She loved
it because it had as yet afforded her so little delight. She loved
it because she had so much happiness, so much rapture and enjoyment
yet to hope from it. She did not wish to die yet, for she was ever
waiting for that life of which she had a foretaste only in her
dreams, and which her palpitating and swelling heart told her was
ready to awake in her, and, with its sunny, brilliant eyes, arouse
her from the winter sleep of her existence.

It was a bright and beautiful spring day. Catharine wanted to avail
herself of it, to take a ride and forget for one brief hour that she
was a queen. She wanted to enjoy the woods, the sweet May breeze,
the song of birds, the green meadows, and to inhale in full draughts
the pure air.

She wanted to ride. Nobody suspected how much secret delight and
hidden rapture lay in these words. No one suspected that for months
she had been looking forward with pleasure to this ride, and
scarcely dared to wish for it, just because it would be the
fulfilment of her ardent wishes.

She was already dressed in her riding-habit, and the little red
velvet hat, with its long, drooping white feather, adorned her
beautiful head. Walking up and down the room, she was waiting only
for the return of the lord chamberlain, whom she had sent to the
king to inquire whether he wished to speak with her before her ride.

Suddenly the door opened, and a strange apparition showed itself on
the threshold. It was a small, compact masculine figure, clad in
vesture of crimson silk, which was trimmed in a style showy and
motley enough, with puffs and bows of all colors, and which, just on
account of its motley appearance, contrasted strangely enough with
the man's white hair, and earnest and sombre face.

"Ah, the king's fool," said Catharine, with a merry laugh. "Well,
John, what is it that brings you here? Do you bring me a message
from the king, or have you made a bold hit, and wish me to take you
again under my protection?"

"No, queen," said John Heywood, seriously, "I have made no bold hit,
nor do I bring a message from the king. I bring nothing but myself.
Ah, queen, I see you want to laugh, but I pray you forget for a
moment that John Heywood is the king's fool, and that it does not
become him to wear a serious face and indulge sad thoughts like
other men."

"Oh, I know that you are not merely the king's fool, but a poet
also," said Catharine, with a gracious smile.

"Yes," said he, "I am a poet, and therefore it is altogether proper
for me to wear this fool's cap, for poets are all fools, and it were
better for them to be hung on the nearest tree instead of being
permitted to run about in their crazy enthusiasm, and babble things
on account of which people of sense despise and ridicule them. I am
a poet, and therefore, queen, I have put on this fool's dress, which
places me under the king's protection, and allows me to say to him
all sorts of things which nobody else has the courage to speak out.
But to-day, queen, I come to you neither as a fool nor as a poet,
but I come to you because I wish to cling to your knees and kiss
your feet. I come because I wish to tell you that you have made John
Heywood forever your slave. He will from this time forth lie like a
dog before your threshold and guard you from every enemy and every
evil which may press upon you. Night and day he will be ready for
your service, and know neither repose nor rest, if it is necessary
to fulfil your command or your wish."

As he thus spoke, with trembling voice and eyes dimmed with tears,
he knelt down and bowed his head at Catharine's feet.

"But what have I done to inspire you with such a feeling of
thankfulness?" asked Catharine with astonishment. "How have I
deserved that you, the powerful and universally dreaded favorite of
the king, should dedicate yourself to my service?"

"What have you done?" said he. "My lady, you have saved my son from
the stake! They had condemned him--that handsome noble youth--
condemned him, because he had spoken respectfully of Thomas More;
because he said this great and noble man did right to die, rather
than be false to his convictions. Ah, nowadays, it requires such a
trifle to condemn a man to death! a couple of thoughtless words are
sufficient! And this miserable, lick-spittle Parliament, in its
dastardliness and worthlessness, always condemns and sentences,
because it knows that the king is always thirsty for blood, and
always wants the fires of the stake to keep him warm. So they had
condemned my son likewise, and they would have executed him, but for
you. But you, whom God has sent as an angel of reconciliation on
this regal throne reeking with blood; you who daily risk your life
and your crown to save the life of some one of those unfortunates
whom fanaticism and thirst for blood have sentenced, and to procure
their pardon, you have save my son also."

"How! that young man who was to be burned yesterday, was your son?"

"Yes, he was my son."

"And you did not tell the king so? and you did not intercede for
him?"

"Had I done so, he would have been irretrievably lost! For you well
know the king is so proud of his impartiality and his virtue! Oh,
had he known that Thomas is my son he would have condemned him to
death, to show the people that Henry the Eighth everywhere strikes
the guilty and punishes the sinner, whatever name he may bear, and
whoever may intercede for him. Ah, even your supplication would not
have softened him, for the high-priest of the English Church could
never have pardoned this young man for not being the legitimate son
of his father, for not having the right to bear his name, because
his mother was the spouse of another man whom Thomas must call
father."

"Poor Heywood! Yes, now I understand. The king would, indeed, never
have forgiven this; and had he known it, your son would have
inevitably been condemned to the stake."

"You saved him, queen! Do you not believe now that I shall be
forever thankful to you?"

"I do believe it," said the queen, with a pleasant smile, as she
extended her hand for him to kiss. "I believe you, and I accept your
service."

"And you will need it, queen, for a tempest is gathering over your
head, and soon the lightning will flash and the thunders roll."

"Oh, I fear not! I have strong nerves!" said Catharine, smiling.
"When a storm comes, it is but a refreshing of nature, and I have
always seen that after a storm the sun shines again."

"You are a brave soul!" swirl John Heywood, sadly.

"That is, I am conscious of no guilt!"

"But your enemies will invent a crime to charge you with. Ah, as
soon as it is the aim to calumniate a neighbor and plunge him in
misery, men are all poets!"

"But you just now said that poets are crack-brained, and should be
hung to the first tree. We will, therefore, treat these slanderers
as poets, that is all."

"No, that is not all!" said John Heywood, energetically. "For
slanderers are like earth-worms. You cut them in pieces, but instead
of thereby killing them, you multiply each one and give it several
heads."

"But what is it, then, that I am accused of?" exclaimed Catharine,
impatiently. "Does not my life lie open and clear before you all? Do
I ever take pains to have any secrets? Is not my heart like a glass
house, into which you can all look, to convince yourselves that it
is a soil wholly unfruitful, and that not a single poor little
flower grows there?"

"Though this be so, your enemies will sow weeds and make the king
believe that it is burning love which has grown up in your heart."

"How! They will accuse me of having a love-affair?" asked Catharine,
and her lips slightly trembled.

"I do not know their plans yet; but I will find them out. There is a
conspiracy at work. Therefore, queen, be on your guard! Trust
nobody, for foes are ever wont to conceal themselves under
hypocritical faces and deceiving words."

"If you know my enemies, name them to me!" said Catharine,
impatiently. "Name them to me, that I may beware of them."

"I have not come to accuse anybody, but to warn you. I shall,
therefore, take good care not to point out your enemies to you; but
I will name your friends to you."

"Ah, then, I have friends, too!" whispered Catharine, with a happy
smile.

"Yes, you have friends; and, indeed, such as are ready to give their
blood and life for you."

"Oh, name them, name them to me!" exclaimed Catharine, all of a
tremble with joyful expectation.

"I name first, Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury. He is your true
and staunch friend, on whom you can build. He loves you as queen,
and he prizes you as the associate whom God has sent him to bring to
completion, here at the court of this most Christian and bloody
king, the holy work of the Reformation, and to cause the light of
knowledge to illuminate this night of superstition and priestly
domination. Build strongly on Cranmer, for he is your surest and
most invariable supporter, and should he sink, your fall would
inevitably follow. Therefore, not only rely on him, but also protect
him, and look upon him as your brother; for what you do for him, you
do for yourself."

"Yes, you are right," said Catharine, thoughtfully. "Cranmer is a
noble and staunch friend; and often enough already he has protected
me, in the king's presence, against those little pin-prickings of my
enemies, which do not indeed kill, but which make the whole body
sore and faint."

"Protect him, and thus protect yourself."

"Well, and the other friends?"

"I have given Cranmer the precedence; but now, queen, I name myself
as the second of your friends. If Cranmer is your staff, I will be
your dog; and, believe me, so long as you have such a staff and so
faithful a dog, you are safe. Cranmer will warn you of every stone
that lies in your way, and I will bite and drive off the enemies,
who, hidden behind the thicket, lurk in the way to fall upon you
from behind."

"I thank you! Really, I thank you!" said Catharine, heartily. "Well,
and what more?"

"More?" inquired Heywood with a sad smile.

"Mention a few more of my friends."

"Queen, it is a great deal, if one in a lifetime has found two
friends upon whom he can rely, and whose fidelity is not guided by
selfishness. You are perhaps the only crowned head that can boast of
such friends."

"I am a woman," said Catharine, thoughtfully, "and many women
surround me and daily swear to me unchanging faithfulness and
attachment. How! are all these unworthy the title of friends? Is
even Lady Jane Douglas unworthy; she, whom I have called my friend
these many long years, and whom I trust as a sister? Tell me, John
Heywood, you who, as it is said, know everything, and search out
everything that takes place at court, tell me, is not Lady Jane
Douglas my friend?"

John Heywood suddenly became serious and gloomy, and looked on the
ground, absorbed in reflection. Then he swept his large, bright eyes
all around the room, in a scrutinizing manner, as if he wished to
convince himself that no listener was really concealed there, and
stepping close up to the queen, he whispered: "Trust her not; she is
a papist, and Gardiner is her friend."

"Ah, I suspected it," whispered Catharine, sadly.

"But listen, queen; give no expression to this suspicion by look, or
words, or by the slightest indication. Lull this viper into the
belief that you are harmless; lull her to sleep, queen. She is a
venomous and dangerous serpent, which must not be roused, lest,
before you suspect it, it bite you on the heel. Be always gracious,
always confidential, always friendly toward her. Only, queen, do not
tell her what you would not confide to Gardiner and Earl Douglas
likewise. Oh, believe me, she is like the lion in the doge's palace
at Venice. The secrets that you confide to her will become
accusations against you before the tribunal of blood."

Catharine shook her head with a smile. "You are too severe, John
Heywood. It is possible that the religion which she secretly
professes has estranged her heart from me, but she would never be
capable of betraying me, or of leaguing herself with my foes. No,
John, you are mistaken. It would be a crime to believe thus. My God,
what a wicked and wretched world it must be in which we could not
trust even our most faithful and dearest friends!"

"The world is indeed wicked and wretched, and one must despair of
it, or consider it a merry jest, with which the devil tickles our
noses. For me, it is such a jest, and therefore, queen, I have
become the king's fool, which at least gives me the right of
spurting out upon the crawling brood all the venom of the contempt I
feel for mankind, and of speaking the truth to those who have only
lies, by dripping honey, ever on their lips. The sages and poets are
the real fools of our day, and since I did not feel a vocation to be
a king, or a priest, a hangman, or a lamb for sacrifice, I became a
fool."

"Yes, a fool, that is to say, an epigrammatist, whose biting tongue
makes the whole court tremble."

"Since I cannot, like my royal master, have these criminals
executed, I give them a few sword-cuts with my tongue. Ah, I tell
you, you will much need this ally. Be on your guard, queen: I heard
this morning the first growl of the thunder, and in Lady Jane's eyes
I observed the stealthy lightning. Trust her not. Trust no one here
but your friends Cranmer and John Heywood."

"And you say, that in all this court, among all these brilliant
women, these brave cavaliers, the poor queen has not a single
friend, not a soul, whom she may trust, on whom she may lean? Oh,
John Heywood, think again, have pity on the poverty of a queen.
Think again. Say, only you two? No friend but you?"

And the queen's eyes filled with tears, which she tried in vain to
repress.

John Heywood saw it and sighed deeply. Better than the queen herself
perhaps, he had read the depths of her heart, and knew its deep
wound. But he also had sympathy with her pain, and wished to
mitigate it a little.

"I recollect," said he, gently and mournfully--"yes, I recollect,
you have yet a third friend at this court."

"Ah, a third friend!" exclaimed Catharine, and again her voice
sounded cheery and joyous. "Name him to me, name him! For you see
clearly I am burning with impatience to hear his name."

John Heywood looked into Catharine's glowing countenance with a
strange expression, at once searching and mournful, and for a moment
dropped his head upon his breast and sighed.

"Now, John, give me the name of this third friend."

"Do you not know him, queen?" asked Heywood, as he again stared
steadily in her face. Do you not know him? It is Thomas Seymour,
Earl of Sudley."

There passed as it were a sunbeam over Catharine's face, and she
uttered a low cry.

John Heywood said, sadly: "Queen, the sun strikes directly in your
face. Take care that it does not blind your bright eyes. Stand in
the shade, your majesty, for, hark! there comes one who might report
the sunshine in your face for a conflagration."

Just then the door opened, and Lady Jane appeared on the threshold.
She threw a quick, searching glance around the room, and an
imperceptible smile passed over her beautiful pale face.

"Your majesty," said she solemnly, "everything is ready. You can
begin your ride when it pleases you. The Princess Elizabeth awaits
you in the anteroom, and your master of horse already holds the
stirrup of your steed."

"And the lord chamberlain?" asked Catharine, blushing, "has he no
message from the king to bring me?"

"Ay!" said the Earl of Surrey as he entered. "His majesty bids me
tell the queen that she may extend her ride as far as she wishes.
The glorious weather is well worth that the Queen of England should
enjoy it, and enter into a contest with the sun."

"Oh, the king is the most gallant of cavaliers," said Catharine,
with a happy smile. "Now come, Jane, let us ride."

"Pardon me, your majesty," said Lady Jane, stepping back. "I cannot
to-day enjoy the privilege of accompanying your majesty. Lady Anne
Ettersville is to-day in attendance."

"Another time, then, Jane! And you, Earl Douglas, you ride with us?"

"The king, your majesty, has ordered me to his cabinet."

"Behold now a queen abandoned by all her friends!" said Catharine
cheerily, as with light, elastic step she passed through the hall to
the courtyard.

"Here is something going on which I must fathom!" muttered John
Heywood, who had left the hall with the rest. "A mousetrap is set,
for the cats remain at home, and are hungry for their prey."

Lady Jane had remained behind in the hall with her father. Both had
stepped to the window, and were silently looking down into the yard,
where the brilliant cavalcade of the queen and her suite was moving
about in motley confusion.

Catharine had just mounted her palfrey; the noble animal,
recognizing his mistress, neighed loudly, and, giving a snort,
reared up with his noble burden.

Princess Elizabeth, who was close to the queen, uttered a cry of
alarm. "You will fall, queen," said she, "you ride such a wild
animal."

"Oh, no, indeed," said Catharine, smiling; "Hector is not wild. It
is with him as with me. This charming May air has made us both
mettlesome and happy. Away, then, my ladies and lords! our horses
must be to-day swift as birds. We ride to Epping Forest."

And through the open gateway dashed the cavalcade. The queen in
front; at her right, the Princess Elizabeth; at her left, the master
of horse, Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley.

When the train had disappeared, father and daughter stepped back
from the window, and looked at each other with strange, dark, and
disdainful looks.

"Well, Jane?" said Earl Douglas, at length. "She is still queen, and
the king becomes daily more unwieldy and ailing. It is time to give
him a seventh queen."

"Soon, my father, soon."

"Loves the queen Henry Howard at last?"

"Yes, he loves her!" said Jane, and her pale face was now colorless
as a winding-sheet.

"I ask, whether she loves him?"

"She will love him!" murmured Jane, and then suddenly mastering
herself, she continued: "but it is not enough to make the queen in
love; doubtless it would be still more efficient if some one could
instill a new love into the king. Did you see, father, with what
ardent looks his majesty yesterday watched me and the Duchess of
Richmond?"

"Did I see it? The whole court talked about it."

"Well, now, my father, manage it so that the king may be heartily
bored to-day, and then bring him to me. He will find the Duchess of
Richmond with me."

"Ah, a glorious thought! You will surely be Henry's seventh queen."

"I will ruin Catharine Parr, for she is my rival, and I hate her!"
said Jane, with glowing cheeks and flashing eyes. "She has been
queen long enough, and I have bowed myself before her. Now she shall
fall in the dust before me, and I will set my foot upon her head."


CHAPTER XI.

THE RIDE.


It was a wondrous morning. The dew still lay on the grass of the
meadows, over which they had just ridden to reach the thicket of the
forest, in whose trees resounded the melodious voices of blithe
birds. Then they rode along the banks of a babbling forest stream,
and spied the deer that came forth into the glade on the other side,
as if they wanted, like the queen and her train, to listen to the
song of the birds and the murmuring of the fountains. Catharine felt
a nameless, blissful pleasure swell her bosom. She was to-day no
more the queen, surrounded by perils and foes; no more the wife of
an unloved, tyrannical husband; not the queen trammelled with the
shackles of etiquette. She was a free, happy woman, who, in
presageful, blissful trepidation, smiled at the future, and said to
each minute, "Stay, stay, for thou art so beautiful!"

It was a sweet, dreamy happiness, the happiness of that hour. With
glad heart, Catharine would have given her crown for it, could she
have prolonged this hour to an eternity.

He was at her side--he of whom John Heywood had said, that he was
among her most trustful and trusty friends. He was there; and even
if she did not dare to look at him often, often to speak to him, yet
she felt his presence, she perceived the glowing beams of his eyes,
which rested on her with consuming fire. Nobody could observe them.
For the court rode behind them, and before them and around them was
naught but Nature breathing and smiling with joy, naught but heaven
and God.

She had forgotten however that she was not quite alone, and that
while Thomas Seymour rode on her left, on her right was Princess
Elizabeth--that young girl of fourteen years--that child, who,
however, under the fire of suffering and the storms of adversity,
was early forced to precocious bloom, and whose heart, by the tears
and experience of her unhappy childhood, had acquired an early
ripeness. Elizabeth, a child in years, had already all the strength
and warmth of a woman's feelings. Elizabeth, the disowned and
disinherited princess, had inherited her father's pride and
ambition; and when she looked on the queen, and perceived that
little crown wrought on her velvet cap in diamond embroidery, she
felt in her bosom a sharp pang, and remembered, with feelings of
bitter grief, that this crown was destined never to adorn her head,
since the king, by solemn act of Parliament, had excluded her from
the succession to the throne. [Footnote: Tytler, p. 340] But for a
few weeks this pain had been more gentle, and less burning. Another
feeling had silenced it. Elizabeth who was never to be queen or
sovereign--Elizabeth might be a wife at least. Since she was denied
a crown, they should at least allow her instead a wife's happiness;
they should not grudge her the privilege of twining in her hair a
crown of myrtle.

She had been early taught to ever have a clear consciousness of all
her feelings; nor had she now shrunk from reading the depths of her
heart with steady and sure eye.

She knew that she loved, and that Thomas Seymour was the man whom
she loved.

But the earl? Did he love her in return? Did he understand the
child's heart? Had he, beneath the childish face, already recognized
the passionate, proud woman? Had he guessed the secrets of this
soul, at once so maidenly and chaste, and yet so passionate and
energetic?

Thomas Seymour never betrayed a secret, and what he had, it may be,
read in the eyes of the princess, and what he had, perhaps, spoken
to her in the quiet shady walks of Hampton Court, or in the long,
dark corridors of Whitehall, was known to no one save those two. For
Elizabeth had a strong, masculine soul; she needed no confidant to
share her secrets; and Thomas Seymour had feared even, like the
immortal hair-dresser of King Midas, to dig a hole and utter his
secret therein; for he knew very well that, if the reed grew up and
repeated his words, he might, for these words, lay his head on the
block.

Poor Elizabeth! She did not even suspect the earl's secret and her
own were not, however, the same; she did not suspect that Thomas
Seymour, if he guessed her secret, might, perhaps, avail himself of
it to make thereof a brilliant foil for his own secret.

He had, like her, ever before his eyes the diamond crown on the head
of the young queen, and he had noticed well how old and feeble the
king had become of late.

As he now rode by the side of the two princesses, he felt his heart
swell with a proud joy, and bold and ambitious schemes alone
occupied his soul.

The two women understood nothing of this. They were both too much
occupied with their own thoughts; and while Catharine's eyes swept
with beaming look the landscape far and wide, the brow of the
princess was slightly clouded, and her sharp eye rested with a fixed
and watchful gaze on Thomas Seymour.

She had noticed the impassioned look which he had now and then
fastened on the queen. The slight, scarcely perceptible tremor of
his voice, when he spoke, had not escaped her.

Princess Elizabeth was jealous; she felt the first torturing motions
of that horrible disease which she had inherited from her father,
and in the feverish paroxysms of which the king had sent two of his
wives to the scaffold.

She was jealous, but not of the queen; much more, she dreamed not
that the queen might share and return Seymour's love. It never came
into her mind to accuse the queen of an understanding with the earl.
She was jealous only of the looks which he directed toward the
queen; and because she was watching those looks, she could not at
the same time read the eyes of her young stepmother also; she could
not see the gentle flames which, kindled by the fire of his looks,
glowed in hers.

Thomas Seymour had seen them, and had he now been alone with
Catharine, he would have thrown himself at her feet and confided to
her all the deep and dangerous secrets that he had so long harbored
in his breast; he would have left to her the choice of bringing him
to the block, or of accepting the love which he consecrated to her.

But there, behind them, were the spying, all-observing, all-
surmising courtiers; there was the Princess Elizabeth, who, had he
ventured to speak to the queen, would have conjectured from his
manner the words which she could not understand; for love sees so
clearly, and jealousy has such keen ears!

Catharine suspected nothing of the thoughts of her companions. She
alone was happy; she alone gave herself up with full soul to the
enjoyment of the moment. She drew in with intense delight the pure
air; she drank in the odor of the meadow blossoms; she listened with
thirsty ear to the murmuring song which the wind wafted to her from
the boughs of the trees. Her wishes extended not beyond the hour;
she rested in the full enjoyment of the presence of her beloved. He
was there--what needed she more to make her happy?

Her wishes extended not beyond this hour. She was only conscious how
delightful it was thus to be at her beloved's side, to breathe the
same air, to see the same sun, the same flowers on which his eyes
rested, and on which their glances at least might meet in kisses
which were denied to their lips.

But as they thus rode along, silent and meditative, each occupied
with his own thoughts, there came the assistance for which Thomas
Seymour had prayed, fluttering along in the shape of a fly.

At first this fly sported and buzzed about the nose of the fiery,
proud beast which the queen rode; and as no one noticed it, it was
not disturbed by Hector's tossing of his mane, but crept securely
and quietly to the top of the noble courser's head, pausing a little
here and there, and sinking his sting into the horse's flesh, so
that he reared and began loudly to neigh.

But Catharine was a bold and dexterous rider, and the proud spirit
of her horse only afforded her delight, and gave the master of horse
an opportunity to praise her skill and coolness.

Catharine received with a sweet smile the encomiums of her beloved.
But the fly kept creeping on, and, impelled by a diabolic delight,
now penetrated the horse's ear. The poor, tormented animal made a
spring forward. This spring, instead of freeing him from his enemy,
made him penetrate the ear still farther, and sink his sting still
deeper into the soft fleshy part of the same.

Stung by the maddening pain, the horse cast off all control, and,
heedless of bridle and scorning the bit, dashed forward in a furious
run--forward over the meadow swift as an arrow, resistless as the
lightning.

"On, on, to the queen's rescue!" thundered the master of horse, and
with mad haste, away flew he also over the meadow.

"To the help of the queen!" repeated Princess Elizabeth, and she
likewise spurred her horse and hurried forward, accompanied by the
whole suite.

But what is the speed of a horse ever so swift, but yet in his
senses, compared with the raving madness of a crazy courser, that,
despising all subjection, and mocking at the bridle, dashes ahead,
foaming with the sense of freedom and unrestraint, uncontrollable as
the surge lashed by the storm!

Already far behind them lay the meadows, far behind them the avenues
leading through the woods, and over brooks and ditches, over meadows
and wastes, Hector was dashing on.

The queen still sat firmly in the saddle; her cheeks were colorless;
her lips trembled; but her eye was still bright and clear. She had
not yet lost her presence of mind; she was perfectly conscious of
her danger. The din of screaming, screeching voices, which she heard
at first, had long since died away in silence behind her. An immense
solitude, the deep silence of the grave, was around her.

Naught was heard save the panting and snorting of the horse; naught
but the crash and clatter of his hoofs. Suddenly, however, this
sound seemed to find an echo. It was repeated over yonder. There was
the same snorting and panting; there was the same resounding
trampling of hoofs. And now, oh, now, struck on Catharine's car the
sound of a voice only too well loved, and made her scream aloud with
delight and desire.

But this cry frightened anew the enraged animal. For a moment,
exhausted and panting, he had slackened in his mad race; now he
sprang forward with renewed energy; now he flew on as if impelled by
the wings of the wind. But ever nearer and nearer sounded the loved
voice ever nearer the tramp of his horse.

They were now upon a large plain, shut in on all sides by woods.
While the queen's horse circled the plain in a wide circuit,
Seymour's, obedient to the rein, sped directly across it, and was
close behind the queen.

"Only a moment more! Only hold your arms firmly around the animal's
neck, that the shock may not hurl you off, when I lay hold of the
rein!" shouted Seymour, and he set his spurs into his horse's
flanks, so that he sprang forward with a wild cry.

This cry roused Hector to new fury. Panting for breath, he shot
forward with fearful leaps, now straight into the thicket of the
woods.

"I hear his voice no more," murmured Catharine. And at length
overcome with anxiety and the dizzy race, and worn out with her
exertions, she closed her eyes; her senses appeared to be about
leaving her.

But at this moment, a firm hand seized with iron grasp the rein of
her horse, so that he bowed his head, shaking, trembling, and almost
ashame, as the horse had found his lord and master.

"Saved! I am saved!" faltered Catharine, and breathless, scarcely in
her senses, she leaned her head on Seymour's shoulder.

He lifted her gently from the saddle, and placed her on the soft
moss beneath an ancient oak. Then he tied the horses to a bough, and
Catharine, trembling and faint, sank on her knees to rest after such
violent exertion.


CHAPTER XII.

THE DECLARATION.


Thomas Seymour returned to Catharine. She still lay there with
closed eyes, pale and motionless.

He gazed on her long and steadily; his eyes drank in, in long
draughts, the sight of this beautiful and noble woman, and he forgot
at that moment that she was a queen.

He was at length alone with her. At last, after two years of
torture, of resignation, of dissimulation, God had granted him this
hour, for which he had so long yearned, which he had so long
considered unattainable. Now it was there, now it was his.

And had the whole court, had King Henry himself, come right then,
Thomas Seymour would not have heeded it; it would not have
affrighted him. The blood had mounted to his head and overcome his
reason. His heart, still agitated and beating violently from his
furious ride and his anxiety for Catharine, allowed him to hear no
other voice than that of passion.

He knelt by the queen and seized her hand.

Perhaps it was this touch which roused her from her unconsciousness.
She raised her eyes and gazed around with a perplexed look.

"Where am I?" breathed she in a low tone.

Thomas Seymour pressed her hand to his lips. "You are with the most
faithful and devoted of your servants, queen!"

"Queen!" This word roused her from her stupor, and caused her to
raise herself half up.

"But where is my court? Where is the Princess Elizabeth? Where are
all the eyes that heretofore watched me? Where are all the listeners
and spies who accompany the queen?"

"They are far away from here," said Seymour in a tone which betrayed
his secret delight. "They are far away from here, and need at least
an hour's time to come up with us. An hour, queen! are you aware
what that is to me? An hour of freedom, after two years of
imprisonment! An hour of happiness, after two years of daily
torture, daily endurance of the torments of hell!"

Catharine, who had at first smiled, had now become grave and sad.

Her eye rested on the cap which had fallen from her head and lay
near her on the grass.

She pointed with trembling finger to the crown, and said softly,
"Recognize you that sign, my lord?"

"I recognize it, my lady; but in this hour, I no longer shrink back
at it. There are moments in which life is at its crowning point, and
when one heeds not the abyss that threatens close beneath. Such an
hour is the present. I am aware that this hour makes me guilty of
high treason and may send me to the block; but nevertheless I will
not be silent. The fire which burns in my breast consumes me. I must
at length give it vent. My heart, that for years has burned upon a
funeral pyre, and which is so strong that in the midst of its
agonies it has still ever felt a sensation of its blessedness--my
heart must at length find death or favor. You shall hear me, queen!"

"No, no," said she, almost in anguish, "I will not, I cannot hear
you! Remember that I am Henry the Eighth's wife, and that it is
dangerous to speak to her. Silence, then, earl, silence, and let us
ride on."

She would have arisen, but her own exhaustion and Lord Seymour's
hand caused her to sink back again.

"No, I will not be silent," said he. "I will not be silent until I
have told you all that rages and glows within me. The Queen of
England may either condemn me or pardon me, but she shall know that
to me she is not Henry the Eighth's wife, but only the most charming
and graceful, the noblest and loveliest woman in England. I will
tell her that I never recollect she is my queen, or, if I do so, it
is only to curse the king, who was presumptuous enough to set this
brightly sparkling jewel in his bloody crown."

Catharine, almost horrified, laid her hand on Seymour's lips.
"Silence, unhappy man, silence! Know you that it is your sentence of
death which you are now uttering? Your sentence of death, if any
soul hears you?"

"But no one hears me. No one save the queen, and God, who, however,
is perhaps more compassionate and merciful than the queen. Accuse me
then, queen; go and tell your king that Thomas Seymour is a traitor;
that he dares love the queen. The king will send me to the scaffold,
but I shall nevertheless deem myself happy, for I shall at least die
by your instrumentality. Queen, if I cannot live for you, then
beautiful it is to die for you!"

Catharine listened to him wholly stupefied, wholly intoxicated. This
was, for her, language wholly new and never heard before, at which
her heart trembled in blissful awe, which rushed around her in
enchanting melodies and lulled her into a sweet stupefaction. Now
she herself even forgot that she was queen, that she was the wife of
Henry, the bloodthirsty and the jealous. She was conscious only of
this, that the man whom she had so long loved, was now kneeling at
her side. With rapture she drank in his words, which struck upon her
ear like exquisite music.

Thomas Seymour continued. He told her all he had suffered. He told
her he had often resolved to die, in order to put an end to these
tortures, but that then a glance of her eye, a word from her lips,
had given him strength to live, and still longer endure these
tortures, which were at the same time so full of rapture.

"But now, queen, now my strength is exhausted, and it is for you to
give me life or death. To-morrow I will ascend the scaffold, or you
shall permit me to live, to live for you."

Catharine trembled and looked at him wellnigh astounded. He seemed
so proud and imperative, she almost felt a fear for him, but it was
the happy fear of a loving, meek woman before a strong, commanding
man.

"Know you," said she, with a charming smile, "that you almost have
the appearance of wishing to command me to love you?"

"No, queen," said he, proudly, "I cannot command you to love me, but
I bid you tell me the truth. I bid you do this, for I am a man who
has the right to demand the truth of a woman face to face. And I
have told you, you are not the queen to me. You are but a beloved,
an adored woman. This love has nothing to do with your royalty, and
while I confess it to you, I do not think that you abase yourself
when you receive it. For the true love of a man is ever the holiest
gift that he can present to a woman, and if a beggar dedicates it to
a queen, she must feel herself honored by it. Oh, queen, I am a
beggar. I lie at your feet and raise my hands beseechingly to you;
but I want not charity, I want not your compassion and pity, which
may, perhaps, grant me an alms to lessen my misery. No, I want you
yourself. I require all or nothing. It will not satisfy me that you
forgive my boldness, and draw the veil of silence over my mad
attempt. No, I wish you to speak, to pronounce my condemnation or a
benediction on me. Oh, I know you are generous and compassionate,
and even if you despise my love and will not return it, yet, it may
be, you will not betray me. You will spare me, and be silent. But I
repeat it, queen, I do not accept this offer of your magnanimity.
You are to make me either a criminal or a god; for I am a criminal
if you condemn my love, a god if you return it."

"And do you know, earl," whispered Catharine, "that you are very
cruel? You want me to be either an accuser or an accomplice. You
leave me no choice but that of being either your murderess or a
perjured and adulterous woman--a wife who forgets her plighted faith
and her sacred duty, and defiles the crown which my husband has
placed upon my head with stains, which Henry will wash out with my
own blood and with yours also."

"Let it be so, then," cried the earl, almost joyfully. "Let my head
fall, no matter how or when, if you but love me; for then I shall
still be immortal; for a moment in your arms is an eternity of
bliss."

"But I have already told you that not only your head, but mine also,
is concerned in this matter. You know the king's harsh and cruel
disposition. The mere suspicion is enough to condemn me. Ah, if he
knew what we have just now spoken here, he would condemn me, as he
condemned Catharine Howard, though I am not guilty as she was. Ah, I
shudder at the thought of the block; and you, Earl Seymour, you
would bring me to the scaffold, and yet you say you love me!"

Seymour sunk his head mournfully upon his breast and sighed deeply.
"You have pronounced my sentence, queen, and though you are too
noble to tell me the truth, yet I have guessed it. No, you do not
love me, for you see with keen eyes the danger that threatens you,
and you fear for yourself. No, you love me not, else you would think
of nothing save love alone. The dangers would animate you, and the
sword which hangs over your head you would not see, or you would
with rapture grasp its edge and say, 'What is death to me, since I
am happy! What care I for dying, since I have felt immortal
happiness!' Ah, Catharine, you have a cold heart and a cool head.
May God preserve them both to you; then will you pass through life
quietly and safely; but you will yet be a poor, wretched woman, and
when you come to die, they will place a royal crown upon your
coffin, but love will not weep for you. Farewell, Catharine, Queen
of England, and since you cannot love him, give Thomas Seymour, the
traitor, your sympathy at least."

He bowed low and kissed her feet, then he arose and walked with firm
step to the tree where he had tied the horses. But now Catharine
arose, now she flew to him, and grasping his hand, asked, trembling
and breathless, "What are you about to do? whither are you going?"

"To the king, my lady."

"And what will you do there?"

"I will show him a traitor who has dared love the queen. You have
just killed my heart; he will kill only my body. That is less
painful, and I will thank him for it."

Catharine uttered a cry, and with passionate vehemence drew him back
to the place where she had been resting.

"If you do what you say, you will kill me," said she, with trembling
lips. "Hear me, hear! The moment you mount your horse to go to the
king, I mount mine too; but not to follow you, not to return to
London, but to plunge with my horse down yonder precipice. Oh, fear
nothing; they will not accuse you of my murder. They will say that I
plunged down there with my horse, and that the raging animal caused
my death."

"Queen, take good heed, consider well what you say!" exclaimed
Thomas Seymour, his countenance clearing up and his face flaming
with delight. "Bear in mind that your words must be either a
condemnation or an avowal. I wish death, or your love! Not the love
of a queen, who thinks to be gracious to her subject, when for the
moment she elevates him to herself; but the love of a woman who bows
her head in meekness and receives her lover as at the same time her
lord. Oh, Catharine, be well on your guard! If you come to me with
the pride of a queen, if there be even one thought in you which
tells you that you are bestowing a favor on a subject as you take
him to your heart, then be silent and let me go hence. I am proud,
and as nobly born as yourself, and however love throws me conquered
at your feet, yet it shall not bow my head in the dust! But if you
say that you love me, Catharine, for that I will consecrate my whole
life to you. I will be your lord, but your slave also. There shall
be in me no thought, no feeling, no wish that is not devoted and
subservient to you. And when I say that I will he your lord, I mean
not thereby that I will not lie forever at your feet and bow my head
in the dust, and say to you: Tread on it, if it seem good to you,
for I am your slave!"

And speaking thus, he dropped on his knees and pressed to her feet
his face, whose glowing and noble expression ravished Catharine's
heart.

She hent down to him, and gently lifting his head, looked with an
indescribable expression of happiness and love deep into his beaming
eyes.

"Do you love me?" asked Seymour, as he put his arm softly around her
slender waist, and arose from his kneeling attitude.

"I love you!" said she, with a firm voice and a happy smile. "I love
you, not as a queen, but as a woman; and if perchance this love
hring us both to the scaffold, well then we shall at least die
together, to meet again there above!"

"No, think not now of dying, Catharine, think of living--of the
beautiful, enchanting future which is beckoning to us. Think of the
days which will soon come, and in which our love will no longer
require secresy or a veil, but when we will manifest it to the whole
world, and can proclaim our happiness from a full glad breast! Oh,
Catharine, let us hope that compassionate and merciful death will
loose at last the unnatural bonds that bind you to that old man.
Then, when Henry is no more, then will you be mine, mine with yonr
entire being, with your whole life; and instead of a proud regal
crown, a crown of myrtle shall adorn your head! Swear that to me,
Catharine; swear that you will become my wife, as soon as death has
set you free."

The queen shuddered and her cheeks. grew pale. "Oh," said she with a
sigh, "death then is our hope and perhaps the scaffold our end!"

"No, Catharine, love is our hope, and happiness our end. Think of
life, of our future! God grant my request. Swear to me here in the
face of God, and of sacred and calm nature around us, swear to me,
that from the day when death frees you from your husband you will be
mine, my wife, my consort! Swear to me, that you, regardless of
etiquette and unmindful of tyrannical custom, will be Lord Seymour's
wife, before the knell for Henry's death has died away. We will find
a priest, who may bless our love and sanctify the covenant that we
have this day concluded for eternity! Swear to me, that, till that
wished--for day, you will keep for me your truth and love, and never
forget that my honor is yours also, that your happiness is also
mine!"

"I swear it!" said Catharine, solemnly. "You may depend upon me at
all times and at all hours. Never will I be untrue to you; never
will I have a thought that is not yours. I will love you as Thomas
Seymour deserves to be loved, that is with a devoted and faithful
heart. It will be my pride to subject myself to you, and with glad
soul will I serve and follow you, as your true and obedient wife."

"I accept your oath!" said Seymour, solemnly. "But in return I swear
that I will honor and esteem you as my queen and mistress. I swear
to you that you shall never find a more obedient subject, a more
unselfish counsellor, a more faithful husband, a braver champion,
than I will be. 'My life for my queen, my entire heart for my
beloved'; this henceforth shall be my motto, and may I be disowned
and despised by God and by you, if ever I violate this oath."

"Amen!" said Catharine, with a bewitching smile.

Then both were silent. It was that silence which only love and
happiness knows--that silence which is so rich in thoughts and
feelings, and therefore so poor in words!

The wind rustled whisperingly in the trees, among whose dark
branches here and there a bird's warbling or flute-like notes
resounded. The sun threw his emerald light over the soft velvety
carpet of the ground, which, rising and falling in gentle,
undulating lines, formed lovely little hollows and hillocks, on
which now and then was seen here and there the slender and stately
figure of a hart, or a roe, that, looking around searchingly with
his bright eyes, started back frightened into the thicket on
observing these two human figures and the group of horses encamped
there.

Suddenly this quiet was interrupted by the loud sound of the
hunter's horn, and in the distance were heard confused cries and
shouts, which were echoed by the dense forest and repeated in a
thousand tones.

With a sigh the queen raised her head from the earl's shoulder.

The dream was at an end; the angel came with flaming sword to drive
her from paradise.

For she was no longer worthy of paradise. The fatal word had been
spoken, and while it brought her love, it had perjured her.

Henry's wife, his by her vow taken before the altar, had betrothed
herself to another, and given him the love that she owed her
husband.

"It is passed," said he, mournfully. "These sounds call me back to
my slavery. We must both resume our roles. I must become queen
again."

"But first swear to me that you will never forget this hour; that
you will ever think upon the oaths which we have mutually sworn."

She looked at him almost astounded. "My God! can truth and love be
forgotten?"

"You will remain ever true, Catharine?"

She smiled. "See, now, my jealous lord, do I address such questions
to you?"

"Oh, queen, you well know that you possess the charm that binds
forever."

"Who knows?" said she dreamily, as she raised her enthusiastic look
to heaven, and seemed to follow the bright silvery clouds which were
sailing slowly across the blue ether.

Then her eyes fell on her beloved, and laying her hand softly upon
his shoulder, she said: "Love is like God--eternal, primeval, and
ever present! But you must believe in it to feel its presence; you
must trust it to be worthy of its blessing!"

But the hallooing and the clangor of the horns came nearer and
nearer. Even now was heard the barking of the dogs and the tramp of
horses.

The earl had untied the horses, and led Hector, who was now quiet
and gentle as a lamb, to his mistress.

"Queen," said Thomas Seymour, "two delinquents now approach you!
Hector is my accomplice, and had it not been that the fly I now see
on his swollen ear had made him raving, I should be the most
pitiable and unhappy man in your kingdom, while now I am the
happiest and most enviable."

The queen made no answer, but she put both her arms around the
animal's neck and kissed him.

"Henceforth," said she, "then I will ride only Hector, and when he
is old and unfit for service--"

"He shall be tended and cared for in the stud of Countess Catharine
Seymour!" interrupted Thomas Seymour, as he held the queen's stirrup
and assisted her into the saddle.

The two rode in silence toward the sound of the voices and horns,
both too much occupied by their own thoughts to interrupt them by
trifling words.

"He loves me!" thought Catharine. "I am a happy, enviable woman, for
Thomas Seymour loves me."

"She loves me!" thought he, with a proud, triumphant smile. "I
shall, therefore, one day become Regent of England."

Just then they came out on the large level meadow, through which
they had previously ridden, and over which now came, scattered here
and there in motley confusion, the entire royal suite, Princess
Elizabeth at the head.

"One thing more!" whispered Catharine. "If you ever need a messenger
to me, apply to John Heywood. He is a friend whom we can trust."

And she sprang forward to meet the princess, to recount to her all
the particulars of her adventure, and her happy rescue by the master
of horse.

Elizabeth, however, listened to her with glowing looks and thoughts
distracted, and as the queen then turned to the rest of her suite,
and, surrounded by her ladies and lords, received their
congratulations, a slight sign from the princess called Thomas
Seymour to her side.

She allowed her horse to curvet some paces forward, by which she and
the earl found themselves separated a little from the rest, and were
sure of being overheard by no one.

"My lord," said she, in a vehement, almost threatening voice, "you
have often and in vain besought me to grant you an interview. I have
denied you. You intimated that you had many things to say to me, for
which we must be alone, and which must reach no listener's ear.
Well, now, to-day I grant you an interview, and I am at last
inclined to listen to you."

She paused and waited for a reply. But the earl remained silent. He
only made a deep and respectful bow, bending to the very neck of his
horse. "Well and good; I will go to this rendezvous were it but to
blind Elizabeth's eyes, that she may not see what she never ought to
see. That was all."

The young princess cast on him an angry look, and a dark scowl
gathered on her brow. "You understand well how to control your joy,"
said she; "and any one to see you just now would think--"

"That Thomas Seymour is discreet enough not to let even his rapture
be read in his countenance at this dangerous court," interrupted the
earl in a low murmur. "When, princess, may I see you and where?"

"Wait for the message that John Heywood will bring you to-day,"
whispered Elizabeth, as she sprang forward and again drew near the
queen.

"John Heywood, again!" muttered the earl. "The confidant of both,
and so my hangman, if he wishes to be!"


CHAPTER XIII.

"LE ROI S'ENNUIT."


King Henry was alone in his study. He had spent a few hours in
writing on a devout and edifying book, which he was preparing for
his subjects, and which, in virtue of his dignity as supreme lord of
the Church, he designed to commend to their reading instead of the
Bible.

He now laid down his pen, and, with infinite complacency, looked
over the written sheets, which were to be to his people a new proof
of his paternal love and care, and so convince them that Henry the
Eighth was not only the noblest and most virtuous of kings, but also
the wisest.

But this reflection failed to make the king more cheerful to-day;
perhaps because he had already indulged in it too frequently. To be
alone, annoyed and disturbed him--there were in his breast so many
secret and hidden voices, whose whispers he dreaded, and which,
therefore, he sought to drown--there were so many recollections of
blood, which ever and again rose before him, however often he tried
to wash them out in fresh blood, and which the king was afraid of,
though he assumed the appearance of never repenting, never feeling
disquietude.

With hasty hand he touched the gold bell standing by him, and his
face brightened as he saw the door open immediately, and Earl
Douglas make his appearance on the threshold.

"Oh, at length!" said the lord, who had very well understood the
expression of Henry's features; "at length, the king condescends to
be gracious to his people."

"I gracious?" asked the king, utterly astonished. "Well, how am I
so?"

"By your majesty's resting at length from his exertions, and giving
a little thought to his valuable and needful health. When you
remember, sire, that England's weal depends solely and alone on the
weal of her king, and that you must be and remain healthy, that your
people, likewise may be healthy."

The king smiled with satisfaction. It never came into his head to
doubt the earl's words. It seemed to him perfectly natural that the
weal of his people depended on his person; but yet it was always a
lofty and beautiful song, and he loved to have his courtiers repeat
it.

The king, as we have said, smiled, but there was something unusual
in that smile, which did not escape the earl.

"He is in the condition of a hungry anaconda," said Earl Douglas to
himself. "He is on the watch for prey, and he will be bright and
lively again just as soon as he has tasted a little human flesh and
blood. Ah, luckily we are well supplied in that way. Therefore, we
will render unto the king what is the king's. But we must be
cautious and go to work warily."

He approached the king and imprinted a kiss on his hand.

"I kiss this hand," said he, "which has been to-day the fountain
through which the wisdom of the head has been poured forth on this
blessed paper. I kiss this paper, which will announce and explain to
happy England God's pure and unadulterated word; but yet I say let
this suffice for the present, my king; take rest; remember awhile
that you are not only a sage, but also a man."

"Yes and truly a weak and decrepit one!" sighed the king, as with
difficulty he essayed to rise, and in so doing leaned so heavily and
the earl's arm that he almost broke down under the monstrous load.

"Decrepit!" said Earl Douglas, reproachfully. "Your majesty moves
to-day with as much ease and freedom as a youth, and my arm was by
no means needed to help you up."

"Nevertheless, we are growing old!" said the king, who, from his
weariness, was unusually sentimental and low-spirited to-day.

"Old!" repeated Earl Douglas. "Old, with those eyes darting fire,
and that lofty brow, and that face, in every feature so noble! No,
your majesty, kings have this in common with the gods--they never
grow old."

"And therein they resemble parrots to a hair!" said John Heywood,
who just then entered the room. "I own a parrot which my great-
grandfather inherited from his great-grandfather, who was hair-
dresser to Henry the Fourth, and which to-day still sings with the
same volubility as he did a hundred years ago: 'Long live the king!
long live this paragon of virtue, sweetness, beauty, and mercy! Long
live the king!' He has cried this for hundreds of years, and he has
repeated it for Henry the Fifth and Henry the Sixth, for Henry the
Seventh and Henry the Eighth! And wonderful, the kings have changed,
but the song of praise has always been appropriate, and has ever
been only the simple truth! Just like yours, my Lord Douglas! Your
majesty may depend upon it, he speaks the truth, for he is near akin
to my parrot, which always calls him 'My cousin,' and has taught him
his immortal song of praise to kings."

The king laughed, while Earl Douglas cast at John Heywood a sharp,
spiteful look.

"He is an impudent imp, is he not, Douglas?" said the king.

"He is a fool!" replied he, with a shrug.

"Exactly, and therefore I just now told you the truth. For you know
children and fools speak the truth. And I became a fool just on this
account, that the king, whom you all deceive by your lies, may have
about him some creature, besides his looking-glass, to tell him the
truth."

"Well, and what truth will you serve up for me today?"

"It is already served, your majesty. So lay aside for a little your
regal crown and your high priesthood, and conclude to be for awhile
a carnivorous beast. It is very easy to become a king. For that,
nothing more is necessary than to be born of a queen under a canopy.
But it is very difficult to be a man who has a good digestion. It
requires a healthy stomach and a light conscience. Come, King Henry,
and let us see whether you are not merely a king, but also a man
that has a good stomach." And with a merry laugh he took the king's
other arm and led him with the earl into the dining-room.

The king, who was an extraordinary eater, silently beckoned his
suite to take their places at the table, after he had seated himself
in his gilded chair. With grave and solemn air he then received from
the hands of the master of ceremonies the ivory tablet on which was
the bill of fare for the day. The king's dinner was a solemn and
important affair. A multitude of post-wagons and couriers were ever
on the way to bring from the remotest ends of the earth dainties for
the royal table. The bill of fare, therefore, to-day, as ever,
exhibited the choicest and rarest dishes; and always when the king
found one of his favorite ones written down he made an assenting and
approving motion of the head, which always lighted up the face of
the master of ceremonies like a sunbeam. There were birds' nests
brought from the East Indies by a fast-sailing vessel, built
specially for the purpose. There were hens from Calcutta and
truffles from Languedoc, which the poet-king, Francis the First of
France, had the day before sent to his royal brother as a special
token of affection. There was the sparkling wine of Champagne, and
the fiery wine of the Island of Cyprus, which the Republic of Venice
had sent to the king as a mark of respect. There were the heavy
wines of the Rhine, which looked like liquid gold, and diffused the
fragrance of a whole bouquet of flowers, and with which the
Protestant princes of Northern Germany hoped to fuddle the king,
whom they would have gladly placed at the head of their league.
There, too, were the monstrous, gigantic partridge pastries, which
the Duke of Burgundy had sent, and the glorious fruits of the south,
from the Spanish coast, with which the Emperor Charles the Fifth
supplied the King of England's table. For it was well known that, in
order to make the King of England propitious, it was necessary first
to satiate him; that his palate must first be tickled, in order to
gain his head or his heart.

But to-day all these things seemed insufficient to give the king the
blissful pleasure which, at other times, was wont to be with him
when he sat at table. He heard John Heywood's jests and biting
epigrams with a melancholy smile, and a cloud was on his brow.

To be in cheerful humor, the king absolutely needed the presence of
ladies. He needed them as the hunter needs the roe to enjoy the
pleasure of the chase--that pleasure which consists in killing the
defenceless and in declaring war against the innocent and peaceful.

The crafty courtier, Earl Douglas, readily divined Henry's
dissatisfaction, and understood the secret meaning of his frowns and
sighs. He hoped much from them, and was firmly resolved to draw some
advantage therefrom, to the benefit of his daughter, and the harm of
the queen.

"Your majesty," said he, "I am just on the point of turning traitor,
and accusing my king of an injustice."

The king turned his flashing eyes upon him, and put his hand,
sparkling with jewelled rings, to the golden goblet filled with
Rhenish wine.

"Of an injustice--me--your king?" asked he, with stammering tongue.

"Yes, of an injustice, inasmuch as you are for me God's visible
representative on earth. I would blame God if He withdrew from us
for a day the brightness of the sun, the gorgeousness and perfume of
His flowers, for since we children of men are accustomed to enjoy
these glories, we have in a certain measure gained a right to them.
So I accuse you because you have withdrawn from us the embodied
flowers and the incarnate suns; because you have been so cruel,
sire, as to send the queen to Epping Forest."

"Not so; the queen wanted to ride," said Henry, peevishly. "The
spring weather attracted her, and since I, alas! do not possess
God's exalted attribute of ubiquity, I was, no doubt, obliged to
come to the resolution of being deprived of her presence. There is
no horse capable of carrying the King of England."

"There is Pegasus, however, and in masterly manner you know how to
manage him. But how, your majesty! the queen wanted to ride, though
she was deprived of your presence thereby? She wanted to ride,
though this pleasure-ride was at the same time a separation from
you? Oh how cold and selfish are women's hearts! Were I a woman, I
would never depart from your side, I would covert no greater
happiness than to be near you, and to listen to that high and
exalted wisdom which pours from your inspired lips. Were I a woman--
"

"Earl, I opine that your wish is perfectly fulfilled," said John
Heywood seriously. "You make in all respects the impression of an
old woman!"

All laughed. But the king did not laugh; he remained serious and
looked gloomily before him.

"It is true," muttered he, "she seemed excited with joy about this
excursion, and in her eyes shone a fire I have seldom seen there.
There must be some peculiar circumstance connected with this ride.
Who accompanied the queen?"

"Princess Elizabeth," said John Heywood, who had heard everything,
and saw clearly the arrow that the earl had shot at the queen.
"Princess Elizabeth, her true and dear friend, who never leaves her
side. Besides, her maids of honor, who, like the dragon in the
fable, keep watch over the beautiful princess."

"Who else is in the queen's company?" inquired Henry, sullenly.

"The master of horse, Earl of Sudley," said Douglas, "and--"

"That is an observation in the highest degree superfluous,"
interrupted John Heywood; "it is perfectly well understood by itself
that the master of horse accompanies the queen. That is just as much
his office as it is yours to sing the song of your cousin, my
parrot."

"He is right," said the king quickly. "Thomas Seymour must accompany
her, and it is my will also. Thomas Seymour is a faithful servant,
and this he has inherited from his sister Jane, my much loved queen,
now at rest with God, that he is devoted to his king in steadfast
affection."

"The time has not yet come when one may assail the Seymours,"
thought the earl. "The king is yet attached to them; so he will feel
hostile toward the foes of the Seymours. Let us then begin our
attack on Henry Howard--that is to say, on the queen."

"Who accompanied the queen besides?" inquired Henry the Eighth,
emptying the golden beaker at a draught, as though he would thereby
cool the fire which already began to blaze within him. But the fiery
Rhenish wine instead of cooling only heated him yet more; it drove,
like a tempest, the fire kindled in his jealous heart in bright
flames to his head, and made his brain glow like his heart.

"Who else accompanied her beside these?" asked Earl Douglas
carelessly. "Well, I think, the lord chamberlain, Earl of Surrey."

A dark scown gathered on the king's brow. The lion had scented his
prey.

"The lord chamberlain is not in the queen's train!" said John
Heywood earnestly.

"No," exclaimed Earl Douglas. "The poor earl. That will make him
very sad."

"And why think you that will make him sad?" asked the king in a
voice very like the roll of distant thunder.

"Because the Earl of Surrey is accustomed to live in the sunshine of
royal favor, sire; because he resembles that flower which always
turns its head to the sun, and receives from it vigor, color, and
brilliancy."

"Let him take care that the sun does not scorch him," muttered the
king.

"Earl," said John Heywood, "you must put on your spectacles so that
you can see better. This time you have confounded the sun with one
of its satellites. Earl Surrey is far too prudent a man to be so
foolish as to gaze at the sun, and thereby blind his eyes and parch
his brain. And so he is satisfied to worship one of the planets that
circle round the sun."

"What does the fool intend to say by that?" asked the earl
contemptuously.

"The wise will thereby give you to understand that you have this
time mistaken your daughter for the queen," said John Heywood,
emphasizing sharply every word, "and that it has happened to you, as
to many a great astrologer, you have taken a planet for a sun."

Earl Douglas cast a dark, spiteful look at John Heywood, who
answered it with one equally piercing and furious.

Their eyes were firmly fixed on each other's, and in those eyes they
both read all the hatred and all the bitterness which were working
in the depths of their souls. Both knew that they had from that hour
sworn to each other an enmity burning and full of danger.

The king had noticed nothing of this dumb but significant scene. He
was looking down, brooding over his gloomy thoughts, and the storm-
clouds rolling around his brow gathered darker and darker.

With an impetuous movement he arose from his seat, and this time he
needed no helping hand to stand up. Wrath was the mighty lever that
threw him up.

The courtiers arose from their seats in silence, and nobody besides
John Heywood observed the look of understanding which Earl Douglas
exchanged with Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, and Wriothesley, the
lord chancellor.

"Ah, why is not Cranmer here?" said John Heywood to himself. "I see
the three tiger-cats prowling, so there must be prey to devour
somewhere. Well, I will at any rate keep my ears open wide enough to
hear their roaring."

"The dinner is over, gentlemen!" said the king hastily; and the
courtiers and gentlemen in waiting silently withdrew to the
anteroom.

Only Earl Douglas, Gardiner, and Wriothesley, remained in the hall,
while John Heywood crept softly into the king's cabinet and
concealed himself behind the hanging of gold brocade which covered
the door leading from the king's study to the outer anteroom.

"My lords," said the king, "follow me into my cabinet. As we are
dull, the most advisable thing for us to do is to divert ourselves
while we occupy ourselves with the weal of our beloved subjects, and
consult concerning their happiness and what is conducive to their
welfare. Follow me then, and we will hold a general consultation."

"Earl Douglas, your arm!" and as the king leaned on it and walked
slowly toward the cabinet, at the entrance of which the lord
chancellor and the Bishop of Winchester were waiting for him, he
asked in a low voice: "You say that Henry Howard dares ever intrude
himself into the queen's presence?"

"Sire, I did not say that; I meant only that he is constantly to be
seen in the queen's presence."

"Oh, you mean that she perhaps authorizes him to do so," said the
king, grinding his teeth.

"Sire, I hold the queen to be a noble and dutiful wife."

"I should be quite inclined to lay your head at your feet if you did
not!" said the king, in whose face the first lightning of the
bursting cloud of wrath began to flash.

"My head belongs to the king!" said Earl Douglas respectfully. "Let
him do with it as he pleases."

"But Howard--you mean, then, that Howard loves the queen?"

"Yes, sire, I dare affirm that."

"Now, by the Mother of God, I will tread the serpent under my feet,
as I did his sister!" exclaimed Henry, fiercely. "The Howards are an
ambitious, dangerous, and hypocritical race."

"A race that never forgets that a daughter of their house has sat on
your throne."

"But they shall forget it," cried the king, "and I must wash these
proud and haughty thoughts out of their brain with their own blood.
They have not then learned, from the example of their sister, how I
punish disloyalty. This insolent race needs another fresh example.
Well, they shall have it. Only put the means in my hand, Douglas,
only a little hook that I can strike into the flesh of these
Howards, and I tell you, with that little hook I will drag them to
the scaffold. Give me proof of the earl's criminal love, and I
promise you that for this I will grant you what you ask."

"Sire, I will give you this proof."

"When?"

"In four days, sire! At the great contest of the poets, which you
have ordered to take place on the queen's birthday."

"I thank you, Douglas, I thank you," said the king with an
expression almost of joy. In four days you will have rid me of the
troublesome race of Howards."

"But, sire, if I cannot give the proof you demand without accusing
one other person?"

The king, who was just about to pass the door of his cabinet, stood
still, and looked steadily into the earl's eyes. "Then," said he, in
a tone peculiarly awful, "you mean the queen? Well, if she is
guilty, I will punish her. God has placed the sword in my hand that
I may bear it to His honor and to the terror of mankind. If the
queen has sinned, she will be punished. Furnish me the proof of
Howard's guilt, and do not trouble yourself if we thereby discover
the guilt of others. We shall not timidly shrink back, but let
justice take its course."


CHAPTER XIV.

THE QUEEN'S FRIEND.


Earl Douglas, Gardiner, and Wriothesley, had accompanied the king
into his cabinet.

At last the great blow was to be struck, and the plan of the three
enemies of the queen, so long matured and well-considered, was to be
at length put in execution. Therefore, as they followed the king,
who with unwonted activity preceded them, they exchanged with each
other one more look of mutual understanding.

By that look Earl Douglas said, "The hour has come. Be ready!"

And the looks of his friends responded, "We are ready!"

John Heywood, who, hidden behind the hangings, saw and observed
everything, could not forbear a slight shudder at the sight of these
four men, whose dark and hard features seemed incapable of being
touched by any ray of pity or mercy.

There was first the king, that man with the Protean countenance,
across which storm and sunshine, God and the devil traced each
minute new lines; who could be now an inspired enthusiast, and now a
bloodthirsty tyrant; now a sentimental wit, and anon a wanton
reveler; the king, on whose constancy nobody, not even himself,
could rely; ever ready, as it suited his caprice or his interest, to
betray his most faithful friend, and to send to the scaffold to-day
those whom but yesterday he had caressed and assured of his
unchanging affection; the king, who considered himself privileged to
indulge with impunity his low appetites, his revengeful impulses,
his bloodthirsty inclinations; who was devout from vanity, because
devotion afforded him an opportunity of identifying himself with
God, and of regarding himself in some sort the patron of Deity.

There was Earl Douglas, the crafty courtier with ever-smiling face,
who seemed to love everybody, while in fact he hated all; who
assumed the appearance of perfect harmlessness, and seemed to be
indifferent to everything but pleasure, while nevertheless secretly
he held in his hand all the strings of that great net which
encompassed alike court and king--Earl Douglas, whom the king loved
for this alone, because he generally gave him the title of grand and
wise high-priest of the Church, and who was, notwithstanding this,
Loyola's vicegerent, and a true and faithful adherent of that pope
who had damned the king as a degenerate son and given him over to
the wrath of God.

Lastly, there were the two men with dark, malignant looks, with
inflexible, stony faces, which u ere never lighted up by a smile, or
a gleam of joy; who always condemned, always punished, and whose
countenances never brightened save when the dying shriek of the
condemned, or the groans of some poor wretch upon the rack, fell
upon their ears; who were the tormentors of humanity, while they
called themselves the ministers and servants of God.

"Sire," said Gardiner, when the king had slowly taken his seat upon
the ottoman--"sire, let us first ask the blessing of the Lord our
God on this hour of conference. May God, who is love, but who is
wrath also, may He enlighten and bless us!"

The king devoutly folded his hands, but it was only a prayer of
wrath that animated his soul.

"Grant, O God, that I may punish Thine enemies, and everywhere dash
in pieces the guilty!"

"Amen!" said Gardiner, as he repeated with solemn earnestness the
king's words.

"Send us the thunderbolt of Thy wrath," prayed Wriothesley, "that we
may teach the world to recognize Thy power and glory!"

Earl Douglas took care not to pray aloud. What he had to request of
God was not allowed to reach the ear of the king.

"Grant, O God," prayed he in his heart, "grant that my work may
prosper, and that this dangerous queen may ascend the scaffold, to
make room for my daughter, who is destined to bring back into the
arms of our holy mother, the Church--guilty and faithless king."

"Now my lords," said the king, fetching a long breath, "now tell me
how stand matters in my kingdom, and at my court?"

"Badly," said Gardiner. "Unbelief again lifts up its head. It is a
hydra. If you strike off one of its heads, two others immediately
spring up in its place. This cursed sect of reformists and atheists
multiplies day by day, and our prisons are no longer sufficient to
contain them; and when we drag them to the stake, their joyful and
courageous death always makes fresh proselytes and fresh apostates."

"Yes, matters are bad," said the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley; "in
vain have we promised pardon and forgiveness to all those who would
return penitent and contrite; they laugh to scorn our offers of
pardon, and prefer a death of torture to the royal clemency. What
avails it that we have burnt to death Miles Coverdale, who had the
hardihood to translate the Bible? His death appears to have been
only the tocsin that aroused other fanatics, and, without our being
able to divine or suspect where all these books come from, they have
overflowed and deluged the whole land; and we now already have more
than four translations of the Bible. The people read them with
eagerness; and the corrupt seek of mental illumination and free-
thinking waxes daily more powerful and more pernicious."

"And now you, Earl Douglas?" asked the king, when the lord
chancellor ceased. "These noble lords have told me how matters stand
in my kingdom. You will advise me what is the aspect of things at my
court."

"Sire," said Earl Douglas, slowly and solemnly--for he wished each
word to sink into the king's breast like a poisoned arrow--"sire,
the people but follow the example which the court sets them. How can
you require faith of the people, when under their own eyes the court
turns faith to ridicule, and when infidels find at court aid and
protection?"

"You accuse, but give no names," said the king, impatiently. "Who
dares at my court be a protector of heretics?"

"Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury!" said the three men, as with one
mouth. The signal-word was spoken, the standard of a bloody struggle
set up.

"Cranmer?" repeated the king thoughtfully. "He has, however, always
been a faithful servant and an attentive friend to me. It was he who
delivered me from the unholy bond with Catharine of Aragon: it was
he too who warned me of Catharine Howard, and furnished me with
proofs of her guilt. Of what misdemeanor do you accuse him?"

"He denies the six articles," said Gardiner, whose malicious face
now glowed with bitter hatred. "He reprobates auricular confession,
and believes not that the voluntarily taken vows of celibacy are
binding."

"If he does that, then he is a traitor!" cried the king, who was
fond of always throwing a reverence for chastity and modesty, as a
kind of holy mantle, over his own profligate and lewd life; and whom
nothing more embittered than to encounter another on that path of
vice which he himself, by virtue of his royal prerogative, and his
crown by the grace of God, could travel in perfect safety.

"If he does that, then he is a traitor! My arm of vengeance will
smite him!" repeated the king again. "It was I who gave my people
the six articles, as a sacred and authoritative declaration of
faith; and I will not suffer this only true and right doctrine to be
assailed and obscured. But you are mistaken, my lords. I am
acquainted with Cranmer, and I know that he is loyal and faithful."

"And yet it is he," said Gardiner, "who confirms these heretics in
their obduracy and stiff-neckedness. He is the cause why these lost
wretches do not, from the fear of divine wrath at least, return to
you, their sovereign and high-priest. For he preaches to them that
God is love and mercy; he teaches them that Christ came into the
world in order to bring to the world love and the forgiveness of
sins, and that they alone are Christ's true disciples and servants
who emulate His love. Do you not see then, sire, that this is a
covert and indirect accusation against yourself, and that while he
praises pardoning love, he at the same time condemns and accuses
your righteous and punitory wrath?"

The king did not answer immediately, but sat with his eyes fixed,
grave and pondering. The fanatical priest had gone too far; and,
without being aware of it, it was he himself who was that very
instant accusing the king.

Earl Douglas felt this. He read in the king's face that he was just
then in one of those moments of contrition which sometimes came over
him when his soul held involuntary intercourse with itself. It was
necessary to arouse the sleeping tiger and point out to him some
prey, so as to make him again bloodthirsty.

"It would be proper if Cranmer preached only Christian love," said
he. "Then would he be only a faithful servant of his Lord, and a
follower of his king. But he gives to the world an abominable
example of a disobedient and perfidious servant; he denies the truth
of the six articles, not in words, but in deeds. You have ordered
that the priests of the Church remain single. Now, then, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is married!"

"Married!" cried the king, his visage glowing with rage. "Ah, I will
chastise him, this transgressor of my holy laws! A minister of the
Church, a priest, whose whole life should be naught but an
exhibition of holiness, an endless communion with God, and whose
high calling it is to renounce fleshly lusts and earthly desires!
And he is married! I will make him feel the whole weight of my royal
anger! He shall learn from his own experience that the king's
justice is inexorable, and that in every case he smites the head of
the sinner, be he who he may!"

"Your majesty is the embodiment of wisdom and justice," said
Douglas, "and your faithful servants well know, if the royal justice
is sometimes tardy in smiting guilty offenders, this happens not
through your will, but through your servants who venture to stay the
arm of justice."

"When and where has this happened?" asked Henry; and his face
flushed with rage and excitement. "Where is the offender whom I have
not punished? Where in my realm lives a being who has sinned against
God or his king, and whom I have not dashed to atoms?"

"Sire," said Gardiner solemnly, "Anne Askew is yet alive."

"She lives to mock at your wisdom and to scoff at your holy creed!"
cried Wriothesley.

"She lives, because Bishop Cranmer wills that she should not die,"
said Douglas, shrugging his shoulders. The king broke out into a
short, dry laugh. "Ah, Cranmer wills not that Anne Askew die!" said
he, sneering. "He wills not that this girl, who has so fearfully
offended against her king, and against God, should he punished!"

"Yes, she has offended fearfully, and yet two years have passed away
since her offence," cried Gardiner--"two years which she has spent
in deriding God and mocking the king!"

"Ah," said the king, "we have still hoped to turn this young,
misguided creature from the ways of sin and error to the path of
wisdom and repentance. We wished for once to give our people a
shining example of our willingness to forgive those who repent and
renounce their heresy, and to restore them to a participation of our
royal favor. Therefore it was that we commissioned you, my lord
hishop, by virtue of your prayers and your forcible and convincing
words, to pluck this poor child from the claws of the devil, who has
charmed her ear."

"But she is unbending," said Gardiner, grinding his teeth. "In vain
have I depicted to her the pains of hell, which await her if she
return not to the faith; in vain have I subjected her to every
variety of torture and penance; in vain have I sent to her in prison
other converts, and had them pray with her night and day
incessantly; she remains unyielding, hard as stone, and neither the
fear of punishment nor the prospect of freedom and happiness has the
power to soften that marble heart."

"There is one means yet untried," said Wriothesley--"a means,
moreover, which is a more effective preacher of repentance than the
most enthusiastic orators and the most fervent prayers, and which I
have to thank for bringing back to God and the faith many of the
most hardened heretics."

"And this means is--"

"The rack, your majesty."

"Ah, the rack!" replied the king, with an involuntary shudder.

"All means are good that lead to the holy end!" said Gardiner,
devoutly folding his hands.

"The soul must be saved, though the body be pierced with wounds!"
cried Wriothesley.

"The people must be convinced," said Douglas, "that the lofty spirit
of the king spares not even those who are under the protection of
influential and might personages. The people murmur that this time
justice is not permitted to prevail, because Archbishop Cranmer
protects Anne Askew, and the queen is her friend."

"The queen is never the friend of a criminal!" said Henry,
vehemently.

"Perchance she does not consider Anne Askew a criminal," responded
Karl Douglas, with a slight smile. "It is known, indeed, that the
queen is a great friend of the Reformation; and the people, who dare
not call her a heretic--the people call her 'the Protestant.'"

"Is it, then, really believed that it is Catharine who protects Anne
Askew, and keeps her from the stake?" inquired the king,
thoughtfully.

"It is so thought, your majesty."

"They shall soon see that they are mistaken, and that Henry the
Eighth well deserves to be called the Defender of the Faith and the
Head of his Church!" cried the king, with burning rage. "For when
have I shown myself so long-suffering and weak in punishing, that
people believe me inclined to pardon and deal gently? Have I not
sent to the scaffold even Thomas More and Cromwell, two renowned and
in a certain respect noble and high-minded men, because they dared
defy my supremacy and oppose the doctrine and ordinance which I
commanded them to believe? Have I not sent to the block two of my
queens--two beautiful young women, in whom my heart was well
pleased, even when I punished them--because they had provoked my
wrath? Who, after such brilliant examples of our annihilating
justice, who dare accuse us of forbearance?"

"But at that time, sire," said Douglas, in his soft, insinuating
voice, "but at that time no queen as yet stood at your side who
called heretics true believers, and favored traitors with her
friendship."

The king frowned, and his wrathful look encountered the friendly and
submissive countenance of the earl. "You know I hate these covert
attacks," said he. "If you can tax the queen with any crime, well
now, do so. If you cannot, hold your peace!"

"The queen is a noble and virtuous lady," said the earl, "only she
sometimes permits herself to be led away by her magnanimous spirit.
Or how, your majesty, can it possibly be with your permission that
my lady the queen maintains a correspondence with Anne Askew?"

"What say you? The queen in correspondence with Anne Askew?" cried
the king in a voice of thunder. "That is a lie, a shameless lie,
hatched up to ruin the queen; for it is very well known that the
poor king, who has been so often deceived, so often imposed upon,
believes himself to have at last found in this woman a being whom he
can trust, and in whom he can put faith. And they grudge him that.
They wish to strip him of this last hope also, that his heart may
harden entirely to stone, and no emotion of pity evermore find
access to him. Ah, Douglas, Douglas, beware of my wrath, if you
cannot prove what you say!"

"Sire, I can prove it! For Lady Jane herself, no longer ago than
yesterday, was made to give up a note from Anne Askew to the queen."

The king remained silent for a while, and gazed fixedly on the
ground. His three confidants observed him with breathless, trembling
expectation.

At length the king raised his head again, and turned his gaze, which
was now grave and steady, upon the lord chancellor. "My Lord
Chancellor Wriothesley," said he, "I empower you to conduct Anne
Askew to the torture-room, and try whether the torments which are
prepared for the body are perchance able to bring this erring soul
to an acknowledgment of her faults. My Lord Bishop Gardiner, I
promise my word that I will give attention to your accusation
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and that, if it be well
founded, he shall not escape punishment. My Lord Douglas, I will
give my people and all the world proof that I am still God's
righteous and avenging vice-gerent on earth, and that no
consideration can restrain my wrath, no after-thought stay my arm,
whenever it is ready to fall and smite the head of the guilty. And
now, my lords, let us declare this session at an end. Let us breathe
a little from these exertions, and seek some recreation for one
brief hour.

"My Lords Gardiner and Wriothesley, you are now at liberty. You,
Douglas, will accompany me into the small reception-room. I want to
see bright and laughing faces around me. Call John Heywood, and if
you meet any ladies in the palace, of course I beg them to shed on
us a little of that sunshine which you say is peculiarly woman's."

He laughed, and, leaning on the earl's arm, left the cabinet.

Gardiner and Wriothesley stood there in silence, watching the king,
who slowly and heavily traversed the adjacent hall, and whose cheery
and laughing voice came ringing back to them.

"He is a weathercock, turning every moment from side to side," said
Gardiner, with a contemptuous shrug of the shoulders.

"He calls himself God's sword of vengeance, but he is nothing more
than a weak tool, which we bend and use at our will," muttered
Wriothesley, with a hoarse laugh. "Poor, pitiful fool, deeming
himself so mighty and sturdy; imagining himself a free king, ruling
by his sovereign will alone, and yet he is but our servant and
drudge! Our great work is approaching its end, and we shall one day
triumph. Anne Askew's death is the sign of a new covenant, which
will deliver England and trample the heretics like dust beneath our
feet. And when at length we shall have put down Cranmer, and brought
Catharine Parr to the scaffold, then will we give King Henry a queen
who will reconcile him with God and the Church, out of which is no
salvation."

"Amen, so be it!" said Gardiner; and arm in arm	they both left the
cabinet.

Deep stillness now reigned in that little spot, and nobody saw John
Heywood as he now came from behind the hanging, and, completely worn
out and faint, slipped for a moment into a chair.

"Now I know, so far at least, the plan of these blood-thirsty tiger-
cats," muttered he. "They wish to give Henry a popish queen; and so
Cranmer must be overthrown, that, when they have deprived the queen
of this powerful prop, they may destroy her also and tread her in
the dust. But as God liveth, they shall not succeed in this! God is
just, and He will at last punish these evil-doers. And supposing
there is no God, then will we try a little with the devil himself.
No, they shall not destroy the noble Cranmer and this beautiful,
high-minded queen. I forbid it--I, John Heywood, the king's fool. I
will see everything, observe everything, hear everything. They shall
find me everywhere on their path; and when they poison the king's
ear with their diabolical whisperings, I will heal it again with my
merry deviltries. The king's fool will be the guardian angel of the
queen."


CHAPTER XV.

JOHN HEYWOOD.


After so much care and excitement, the king needed an hour of
recreation and amusement. Since the fair young queen was seeking
these far away in the chase, and amid the beauties of Nature, Henry
must, no doubt, be content to seek them for himself, and in a way
different from the queen's. His unwieldiness and his load of flesh
prevented him from pursuing the joys of life beyond his own halls;
so the lords and ladies of his court had to bring them hither to
him, and station the flitting goddess of Joy, with her wings
fettered, in front of the king's trundle-chair.

The gout had that day again overcome that mighty king of earth; and
a heavy, grotesque mass it was which sat there in the elbow-chair.

But the courtiers still called him a fine-looking and fascinating
man; and the ladies still smiled on him and said, by their sighs and
by their looks, that they loved him; that he was ever to them the
same handsome and captivating man that he was twenty years before,
when yet young, fine-looking, and slim. How they smile upon him, and
ogle him! How Lady Jane, the maiden otherwise so haughty and so
chaste, does wish to ensnare him with her bright eyes as with a net!
How bewitchingly does the Duchess of Richmond, that fair and
voluptuous woman, laugh at the king's merry jests and double
entendres!

Poor king! whose corpulency forbids him to dance as he once had done
with so much pleasure and so much dexterity! Poor king! whose age
forbids him to sing as once he had done to the delight both of the
court and himself!

But there are yet, however, pleasant, precious, joyous hours, when
the man revives some little in the king; when even youth once more
again awakes within him, and smiles in a few dear, blessed
pleasures. The king still has at least eyes to perceive beauty, and
a heart to feel it.

How beautiful Lady Jane is, this white lily with the dark, star-like
eyes! How beautiful Lady Richmond, this full-blown red rose with the
pearl-white teeth!

And they both smile at him; and when the king swears he loves them,
they bashfully cast down their eyes and sigh.

"Do you sigh, Jane, because you love me?"

"Oh, sire, you mock me. It would be a sin for me to love you, for
Queen Catharine is living."

"Yes, she is living!" muttered the king; and his brow darkened; and
for a moment the smile disappeared from his lips.

Lady Jane had committed a mistake. She had reminded the king of his
wife when it was yet too soon to ask for her death.

John Heywood read this in the countenance of his royal master, and
resolved to take advantage of it. He wished to divert the attention
of the king, and to draw it away from the beautiful, captivating
women who were juggling him with their bewitching charms.

"Yes, the queen lives!" said he, joyfully, "and God be praised for
it! For how tedious and dull it would be at this court had we not
our fair queen, who is as wise as Methuselah, and innocent and good
as a new-born babe! Do you not, Lady Jane, say with me, God be
praised that Queen Catharine is living?"

"I say so with you!" said Jane, with ill-concealed vexation.

"And you, King Henry, do you not say it too?"

"Of course, fool!"

"Ah, why am I not King Henry?" sighed John Heywood. "King, I envy
you, not your crown, or your royal mantle; not your attendants or
your money. I envy you only this, that you can say, 'God be praised
that my wife is still alive!' while I never know but one phrase,'God
have pity, my wife is still alive!' Ah, it is very seldom, king,
that I have heard a married man speak otherwise! You are in that
too, as in all things else, an exception, King Henry; and your
people have never loved you more warmly and purely than when you
say, 'I thank God that my consort is alive!' Believe me, you are
perhaps the only man at your court who speaks after this manner,
however ready they may be to be your parrots, and re-echo what the
lord high-priest says."

"The only man that loves his wife?" said Lady Richmond. "Behold now
the rude babbler! Do you not believe, then, that we women deserve to
be loved?"

"I am convinced that you do not."

"And for what do you take us, then?"

"For cats, which God, since He had no more cat-skin, stuck into a
smooth hide!"

"Take care, John, that we do not show you our claws!" cried the
duchess, laughing.

"Do it anyhow, my lady! I will then make a cross, and ye will
disappear. For devils, you well know, cannot endure the sight of the
holy cross, and ye are devils."

John Heywood, who was a remarkably fine singer, seized the mandolin,
which lay near him, and began to sing.

It was a song, possible only in those days, and at Henry's
voluptuous and at the same time canting court--a song full of the
most wanton allusions, of the most cutting jests against both monks
and women; a song which made Henry laugh, and the ladies blush; and
in which John Heywood had poured forth in glowing dithyrambics all
his secret indignation against Gardiner, the sneaking hypocrite of a
priest, and against Lady Jane, the queen's false and treacherous
friend.

But the ladies laughed not. They darted flashing glances at John
Heywood; and Lady Richmond earnestly and resolutely demanded the
punishment of the perfidious wretch who dared to defame women. The
king laughed still harder. The rage of the ladies was so exceedingly
amusing.

"Sire," said the beautiful Richmond, "he has insulted not us, but
the whole sex; and in the name of our sex, I demand revenge for the
affront."

"Yes, revenge!" cried Lady Jane, hotly.

"Revenge!" repeated the rest of the ladies.

"See, now, what pious and gentle-hearted doves ye are!" cried John
Heywood.

The king said, laughingly: "Well, now, you shall have your will--you
shall chastise him."

"Yes, yes, scourge me with rods, as they once scourged the Messiah,
because He told the Pharisees the truth. See here! I am already
putting on the crown of thorns."

He took the king's velvet cap with solemn air, and put it on.

"Yes, whip him, whip him!" cried the king, laughing, as he pointed
to the gigantic vases of Chinese porcelain, containing enormous
bunches of roses, on whose long stems arose a real forest of
formidable-looking thorns.

"Pull the large bouquets to pieces; take the roses in your hand, and
whip him with the stems!" said the king, and his eyes glistened with
inhuman delight, for the scene promised to be quite interesting. The
rose-stems were long and hard, and the thorns on them pointed and
sharp as daggers. How nicely they would pierce the flesh, and how he
would yell and screw his face, the good-natured fool!

"Yes, yes, let him take off his coat, and we will whip him!" cried
the Duchess of Richmond; and the women, all joining in the cry,
rushed like furies upon John Heywood, and forced him to lay aside
his silk upper garment. Then they hurried to the vases, snatched out
the bouquets, and with busy hands picked out the longest and
stoutest stems. And loud were their exclamations of satisfaction, if
the thorns were right and sharp, such as would penetrate the flesh
of the offender right deeply. The king's laughter and shouts of
approval animated them more and more, and made them more excited and
furious. Their cheeks glowed, their eyes glared; they resembled
Bacchantes circling the god of riotous joviality with their shouts
of "Evoe! evoe!"

"Not yet! do not strike yet!" cried the king. "You must first
strengthen yourselves for the exertion, and fire your arms for a
powerful blow!"

He took the large golden beaker which stood before him and, tasting
it, presented it to Lady Jane.

"Drink, my lady, drink, that your arm may be strong!"

And they all drank, and with animated smiles pressed their lips on
the spot which the king's mouth had touched. And now their eyes had
a brighter flame, and their cheeks a more fiery glow.

A strange and exciting sight it was, to see those beautiful women
burning with malicious joy and thirst for vengeance, who for the
moment had laid aside all their elegant attitudes, their lofty and
haughty airs, to transform themselves into wanton Bacchantes, bent
on chastising the offender, who had so often and so bitterly lashed
them all with his tongue.

"Ah, I would a painter were here!" said the king. "He should paint
us a picture of the chaste nymphs of Diana pursuing Actaeon. You are
Actaeon, John!"

"But they are not the chaste nymphs, king; no, far from it," cried
Heywood; laughing, "and between these fair women and Diana I find no
resemblance, but only a difference."

"And in what consists the difference, John?"

"Herein, sire, that Diana carried her horn at her side; but these
fair ladies make their husbands wear their horns on the forehead!"

A loud peal of laughter from the gentlemen, a yell of rage from the
ladies, was the reply of this new epigram of John Heywood. They
arranged themselves in two rows, and thus formed a lane through
which John Heywood had to pass.

"Come, John Heywood, come and receive your punishment"; and they
raised their thorny rods threateningly, and flourished them with
angry gestures high above their heads.

The scene was becoming to John in all respects very piquant, for
these rods had very sharp thorns, and only a thin linen shirt
covered his back.

With bold step, however, he approached the fatal passage through
which he was to pass.

Already he beheld the rods drawn back; and it seemed to him as if
the thorns were even now piercing his back.

He halted, and turned with a laugh to the king. "Sire, since you
have condemned me to die by the hands of these nymphs, I claim the
right of every condemned criminal--a last favor."

"The which we grant you, John."

"I demand that I may put on these fair women one condition--one
condition on which they may whip me. Does your majesty grant me
this?"

"I grant it!"

"And you solemnly pledge me the word of a king that this condition
shall be faithfully kept and fulfilled?"

"My solemn, kingly word for it!"

"Now, then," said John Heywood, as he entered the passage, "now,
then, my ladies, my condition is this: that one of you who has had
the most lovers, and has oftenest decked her husband's head with
horns, let her lay the first stroke on my back." [Footnote: Flogel's
"Geschichte der Hofnarren," p.899]

A deep silence followed. The raised arms of the fair women sank. The
roses fell from their hands and dropped to the ground. Just before
so bloodthirsty and revengeful, they seemed now to have become the
softest and gentlest of beings.

But could their looks have killed, their fire certainly would have
consumed poor John Heywood, who now gazed at them with an insolent
sneer, and advanced into the very midst of their lines.

"Now, my ladies, you strike him not?" asked the king.

"No, your majesty, we despise him too much even to wish to chastise
him," said the Duchess of Richmond.

"Shall your enemy who has injured you go thus unpunished?" asked the
king. "No, no, my ladies; it shall not be said that there is a man
in my kingdom whom I have let escape when so richly deserving
punishment. We will, therefore, impose some other punishment on him.
He calls himself a poet, and has often boasted that he could make
his pen fly as fast as his tongue! Now, then, John, show us in this
manner that you are no liar! I command you to write, for the great
court festival which takes place in a few days, a new interlude; and
one indeed, hear you, John, which is calculated to make the greatest
growler merry, and over which these ladies will be forced to laugh
so heartily, that they will forget all their ire!"

"Oh," said John dolefully, "what an equivocal and lewd poem it must
be to please these ladies and make them laugh! My king, we must,
then, to please these dear ladies, forget a little our chastity,
modesty, and maiden bashfulness, and speak in the spirit of the
ladies--that is to say, as lasciviously as possible."

"You are a wretch!" said Lady Jane; "a vulgar hypocritical fool."

"Earl Douglas, your daughter is speaking to you," said John Heywood,
calmly. "She flatters you much, your tender daughter."

"Now then, John, you have heard my orders, and will you obey them?
In four days will this festival begin; I give you two days more. In
six days, then, you have to write a new interlude. And if he fails
to do it, my ladies, you shall whip him until you bring the blood;
and that without any condition." Just then was heard without a
flourish of trumpets and the clatter of horse-hoofs.

"The queen has returned," said John Heywood, with a countenance
beaming with joy, as he fixed his smiling gaze full of mischievous
satisfaction on Lady Jane.

"Nothing further now remains for you to do, but dutifully to meet
your mistress upon the great staircase, for, as you so wisely said
before, the queen still lives."

Without waiting for an answer, John Heywood ran out and rushed
through the anteroom and down the steps to meet the queen. Lady Jane
watched him with a dark, angry look; and as she turned slowly to the
door to go and meet the queen, she muttered low between her
closely-pressed lips: "The fool must die, for he is the queen's
friend!"


CHAPTER XVI.

THE CONFIDANT.


The queen was just ascending the steps of the great public
staircase, and she greeted John Heywood with a friendly smile.

"My lady," said he aloud, "I have a few words in private to say to
you, in the name of his majesty."

"Words in private!" repeated Catharine, as she stopped upon the
terrace of the palace. "Well, then, fall back, my lords and ladies;
we wish to receive his majesty's mysterious message."

The royal train silently and respectfully withdrew into the large
anteroom of the palace, while the queen remained alone with John
Heywood on the terrace.

"Now, speak, John."

"Queen, heed well my words, and grave them deep on your memory! A
conspiracy is forged against you, and in a few days, at the great
festival, it will be ripe for execution. Guard well, therefore,
every word you utter, ay, even your very thoughts. Beware of every
dangerous step, for you may be certain that a listener stands behind
you! And if you need a confidant, confide in no one but me! I tell
you, a great danger lies before you, and only by prudence and
presence of mind will you be able to avoid it."

This time the queen did not laugh at her friend's warning voice. She
was serious; she even trembled.

She had lost her proud sense of security and her serene confidence--
she was no longer guiltless--she had a dangerous secret to keep,
consequently she felt a dread of discovery; and she trembled not
merely for herself, but also for him whom she loved.

"And in what consists this plot?" asked she, with agitation.

"I do not yet understand it; I only know that it exists. But I will
search it out, and if your enemies lurk about you with watchful
eyes, well, then, I will have spying eyes to observe them."

"And is it I alone that they threaten?"

"No, queen, your friend also."

Catharine trembled. "What friend, John?"

"Archbishop Cranmer."

"Ah, the archbishop!" replied she, drawing a deep breath.

"And is he all, John? Does their enmity pursue only me and him?"

"Only you two!" said John Heywood, sadly, for he had fully
understood the queen's sigh of relief, and he knew that she had
trembled for another. "But remember, queen, that Cranmer's
destruction would be likewise your own; and that as you protect the
archbishop, he also will protect you with the king--you, queen, and
your FRIENDS."

Catharine gave a slight start, and the crimson on her cheek grew
deeper. "I shall always be mindful of that, and ever be a true and
real friend to him and to you; for you two are my only friends: is
it not so?"

"No, your majesty, I spoke to you of yet a third, of Thomas
Seymour."

"Oh, he!" cried she with a sweet smile. Then she said suddenly, and
in a low quick voice: "You say I must trust no one here but you.
Now, then, I will give you a proof of my confidence. Await me in the
green summer-house at twelve o'clock to-night. You must be my
attendant on a dangerous excursion. Have you courage, John?"

"Courage to lay down my life for you, queen!"

"Come, then, but bring your weapon with you."

"At your command! and is that your only order for to-day?"

"That is all, John! only," added she, with hesitation and a slight
blush, "only, if you perchance meet Earl Sudley, you may say to him
that I charged you to greet him in my name."

"Oh!" sighed John Hey wood, sadly.

"He has to-day saved my life, John," said she, as if excusing
herself. "It becomes me well, then, to be grateful to him."

And giving him a friendly nod, she stepped into the porch of the
castle.

"Now let anybody say again, that chance is not the most mischievous
and spiteful of all devils!" muttered John Heywood. "This devil,
chance, throws in the queen's way the very person she ought most to
avoid; and she must be, as in duty bound, very grateful to a lover.
Oh, oh, so he has saved her life? But who knows whether he may not
be one day the cause of her losing it!"

He dropped his head gloomily upon his breast, when suddenly he heard
behind him a low voice calling his name; and as he turned, he saw
the young Princess Elizabeth hastening toward him with a hurried
step. She was at that moment very beautiful. Her eyes gleamed with
the fire of passion; her cheeks glowed; and about her crimson lips
there played a gentle, happy smile. She wore, according to the
fashion of the time, a close-fitting high-necked dress, which showed
off to perfection the delicate lines of her slender and youthful
form, while the wide standing collar concealed the somewhat too
great length of her neck, and made her ruddy, as yet almost childish
face stand out as it were from a pedestal. On either side of her
high, thoughtful brow, fell, in luxurious profusion, light flaxen
curls; her head was covered with a black velvet cap, from which a
white feather drooped to her shoulders.

She was altogether a charming and lovely apparition, full of
nobleness and grace, full of fire and energy; and yet, in spite of
her youthfulness, not wanting in a certain grandeur and dignity.
Elizabeth, though still almost a child, and frequently bowed and
humbled by misfortune, yet ever remained her father's own daughter.
And though Henry had declared her a bastard and excluded her from
the succession to the throne, yet she bore the stamp of her royal
blood in her high, haughty brow; in her keen, flashing eye.

As she now stood before John Heywood, she was not, however, the
haughty, imperious princess, but merely the shy, blushing maiden,
who feared to trust her first girlish secret to another's ear, and
ventured only with trembling hand to draw aside the veil which
concealed her heart.

"John Heywood," said she, "you have often told me that you loved me;
and I know that my poor unfortunate mother trusted you, and summoned
you as a witness of her innocence. You could not at that time save
the mother, but will you now serve Anne Boleyn's daughter, and be
her faithful friend?"

"I will," said Heywood, solemnly, "and as true as there is a God
above us, you shall never find me a traitor."

"I believe you, John; I know that I may trust you. Listen then, I
will now tell you my secret--a secret which no one but God knows,
and the betrayal of which might bring me to the scaffold. Will you
then swear to me, that you will never, under any pretext, and from
any motive whatsoever, betray to anybody, so much as a single word
of what I am now about to tell you? Will you swear to me, never to
intrust this secret to any one, even on your death-bed, and not to
betray it even in the confessional?"

"Now as regards that, princess," said John, with a laugh, "you are
perfectly safe. I never go to confession, for confession is a
highly-spiced dish of popery on which I long since spoilt my
stomach; and as concerns my deathbed, one cannot, under the blessed
and pious reign of Henry the Eighth, altogether know whether he will
be really a participant of any kind, or whether he may not make a
far more speedy and convenient trip into eternity by the aid of the
hangman."

"Oh, be serious, John--do, I pray you! Let the fool's mask, under
which you hide your sober and honest face, not hide it from me also.
Be serious, John, and swear to me that you will keep my secret."

"Well, then, I swear, princess; I swear by your mother's spirit to
betray not a word of what you are going to tell me."

"I thank you, John. Now lean this way nearer to me, lest the breeze
may catch a single word of mine and bear it farther. John, I love!"

She saw the half-surprised, half-incredulous smile which played
around John Heywood's lips. "Oh," continued she, passionately, "you
believe me not. You consider my fourteen years, and you think the
child knows nothing yet of a maiden's feelings. But remember, John,
that those girls who live under a warm sun are early ripened by his
glowing rays, and are already wives and mothers when they should
still be dreaming children. Well, now, I too am the daughter of a
torrid zone, only mine has not been the sun of prosperity, and it
has been sorrow and misfortune which have matured my heart. Believe
me, John, I love! A glowing, consuming fire rages within me; it is
at once my delight and my misery, my happiness and my future.

"The king has robbed me of a brilliant and glorious future; let them
not, then, grudge me a happy one, at least. Since I am never to be a
queen, I will at least be a happy and beloved wife. If I am
condemned to live in obscurity and lowliness, at the very least, I
must not be prohibited from adorning this obscure and inglorious
existence with flowers, which thrive not at the foot of the throne,
and to illuminate it with stars more sparkling than the refulgence
of the most radiant kingly crown."

"Oh, you are mistaken about your own self!" said John Heywood,
sorrowfully. "You choose the one only because the other is denied.
You would love only because you cannot rule; and since your heart,
which thirsts for fame and honor, can find no other satisfaction,
you would quench its thirst with some other draught, and would
administer love as an opiate to lull to rest its burning pains.
Believe me, princess, you do not yet know yourself! You were not
born to be merely a loving wife, and your brow is much too high and
haughty to wear only a crown of myrtle. Therefore, consider well
what you do, princess! Be not carried away by your father's
passionate blood, which boils in your veins also. Think well before
you act. Your foot is yet on one of the steps to the throne. Draw it
not back voluntarily. Maintain your position; then, the next step
brings you again one stair higher up. Do not voluntarily renounce
your just claim, but abide in patience the coming of the day of
retribution and justice. Only do not yourself make it impossible,
that there may then be a full and glorious reparation. PRINCESS
Elizabeth may yet one day be queen, provided she has not exchanged
her name for one less glorious and noble."

"John Heywood," said she, with a bewitching smile, "I have told you
I love him."

"Well, love him as much as you please, but do it in silence, and
tell him not of it; but teach your love resignation."

"John, he knows it already."

"Ah, poor princess! you are still but a child, that sticks its hands
in the fire with smiling bravery and scorches them, because it knows
not that fire burns."

"Let it burn, John, burn! and let the flames curl over my head!
Better be consumed in fire than perish slowly and horribly with a
deadly chill! I love him, I tell you, and he already knows it!"

"Well, then, love him, but, at least, do not marry him!" cried John
Heywood, surlily.

"Marry!" cried she, with astonishment. "Marry! I had never thought
of it."

She dropped her head upon her breast, and stood there, silent and
thoughtful.

"I am much afraid I made a blunder, then!" muttered John Heywood. "I
have suggested a new thought to her. Ah, ah, King Henry has done
well in appointing me his fool! Just when we deem ourselves the
wisest, we are the greatest fools!"

"John," said Elizabeth, as she raised her head again and smiled to
him in a glow of excitement, "John, you are entirely right; if we
love, we must marry."

"But I said just the contrary, princess!"

"All right!" said she, resolutely. "All this belongs to the future;
we will busy ourselves with the present. I have promised my lover an
interview."

"An interview!" cried John Heywood, in amazement. "You will not be
so foolhardy as to keep your promise?"

"John Heywood," said she, with an air of approaching solemnity,
"King Henry's daughter will never make a promise without fulfilling
it. For better or for worse, I will always keep my plighted word,
even if the greatest misery and ruin were the result!"

John Heywood ventured to offer no further opposition. There was at
this moment something peculiarly lofty, proud, and truly royal in
her air, which impressed him with awe, and before which he bowed.

"I have granted him an interview because he wished it," said
Elizabeth; "and, John, I will confess it to you, my own heart longed
for it. Seek not, then, to shake my resolution; it is as firm as a
rock. But if you are not willing to stand by me, say so, and I will
then look about me for another friend, who loves me enough to impose
silence on his thoughts."

"But who, perhaps, will go and betray you. No, no, it has been once
resolved upon, and unalterably; so no one but I must be your
confidant. Tell me, then, what I am to do, and I will obey you."

"You know, John, that my apartments are situated in yonder wing,
overlooking the garden. Well, in my dressing-room, behind one of the
large wall pictures, I have discovered a door leading into a lonely,
dark corridor. From this corridor there is a passage up into yonder
tower. It is unoccupied and deserted. Nobody ever thinks of entering
that part of the castle, and the quiet of the grave reigns
throughout those apartments, which nevertheless are furnished with a
magnificence truly regal. There will I receive him."

"But how shall he make his way thither?"

"Oh, do not be concerned; I have thought over that many days since;
and while I was refusing my lover the interview for which he again
and again implored me, I was quietly preparing everything so as to
be able one day to grant it to him. Today this object is attained,
and today have I fulfilled his wish, voluntarily and unasked; for I
saw he had no more courage to ask again. Listen, then. From the
tower, a spiral staircase leads down to a small door, through which
you gain entrance into the garden. I have a key to this door. Here
it is. Once in possession of this key, he has nothing further to do
but remain behind in the park this evening, instead of leaving the
castle; and by means of this he will come to me, for I will wait for
him in the tower, in the large room directly opposite the staircase
landing. Here, take the key; give it to him, and repeat to him all
that I have said."

"Well, princess, there remains for you now only to appoint the hour
at which you will receive him there."

"The hour," said she, as she turned away her blushing face. "You
understand, John, that it is not feasible to receive him there by
day, because there is by day not a single moment in which I am not
watched."

"You will then receive him by night!" said John Heywood, sadly. "At
what hour?"

"At midnight! And now you know all; and I beg you, John, hasten and
carry him my message; for, look, the sun is setting, and it will
soon be night."

She nodded to him with a smile, and turned to go.

"Princess, you have forgotten the most important point. You have not
yet told me his name."

"My God! and you do not guess it? John Heywood, who has such sharp
eyes, sees not that there is at this court but a single one that
deserves to be loved by a daughter of the king!"

"And the name of this single one is--"

"Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley!" whispered Elizabeth, as she turned
away quickly and entered the castle.

"Oh, Thomas Seymour!" said John Heywood, utterly astounded. As if
paralyzed with horror, he stood there motionless, staring up at the
sky and repealing over and over, "Thomas Seymour! Thomas Seymour! So
he is a sorcerer who administers a love-potion to all the women, and
befools them with his handsome, saucy face. Thomas Seymour! The
queen loves him; the princess loves him; and then there is this
Duchess of Richmond, who will by all means be his wife! This much,
however, is certain, he is a traitor who deceives both, because to
both he has made the same confession of love. And there again is
that imp, chance, which compels me to be the confidant of both these
women. But I will be well on my guard against executing both my
commissions to this sorcerer. Let him at any rate become the husband
of the princess; perhaps this would be the surest means of freeing
the queen from her unfortunate love."

He was silent, and still gazed up thoughtfully at the sky. "Yes,"
said he then, quite cheerfully, "thus shall it be. I will combat the
one love with the other. For the queen to love him, is dangerous. I
will therefore so conduct matters that she must hate him. I will
remain her confidant. I will receive her letters and her
commissions, but I will burn her letters and not execute her
commissions. I am not at liberty to tell her that the faithless
Thomas Seymour is false to her, for I have solemnly pledged my word
to the princess never to breathe her secret to any one; and I will
and must keep my word. Smile and love, then; dream on thy sweet
dream of love, queen; I wake for thee; I will cause the dark cloud
resting on thee to pass by. It may, perhaps, touch thine heart; but
thy noble and beautiful head--that at least it shall not be allowed
to crush; that--"

"Now, then, what are you staring up at the sky for, as if you read
there a new epigram with which to make the king laugh, and the
parsons rave?" asked a voice near him; and a hand was laid heavily
on his shoulder.

John Heywood did not look round at all; he remained in the same
attitude, gazing up steadily at the sky. He had very readily
recognized the voice of him who had addressed him; he knew very well
that he who stood near him was no other than the bold sorcerer whom
he was just then cursing at the bottom of his heart; no other than
Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley.

"Say, John, is it really an epigram?" asked Thomas Seymour again.
"An epigram on the hypocritical, lustful, and sanctimonious priestly
rabble, that with blasphemous hypocrisy fawn about the king, and are
ever watchful how they can set a trap for one of us honorable and
brave men? Is that what Heaven is now revealing to you?"

"No, my lord, I am only looking at a hawk which hovers about there
in the clouds. I saw him mount, earl, and only think of the wonder--
he had in each talon a dove! Two doves for one hawk. Is not that too
much--wholly contrary to law and nature?"

The earl cast on him a penetrating and distrustful look. But John
Heywood, remaining perfectly calm and unembarrassed, continued
looking at the clouds.

"How stupid such a brute is, and how much to his disadvantage will
his very greediness be! For since he holds a dove in each claw, he
will not be able to enjoy either of them; because he has no claw at
liberty with which to tear them. Soon as he wishes to enjoy the one,
the other will escape; when he grabs after that, the other flies
away; and so at last he will have nothing at all, because he was too
rapacious and wanted more than he could use."

"And you are looking after this hawk in the skies? But you are
perhaps mistaken, and he whom you seek is not above there at all,
but here below, and perchance quite close to you?" asked Thomas
Seymour significantly.

But John Heywood would not understand him.

"Nay," said he," he still flies, but it will not last long. For
verily I saw the owner of the dovecot from which the hawk has stolen
the two doves. He had a weapon; and he, be ye sure of it--he will
kill this hawk, because he has robbed him of his pet doves."

"Enough, enough!" cried the earl, impatiently. "You would give me a
lesson, but you must know I take no counsel from a fool, even were
he the wisest."

"In that you are right, my lord, for only fools are so foolish as to
hearken to the voice of wisdom. Besides, each man forges his own
fortune. And now, wise sir, I will give you a key, which you
yourself have forged, and behind which lies your fortune. There,
take this key; and if you at midnight slip through the garden to the
tower over yonder, this key will open to you the door of the same,
and you can then without hesitation mount the spiral staircase and
open the door which is opposite the staircase. Behind that you will
find the fortune which you have forged for yourself, sir blacksmith,
and which will bid you welcome with warm lips and soft arms. And so
commending you to God, I must hasten home to think over the comedy
which the king has commanded me to write."

"But you do not so much as tell me from whom this message comes?"
said Earl Sudley, retaining him. "You invite me to a meeting and
give me a key, and I know not who will await me there in that
tower."

"Oh, you do not know? There is then more than one who might await
you there? Well, then, it is the youngest and smallest of the two
doves who sends you the key."

"Princess Elizabeth?"

"You have named her, not I!" said John Heywood, as he disengaged
himself from the earl's grasp and hurried across the courtyard to
betake himself to his lodgings.

Thomas Seymour watched him with a scowl, and then slowly directed
his eyes to the key that Heywood had given him.

"The princess then awaits me," whispered he, softly. "Ah, who can
read it in the stars? who can know whither the crown will roll when
it tumbles from King Henry's head? I love Catharine, but I love
ambition still more; and if it is demanded, to ambition must I
sacrifice my heart."


CHAPTER XVII.

GAMMER GUETON'S NEEDLE.


Slowly and lost in gloomy thought, John Heywood walked toward his
lodgings. These lodgings were situated in the second or inner court
of the vast palace of Whitehall, in that wing of the castle which
contained the apartments of all the higher officers of the royal
household, and so those of the court-jesters also; for the king's
fool was at that period a very important and respectable personage,
who occupied a rank equal to that of a gentleman of the royal bed-
chamber.

John Heywood had just crossed this second courtyard, when all at
once loud, wrangling voices, and the clear, peculiar ring of a box
on the ear, startled him out of his meditations. He stopped and
listened. His face, before so serious, had now reassumed its usual
merry and shrewd expression; his large eyes again glittered with
humor and mischief. "There again verily is my sweet, charming
housekeeper, Gammer Gurton," said John Heywood, laughing; "and she
no doubt is quarrelling again with my excellent servant, that poor,
long-legged, blear-eyed Hodge. Ah! ha! Yesterday I surprised her as
she applied a kiss to him, at which he made as doleful a face as if
a bee had stung him. To-day I hear how she is boxing his ears. He is
perhaps now laughing at it, and thinks it is a rose-leaf which cools
his cheek. That Hodge is such a queer bird! But we will at once see
what there is to-day, and what farce is being performed now."

He crept softly up-stairs, and, opening the door of his room, closed
it again behind him quickly and gently. Gammer Gurton, who was in
the room adjoining, had heard nothing, seen nothing; and had the
heavens come tumbling down at that moment, she would have scarcely
noticed it; for she had eyes and sense only for this long, lank
lackey who stood before her shaking with fear, and staring at her
out of his great bluish-white eyes. Her whole soul lay in her
tongue; and her tongue ran as fast as a will-wheel, and with the
force of thunder. How, then, could Gammer Gurton well have time and
ears to hear her master, who had softly entered his chamber and
slyly crept to the door, only half closed, which separated his room
from that of the housekeeper?" How!" screamed Gammer Gurtoh, "you
silly raga muffin, you wish to make me believe that it was the cat
that ran away with my sewing-needle, as if my sewing-needle were a
mouse and smelt of bacon, you stupid, blear-eyed fool!"

"Ah, you call me a fool," cried Hodge, with a laugh, which caused
his mouth to describe a graceful line across his face from ear to
ear; "you call me a fool, and that is a great honor for me, for then
I am a servant worthy of my master. And as to being blear-eyed, that
must be caused by the simple fact that I have nothing all day long
before my eyes but you, Gammer Gurton--you, with your face like a
full moon--you, sailing through the room like a frigate, and with
your grappling-irons, your hands, smashing to pieces everything
except your own looking-glass."

"You shall pay me for that, you double-faced, thread-bare lout!"
screamed Gammer Gurton, as she rushed on Hodge with clenched fist.

But John Heywood's cunning servant had anticipated this; he had
already slipped under the large table which stood in the middle of
the room. As the housekeeper now made a plunge to drag him out of
his extemporary fortress, he gave her such a hearty pinch on the
leg, that she sprang back with a scream, and sank, wholly overcome
by the pain, into the huge, leather-covered elbow-chair which was
near her workstand at the window.

"You are a monster, Hodge," groaned she, exhausted--" a heartless,
horrible monster. You have stolen my sewing-needle--you only. For
you knew very well that it was my last one, and that, if I have not
that, I must go at once to the shopkeeper to buy some needles. And
that is just what you want, you weathercock, you. You only want me
to go out, that you may have an opportunity to play with Tib."

"Tib? Who is Tib?" asked Hodge as he stretched out his long neck
from under the table, and stared at Gammer Gurton with well-assumed
astonishment.

"Now this otter wants me yet to tell him who Tib is!" screamed the
exasperated dame. "Well, then, I will tell you. Tib is the cook for
the major-domo over there--a black-eyed, false, coquettish little
devil, who is bad and mean enough to troll away the lover of an
honest and virtuous woman, as I am; a lover who is such a pitiful
little thing that one would think no one but myself could find him
out and see him; nor could I have done it had I not for forty years
trained my eyes to the search, and for forty years looked around for
the man who was at length to marry me, and make me a respectable
mistress. Since my eyes then were at last steadily fixed on this
phantom of man, and I found nothing there, I finally discovered you,
you cobweb of a man!"

"What! you call me a cobweb?" screamed Hodge, as he crept from under
the table, and, drawing himself up to his full height, placed
himself threateningly in front of Gammer Gurton's elbow-chair. "You
call me a cobweb? Now, I swear to you that you shall henceforth
never more be the spider that dwells in that web! For you are a
garden-spider, an abominable, dumpy, old garden-spider, for whom a
web, such as Hodge is, is much too fine and much too elegant. Be
quiet, therefore, old spider, and spin your net elsewhere! You shall
not live in my net, but Tib--for, yes, I do know Tib. She is a
lovely, charming child of fourteen, as quick and nimble as a kid,
with lips red as the coral which you wear on your fat pudding of a
neck, with eyes which shine yet brighter than your nose, and with a
figure so slender and graceful that she might have been carved out
of one of your fingers. Yes, yes, I know Tib. She is an
affectionate, good child, who would never be so hard-hearted as to
abuse the man she loves, and could not be so mean and pitiful, even
in thought, as to wish to marry the man she did not love. Just
because he is a man. Yes, I know Tib, and now I will go straight to
her and ask her if she will marry a good, honest lad, who, to be
sure, is somewhat lean, but who doubtless will become fatter if he
has any other fare than the meagre, abominable stuff on which Gammer
Gurton feeds him; a lad who, to be sure, is blear-eyed, but will
soon get over that disease when he no more sees Gammer Gurton, who
acts on his eyes like a stinking onion, and makes them always red
and running water. Good-by, old onion! I am going to Tib."

But Gammer Gurton whirled up out of her elbow-chair like a top, and
was upon Hodge, whom she held by the coat-tail, and brought him to a
stand.

"You dare go to Tib again! You dare pass that door and you shall see
that the gentle, peaceable, and patient Gammer Gurton is changed
into a lioness, when any one tries to tear from her that most sacred
and dearest of treasures, her husband. For you are my husband,
inasmuch as I have your word that you will marry me."

"But I have not told you when and where I will do it, Gammer Gurton;
and so you can wait to all eternity, for only in heaven will I be
your husband."

"That is an abominable, malicious lie!" screamed Gammer Gurton. "A
good-for-nothing lie, say I! For did you not long ago snivel and beg
till I was forced to promise you to make a will, and in it declare
Hodge, my beloved husband, sole heir of all my goods and chattels,
and bequeath to him everything I have scraped together in my
virtuous and industrious life?"

"But you did not make it--the will. You broke your word; and,
therefore, I will do the same."

"Yes, I have made it, you greyhound. I have made it; and this very
day I was going with you to a justice of the peace and have it
signed, and then to-morrow we would have got married."

"You have made the will, you round world of love?" said Hodge
tenderly, as with his long, withered, spindling arms he tried to
clasp the gigantic waist of his beloved. "You have made the will and
declared me your heir? Come, then, Gammer Gurton, come, let us go to
the justice of the peace!"

"But do you not see, then," said Gammer Gurton, with a tender, cat-
like purr, "do you not see, then, that you rumple my frill when you
hug me so? Let me go, then, and help me find my needle quickly, for
without the needle we cannot go to the justice of the peace."

"What, without the needle not go to the justice of the peace?"

"No; for only see this hole which Gib, the cat, tore in my prettiest
cap awhile ago, as I took the cap out of the box and laid it on the
table. Indeed I cannot go to the justice of the peace with such a
hole in my cap! Search then, Hodge, search, so that I can mend my
cap, and go with you to the justice of the peace!"

"Lord God, where in the world can it be, the unlucky needle? I must
have it, I must find it, so that Gammer Gurton may take her will to
the justice of the peace!"

And in frantic desperation, Hodge searched all about on the floor
for the lost needle, and Gammer Gurton stuck her large spectacles on
her flaming red nose and peered about on the table. So eager was she
in the search, that she even let her tongue rest a little, and deep
silence reigned in the room.

Suddenly this silence was broken by a voice; which seemed to come
from the courtyard. It was a soft, sweet voice that cried: "Hodge,
dear Hodge, are you there? Come to me in the court, only for a few
minutes! I want to have a bit of a laugh with you!"

It was as though an electric shock had passed through the room with
that voice, and struck at the same time both Gammer Gurton and
Hodge.

Both startled, and discontinuing the search, stood there wholly
immovable, as if petrified. Hodge especially, poor Hodge, was as if
struck by lightning. His great bluish-white eyes appeared to be
coming out of their sockets; his long arms hung down, flapping and
dangling about like a flail; his knees, half bent, seemed already to
be giving way in expectation of the approaching storm.

This storm did not in fact make him wait long. "That is Tib!"
screamed Gammer Gurton, springing like a lioness upon Hodge and
seizing him by the shoulders with both her hands. "That is Tib, you
thread-like, pitiful greyhound! Well, was I not right, now, when I
called you a faithless, good-for-nothing scamp, that spares not
innocence, and breaks the hearts of the women as he would a cracker,
which he swallows at his pleasure? Was I not right, in saying that
you were only watching for me to go out in order to go and sport
with Tib?"

"Hodge, my dear, darling Hodge," cried the voice beneath there, and
this time louder and more tender than before, "Hodge, oh come, do
now, come with me in the court, as you promised me; come and get the
kiss for which you begged me this morning!"

"I will be a damned otter, if I begged her for it, and if I
understand a single word of what she says!" said Hodge, wholly
dumfounded and quaking all over.

"Ah, you understand not a word of what she says?" screamed Gammer
Gurton. "Well, but I understand it. I understand that everything
between us is past and done with, and that I have nothing more to do
with you, you Moloch, you! I understand that I shall not go and make
my will, to become your wife and fret myself to death over this
skeleton of a husband, that I may leave you to chuckle as my heir.
No, no, it is past. I am not going to the justice of the peace, and
I will tear up my will!"

"Oh, she is going to tear up her will!" howled Hodge; "and then I
have tormented myself in vain; in vain have endured the horrible
luck of being loved by this old owl! Oh, oh, she will not make her
will, and Hodge will remain the same miserable dog he always was!"

Gammer Gurton laughed scornfully. "Ah, you are aware at last what a
pitiable wretch you are, and how much a noble and handsome person,
as I am, lowered herself when she made up her mind to pick up such a
weed and make him her husband."

"Yes, yes, I know it!" whined Hodge; "and I pray you pick me up and
take me, and above all things make your will!"

"No, I will not take you, and I shall not make my will! It is all
over with, I tell you; and now you can go as soon as vou please to
Tib, who has called you so lovingly. But first give me back my
sewing-needle, you magpie, you! Give me here my sewing-needle, which
you have stolen. It is of no use to you now, for it is not necessary
for me to go out in order that you may go and see Tib. We have
nothing more to do with each other, and you can go where you wish.
My sewing-needle, say I--my needle, or I will hang you as a
scarecrow in my pea-patch, to frighten the sparrows out of it. My
sewing-needle, or--"

She shook her clenched fist threateningly at Hodge, fully convinced
that now, as always before, Hodge would retreat before this menacing
weapon of his jealous and irritable lady-love, and seek safety under
the bed or the table.

This time, however, she was mistaken. Hodge, who saw that all was
lost, felt that his patience was at length exhausted; and his
timidity was now changed to the madness of despair. The lamb was
transformed into a tiger, and with a tiger's rage he pounced upon
Gammer Gurton, and, throwing aside her fist, he dealt her a good
sound blow on the cheek.

The signal was given, and the battle began. It was waged by both
sides with equal animosity and equal vigor; only Hodge's bony hand
made by far the most telling blows on Gammer Gurton's mass of flesh,
and was always certain, wherever he struck, to hit some spot of this
huge mass; while Gammer Gurton's soft hand seldom touched that thin,
threadlike figure, which dexterously parried every blow.

"Stop, you fools!" suddenly shouted a stentorian voice. "See you
not, you goblins, that your lord and master is here? Peace, peace
then, you devils, and do not be hammering away at one another, but
love each other.

It is the master!" exclaimed Gammer Gurton, lowering her fist in the
utmost contrition.

"Do not turn me away, sir!" moaned Hodge; "do not dismiss me from
your service because at last I have for once given the old hag a
good bruising. She has deserved it a long time, and an angel himself
must at last lose patience with her."

"I turn you out of my service!" exclaimed John Heywood, as he wiped
his eyes, wet with laughing. "No, Hodge, you are a real jewel, a
mine of fun and merriment; and you two have, without knowing it,
furnished me with the choicest materials for a piece which, by the
king's order, I have to write within six days. I owe you, then, many
thanks, and will show my gratitude forthwith. Listen well to me, my
amorous and tender pair of turtle-doves, and mark what I have to say
to you. One cannot always tell the wolf by his hide, for he
sometimes put on a sheep's skin; and so, too, a man cannot always be
recognized by his voice, for he sometimes borrows that of his
neighbor. Thus, for example, I know a certain John Heywood, who can
mimic exactly the voice of a certain little miss named Tib, and who
knows how to warble as she herself: 'Hodge, my dear Hodge!'" And he
repeated to them exactly, and with the same tone and expression, the
words that the voice had previously cried.

"Ah, it was you, sir?" cried Hodge, with a broad grin--"that Tib in
the court there, that Tib about whom we have been pummelling each
other?"

"I was Tib, Hodge--I who was present during the whole of your
quarrel, and found it hugely comical to send Tib's voice thundering
into the midst of our lovers' quarrel, like a cannon-stroke! Ah, ha!
Hodge, that was a fine bomb-shell, was it not? And as I said 'Hodge,
my dear Hodge,' you tumbled about like a kernel of corn which a
dung-beetle blows with his breath. No, no, my worthy and virtuous
Gammer Gurton, it was not Tib who called the handsome Hodge, and
more than that, I saw Tib, as your contest began, go out at the
courtyard gate."

"It was not Tib!" exclaimed Gammer Gurton, much moved, and happy as
love could make her. "It was not Tib, and she was not in the court
at all, and Hodge could not then go down to her, while I went to the
shopkeeper's to buy needles. Oh, Hodge, Hodge, will you forgive me
for this; will you forget the hard words which I spoke in the fury
of my anguish, and can you love me again?"

"I will try," said Hodge, gravely; "and without doubt I shall
succeed, provided you go to-day forthwith to the justice, and make
your will."

"I will make my will, and to-morrow we will go to the priest; shall
it not be so, my angel?"

"Yes, we go to the priest to-morrow!" growled Hodge, as with a
frightful grimace he scratched himself behind the ears.

"And now come, my angel, and give me a kiss of reconciliation!" She
spread her arms out, and when Houge did not come to her, but
remained immovable, and steadfast in his position, she went to Hodge
and pressed him tenderly to her heart.

Suddenly she uttered a shriek, and let go of Hodge, She had felt a
terrible pain in her breast. It seemed as though a small dagger had
pierced her bosom.

And there it was, the lost needle, and Hodge then was innocent and
pure as the early dawn.

He had not mischievously purloined the needle, so that Gammer Gurton
would be compelled to leave her house in order to fetch some new
needles from the shopkeeper's; he had not intended to go to Tib, for
Tib was not in the court, but had gone out.

"Oh Hodge, Hodge, good Hodge, you innocent dove, will you forgive
me?"

"Come to the justice of the peace, Gammer Gurton, and I forgive
you!"

They sank tenderly into each other's arms, wholly forgetful of their
master, who still stood near them, and looked on, laughing and
nodding his head.

"Now, then, I have found the finest and most splendid materials for
my piece," said John Heywood, as he left the loving pair and betook
himself to his own room. "Gammer Gurton has saved me, and King Henry
will not have the satisfaction of seeing me whipped by those most
virtuous and most lovely ladies of his court. To work, then,
straightway to work!"

He seated himself at his writing-desk, and seized pen and paper.

"But how!" asked he, suddenly pausing. "That is certainly a rich
subject for a composition; but I can never in the world get an
interlude out of it! What shall I do with it? Abandon this subject
altogether, and again jeer at the monks and ridicule the nuns? That
is antiquated and worn out! I will write something new, something
wholly new, and something which will make the king so merry, that he
will not sign a death-warrant for a whole day. Yes, yes, a merry
play shall it be, and then I will call it boldly and fearlessly a
comedy!"

He seized his pen and wrote: "Gammer Gurton's Needle, a right pithy,
pleasant, and merry comedy."

And thus originated the first English comedy, by John Heywood, fool
to King Henry the Eighth. [Footnote: This comedy was first printed
in the year 1661, but it was represented at Christ College fully a
hundred years previously. Who was the author of it is not known with
certainty; but it is possible that the writer of it was John
Heywood, the epigrammatist and court-jester.--See Dramaturgic oder
Theorie und Geschichte der dramatischen Kunst, von Theodore Mundt,
vol i, p. 809. Flogel's Geschicbte der Hofnarren, p. 399.]


CHAPTER XVIII.

LADY JANE.


All was quiet in the palace of Whitehall. Even the servants on guard
in the vestibule of the king's bedchamber had been a long time
slumbering, for the king had been snoring for several hours; and
this majestical sound was, to the dwellers in the palace, the joyful
announcement that for one fine night they were exempt from service,
and might be free men.

The queen also had long since retired to her apartments, and
dismissed her ladies at an unusually early hour. She felt, she said,
wearied by the chase, and much needed rest. No one, therefore, was
to disturb her, unless the king should order it.

But the king, as we have said, slept, and the queen had no reason to
fear that her night's rest would be disturbed.

Deep silence reigned in the palace. The corridors were empty and
deserted, the apartments all silent.

Suddenly a figure tripped along softly and cautiously through the
long feebly lighted corridor. She was wrapped in a black mantle; a
veil concealed her face.

Scarcely touching the floor with her feet, she floated away, and
glided down a little staircase. Now she stops and listens. There is
nothing to hear; all is noiseless and still.

Then, on again. Now she wings her steps. For here she is sure of not
being heard. It is the unoccupied wing of the castle of Whitehall.
Nobody watches her here.

On, then, on, adown that corridor, descending those stairs. There
she stops before a door leading into the summer-house. She puts her
ear to the door, and listens. Then she claps her hands three times.

The sound is reechoed from the other side.

"Oh, he is there, he is there!" Forgotten now are her cares,
forgotten her pains and tears. He is there. She has him again.

She throws open the door. It is dark indeed in the chamber, but she
sees him. for the eye of love pierces the night; and if the sees him
not, yet she feels his presence.

She rests on his heart; he presses her closely to his breast.
Leaning on each other, they grope cautiously along through the dark,
desolate chamber to the divan at the upper end, and there, both
locked in a happy embrace, they sink upon the cushion.

"At last I have you again! and my arms again clasp this divine form,
and again my lips press this crimson mouth! Oh, my beloved, what an
eternity has this separation been! Six days! Six long nights of
agony! Have you not felt how my soul cried out for you, and was
filled with trepidation; how I stretched my arms out into the night,
and let them fall again disconsolate and trembling with anguish,
because they clasped nothing--naught but the cold, vacant night
breeze! Did you not hear, my beloved, how I cried to you with sighs
and tears, how in glowing dithyrambics I poured forth to you my
longing, my love, my rapture? But you, cruel you, remained ever
cold, ever smiling. Your eyes were ever flashing in all the pride
and grandeur of a Juno. The roses on your cheeks were not one whit
the paler. No, no, you have not longed for me; your heart has not
felt this painful, blissful anguish. You are first and above all
things the proud, cold queen, and next, next the loving woman."

"How unjust and hard you are, my Henry!" whispered she softly. "I
have indeed suffered; and perhaps my pains have been more cruel and
bitter than yours, for I--I had to let them consume me within. You
could pour them forth, you could stretch out your arms after me, you
could utter lamentations and sighs. You were not, like me, condemned
to laugh, and to jest, and to listen with apparently attentive ear
to all those often heard and constantly repeated phrases of praise
and adoration from those about me. You were at least free to suffer.
I was not. It is true I smiled, but amidst the pains of death. It is
true my cheeks did not blanch, but rouge was the veil with which I
covered their paleness; and then, Henry, in the midst of my pains
and longings, I had, too, a sweet consolation--your letters, your
poems, which fell like the dew of heaven upon my sick soul, and
restored it to health, for new torments and new hopes. Oh, how I
love them--those poems, in whose noble and enchanting language your
love and our sufferings are reechoed! How my whole soul flew forth
to meet them when I received them, and how pressed I my lips
thousands and thousands of times on the paper which seemed to me
redolent with your breath and your sighs! How I love that good,
faithful Jane, the silent messenger of our love! When I behold her
entering my chamber, with the unsullied paper in hand, she is to me
the dove with the olive-leaf, that brings me peace and happiness,
and I rush to her, and press her to my bosom; and give her all the
kisses I would give you, and feel how poor and powerless I am,
because I cannot repay her all the happiness that she brings me. Ah,
Henry, how many thanks do we owe to poor Jane!"

"Why do you call her poor, when she can be near you, always behold
yon, always hear you?"

"I call her poor, because she is unhappy. For she loves, Henry--she
loves to desperation, to madness, and she is not loved. She is
pining away with grief and pain, and wrings her hands in boundless
woe. Have you not noticed how pale she is, and how her eyes become
daily more dim?"

"No, I have not seen it, for I see naught but you, and Lady Jane is
to me a lifeless image, as are all other women. But what! You
tremble; and your whole frame writhes in my arms, as if in a
convulsion! And what is that? Are you weeping?"

"Oh, I weep, because I am so happy. I weep, because I was thinking
how fearful the suffering must be, to give the whole heart away, and
receive nothing in return, naught but death! Poor Jane!"

"What is she to us? We, we love each other. Come, dear one, let me
kiss the tears from your eyes; let me drink this nectar, that it may
inspire me, and transfigure me to a god! Weep no more--no, weep not;
or, if you will do so, be it only in the excess of rapture, and
because word and heart are too poor to hold all this bliss!"

"Yes, yes, let us shout for joy; let us be lost in blessedness!"
exclaimed she passionately, as with frantic violence she threw
herself on his bosom.

Both were now silent, mutely resting on each other's heart.

Oh, how sweet this silence; how entrancing this noiseless, sacred
night! How the trees without there murmur and rustle, as if they
were singing a heavenly lullaby to the lovers! how inquisitively the
pale crescent moon peeps through the window, as though she were
seeking the twain whose blessed confidante she is!

But happiness is so swift-winged, and time flies so fast, when love
is their companion!

Even now they must part again--now they must again say farewell.
"Not yet, beloved, stay yet! See, the night is still dark; and hark,
the castle clock is just striking two. No, go not yet."

"I must, Henry, I must; the hours are past in which I can be happy."

"Oh, you cold, proud soul! Does the head already long again for the
crown; and can you wait no longer for the purple to again cover your
shoulders? Come, let me kiss your shoulder; and think now, dear,
that my crimson lips are also a purple robe.

And a purple robe for which I would gladly give my crown and my
life!" cried she, with the utmost enthusiasm, as she folded him in
her arms.

"Do you love me, then? Do you really love me?"

"Yes, I love you!"

"Can you swear to me that you love no one except me?"

"I can swear it, as true as there is a God above us, who hears my
oath."

"Bless you for it, you dear, you only one--oh, how shall I call
you?--you whose name I may not utter! Oh, do you know that it is
cruel never to name the name of the loved one? Withdraw that
prohibition; grudge me not the painfully sweet pleasure of being
able at least to call you by your name!"

"No," said she, with a shudder; "for know you not that the sleep-
walkers awake out of their dreams when they are called by name? I am
a somnambulist, who, with smiling courage, moves along a dizzy
height; call me by name, and I shall awake, and, shuddering, plunge
into the abyss beneath. Ah, Henry, I hate my name, for it is
pronounced by other lips than yours. For you I will not be named as
other men call me. Baptize me, my Henry; give me another name--a
name which is our secret, and which no one knows besides us."

"I name you Geraldine; and as Geraldine I will praise and laud you
before all the world. I will, in spite of all these spies and
listeners, repeat again and again that I love you, and no one, not
the king himself, shall be able to forbid me."

"Hush!" said she, with a shudder, "speak not of him! Oh, I conjure
you, my Henry, be cautious; think that you have sworn to me ever to
think of the danger that threatens us, and will, without doubt, dash
us in pieces if you, by only a sound, a look, or a smile, betray the
sweet secret that unites us two. Are you still aware what you have
sworn to me?"

"I am aware of it! But it is an unnatural Draconian law. What! even
when I am alone with you, shall I never be allowed to address you
otherwise than with that reverence and restrain which is due the
queen? Even when no one can hear us, may I, by no syllable, by none,
not the slightest intimation, remind you of our love?"

"No, no, do it not; for this castle has everywhere eyes and ears,
and everywhere are spies and listeners behind the tapestry; behind
the curtains; everywhere are they concealed and lurking, watching
every feature, every smile, every word, whether it may not afford
ground for suspicion. No, no, Henry; swear to me by our love that
you will never, unless here in this room, address me otherwise than
your queen. Swear to me that, beyond these walls, you will be to me
only the respectful servant of your queen, and at the same time the
proud earl and lord, of whom it is said that never has a woman been
able to touch his heart. Swear to me that you will not, by a look,
by a smile, by even the gentlest pressure of the hand, betray what
beyond this room is a crime for both of us. Let this room be the
temple of our love; but when we once pass its threshold, we will not
profane the sweet mysteries of our happiness, by allowing unholy
eyes to behold even a single ray of it. Shall it be so, my Henry?

"Yes, it shall be so!" said he, with a troubled voice; "although I
must confess that this dreadful illusion often tortures me almost to
death. Oh, Geraldine, when I meet you elsewhere, when I observe the
eye so icy and immovable, with which you meet my look, I feel as it
were my heart convulsed; and I say to myself: 'This is not she, whom
I love--not the tender, passionate woman, whom in the darkness of
the night I sometimes lock in my arms. This is Catharine, the queen,
but not my loved one. A woman cannot so disguise herself; art goes
not so far as to falsify the entire nature, the innermost being and
life of a person.' Oh, there have been hours, awful, horrible hours,
when it seemed to me as though all this were a delusion, a
mystification--as though in some way an evil demon assumed the
queen's form by night to mock me, poor frenzied visionary, with a
happiness that has no existence, but lives only in my imagination.
When such thoughts come to me, I feel a frenzied fury, a crushing
despair, and I could, regardless of my oath and even the danger that
threatens you, rush to you, and, before all the courtly rabble and
the king himself, ask: 'Are you really what you seem? Are you,
Catharine Parr, King Henry's wife--nothing more, nothing else than
that? Or are you, my beloved, the woman who is mine in her every
thought, her every breath; who has vowed to me eternal love and
unchanging truth; and whom I, in spite of the whole world, and the
king, press to my heart as my own?'"

"Unhappy man, if you ever venture that, you doom us both to death!"

"Be it so, then! In death you will at least be mine, and no one
would longer dare separate us, and your eyes would no longer look so
cold and strangely upon me, as they often now do. Oh, I conjure you,
gaze not upon me at all, if you cannot do it otherwise than with
those cold, proud looks, that benumb my heart. Turn away your eyes,
and speak to me with averted face."

"Then, men will say that I hate you, Henry."

"It is more agreeable to me for them to say you abhor me than for
them to see that I am wholly indifferent to you; that I am to you
nothing more than the Earl of Surrey, your lord chamberlain."

"No, no, Henry. They shall see that you are more to me than merely
that. Before the whole assembled court I will give you a token of my
love. Will you then believe, you dear, foolish enthusiast, that I
love you, and that it is no demon that rests here in your arms and
swears that she loves nothing but you? Say, will you then believe
me?"

"I will believe you! But no, there is no need of any sign, or any
assurance. Nay, I know it; I feel indeed the sweet reality that
cuddles to my side, warm, and filling me with happiness; and it is
only the excess of happiness that makes me incredulous."

"I will convince you thoroughly; and you shall doubt no more, not
even in the intoxication of happiness. Listen, then. The king, as
you know, is about to hold a great tournament and festival of the
poets, and it will take place in a few days. Now, then, at this fete
I will publicly, in the presence of the king and his court, give you
a rosette that I wear on my shoulder, and in the silver fringe of
which you will find a note from me. Will that satisfy you, my
Henry?"

"And do you still question it, my dear? Do you question it, when you
will make me proud and happy above all others of your court?"

He pressed her closely to his heart and kissed her. But suddenly she
writhed in his arms, and started up in wild alarm.

"Day is breaking, day is breaking! See there! a red streak is
spreading over the clouds. The sun is coming; day is coming, and
already begins to dawn."

He endeavored to detain her still; but she tore herself passionately
away, and again enveloped her head in her veil.

"Yes," said he, "day is breaking and it is growing light! Let me
then, for a moment at least, see your face. My soul thirsts for it
as the parched earth for the dew. Come, it is light here at the
window. Let me see your eyes."

She tore herself vehemently away. "No, no, you must be gone! Hark,
it is already three o'clock. Soon everything will be astir in the
castle. Did it not seem as if some person passed by the door here?
Haste, haste, if you do not wish me to die of dread!" She threw his
cloak over him; she drew his hat over his brow; then once more she
threw her arms around his neck and pressed on his lips a burning
kiss. "Farewell, my beloved! farewell, Henry Howard! When we see
each other again to-day, you are the Earl of Surrey, and I, the
queen--not your loved one--not the woman who loves you! Happiness is
past, and suffering awakes anew. Farewell."

She herself opened the glass door, and pushed her lover out.

"Farewell, Geraldine; good-night, my dear! Day comes, and I again
greet you as my queen, and I shall have to endure again the torture
of your cold looks and your haughty smiles."


CHAPTER XIX.

LOYOLA'S GENERAL.


She rushed to the window and gazed after him till he had
disappeared, then she uttered a deep cry of anguish, and, wholly
overcome by her agony, she sank down on her knees weeping and
wailing, wringing her hands, and raising them to God.

But just before so happy and joyful, she was now full of woe and
anguish; and bitter sighs of complaint came trembling from her lips.

"Oh, oh," moaned she, with sobs; "what terrible agonies are these,
and how full of despair the anguish that lacerates my breast! I have
lain in his arms; I have received his vows of love and accepted his
kisses; and these vows are not mine, and these kisses he gave not to
me. He kissed me, and he loves in me only her whom I hate. He lays
his hands in mine and utters vows of love which he dedicates to her.
He thinks and feels for her only--her alone. What a terrible torture
this is! To be loved under her name; under her name to receive the
vows of love that yet belong to me only--to me alone! For he loves
me, me exclusively. They are my lips that he kisses, my form that he
embraces; to me are addressed his words and his letters; and it is I
that reply to them. He loves me, me only, and yet he puts no faith
in me. I am nothing to him, naught but a lifeless image, like other
women. This he has told me; and I did not become frenzied; and I had
the cruel energy to pass off the tears wrung from me by despair, for
tears of rapture. Oh, detestable, horrible mockery of fate--to be
what I am not, and not to be what I am!"

And with a shrill cry of agony she tore her hair, and with her fist
smote upon her breast, and wept and moaned aloud.

She heard naught; she saw naught; she felt naught but her
inexpressible and despairing anguish.

She did not once tremble for herself; she thought not at all of
this--that she would be lost if she were found in this place.

And yet at the other side of the room a door had opened, softly and
noiselessly, and a man had entered.

He shut the door behind him and walked up to Lady Jane, who still
lay on the floor. He stood behind her while she uttered her
despairing lamentation. He heard every word of her quivering lips;
her whole heart painfully convulsed and torn with grief lay unveiled
before him; and she knew it not.

Now he bent over her; and with his hand he lightly touched her
shoulder. At this touch she gave a convulsive start, as if hit by
the stroke of a sword, and her sobbing was immediately silenced.

An awful pause ensued. The woman lay on the floor motionless,
breathless, and near her, tall and cold as a figure of bronze, stood
the man.

"Lady Jane Douglas," said he then, sternly and solemnly, "stand up.
It becomes not your father's daughter to be upon her knees, when it
is not God to whom she kneels. But you are not kneeling to God, but
to an idol, which you yourself have made, and to which you hate
erected a temple in your heart. This idol is called 'Your own
personal misfortune.' But it is written, 'Thou shalt have no other
Gods but me.' Therefore I say to you once more, Lady Jane Douglas,
rise from your knees, for it is not your God to whom you kneel."

And as though these words exercised a magnetic power over her, she
raised herself up slowly from the floor, and now stood there before
her father, stern and cold as a statue of marble.

"Cast from you the sorrows of this world, which burden you, and
hinder you in the sacred work which God has imposed on you!"
continued Earl Douglas in his metallic, solemn voice. "It is
written, 'Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest,' saith our God. But you, Jane, you are to throw
down your trouble at the foot of the throne; and your burden will
become a crown that will glorify your head."

He laid his hand on her head, but she wildly shook it off.

"No," cried she, with heavy, faltering tongue, as if confused in a
dream. "Away with this crown! I wish no crown upon which devils have
laid a spell. I wish no royal robe that has been dyed crimson with
the blood of my beloved."

"She is still in the delirium of her anguish," muttered the earl, as
he contemplated the pale, trembling woman who had now sunk again to
her knees, and was staring straight before her with eyes bewildered
and stretched wide open. But the looks of the earl remained cold and
unmoved, and not the least compassion was aroused in him for his
poor daughter, now penetrated with anguish.

"Arise," said he, in a hard, steelly voice. "The Church, by my
mouth, commands you to serve her as you have vowed to do; that is to
say, with glad heart and a sense of your reliance on God; that is to
say, with smiling lips and a serene, beaming eye, as becomes a
disciple inspired by faith, and as you have sworn to do in the hands
of our lord and master, Ignatius Loyola."

"I cannot! I cannot!" moaned she, in a low tone. I cannot be glad at
heart when despair, like a wild boar, is rending my heart; I cannot
command my eye to shine when my eyes are dimmed with tears of
anguish. Oh, have pity, have compassion! Remember that you are my
father; that I am your daughter--the daughter of a wife whom you
loved, and who would find in the grave no rest if she knew how you
are racking and torturing me. My mother, my mother, if thy spirit is
near me, come and protect me. Let thy mild looks overshadow my head,
and breathe a breath of thy love into the heart of this cruel
father, who is ready to sacrifice his child on the altar of his
God."

"God has called me," said the earl, "and, like Abraham, I too will
learn to obey. But I will not adorn my victim with flowers, but with
a royal crown. I will not plunge a knife into her breast, but will
put a golden sceptre into her hand and say: Thou art a queen before
men, but before God be thou a faithful and obedient servant. Thou
hast all to command. But the holy Church, to whose service thou hast
consecrated thyself, and who will bless thee if thou art faithful,
who will dash thee in pieces with her curse if thou darest deal
treacherously, she commands thee. No, you are not my daughter, but
the priestess of the Church, consecrated to her holy service. No,
Ihave no sympathy with your tear's and this anguish, for I see the
end of these sorrows, and I know that these tears will be as a
diadem of pearls about your temples. Lady Jane Douglas, it is the
saintly Loyola who sends you his commands by my mouth. Obey them,
not because I am your father, but because I am the general to whom
you have sworn obedience and fidelity unto your life's end."

"Then kill me, my father!" said she, feebly. "Let this life end,
which is but a torture, a protracted martyrdom. Punish me for my
disobedience by plunging your dagger deep into my breast. Punish me,
and grudge me not the repose of the grave."

"Poor enthusiast!" said the father; "suppose you, we would be
foolish enough to subject you to so light a punishment! No, no, if
you dare, in insolent disobedience, rebel against my commands, your
penance shall be a terrible one, and your punishment without end. I
will not kill you, but him whom you love; it will be his head that
falls; and you will be his murderess. He shall die on the scaffold
and you--you shall live in disgrace."

"Oh, horrible!" groaned Jane, as she buried her face in her hands.

Her father continued: "Silly, short-sighted child, who thought she
could play with the sword, and did not see that she herself might
feel the stroke of this double-edged blade! You wanted to be the
servant of the Church, that you might thereby become mistress of the
world. You would acquire glory, but this glory must not singe your
head with its fiery rays. Silly child! he who plays with fire will
be consumed. But we penetrated your thoughts and the wish of which
you yourself were unconscious. We looked into the depths of your
being, and when we found love there, we made use of love for our own
purposes and your salvation. What do you bewail, then, and why do
you weep? Have we not allowed you to love? Have we not authorized
you to give yourself entirely up to this love? Do you not call
yourself Earl Surrey's wife, though you cannot name to me the priest
that married you? Lady Jane, obey, and we envy you not the happiness
of your love; dare to rebel against us, and disgrace and shame
overtake you, and you shall stand before all the world disowned and
scoffed at; you the strumpet, that--"

"Stop, my father!" cried Jane, as she sprang vehemently from the
floor. "Desist from your terrible words if you do not wish me to die
of shame. Nay, I submit, I obey! You are right, I cannot draw back."

"And why would you either? Is it not a life pleasant and full of
enjoyment? Is it not rare good fortune to see our sins transfigured
to virtue; to be able to account earthly enjoyment the service of
Heaven? And what do you bewail then? That he does not love you? Nay,
he does love you; his vows of love still echo in your ears; your
heart still trembles with the fruition of happiness. What matters it
if the Earl of Surrey with his inward eyes sees the woman he folds
in his arms to be another than you? Yet in reality he loves but you
alone. Whether you are for him named Catharine Parr or Jane Douglas,
it is all the same if you only are his love."

"But a day will come when he will discover his mistake, and when he
will curse me."

"That day will never come. The holy Church will find a way to avert
that, if you bow to her will and are obedient to her."

"I do bow to it!" sighed Jane. "I will obey; only promise me, my
father, that no harm shall happen to him; that I shall not be his
murderess."

"No, you shall become his savior and deliverer. Only you must fulfil
punctually the work I commit to you. First of all, then, tell me the
result of your meeting to-day. He does not doubt that you are the
queen?"

"No, he believes it so firmly that he would take the sacrament on
it. That is to say, he believes it now because I have promised him
to give him publicly a sign by which he may recognize that it is the
queen that loves him."

"And this sign?" inquired her father, with a look beaming with joy.

"I have promised him that at the great tournament, the queen will
give him a rosette, and that in that rosette be will find a note
from the queen."

"Ah, the idea is an admirable one!" exclaimed Lord Douglas, "and
only a woman who wishes to avenge herself could conceive it. So,
then, the queen will become her own accuser, and herself give into
our hands a proof of her guilt. The only difficulty in the way is to
bring the queen, without arousing her suspicion, to wear this
rosette, and to give it to Surrey."

"She will do it if I beg her to do so, for she loves me; and I shall
so represent it to her that she will do it as an act of kindness to
me. Catharine is good-natured and agreeable, and cannot refuse a
request."

"And I will apprise the king of it. That is to say, I shall take
good care not to do this myself, for it is always dangerous to
approach a hungry tiger in his cage and carry him his food, because
he might in his voracity very readily devour our own hand together
with the proffered meat."

"But how?" asked she with an expression of alarm. "Will he content
himself with punishing Catharine alone; will he not also crush him--
him whom he must look upon as her lover?"

"He will do so. But you yourself shall save him and set him free.
You shall open his prison and give him freedom, and he will love
you--you, the savior of his life."

"Father, father, it is a hazardous game that you are playing; and it
may happen that you will become thereby your daughter's murderer.
For, listen well to what I tell you; if his head falls, I die by my
own hands; if you make me his murderess, you become thereby mine;
and I will curse you and execrate you in hell! What to me is a royal
crown if it is stained with Henry Howard's blood? What care I for
renown and honor, if he is not there to see my greatness, and if his
beaming eyes do not reflect back to me the light of my crown?
Protect him, therefore; guard his life as the apple of your eye, if
you wish me to accept the royal crown that you offer me, so that the
King of England may become again a vassal of the Church!"

"And that the whole of devout Christendom may praise Jane Douglas,
the pious queen who has succeeded in the holy work of bringing the
rebellious and recreant son of the Church, Henry the Eighth, back to
the Holy Father in Rome, to the only consecrated lord of the Church,
truly penitent. On, on, my daughter; do not despond. A high aim
beckons you, and a brilliant fortune awaits you! Our holy mother,
the Church, will bless and praise you, and Henry the Eighth will
declare you his queen."


CHAPTER XX.

THE PRISONER.


Still all was calm and quiet in the palace of Whitehall. Nothing was
stirring, and nobody had heard how Lady Jane Douglas left her
chamber and glided down the corridor.

No one has heard it, and no eye is awake, and none sees what is now
taking place in the queen's room. She is alone--all alone. The
servants are all asleep in their chambers. The queen herself has
bolted the doors of the anteroom on the inside, and no other door
leads into her boudoir and bedroom, except through this anteroom.
She is therefore perfectly secluded, perfectly secure.

Speedily and in haste she envelops herself in a long black mantle,
the hood of which she draws well over her head and brow, and which
completely covers and conceals her form.

And now she presses on a spring inserted in the frame of a picture.
The picture flies back and shows an opening, through which a person
can quite conveniently pass out.

Catharine does so. Then she carefully pushes the picture back to its
place from the outside, and for a long time walks on in the passage
hollowed out of the solid wall, till groping along she at last lays
hold again of a knob in the wall. She presses on it; and now at her
feet opens a trap-door, through which a feeble light forces its way
and renders visible a small narrow staircase there situated.
Catharine enters and descends the steps with winged feet. Now at the
foot of the staircase she again presses on a secret spring; and
again a door opens, through which the queen passes into a large
hall.

"Oh," whispered she, fetching a long breath, "the green summer house
at last."

She quickly traversed it and opened the next door.

"John Heywood?"

"I am here, queen!"

"Hush, hush! gently as possible, that the watch, who walks up and
down just behind the door, may not hear us. Come, we still have a
long walk--let us make haste."

Again she pressed on a spring inserted in the wall; and again a door
opens. But before Catharine bolts this door, she takes the lamp
burning on the table there, which is to lighten the dark and
difficult path through which they are now to wend their way.

Now she bolts the door behind them; and they enter a long, dark
corridor, at the end of which is found still another staircase, and
down which they both go. Numberless steps conduct them below;
gradually the air becomes dense, the steps moist. The stillness of
the grave is around them. No sound of life, not the least noise, is
now perceptible.

They are in a subterranean passage, which stretches out in length
before them farther than the eye can reach. Catharine turns to John
Heywood; the lamp lights up her face, which is pale, but exhibits an
expression firm and resolute.

"John Heywood, reflect once more! I ask not whether you have
courage, for I know that. I only wish to know whether you will
employ this courage for your queen?"

"No, not for the queen, but for the noble woman who has saved my
son."

"You must then be my protector to-day if we meet with dangers. But
if it be God's will, we shall encounter no dangers. Let us go."

They go vigorously forward, silent all the way. At length they come
to a place where the passage grows broader, and spreads out into a
little open chamber, on the side walls of which a few teats are
placed.

"We have now accomplished half of the journey," said Catharine; "and
here we will rest a little."

She placed the lamp on the small marble table in the middle of the
passage, and sat down, pointing to John Heywood to take a seat near
her.

"I am not the queen, here," said she; "and you are not the king's
fool; but I am a poor weak woman, and you are my protector. You may,
therefore, well have the right to sit by me."

But John shook his head with a smile, and sat down at her feet. "St.
Catharine, savior of my son, I lie at thy feet, and devoutly return
thanks to thee."

"John, are you acquainted with this subterranean passage?" asked the
queen.

John gave a sad smile. "I am acquainted with it, queen."

"Ah, you know it? I supposed it was a secret of the king and queen."

"Then you will readily conceive that the fool knows it. For the King
of England and the fool are twin brothers. Yes, queen, I know this
passage; and I once wended it in anguish and tears."

"What! You yourself, John Heywood?"

"Yes, queen. And now I ask you, do you know the history of this
underground passage? You are silent. Now, well for you that you do
not know it. It is a long and bloody history, and if I should
narrate to you the whole of it, the night would be too short for it.
When this passage was built, Henry was still young, and possessed
yet a heart. At that time, he loved not merely his wives, but his
friends and servants also--specially Cromwell, the all-powerful
minister. He then resided at Whitehall, and Henry in the royal
apartments of the Tower. But Henry was always longing for his
favorite; and so Cromwell one day surprised him with this
subterranean passage, the construction of which had occupied a
hundred men a whole year. Ah, ah, the king was then very much moved,
and thanked his powerful minister for this surprise with tears and
hugs. There passed scarcely a day that Henry did not go to Cromwell
through this passage. So he saw each day how the palace of Whitehall
became more and more splendid and glorious; and when he returned to
the Tower, he discovered that this residence was altogether unworthy
of a king; but that his minister lived by far more magnificently
than the King of England. That, queen, was the cause of Cromwell's
fall! The king wanted Whitehall. The sly Cromwell noticed it, and
made him a present of his gem, the palace on whose construction and
decoration he had labored ten years. Henry accepted the present; but
now Cromwell's fall was irrevocable. The king could not, of course,
forgive Cromwell for having dared to offer him a present so
valuable, that Henry could not or would not repay it. He remained,
therefore, Cromwell's debtor; and since this tormented and vexed
him, he swore Cromwell's ruin. When Henry moved into Whitehall, it
was concluded that Cromwell must ascend the scaffold. Ah, the king
is such an economical builder! A palace costs him nothing but the
head of a subject. With Cromwell's bead be paid for Whitehall; and
Wolsey died for Hampton Court."

"Not on the scaffold, though, John."

"Oh, no; Henry preferred merely to break his heart, and not his
head. First, he had that wonderful pleasure-villa, Hampton Court,
with all its treasures, presented him by Wolsey; then he removed him
from all his offices, and deprived him of all his honors. Finally,
he was to go to the Tower as a prisoner; but he died on his way
thither. No, you are right! Wolsey did not die on the scaffold, he
was put to death much more slowly and more cruelly. He was not
killed with the sword, but pricked to death with pins!"

"Did you not say, John, that you had travelled this way once
before?"

"Yes, queen, and I did it to bid farewell to the noblest of men, and
the truest of friends, Thomas More! I begged and besought Cromwell
so long that he had compassion on my anguish, and allowed me to go
through this passage to Thomas More, that I might at least receive
the blessing and last kiss of affection of this saint. Ah, queen,
speak no more of it to me! From that day I became a fool; for I saw
it was not worth the trouble to be an honest man, when such men as
More are executed as criminals. Come, queen, let us go on!"

"Yes, on, John!" said she, rising. "But do you know then whither we
are going?"

"Ah, queen, do I not then know you? and did I not tell you that Anne
Askew is to be stretched upon the rack to-morrow, unless she
recant?"

"I see that you have understood me," said she, giving him a friendly
nod. "Yes, I am going to Anne Askew."

"But how will you, without being seen and discovered, find out her
cell?"

"John, even the unhappy have friends. Yes, the queen herself has a
few; and so chance, or it may be even God's will, has so arranged
matters, that Anne Askew is occupying, just at this time, that small
room in which the secret passage terminates."

"Is she alone in that room?"

"Yes, all alone. The guard stands without before the door."

"And should they hear you, and open the door?"

"Then without doubt I am lost, unless God supports me."

They walked on in silence, both too much occupied with their own
thoughts to interrupt them by conversation.

But this long, extended walk at length wearied Catharine. She leaned
exhausted against the wall.

"Will you do me a favor, queen?" asked John Heywood. "Permit me to
carry you. Your little feet can bear you no farther; make me your
feet, your majesty!"

She refused with a friendly smile. "No, John, these are the passion-
stations of a saint; and you know one must make the round of them in
the sweat of his face, and on his knees."

"Oh, queen, how noble and how courageous you are!" exclaimed John
Heywood. "You do good without display, and you shun no danger, if it
avails toward the accomplishment of noble work."

"Yet, John," said she, with a bewitching smile, "I dread danger; and
just on that account I begged you to accompany me. I shudder at the
long, desolate way, at the darkness and grave-like stillness of this
passage. Ah, John, I thought to myself, if I came here alone, the
shades of Anne Boleyn and Catharine would be roused from their sleep
by me who wear their crown; they would hover about me, and seize me
by the hand and lead me to their graves, to show me that there is
yet room there for me likewise. You see, then, that I am not at all
courageous, but a cowardly and trembling woman."

"And nevertheless, you came, queen."

"I reckoned on you, John Heywood. It was my duty to risk this
passage, to save, perchance, the life of the poor enthusiastic girl.
For it shall not be said that Catharine deserts her friends in
misfortune, and that she shrinks back at danger. I am but a poor,
weak woman, John, who cannot defend her friends with weapons, and,
therefore, I must resort to other means. But see, John, here the
path forks! Ah, my God! I know it only from the description that was
given me, but no one said anything of this to me. John, which way
must we now turn?"

"This way, queen; and here we are at the end of our journey. That
path there leads to the torture-chamber, that is to say, to a small
grated window, through which one can overlook that room. When King
Henry was in special good-humor, he would resort with his friend to
this grating to divert himself a little with the tortures of the
damned and blasphemers. For you well know, queen, only such as have
blasphemed God, or have not recognized King Henry as the pope of
their Church, have the honor of the rack as their clue. But hush!
here we are at the door, and here is the spring that opens it."

Catharine set her lamp on the ground and pressed the spring.

The door turned slowly and noiselessly on its hinges, and softly,
like shades, the two entered.

They now found themselves in a small, circular apartment, which
seemed to have been originally a niche formed in the wall of the
Tower, rather than a room. Through a narrow grated opening in the
wall only a little air and light penetrated into this dungeon, the
bald, bare walls of which showed the stones of the masonry. There
was no chair, no table in the whole space; only yonder in that
corner on the earth they had heaped up some straw. On this straw lay
a pale, tender creature; the sunken, thin cheeks, transparently
white as alabaster; the brow so pure and clear; the entire
countenance so peaceful; the bare, meagre arms thrown back over the
head; the hands folded over the forehead, the head bent to one side
in quiet, peaceful slumber; the delicate, tender form wrapped in a
long black dress, gently stretched out, and on her lips a smile,
such as only the happy know.

That was Anne Askew, the criminal, the condemned--Anne Askew, who
was an atheist only for this, because she did not believe in the
king's vast elevation and godlikeness, and would not subject her own
free soul to that of the king.

"She sleeps," whispered Catharine, deeply mored, Wholly
involuntarily she folded her hands as she stepped to the couch of
the sufferer, and a low prayer trembled on her lips.

"So sleep the gust!" said Hey wood. "Angels comfort them in their
slumbers; and the breath of God refreshes them. Poor girl; how soon,
and they will wrench these noble, fair limbs, and torture thee for
the honor of God, and open to tones of distress that mouth which now
smiles so peacefully!"

"No, no," said the queen, hastily. "I have come to save her, and God
will assist me to do it. I cannot spare her slumbers any longer. I
must wake her."

She bent down and pressed a kiss on the young girl's forehead.
"Anne, awake; I am here! I will save you and set you free. Anne,
Anne, awake!"

She slowly raised her large, brilliant eyes, and nodded a salutation
to Catharine.

"Catharine Parr!" said she, with a smile. "I expected only a letter
from you; and have you come yourself?"

"The guards have been dismissed, and the turnkeys changed, Anne; for
our correspondence had been discovered."

"Ah, you will write to me no more in future! And yet your letters
were my only comfort," sighed Anne Askew. "But that also is well;
and perhaps it will only make the path that I have to tread still
easier. The heart may move its pinions freely and easily, and return
to God."

"Hear me, Anne, hear," said Catharine in a low and hurried voice. "A
terrible danger threatens you! The king has given orders to move
you, by means of the rack, to recant."

"Well, and what more?" asked Anne, with smiling face.

"Unfortunate, you know not what you are saying! You know not what
fearful agonies await you! You know not the power of pains, which
are perhaps still mightier than the spirit, and may overcome it."

"And if I did know them now, what would it avail me?" asked Anne
Askew. "You say they will put me to the rack. Well, then, I shall
have to bear it, for I have no power to change their will."

"Yet, Anne, yet you have the power! Retract what you have said,
Anne! Declare that you repent, and that you perceive that you have
been deluded! Say that you will recognize the king as lord of the
Church; that you will swear to the six articles, and never believe
in the Pope of Rome. Ah, Anne, God sees your heart and knows your
thoughts. You have no need to make them known by your lips. He has
given you life, and you have no right to throw it away; you must
seek to keep it so long as you can. Recant, then! It is perfectly
allowable to deceive those who would murder us. Recant, then, Anne,
recant! When they in their haughty arrogance demand of you to say
what they say, consider them as lunatics, to whom you make apparent
concessions only to keep them from raving. Of what consequence is it
whether you do or do not say that the king is the head of the
Church? From His heavens above, God looks down and smiles at this
petty earthly strife which concerns not Him, but men only. Let
scholars and theologians wrangle; we women have nothing to do with
it. If we only believe in God, and bear Him to our hearts, the form
in which we do it is a matter of indifference. But in this case the
question is not about God, but merely about external dogmas. Why
should you trouble yourself with these? What have you to do with the
controversies of the priests? Recant, then, poor enthusiastic child,
recant!"

While Catharine, in a low tone and with fluttering breath, thus
spoke, Anne Askew had slowly arisen from her couch, and now stood,
like a lily, so slender and delicate, confronting the queen.

Her noble countenance expressed deep indignation. Her eyes shot
lightning, and a contemptuous smile was on her lips.

"What! Can you thus advise me?" said she. "Can you wish me to deny
my faith, and abjure my God, only to escape earthly pain? And your
tongue does not refuse to utter this, and your heart does not shrink
with shame while you do it? Look at these arms; what are they worth
that I should not sacrifice them to God? See these feeble limbs! Are
they so precious that I, like a disgusting niggard, should spare
them? No, no, God is my highest good--not this feeble, decaying
body! For God I sacrifice it. I should recant? Never! Faith is not
enveloped in this or that garb; it must be naked and open. So may
mine be. And if I then am chosen to be an example of pure faith,
that denies not, and makes profession--well, then, envy me not this
preeminence. 'Many are called, but few are chosen.' If I am one of
the chosen, I thank God for it, and bless the erring mortals who
wish to make me such by means of the torture of the rack. Ah,
believe me, Catharine, I rejoice to die, for it is such a sad,
desolate, and desperate thing to live. Let me die, Catharine--die,
to enter into blessedness!"

"But, poor, pitiable child! this is more than death; it is the
torture of earth that threatens you. Oh, bethink you, Anne, that you
are only a feeble woman. Who knows whether the rack may not yet
conquer your spirit, and whether you, with your mangled limbs, may
not by the fury of the pain yet be brought to that point that you
will recant and abjure your faith?"

"If I could do that," cried Anne Askew, with flashing eyes, "believe
me, queen, as soon as I came to my senses I would lay violent hands
on myself, in order to give myself over to eternal damnation, as the
punishment of my recantation! God has ordered that I shall be a sign
of the true faith. Be His command fulfilled!"

"Well, then, so be it," said Catharine resolutely. "Do not recant,
but save yourself from your executioners! I, Anne, I, will save you!
I cannot bear--I cannot think of it--that this dear noble form
should be sacrificed to a vile delusion of man; that they will
torture to the honor of God a noble likeness of the same God! Oh,
come, come, I will save you! I, the queen! Give me your hand. Follow
me out of this dungeon. I know a path that leads out of this place;
and I will conceal you so long in my own apartments that you can
continue your flight without danger."

"No, no, queen, you shall not conceal her with you!" said John
Heywood. "You have been graciously pleased to allow me to be your
confidant; envy me not, then, a share in your noble work also. Not
with you shall Anne Askew find refuge, but with me. Oh, come, Anne,
follow your friends. It is life that calls you, that opens the doors
to you, and desires to call you by a thousand names to itself! Do
you not hear them, all those sweet and alluring voices; do you not
see them, all those noble and smiling faces, how they greet you and
beckon to you? Anne Askew, it is the noble husband that calls you!
You know him not as yet, but he is waiting for you there in the
world without. Anne Askew, there are your children, who are
stretching their tender arms out to you. You have not yet borne
them; but love holds them in her arms, and will bring them to meet
you. It is the wife and the mother that the world yet demands of
you, Anne. You ought not to shun the holy calling which God has
given you. Come, then, and follow us--follow your queen, who has the
right to order her subject. Follow the friend, who has sworn that he
will watch over you and protect you as a father!"

"Father in heaven, protect me!" exclaimed Anne Askew, falling on her
knees and stretching her hands upward. "Father in heaven! they would
tear away Thy child, and alienate my heart from Thee! They are
leading me into temptation and alluring me with their words. Protect
me, my Father; make my ear deaf, that I may not hear them! Give me a
sign that I am Thine; that no one has any longer power over me, save
Thou alone! A sign, that Thou, Father, callest me!"

And as if God had really heard her prayer, a loud knocking was now
perceived at the outer door, and a voice cried: "Anne Askew, awake!
and hold yourself ready! The high chancellor and the Bishop of
Winchester come to fetch you away!"

"Ah, the rack!" groaned Catharine, as with a shudder she buried her
face in her hands.

"Yes, the rack!" said Anne, with a blissful smile. "God calls me!"

John Heywood had approached the queen and impetuously seized her
hand. "You see it is in vain," said he, urgently. "Make haste then
to save yourself! Hasten to leave this prison before the door there
opens."

"No," said Catharine, firmly and resolutely. "No, I stay. She shall
not surpass me in courage and greatness of soul! She will not deny
her God; well, then, I also will be a witness of my God. I will not
in shame cast my eyes to the ground before this young girl; like
her, I will frankly and openly profess my faith; like her I will
say: 'God alone is Lord of his Church,' God--"

There was a movement without; a key was heard to turn in the lock.

"Queen, I conjure you," besought John Heywood, "by all that is holy
to you, by your love, come, come!"

"No, no!" cried she, vehemently.

But now Anne seized her hand, and stretching the other arm toward
heaven, she said in a loud, commanding voice: "In the name of God, I
order you to leave me!"

While Catharine drew back wholly involuntarily, John Heywood pushed
her to the secret door, and urging her out almost with violence, he
drew the door to behind them both.

Just as the secret door had closed, the other on the opposite side
opened. "With whom were you speaking?" asked Gardiner, peering
around the room with a sharp look.

"With the tempter, that wished to alienate me from God," said she--
"with the tempter, who at the approach of your footsteps wanted to
fool my heart with fear, and persuade me to recant!"

"You are, then, firmly resolved? you do not retract?" asked
Gardiner; and a savage joy shone in his pale, hard countenance.

"No, I do not recant!" said she, with a face beaming with smiles.

"Then, in the name of God and of the king, I take you into the
torture-chamber!" cried Chancellor Wriothesley, as he advanced and
laid his heavy hand on Anne's shoulder. "You would not hear the
voice of love warning you and calling you, so we will now try to
arouse you from your madness by the voice of wrath and damnation."
He beckoned to the attendants on the rack, who stood behind him in
the open door, and ordered them to seize her and carry her to the
torture-chamber.

Anne, smiling, turned them back. "Nay, not so!" said she. "The
Saviour went on foot, and bore His cross to the place of execution.
I will tread His path. Show me the way, I follow you. But let no one
dare touch me. I will show you that not by constraint, but gladly
and freely, I tread the path of suffering, which I shall endure for
the sake of my God. Rejoice, oh my soul!--sing, my lips! for the
bridegroom is near, and the feast is about to begin."

And in exultant tones Anne Askew began to sing a hymn, that had not
died away when she entered the torture-chamber.


CHAPTER XXI.

PRINCESS ELIZABETH.


The king sleeps. Let him sleep! He is old and infirm, and God has
severely punished the restless tyrant with a vacillating, ever-
disquieted, never-satisfied spirit, while He bound his body and made
the spirit prisoner of the body; while He made the ambitious king,
struggling for the infinite, a slave to his own flesh. How high
soever his thoughts soar, still the king remains a clumsy, confined,
powerless child of humanity; how much soever his conscience harasses
him with disquiet and dread, yet he must be calm and endure it. He
cannot run away from his conscience; God has fettered him by the
flesh. The king is sleeping! But the queen is not; and Jane Douglas
is not; neither is the Princess Elizabeth. She has watched with
heart beating high. She is restless, and, pacing her room up and
down in strange confusion, waited for the hour that she had
appointed for the meeting. Now the hour had arrived. A glowing
crimson overspread the face of the young princess; and her hand
trembled as she took the light and opened the secret door to the
corridor. She stood still for a moment, hesitating; then, ashamed of
her irresolution, she crossed the corridor and ascended the small
staircase which led to the tower-chamber. With a hasty movement she
pushed open the door and entered the small slip that was at the end
of her journey, and Thomas Seymour was already there.

As she saw him, an involuntary trepidation came over her, and for
the first time she now became conscious of her hazardous step.

As Seymour, the ardent young man, approached her with a passionate
salutation, she stepped shyly back and pushed away his hand.

"How! you will not allow me to kiss your hand?" asked he, and she
thought she observed on his face a slight, scornful smile. "You make
me the happiest of mortals by inviting me to this interview, and now
you stand before me rigid and cold, and I am not once permitted to
clasp you in my arms, Elizabeth!"

Elizabeth! He had called her by her first name without her having
given him permission to do so. That offended her. In the midst of
her confusion, that aroused the pride of the princess, and made her
aware how much she must have forgotten her own dignity, when another
could be so forgetful of it.

She wished to regain it. At this moment she would have given a year
of her life if she had not taken this step--if she had not invited
the earl to this meeting.

She wanted to try and regain in his eyes her lost position, and
again to become to him the princess.

Pride in her was still mightier than love. She meant her lover
should at the same time bow before her as her favored servant.

Therefore she gravely said: "Earl Thomas Seymour, you have often
begged us for a private conversation; we now grant it to you. Speak,
then! what matter of importance have you to bring before us?"

And with an air of gravity she stepped to an easy-chair, on which
she seated herself slowly and solemnly like a queen, who gives
audience to her vassals.

Poor, innocent child, that in her unconscious trepidation wished to
intrench herself behind her grandeur, as behind a shield, which
might conceal her maidenly fear and girlish anxiety!

Thomas Seymour, however, divined her thoughts; and his proud and
cold heart revolted against this child's attempt to defy him.

He wanted to humble her; he wished to compel her to bow before him,
and implore his love as a gracious gift.

He therefore bowed low to the princess, and respectfully said: "Your
highness, it is true I have often besought you for an audience; but
you have so long refused me, that at last I could no longer summon
up courage to solicit it; and I let my wish be silent and my heart
dumb. Therefore seek not now, when these pains have been subdued, to
excite them again. My heart should remain dead, my lips mute. You
have so willed; and I have submitted to your will. Farewell, then,
princess, and may your days be happier and more serene than those of
poor Thomas Seymour!"

He bowed low before her, and then went slowly to the door. He had
already opened it and was about to step out, when a hand was
suddenly laid on his shoulder and drew him with vehement impetuosity
back into the room.

"Do you want to go?" asked Elizabeth, with fluttering breath and
trembling voice. "You want to leave me, and, flouting me, you want
now, it may be, to go to the Duchess of Richmond, your mistress, and
relate to her with a sneer that the Princess Elizabeth granted you
an interview, and that you have flouted her?"

"The Duchess of Richmond is not my mistress," said the earl,
earnestly.

"No, not your mistress; but she will very soon be your wife!"

"She will never be my wife!"

"And why not?"

"Because I do not love her, princess."

A beam of delight passed over Elizabeth's pale, agitated face. "Why
do you call me princess?" asked she.

"Because you have come as a princess to favor your poor servant with
an audience. But, ah, it would be greatly abusing your princely
grace did I want to protract this audience still further. I
therefore retire, princess."

And again he approached the door. But Elizabeth rushed after him,
and, laying hold of his arms with both her hands, she wildly pushed
him back.

Her eyes shot lightning; her lips trembled; a passionate warmth was
manifested in her whole being. Now she was the true daughter of her
father, inconsiderate and passionate in her wrath, destroying in her
ferocity.

"You shall not go," muttered she, with her teeth firmly set. "I will
not let you go! I will not let you confront me any longer with that
cold, smiling face. Scold me; cast on me the bitterest reproaches,
because I have dared to brave you so long; curse me, if you can!
Anything but this smiling calmness. It kills me; it pierces my heart
like a dagger. For you see well enough that I have no longer the
power to withstand you; you see well enough that I love you. Yes, I
love you to ecstasy and to desperation; with desire and dread. I
love you as my demon and my angel. I am angry, because you have so
entirely crushed the pride of my heart. I curse you, because you
have made me so entirely your slave; and the next moment I fall on
my knees and beseech God to forgive me this crime against you. I
love you, I say--not as those soft, gentle-hearted women love, with
a smile on the lip; but with madness and desperation, with jealousy
and wrath. I love you as my father loved Anne Boleyn, whom, in the
hatred of his love and the cruel wrath of his jealousy, he made to
mount the scaffold, because he had been told that she was untrue to
him. Ah, had I the power, I would do as my father did; I would
murder you, if you should dare ever to cease to love me. And now,
Thomas Seymour, now say whether you have the courage to desire to
leave me?"

She looked bewitching in the naming might of her passion; she was so
young, so ardent; and Thomas Seymour was so ambitious! In his eyes
Elizabeth was not merely the beautiful, charming maiden, who loved
him: she was more than that: she was the daughter of Henry the
Eighth, the Princess of England, perchance some day the heiress of
the throne. It is true, her father had disinherited her, and by act
of Parliament declared her unworthy of succeeding to the
throne.[Footnote: Burnet, vol. i, p. 138] But Henry's vacillating
mind might change, and the disowned princess might one day become
queen.

The earl thought of this as he gazed on Elizabeth--as he saw her
before him, so charming, so young, and so glowing with passion. He
thought of it as he now clasped her in his arms, and pressed on her
lips a burning kiss.

"No, I will not go," whispered he. "I will never more depart from
your side, if you do not wish me to go. I am yours!--your slave,
your vassal; and I will never be anything else but this alone. They
may betray me; your father may punish me for high treason; yet will
I exult in my good fortune, for Elizabeth loves me, and it will be
for Elizabeth that I die!"

"You shall not die!" cried she, clinging fast to him. "You shall
live, live at my side, proud, great, and happy! You shall be my lord
and my master; and if I am ever queen, and I feel here in my heart
that I must become so, then will Thomas Seymour be King of England."

"That is to say, in the quiet and secrecy of your chamber I should
perhaps be so!" said he with a sigh. "But there without, before the
world, I shall still be ever only a servant; and at the best, I
shall be called the favorite."

"Never, never, that I swear to you! Said I not that I loved you?"

"But the love of a woman is so changeable! Who knows how long it
will be before yon will tread under your feet poor Thomas Seymour,
when once the crown has adorned your brow."

She looked at him well-nigh horrified. "Can this be, then? Is it
possible that one can forget and forsake what he once loved?"

"Do you ask, Elizabeth? Has not your father already his sixth wife?"

"It is true," said she, as mournfully she dropped her head upon her
breast. "But I," said she, after a pause, "I shall not be like my
father in that. I shall love you eternally! And that you may have a
guaranty of my faithfulness, I offer myself to you as your wife."

Astonished, he looked inquiringly into her excited, glowing face! He
did not understand her.

But she continued, passionately: "Yes, you shall be my lord and my
husband! Come, my beloved, come! I have not called you to take upon
yourself the disgraceful role of the secret lover of a princess--I
have called you to be my husband. I wish a bond to unite us two,
that is so indissoluble that not even the wrath and will of my
father, but only death itself, can sever it. I will give you proof
of my love and my devotion; and you shall be forced to acknowledge
that I truly love you. Come, my beloved, that I may soon hail you as
my husband!"

He looked at her as though petrified. "Whither will you lead me?"

"To the private chapel," said she, innocently. "I have written
Cranmer to await me there at daybreak. Let us hasten, then!"

"Cranmer! You have written to the archbishop?" cried Seymour,
amazed. "How! what say you? Cranmer awaits us in the private
chapel?"

"Without doubt he is waiting for us, as I have written him to do
so."

"And what is he to do? What do you want of him?"

She looked at him in astonishment. "What do I want of him? Why, that
he may marry us!"

The earl staggered back as if stunned. "And have you written him
that also?"

"Nay, indeed," said she, with a charming, childlike smile. "I know
very well that it is dangerous to trust such secrets to paper. I
have only written him to come in his official robes, because I have
an important secret to confess to him."

"Oh, God he praised! We are not lost," sighed Seymour.

"But how, I do not understand you?" asked she. "You do not extend me
your hand! You do not hasten to conduct me to the chapel!"

"Tell me, I conjure you, tell me only this one thing: have you ever
spoken to the archbishop of your--no--of our love? Have you ever
betrayed to him so much, as a syllable of that which stirs our
hearts?"

She blushed deeply beneath the steady gaze which he fixed on her.
"Upbraid me, Seymour," whispered she. "But my heart was weak and
timorous; and as often as I tried to fulfil the holy duty, and
confess everything honestly and frankly to the archbishop, I could
not do it! The word died on my lips; and it was as though an
invisible power paralyzed my tongue."

"So, then, Cranmer knows nothing?"

"No, Seymour, he knows nothing as yet. But now he shall learn all;
now we will go before him and tell him that we love each other, and
constrain him, by our prayers, to bless our union, and join our
hands."

"Impossible!" cried Seymour. "That can never be!"

"How! What do you say?" asked she in astonishment.

"I say that Cranmer will never be so insane, nay, so criminal, as to
fulfil your wish. I say that you can never be my wife."

She looked him full and square in the face. "Have you not then told
me that you loved me?" asked she. "Have I not sworn to you that I
loved you in return? Must we then not be married, in order to
sanctify the union of our hearts?"

Seymour sank his eyes to the ground before her pure innocent look,
and blushed for shame. She did not understand this blush; because he
was silent, she deemed him convinced.

"Come," said she, "come; Cranmer is waiting for us!"

He again raised his eyes and looked at her in amazement, "Do you not
see, then, this is all only a dream that can never become reality?
Do you not feel that this precious fantasy of your great and noble
heart will never be realized? How! are you then so little acquainted
with your father as not to know that he would destroy us both if we
should dare to set at naught his paternal and his royal authority?
Your birth would not secure you from his destroying fury, for you
well know he is unyielding and reckless in his wrath; and the voice
of consanguinity sounds not so loud in him that it would not be
drowned by the thunder of his wrath. Poor child, you have learned
that already! Remember with what cruelty he has already revenged
himself on you for the pretended fault of your mother; how he
transferred to you his wrath against her. Remember that he refused
your hand to the Dauphin of France, not for the sake of your
happiness, but because he said you were not worthy of so exalted a
position. Anne Boleyn's bastard could never become Queen of France.
And after such a proof of his cruel wrath against you, will you dare
cast in his face this terrible insult?--compel him to recognize a
subject, a servant, as his son?"

"Oh, this servant is, however, the brother of a Queen of England!"
said she, shyly. "My father loved Jane Seymour too warmly not to
forgive her brother."

"Ah, ah, you do not know your father! He has no heart for the past;
or, if he has, it is only to take vengeance for an injury or a
fault, but not to reward love. King Henry would be capable of
sentencing Anne Boleyn's daughter to death, and of sending to the
block and rack Catharine Howard's brothers, because these two queens
once grieved him and wounded his heart; but he would not forgive me
the least offence on account of my being the brother of a queen who
loved him faithfully and tenderly till her death. But I speak not of
myself. I am a warrior, and have too often looked death in the face
to fear him now. I speak only of you, Elizabeth. You have no right
to perish thus. This noble head must not be laid upon the block. It
is destined to wear a royal crown. A fortune still higher than love
awaits you--fame and power! I must not draw you away from this proud
future. The Princess Elizabeth, though abused and disowned, may yet
one day mount the throne of England. The Countess Seymour never! she
disinherits herself! Follow, then, your high destiny. Earl Seymour
retires before a throne."

"That is to say, you disdained me?" asked she, angrily stamping the
floor with her foot. "That is to say, the proud Earl Seymour holds
the bastard too base for his coronet! That is to say, you love me
not!"

"No, it means that I love you more than myself--better and more
purely than any other man can love you; for this love is so great
that it makes my selfishness and my ambition silent, and allows me
to think only of you and your future."

"Ah," sighed she, mournfully., "if you really loved me, you would
not consider--you would not see the danger, nor fear death. You
would think of nothing, and know nothing, save love."

"Because I think of love, I think of you," said Seymour. "I think
that you are to move along over the world, great, powerful, and
glorious, and that I will lend you my arm for this. I think of this,
that my queen of the future needs a general who will win victories
for her, and that I will be that general. But when this goal is
reached--when you are queen--then you have the power from one of
your subjects to make a husband; then it rests with your own will to
elevate me to be the proudest, the happiest, and the most enviable
of all men. Extend me your hand, then, and I will thank and praise
God that he is so gracious to me; and my whole existence will be
spent in the effort to give you the happiness that you are so well
entitled to demand."

"And until then?" asked she, mournfully.

"Until then, we will be constant, and love each other!" cried he, as
he gently pressed her in his arms. She gently repelled him. "Will
you also be true to me till then?"

"True till death!"

"They have told me that you would marry the Duchess of Richmond, in
order thereby to at length put an end to the ancient hatred between
the Howards and Seymours."

Thomas Seymour frowned, and his countenance grew dark. "Believe me,
this hatred is invincible," said he; "and no matrimonial alliance
could wash it away. It is an inheritance from many years in our
families; and I am firmly resolved not to renounce my inheritance. I
shall just as little marry the Duchess of Richmond, as Henry Howard
will my sister, the Countess of Shrewsbury."

"Swear that to me! Swear to me, that you say the truth, and that
this haughty and coquettish duchess shall never be your wife. Swear
it to me, by all that is sacred to you!"

"I swear it by my love!" exclaimed Thomas Seymour, solemnly.

"I shall then at least have one sorrow the less," sighed Elizabeth.
"I shall have no occasion to be jealous. And is it not true," she
then said, "is it not true we shall often see each other? We will
both keep this secret of this tower faithfully and sacredly; and
after days full of privation and disappointment, we will here keep
festival the nights full of blissful pleasure and sweet transport.
But why do you smile, Seymour?"

"I smile, because you are pure and innocent as an angel," said he,
as he reverently kissed her hand. "I smile, because you are an
exalted, godlike child, whom one ought to adore upon his knees, and
to whom one ought to pray, as to the chaste goddess Vesta! Yes, my
dear, beloved child, here we will, as you say, pass nights full of
blissful pleasure; and may I be reprobate and damned, if I should
ever be capable of betraying this sweet, guileless confidence with
which you favor me, and sully your angel purity!"

"Ah, we will be very happy, Seymour!" said she, smiling. "I lack
only one thing--a friend, to whom I can tell my happiness, to whom I
can speak of you. Oh, it often seems to me as if this love, which
must always be concealed, always shut up, must at last burst my
breast; as if this secret must with violence break a passage, and
roar like a tempest over the whole world. Seymour, I want a
confidante of my happiness and my love."

"Guard yourself well against desiring to seek such a one!" exclaimed
Seymour, anxiously. "A secret that three know, is a secret no more;
and one day your confidante will betray us."

"Not so; I know a woman who would be incapable of that--a woman who
loves me well enough to keep my secret as faithfully as I myself; a
woman who could be more than merely a confidante, who could be the
protectress of our love. Oh, believe me, if we could gain her to our
side, then our future would be a happy and a blessed one, and we
might easily succeed in obtaining the king's consent to our
marriage."

"And who is this woman?"

"It is the queen."

"The queen!" cried Thomas Seymour, with such an expression of horror
that Elizabeth trembled; "the queen your confidante? But that is
impossible! That would be plunging us both inevitably into ruin.
Unhappy child, be very careful not to mention even a single word, a
syllable of your relation to me. Be very careful not to betray to
her, even by the slightest intimation, that Thomas Seymour is not
indifferent to you! Ah, her wrath would dash to pieces you and me!"

"And why do you believe that?" asked Elizabeth, gloomily. "Why do
you suppose that Catharine would fly into a passion because Earl
Seymour loves me? Or how?--it is she, perhaps, that you love, and
you dare not therefore let her know that you have sworn your love to
me also? Ah, I now see through it all; I understand it all! You love
the queen--her only. For that reason you will not go to the chapel
with me; for that reason you swore that you would not marry the
Duchess of Richmond; and therefore--oh, my presentiment did not
deceive me--therefore that furious ride in Epping Forest to-day. Ah,
the queen's horse must of course become raving, and run away, that
his lordship, the master of horse, might follow his lady, and with
her got lost in the thicket of the woods!--And now," said she, her
eyes flashing with anger, and raising her hand to heaven as if
taking an oath, "now I say to you: Take heed to yourself! Take heed
to yourself, Seymour, that you do not, even by a single word or a
single syllable, betray your secret, for that word would crush you!
Yes, I feel it, that I am no bastard, that I am my father's own
daughter; I feel it in this wrath and this jealousy that rages
within me! Take heed to yourself, Seymour, for I will go hence and
accuse you to the king, and the traitor's head will fall upon the
scaffold!"

She was beside herself. With clenched fists and a threatening air
she paced the room up and down. Tears gushed from her eyes; but she
shook them out of her eyelashes, so that they fell scattering about
her like pearls. Her father's impetuous and untractable nature
stirred within her, and his blood seethed in her veins.

But Thomas Seymour had already regained his self-command and
composure. He approached the princess and despite her struggles
clasped her in his arms.

"Little fool!" said he, between his kisses. "Sweet, dear fool, how
beautiful you are in your anger, and how I love you for it! Jealousy
is becoming to love; and I do not complain, though you are unjust
and cruel toward me. The queen has much too cold and proud a heart
ever to be loved by any man. Ah, only to think this is already
treason to her virtue and modesty; and surely she has not deserved
this from us two, that we should disdain and insult her. She is the
first that has always been just to you; and to me she has ever been
only a gracious mistress!"

"It is true," murmured Elizabeth, completely ashamed; "she is a true
friend and mother; and I have her to thank for my present position
at this court."

Then, after a pause, she said, smiling, and extending her hand to
the earl: "You are right. It would be a crime to suspect her; and I
am a fool. Forgive me, Seymour, forgive my absurd and childish
anger; and I promise you in return to betray our secret to no one,
not even to the queen."

"Do you swear that to me?"

"I swear it to you! and I swear to you more than that: I will never
again be jealous of her."

"Then you do but simple justice to yourself and to the queen also,"
said the earl, with a smile, as he drew her again to his arms.

But she pushed him gently back. "I must now away. The morning dawns,
and the archbishop awaits me in the royal chapel."

"And what will you say to him, beloved?"

"I will make my confession to him."

"How! so you will then betray our love to him?"

"Oh," said she, with a bewitching smile," that is a secret between
us and God; and only to Him alone can we confess it; because He
alone can absolve us from it. Farewell, then, Seymour, farewell, and
think of me till we see each other again! But when--say, when shall
we meet again?"

"When there is a night like this one, beloved, when the moon is not
in the heavens.

Oh, then I could wish there were a change of the moon every week,"
said she, with the charming innocence of a child. "Farewell,
Seymour, farewell; we must part."

She clung to his tall, sturdy form as the ivy twines around the
trunk of an oak. Then they parted. The princess slipped again softly
and unseen into her apartments, and thence into the royal chapel;
the earl descended again the spiral staircase which led to the
secret door of the garden.

Unobserved and unseen he returned to his palace; even his valet, who
slept in the anteroom, did not see him, as the earl crept past him
lightly on his toes, and betook himself to his sleeping-room.

But no sleep came to his eyes that night, and his soul was restless
and full of fierce torment. He was angry with himself, and accused
himself of treachery and perfidy; and then again, full of proud
haughtiness, he still tried to excuse himself and to silence his
conscience, which was sitting in judgment on him.

"I love her--her only!" said he to himself. "Catharine possesses my
heart, my soul; I am ready to devote my whole life to her. Yes, I
love her! I have this day so sworn to her; and she is mine for all
eternity!"

"And Elizabeth?" asked his conscience. "Have you not sworn truth and
love to her also?"

"No!" said he. "I have only received her oath; I have not given her
mine in return. And when I vowed never to marry the Duchess of
Richmond; when I swore this 'by my love,' then I thought only of
Catharine--of that proud, beautiful, charming woman, at once
maidenly and voluptuous; but not of this young, inexperienced, wild
child--of this unattractive little princess!"

"But the princess may one day become a queen," whispered his
ambition.

"That, however, is very doubtful," replied he to himself. "But it is
certain that Catharine will one day be the regent, and if I am at
that time her husband, then I am Regent of England."

This was the secret of his duplicity and his double treachery.
Thomas Seymour loved nothing but himself, nothing but his ambition.
He was capable of risking his life for a woman; but for renown and
greatness he would have gladly sacrificed this woman.

For him there was only one aim, one struggle: to be come great and
powerful above all the nobles of the kingdom--to be the first man in
England. And to reach this aim, he would be afraid of no means; he
would shrink from no treachery and no sin.

Like the disciples of Loyola, he said, in justification of himself,
"the end sanctifies the means."

And thus for him every means was right which conducted him to the
end; that is to say, to greatness and glory.

He was firmly convinced that he loved the queen ardently; and in his
nobler hours he did really love her. Depending on the moment, a son
of the hour, in him feeling and will varied with the rapidity of
lightning, and he ever was wholly and completely that with which the
moment inflamed him.

When, therefore, he stood before the queen, he did not lie when he
swore that he loved her passionately. He really loved her, with
double warmth, since she had to his mind in some sort identified
herself with his ambition. He adored her, because she was the means
that might conduct him to his end; because she might some day hold
in her hands the sceptre of England. And on the day when this came
to pass, he wished to be her lover and her lord. She had accepted
him as her lord, and he was entirely certain of his future sway.

Consequently he loved the queen, but his proud and ambitious heart
could never be so completely animated by one love as that there
should not be room in it for a second, provided this second love
presented him a favorable chance for the attainment of the aim of
his life.

Princess Elizabeth had this chance. And if the queen would certainly
become one day Regent of England, yet Elizabeth might some day
perchance become queen thereof. Of course, it was as yet only a
perhaps, but one might manage out of this perhaps to make a reality.
Besides, this young, passionate child loved him, and Thomas Seymour
was himself too young and too easily excitable to be able to despise
a love that presented him with such enticing promises and bright
dreams of the future.

"It does not become a man to live for love alone," said he to
himself as he now thought over the events of the night. "He must
struggle for the highest and wish to reach the greatest, and no
means of attaining this end ought he to leave unemployed. Besides,
my heart is large enough to satisfy a twofold love. I love them
both--both of these fair women who fetch me a crown. Let fate decide
to which of the two I shall one day belong!"


CHAPTER XXII.

HENRY HOWARD, EARL OF SURREY.


The great court festival, so long expected, was at last to take
place today. Knights and lords were preparing for the tournament;
poets and scholars for the feast of the poets. For the witty and
brave king wished to unite the two in this festival today, in order
to give the world a rare and great example of a king who could claim
all virtue and wisdom as his own; who could be equally great as a
hero and as a divine; equally great as a poet and as a philosopher
and a scholar.

The knights were to fight for the honor of their ladies; the poets
were to sing their songs, and John Heywood to bring out his merry
farces. Ay, even the great scholars were to have a part in this
festival; for the king had specially, for this, summoned to London
from Cambridge, where he was then professor in the university, his
former teacher in the Greek language, the great scholar Croke, to
whom belonged the merit of having first made the learned world of
Germany, as well as of England, again acquainted with the poets of
Greece. [Footnote: Tytler, p. 307.] He wished to recite with Croke
some scenes from Sophocles to his wondering court; and though, to be
sure, there was no one there who understood the Greek tongue, yet
all, without doubt, must be enraptured with the wonderful music of
the Greek and the amazing erudition of the king.

Preparations were going on everywhere; arrangements were being made;
every one was making his toilet, whether it were the toilet of the
mind or of the body.

Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, made his also; that is to say, he had
retired to his cabinet, and was busy filing away at the sonnets
which he expected to recite to-day, and in which he lauded the
beauty and the grace of the fair Geraldine.

He had the paper in his hand, and was lying on the velvet ottoman
which stood before his writing-table.

Had Lady Jane Douglas seen him now, she would have been filled with
painful rapture to observe how, with head leaned back on the
cushion, his large blue eyes raised dreamily to heaven, he smiled
and whispered gentle words.

He was wholly absorbed in sweet reminiscences; he was thinking of
those rapturous, blessed hours which he a few days before had spent
with his Geraldine; and as he thought of them he adored her, and
repeated to her anew in his mind his oath of eternal love and
inviolable truth.

His enthusiastic spirit was completely filled with a sweet
melancholy; and he felt perfectly intoxicated by the magical
happiness afforded him by his Geraldine.

She was his--his at last! After struggles so long and painful, after
such bitter renunciation, and such mournful resignation, happiness
had at last arisen for him; the never expected had at last become
indeed a reality. Catharine loved him. With a sacred oath she had
sworn to him that she would one day become his wife; that she would
become his wife before God and man.

But when is the day to come on which he may show her to the world as
his consort? When will she be at length relieved from the burden of
her royal crown? When at length will fall from her those golden
chains that bind her to a tyrannical and bloodthirsty husband--to
the cruel and arrogant king? When will Catharine at length cease to
be queen, in order to become Lady Surrey?

Strange! As he asked himself this, there ran over him a shudder, and
an unaccountable dread fell upon his soul.

It seemed to him as if a voice whispered to him: "Thou wilt never
live to see that day! The king, old as he is, will nevertheless live
longer than thou! Prepare thyself to die, for death is already at
thy door!"

And it was not the first time that he had heard that voice. Often
before it had spoken to him, and always with the same words, the
same warning. Often it seemed to him in his dreams as if he felt a
cutting pain about the neck; and he had seen a scaffold, from which
his own head was rolling down.

Henry Howard was superstitious; for he was a poet, and to poets it
is given to perceive the mysterious connection between the visible
and the invisible world; to believe that supernatural powers and
invisible forms surround man, and either protect him or else curse
him.

There were hours in which he believed in the reality of his dreams--
in which he did not doubt of that melancholy and horrible fate which
they foretold.

Formerly he had given himself up to it with smiling resignation; but
now--since he loved Catharine, since she belonged to him--now he
would not die. Now, when life held out to him its most enchanting
enjoyments, its intoxicating delights--now he would not leave them--
now he dreaded to die. He was therefore cautious and prudent; and,
knowing the king's malicious, savage, and jealous character, he had
always been extremely careful to avoid everything that might excite
him, that might arouse the royal hyena from his slumbers.

But it seemed to him as though the king bore him and his family a
special spite; as though he could never forgive them that the
consort whom he most loved, and who had the most bitterly wronged
him, had sprung from their stock. In the king's every word and every
look, Henry Howard felt and was sensible of this secret resentment
of the king; he suspected that Henry was only watching for the
favorable moment when he could seize and strangle him.

He was therefore on his guard. For now, when Geraldine loved him,
his life belonged no longer to himself alone; she loved him; she had
a claim on him; his days were, therefore, hallowed in his own eyes.

So he had kept silence under the petty annoyances and vexations of
the king. He had taken it even without murmuring, and without
demanding satisfaction, when the king had suddenly recalled him from
the army that was fighting against France, and of which he was
commander-in-chief, and in his stead had sent Lord Hertford, Earl of
Sudley, to the army which was encamped before Boulogne and
Montreuil. He had quietly and without resentment returned to his
palace; and since he could no longer be a general and warrior, he
became again a scholar and poet. His palace was now again the resort
of the scholars and writers of England; and he was always ready,
with true princely munificence, to assist oppressed and despised
talent; to afford the persecuted scholar an asylum in his palace. He
it was who saved the learned Fox from starvation, and took him into
his house, where Horatius Junius and the poet Churchyard, afterward
so celebrated, had both found a home--the former as his physician
and the latter as his page. [Footnote: Nott's Life of the Earl of
Surrey]

Love, the arts, and the sciences, caused the wounds that the king
had given his ambition, to heal over; and he now felt no more
rancor; now he almost thanked the king. For to his recall only did
he owe his good fortune; and Henry, who had wished to injure him,
had given him his sweetest pleasure.

He now smiled as he thought how Henry, who had taken from him the
baton, had, without knowing it, given him in return his own queen,
and had exalted him when he wished to humble him.

He smiled, and again took in hand the poem in which he wished to
celebrate in song, at the court festival that day, the honor and
praise of his lady-love, whom no one knew, or even suspected--the
fair Geraldine.

"The verses are stiff," muttered he; "this language is so poor! It
has not the power of expressing all that fulness of adoration and
ecstasy which I feel. Petrarch was more fortunate in this respect.
His beautiful, flexible language sounds like music, and it is, even
just by itself, the harmonious accompaniment of his love. Ah,
Petrarch, I envy thee, and yet would not be like thee. For thine was
a mournful and bitter-sweet lot. Laura never loved thee; and she was
the mother of twelve children, not a single one of whom belonged to
thee."

He laughed with a sense of his own proud success in love, and seized
Petrarch's sonnets, which lay near him on the table, to compare his
own new sonnet with a similar one of Petrarch's.

He was so absorbed in these meditations, that he had not at all
observed that the hanging which concealed the door behind him was
pushed aside, and a marvellous young woman, resplendent with
diamonds and sparkling with jewelry, entered his cabinet.

For an instant she stood still upon the threshold, and with a smile
observed the earl, who was more and more absorbed in his reading.

She was of imposing beauty; her large eyes blazed and glowed like a
volcano; her lofty brow seemed in all respects designed to wear a
crown. And, indeed, it was a ducal coronet that sparkled on her
black hair, which in long ringlets curled down to her full,
voluptuous shoulders. Her tall and majestic form was clad in a white
satin dress, richly trimmed with ermine and pearls; two clasps of
costly brilliants held fast to her shoulders the small mantilla of
crimson velvet, faced with ermine, which covered her back and fell
down to her waist.

Thus appeared the Duchess of Richmond, the widow of King Henry's
natural son, Henry Richmond; the sister of Lord Henry Howard, Earl
of Surrey; and the daughter of the noble Duke of Norfolk.

Since her husband had died and left her a widow at twenty, she
resided in her brother's palace, and had placed herself under his
protection, and in the world they were known as "the affectionate
brother and sister."

Ah, how little knew the world, which is ever wont to judge from
appearances, of the hatred and the love of these two; how little
suspicion had it of the real sentiments of this brother and sister!

Henry Howard had offered his sister his palace as her residence,
because he hoped by his presence to lay on her impulsive and
voluptuous disposition a restraint which should compel her not to
overstep the bounds of custom and decency. Lady Richmond had
accepted this offer of his palace because she was obliged to;
inasmuch as the avaracious and parsimonious king gave his son's
widow only a meagre income, and her own means she had squandered and
lavishly thrown away upon her lovers.

Henry Howard had thus acted for the honor of his name; but he loved
not his sister; nay, he despised her. But the Duchess of Richmond
hated her brother, because her proud heart felt humbled by him, and
under obligations of gratitude.

But their hatred and their contempt were a secret that they both
preserved in the depths of the heart, and which they scarcely dared
confess to themselves. Both had veiled this their inmost feeling
with a show of affection, and only once in a while was one betrayed
to the other by some lightly dropped word or unregarded look.


CHAPTER XXIII.

BROTHER AND SISTER.


Lightly on the tips of her toes the duchess stole toward her
brother, who did not yet observe her. The thick Turkish carpet made
her steps inaudible. She already stood behind the earl, and he had
not yet noticed her.

Now she bent over his shoulder, and fastened her sparkling eyes on
the paper in her brother's hand.

Then she read in a loud, sonorous voice the title of it: "Complaint,
because Geraldine never shows herself to her lover unless covered by
her veil." [Footnote: Sonnet by Surrey.--See Nott's Life and Works
of Surrey.] "Ah," said the duchess, laughing, "now, then, I have
spied out your secret, and you must surrender to me at discretion.
So you are in love; and Geraldine is the name of the chosen one to
whom you address your poems! I swear to you, my brother, you will
repay me dear for this secret."

"It is no secret at all, sister," said the earl, with a quiet smile,
as he rose from the divan and saluted the duchess. "It is so little
a secret, that I shall recite this sonnet at the court festival this
very evening. I shall not, therefore, need your secrecy, Rosabella."

"So the fair Geraldine never shows herself to you unless in a dark
veil, black as the night," said the duchess, musingly. "But tell me,
brother, who then is the fair Geraldine? Of the ladies at court, I
know not a single one who bears that name."

"So you see from that, the whole is only a fiction--a creation of my
fancy."

"No, indeed," said she, smiling; "one does not write with such
warmth and enthusiasm unless he is really in love. You sing your
lady-love, and you give her another name. That is very plain. Do not
deny it, Henry, for I know indeed that you have a lady-love. It may
be read in your eyes. And look you! it is on account of this dear
one that I have come to you. It pains me, Henry, that you have no
confidence in me, and allow me no share in your joys and sorrows. Do
you not know, then, how tenderly I love you, my dear, noble
brother?"

She put her arm tenderly round his neck, and wanted to kiss him. He
bent his head back, and laying his hand on her rosy, round chin, he
looked inquiringly and smilingly into her eyes.

"You want something of me, Rosabella!" said he. "I have never yet
enjoyed your tenderness and sisterly affection, except when you
needed my services."

"How suspicious you are!" cried she, with a charming pout, as she
shook his hand away from her face. "I have come from wholly
disinterested sympathy; partly to warn you, partly to find out
whether your love is perchance fixed upon a lady that would render
my warning useless."

"Well, so you see, Rosabella, that I was right, and that your
tenderness was not aimless. Now, then, you want to warn me? I have
yet to learn that I need any warning."

"Nay, brother! For it would certainly be very dangerous and
mischievous for you, if your love should chance not to be in
accordance with the command of the king."

A momentary flush spread over Henry Howard's face, and his brow
darkened.

"With the king's command?" asked he, in astonishment. "I did not
know that Henry the Eighth could control my heart. And, at any rate,
I would never concede him that right. Say quickly, then, sister,
what is it? What means this about the king's command, and what
matrimonial scheme have you women been again contriving? For I well
know that you and my mother have no rest with the thought of seeing
me still unmarried. You want to bestow on me, whether or no, the
happiness of marriage; yet, nevertheless, it appears to me that you
both have sufficiently learned from experience that this happiness
is only imaginary, and that marriage in reality is, at the very
least, the vestibule of hell."

"It is true," laughed the duchess; "the only happy moment of my
married life was when my husband died. For in that I am more
fortunate than my mother, who has her tyrant still living about her.
Ah, how I pity my mother!"

"Dare not to revile our noble father!" cried the earl, almost
threateningly. "God alone knows how much he has suffered from our
mother, and how much he still suffers. He is not to blame for this
unhappy marriage. But you have not come to talk over these sad and
disgraceful family matters, sister! You wish to warn me, did you
say?"

"Yes, warn you!" said the duchess, tenderly, as she took her
brother's hand and led him to the ottoman. "Come, let us sit down
here, Henry, and let us for once chat confidentially and cordially,
as becomes brother and sister. Tell me, who is Geraldine?"

"A phantom, an ideal! I have told you that already."

"You really love, then, no lady at this court?"

"No, none! There is among all these ladies, with whom the queen has
surrounded herself, not one whom I am able to love."

"Ah, your heart then is free, Henry; and you will be so much more
easily inclined to comply with the king's wish."

"What does the king wish?"

She laid her head on her brother's shoulder, and said in a low
whisper: "That the Howard and Seymour families be at last
reconciled; that at last they may reconcile the hatred, which has
for centuries separated them, by means of a firm and sincere bond of
love."

"Ah, the king wants that!" cried the earl, scornfully.

"Forsooth, now, he has made a good beginning toward bringing about
this reconciliation. He has insulted me before all Europe, by
removing me from my command, and investing a Seymour with my rank
and dignity; and he requires that I in return shall love this
arrogant earl, who has robbed me of what is my due; who has long
intrigued and besieged the king's ears with lies and calumnies, till
he has gained his end and supplanted me."

"It is true the king recalled you from the army; but this was done
in order to give you the first place at his court--to appoint you
lord chamberlain to the queen."

Henry Howard trembled and was silent. "It is true," he then
muttered; "I am obliged to the king for this place."

"And then," continued the duchess, with an innocent air, "then I do
not believe either that Lord Hertford is to blame for your recall.
To prove this to you, he has made a proposal to the king, and to me
also, which is to testify to you and to all the world how great an
honor Lord Hertford esteems it to be allied to the Howards, and
above all things to you, by the most sacred bonds."

"Ah, that noble, magnanimous lord!" cried Henry Howard, with a
bitter laugh. "As matters do not advance well with laurels, he tries
the myrtles; since he can win no battles, he wants to make
marriages. Now, sister, let me hear what he has to propose."

"A double marriage, Henry. He asks my hand for his brother Thomas
Seymour, provided you choose his sister, Lady Margaret, for your
wife."

"Never!" cried the earl. "Never will Henry Howard present his hand
to a daughter of that house; never condescend so far as to elevate a
Seymour to be his wife. That is well enough for a king--not for a
Howard!

Brother, you insult the king!"

"Well, I insult him, then! He has insulted me, too, in arranging
this base scheme."

"Brother, reflect; the Seymours are powerful, and stand high in the
king's favor."

"Yes, in the king's favor they stand high! But the people know their
proud, cruel, and arrogant disposition; and the people and nobility
despise them. The Seymours have the voice of the king in their
favor; the Howards the voice of the whole country, and that is of
more consequence. The king can exalt the Seymours, for they stand
far beneath him. He cannot exalt the Howards, for they are his
equals. Nor can he degrade them. Catharine died on the scaffold--the
king became thereby only a hangman--our escutcheon was not sullied
by that act!"

"These are very proud words, Henry!"

"They become a son of the Norfolks, Rosabella! Ah, see that petty
Lord Hertford, Earl Seymour. He covets a ducal coronet for his
sister. He wants to give her to me to wife; for as soon as our poor
father dies, I wear his coronet! The arrogant upstarts! For the
sister's escutcheon, my coronet; for the brother's, your coronet.
Never, say I, shall that be!"

The duchess had become pale, and a tremor ran through her proud
form. Her eyes flashed, and an angry word was already suspended on
her lips; but she still held it back. She violently forced herself
to calmness and self-possession.

"Consider once more, Henry," said she, "do not decide at once. You
speak of our greatness; but you do not bear in mind the power of the
Seymours. I tell you they are powerful enough to tread us in the
dust, despite all our greatness. And they are not only powerful at
the present; they will be so in the future also; for it is well
known in what disposition and what way of thinking the Prince of
Wales is trained up. The king is old, weak, and failing; death lurks
behind his throne, and will soon enough press him in his arms. Then
Edward is king. With him, the heresy of Protestantism triumphs; and
however great and numerous our party may be, yet we shall be
powerless and subdued. Yes, we shall be the oppressed and
persecuted."

"We shall then know how to fight, and if it must be so, to die
also!" cried her brother. "It is more honorable to die on the
battle-field than to purchase life and humiliation."

"Yes, it is honorable to die on the field of battle; but, Henry, it
is a disgrace to come to an end upon the scaffold. And that, my
brother, may be your fate, if you do not this time bend your pride;
if you do not grasp the hand that Lord Hertford extends to you in
reconciliation, but mortally offend him. He will take bloody
vengeance, when once he comes into power."

"Let him do it, if he can; my life is in God's hand! My head belongs
to the king, but my heart to myself; and that I will never degrade
to merchandise, which I may barter for a little security and royal
favor."

"Brother, I conjure you, consider it!" cried the duchess, no longer
able to restrain her passionate disposition, and all ablaze in her
savage wrath. "Dare not in proud arrogance to destroy my future
also! You may die on the scaffold, if you choose; but I--I will be
happy; I will at last, after so many years of sorrow and disgrace,
have my share of life's joys also. It is my due, and I will not
relinquish it; and you shall not be allowed to tear it from me.
Know, then, my brother, I love Thomas Seymour; all my desire, all my
hope is fixed on him; and I will not tear this love out of my heart;
I will not give him up."

"Well, if you love him, marry him, then!"exclaimed her brother.
"Become the wife of this Thomas Seymour! Ask the duke, our father,
for his consent to this marriage, and I am certain he will not
refuse you, for he is prudent and cautious, and will, better than I,
calculate the advantages which a connection with the Seymours may
yield our family. Do that, sister, and marry your dearly beloved. I
do not hinder you."

"Yes, you do hinder me--you alone!" cried his sister, flaming with
wrath. "You will refuse Margaret's hand; you will give the Seymours
mortal offence. You thereby make my union with Thomas Seymour
impossible! In the proud selfishness of your haughtiness, you see
not that you are dashing to atoms my happiness, while you are
thinking only of your desire to offend the Seymours. But I tell you,
I love Thomas Seymour--nay, I adore him. He is my happiness, my
future, my eternal bliss. Therefore have pity on me, Henry! Grant me
this happiness, which I implore you for as Heaven's blessing. Prove
to me that you love me, and are willing to make this sacrifice for
me. Henry, on my knees, I conjure you! Give me the man I love; bend
your proud head; become Margaret Seymour's husband, that Thomas
Seymour may become mine."

She had actually sunk upon her knees; and her face deluged with
tears, bewitchingly beautiful in her passionate emotion, she looked
up imploringly to her brother.

But the earl did not lift her up; on the contrary, with a smile, he
fell back a step. "How long is it now, duchess," asked he,
mockingly, "since you swore that your secretary, Mr. Wilford, was
the man whom you loved? Positively, I believed you--I believed it
till I one day found you in the arms of your page. On that day, I
swore to myself never to believe you again, though you vowed to me,
with an oath ever so sacred, that you loved a man. Well, now, you
love a man; but what one, is a matter of indifference. To-day his
name is Thomas, tomorrow Archibald, or Edward as you please!"

For the first time the earl drew the veil away from his heart, and
let his sister see all the contempt and anger that he felt toward
her.

The duchess also felt wounded by his words, as by a red-hot iron.

She sprang from her knees; and with flurried breath, with looks
flashing with rage, every muscle of her countenance convulsed and
trembling, there she stood before her brother. She was a woman no
more; she was a lioness, that, without compassion or pity, will
devour him who has dared irritate her.

"Earl of Surrey, you are a shameless wretch!" said she, with
compressed, quivering lips. "Were I a man, I would slap you in the
face, and call you a scoundrel. But, by the eternal God, you shall
not say that you have done this with impunity! Once more, and for
the last time, I now ask you, will you comply with Lord Hertford's
wish? Will you marry Lady Margaret, and accompany me with Thomas
Seymour to the altar?"

"No, I will not, and I will never do it!" exclaimed her brother,
solemnly. "The Howards bow not before the Seymours; and never will
Henry Howard marry a wife that he does not love!"

"Ah, you love her not!" said she, breathless, gnashing her teeth.
"You do not love Lady Margaret; and for this reason must your sister
renounce her love, and give up this man whom she adores. Ah, you
love not this sister of Thomas Seymour? She is not the Geraldine
whom you adore--to whom you dedicate your verses! Well, now, I will
find her out--your Geraldine. I will discover her; and then, woe to
you and to her! You refuse me your hand to lead me to the altar with
Thomas Seymour; well, now, I will one day extend you my hand to
conduct you and your Geraldine to the scaffold!"

And as she saw how the earl startled and turned pale, she continued
with a scornful laugh: "Ah, you shrink, and horror creeps over you!
Does your conscience admonish you that the hero, rigid in virtue,
may yet sometimes make a false step? You thought to hide your
secret, if you enveloped it in the veil of night, like your
Geraldine, who, as you wailingly complain in that poem there, never
shows herself to you without a veil as black as night. Just wait,
wait! I will strike a light for you, before which all your night-
like veils shall he torn in shreds; I will light up the night of
your secret with a torch which will be large enough to set on fire
the fagot piles ahout the stake to which you and your Geraldine are
to go!"

"Ah, now you let me see for the first time your real countenance,"
said Henry Howard, shrugging his shoulders. "The angel's mask falls
from your face; and I behold the fury that was hidden beneath it.
Now you are your mother's own daughter; and at this moment I
comprehend for the first time what my father has suffered, and why
he shunned not even the disgrace of a divorce, just to be delivered
from such a Megaera."

"Oh, I thank you, thank you!" cried she, with a savage laugh. "You
are filling up the measure of your iniquity. It is not enough that
you drive your sister to despair; you revile your mother also! You
say that we are furies; well, indeed, for we shall one day be such
to you, and we will show you our Medusa-face, before which you will
be stiffened to stone. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, from this hour
out, I am your implacable enemy; look out for the head on your
shoulders, for my hand is raised against it, and in my hand is a
sword! Guard well the secret that sleeps in your breast; for you
have transformed me to a vampire that will suck your heart's blood.
You have reviled my mother, and I will go hence and tell her of it.
She will believe me; for she well knows that you hate her, and that
you are a genuine son of your father; that is to say, a canting
hypocrite, a miserable fellow, who carries virtue on the lips and
crime in the heart."

"Cease, I say, cease," cried the earl, "if you do not want me to
forget that you are a woman and my sister!"

"Forget it by all means," said she, scornfully. "I have forgotten
long since that you are my brother, as you have long since forgotten
that you are the son of your mother. Farewell, Earl of Surrey; I
leave you and your palace, and will from this hour out abide with my
mother. the divorced wife of the Duke of Norfolk. But mark you this:
we two are separated from you in our love--but not in our hate! Our
hatred to you remains eternal and unchangeable; and one day it will
crush you! Farewell, Earl of Surrey; we meet again in the king's
presence!"

She rushed to the door. Henry Howard did not hold her back. He
looked after her with a smile as she left the cabinet, and murmured,
almost compassionately: "Poor woman! I have, perhaps, cheated her
out of a lover, and she will never forgive me that. Well, let it be
so! Let her, as much as she pleases, be my enemy, and torment me
with petty pin-prickings, if she be but unable to harm her. I hope,
though, that I have guarded well my secret, and she could not
suspect the real cause of my refusal. Ah, I was obliged to wrap
myself in that foolish family pride, and make haughtiness a cloak
for my love. Oh, Geraldine, thee would I choose, wert thou the
daughter of a peasant; and I would not hold my escutcheon tarnished,
if for thy sake I must draw a pale athwart it.--But hark! It is
striking four! My service begins! Farewell, Geraldine, I must to the
queen!"

And while he betook himself to his dressing-room, to put on his
state robes for the great court feast, the Duchess of Richmond
returned to her own apartments, trembling and quivering with rage.
She traversed these with precipitate haste, and entered her boudoir,
where Earl Douglas was waiting for her.

"Well," said he, stepping toward her with his soft, lurking smile,
"has he consented?"

"No," said she, gnashing her teeth. "He swore he would never enter
into an alliance with the Seymours."

"I well knew that," muttered the earl. "And what do you decide upon
now, my lady?"

"I will have revenge! He wants to hinder me from being happy; I will
for that make him unhappy!"

"You will do well in that, my lady; for he is an apostate and
perjurer; an unfaithful son of the Church. He inclines to the
heretical sect, and has forgotten the faith of his fathers."

"I know it!" said she, breathlessly.

Earl Douglas looked at her in astonishment, and continued: "But he
is not merely an atheist, he is a traitor also; and more than once
he has reviled his king, to whom he, in his pride of heart, believes
himself far superior."

"I know it!" repeated she.

"So proud is he," continued the earl, "so full of blasphemous
haughtiness, that he might lay his hands upon the crown of England."

"I know it!" said the duchess again. But as she saw the earl's
astonished and doubting looks, she added, with an inhuman smile: "I
know everything that you want that I should know! Only impute crimes
to him; only accuse him; I will substantiate everything, testify to
everything that will bring him to ruin. My mother is our ally; she
hates the father as hotly as I the son. Bring your accusation, then,
Earl Douglas; we are your witnesses!"

"Nay, indeed, my lady," said he, with a gentle, insinuating smile.
"I know nothing at all; I have heard nothing; how, then, can I bring
an accusation? You know all; to you he has spoken. You must be his
accuser!"

"Well, then, conduct me to the king!" said she.

"Will you allow me to give you some more advice first?"

"Do so, Earl Douglas."

"Be very cautious in the choice of your means. Do not waste them all
at once, so that if your first thrust does not hit, you may not be
afterward without weapons. It is better, and far less dangerous, to
surely kill the enemy that you hate with a slow, creeping poison,
gradually and day by day, than to murder him at once with a dagger,
which may, however, break on a rib and become ineffective. Tell,
then, what you know, not at once, but little by little. Administer
your drug which is to make the king furious, gradually; and if you
do not hit your enemy to-day, think that you will do it so much the
more surely to-morrow. Nor do you forget that we have to punish, not
merely the heretic Henry Howard, but above all things the heretical
queen, whose unbelief will call down the wrath of the Most High upon
this land."

"Come to the king," said she, hastily. "On the way you can tell me
what I ought to make known and what conceal. I will do implicitly
what you say. Now, Henry Howard," said she softly to herself, "hold
yourself ready; the contest begins! In your pride and selfishness
you have destroyed the happiness of my life--my eternal felicity. I
loved Thomas Seymour; I hoped by his side to find the happiness that
I have so long and so vainly sought in the crooked paths of life. By
this love my soul would have been saved and restored to virtue. My
brother has willed otherwise. He has, therefore, condemned me to be
a demon, instead of an angel. I will fulfil my destiny. I will be an
evil spirit to him." [Footnote: The Earl of Surrey, by his refusal
to marry Margaret Seymour, gave occasion to the rupture of the
proposed alliance between Thomas Seymour and the Duchess of
Richmond, his sister. After that the duchess mortally hated him and
combined with his enemies against him. The Duchess of Richmond is
designated by all the historians of her time as "the most beautiful
woman of her century, but also a shameless Messalina."--See Tytler,
p. 890. Also Burnet, vol. i, p. 134; Leti, vol. i, p. 83; and Nott's
Life of Henry Howard.]


CHAPTER XXIV.

THE QUEEN'S TOILET.


The festivities of the day are concluded, and the gallant knights
and champions, who have to-day broken a lance for the honor of their
ladies, may rest from their victories upon their laurels. The
tournament of arms was over, and the tournament of mind was about to
begin. The knights, therefore, retired to exchange the coat-of-mail
for gold-embroidered velvet apparel; the ladies to put on their
lighter evening dresses; and the queen, likewise with this design,
had withdrawn to her dressing-room, while the ladies and lords of
her court were in attendance in the large anteroom to escort her to
the throne.

Without, it was beginning to grow dusky, and the twilight cast its
long shadows across this hall, in which the cavaliers of the court
were walking up and down with the ladies, and discussing the
particularly important events of the day's tourney.

The Earl of Sudley, Thomas Seymour, had borne off the prize of the
day, and conquered his opponent, Henry Howard. The king had been in
raptures on this account. For Thomas Seymour had been for some time
his favorite; perhaps because he was the declared enemy of the
Howards. He had, therefore, added to the golden laurel crown which
the queen had presented to the earl as the award, a diamond pin, and
commanded the queen to fasten it in the earl's ruff with her own
hand. Catharine had done so with sullen countenance and averted
looks; and even Thomas Seymour had shown himself only a very little
delighted with the proud honor with which the queen, at her
husband's command, was to grace him.

The rigid popish party at court formed new hopes from this, and
dreamed of the queen's conversion and return to the true, pure
faith; while the Protestant, "the heretical" party, looked to the
future with gloomy despondency, and were afraid of being robbed of
their most powerful support and their most influential patronage.

Nobody had seen that, as the queen arose to crown the victor, Thomas
Seymour, her handkerchief, embroidered with gold, fell from her
hands, and that the earl, after he had taken it up and presented it
to the queen, had thrust his hand for a moment, with a motion wholly
accidental and undesigned, into his ruff, which was just as white as
the small neatly-folded paper which he concealed in it, and which he
had found in the queen's handkerchief.

One person had seen it. This little ruse of the queen had not
escaped John Heywood, who had immediately, by some cutting
witticism, set the king to laughing, and tried to draw the attention
of the courtiers from the queen and her lover.

He was now standing crowded into the embrasure of a window, and
entirely concealed behind the silk curtain; and so, without being
seen, he let his falcon eyes roam over the whole room.

He saw everything; he heard everything; and, noticed by none, he
observed all.

He saw how Earl Douglas now made a sign to Bishop Gardiner, and how
he quickly answered it.

As if by accident, both now left the groups with whom they had just
been chatting, and drew near each other, looking about for some
place where, unobserved and separated from the rest, they might
converse together. In all the windows were standing groups, chatting
and laughing; only that window behind the curtain of which John
Heywood was concealed, was unoccupied.

So Earl Douglas and the bishop turned thither.

"Shall we attain our end to-day?" asked Gardiner, in a low voice.

"With God's gracious assistance, we shall annihilate all our enemies
to-day. The sword already hangs over their heads, and soon it will
fall and deliver us from them," said Earl Douglas, solemnly.

"Are you, then, certain of it?" asked Gardiner, and an expression of
cruel delight flitted across his malicious, ashy face. "But tell me,
how comes it that Archbishop Cranmer is not here?"

"He is sick, and so had to remain at Lambeth.

May this sickness be the forerunner of his death!" muttered the
bishop, devoutly folding his hands.

"It will be so, your highness; God will destroy His enemies and
bless us. Cranmer is accused, and the king will judge him without
mercy.

And the queen?"

Earl Douglas was a moment silent, and then said, in a low whisper:
"Wait but a few hours more, and she will be queen no longer. Instead
of returning from the throne-room to her apartments, we shall
accompany her to the Tower."

John Heywood, completely enveloped in the folds of the curtain, held
his breath and listened.

"And you are, then, perfectly sure of our victory?" asked Gardiner.
"Can no accident, no unforeseen circumstance, snatch it from us?"

"If the queen gives him the rosette--no! For then the king will find
Geraldine's love-letter in the silver knot, and she is condemned. So
all depends on the queen's wearing the rosette, and not discovering
its contents. But see, your highness, there is the Duchess of
Richmond approaching us. She makes a sign to me. Now pray for us,
your highness, for I am going with her to the king, and she will
accuse this hated Catharine Parr! I tell you, bishop, it is an
accusation involving life and death; and if Catharine escape one
danger, she will run into another. Wait here for me, your highness;
I will return soon and tell you the result of our scheme. Lady Jane,
also, will soon bring us news here."

He left the window and followed the duchess, who crossed the hall,
and with her disappeared through the door that led to the king's
apartments.

The ladies and lords of the court laughed and chatted away.

John Heywood stood, with throbbing heart and in breathless anxiety,
behind the curtain, close by Gardiner, who had folded his hands and
was praying.

While Gardiner prayed, and Douglas accused and calumniated, the
queen, suspecting nothing of these plots they were framing against
her, was in her toilet-room and being adorned by her women.

She was to-day very beautiful, very magnificent to look upon; at
once a woman and queen; at the same time resplendent and modest,
with a bewitching smile on her rosy lips; and yet commanding respect
in her proud and glorious beauty. None of Henry's queens had so well
understood the art of appearing in public, and none remained so much
the woman while doing so.

As she now stood before the large mirror, which the Republic of
Venice had sent the king as a wedding-gift, and which reflected the
figure of the queen sparkling with diamonds, she smiled, for she was
obliged to confess to herself that she was very beautiful to-day;
and she thought that to-day Thomas Seymour would look upon his love
with pride.

As she thought of him, a deep crimson overspread her face, and a
thrill flew through her frame. How handsome he had been at the
tournament that day; how splendidly he leaped over the barriers; how
his eye flashed; how contemptuous had been his smile! And then, that
look which he directed over to her at the moment when he had
conquered his antagonist, Henry Howard, and hurled the lance from
his hand! Oh, her heart was then ready to burst with delight and
rapture!

Wholly given up to her reverie, she sank in her gilded arm-chair and
cast her eyes to the ground, dreaming and smiling.

Behind her stood her women in respectful silence, waiting for a sign
from their mistress. But the queen no longer thought at all of them;
she imagined herself alone; she saw nobody but that handsome, manly
face for which she had reserved a place in her heart.

Now the door opened, and Lady Jane Douglas entered. She, too, was
magnificently dressed, and sparkling with diamonds; she, too, was
beautiful, but it was the pallid, dreadful beauty of a demon; and he
who looked upon her just then, as she entered the room, would have
trembled, and his heart would have been seized with an undefined
fear.

She threw a quick glance on her mistress lost in revery; and as she
saw that her toilet was finished, she made a sign to the women, who
silently obeyed and left the room.

Still Catharine noticed nothing. Lady Jane stood behind her and
observed her in the mirror. As she saw the queen smile, her brow
darkened and fierce fire flashed in her eyes.

"She shall smile no more," said she to herself. "I suffer thus
terribly by her; well, now, she shall suffer too."

Softly and noiselessly she slipped into the next room, the door of
which stood ajar, and opened with hurried hand a carton filled with
ribbons and bows. Then she drew from the velvet pocket, wrought with
pearls, which hung at her side, suspended by a gold chain, a dark-
red rosette, and threw it into the box. That was all.

Lady Jane now returned to the adjoining room; and her countenance,
which had been previously gloomy and threatening, was now proud and
joyful.

With a bright smile she walked up to the queen, and kneeling down at
her side, she pressed a fervent kiss on the hand that was hanging
down.

"What is my queen musing over?" asked she, as she laid her head on
Catharine's knee and tenderly looked up at her.

The queen gave a slight start, and raised her head. She saw Lady
Jane's tender smile, and her yet searching looks.

Because she felt conscious of guilt, at least of guilty thoughts,
she was on her guard, and remembered John Heywood's warning.

"She is observing me," she said to herself; "she seems affectionate;
so she is brooding over some wicked plot.

Ah, it is well you have come, Jane," said she aloud. "You can help
me; for, to tell you the truth, I am in great perplexity. I am in
want of a rhyme, and I am thinking in vain how I shall find it."

"Ah, are you composing poetry, queen?"

"Why, Jane, does that surprise you? Shall I, the queen, be able,
then, to bear off no prize? I would give my precious jewels, if I
could succeed in composing a poem to which the king was obliged to
award the prize. But I am wanting in a musical ear; I cannot find
the rhyme, and so shall he obliged at last to give up the idea of
winning laurels also. How the king would enjoy it, though! For, to
confess the truth to you, I believe he is a little afraid that Henry
Howard will bear off the prize, and he would be very thankful to me
if I could contest it with him. You well know the king has no love
for the Howards."

"And you, queen?" asked Jane; and she turned so pale, that the queen
herself noticed it.

"You are unwell, Jane," said she, sympathizingly. "Really, Jane, you
seem to be suffering. You need recreation; you should rest a
little."

But Jane had already regained her calm and earnest air, and she
succeeded in smiling.

"No, indeed!" said she. "I am well, and satisfied to be permitted to
be near you. But will you allow me, queen, to make a request of
you?"

"Ask, Jane, ask, and it is granted beforehand; for I know that Jane
will request nothing that her friend cannot grant."

Lady Jane was silent, and looked thoughtfully upon the ground. With
firm resolution she struggled with herself. Her proud heart reared
fiercely up at the thought of bowing before this woman, whom she
hated, and of being obliged to approach her with a fawning prayer.
She felt such raging hate against the queen, that in that hour she
would willingly have given her own life, if she could have first
seen her enemy at her feet, wailing and crushed.

Henry Howard loved the queen; so Catharine had robbed her of the
heart of him whom she adored. Catharine had condemned her to the
eternal torment of renouncing him--to the rack of enjoying a
happiness and a rapture that was not hers--to warm herself at a fire
which she like a thief had stolen from the altar of another's god.

Catharine was condemned and doomed. Jane had no more compassion. She
must crush her.

"Well," asked the queen, "you are silent? You do not tell me what I
am to grant you?"

Lady Jane raised her eyes, and her look was serene and peaceful.
"Queen," said she, "I encountered in the ante-room one who is
unhappy, deeply bowed down. In your hand alone is the power to raise
him up again. Will you do it?"

"Will I do it!" exclaimed Catharine, quickly. "Oh, Jane, you well
know how much my heart longs to help and be serviceable to the
unfortunate! Ah, so many wounds are inflicted at this court, and the
queen is so poor in balm to heal them! Allow me this pleasure then,
Jane, and I shall be thankful to you, not you to me! Speak then,
Jane, speak quickly; who is it that needs my help?"

"Not your help, queen, but your compassion and your grace. Earl
Sudley has conquered poor Earl Surrey in the tournament to-day, and
you comprehend that your lord chamberlain feels himself deeply bowed
and humbled."

"Can I alter that, Jane? Why did the visionary earl, the
enthusiastic poet, allow himself a contest with a hero who already
knows what he wants, and ever accomplishes what he wills? Oh, it was
wonderful to look upon, with what lightning speed Thomas Seymour
lifted him out of the saddle! And the proud Earl Surrey, the wise
and learned man, the powerful party leader, was forced to bow before
the hero, who like an angel Michael had thrown him in the dust."

The queen laughed.

That laugh went through Jane's heart like a cutting sword.

"She shall pay me for that!" said she softly to herself. "Queen,"
said she aloud, "you are perfectly right; he has deserved this
humiliation; but now, after he is punished, you should lift him up.
Nay, do not shake your beautiful head. Do it for your own sake,
queen; do it from prudence. Earl Surrey, with his father, is the
head of a powerful party, whom this humiliation of the Howards fills
with a still more burning hate against the Seymours, and who will,
in time to come, take a bloody revenge for it."

"Ah, you frighten me!" said the queen, who had now become serious.

Lady Jane continued: "I saw how the Duke of Norfolk bit his lips, as
his son had to yield to Seymour; I heard how one, here and there,
muttered low curses and vows of vengeance against the Seymours."

"Who did that? Who dared to do it?" exclaimed Catharine, springing
up impetuously from her arm-chair. "Who at this court is so
audacious as to wish to injure those whom the queen loves? Name him
to me, Jane; I will know his name! I will know it, that I may accuse
him to the king. For the king does not want that these noble
Seymours should give way to the Howards; he does not want that the
nobler, the better, and more glorious, should bow before these
quarrelsome, domineering papists. The king loves the noble Seymours,
and his powerful arm will protect them against all their enemies."

"And, without doubt, your majesty will assist him in it?" said Jane,
smiling.

This smile brought the queen back to her senses again.

She perceived that she had gone too far; that she had betrayed too
much of her secret. She must, therefore, repair the damage, and
allow her excitement to be forgotten. Therefore she said, calmly:
"Certainly, Jane; I will assist the king to be just. But never will
I be unjust, not even against these papists. If I cannot love them,
nevertheless no one shall say that I hate them. And besides, it
becomes a queen to rise above parties. Say, then, Jane, what can I
do for poor Surrey? With what shall we bind up these wounds that the
brave Seymour has inflicted on him?"

"You have publicly given the victor in the tournament a token of
your great favor--you have crowned him."

"It was the king's order," exclaimed Catharine, warmly.

"Well! He will not, however, command you to reward the Earl of
Surrey also, if he likewise should gain the victory this evening. Do
it, therefore, of your own accord, queen. Give him openly, before
your whole court, a token of your favor! It is so easy for princes
to make men happy, to comfort the unfortunate! A smile, a friendly
word, a pressure of the hand is sufficient for it. A ribbon that you
wear on your dress makes him to whom you present it, proud and
happy, and raises him high above all others. Ponder it well, queen;
I speak not for Earl Surrey's sake; I am thinking more of yourself.
If you have the courage, publicly and in spite of the disgrace with
which King Henry threatens the Howards, to be nevertheless just to
them, and to recognize _their_ merits as well as that of others--
believe me, if you do that, the whole of this powerful party, which
is now hostile to you, will fall at your feet overcome and
conquered. You will at last become the all-powerful and universally
loved Queen of England; and, like the heretics, the papists also
will call you their mistress and protectress. Consider no longer!
Let your noble and generous heart prevail! Spiteful fortune has
prostrated Henry Howard in the dust. Extend him your hand, queen,
that he may rise again, and again stand there at your court, proud
and radiant as he always was. Henry Howard well deserves that you
should be gracious to him. Great and beaming like a star, he shines
on high above all men; and there is no one who can say that he
himself is more prudent or braver, wiser or more learned, noble or
greater, than the noble, the exalted Surrey. All England resounds
with his fame. The women repeat with enthusiasm his beautiful
sonnets and love-songs; the learned are proud to call him their
equal, and the warriors speak with admiration of his feats of arms.
Be just, then, queen! You have so highly honored the merit of valor;
now, honor the merit of mind also! You have, in Seymour, honored the
warrior; now, in Howard, honor the poet and the man!"

"I will do it," said Catharine, as with a charming smile she looked
into Jane's glowing and enthusiastic countenance. "I will do it,
Jane, but upon one condition!"

"And this condition is--"

Catharine put her arm around Jane's neck, and drew her close to her
heart, "That you confess to me, that you love Henry Howard, whom you
know how to defend so enthusiastically and warmly."

Lady Jane gave a start, and for a moment leaned her head on the
queen's shoulder, exhausted.

"Well," asked she, "do you confess it? Will you acknowledge that
your proud, cold heart is obliged to declare itself overcome and
conquered?"

"Yes, I confess it," cried Lady Jane, as with passionate vehemence
she threw herself at Catharine's feet. "Yes, I love him--I adore
him. I know it is a disdained and unhappy love; but what would you
have? My heart is mightier than everything else. I love him; he is
my god and my lord; I adore him as my savior and lord. Queen, you
know all my secret; betray me if you will! Tell it to my father, if
you wish him to curse me. Tell it to Henry Howard, if it pleases you
to hear how he scoffs at me. For he, queen--he loves me not!"

"Poor unfortunate Jane!" exclaimed the queen, compassionately.

Jane uttered a low cry, and rose from her knees. That was too much.
Her enemy commiserated her. She, who was to blame for her sorrow--
she bemoaned her fate.

Ah, she could have strangled the queen; she could have plunged a
dagger into her heart, because she dared to commiserate her.

"I have complied with your condition, queen," said she, breathing
hurriedly. "Will you now comply with my request?"

"And will you really be an advocate for this unthankful, cruel man,
who does not love you? Proudly and coldly he passes your beauty by,
and you--you intercede for him!"

"Queen, true love thinks not of itself! It sacrifices itself. It
makes no question of the reward it receives, but only of the
happiness which it bestows. I saw in his pale, sorrowful face, how
much he suffered; ought I not to think of comforting him? I
approached him, I addressed him; I heard his despairing lamentation
over that misfortune, which, however, was not the fault of his
activity and courage, but, as all the world saw, the fault of his
horse, which was shy and stumbled. And as he, in all the bitterness
of his pain, was lamenting that you, queen, would despise and scorn
him, I, with full trust in your noble and magnanimous heart,
promised him that you would, at my request, yet give him to-day,
before your whole court, a token of your favor. Catharine, did I do
wrong?"

"No, Jane, no! You did right; and your words shall be made good. But
how shall I begin? What shall I do?"

"The earl this evening, after the king has read the Greek scene with
Croke, will recite some new sonnets which he has composed. When he
has done so, give him some kind of a present--be it what it may, no
matter--as a token of your favor."

"But how, Jane, if his sonnets deserve no praise and no
acknowledgment?

You may be sure that they do deserve it. For Henry Howard is a noble
and true poet, and his verses are full of heavenly melody and
exalted thoughts."

The queen smiled. "Yes," said she, "you love him ardently; for you
have no doubt as to him. We will, therefore, recognize him as a
great poet. But with what shall I reward him?"

"Give him a rose that you wear in your bosom--a rosette that is
fastened to your dress and shows your colors."

" But alas, Jane, to-day I wear neither a rose nor a rosette."

"Yet you can wear one, queen. A rosette is, indeed, wanting here on
your shoulder. Your purple mantle is too negligently fastened. We
must put some trimming here."

She went hastily into the next room and returned with the box in
which were kept the queen's ribbons embroidered with gold, and bows
adorned with jewels.

Lady Jane searched and selected, here and there, a long time. Then
she took the crimson velvet rosette, which she herself had
previously thrown into the box, and showed it to the queen.

"See, it is at the same time tasteful and rich, for a diamond clasp
confines it in the middle. Will you allow me to fasten this rosette
on your shoulder, and will you give it to the Earl of Surrey?"

"Yes, Jane, I will give it to him, because you wish it. But, poor
Jane, what do, you gain by my doing it?"

"At any rate, a friendly smile, queen."

"And is that enough for you? Do you love him so much, then?"

"Yes, I love him!" said Jane Douglas, with a sigh of pain, as she
fastened the rosette on the queen's shoulder.

"And now, Jane, go and announce to the master of ceremonies that I
am ready, as soon as the king wishes it, to resort to the gallery."
Lady Jane turned to leave the chamber. But, already upon the
threshold, she returned once more.

"Forgive me, queen, for venturing to make one more request of you.
You have, however, just shown yourself too much the noble and true
friend of earlier days for me not to venture one more request."

"Now, what is it, poor Jane?"

"I have intrusted my secret not to the queen, but to Catharine Parr,
the friend of my youth. Will she keep it, and betray to none my
disgrace and humiliation?"

"My word for that, Jane. Nobody but God and ourselves shall ever
know what we have spoken."

Lady Jane humbly kissed her hand and murmured a few words of thanks;
then she left the queen's room to go in quest of the master of
ceremonies.

In the queen's anteroom she stopped a moment, and leaned against the
wall, exhausted, and as it were crushed. Nobody was here who could
observe and listen to her. She had no need to smile, no need to
conceal, beneath a calm and equable appearance, all those
tempestuous and despairing feelings which were working within. She
could allow her hatred and her resentment, her rage and her despair,
to pour forth in words and gestures, in tears and imprecations, in
sobs and sighs. She could fall on her knees and beseech God for
grace and mercy, and call on the devil for revenge and destruction.

When she had so done, she arose, and her demeanor resumed its wonted
cold and calm expression. Only her cheeks were still paler; only a
still gloomier fire darted from her eyes, and a scornful smile
played about her thin, compressed lips.

She traversed the rooms and corridors, and now she entered the
king's anteroom. As she observed Gardiner, who was standing alone
and separated from the rest in the embrasure of the window, she went
up to him; and John Heywood, who was still hidden behind the
curtain, shuddered at the frightful and scornful expression of her
features.

She offered the bishop her hand, and tried to smile. "It is done"
said she, almost inaudibly.

"What! The queen wears the rosette?" asked Gardiner vivaciously.

"She wears the rosette, and will give it to him."

"And the note is in it?"

"It is concealed under the diamond clasp."

"Oh, then she is lost!" muttered Gardiner. "If the king finds this
paper, Catharine's death-warrant is signed."

"Hush!" said Lady Jane. "See! Lord Hertford is coming toward us. Let
us go to meet him."

They both left the window and walked out into the hall.

John Heywood immediately slipped from behind the curtain, and,
softly gliding along by the wall, left the hall perceived by no one.

Outside, he stopped and reflected.

"I must see this conspiracy to the bottom," said he to himself. "I
must find out through whom and by what they wish to destroy her; and
I must have sure and undeniable proof in my hands, in order to be
able to convict them, and successfully accuse them to the king.
Therefore it is necessary to be cautious and prudent. So let us
consider what to do. The simplest thing would be to beg the queen
not to wear the rosette. But that is only to demolish the web for
this time, without, however, being able to kill the spider that wove
it. So she must wear the rosette; for besides, without that I should
never be able either to find out to whom she is to give it. But the
paper that is concealed in the rosette--that I must have--that must
not be in it. 'If the king finds this paper. Catharine's death-
warrant is signed.' Now, my reverend priest of the devil, the king
will not find that paper, for John Heywood will not have it so. But
how shall I begin? Shall I tell the queen what I heard? No! She
would lose her cheerful spirit and become embarrassed, and the
embarrassment would be in the king's eyes the most convincing proof
of her guilt. No, I must take this paper out of the rosette without
the queen's being aware of it. Boldly to work, then! I must have
this paper, and tweak these hypocrites by the nose. How it can be
done, it is not clear to me yet; but I will do it--that is enough.
Halloo, forward to the queen!"

With precipitant haste he ran through the halls and corridors, while
with a smile he muttered away to himself: "Thank God, I enjoy the
honor of being the fool; for only the king and the fool have the
privilege of being able to enter unannounced every room, even the
queen's."

Catharine was alone in her boudoir, when the small door, through
which the king was accustomed to resort to her, was softly opened.

"Oh, the king is coming!" said she, walking to the door to greet her
husband.

"Yes, the king is coming, for the fool is already here," said John
Heywood, who entered through the private door. "Are we alone, queen?
Does nobody overhear us?"

"No, John Heywood, we are all alone. What do you bring me?"

"A letter, queen."

"From whom?" asked she, and a glowing crimson flitted over her
cheek.

"From whom?" repeated John Heywood, with a waggish smile. "I do not
know, queen; but at any rate it is a begging letter; and without
doubt you would do well not to read it at all; for I bet you, the
shameless writer of this letter demands of you some impossibility--
it may be a smile, or a pressure of the hand, a lock of your hair,
or perchance even a kiss. So, queen, do not read the begging letter
at all."

"John," said she, smiling, and yet trembling with impatience, "John,
give me the letter."

"I will sell it to you, queen. I have learned that from the king,
who likewise gives nothing away generously, without taking in return
more than he gives. So let us trade. I give you the letter; you give
me the rosette which you wear on your shoulder there."

"Nay, indeed, John; choose something else--I cannot give you the
rosette."

"And by the gods be it sworn!" exclaimed John, with comic pathos, "I
give you not the letter, if you do not give me the rosette."

"Silly loon," said the queen, "I tell you I cannot! Choose something
else, John; and I conjure you, dear John, give me the letter."

"Then only, when you give me the rosette. I have sworn it by the
gods, and what I vow to them, that I stick to! No, no, queen--not
those sullen airs, not that angry frown. For if I cannot in earnest
receive the rosette as a present, then let us do like the Jesuits
and papists, who even trade with the dear God, and snap their
fingers at Him. I must keep my oath! I give you the letter, and you
give me the rosette; but listen--you only lend it to me; and when I
have it in my hand a moment, I am generous and bountiful, like the
king, and I make you a present of your own property."

With a quick motion the queen tore the rosette from her shoulder,
and handed it to John Heywood.

"Now give me the letter, John."

"Here it is," said John Heywood as he received the rosette. "Take
it; and you will see that Thomas Seymour is my brother."

"Your brother?" asked Catharine with a smile, as with trembling hand
she broke the seal.

"Yes, my brother, for he is a fool! Ah, I have a great many
brothers. The family of fools is so very large!"

The queen no longer heard. She was reading the letter of her lover.
She had eyes only for those lines, that told her that Thomas Seymour
loved her, adored her, and was pining away with longing after her.
She did not see how John Heywood, with nimble hand, unfastened the
diamond clasp from the rosette, and took out of it the little paper
that was concealed in the folds of the ribbon.

"She is saved!" murmured he, while he thrust the fatal paper into
his doublet, and fastened the clasp again with the pin." She is
saved, and the king will not sign her death-warrant this time."

Catharine had read the letter to the end, and hid it in her bosom.

"Queen, you have sworn to burn up every letter that I bring you from
him; for, forbidden love-letters are dangerous things. One day they
may find a tongue and testify against you! Queen, I will not bring
you again another letter, if you do not first burn that one."

"John, I will burn it up when once I have really read it. Just now I
read it only with my heart, not with my eyes. Allow me, then, to
wear it on my heart a few hours more."

"Do you swear to me that you will burn it up this very day?"

"I swear it."

"Then I will be satisfied this time. Here is your rosette; and like
the famous fox in the fable, that pronounced the grapes sour because
he could not get them, I say, take your rosette back; I will have
none of it."

He handed the queen the rosette, and she smilingly fastened it on
her shoulder again.

"John," said she, with a bewitching smile, extending her hand to
him, "John, when will you at length permit me to thank you otherwise
than with words? When will you at length allow your queen to reward
you for all this service of love, otherwise than with words?"

John Heywood kissed her hand, and said mournfully: "I will demand a
reward of you on the day when my tears and my prayers succeed in
persuading you to renounce this wretched and dangerous love. On that
day I shall have really deserved a reward, and I will accept it from
you with a proud heart."

"Poor John! So, then, you will never receive your reward; for that
day will never come!"

"So, then, I shall probably receive my reward, but from the king;
and it will be a reward whereby one loses hearing and sight, and
head to boot. Well, we shall see! Till then, farewell, queen! I must
to the king; for somebody might surprise me here, and come to the
shrewd conclusion that John Heywood is not always a fool, but
sometimes also the messenger of love! I kiss the hem of your
garment; farewell, queen!"

He glided again through the private door.

"Now we will at once examine this paper," said he, as he reached the
corridor and was sure of being seen by no one.

He drew the paper out of his doublet and opened it. "I do not know
the hand-writing," muttered her, "but it was a woman that wrote it."

"The letter read: "Do you believe me now, my beloved? I swore to
deliver to you to-day, in the presence of the king and all of my
court, this rosette; and I have done so. For you I gladly risk my
life, for you are my life; and still more beautiful were it to die
with you, than to live without you. I live only when I rest in your
arms; and those dark nights, when you can be with me, are the light
and sunshine of my days. Let us pray Heaven a dark night may soon
come; for such a night restores to me the loved one, and to you,
your happy wife, Geraldine."

"Geraldine! who is Geraldine?" muttered John Heywood, slipping the
paper into his doublet again. "I must disentangle this web of lying
and deceit. I must know what all this means. For this is more than a
conspiracy--a false accusation. It concerns, as it seems, a reality.
This letter the queen is to give to a man; and in it, sweet
recollections, happy nights, are spoken of. So he who receives this
letter is in league with them against Catharine, and I dare say her
worst enemy, for he makes use of love against her. Some treachery or
knavery is concealed behind this. Either the man to whom this letter
is addressed is deceived--and he is unintentionally a tool in the
hands of the papists--or he is in league with them, and has given
himself up to the villainy of playing the part of a lover to the
queen. But who can he be? Perchance, Thomas Seymour. It were
possible; for he has a cold and deceitful heart, and he would be
capable of such treachery. But woe be to him if it is he! Then it
will be I who accuses him to the king; and, by God! his head shall
fall! Now away to the king!"

Just as he entered the king's anteroom, the door of the cabinet
opened, and the Duchess of Richmond, accompanied by Earl Douglas,
walked out.

Lady Jane and Gardiner were standing, as if by accident, near the
door.

"Well, have we attained our end there also?" asked Gardiner.

"We have attained it," said Earl Douglas. "The duchess has accused
her brother of a liaison with the queen. She has deposed that he
sometimes leaves the palace by night, and does not return to it
before morning. She has declared that for four nights she herself
dogged her brother and saw him as he entered the wing of the castle
occupied by the queen; and one of the queen's maids has communicated
to the duchess that the queen was not in her room on that night."

"And the king listened to the accusation, and did not throttle you
in his wrath!"

"He is just in that dull state of rage in which the lava that the
crater will afterward pour forth, is just prepared. As yet all is
quiet, but be sure there will be an eruption, and the stream of red-
hot lava will busy those who have dared excite the god Vulcan."

"And does he know about the rosette?" asked Lady Jane.

"He knows everything. And until that moment he will allow no one to
suspect his wrath and fury. He says he will make the queen perfectly
secure, in order to get into his hands thereby sure proof of her
guilt. Well, we will furnish him this evidence; and hence it follows
that the queen is inevitably lost."

"But hark! The doors are opened, and the master of ceremonies comes
to summon us to the golden gallery."

"Just walk in," muttered John Heywood, gliding along behind them. "I
am still here; and I will be the mouse that gnaws the net in which
you want to catch my noble-minded lioness."


CHAPTER XXV.

THE QUEEN'S ROSETTE.


The golden gallery, in which the tourney of the poets was to take
place, presented to-day a truly enchanting and fairy-like aspect.
Mirrors of gigantic size, set in broad gilt frames, ornamented with
the moat perfect carved work, covered the walls, and threw back, a
thousand times reflected, the enormous chandeliers which, with their
hundreds and hundreds of candles, shed the light of day in the vast
hall. Here and there were seen, arranged in front of the mirrors,
clusters of the rarest and choicest flowers, which poured through
the hall their fragrance, stupefying and yet so enchanting, and
outshone in brilliancy of colors even the Turkish carpet, which
stretched through the whole room and changed the floor into one
immense flower-bed. Between the clumps of flowers were seen tables
with golden vases, in which were refreshing beverages; while at the
other end of the enormous gallery stood a gigantic sideboard, which
contained the choicest and rarest dishes. At present the doors of
the sideboard, which, when open, formed a room of itself, were
closed.

They had not yet come to the material enjoyments; they were still
occupied in absorbing the spiritual. The brilliant and select
company that filled the hall was still for some time condemned to be
silent, and to shut up within them their laughter and gossip, their
backbiting and slander, their flattery and hypocrisy.

Just now a pause ensued. The king, with Croke, had recited to his
court a scene from "Antigone"; and they were just taking breath from
the wonderful and exalted enjoyment of having just heard a language
of which they understood not a word, but which they found to be very
beautiful, since the king admired it.

Henry the Eighth had again leaned back on his golden throne, and,
panting, rested from his prodigious exertion; and while he rested
and dreamed, an invisible band played a piece of music composed by
the king himself, and which, with its serious and solemn movement,
strangely contrasted with this room so brilliant and cheerful--with
this splendid, laughing and jesting assembly.

For the king had bidden them amuse themselves and be gay; to give
themselves up to unrestrained chit-chat. It was, therefore, natural
for them to laugh, and to appear not to notice the king's exhaustion
and repose.

Besides, they had not for a long time seen Henry so cheerful, so
full of youthful life, so sparkling with wit and humor, as on this
evening. His mouth was overflowing with jests that made the
gentlemen laugh, and the beautiful, brilliant women blush, and,
above all, the young queen, who sat by him on the rich and splendid
throne, and now and then threw stolen and longing glances at her
lover, for whom she would willingly and gladly have given her royal
crown and her throne.

When the king saw how Catharine blushed, he turned to her, and in
his tenderest tone begged her pardon for his jest, which, however,
in its sauciness, served only to make his queen still more
beautiful, still more bewitching. His words were then so tender and
heartfelt, his looks so full of love and admiration, that nobody
could doubt but that the queen was in highest favor with her
husband, and that he loved her most tenderly.

Only the few who knew the secret of this tenderness of the king, so
open and so unreservedly displayed, comprehended fully the danger
which threatened the queen; for the king was never more to be
dreaded than when he flattered; and on no one did his wrath fall
more crushingly than on him whom he had just kissed and assured of
his favor.

This was what Earl Douglas said to himself, when he saw with what a
cordial look Henry the Eighth chatted with his consort.

Behind the throne of the royal pair was seen John Heywood, in his
fantastic and dressy costume, with his face at once noble and
cunning; and the king just then broke out into loud, resounding
laughter at his sarcastic and satirical observations.

"King, your laugh does not please me to-day," said John Heywood,
earnestly. "It smacks of gall. Do you not find it so, queen?"

The queen was startled from her sweet reveries, and that was what
John Heywood had wished. He, therefore, repeated his question.

"No, indeed," said she: "I find the king to-day quite like the sun.
He is radiant and bright, like it."

"Queen, you do not mean the sun, but the full moon," said John
Heywood. "But only see, Henry, how cheerfully Earl Archibald Douglas
over there is chatting with the Duchess of Richmond! I love that
good earl. He always appears like a blind-worm, which is just in the
notion of stinging some one on the heel, and hence it comes that,
when near the earl, I always transform myself into a crane. I stand
on one leg; because I am then sure to have the other at least safe
from the earl's sting. King, were I like you, I would not have those
killed that the blind-worm has stung; but I would root out the
blind-worms, that the feet of honorable men might be secure from
them."

The king cast at him a quick, searching look, which John Heywood
answered with a smile.

"Kill the blind-worms, King Henry," said he; "and when you are once
at work destroying vermin, it will do no harm if you once more give
these priests also a good kick. It is now a long time since we burnt
any of them, and they are again becoming arrogant and malicious, as
they always were and always will be. I see even the pious and meek
bishop of Winchester, the noble Gardiner, who is entertaining
himself with Lady Jane over there, smiling very cheerfully, and that
is a bad sign; for Gardiner smiles only when he has again caught a
poor soul, and prepared it as a breakfast for his lord. I do not
mean you, king, but his lord--the devil. For the devil is always
hungry for noble human souls; and to him who catches one for him he
gives indulgence for his sins for an hour. Therefore Gardiner
catches so many souls; for since he sins every hour, every hour he
needs indulgence."

"You are very spiteful to-day, John Heywood," said the queen,
smiling, while the king fixed his eyes on the ground, thoughtful and
musing.

John Heywood's words had touched the sore place of his heart, and,
in spite of himself, filled his suspicious soul with new doubts.

He mistrusted not merely the accused, but the accusers also; and if
he punished the one as criminals, he would have willingly punished
the others as informants.

He asked himself: "What aim had Earl Douglas and Gardiner in
accusing the queen; and why had they startled him out of his quiet
and confidence?" At that moment, when he looked on his beautiful
wife, who sat by him in such serene tranquillity, unembarrassed and
smiling, he felt a deep anger fill his heart, not against Catharine,
but against Jane, who accused her. She was so lovely and beautiful!
Why did they envy him her? Why did they not leave him in his sweet
delusion? But perhaps she was not guilty. No, she was not. The eye
of a culprit is not thus bright and clear. The air of infidelity is
not thus unembarrassed--of such maidenly delicacy.

Moreover, the king was exhausted and disgusted. One can become
satiated even with cruelty; and, at this hour, Henry felt completely
surfeited with bloodshed.

His heart--for, in such moments of mental relaxation and bodily
enfeeblement, the king even had a heart--his heart was already in
the mood of pronouncing the word pardon, when his eye fell on Henry
Howard, who, with his father, the Duke of Norfolk, and surrounded by
a circle of brilliant and noble lords, was standing not far from the
royal throne.

The king felt a deadly stab in his breast, and his eyes darted
lightning over toward that group.

How proud and imposing the figure of the noble earl looked; how high
he overtopped all others; how noble and handsome his countenance;
how kingly was his bearing and whole appearance!

Henry must admit all this; and because he must do so, he hated him.

Nay! no mercy for Catharine! If what her accusers had told him were
true--if they could give him the proofs of the queen's guilt, then
she was doomed. And how could he doubt it? Had they not told him
that in the rosette, which the queen would give Earl Surrey, was
contained a love-letter from Catharine, which he would find? Had not
Earl Surrey, in a confidential hour, yesterday imparted this to his
sister, the Duchess of Richmond, when he wished to bribe her to be
the messenger of love between the queen and himself? Had she not
accused the queen of having meetings by night with the earl in the
deserted tower?

Nay, no compassion for his fair queen, if Henry Howard was her
lover.

He must again look over at his hated enemy. There he still stood by
his father, the Duke of Norfolk. How sprightly and gracefully the
old duke moved; how slim his form; and how lofty and imposing his
bearing! The king was younger than the duke; and yet he was fettered
to his truckle-chair; yet he sat on his throne like an immovable
colossus, while he moved freely and lightly, and obeyed his own
will, not necessity. Henry could have crushed him--this proud,
arrogant earl, who was a free man, whilst his king was nothing but a
prisoner to his own flesh, a slave of his unwieldy body.

"I will exterminate it--this proud, arrogant race of Howards!"
muttered the king, as he turned with a friendly smile to the Earl of
Surrey.

"You have promised us some of your poems, cousin!" said he. "So let
us now enjoy them; for you see, indeed, how impatiently all the
beautiful women look on England's noblest and greatest poet, and how
very angry with me they would be if I still longer withhold this
enjoyment from them! Even my fair queen is full of longing after
your songs, so rich in fancy; for you well know, Howard, she loves
poetry, and, above all things, yours."

Catharine had scarcely heard what the king said. Her looks had
encountered Seymour's, and their eyes were fixed on each other's.
But she had then cast down to the floor her eyes, still completely
filled with the sight of her lover, in order to think of him, since
she no longer dared gaze at him.

When the king called her name, she started up and looked at him
inquiringly. She had not heard what he had said to her.

"Not even for a moment does she look toward me!" said Henry Howard
to himself. "Oh, she loves me not! or at least her understanding is
mightier than her love. Oh, Catharine, Catharine, fearest thou death
so much that thou canst on that account deny thy love?"

With desperate haste he drew out his portfolio. "I will compel her
to look at me, to think of me, to remember her oath," thought he.
"Woe to her, if she does not fulfil it--if she gives me not the
rosette, which she promised me with so solemn a vow! If she does it
not, then I will break this dreadful silence, and before her king,
and before her court, accuse her of treachery to her love. Then, at
least, she will not be able to cast me off; for we shall mount the
scaffold together."

"Does my exalted queen allow me to begin?" asked he aloud, wholly
forgetting that the king had already given him the order to do so,
and that it was he only who could grant such a permission.

Catharine looked at him in astonishment. Then her glance fell on
Lady Jane Douglas, who was gazing over at her with an imploring
expression. The queen smiled; for she now remembered that it was
Jane's beloved who had spoken to her, and that she had promised the
poor young girl to raise again the dejected Earl of Surrey and to be
gracious to him.

"Jane is right," thought she; "he appears to be deeply depressed and
suffering. Ah, it must be very painful to see those whom one loves
suffering. I will, therefore, comply with Jane's request, for she
says this might revive the earl."

With a smile she bowed to Howard. "I beg you," said she, "to lend
our festival its fairest ornament--to adorn it with the fragrant
flowers of your poesy. You see we are all burning with desire to
hear your verses."

The king shook with rage, and a crushing word was already poised
upon his lip. But he restrained himself. He wanted to have proofs
first; he wanted to see them not merely accused, but doomed also;
and for that he needed proofs of their guilt.

Henry Howard now approached the throne of the royal pair, and with
beaming looks, with animated countenance, with a voice trembling
with emotion, he read his love-song to the fair Geraldine. A murmur
of applause arose when he had read his first sonnet. The king only
looked gloomily, with fixed eyes; the queen alone remained
uninterested and cold.

"She is a complete actress," thought Henry Howard, in the madness of
his pain. "Not a muscle of her face stirs; and yet this sonnet must
remind her of the fairest and most sacred moment of our love."

The queen remained unmoved and cold. But had Henry Howard looked at
Lady Jane Douglas, he would have seen how she turned pale and
blushed; how she smiled with rapture, and how, nevertheless, her
eyes filled with tears.

Earl Surrey, however, saw nothing but the queen; and the sight of
her made him tremble with rage and pain. His eyes darted lightning:
his countenance glowed with passion; his whole being was in
desperate, enthusiastic excitement. At that moment he would have
gladly breathed out his life at Geraldine's feet, if she would only
recognize him--if she would only have the courage to call him her
beloved.

But her smiling calmness, her friendly coolness, brought him to
despair.

He crumpled the paper in his hand; the letters danced before his
eyes; he could read no more.

But he would not remain, mute, either. Like the dying swan, he would
breathe out his pain in a last song, and give sound and words to his
despair and his agony. He could no longer read; but he improvised.

Like a glowing stream of lava, the words flowed from his lips; in
fiery dithyrambic, in impassioned hymns, he poured forth his love
and pain. The genius of poesy hovered over him and lighted up his
noble and thoughtful brow.

He was radiantly beautiful in his enthusiasm; and even the queen
felt herself carried away by his words. His plaints of love, his
longing pains, his rapture and his sad fancies, found an echo in her
heart. She understood him; for she felt the same joy, the same
sorrow and the same rapture; only she did not feel all this for him.

But, as we have said, he enchanted her; the current of his passion
carried her away. She wept at his laments; she smiled at his hymns
of joy.

When Henry Howard at length ceased, profound silence reigned in the
vast and brilliant hall.

All faces betrayed deep emotion; and this universal silence was the
poet's fairest triumph; for it showed that envy and jealousy were
dumb, and that scorn itself could find no words.

A momentary pause ensued; it resembled that sultry, ominous
stillness which is wont to precede the bursting of a tempest; when
Nature stops a moment in breathless stillness, to gather strength
for the uproar of the storm.

It was a significant, an awful pause; but only a few understood its
meaning.

Lady Jane leaned against the wall, completely shattered and
breathless. She felt that the sword was hanging over their heads,
and that it would destroy her if it struck her beloved.

Earl Douglas and the Bishop of Winchester had involuntarily drawn
near each other, and stood there hand in hand, united for this
unholy struggle; while John Heywood had crept behind the king's
throne, and in his sarcastic manner whispered in his ear some
epigrams, that made the king smile in spite of himself.

But now the queen arose from her seat, and beckoned Henry Howard
nearer to her.

"My lord," said she, almost with solemnity," as a queen and as a
woman I thank you for the noble and sublime lyrics which you have
composed in honor of a woman! And for that the grace of my king has
exalted me to be the first woman in England, it becomes me, in the
name of all women, to return to you my thanks. To the poet is due a
reward other than that of the warrior. To the victor on the
battlefield is awarded a laurel crown. But you have gained a victory
not less glorious, for you have conquered hearts! We acknowledge
ourselves vanquished, and in the name of all these noble women, I
proclaim you their knight! In token of which, accept this rosette,
my lord. It entitles you to wear the queen's colors; it lays you
under obligation to be the knight of all women!"

She loosened the rosette from her shoulder, and handed it to the
earl.

He had sunk on one knee before her, and already extended his hand to
receive this precious and coveted pledge.

But at this moment the king arose, and, with an imperious gesture,
held back the queen's hand.

"Allow me, my lady," said he, in a voice quivering with rage--"allow
me first to examine this rosette, and convince myself that it is
worth enough to be presented to the noble earl as his sole reward.
Let me see this rosette."

Catharine looked with astonishment into that face convulsed with
passion and fury, but without hesitation she handed him the rosette.

"We are lost!" murmured Earl Surrey, while Earl Douglas and Gardiner
exchanged with each other looks of triumph; and Jane Douglas
murmured in her trembling heart prayers of anxiety and dread,
scarcely hearing the malicious and exultant words which the Duchess
of Richmond was whispering in her ear.

The king held the rosette in his hand and examined it. But his hands
trembled so much that he was unable to unfasten the clasp which held
it together.

He, therefore, handed it to John Heywood. "These diamonds are poor,"
said he, in a curt, dry tone. "Unfasten the clasp, fool; we will
replace it with this pin here. Then will the present gain for the
earl a double value; for it will come at the same time from me and
from the queen.

How gracious you are to-day!" said John Heywood, smiling--"as
gracious as the cat, that plays a little longer with the mouse
before she devours it."

"Unfasten the clasp!" exclaimed the king, in a thundering voice, no
longer able to conceal his rage. Slowly John Heywood unfastened the
clasp from the ribbon. He did it with intentional slowness and
deliberation; he let the king see all his movements, every turn of
his fingers; and it delighted him to hold those who had woven this
plot in dreadful suspense and expectation.

Whilst he appeared perfectly innocent and unembarrassed, his keen,
piercing glance ran over the whole assembly, and he noticed well the
trembling impatience of Gardiner and Earl Douglas; and it did not
escape him how pale Lady Jane was, and how full of expectation were
the intent features of the Duchess of Richmond.

"They are the ones with whom this conspiracy originated," said John
Heywood to himself. "But I will keep silence till I can one day
convict them."

"There, here is the clasp!" said he then aloud to the king. "It
stuck as tightly in the ribbon as malice in the hearts of priests
and courtiers!"

The king snatched the ribbon out of his hand, and examined it by
drawing it through his fingers.

"Nothing! nothing at all!" said he, gnashing his teeth; and now,
deceived in his expectations and suppositions, he could no longer
muster strength to withstand that roaring torrent of wrath which
overflowed his heart. The tiger was again aroused in him; he had
calmly waited for the moment when the promised prey would be brought
to him; now, when it seemed to be escaping him, his savage and cruel
disposition started up within him. The tiger panted and thirsted for
blood; and that he was not to get it, made him raging with fury.

With a wild movement he threw the rosette on the ground, and raised
his arm menacingly toward Henry Howard. "Dare not to touch that
rosette," cried he, in a voice of thunder, "before you have
exculpated yourself from the guilt of which you are accused."

Earl Surrey looked him steadily and boldly in the eye. "Have I been
accused, then?" asked he. "Then I demand, first of all, that I be
confronted with my accusers, and that my fault be named!"

"Ha, traitor! Do you dare to brave me?" yelled the king, stamping
furiously with his foot. "Well, now, I will be your accuser and I
will be your judge!"

"And surely, my king and husband, you will be a righteous judge,"
said Catharine, as she inclined imploringly toward the king and
grasped his hand. "You will not condemn the noble Earl Surrey
without having heard him; and if you find him guiltless, you will
punish his accusers?"

But this intercession of the queen made the king raging. He threw
her hand from him, and gazed at her with looks of such flaming
wrath, that she involuntarily trembled.

"Traitoress yourself!" yelled he, wildly. "Speak not of innocence--
you who are yourself guilty; and before you dare defend the earl,
defend yourself!"

Catharine rose from her seat and looked with flashing eyes into the
king's face blazing with wrath. "King Henry of England," said she,
solemnly, "you have openly, before your whole court, accused your
queen of a crime. I now demand that you name it!"

She was of wondrous beauty in her proud, hold bearing--in her
imposing, majestic tranquillity.

The decisive moment had come, and she was conscious that her life
and her future were struggling with death for the victory.

She looked over to Thomas Seymour, and their eyes met. She saw how
he laid his hand on his sword, and nodded to her a smiling greeting.

"He will defend me; and before he will suffer me to be dragged to
the Tower, he himself will plunge his sword into my breast," thought
she, and a joyous, triumphant assurance filled her whole heart.

She saw nothing but him, who had sworn to die with her when the
decisive moment came. She looked with a smile on the blade which he
had already half drawn from its scabbard; and she hailed it as a
dear, long-yearned-for friend.

She saw not that Henry Howard also had lain his hand on his sword;
that he, too, was ready for her defence, firmly resolved to slay the
king himself, before his mouth uttered the sentence of death over
the queen.

But Lady Jane Douglas saw it. She understood how to read the earl's
countenance; she felt that he was ready to go to death for his
beloved; and it filled her heart at once with woe and rapture.

She, too, was now firmly resolved to follow her heart and her love;
and, forgetting all else besides these, she hastened forward, and
was now standing by Henry Howard.

"Be prudent, Earl Surrey," said she, in a low whisper. "Take your
hand from your sword. The queen, by my mouth, commands you to do
so!"

Henry Howard looked at her astonished and surprised; but he let his
hand slip from the hilt of his sword, and again looked toward the
queen.

She had repeated her demand; she had once more demanded of the king-
-who, speechless and completely overcome with anger, had fallen back
into his seat--to name the crime of which she was accused.

"Now, then, my queen, you demand it, and you shall hear it," cried
he. "You want to know the crime of which you are accused? Answer me
then, my lady! They accuse you of not always staying at night in
your sleeping-room. It is alleged that you sometimes leave it for
many hours; and that none of your women accompanied you when you
glided through the corridors and up the secret stairs to the lonely
tower, in which, was waiting for you your lover, who at the same
time entered the tower through the small street door."

"He knows all!" muttered Henry Howard; and again he laid his hand on
his sword, and was about to approach the queen.

Lady Jane held him back. "Wait for the issue," said she. "There is
still time to die!"

"He knows all!" thought the queen also; and now she felt within
herself the daring courage to risk all, that at least she might not
stand there a traitoress in the eyes of her lover.

"He shall not believe that I have been untrue to him," thought she.
"I will tell all--confess all, that he may know why I went and
whither."

"Now answer, my Lady Catharine!" thundered the king. "Answer, and
tell me whether you have been falsely accused. Is it true that you,
eight days ago, in the night between Monday and Tuesday, left your
sleeping-room at the hour of midnight, and went secretly to the
lonely tower? Is it true that you received there a man who is your
lover?"

The queen looked at him in angry pride. "Henry, Henry, woe to you,
that you dare thus insult your own wife!" cried she.

"Answer me! You were not on that night in your sleeping-room?"

"No," said Catharine, with dignified composure, "I was not there."

The king sank back in his seat, and a real roar of fury sounded from
his lips. It made the women turn pale, and even the men felt
themselves tremble.

Catharine alone had not heeded it at all; she alone had heard
nothing save that cry of amazement which Thomas Seymour uttered; and
she saw only the angry and up-braiding looks which he threw across
at her. She answered these looks with a friendly and confident
smile, and pressed both her hands to her heart, as she looked at
him.

"I will justify myself before him at least," thought she.

The king had recovered from his first shock. He again raised himself
up, and his countenance now exhibited a fearful, threatening
coolness.

"You confess, then," asked he, "that you were not in your sleeping-
room on that night?"

"I have already said so," exclaimed Catharine, impatiently. The king
compressed his lips so violently, that they bled. "And a man was
with you?" asked he--"a man with whom you made an assignation, and
whom you received in the lonely tower?"

"A man was with me. But I did not receive him in the lonely tower;
and it was no assignation."

"Who was that man?" yelled the king. "Answer me! Tell me his name,
if you do not want me to strangle you myself!"

"King Henry, I fear death no longer!" said Catharine, with a
contemptuous smile.

"Who was that man? Tell me his name!" yelled the king once more.

The queen raised herself more proudly, and her defiant look ran over
the whole assembly.

"The man," said she, solemnly, "who was with me on that night--he is
named--"

"He is named John Heywood!" said this individual; as he seriously
and proudly walked forward from behind the king's throne. "Yes,
Henry, your brother, the fool John Heywood, had on that night the
proud honor of accompanying your consort on her holy errand; but, I
assure you, that he was less like the king, than the king is just
now like the fool."

A murmur of surprise ran through the assembly. The king leaned back
in his royal seat speechless. "And now, King Henry," said Catharine,
calmly--"now I will tell you whither I went with John Heywood on
that night."

She was silent, and for a moment leaned back on her seat. She felt
that the looks of all were directed to her; she heard the king's
wrathful groan; she felt her lover's flashing, reproachful glances;
she saw the derisive smile of those haughty ladies, who had never
forgiven her--that she, from a simple baroness, had become queen.
But all this made her only still bolder and more courageous.

She had arrived at the turning-point of her life, where she must
risk everything to avoid sinking into the abyss.

But Lady Jane also had arrived at such a decisive moment of her
existence. She, too, said to herself: "I must at this hour risk all,
if I do not want to lose all." She saw Henry Howard's pale,
expectant face. She knew, if the queen now spoke, the whole web of
their conspiracy would be revealed to him.

She must, therefore, anticipate the queen. She must warn Henry
Howard.

"Fear nothing!" whispered she to him. "We were prepared for that. I
have put into her hands the means of escape!"

"Will you now at last speak?" exclaimed the king, quivering with
impatience and rage. "Will you at last tell us where you were on
that night?"

"I will tell!" exclaimed Catharine, rising up again boldly and
resolutely "But woe be to those who drive me to this! For I tell you
beforehand, from the accused I will become an accuser who demands
justice, if not before the throne of the King of England, yet before
the throne of the Lord of all kings! King Henry of England, do you
ask me whither I went on that night with John Heywood? I might,
perhaps, as your queen and consort, demand that you put this
question to me not before so many witnesses, but in the quiet of our
chamber; but you seek publicity, and I do not shun it. Well, hear
the truth, then, all of you! On that night, between Monday and
Tuesday, I was not in my sleeping-apartment, because I had a grave
and sacred duty to perform; because a dying woman called on me for
help and pity! Would you know, my lord and husband, who this dying
woman was? It was Anne Askew!"

"Anne Askew!" exclaimed the king in astonishment; and his
countenance exhibited a less wrathful expression.

"Anne Askew!" muttered the others; and John Heywood very well saw
how Bishop Gardiner's brow darkened, and how Chancellor Wriothesley
turned pale and cast down his eyes.

"Yes,I was with Anne Askew!" continued the queen--"with Anne Askew,
whom those pious and wise lords yonder had condemned, not so much on
account of her faith, but because they knew that I loved her. Anne
Askew was to die, because Catharine Parr loved her! She was to go to
the stake, that my heart also might burn with fiery pains! And
because it was so, I was obliged to risk everything in order to save
her. Oh, my king, say yourself, did I not owe it to this poor girl
to try everything in order to save her? On my account she was to
suffer these tortures. For they had shamefully stolen from me a
letter which Anne Askew, in the distress of her heart, had addressed
to me; and they showed this letter to you in order to cast suspicion
on me and accuse me to you. But your noble heart repelled the
suspicion; and now their wrath fell again on Anne Askew, and she
must suffer, because they did not find me punishable. She must atone
for having dared to write to me. They worked matters with you so
that she was put to the rack. But when my husband gave way to their
urging, yet the noble king remained still awake in him. 'Go,' said
he, 'rack her and kill her; but see first whether she will not
recant.'"

Henry looked astonished into her noble and defiant face. "Do you
know that?" asked he. "And yet we were alone, and no human being
present. Who could tell you that?"

"When man is no longer able to help, then God undertakes!" said
Catharine solemnly. "It was God who commanded me to go to Anne
Askew, and try whether I could save her. And I went. But though the
wife of a noble and great king, I am still but a weak and timid
woman. I was afraid to tread this gloomy and dangerous path alone; I
needed a strong manly arm to lean upon; and so John Heywood lent me
his."

"And you were really with Anne Askew," interposed the king,
thoughtfully--"with that hardened sinner, who despised mercy, and in
the stubbornness of her soul would not be a partaker of the pardon
that I offered her?"

"My lord and husband," said the queen, with tears in her eyes, "she
whom you have just accused stands even now before the throne of the
Lord, and has received from her God the forgiveness of her sins!
Therefore, do you likewise pardon her; and may the flames of the
stake, to which yesterday the noble virgin body of this girl was
bound, have consumed also the wrath and hatred which had been
kindled in your heart against her! Anne Askew passed away like a
saint; for she forgave all her enemies and blessed her tormentors."

"Anne Askew was a damnable sinner, who dared resist the command of
her lord and king!" interrupted Bishop Gardiner, looking daggers at
her.

"And dare you maintain, my lord, that you at that time fulfilled the
commands of your royal master simply and exactly?" asked Catharine.
"Did you keep within them with respect to Anne Askew? No! I say; for
the king had not ordered you to torture her; he had not bidden you
to lacerate in blasphemous wrath a noble human form, and distort
that likeness of God into a horrible caricature. And that, my lord,
you did! Before God and your king, I accuse you of it--I, the queen!
For you know, my lord and husband, I was there when Anne Askew was
racked. I saw her agony, and John Heywood saw it with me."

The eyes of all were now directed inquiringly to the king, of whose
ferocity and choler every one expected a violent outbreak.

But this time they were mistaken. The king was so well satisfied to
find his consort clear of the crime laid to her charge, that he
willingly forgave her for having committed a crime of less weighty
character. Besides, it filled him with respect to see his consort
confronting her accusers so boldly and proudly; and he felt toward
them just as burning wrath and hatred as he had before harbored
against the queen. He was pleased that the malignant and persistent
persecutors of his fair and proud wife should now be humbled by her
before the eyes of all his court.

Therefore he looked at her with an imperceptible smile, and said
with deep interest: "But how could this happen, my lady? By what
path did you get thither?"

"That is an inquiry which any one except the king is authorized to
make. King Henry alone knows the way that I went!" said Catharine,
with a slight smile.

John Heywood, who was still standing behind the king's throne, now
bent down close to Henry's ear, and spoke with him a long time in a
quick, low tone.

The king listened to him attentively; then he murmured so loud that
the bystanders could very well understand him: "By God, she is a
spirited and brave woman; and we should be obliged to confess that,
even were she not our queen!"

"Continue, my lady!" said he then aloud, turning to the queen with a
gracious look. "Relate to me, Catharine, what saw you then in the
torture-chamber?"

"Oh, my king and lord, it horrifies me only to think of it," cried
she, shuddering and turning pale. "I saw a poor young woman who
writhed in fearful agony, and whose staring eyes were raised in mute
supplication to Heaven. She did not beg her tormentors for mercy;
she wanted from them no compassion and no pity; she did not scream
and whine from the pain, though her limbs cracked and her flesh
snapped apart like glass; she raised her clasped hands to God, and
her lips murmured low prayers, which, perhaps, made the angels of
heaven weep, but were not able to touch the hearts of her
tormentors. You had ordered her to be racked, if she would not
retract. They did not ask her whether she would do this--they racked
her. But her soul was strong and full of courage; and, under the
tortures of the executioner, her lips remained mute. Let theologians
say and determine whether Anne Askew's faith was a false one; but
this they will not dare deny: that in the noble enthusiasm of this
faith, she was a heroine who at least did not deny her God. At
length, worn out with so much useless exertion, the assistant
executioners discontinued their bloody work, to rest from the
tortures which they had prepared for Anne Askew. The lieutenant of
the Tower declared the work of the rack ended. The highest degrees
had been applied, and they had proved powerless; cruelty was obliged
to acknowledge itself conquered. But the priests of the Church, with
savage vehemence, demanded that she should be racked once more. Dare
deny that, ye lords, whom I behold standing there opposite with
faces pale as death! Yes, my king, the servants of the rack refused
to obey the servants of God; for in the hearts of the hangman's
drudges there was more pity than in the hearts of the priests! And
when they refused to proceed in their bloody work, and when the
lieutenant of the Tower, in virtue of the existing law, declared the
racking at an end, then I saw one of the first ministers of our
Church throw aside his sacred garments; then the priest of God
transformed himself into a hangman's drudge, who, with bloodthirsty
delight, lacerated anew the noble mangled body of the young girl,
and more cruel than the attendants of the rack, unsparingly they
broke and dislocated the limbs, which they had only squeezed in
their screws. [Footnote: Burnet's "History of the Reformation," vol.
i, p. 132.] Excuse me, my king, from sketching this scene of horror
still further! Horrified and trembling, I fled from that frightful
place, and returned to my room, shattered and sad at heart."

Catharine ceased, exhausted, and sank back into her seat.

A breathless stillness reigned around. All faces were pale and
colorless. Gardiner and Wriothesley stood with their eyes fixed,
gloomy and defiant, expecting that the king's wrath would crush and
destroy them.

But the king scarcely thought of them; he thought only of his fair
young queen, whose boldness inspired him with respect, and whose
innocence and purity filled him with a proud and blissful joy.

He was, therefore, very much inclined to forgive those who in
reality had committed no offence further than this, that they had
carried out a little too literally and strictly the orders of their
master.

A long pause had ensued--a pause full of expectation and anxiety for
all who were assembled in the hall. Only Catharine reclined calmly
in her chair, and with beaming eyes looked across to Thomas Seymour,
whose handsome countenance betrayed to her the gratification and
satisfaction which he felt at this clearing up of her mysterious
night-wandering.

At last the king arose, and, bowing low before his consort, said in
a loud, full-toned voice: "I have deeply and bitterly injured you,
my noble wife; and as I publicly accused you, I will also publicly
ask your forgiveness! You have a right to be angry with me; for it
behooved me, above all, to believe with unshaken firmness in the
truth and honor of my wife. My lady, you have made a brilliant
vindication of yourself; and I, the king, first of all bow before
you, and beg that you may forgive me and impose some penance."

"Leave it to me, queen, to impose a penance on this repentant
sinner!" cried John Hey wood, gayly. "Your majesty is much too
magnanimous, much too timid, to treat him as roughly as my brother
King Henry deserves. Leave it to me, then, to punish him; for only
the fool is wise enough to punish the king after his deserts."

Catharine nodded to him with a grateful smile. She comprehended
perfectly John Heywood's delicacy and nice tact; she apprehended
that he wanted by a joke to relieve her from her painful situation,
and put an end to the king's public acknowledgment, which at the
same time must turn to her bitter reproach--bitter, though it were
only self-reproach.

"Well," said she, smiling, "what punishment, then, will you impose
upon the king?"

"The punishment of recognizing the fool as his equal!"

"God is my witness that I do so!" cried the king, almost solemnly.
"Fools we are, one and all, and we fall short of the renown which we
have before men."

"But my sentence is not yet complete, brother!" continued John
Heywood. "I furthermore give sentence, that you also forthwith allow
me to recite my poem to you, and that you open your ears in order to
hear what John Heywood, the wise, has indited!"

"You have, then, fulfilled my command, and composed a new
interlude?" cried the king, vivaciously.

"No interlude, but a wholly novel, comical affair--a play full of
lampoons and jokes, at which your eyes are to overflow, yet not with
weeping, but with laughter. To the right noble Earl of Surrey
belongs the proud honor of having presented to our happy England her
first sonnets. Well, now, I also will give her something new. I
present her the first comedy; and as he sings the beauty of his
Geraldine, so I celebrate the fame of Gammer Gurton's sewing-needle-
-Gammer Gurton's needle--so my piece is called; and you, King Henry,
shall listen to it as a punishment for your sins!"

"I will do so," cried the king, cheerfully, "provided you permit it,
Kate! But before I do so, I make also one more condition--a
condition for you, queen! Kate, you have disdained to impose a
penance on me, but grant me at least the pleasure of being allowed
to fulfil some wish of yours! Make me a request, that I may grant it
you!"

"Well, then, my lord and king," said Catharine with a charming
smile, "I beg you to think no more of the incidents of this day, and
to forgive those whom I accused, only because their accusation was
my vindication. They who brought charges against me have in this
hour felt contrition for their own fault. Let that suffice, king,
and forgive them, as I do!"

"You are a noble and great woman, Kate!" cried the king; and, as his
glance swept over toward Gardiner with an almost contemptuous
expression, he continued: "Your request is granted. But woe to them
who shall dare accuse you again! And have you nothing further to
demand, Kate?"

"Nay, one thing more, my lord and husband!" She leaned nearer to the
king's ear, and whispered: "They have also accused your noblest and
most faithful servant; they have accused Cranmer. Condemn him not,
king, without having heard him; and if I may beg a favor of you, it
is this: talk with Cranmer yourself. Tell him of what they have
charged him, and hear his vindication."

"It shall be so, Kate," said the king, "and you shall be present!
But let this be a secret between us, Kate, and we will carry it out
in perfect silence. And now, then, John Heywood, let us hear your
composition; and woe to you, if it does not accomplish what you
promised--if it does not make us laugh! For you well know that you
are then inevitably exposed to the rods of our injured ladies."

"They shall have leave to whip me to death, if I do not make you
laugh!" cried John Heywood, gayly, as he drew out his manuscript.

Soon the hall rang again with loud laughter; and in the universal
merriment no one observed that Bishop Gardiner and Earl Douglas
slipped quietly away.

In the anteroom without, they stopped and looked at each other long
and silently; their countenances expressed the wrath and bitterness
which filled them; and they understood this mute language of their
features.

"She must die!" said Gardiner in a short and quick tone. "She has
for once escaped from our snares; we will tie them all the tighter
next time!"

"And I already hold in my hand the threads out of which we will form
these snares," said Earl Douglas. "We have to-day falsely accused
her of a love-affair. When we do it again, we shall speak the truth.
Did you see the looks that Catharine exchanged with the heretical
Earl Sudley, Thomas Seymour?"

"I saw them, earl!"

"For these looks she will die, my lord. The queen loves Thomas
Seymour, and this love will be her death."

"Amen!" said Bishop Gardiner, solemnly, as he raised his eyes
devoutly to heaven. "Amen! The queen has grievously and bitterly
injured us to-day; she has insulted and abused us before all the
court. We will requite her for it some day! The torture-chamber,
which she has depicted in such lively colors, may yet one day open
for her, too--not that she may behold another's agonies, but that
she may suffer agonies herself. We shall one day avenge ourselves!"


CHAPTER XXVI.

REVENGE.


Miss Holland, the beautiful and much-admired mistress of the Duke of
Norfolk, was alone in her magnificently adorned boudoir. It was the
hour when ordinarily the duke was wont to be with her; for this
reason she was charmingly attired, and had wrapped herself in that
light and voluptuous negligee which the duke so much liked, because
it set off to so much advantage the splendid form of his friend.

But to-day the expected one did not make his appearance: in his
stead his valet had just come and brought the fair miss a note from
his master. This note she was holding in her hand, while with
passionate violence she now walked up and down her boudoir. A
glowing crimson blazed upon her cheeks, and her large, haughty eyes
darted wild flashes of wrath.

She was disdained--she, Lady Holland, was forced to endure the
disgrace of being dismissed by her lover.

There, there, in that letter which she held in her hand, and which
burned her fingers like red-hot iron--there it stood in black and
white, that he would see her no more; that he renounced her love;
that he released her.

Her whole frame shook as she thought of this. It was not the anguish
of a loving heart which made her tremble; it was the wounded pride
of the woman.

He had abandoned her. Her beauty, her youth no longer had the power
to enchain him--the man with white hairs and withered features.

He had written her that he was satiated and weary, not of her, but
only of love in general; that his heart had become old and withered
like his face: and that there was still in his breast no more room
for love, but only for ambition.

Was not that a revolting, an unheard-of outrage--to abandon the
finest woman in England for the sake of empty, cold, stern ambition?

She opened the letter once more. Once more she read that place. Then
grinding her teeth with tears of anger in her eyes: "He shall pay me
for this! I will take vengeance for this insult!" She thrust the
letter into her bosom, and touched the silver bell.

"Have my carriage brought round!" was her order to the servant who
entered; and he withdrew in silence.

"I will avenge myself!" muttered she, as with trembling hands she
wrapped herself in her large Turkish shawl. "I will avenge myself;
and, by the Eternal! it shall be a bloody and swift vengeance! I
will show him that I, too, am ambitious, and that my pride is not to
be humbled. He says he will forget me. Oh, I will compel him to
think of me, even though it be only to curse me!"

With hasty step she sped through the glittering apartments, which
the liberality of her lover had furnished so magnificently, and
descended to the carriage standing ready for her.

"To the Duchess of Norfolk's!" said she to the footman standing at
the door of the carriage, as she entered it.

The servant looked at her in astonishment and inquiringly.

"To the Duke of Norfolk; is it not, my lady?"

"No, indeed, to the duchess!" cried she with a frown, as she leaned
back on the cushion.

After a short time, the carriage drew up before the palace of the
duchess, and with haughty tread and commanding air she passed
through the porch.

"Announce me to the duchess immediately," was her order to the
lackey who was hurrying to meet her.

"Your name, my lady?"

"Miss Arabella Holland."

The servant stepped back, and stared at her in surprise.

"Miss Arabella Holland! and you order me to announce you to the
duchess?"

A contemptuous smile played a moment about the thin lips of the
beautiful miss. "I see you know me," said she, "and you wonder a
little to see me here. Wonder as much as you please, good friend;
only conduct me immediately to the duchess.

I doubt whether her ladyship receives calls to-day," stammered the
servant, hesitatingly.

"Then go and ask; and, that I may learn her answer as soon as
possible, I will accompany you."

With a commanding air, she motioned to the servant to go before her;
and he could not summon up courage to gainsay this proud beauty.

In silence they traversed the suite of stately apartments, and at
length stood before a door hung with tapestry.

"I must beg you to wait here a moment, my lady, so that I can
announce you to the duchess, who is there in her boudoir."

"No, indeed; I will assume that office myself," said Miss Holland,
as with strong hand she pushed back the servant and opened the door.

The duchess was sitting at her writing-table, her back turned to the
door through which Arabella had entered. She did not turn round;
perhaps she had not heard the door open. She continued quietly
writing.

Miss Arabella Holland with stately step crossed the room, and now
stood close to the chair of the duchess.

"Duchess, I would like to speak with you," said she, coolly and
calmly.

The duchess uttered a cry and looked up. "Miss Holland!" cried she
amazed, and hastily rising. "Miss Holland! you here with me, in my
house! What do you want here? How dare you cross my threshold?"

"I see you still hate me, my lady," said Arabella, smiling. "You
have not yet forgiven me that the duke, your husband, found more
delight in my young, handsome face, than in yours, now growing old--
that my sprightly, wanton disposition pleased him better than your
cold, stately air."

The duchess turned pale with rage, and her eyes darted lightning.
"Silence, you shameless creature! silence, or I will call my
servants to rid me of you!"

"You will not call them; for I have come to be reconciled with you,
and to offer you peace."

"Peace with you!" sneered the duchess--"peace with that shameless
woman who stole from me my husband, the father of my children?--who
loaded me with the disgrace of standing before the whole world as a
repudiated and despised wife, and of suffering myself to be compared
with you, that the world might decide which of us two was worthier
of his love? Peace with you, Miss Holland?--with the impudent
strumpet who squanders my husband's means in lavish luxury, and,
with scoffing boldness, robs my children of their lawful property?"

"It is true, the duke is very generous," said Miss Holland,
composedly. "He loaded me with diamonds and gold."

"And meanwhile I was doomed almost to suffer want," said the
duchess, grinding her teeth.

"Want of love, it may be, my lady, but not want of money; for you
are very magnificently fitted up; and every one knows that the
Duchess of Norfolk is rich enough to be able to spare the trifles
that her husband laid at my feet. By Heaven! my lady, I would not
have deemed it worth the trouble to stoop for them, if I had not
seen among these trifles his heart. The heart of a man is well worth
a woman's stooping for! You have neglected that, my lady, and
therefore you lost your husband's heart. I picked it up. That is
all. Why will you make a crime of that?"

"That is enough!" cried the duchess. "It does not become me to
dispute with you; I desire only to know what gave you the courage to
come to me?"

"My lady, do you hate me only? Or do you also hate the duke your
husband?"

"She asks me whether I hate him!" cried the duchess, with a wild,
scornful laugh. "Yes, Miss Holland, yes! I hate him as ardently as I
despise you. I hate him so much that I would give my whole estate--
ay, years of my life--if I could punish him for the disgrace he has
put upon me."

"Then, my lady, we shall soon understand each other; for I too hate
him," said Miss Holland, quietly seating herself on the velvet
divan, and smiling as she observed the speechless astonishment of
the duchess.

"Yes, my lady, I hate him; and without doubt still more ardently,
still more intensely than you yourself; for I am young and fiery;
you are old, and have always managed to preserve a cool heart."

The duchess was convulsed with rage; but silently, and with an
effort, she gulped down the drop of wormwood which her wicked rival
mingled in the cup of joy which she presented to her.

"You do hate him, Miss Holland?" asked she, joyfully.

"I hate him, and I have come to league myself with you against him.
He is a traitor, a perfidious wretch, a perjurer. I will take
vengeance for my disgrace!"

"Ah, has he then deserted you also?"

"He has deserted me also."

"Well, then, God be praised!" cried the duchess, and her face beamed
with joy. "God is great and just; and He has punished you with the
same weapons with which you sinned! For your sake, he deserted me;
and for the sake of another woman, he forsakes you."

"Not so, my lady!" said Miss Holland, proudly. "A woman like me is
not forsaken on account of a woman; and he who loves me will love no
other after me. There, read his letter!"

She handed the duchess her husband's letter.

"And what do you want to do now?" asked the duchess, after she had
read it.

"I will have revenge, my lady! He says he no longer has a heart to
love; well, now, we will so manage, that he may no longer have a
head to think. Will you be my ally, my lady?

I will."

"And I also will be," said the Duchess of Richmond, who just then
opened the door and came out of the adjoining room.

Not a word of this entire conversation had escaped her, and she very
well understood that the question was not about some petty
vengeance, but her father's head. She knew that Miss Holland was not
a woman that, when irritated, pricked with a pin; but one that
grasped the dagger to strike her enemy a mortal blow.

"Yes, I too will be your ally," cried the Duchess of Richmond; "we
have all three been outraged by the same man. Let, then, our revenge
be a common one. The father has insulted you; the son, me. Well,
then, I will help you to strike the father, if you in return will
assist me to destroy the son."

"I will assist you," said Arabella, smiling; "for I also hate the
haughty Earl of Surrey, who prides himself on his virtue, as if it
were a golden fleece which God himself had stuck on his breast. I
hate him; for he never meets me but with proud disregard; and he
alone is to blame for his father's faithlessness."

"I was present when with tears he besought the duke, our father, to
free himself from your fetters, and give up this shameful and
disgraceful connection with you," said the young duchess.

Arabella answered nothing. But she pressed her hands firmly
together, and a slight pallor overspread her cheeks.

"And why are you angry with your brother?" asked the old duchess,
thoughtfully.

"Why am I angry with him, do you ask, my mother? I am not angry with
him; but I execrate him, and I have sworn to myself never to rest
till I have avenged myself. My happiness, my heart, and my future,
lay in his hands; and he has remorselessly trodden under his haughty
feet these--his sister's precious treasures. It lay with him to make
me the wife of the man I love; and he has not done it, though I lay
at his feet weeping and wringing my hands."

"But it was a great sacrifice that you demanded," said her mother.
"He had to give his hand to a woman he did not love, so that you
might be Thomas Seymour's wife."

"Mother, you defend him; and yet he it is that blames you daily; and
but yesterday it seemed to him perfectly right and natural that the
duke had forsaken you, our mother."

"Did he do that?" inquired the duchess, vehemently. "Well, now, as
he has forgotten that I am his mother, so will I forget that he is
my son. I am your ally! Revenge for our injured hearts! Vengeance on
father and son!"

She held out both hands, and the two young women laid their hands in
hers.

"Vengeance on father and son!" repeated they both; and their eyes
flashed, and crimson now mantled their cheeks.

"I am tired of living like a hermit in my palace, and of being
banished from court by the fear that I may encounter my husband
there."

"You shall encounter him there no more," said her daughter,
laconically.

"They shall not laugh and jeer at me," cried Arabella. "And when
they learn that he has forsaken me, they shall also know how I have
avenged myself for it."

"Thomas Seymour can never become my husband so long as Henry Howard
lives; for he has mortally offended him, as Henry has rejected the
hand of his sister. Perhaps I may become his wife, if Henry Howard
is no more," said the young duchess. "So let us consider. How shall
we begin, so as to strike them surely and certainly?"

"When three women are agreed, they may well be certain of their
success," said Arabella, shrugging her shoulders. "We live--God be
praised for it--under a noble and high-minded king, who beholds the
blood of his subjects with as much pleasure as he does the crimson
of his royal mantle, and who has never yet shrunk back when a death-
warrant was to be signed."

"But this time he will shrink back," said the old duchess. "He will
not dare to rob the noblest and most powerful family of his kingdom
of its head."

"That very risk will stimulate him," said the Duchess of Richmond,
laughing; "and the more difficult it is to bring down these heads,
so much the more impatiently will he hanker after it. The king hates
them both, and he will thank us, if we change his hatred into
retributive justice."

"Then let us accuse both of high treason!" cried Arabella. "The duke
is a traitor; for I will and can swear that he has often enough
called the king a bloodthirsty tiger, a relentless tyrant, a man
without truth and without faith, although he coquettishly pretends
to be the fountain and rock of all faith."

"If he has said that, and you have heard him, you are in duty bound
to communicate it to the king, if you do not want to be a traitoress
yourself," exclaimed the young duchess, solemnly.

"And have you not noticed that the duke has for some time borne the
same coat-of-arms as the king?" asked the Duchess of Norfolk. "It is
not enough for his haughty and ambitious spirit to be the first
servant of this land; he strives to be lord and king of it."

"Tell that to the king, and by to-morrow the head of the traitor
falls. For the king is as jealous of his kingdom as ever a woman was
of her lover. Tell him that the duke bears his coat-of-arms, and his
destruction is certain."

"I will tell him so, daughter."

"We are sure of the father, but what have we for the son?"

"A sure and infallible means, that will as certainly dispatch him
into eternity as the hunter's tiny bullet slays the proudest stag.
Henry loves the queen; and I will furnish the king proof of that,"
said the young duchess.

"Then let us go to the king!" cried Arabella, impetuously.

"No, indeed! That would make a sensation, and might easily frustrate
our whole plan," said the Duchess of Richmond. "Let us first talk
with Earl Douglas, and hear his advice. Come; every minute is
precious! We owe it to our womanly honor to avenge ourselves. We
cannot and will not leave unpunished those who have despised our
love, wounded our honor, and trodden under foot the holiest ties of
nature!"


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE ACKNOWLEDGMENT.


The Princess Elizabeth was sitting in her room, melancholy and
absorbed in thought. Her eyes were red with weeping; and she pressed
her hand on her heart, as if she would repress its cry of anguish.

With a disconsolate, perplexed look she gazed around her chamber,
and its solitude was doubly painful to her to-day, for it testified
to her forsaken condition, to the disgrace that still rested on her.
For were it not so, to-day would have been to the whole court a day
of rejoicing, of congratulations.

To-day was Elizabeth's birthday; fourteen years ago to-day, Anne
Boleyn's daughter had seen the light of this world.

"Anne Boleyn's daughter!" That was the secret of her seclusion. That
was why none of the ladies and lords of the court had remembered her
birthday; for that would have been at the same time a remembrance of
Anne Boleyn, of Elizabeth's beautiful and unfortunate mother, who
had been made to atone for her grandeur and prosperity by her death.

Moreover, the king had called his daughter Elizabeth a bastard, and
solemnly declared her unworthy of succeeding to the throne.

Her birthday, therefore, was to Elizabeth only a day of humiliation
and pain. Reclining on her divan, she thought of her despised and
joyless past, of her desolate and inglorious future.

She was a princess, and yet possessed not the rights of her birth;
she was a young maiden, and yet doomed, in sad resignation, to
renounce all the delights and enjoyments of youth, and to condemn
her passionate and ardent heart to the eternal sleep of death. For
when the Infante of Spain sued for her hand, Henry the Eighth had
declared that the bastard Elizabeth was unworthy of a princely
husband. But in order to intimidate other suitors also, he had
loudly and openly declared that no subject should dare be so
presumptuous as to offer his hand to one of his royal daughters, and
he who dared to solicit them in marriage should be punished as a
traitor.

So Elizabeth was condemned to remain unmarried; and nevertheless she
loved; nevertheless she harbored only this one wish, to be the wife
of her beloved, and to be able to exchange the proud title of
princess for the name of Countess Seymour.

Since she loved him, a new world, a new sun had arisen on her; and
before the sweet and enchanting whispers of her love, even the proud
and alluring voices of her ambition had to be silent. She no longer
thought of it, that she would never be a queen; she was only
troubled that she could not be Seymour's wife.

She no longer wanted to rule, but she wanted to be happy. But her
happiness reposed on him alone--on Thomas Seymour.

Such were her thoughts, as she was in her chamber on the morning of
her birthday, alone and lonely; and her eyes reddened by tears, her
painfully convulsed lips, betrayed how much she had wept to-day; how
much this young girl of fourteen years had already suffered.

But she would think no more about it; she would not allow the
lurking, everywhere-prying, malicious, and wicked courtiers the
triumph of seeing the traces of her tears, and rejoicing at her
pains and her humiliation. She was a proud and resolute soul; she
would rather have died than to have accepted the sympathy and pity
of the courtiers.

"I will work," said she. "Work is the best balm for all pains."

And she took up the elaborate silk embroidery which she had begun
for her poor, unfortunate friend, Anne of Cleves, Henry's divorced
wife. But the work occupied only her fingers, not her thoughts.

She threw it aside and seized her books. She took Petrarch's
Sonnets; and his love plaints and griefs enchained and stirred her
own love-sick heart.

With streaming tears, and yet smiling and full of sweet melancholy,
Elizabeth read these noble and tender poems. It appeared to her as
if Petrarch had only said what she herself so warmly felt. There
were her thoughts, her griefs. He had said them in his language; she
must now repeat them in her own. She seated herself, and with hands
trembling with enthusiasm, fluttering breath, perfectly excited and
glowing, in glad haste she began a translation of Petrarch's first
sonnet. [Footnote: Elizabeth, who even as a girl of twelve years old
spoke four languages, was very fond of composing verses, and of
translating the poems of foreign authors. But she kept her skill in
this respect very secret, and was always very angry if any one by
chance saw one of her poems. After her death there were found among
her papers many translations, especially of Petrarch's Sonnets,
which were the work of her earliest youth.--Leti, vol. i, p. 150.] A
loud knock interrupted her; and in the hastily opened door now
appeared the lovely form of the queen.

"The queen!" exclaimed Elizabeth with delight. "Have you come to me
at such an early morning hour?"

"And should I wait till evening to wish my Elizabeth happiness on
her festival? Should I first let the sun go down on this day, which
gave to England so noble and so fair a princess?" asked Catharine.
"Or you thought, perhaps, I did not know that this was your
birthday, and that to-day my Elizabeth advances from the years of
childhood, as a proud maiden full of hope?"

"Full of hope?" said Elizabeth, sadly. "Anne Boleyn's daughter has
no hopes: and when you speak of my birthday, you remind me at the
same time of my despised birth!"

"It shall be despised no longer!" said Catharine, and, as she put
her arm tenderly around Elizabeth's neck, she handed her a roll of
parchment.

"Take that, Elizabeth; and may this paper be to you the promise of a
joyful and brilliant future! At my request, the king has made this
law, and he therefore granted me the pleasure of bringing it to
you."

Elizabeth opened the parchment and read, and a radiant expression
overspread her countenance.

"Acknowledged! I am acknowledged!" cried she. "The disgrace of my
birth is taken away! Elizabeth is no more a bastard--she is a royal
princess!"

"And she may some day be a queen!" said Catharine, smiling.

"Oh," cried Elizabeth, "it is not that which stirs me with such joy.
But the disgrace of my birth is taken away; and I may freely hold up
my head and name my mother's name! Now thou mayst sleep calmly in
thy grave, for it is no longer dishonored! Anne Boleyn was no
strumpet; she was King Henry's lawful wife, and Elizabeth is the
king's legitimate daughter! I thank Thee, my God--I thank Thee!" And
the young, passionate girl threw herself on her knees, and raised
her hands and her eyes to heaven.

"Spirit of my glorified mother," said she, solemnly, "I call thee!
Come to me! Overshadow me with thy smile, and bless me with thy
breath! Queen Anne of England, thy daughter is no longer a bastard,
and no one dares venture more to insult her. Thou wert with me when
I wept and suffered, my mother; and often in my disgrace and
humiliation, it was as if I heard thy voice, which whispered comfort
to me; as if I saw thy heavenly eyes, which poured peace and love
into my breast! Oh, abide with me now also, my mother--now, when my
disgrace is taken away, abide with me in my prosperity; and guard my
heart, that it may be kept pure from arrogance and pride, and remain
humble in its joy! Anne Boleyn, they laid thy beautiful, innocent
head upon the block; but this parchment sets upon it again the royal
crown; and woe, woe to those who will now still dare insult thy
memory!"

She sprang from her knees and rushed to the wall opposite, on which
was a large oil painting, which represented Elizabeth herself as a
child playing with a dog.

"Oh, mother, mother!" said she, "this picture was the last earthly
thing on which thy looks rested; and to these painted lips of thy
child thou gavest thy last kiss, which thy cruel hangman would not
allow to thy living child. Oh, let me sip up this last kiss from
that spot; let me touch with my mouth the spot that thy lips have
consecrated!"

She bent down and kissed the picture.

"And now come forth out of thy grave, my mother," said she,
solemnly. "I have been obliged so long to hide, so long to veil
thee! Now thou belongest to the world and to the light! The king has
acknowledged me as his lawful daughter; he cannot refuse me to have
a likeness of my mother in my room."

As she thus spoke, she pressed on a spring set in the broad gilt
frame of the picture; and suddenly the painting was seen to move and
slowly open like a door, so as to render visible another picture
concealed beneath it, which represented the unfortunate Anne Boleyn
in bridal attire, in the full splendor of her beauty, as Holbein had
painted her, at the desire of her husband the king.

"How beautiful and angelic that countenance is!" said Catharine,
stepping nearer. "How innocent and pure those features! Poor queen!
Yet thine enemies succeeded in casting suspicion on thee and
bringing thee to the scaffold. Oh, when I behold thee, I shudder;
and my own future rises up before me like a threatening spectre! Who
can believe herself safe and secure, when Anne Boleyn was not
secure; when even she had to die a dishonorable death? Ah, do but
believe me, Elizabeth, it is a melancholy lot to be Queen of
England; and often indeed have I asked the morning whether I, as
still Queen of England, shall greet the evening. But no--we will not
talk of myself in this hour, but only of you, Elizabeth--of your
future and of your fortune. May this document be acceptable to you,
and realize all the wishes that slumber in your bosom!"

"One great wish of mine it has fulfilled already," said Elizabeth,
still occupied with the picture. "It allows me to show my mother's
likeness unveiled! That I could one day do so was her last prayer
and last wish, which she intrusted to John Heywood for me. To him
she committed this picture. He alone knew the secret of it, and he
has faithfully preserved it."

"Oh, John Heywood is a trusty and true friend," said Catharine,
heartily; "and it was he who assisted me in inclining the king to
our plan and in persuading him to acknowledge you."

With an unutterable expression Elizabeth presented both hands to
her. "I thank you for my honor, and the honor of my mother," said
she; "I will love you for it as a daughter; and never shall your
enemies find with me an open ear and a willing heart. Let us two
conclude with each other a league offensive and defensive! Lot us
keep true to each other; and the enemies of the one shall be the
enemies of the other also. And where we see danger we will combat it
in common; and we will watch over each other with a true sisterly
eye, and warn one another whenever a chance flash brings to light an
enemy who is stealing along in the darkness, and wants with his
dagger to assassinate us from behind."

"So be it!" said Catharine, solemnly. "We will remain inseparable,
and true to one another, and love each other as sisters!"

And as she imprinted a warm kiss on Elizabeth's lips, she continued:
"But now, princess, direct your looks once more to that document, of
which at first you read only the beginning. Do but believe me, it is
important enough for you to read it quite to the end; for it
contains various arrangements for your future, and settles on you a
suite and a yearly allowance, as is suitable for a royal princess."

"Oh, what care I for these things?" cried Elizabeth, merrily. "That
is my major-domo's concern, and he may attend to it."

"But there is yet another paragraph that will interest you more,"
said Catharine, with a slight smile; "for it is a full and complete
reparation to my proud and ambitious Elizabeth. You recollect the
answer which your father gave to the King of France when he
solicited your hand for the dauphin?"

"Do I recollect it!" cried Elizabeth, her features quickly becoming
gloomy. "King Henry said: 'Anne Boleyn's daughter is not worthy to
accept the hand of a royal prince.'"

"Well, then, Elizabeth, that the reparation made to you may be
complete, the king, while he grants you your lawful title and honor,
has decreed that you are permitted to marry only a husband of equal
birth; to give your hand only to a royal prince, if you would
preserve your right of succeeding to the throne, Oh, certainly,
there could be no more complete recantation of the affront once put
upon you. And that he consented to do this, you owe to the eloquent
intercession of a true and trusty friend; you have John Hey wood to
thank for it."

"John Heywood!" cried Elizabeth, in a bitter tone.

"Oh, I thank you, queen, that it was not you who determined my
father to this decision. John Heywood did it, and you call him my
friend? You say that he is a true and devoted servant to us both?
Beware of his fidelity, queen, and build not on his devotedness; for
I tell you his soul is full of falsehood; and while he appears to
bow before you in humbleness, his eyes are only searching for the
place on your heel where he can strike you most surely and most
mortally. Oh, he is a serpent, a venomous serpent; and he has just
wounded me mortally and incurably. But no," continued she,
energetically, "I will not submit to this fraud; I will not be the
slave of this injurious law! I will be free to love and to hate as
my heart demands; I will not be shackled, nor be compelled to
renounce this man, whom I perhaps love, and to marry that one, whom
I perhaps abhor."

With an expression of firm, energetic resolve, she took the roll of
parchment and handed it back to Catharine. "Queen, take this
parchment back again; return it to my father, and tell him that I
thank him for his provident goodness, but will decline the brilliant
lot which this act offers me. I love freedom so much, that even a
royal crown cannot allure me when I am to receive it with my hands
bound and my heart not free."

"Poor child!" sighed Catharine, "you know not, then, that the royal
crown always binds us in fetters and compresses our heart in iron
clamps? Ah, you want to be free, and yet a queen! Oh, believe me,
Elizabeth, none are less free than sovereigns! No one has less the
right and the power to live according to the dictates of his heart
than a prince."

"Then," exclaimed Elizabeth, with flashing eyes, "then I renounce
the melancholy fortune of being, perchance, one day queen. Then I do
not subscribe to this law, which wants to guide my heart and limit
my will. What! shall the daughter of King Henry of England allow her
ways to be traced out by a miserable strip of parchment? and shall a
sheet of paper be able to intrude itself between me and my heart? I
am a royal princess; and why will they compel me to give my hand
only to a king's son? Ay, you are right; it is not my father that
has made this law, for my father's proud soul has never been willing
to submit to any such constraint of miserable etiquette. He has
loved where he pleased; and no Parliament--no law--has been able to
hinder him in this respect. I will be my father's own daughter. I
will not submit to this law!"

"Poor child!" said Catharine, "nevertheless you will be obliged to
learn well how to submit; for one is not a princess without paying
for it. No one asks whether our heart bleeds. They throw a purple
robe over it, and though it be reddened with our heart's blood, who
then sees and suspects it? You are yet so young, Elizabeth; you yet
hope so much!"

"I hope so much, because I have already suffered so much--my eyes
have been already made to shed so many tears. I have already in my
childhood had to take before-hand my share of the pain and sorrow of
life; now I will demand my share of life's pleasure and enjoyment
also."

"And who tells you that you shall not have it? This love forces on
you no particular husband; it but gives you the proud right, once
disputed, of seeking your husband among the princes of royal blood."

"Oh," cried Elizabeth, with flashing eyes, "if I should ever really
be a queen, I should be prouder to choose a husband whom I might
make a king, than such a one as would make me a queen. [Footnote:
Elizabeth's own words,--Leti, vol. ii, p. 62.] Oh, say yourself,
Catharine, must it not be a high and noble pleasure to confer glory
and greatness on one we love, to raise him in the omnipotence of our
love high above all other men, and to lay our own greatness, our own
glory, humbly at his feet, that he may be adorned therewith and make
his own possession what is ours?"

"By Heaven, you are as proud and ambitious as a man!" said
Catharine, smiling. "Your father's own daughter! So thought Henry
when he gave his hand to Anne Boleyn; so thought he when he exalted
me to be his queen. But it behooves him thus to think and act, for
he is a man."

"He thought thus, because he loved--not because he was a man."

"And you, too, Elizabeth--do you, too, think thus because you love?"

"Yes, I love!" exclaimed Elizabeth, as with an impulsive movement
she threw herself into Catharine's arms, and hid her blushing face
in the queen's bosom. "Yes, I love! I love like my father--
regardless of my rank, of my birth; but feeling only that my lover
is of equally high birth in the nobility of his sentiment, in his
genius and noble mind; that he is my superior in all the great and
fine qualities which should adorn a man, and yet are conferred on so
few. Judge now, queen, whether that law there can make me happy. He
whom I love is no prince--no son of a king."

"Poor Elizabeth!" said Catharine, clasping the young girl fervently
in her arms.

"And why do you bewail my fate, when it is in your power to make me
happy?" asked Elizabeth, urgently.

"It was you who prevailed on the king to relieve me of the disgrace
that rested on me; you will also have power over him to set aside
this clause which contains my heart's sentence of condemnation."

Catharine shook her head with a sigh. "My power does not reach so
far," said she, sadly. "Ah, Elizabeth, why did you not put
confidence in me? Why did you not let me know sooner that your heart
cherished a love which is in opposition to this law? Why did you not
tell your friend your dangerous secret?"

"Just because it is dangerous I concealed it from you; and just on
that account I do not even now mention the name of the loved one.
Queen, you shall not through me become a guilty traitoress against
your husband; for you well know that he punishes every secret
concealed from him as an act of high treason. No, queen; if I am a
criminal, you shall not he my accomplice. Ah, it is always dangerous
to be the confidant of such a secret. You see that in John Heywood.
He alone was my confidant, and he betrayed me. I myself put the
weapons into his hands, and he turned them against me."

"No, no," said Catharine, thoughtfully; "John Heywood is true and
trusty, and incapable of treachery."

"He has betrayed me!" exclaimed Elizabeth, impetuously. "He knew--he
only--that I love, and that my beloved, though of noble, still is
not of princely birth. Yet it was he, as you said yourself, who
moved the king to introduce this paragraph into the act of
succession."

"Then, without doubt, he has wished to save you from an error of
your heart."

"No, he has been afraid of the danger of being privy to this secret,
and at the cost of my heart and my happiness he wanted to escape
this danger. But oh, Catharine, you are a noble, great and strong
woman; you are incapable of such petty fear--such low calculation;
therefore, stand by me; be my savior and protectress! By virtue of
that oath which we have just now mutually taken--by virtue of that
mutual clasp of the hands just given--I call you to my help and my
assistance. Oh, Catharine, allow me this high pleasure, so full of
blessing, of being at some time, perhaps, able to make him whom I
love great and powerful by my will. Allow me this intoxicating
delight of being able with my hand to offer to his ambition at once
power and glory--it may be even a crown. Oh, Catharine, on my knees
I conjure you--assist me to repeal this hated law, which wants to
bind my heart and my hand!"

In passionate excitement she had fallen before the queen, and was
holding up her hands imploringly to her.

Catharine, smiling, bent down and raised her up in her arms.
"Enthusiast," said she, "poor young enthusiast! Who knows whether
you will thank me for it one day, if I accede to your wish; and
whether you will not some time curse this hour which has brought
you, perhaps, instead of the hoped-for pleasure, only a knowledge of
your delusion and misery?"

"And were it even so," cried Elizabeth, energetically, "still it is
better to endure a wretchedness we ourselves have chosen, than to be
forced to a happy lot. Say, Catharine--say, will you lend me your
assistance? Will you induce the king to withdraw this hated clause?
If you do it not, queen, I swear to you, by the soul of my mother,
that I will not submit to this law; that I will solemnly, before all
the world, renounce the privilege that is offered me; that I--"

"You are a dear, foolish child," interrupted Catharine--"a child,
that in youthful presumption might dare wish to fetch the lightnings
down from heaven, and borrow from Jupiter his thunderbolt. Oh, you
are still too young and inexperienced to know that fate regards not
our murmurs and our sighs, and, despite our reluctance and our
refusal, still leads us in its own ways, not our own. You will have
to learn that yet, poor child!"

"But I will not!" cried Elizabeth, stamping on the floor with all
the pettishness of a child. "I will not ever and eternally be the
victim of another's will; and fate itself shall not have power to
make me its slave!"

"Well, we will see now," said Catharine, smiling. "We will try this
time, at least, to contend against fate; and I will assist you if I
can."

"And I will love you for it as my mother and my sister at once,"
cried Elizabeth, as with ardor she threw herself into Catharine's
arms. "Yes, I will love you for it; and I will pray God that He may
one day give me the opportunity to show my gratitude, and to reward
you for your magnanimity and goodness."


CHAPTER XXVIII.

INTRIGUES.


For a few days past the king's gout had grown worse, and, to his
wrath and grief, it confined him as a prisoner to his rolling chair.

The king was, therefore, very naturally gloomy and dejected, and
hurled the lightnings of his wrath on all those who enjoyed the
melancholy prerogative of being in his presence. His pains, instead
of softening his disposition, seemed only to heighten still more his
natural ferocity; and often might he heard through the palace of
Whitehall the king's angry growl, and his loud, thundering
invectives, which no longer spared any one, nor showed respect for
any rank or dignity.

Earl Douglas, Gardiner, and Wriothesley very well knew how to take
advantage of this wrathful humor of the king for their purposes, and
to afford the cruel monarch, tortured with pain, one satisfaction at
least--the satisfaction of making others suffer also.

Never had there been seen in England so many burnt at the stake as
in those days of the king's sickness; never had the prisons been so
crowded; never had so much blood flowed as King Henry now caused to
be shed. [Footnote: During the king's reign, and at the instigation
of the clergy, twenty-eight hundred persons were burnt and executed,
because they would not recognize the religious institutions
established by the king as the only right and true ones.--Leti, vol.
i, p. 34.] But all this did not yet suffice to appease the blood-
thirstiness of the king, and his friends and counsellors, and his
priests.

Still there remained untouched two mighty pillars of Protestantism
that Gardiner and Wriothesley had to overthrow. These were the queen
and Archbishop Cranmer.

Still there were two powerful and hated enemies whom the Seymours
had to overcome; these were the Duke of Norfolk and his son, the
Earl of Surrey.

But the various parties that in turn besieged the king's ear and
controlled it, were in singular and unheard-of opposition, and at
the same time inflamed with bitterest enmity, and they strove to
supplant each other in the favor of the king.

To the popish party of Gardiner and Earl Douglas, everything
depended on dispossessing the Seymours of the king's favor; and
they, on the other hand, wanted above all things to continue in
power the young queen, already inclined to them, and to destroy for
the papists one of their most powerful leaders, the Duke of Norfolk.

The one party controlled the king's ear through the queen; the
other, through his favorite, Earl Douglas.

Never had the king been more gracious and affable to his consort--
never had he required more Earl Douglas's presence than in those
days of his sickness and bodily anguish.

But there was yet a third party that occupied an important place in
the king's favor--a power which every one feared, and which seemed
to keep itself perfectly independent and free from all foreign
influences. This power was John Heywood, the king's fool, the
epigrammatist, who was dreaded by the whole court.

Only one person had influence with him. John Heywood was the friend
of the queen. For the moment, then, it appeared as if the "heretical
party," of which the queen was regarded as the head, was the most
powerful at court.

It was therefore very natural for the popish party to cherish an
ardent hatred against the queen; very natural for them to be
contriving new plots and machinations to ruin her and hurl her from
the throne.

But Catharine knew very well the danger that threatened her, and she
was on her guard. She watched her every look, her every word; and
Gardiner and Douglas could not examine the queen's manner of life
each day and hour more suspiciously than she herself did.

She saw the sword that hung daily over her head; and, thanks to her
prudence and presence of mind, thanks to the ever-thoughtful
watchfulness and cunning of her friend Heywood! she had still known
how to avoid the falling of that sword.

Since that fatal ride in the wood of Epping Forest, she had not
again spoken to Thomas Seymour alone; for Catharine very well knew
that everywhere, whithersoever she turned her steps, some spying eye
might follow her, some listener's ear might be concealed, which
might hear her words, however softly whispered, and repeat them
where they might be interpreted into a sentence of death against
her.

She had, therefore, renounced the pleasure of speaking to her lover
otherwise than before witnesses, and of seeing him otherwise than in
the presence of her whole court.

What need had she either for secret meetings? What mattered it to
her pure and innocent heart that she was not permitted to be alone
with him? Still she might see him, and drink courage and delight
from the sight of his haughty and handsome face; still she might be
near him, and could listen to the music of his voice, and intoxicate
her heart with his fine, euphonious and vigorous discourse.

Catharine, the woman of eight-and-twenty, had preserved the
enthusiasm and innocence of a young girl of fourteen. Thomas Seymour
was her first love; and she loved him with that purity and guileless
warmth which is indeed peculiar to the first love only.

It sufficed her, therefore, to see him; to be near him; to know that
he loved her; that he was true to her; that all his thoughts and
wishes belonged to her, as hers to him.

And that she knew. For there ever remained to her the sweet
enjoyment of his letters--of those passionately written avowals of
his love. If she was not permitted to say also to him how warmly and
ardently she returned this love, yet she could write it to him.

It was John Heywood, the true and discreet friend, that brought her
these letters, and bore her answers to him, stipulating, as a reward
for this dangerous commission, that they both should regard him as
the sole confidant of their love; that both should burn up the
letters which he brought them. He had not been able to hinder
Catharine from this unhappy passion, but wanted at least to preserve
her from the fatal consequences of it. Since he knew that this love
needed a confidant, he assumed this role, that Catharine, in the
vehemence of her passion and in the simplicity of her innocent
heart, might not make others sharers of her dangerous secret.

John Heywood therefore watched over Catharine's safety and
happiness, as she watched over Thomas Seymour and her friends. He
protected and guarded her with the king, as she guarded Cranmer, and
protected him from the constantly renewed assaults of his enemies.

This it was that they could never forgive the queen--that she had
delivered Cranmer, the noble and liberal-minded Archbishop of
Canterbury, from their snares. More than once Catharine had
succeeded in destroying their intriguing schemes, and in rending the
nets that Gardiner and Earl Douglas, with so sly and skilful a hand,
had spread for Cranmer.

If, therefore, they would overthrow Cranmer, they must first
overthrow the queen. For this there was a real means--a means of
destroying at once the queen and the hated Seymours, who stood in
the way of the papists.

If they could prove to the king that Catharine entertained criminal
intercourse with Thomas Seymour, then were they both lost; then were
the power and glory of the papists secured.

But whence to fetch the proofs of this dangerous secret, which the
crafty Douglas had read only in Catharine's eyes, and for which he
had no other support than his bare conviction? How should they begin
to influence the queen to some inconsiderate step, to a speaking
witness of her love?

Time hung so heavily on the king's hands! It would have been so easy
to persuade him to some cruel deed--to a hasty sentence of death!

But it was not the blood of the Seymours for which the king
thirsted. Earl Douglas very well knew that. He who observed the king
day and night--he who examined and sounded his every sigh, each of
his softly murmured words, every twitch of his mouth, every wrinkle
of his brow--he well knew what dark and bloody thoughts stirred the
king's soul, and whose blood it was for which he thirsted.

The royal tiger would drink the blood of the Howards; and that they
still lived in health, and abundance, and glory, while he, their
king and master, lonely and sad, was tossing on his couch in pain
and agony--that was the worm which gnawed at the king's heart, which
made his pains yet more painful, his tortures yet keener.

The king was jealous--jealous of the power and greatness of the
Howards. It filled him with gloomy hatred to think that the Duke of
Norfolk, when he rode through the streets of London, was everywhere
received with the acclamations and rejoicing of the people, while
he, the king, was a prisoner in his palace. It was a gnawing pain
for him to know that Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, was praised as
the handsomest and greatest man of England; that he was called the
noblest poet; the greatest scholar; while yet he, the king, had also
composed his poems and written his learned treatises, aye, even a
particular devout book, which he had printed for his people, and
ordered them to read instead of the Bible. [Footnote: Burnet, vol.
i, p. 95.]

It was the Howards who everywhere disputed his fame. The Howards
supplanted him in the favor of his people, and usurped the love and
admiration which were due to the king alone, and which should be
directed toward no one but him. He lay on his bed of pain, and
without doubt the people would have forgotten him, if he had not by
the block, the stake, and the scaffold, daily reminded them of
himself. He lay on his bed of pain, while the duke, splendid and
magnificent, exhibited himself to the people and transported them
with enthusiasm by the lavish and kingly generosity with which he
scattered his money among the populace.

Yes, the Duke of Norfolk was the king's dangerous rival. The crown
was not secure upon his head so long as the Howards lived. And who
could conjecture whether in time to come, when Henry closed his
eyes, the exultant love of the people might not call to the throne
the Duke of Norfolk, or his noble son, the Earl of Surrey, instead
of the rightful heir--instead of the little boy Edward, Henry's only
son?

When the king thought of that, he had a feeling as though a stream
of fire were whirling up to his brain; and he convulsively clenched
his hands, and screamed and roared that he would take vengeance--
vengeance on those hated Howards, who wanted to snatch the crown
from his son.

Edward, the little boy of tender age--he alone was the divinely
consecrated, legitimate heir to the king's crown. It had cost his
father so great a sacrifice to give his people this son and
successor! In order to do it, he had sacrificed Jane Seymour, his
own beloved wife; he had let the mother be put to death, in order to
preserve the son, the heir of his crown.

And the people did not once thank the king for this sacrifice that
Jane Seymour's husband had made for them. The people received with
shouts the Duke of Norfolk, the father of that adulterous queen whom
Henry loved so much that her infidelity had struck him like the stab
of a poisoned dagger.

These were the thoughts that occupied the king on his bed of pain,
and upon which he dwelt with all the wilfulness and moodiness of a
sick man.

"We shall have to sacrifice these Howards to him!" said Earl Douglas
to Gardiner, as they had just again listened to a burst of rage from
their royal master. "If we would at last succeed in ruining the
queen, we must first destroy the Howards."

The pious bishop looked at him inquiringly, and in astonishment.

Earl Douglas smiled. "Your highness is too exalted and noble to be
always able to comprehend the things of this world. Your look, which
seeks only God and heaven, does not always see the petty and pitiful
things that happen here on the earth below."

"Oh, but," said Gardiner, with a cruel smile, "I see them, and it
charms my eye when I see how God's vengeance punishes the enemies of
the Church here on earth. Set up then, by all means, a stake or a
scaffold for these Howards, if their death can be to us a means to
our pious and godly end. You are certain of my blessing and my
assistance. Only I do not quite comprehend how the Howards can stand
in the way of our plots which are formed against the queen, inasmuch
as they are numbered among the queen's enemies, and profess
themselves of the Church in which alone is salvation."

"The Earl of Surrey is an apostate, who has opened his ear and heart
to the doctrines of Calvin!"

"Then let his head fall, for he is a criminal before God, and no one
ought to have compassion on him! And what is there that we lay to
the charge of the father?"

"The Duke of Norfolk is well-nigh yet more dangerous than his son;
for although a Catholic, he has not nevertheless the right faith;
and his soul is full of unholy sympathy and injurious mildness. He
bewails those whose blood is shed because they were devoted to the
false doctrine of the priests of Baal; and-he calls us both the
king's blood-hounds."

"Well, then, cried Gardiner with an uneasy, dismal smile," we will
show him that he has called us by the right name; we will rend him
in pieces!"

"Besides, as we have said, the Howards stand in the way of our
schemes in relation to the queen," said Earl Douglas, earnestly.
"The king's mind is so completely filled with this one hatred and
this one jealousy, that there is no room in it for any other
feeling, for any other hate. It is true he signs often enough these
death-warrants which we lay before him; but he does it, as the lion,
with utter carelessness and without anger, crushes the little mouse
that is by chance under his paws. But if the lion is to rend in
pieces his equal, he must beforehand be put into a rage. When he is
raging, then you must let him have his prey. The Howards shall be
his first prey. But, then, we must exert ourselves, that when the
lion again shakes his mane his wrath may fall upon Catharine Parr
and the Seymours."

"The Lord our God will be with us, and enlighten us, that we may
find the right means to strike His enemies a sure blow!" exclaimed
Gardiner, devoutly folding his hands.

"I believe the right means are already found," said Earl Douglas,
with a smile; "and even before this day descends to its close, the
gates of the Tower will open to receive this haughty and soft-
hearted Duke of Norfolk and this apostate Earl Surrey. Perchance we
may even succeed in striking at one blow the queen together with the
Howards. See! an equipage stops before the grand entrance, and I see
the Duchess of Norfolk and her daughter, the Duchess of Richmond,
getting out of the carriage. Only see! they are making signs to us.
I have promised to conduct these two noble and pious ladies to the
king, and I shall do so. Whilst we are there, pray for us, your
highness, that our words, like well-aimed arrows, may strike the
king's heart, and then rebound upon the queen and the Seymours!"


CHAPTER XXIX.

THE ACCUSATION.


In vain had the king hoped to master his pains, or at least to
forget them, while he tried to sleep. Sleep had fled from the king's
couch; and as he now sat in his rolling-chair, sad, weary, and
harassed with pain, he thought, with gloomy spite, that the Duke of
Norfolk told him but yesterday that sleep was a thing under his
control, and he could summon it to him whenever it seemed good to
him. This thought made him raving with anger; and grinding his
teeth, he muttered: "He can sleep; and I, his lord and king--I am a
beggar that in vain whines to God above for a little sleep, a little
forgetfulness of his pains! But it is this traitorous Norfolk that
prevents me from sleeping. Thoughts of him keep me awake and
restless. And I cannot crush this traitor with these hands of mine;
I am a king, and yet so powerless and weak, that I can find no means
of accusing this traitor, and convicting him of his sinful and
blasphemous deeds. Oh, where may I find him--that true friend, that
devoted servant, who ventures to understand my unuttered thoughts,
and fulfil the wishes to which I dare not give a name?"

Just as he was thus thinking, the door behind him opened and in
walked Earl Douglas. His countenance was proud and triumphant, and
so wild a joy gleamed from his eyes that even the king was surprised
at it.

"Oh," said he, peevishly, "you call yourself my friend; and you are
cheerful, Douglas, while your king is a poor prisoner whom the gout
has chained with brazen bands to this chair."

"You will recover, my king, and go forth from this imprisonment as
the conqueror, dazzling and bright, that by his appearance under
God's blessing treads all his enemies in the dust--that triumphs
over all those who are against him, and would betray their king!"

"Are there, then, any such traitors, who threaten their king?" asked
Henry, with a dark frown.

"Ay, there are such traitors!"

"Name them to me!" said the king, trembling with passionate
impatience. "Name them to me, that my arm may crush them and my
avenging justice overtake the heads of the guilty."

"It is superfluous to mention them, for you, King Henry, the wise
and all-knowing--you know their names."

And bending down closer to the king's ear, Earl Douglas continued:
"King Henry, I certainly have a right to call myself your most
faithful and devoted servant, for I have read your thoughts. I have
understood the noble grief that disturbs your heart, and banishes
sleep from your eyes and peace from your soul. You saw the foe that
was creeping in the dark; you heard the low hiss of the serpent that
was darting his venomous sting at your heel. But you were so much
the noble and intrepid king, that you would not yourself become the
accuser--nay, you would not once draw back the foot menaced by the
serpent. Great and merciful, like God Himself, you smiled upon him
whom you knew to be your enemy. But I, my king--I have other duties.
I am like the faithful dog, that has eyes only for the safety of his
master, and falls upon every one that comes to menace him. I have
seen the serpent that would kill you, and I will bruise his head!"

"And what is the name of this serpent of which you speak?" asked the
king; and his heart beat so boisterously that he felt it on his
trembling lips.

"It is called," said Earl Douglas, earnestly and solemnly--"it is
called Howard!"

The king uttered a cry, and, forgetting his gout and his pains,
arose from his chair.

"Howard!" said he, with a cruel smile. "Say you that a Howard
threatens our life? Which one is it? Name me the traitor!"

"I name them both--father and son! I name the Duke of Norfolk and
the Earl of Surrey! I say that they both are traitors, who threaten
the life and honor of my king, and with blasphemous arrogance dare
stretch out their hands even to the crown!"

"Ah, I knew it, I knew it!" screamed the king. "And it was this that
made me sleepless, and ate into my body like red-hot iron."

And as he fastened on Douglas his eyes flashing with rage, he asked,
with a grim smile: "Can you prove that these Howards are traitors?
Can you prove that they aim at my crown?"

"I hope to be able to do so," said Douglas. "To be sure, there are
no great convincing facts--"

"Oh," said the king, interrupting him with a savage laugh, "there is
no need of great facts. Give into my hand but a little thread, and I
will make out of it a cord strong enough to haul the father and son
up to the gallows at one time."

"Oh, for the son there is proof enough," said the earl, with a
smile: "and as regards the father, I will produce your majesty some
accusers against him, who will be important enough to bring the duke
also to the block. Will you allow me to bring them to you
immediately?"

"Yes, bring them, bring them!" cried the king. "Every minute is
precious that may lead these traitors sooner to their punishment."

Earl Douglas stepped to the door and opened it. Three veiled female
figures entered and bowed reverentially.

"Ah," whispered the king, with a cruel smile, as he sank back again
into his chair, "they are the three Fates that spin the Howards'
thread of life, and will now, it is to be hoped, break it off. I
will furnish them with the scissors for it; and if they are not
sharp enough, I will, with my own royal hands, help them to break
the thread."

"Sire," said Earl Douglas, as, at a sign from him, the three women
unveiled themselves--"sire, the wife, the daughter, and the mistress
of the Duke of Norfolk have come to accuse him of high treason. The
mother and the sister of the Earl of Surrey are here to charge him
with a crime equally worthy of death."

"Now verily," exclaimed the king, "it must be a grievous and
blasphemous sin which so much exasperates the temper of these noble
women, and makes them deaf to the voice of nature!"

"It is indeed such a sin," said the Duchess of Norfolk, in a solemn
tone; and, approaching a few paces nearer to the king, she
continued: "Sire, I accuse the duke, my divorced husband, of high
treason and disloyalty to his king. He has been so bold as to
appropriate your own royal coat-of-arms; and on his seal and
equipage, and over the entrance of his palace, are displayed the
arms of the kings of England."

"That is true," said the king, who, now that he was certain of the
destruction of the Howards, had regained his calmness and self-
possession, and perfectly reassumed the air of a strict, impartial
judge. "Yes, he bears the royal arms on his shield, but yet, if we
remember rightly, the crown and paraph of our ancestor Edward the
Third are wanting."

"He has now added this crown and this paraph to his coat-of-arms,"
said Miss Holland. "He says he is entitled to them; for that, like
the king, he also is descended in direct line from Edward the Third;
and, therefore, the royal arms belong likewise to him."

"If he says that, he is a traitor who presumes to call his king and
master his equal," cried the king, coloring up with a grim joy at
now at length having his enemy in his power.

"He is indeed a traitor," continued Miss Holland. "Often have I
heard him say he had the same right to the throne of England as
Henry the Eighth; and that a day might come when he would contend
with Henry's son for that crown."

"Ah," cried the king, and his eyes darted flashes so fierce that
even Earl Douglas shrank before them, "ah, he will contend with my
son for the crown of England! It is well, now; for now it is my
sacred duty, as a king and as a father, to crush this serpent that
wants to bite me on the heel; and no compassion and no pity ought
now to restrain me longer. And were there no other proofs of his
guilt and his crime than these words that he has spoken to you, yet
are they sufficient, and will rise up against him, like the
hangman's aids who are to conduct him to the block."

"But there are yet other proofs," said Miss Holland, laconically.

The king was obliged to unbutton his doublet. It seemed as though
joy would suffocate him.

"Name them!" commanded he.

"He dares deny the king's supremacy; he calls the Bishop of Rome the
sole head and holy Father of the Church."

"Ah, does he so?" exclaimed the king, laughing. "Well, we shall see
now whether this holy Father will save this faithful son from the
scaffold which we will erect for him. Yes, yes, we must give the
world a new example of our incorruptible justice, which overtakes
every one, however high and mighty he may be, and however near our
throne he may stand. Really, really, it grieves our heart to lay low
this oak which we had planted so near our throne, that we might lean
upon it and support ourselves by it; but justice demands this
sacrifice, and we will make it--not in wrath and spite, but only to
meet the sacred and painful duty of our royalty. We have greatly
loved this duke, and it grieves us to tear this love from our
heart."

And with his hand, glittering with jewels, the king wiped from his
eyes the tears which were not there.

"But how?" asked the king, then, after a pause, "will you have the
courage to repeat your accusation publicly before Parliament? Will
you, his wife, and you, his mistress, publicly swear with a sacred
oath to the truth of your declaration?"

"I will do so," said the duchess, solemnly, "for he is no longer my
husband, no longer the father of my children, but simply the enemy
of my king; and to serve him is my most sacred duty."

"I will do so," cried Miss Holland, with a bewitching smile; "for he
is no longer my lover, but only a traitor, an atheist, who is
audacious enough to recognize as the holy head of Christendom that
man at Rome who has dared to hurl his curse against the sublime head
of our king. It is this, indeed, that has torn my heart from the
duke, and that has made me now hate him as ardently as I once loved
him."

With a gracious smile, the king presented both his hands to the two
women. "You have done me a great service to-day, my ladies," said
he, "and I will find a way to reward you for it. I will give you,
duchess, the half of his estate, as though you were his rightful
heir and lawful widow. And you, Miss Holland, I will leave in
undisputed possession of all the goods and treasures that the
enamored duke has given you."

The two ladies broke out into loud expressions of thanks and into
enthusiastic rapture over the liberal and generous king, who was so
gracious as to give them what they already had, and to bestow on
them what was already their own property.

"Well, and are you wholly mute, my little duchess," asked the king
after a pause, turning to the Duchess of Richmond, who had withdrawn
to the embrasure of a window.

"Sire," said the duchess, smiling, "I was only waiting for my cue."

"And this cue is--"

"Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey! As your majesty knows, I am a merry
and harmless woman; and I understand better how to laugh and joke
than to talk much seriously. The two noble and fair ladies have
accused the duke, my father; and they have done so in a very
dignified and solemn manner. I wish to accuse my brother, Henry
Howard; but you must exercise forbearance, if my words sound less
solemn and elevated. They have told you, sire, that the Duke of
Norfolk is a traitor and a criminal who denominates the Pope of
Rome, and not you, my exalted king, the head of the Church. Now, the
Earl of Surrey is neither a traitor nor a papist; and he has neither
devised criminal plots against the throne of England, nor has he
denied the supremacy of the king. No, sire, the Earl of Surrey is no
traitor and no papist!"

The duchess paused, and looked with a malicious and droll smile into
the astonished faces of those present.

A dark frown gathered on the king's brow, and his eyes, which just
before had looked so cheerful, were now fixed with an angry
expression on the young duchess.

"Why, then, my lady, have you made your appearance here?" asked he.
"Why have you come here, if you have nothing further to say than
what I already know--that the Earl of Surrey is a very loyal
subject, and a man without any ambition, who neither courts the
favor of my people nor thinks of laying his traitorous hands on my
crown?"

The young duchess shook her head with a smile. "I know not whether
he does all that," said she. "I have indeed heard that he said, with
bitter scorn, that you, my king, wanted to be the protector of
religion, yet you yourself were entirely without religion and
without belief. Also, he of late broke out into bitter curses
against you, because you had robbed him of his field-marshal's
staff, and given it to Earl Hertford, that noble Seymour. Also, he
meant to see whether the throne of England were so firm and steady
that it had no need of his hand and his arm to prop it. All that I
have of course heard from him; but you are right, sire, it is
unimportant--it is not worth mentioning, and therefore I do not even
make it as an accusation against him."

"Ah, you are always a mad little witch, Rosabella!" cried the king,
who had regained his cheerfulness. "You say you will not accuse him,
and yet you make his head a plaything that you poise upon your
crimson lips. But take care, my little duchess--take care, that this
head does not fall from your lips with your laughing, and roll down
to the ground; for I will not stop it--this head of the Earl of
Surrey, of whom you say that he is no traitor."

"But is it not monotonous and tiresome, if we accuse the father and
son of the same crime?" asked the duchess, laughing. "Let us have a
little variation. Let the duke be a traitor; the son, my king, is by
far a worse criminal!"

"Is there, then, a still worse and more execrable crime than to be a
traitor to his king and master, and to speak of the anointed of the
Lord without reverence and love?"

"Yes, your majesty, there is a still worse crime; and of that I
accuse the Earl of Surrey. He is an adulterer!"

"An adulterer!" repeated the king, with an expression of abhorrence.
"Yes, my lady, you are right; that is a more execrable and unnatural
crime, and we shall judge it strictly. For it shall not be said that
modesty and virtue found no protector in the king of this land, and
that he will not as a judge punish and crash all those who dare sin
against decency and morals. Oh, the Earl of Surrey is an adulterer,
is he?"

"That is to say, sire, he dares with his sinful love to pursue a
virtuous and chaste wife. He dares to raise his wicked looks to a
woman who stands as high above him as the sun above mortals, and
who, at least by the greatness and high position of her husband,
should be secure from all impure desires and lustful wishes."

"Ah," cried the king, indignantly, "I see already whither that
tends. It is always the same accusation; and now I say, as you did
just now, let us have a little variation! The accusation I have
already often heard; but the proofs are always wanting."

"Sire, this time, it may be, we can give the proofs," said the
duchess, earnestly. Would you know, my noble king, who the Geraldine
is to whom Henry Howard addresses his love-songs? Shall I tell you
the real name of this woman to whom, in the presence of your sacred
person and of your whole court, he uttered his passionate
protestations of love and his oath of eternal faithfulness? Well,
now, this Geraldine--so adored, so deified--is the queen!"

"That is not true!" cried the king, crimson with anger; and he
clenched his hands so firmly about the arms of his chair that it
cracked. "That is not true, my lady!"

"It is true!" said the duchess, haughtily and saucily. "It is true,
sire, for the Earl of Surrey has confessed to me myself that it is
the queen whom he loves, and that Geraldine is only a melodious
appellation for Catharine."

"He has confessed it to you yourself?" inquired the king, with
gasping breath. "Ah, he dares love his king's wife? Woe to him,
woe!"

He raised his clenched fist threateningly to heaven, and his eyes
darted lightning. "But how!" said he, after a pause--" has he not
recently read before us a poem to his Geraldine, in which he thanks
her for her love, and acknowledges himself eternally her debtor for
the kiss she gave him?"

"He has read before your majesty such a poem to Geraldine."

The king uttered a low cry, and raised himself in his seat.
"Proofs," said he, in a hoarse, hollow voice--"proofs--or, I tell
you, your own head shall atone for this accusation!"

"This proof, your majesty, I will give you!" said Earl Douglas,
solemnly. "It pleases your majesty, in the fulness of your
gentleness and mercy, to want to doubt the accusation of the noble
duchess. Well, now, I will furnish you infallible proof that Henry
Howard, Earl of Surrey, really loves the queen, and that he really
dares to extol and adore the king's wife as his Geraldine. You shall
with your own ears, sire, hear how Earl Surrey swears his love to
the queen."

The scream which the king now uttered was so frightful, and gave
evidence of so much inward agony and rage, that it struck the earl
dumb, and made the cheeks of the ladies turn pale.

"Douglas, Douglas, beware how you rouse the lion!" gasped the king.
"The lion might rend you yourself in pieces!"

"This very night I will give you the proof that you demand, sire.
This very night you shall hear how Earl Surrey, sitting at the feet
of his Geraldine, swears to her his love."

"It is well!" said the king. "This night, then! Woe to you, Douglas,
if you cannot redeem your word!"

"I will do so, your majesty. For this, it is only necessary that you
will be graciously pleased to swear to me that you will not, by a
sigh or a breath, betray yourself. The earl is suspicious; and the
fear of an evil conscience has sharpened his ear. He would recognize
you by your sigh, and his lips would not speak those words and
avowals which you desire to hear."

"I swear to you that I will not by any sigh or breath betray my
presence!" said the king, solemnly. "I swear this to you by the holy
mother of God! But now let that suffice. Air--air--I suffocate!
Everything swims before my eyes. Open the window, that a little air
may flow in! Ah! that is good! This air at least is pure, and not
infected with sin and slander!"

And the king had Earl Douglas roll him to the opened window, and
inspired in long draughts that pure fresh air. Then he turned to the
ladies with an agreeable smile.

"My ladies," said he, "I thank you! You have to-day shown yourselves
my true and devoted friends! I shall ever remember it, and I beg of
you, if at any time you need a friend and protector, to apply to us
with all confidence. We shall never forget what great service you
have to-day rendered us."

He nodded to them in a friendly manner, whilst, with a majestic wave
of the hand, he dismissed them, and concluded the audience.

"And now, Douglas," exclaimed the king, vehemently, as soon as the
ladies had retired--"now I have had enough of this dreadful torture!
Oh, you say I am to punish the traitors--these Surreys--and you
inflict on me the most frightful pains of the rack!"

"Sire, there was no other means of delivering up this Surrey to you.
You were wishing that he were a criminal; and I shall prove to you
that he is so."

"Oh, I shall then be able at least to tread his hated head under my
feet" said the king, grinding his teeth. "I shall no more tremble
before this malicious enemy, who goes about among my people with his
hypocritical tongue, while I, tortured with pain, sit in the dungeon
of my sickroom. Yes, yes, I thank you, Douglas, that you will hand
him over to my arm of vengeance; and my soul is full of joy and
serenity at it. Ah, why were you obliged to cloud this fair, this
sublime hour? Why was it necessary to weave the queen into this
gloomy web of guilt and crime? Her cheerful smile and her radiant
looks have ever been an enjoyment so dear to my eyes."

"Sire, I do not by any means say that the queen is guilty. Only
there was no other means to prove to you Earl Surrey's guilt than
that you should hear for yourself his confession of love to the
queen."

"And I will hear it!" cried the king, who had now already overcome
the sentimental emotion of his heart.

"Yes, I will have full conviction of Surrey's guilt; and woe to the
queen, should I find her also guilty! This night, then, earl! But
till then, silence and secrecy! We will have father and son seized
and imprisoned at the same hour; for otherwise the imprisonment of
the one might easily serve as a warning to the other, and he might
escape my just wrath. Ah, they are so sly--these Howards--and their
hearts are so full of cunning and malice! But now they shall escape
me no more; now they are ours! How it does me good to think that!
And how briskly and lightly my heart leaps! It is as though a stream
of new life were rushing through my veins, and a new power were
infused into my blood. Oh, it was these Howards that made me sick. I
shall be well again when I know that they are in the Tower. Yes,
yes, my heart leaps with joy, and this is to be a happy and blessed
day. Call the queen hither to me, that I may once more enjoy her
rosy face before I make it turn pale with terror. Yes, let the queen
come, and let her adorn herself; I want to see her once more in the
full splendor of her youth and her royalty, before her star goes out
in darkness. I will once more delight myself with her before I make
her weep. Ah, know you, Douglas, that there is no enjoyment keener,
more devilish, and more heavenly, than to see such a person who
smiles and suspects nothing, while she is already condemned; who
still adorns her head with roses, while the executioner is already
sharpening the axe that is to lay that head low; who still has hopes
of the future, and of joy and happiness, while her hour of life has
already run out; while I have already bidden her stop and descend
into the grave! So, call the queen to me; and tell her that we are
in a merry mood, and want to jest and laugh with her! Call all the
ladies and lords of our court; and have the royal saloons opened;
and let them be radiant with the brilliancy of the lights; and let
us have music--loud, crashing music--for we want at least to make
this a merry day for us since it seems as though we should have a
sad and unhappy night. Yes, yes, a merry day we will have; and after
that, let come what come may! The saloons shall resound with
laughter and joyfulness; and naught but rejoicing and fun shall be
heard in the great royal saloons. And invite also the Duke of
Norfolk, my noble cousin, who shares with me my royal coat-of-arms.
Yes, invite him, that I may enjoy once more his haughty and imposing
beauty and grandeur before this august sun is extinguished and
leaves us again in night and darkness. Then invite also Wriothesley,
the high chancellor, and let him bring with him a few gallant and
brave soldiers of our body-guard. They are to be the noble duke's
suite, when he wishes to leave our feast and go homeward--homeward--
if not to his palace, yet to the Tower, and to the grave. Go, go,
Douglas, and attend to all this for me! And send me here directly my
merry fool, John Heywood. He must pass away the time for me till the
feast begins. He must make me laugh and be gay."

"I will go and fulfil your orders, sire," said Earl Douglas. "I will
order the feast, and impart your commands to the queen and your
court. And first of all, I will send John Heywood to you. But pardon
me, your majesty, if I venture to remind you that you have given me
your royal word not to betray our secret by a single syllable, or
even by a sigh."

"I gave my word, and I will keep it!" said the king. "Go now, Earl
Douglas, and do what I have bidden you!"

Wholly exhausted by this paroxysm of cruel delight, the king sank
back in his seat, and moaning and groaning he rubbed his leg, the
piercing pains of which he had for a moment forgotten, but which now
reminded him of their presence with so much the more cruel fury.

"Ah, ah!" moaned the king. "He boasts of being able to sleep when he
pleases. Well, this time we will be the one to lull this haughty
earl to sleep. But it will be a sleep out of which he is never to
awake again!"

While the king thus wailed and suffered, Earl Douglas hastened with
quick, firm step through the suite of royal apartments. A proud,
triumphant smile played about his lips, and a joyful expression of
victory flashed from his eyes.

"Triumph! triumph! we shall conquer!" said he, as he now entered his
daughter's chamber and extended his hand to Lady Jane. "Jane, we
have at last reached the goal, and you will soon be King Henry's
seventh wife!"

A rosy shimmer flitted for a moment over Lady Jane's pale, colorless
cheeks, and a smile played about her lips--a smile, however, which
was more sad than loud sobs could have been.

"Ah," said she in a low tone, "I fear only that my poor head will be
too weak to wear a royal crown."

"Courage, courage, Jane, lift up your head, and be again my strong,
proud daughter!"

"But, I suffer so much, my father," sighed she. "It is hell that
burns within me!"

"But soon, Jane, soon you shall feel again the bliss of heaven! I
had forbidden you to grant Henry Howard a meeting, because it might
bring us danger. Well, then, now your tender heart shall be
satisfied. To-night you shall embrace your lover again!"

"Oh," murmured she, "he will again call me his Geraldine, and it
will not be I, but the queen, that he kisses in my arms!"

"Yes, to-day, it will still be so, Jane; but I swear to you that to-
day is the last time that you are obliged to receive him thus."

"The last time that I see him?" asked Jane, with an expression of
alarm.

"No, Jane, only the last time that Henry Howard loves in you the
queen, and not you yourself."

"Oh, he will never love me!" murmured she, sadly.

"He will love you, for you it will be that will save his life.
Hasten, then. Jane, haste! Write him quickly one of those tender
notes that you indite with so masterly a hand. Invite him to a
meeting to-night at the usual time and place."

"Oh, I shall at last have him again!" whispered Lady Jane; and she
stepped to the writing-table and with trembling hand began to write.

But suddenly she stopped, and looked at her father sharply and
suspiciously.

"You swear to me, my father, that no danger threatens him if he
comes?"

"I swear to you, Jane, that you shall be the one to save his life! I
swear to you, Jane, that you shall take vengeance on the queen--
vengeance for all the agony, the humiliation and despair that you
have suffered by her. To-day she is yet Queen of England! To-morrow
she will be nothing more than a criminal, who sighs in the
confinement of the Tower for the hour of her execution. And you will
be Henry's seventh queen. Write, then, my daughter, write! And may
love dictate to you the proper words!"


CHAPTER XXX.

THE FEAST OF DEATH.


For a long time the king had not appeared in such good spirits as on
this festive evening. For a long time he had not been so completely
the tender husband, the good-natured companion, the cheerful bon-
vivant.

The pains of his leg seemed to have disappeared, and even the weight
of his body seemed to be less burdensome than usual, for more than
once he rose from his chair, and walked a few steps through the
brilliantly lighted saloon, in which the ladies and lords of his
court, in festive attire, were moving gently to and fro; in which
music and laughter resounded. How tender he showed himself toward
the queen to-day; with what extraordinary kindness he met the Duke
of Norfolk; with what smiling attention, he listened to the Earl of
Surrey, as he, at the king's desire, recited some new sonnets to
Geraldine!

This marked preference for the noble Howards enraptured the Roman
Catholic party at court, and filled it with new hopes and new
confidence.

But one there was who did not allow himself to be deceived by this
mask which King Henry had to-day put on over his wrathful face.

John Heywood had faith neither in the king's cheerfulness nor in his
tenderness. He knew the king; he was aware that those to whom he was
most friendly often had the most to fear from him. Therefore, he
watched him; and he saw, beneath this mask of friendliness, the
king's real angry countenance sometimes flash out in a quick, hasty
look.

The resounding music and the mad rejoicing no more deceived John
Heywood. He beheld Death standing behind this dazzling life; he
smelt the reek of corruption concealed beneath the perfume of these
brilliant flowers.

John Heywood no longer laughed and no longer chatted. He watched.

For the first time in a long while the king did not need to-day the
exciting jest and the stinging wit of his fool in order to be
cheerful and in good humor.

So the fool had time and leisure to be a reasonable and observant
man; and he improved the time.

He saw the looks of mutual understanding and secure triumph that
Earl Douglas exchanged with Gardiner, and it made him mistrustful to
notice that the favorites of the king, at other times so jealous,
did not seem to be at all disturbed by the extraordinary marks of
favor which the Howards were enjoying this evening.

Once he heard how Gardiner asked Wriothesley, as he passed by, "And
the soldiers of the Tower?" and how he replied just as laconically,
"They stand near the coach, and wait."

It was, therefore, perfectly clear that somebody would be committed
to prison this very day. There was, therefore, among the laughing,
richly-attired, and jesting guests of this court, one who this very
night, when he left these halls radiant with splendor and pleasure,
was to behold the dark and gloomy chambers of the Tower.

The only question was, who that one was for whom the brilliant
comedy of this evening was to be changed to so sad a drama.

John Heywood felt his heart oppressed with an unaccountable
apprehension, and the king's extraordinary tenderness toward the
queen terrified him.

As now he smiled on Catharine, as he now stroked her cheeks, so had
the king smiled on Anne Boleyn in the same hour that he ordered her
arrest; so had he stroked Buckingham's cheek on the same day that he
signed his death-warrant.

The fool was alarmed at this brilliant feast, resounding music, and
the mad merriment of the king. He was horrified at the laughing
faces and frivolous jests, which came streaming from all those
mirthful lips.

O Heaven! they laughed, and death was in the midst of them; they
laughed, and the gates of the Tower were already opened to admit one
of those merry guests of the king into that house which no one in
those days of Henry the Eighth left again, save to go to the stake
or to ascend the scaffold!

Who was the condemned? For whom were the soldiers below at the
carriage waiting? John Heywood in vain racked his brain with this
question.

Nowhere could he spy a trace that might lead him on the right track;
nowhere a clew that might conduct him through this labyrinth of
horrors.

"When you are afraid of the devil, you do well to put yourself under
his immediate protection," muttered John Heywood; and sad and
despondent at heart, he crept behind the king's throne and crouched
down by it on the ground.

John Heywood had such a little, diminutive form, and the king's
throne was so large and broad, that it altogether concealed the
little crouching fool.

No one had noticed that John Heywood was concealed there behind the
king. Nobody saw his large, keen eyes peeping out from behind the
throne and surveying and watching the whole hall.

John Heywood could see everything and hear everything going on in
the vicinity of the king. He could observe every one who approached
the queen.

He saw Lady Jane likewise, who was standing by the queen's seat. He
saw how Earl Douglas drew near his daughter, and how she turned
deadly pale as he stepped up to her.

John Heywood held his breath and listened.

Earl Douglas stood near his daughter, and nodded to her with a
peculiar smile. "Go, now, Jane, go and change your dress. It is
time. Only see how impatiently and longingly Henry Howard is already
looking this way, and with what languishing and enamored glances he
seems to give a hint to the queen. Go then, Jane, and think of your
promise."

"And will you, my father, also think of your promise?" inquired Lady
Jane, with trembling lips. "Will no danger threaten him?"

"I will, Jane. But now make haste, my daughter, and be prudent and
adroit."

Lady Jane bowed, and murmured a few unintelligible words. Then she
approached the queen, and begged permission to retire from the
feast, because a severe indisposition had suddenly overtaken her.

Lady Jane's countenance was so pale and deathlike, that the queen
might well believe in the indisposition of her first maid of honor,
and she allowed her to retire. Lady Jane left the hall. The queen
continued the conversation with Lord Hertford, who was standing by
her. It was a very lively and warm conversation, and the queen
therefore did not heed what was passing around her; and she heard
nothing of the conversation between the king and Earl Douglas.

John Heywood, still crouching behind the king's throne, observed
everything and heard every word of this softly whispered
conversation.

"Sire," said Earl Douglas, "it is late and the hour of midnight is
drawing nigh. Will your majesty be pleased to conclude the feast?
For you well know that at mid-night we must be over there in the
green summer-house, and it is a long way there."

"Yes, yes, at midnight!" muttered the king. "At midnight the
carnival is at an end; and we shall tear off our mask, and show our
wrathful countenance to the criminals! At midnight we must be over
in the green summer-house. Yes, Douglas, we must make haste; for it
would be cruel to let the tender Surrey wait still longer. So we
will give his Geraldine liberty to leave the feast; and we ourselves
must begin our journey. Ah, Douglas, it is a hard path that we have
to tread, and the furies and gods of vengeance bear our torches. To
work, then--to work!"

The king arose from his seat, and stepped to the queen, to whom he
presented his hand with a tender smile.

"My lady, it is late," said he; "and we, who are king of so many
subjects--we are, nevertheless, in turn, the subject of a king. This
is the physician, and we must obey him. He has ordered me to seek my
couch before midnight, and, as a loyal subject must do, I obey. We
wish you, therefore, a good-night, Kate; and may your beautiful eyes
on the morrow also shine as starlike as they do to-night."

"They will shine to-morrow as to-night, if my lord and husband is
still as gracious to me to-morrow as to-day," said Catharine, with
perfect artlessness and without embarrassment, as she gave her hand
to the king. Henry cast on her a suspicious, searching look, and a
peculiar, malicious expression was manifested in his face.

"Do you believe then, Kate, that we can ever be ungracious to you?"
asked he.

"As to that, I think," said she, with a smile, "that even the sun
does not always shine; and that a gloomy night always succeeds his
splendor."

The king did not reply. He looked her steadily in the face, and his
features suddenly assumed a gentler expression.

Perhaps he had compassion on his young wife. Perhaps he felt pity
for her youth and her enchanting smile, which had so often revived
and refreshed his heart.

Earl Douglas at least feared so.

"Sire," said he, "it is late. The hour of midnight is drawing nigh."

"Then let us go," exclaimed the king, with a sigh. "Yes once again,
good-night, Kate! Nay, do not accompany me! I will leave the hall
quite unobserved; and I shall be pleased, if my guests will still
prolong the fairfeast till morning. All of you remain here! No one
but Douglas accompanies me."

"And your brother, the fool!" said John Heywood, who long before had
come out of his hiding-place and was now standing by the king. "Yes,
come, brother Henry; let us quit this feast. It is not becoming for
wise men of our sort to grant our presence still longer to the feast
of fools. Come to your couch, king, and I will lull your ear to
sleep with the sayings of my wisdom, and enliven your soul with the
manna of my learning."

While John Heywood thus spoke, it did not escape him that the
features of the earl suddenly clouded and a dark frown settled on
his brow.

"Spare your wisdom for to-day, John," said the king; "for you would
indeed be preaching only to deaf ears. I am tired, and I require not
your erudition, but sleep. Good-night, John."

The king left the hall, leaning on Earl Douglas's arm.

"Earl Douglas does not wish me to accompany the king," whispered
John Heywood. "He is afraid the king might blab out to me a little
of that diabolical work which they will commence at midnight. Well,
I call the devil, as well as the king, my brother, and with his help
I too will be in the green-room at midnight. Ah, the queen is
retiring; and there is the Duke of Norfolk leaving the hall. I have
a slight longing to see whether the duke goes hence luckily and
without danger, or if the soldiers who stand near the coach, as
Wriothesley says, will perchance be the duke's bodyguard for this
night."

Slipping out of the hall with the quickness of a cat, John Heywood
passed the duke in the anteroom and hurried on to the outer gateway,
before which the carriages were drawn up.

John Heywood leaned against a pillar and watched. A few minutes, and
the duke's tall and proud form appeared in the entrance-hall; and
the footman, hurrying forward, called his carriage.

The carriage rolled up; the door was opened.

Two men wrapped in black mantles sat by the coachman; two others
stood behind as footmen, while a fifth was by the open door of the
carriage.

The duke first noticed him as his foot had already touched the step
of the carriage.

"This is not my equipage! These are not my people!" said he; and he
tried to step back. But the pretended servant forced him violently
into the carriage and shut the door. "Forward!" ordered he. The
carriage rolled on. A moment still, John Heywood saw the duke's pale
face appear at the open carriage window, and it seemed to him as
though he were stretching out his arms, calling for help--then the
carriage disappeared in the night. "Poor duke!" murmured John
Heywood. "The gates of the Tower are heavy, and your arm will not be
strong enough to open them again, when they have once closed behind
you. But it avails nothing to think more about him now. The queen is
also in danger. Away, then, to the queen!"

With fleet foot John Heywood hastened back into the castle. Through
passages and corridors he slipped hurriedly along.

Now he stood in the corridor which led to the apartments of the
queen.

"I will constitute her guard to-night," muttered John Heywood, as he
hid himself in one of the niches in the corridor. "The fool by his
prayers will keep far from the door of his saint the tricks of the
devil, and protect her from the snares which the pious Bishop
Gardiner and the crafty courtier Douglas want to lay for her feet.
My queen shall not fall and be ruined. The fool yet lives to protect
her."


CHAPTER XXXI.

THE QUEEN


From the niche in which John Heywood had hid himself he could survey
the entire corridor and all the doors opening into it--could see
everything and hear everything without being himself seen, for the
projecting pilaster completely shaded him.

So John Heywood stood and listened. All was quiet in the corridor.
In the distance was now and then heard the deadened sound of the
music; and the confused hum of many voices from the festive halls
forced its way to the listener's ear.

This was the only thing that John Heywood perceived. All else was
still. But this stillness did not last long. The corridor was
lighted up, and the sound of rapidly approaching footsteps was
heard.

It was the gold-laced lackeys, who bore the large silver candelabra
to light the queen, who, with her train of ladies, was passing
through the corridor.

She looked wondrously beautiful. The glare of the candles borne
before her illumined her countenance, which beamed with
cheerfulness. As she passed the pillar behind which John Heywood was
standing, she was talking in unrestrained gayety with her second
maid of honor; and a clear and lively laugh rang from her lips,
which disclosed both rows of her dazzling white teeth. Her eyes
sparkled; her checks were flushed with a rich red; bright as stars
glittered the diamonds in the diadem that encircled her lofty brow;
like liquid gold shone her dress of gold brocade, the long trail of
which, trimmed with black ermine, was borne by two lovely pages.

Arrived at the door of her bed-chamber, the queen dismissed her
pages and lackeys, and permitted only the maid of honor to cross the
threshold of her chamber with her.

In harmless gossip the pages glided down the corridor and the
staircase. Then came the lackeys who bore the candelabra. They also
left the corridor.

Now all was quiet again. Still John Heywood stood and listened,
firmly resolved to speak to the queen yet that night, even should he
be obliged to wake her from sleep. Only he wanted to wait till the
maid of honor also had left the queen's room.

Now the door opened, and the maid of honor came out. She crossed the
corridor to that side where her own apartments were situated. John
Heywood heard her open the door and then slide the bolt on the
inside.

"Now but a brief time longer, and I will go to the queen," muttered
John Heywood.

He was just going to leave his lurking-place, when he perceived a
noise as if a door were slowly and cautiously opened.

John Heywood cowered again close behind the pillar, and held his
breath to listen.

A bright light fell over the corridor. A dress came rustling nearer
and nearer.

John Heywood gazed astounded and amazed at the figure, which just
brushed past without seeing him.

That figure was Lady Jane Douglas--Lady Jane, who, on account of
indisposition, had retired from the feast in order to betake herself
to rest. Now, when all rested, she watched--when all laid aside
their festive garments, she had adorned herself with the same. Like
the queen, she wore a dress of gold brocade, trimmed with ermine,
and, like her, a diadem of diamonds adorned Lady Jane's brow.

Now she stood before the queen's door and listened. Then a fierce
sneer flitted across her deathly pale face, and her dark eyes
flashed still more.

"She sleeps," muttered she. "Only sleep, queen--sleep till we shall
come to wake you! Sleep, so that I can wake for you."

She raised her arm threateningly toward the door, and wildly shook
her head. Her long black ringlets encircled and danced around her
sullen brow like the snakes of the furies; and pale and colorless,
and with demon-like beauty, she resembled altogether the goddess of
vengeance, in scornful triumph preparing to tread her victim beneath
her feet.

With a low laugh she now glided adown the corridor, but not to that
staircase yonder, but farther down to the end, where on the wall
hung a life-size picture of Henry the Sixth. She pressed on a
spring; the picture flew open, and through the door concealed behind
it Lady Jane left the corridor.

"She is going to the green-room to a meeting with Henry Howard!"
whispered John Heywood, who now stepped forth from behind the
pillar. "Oh, now I comprehend it all; now the whole of this devilish
plot is clear to me; Lady Jane is Earl Surrey's lady-love, and they
want to make the king believe that it is the queen. Doubtless this
Surrey is with them in the conspiracy, and perhaps he will call Jane
Douglas by the name of the queen. They will let the king see her but
a moment. She wears a gold brocade dress and a diamond diadem like
the queen; and thereby they hope to deceive Henry. She has the
queen's form precisely; and everybody knows the astonishing
similarity and likeness of Lady Jane's voice to that of the queen.
Oh, oh, it is a tolerably cunning plot! But nevertheless you shall
not succeed, and you shall not yet gain the victory. Patience, only
patience! We likewise will be in the green-room, and face to face
with this royal counterfeit we will place the genuine queen!"

With hurried step John Heywood also left the corridor, which was now
lonely and still, for the queen had gone to rest.

Yes, the queen slept, and yet over yonder in the green-room
everything was prepared for her reception.

It was to be a very brilliant and extraordinary reception; for the
king, in his own person, had betaken himself to that wing of the
castle, and the chief master of ceremonies, Earl Douglas, had
accompanied him.

To the king, this excursion, which he had to make on foot, had been
very troublesome; and this inconvenience had made him only still
more furious and excited, and the last trace of compassion for his
queen had disappeared from the king's breast, for on Catharine's
account he had been obliged to make this long journey to the green-
room; and with a grim joy Henry thought only how terrible was to be
his punishment for Henry Howard and also for Catharine.

Now that Earl Douglas had brought him hither, the king no longer had
any doubts at all of the queen's guilt. It was no longer an
accusation--it was proof. For never in the world would Earl Douglas
have dared to bring him, the king, hither, if he were not certain
that he would give him here infallible proofs.

The king, therefore, no longer doubted; at last Henry Howard was in
his power, and he could no more escape him. So he was certain of
being able to bring these two hated enemies to the block, and of
feeling his sleep no longed disturbed by thoughts of his two
powerful rivals.

The Duke of Norfolk had already passed the gates of the Tower, and
his son must soon follow him thither.

At this thought the king felt an ecstasy so savage and bloodthirsty,
that be wholly forgot that the same sword that was to strike Henry
Howard's head was drawn on his queen also.

They were now standing in the green-room, and the king leaned
panting and moaning on Earl Douglas's arm.

The large wide room, with its antique furniture and its faded glory,
was only gloomily and scantily lighted in the middle by the two wax
candles of the candelabrum that Earl Douglas had brought with him;
while further away it was enveloped in deep gloom, and seemed to the
eye through this gloom to stretch out to an interminable length.

"Through the door over there comes the queen," said Douglas; and he
himself shrank at the loud sound of his voice, which in the large,
desolate room became of awful fulness. "And that, there, is Henry
Howard's entrance. Oh, he knows that path very thoroughly; for he
has often enough already travelled it in the dark night, and his
foot no longer stumbles on any stone of offence!"

"But he will perchance stumble on the headsman's block!" muttered
the king, with a cruel laugh.

"I now take the liberty of asking one question more," said Douglas;
and the king did not suspect how stormily the earl's heart beat at
this question. "Is your majesty satisfied to see the earl and the
queen make their appearance at this meeting? Or, do you desire to
listen to a little of the earl's tender protestations?"

"I will hear not a little, but all!" said the king. "Ah, let us
allow the earl yet to sing his swan-like song before he plunges into
the sea of blood!"

"Then," said Earl Douglas, "then we must put out this light, and
your majesty must be content merely to hear the guilty ones, and not
to see them also. We will then betake ourselves to the boudoir here,
which I have opened for this purpose, and in which is an easy-chair
for your majesty. We will place this chair near the open door, and
then your majesty will be able to hear every word of their tender
whisperings."

"But how shall we, if we extinguish this our only light, at last
attain to a sight of this dear loving pair, and be able to afford
them the dramatic surprise of our presence?"

"Sire, as soon as the Earl of Surrey enters, twenty men of the
king's bodyguard will occupy the anteroom through which the earl
must pass; and it needs but a call from you to have them enter the
hall with their torches. I have taken care also that before the
private backgate of the palace two coaches stand ready, the drivers
of which know very well the street that leads to the Tower!"

"Two coaches?" said the king, laughing. "Ah, ah, Douglas, how cruel
we are to separate the tender, loving pair on this journey which is
yet to be their last! Well, perhaps we can compensate them for it,
and allow these turtledoves to make the last trip--the trip to the
stake--together. No, no, we will not separate them in death.
Together they may lay their heads on the block."

The king laughed, quite delighted with his jest, while, leaning on
the earl's arm, he crossed to the little boudoir on the other side,
and took his place in the armchair set near the door.

"Now we must extinguish the light; and may it please your majesty to
await in silence the things that are to come."

The earl extinguished the light, and deep darkness and a grave-like
stillness now followed.

But this did not last long. Now was heard quite distinctly the sound
of footsteps. They came nearer and nearer--now a door was heard to
open and shut again, and it was as though some one were creeping
softly along on his toes in the hall.

"Henry Howard!" whispered Douglas.

The king could scarcely restrain the cry of savage, malicious
delight that forced its way to his lips.

The hated enemy was then in his power; he was convicted of the
crime; he was inevitably lost.

"Geraldine!" whispered a voice, "Geraldine!"

And as if his low call had already been sufficient to draw hither
the loved one, the secret door here quite close to the boudoir
opened. The rustling of a dress was very distinctly heard, and the
sound of footsteps.

"Geraldine!" repeated Earl Surrey.

"Here I am, my Henry!"

With an exclamation of delight, the woman rushed forward toward the
sound of the loved voice.

"The queen!" muttered Henry; and in spite of himself he felt his
heart seized with bitter grief.

He saw with his inward eye how they held each other in their
embrace. He heard their kisses and the low whisper of their tender
vows, and all the agonies of jealousy and wrath filled his soul. But
yet the king prevailed upon himself to be silent and swallow down
his rage. He wanted to hear everything, to know everything.

He clenched his hands convulsively, and pressed his lips firmly
together to hold in his panting breath. He wanted to hear.

How happy they both were! Henry had wholly forgotten that he had
come to reproach her for her long silence; she did not think about
this being the last time she might see her lover.

They were with each other, and this hour was theirs. What did the
whole world matter to them? What cared they whether or not mischief
and ruin threatened them hereafter?

They sat by each other on the divan, quite near the boudoir. They
jested and laughed; and Henry Howard kissed away the tears that the
happiness of the present caused his Geraldine to shed.

He swore to her eternal and unchanging love. In blissful silence she
drank in the music of his words; and then she reiterated, with
jubilant joy, his vows of love.

The king could scarcely restrain his fury.

The heart of Earl Douglas leaped with satisfaction and
gratification. "A lucky thing that Jane has no suspicion of our
presence," thought he--"otherwise she would have been less
unrestrained and ardent, and the king's ear would have imbibed less
poison."

Lady Jane thought not at all of her father; she scarcely remembered
that this very night would destroy her hated rival the queen.

Henry Howard had called her his Geraldine only. Jane had entirely
forgot that it was not she to whom her lover had given this name.

But he himself finally reminded her of it.

"Do you know, Geraldine," said Earl Surrey--and his voice, which had
been hitherto so cheerful and sprightly, was now sad--"do you know,
Geraldine, that I have had doubts of you? Oh, those were frightful,
horrible hours; and in the agony of my heart I came at last to the
resolution of going to the king and accusing myself of this love
that was consuming my heart. Oh, fear naught! I would not have
accused you. I would have even denied that love which you have so
often and with such transporting reality sworn to me. I would have
done it in order to see whether my Geraldine could at last gain
courage and strength to lover. He saw how he pressed her hands to
his lips; how he put his hand to her head to raise it from the
floor.

The king was speechless with rage. He could only lift his arm to
beckon the soldiers to approach; to point to Henry Howard, who had
not yet succeeded in raising the queen's head from the floor.

"Arrest him!" said Earl Douglas, lending words to the king's mute
sign. "In the king's name arrest him, and conduct him to the Tower!"

"Yes, arrest him!" said the king; and, as with youthful speed he
walked up to Henry Howard and put his hand heavily on his shoulder,
he with terrible calmness continued: "Henry Howard, your wish shall
be fulfilled; you shall mount the scaffold for which you have so
much longed!"

The earl's noble countenance remained calm and unmoved; his bright
beaming eye fearlessly encountered the eye of the king flashing with
wrath.

"Sire," said he, "my life is in your hand, and I very well know that
you will not spare it. I do not even ask you to do so. But spare
this noble and beautiful woman, whose only crime is that she has
followed the voice of her heart. Sire, I alone am the guilty one.
Punish me, then--torture me, if you like--but be merciful to her."

The king broke out into a loud laugh. "Ah, he begs for her!" said
he. "This little Earl Surrey presumes to think that his sentimental
love-plaint can exercise an influence on the heart of his judge! No,
no, Henry Howard; you know me better. You say, indeed, that I am a
cruel man, and that blood cleaves to my crown. Well, now, it is our
pleasure to set in our crown a new blood-red ruby; and if we want to
take it from Geraldine's heart's blood, your sonnets will not hinder
us from doing so, my good little earl. That is all the reply I have
to make to you; and I think it will be the last time that we shall
meet on earth!"

"There above we shall see each other again, King Henry of England!"
said Earl Surrey, solemnly. "There But still this hour was hers, and
she would enjoy it. She clung fast to his breast; she drew him with
irresistible force to her heart, which now trembled no longer for
love, but from a nameless anxiety.

"Let us fly! Let us fly!" repeated she, breathlessly. See! This hour
is yet ours. Let us avail ourselves of it; for who knows whether the
next will still belong to us?"

"No! it is no longer yours," yelled the king, as he sprang like a
roused lion from his seat. "Your hours are numbered, and the next
already belongs to the hangman!"

A piercing shriek burst from Geraldine's lips. Then was heard a dull
fall.

"She has fainted," muttered Earl Douglas.

"Geraldine, Geraldine, my loved one!" cried Henry Howard. "My God,
my God! she is dying! You have killed her! Woe to you!"

"Woe to yourself!" said the king, solemnly. "Here with the light!
Here, you folks!"

The door of the anteroom opened, and in it appeared four soldiers
with torches in their hands.

"Light the candles, and guard the door!" said the king, whose
dazzled eyes were not yet able to bear this bright glare of light
which now suddenly streamed through the room.

The soldiers obeyed his orders. A pause ensued. The king had put his
hand before his eyes, and was struggling for breath and self-
control.

When at length he let his hand glide down, his features had assumed
a perfectly calm, almost a serene expression.

With a hasty glance he surveyed the room. He saw the queen in her
dress glistening with gold; he saw how she lay on the floor,
stretched at full length, her face turned to the ground, motionless
and rigid.

He saw Henry Howard, who knelt by his beloved and was busy about her
with all the anxiety and agony of a acknowledge her love openly and
frankly; whether her heart had the power to burst that iron band
which the deceitful rules of the world had placed around it; whether
she would acknowledge her lover when he was willing to die for her.
Yes, Geraldine, I wanted to do it, that I might finally know which
feeling is stronger in you--love or pride--and whether you could
then still preserve the mask of indifference, when death was
hovering over your lover's head. Oh, Geraldine, I should deem it a
fairer fate to die united with you, than to be obliged to still
longer endure this life of constraint and hateful etiquette."

"No, no," said she, trembling, "we will not die. My God, life is
indeed so beautiful when you are by my side! And who knows whether a
felicitous and blissful future may not still await us?"

"Oh, should we die, then should we be certain of this blissful
future, my Geraldine. There, above, there is no more separation--no
more renunciation for us. There above, you are mine, and the bloody
image of your husband no longer stands between us."

"It shall no longer do so, even here on earth," whispered Geraldine.
"Come, my beloved; let us fly far, far hence, where no one knows us-
-where we can cast from us all this hated splendor, to live for each
other and for love."

She threw her arms about her lover, and in the ecstasy of her love
she had wholly forgotten that she could never indeed think to flee
with him, that he belonged to her only so long as he saw her not.

An inexplicable anxiety overpowered her heart; and in this anxiety
she forgot everything--even the queen and the vengeance she had
vowed.

She now remembered her father's words, and she trembled for her
lover's life.

If now her father had not told her the truth--if now he had
notwithstanding sacrificed Henry Howard in order to ruin the queen--
if she was not able to save him, and through her fault he were to
perish on the scaffold--above Henry the Eighth will no more be the
judge, but the condemned criminal; and your bloody and accursed
deeds will witness against you!"

The king laughed. "You avail yourself of your advantage," said he.
"Because you have nothing more to lose and the scaffold is sure of
you, you do not stick at heaping up the measure of your sins a
little more, and you revile your legitimate, God-appointed king! But
you should bear in mind, earl, that before the scaffold there is yet
the rack, and that it is very possible indeed that a painful
question might there be put to the noble Earl Surrey, to which his
agonies might prevent him from returning an answer. Now, away with
you! We have nothing more to say to each other on earth!"

He motioned to the soldiers, who approached the Earl of Surrey. As
they reached their hands toward him, he turned on them a look so
proud and commanding that they involuntarily recoiled a step.

"Follow me!" said Henry Howard, calmly; and, without even deigning
the king a single look more, with head proudly erect, he walked to
the door.

Geraldine still lay on the ground--her face turned to the floor. She
stirred not. She seemed to have fallen into a deep swoon.

Only as the door with a sullen sound closed behind Earl Surrey, a
low wail and moan was perceived--such as is wont to struggle forth
at the last hour from the breast of the dying.

The king did not heed it. He still gazed, with eyes stern and
flashing with anger, toward the door through which Earl Surrey had
passed.

"He is unyielding," muttered he. "Not even the rack affrights him;
and in his blasphemous haughtiness he moves along in the midst of
the soldiers, not as a prisoner, but as a commander. Oh, these
Howards are destined to torment me; and even their death will
scarcely be a full satisfaction to me."

"Sire," said Earl Douglas, who had observed the king with a keen,
penetrating eye, and knew that he had now reached the height of his
wrath, at which he shrank from no deed of violence and no cruelty--
"sire, you have sent Earl Surrey to the Tower. But what shall be
done with the queen, who lies there on the floor in a swoon?"

The king roused himself from his reverie; and his bloodshot eyes
were fixed on Geraldine's motionless form with so dark an expression
of hate and rage, that Earl Douglas exultingly said to himself: "The
queen is lost! He will be inexorable!"

"Ah, the queen!" cried Henry, with a savage laugh. "Yea, verily, I
forgot the queen. I did not think of this charming Geraldine! But
you are right, Douglas; we must think of her and occupy ourselves a
little with her! Did you not say that a second coach was ready?
Well, then, we will not hinder Geraldine from accompanying her
beloved. She shall be where he is--in the Tower, and on the
scaffold! We will therefore wake this sentimental lady and show her
the last duty of a cavalier by conducting her to her carriage!"

He was about to approach the figure of the queen lying on the floor.
Earl Douglas held him back.

"Sire," said he, "it is my duty--as your faithful subject, who loves
you and trembles for your welfare--it is my duty to implore you to
spare yourself and preserve your precious and adored person from the
venomous sting of anger and grief. I conjure you, therefore, do not
deign to look again on this woman, who has so deeply injured you.
Give me your orders--what am I to do with her--and allow me first of
all to accompany you to your apartments."

"You are right," said the king, "she is not worthy of having my eyes
rest on her again; and she is even too contemptible for my anger! We
will call the soldiers that they may conduct this traitoress and
adulteress to the tower, as they have done her paramour."

"Yet for that there is needed still a formality. The queen will not
be admitted into the Tower without the king's written and sealed
order."

"Then I will draw up that order."

"Sire, in that cabinet yonder may be found the necessary writing-
materials, if it please your majesty."

The king leaned in silence on the earl's arm, and allowed himself to
be led again into the cabinet.

With officious haste Earl Douglas made the necessary arrangements.
He rolled the writing-table up to the king; he placed the large
sheet of white paper in order, and slipped the pen into the king's
hand.

"What shall I write?" asked the king, who, by the exertion of his
night's excursion, and of his anger and vexation, began at length to
be exhausted.

"An order for the queen's imprisonment, sire."

The king wrote. Earl Douglas stood behind him, with eager attention,
in breathless expectation, his look steadily fixed on the paper over
which the king's hand, white, fleshy, and sparkling with diamonds,
glided along in hasty characters.

He had at length reached his goal. When at last he should hold in
his hand the paper which the king was then writing--when he had
induced Henry to return to his apartments before the imprisonment of
the queen had taken place--then was he victorious. Not that woman
there would he then imprison; but, with the warrant in his hand, he
would go to the real queen, and take her to the Tower.

Once in the Tower, the queen could no longer defend herself; for the
king would see her no more; and if before the Parliament she
protested her innocence in ever so sacred oaths, still the king's
testimony must convict her; for he had himself surprised her with
her paramour.

No, there was no escape for the queen. She had once succeeded in
clearing herself of an accusation, and proving her innocence, by a
rebutting alibi. But this time she was irretrievably lost, and no
alibi could deliver her.

The king completed his work and arose, whilst Douglas, at his
command, was employed in setting the king's seal to the fatal paper.

From the hall was heard a slight noise, as though some person were
cautiously moving about there.

Earl Douglas did not notice it; he was just in the act of pressing
the signet hard on the melted sealing-wax.

The king heard it, and supposed that it was Geraldine, and that she
was just waking from her swoon and rising.

He stepped to the door of the hall, and looked toward the place
where she was lying. But no--she had not yet risen; she still lay
stretched at full length on the floor.

"She has come to; but she still pretends to be in a swoon," thought
the king; and he turned to Douglas.

"We are done," said he; "the warrant for imprisonment is prepared,
and the sentence of the adulterous queen is spoken. We have done
with her forever; and never shall she again behold our face, or
again hear our voice. She is sentenced and damned, and the royal
mercy has nothing more to do with this sinner. A curse on the
adulteress! A curse on the shameless woman who deceived her husband,
and gave herself up to a traitorous paramour! Woe to her, and may
shame and disgrace forever mark her name, which--"

Suddenly the king stopped and listened. The noise that he had heard
just, before was now repeated louder and quicker; it came nearer and
nearer.

And now the door opened and a figure entered--a figure which made
the king stare with astonishment and admiration. It came nearer and
nearer, light, graceful, and with the freshness of youth; a gold-
brocade dress enveloped it; a diadem of diamonds sparkled on the
brow; and brighter yet than the diamonds beamed the eyes.

"No, the king was not mistaken. It was the queen, She was standing
before him--and yet she still lay motionless and stiff upon the
floor yonder.

The king uttered a cry, and, turning pale, reeled a step backward.

"The queen!" exclaimed Douglas, in terror; and he trembled so
violently that the paper in his hand rattled and fluttered.

"Yes, the queen!" said Catharine, with a haughty smile. "The queen,
who comes to scold her husband, that, contrary to his physician's
orders, he still refrains from his slumbers at so late an hour of
the night."

"And the fool!" said John Heywood, as with humorous pathos he
stepped forward from behind the queen--"the fool, who comes to ask
Earl Douglas how he dared deprive John Heywood of his office, and
usurp the place of king's fool to Henry, and deceive his most
gracious majesty with all manner of silly pranks and carnival
tricks."

"And who"--asked the king, in a voice quivering with rage, fastening
his flashing looks on Douglas with an annihilating expression--"
who, then, is that woman there? Who has dared with such cursed
mummery to deceive the king, and calumniate the queen?"

"Sire," said Earl Douglas, who very well knew that his future and
that of his daughter depended on the present moment, and whom this
consciousness had speedily restored to his self-possession and
calmness--"sire, I beseech your majesty for a moment of private
explanation; and I shall be entirely successful in vindicating
myself."

"Do not grant it him, brother Henry," said John Heywood; "he is a
dangerous juggler; and who knows whether he may not yet, in his
private conversation, convince you that he is king, and you nothing
more than his lickspittle, fawning, hypocritical servant Earl
Archibald Douglas."

"My lord and husband, I beg you to hear the earl's justification,"
said Catharine, as she extended her hand to the king with a
bewitching smile. "It would be cruel to condemn him unheard,

I will hear him, but it shall be done in your presence, Kate, and
you yourself shall decide whether or not his justification is
sufficient."

"No indeed, my husband; let me remain an entire stranger to this
night's conspiracy, so that spite and anger may not fill my heart
and rob me of the supreme confidence which I need, to be able to
walk on at your side happy and smiling in the midst of my enemies."

"You are right, Kate," said the king, thoughtfully. "You have many
enemies at our court; and we have to accuse ourselves that we have
not always succeeded in stopping our ear to their malicious
whisperings, and in keeping ourselves pure from the poisonous breath
of their calumny. Our heart is still too artless, and we cannot even
yet comprehend that men are a disgusting, corrupt race, which one
should tread beneath his feet, but never take to his heart. Come,
Earl Douglas, I will hear you; but woe to you, if you are unable to
justify yourself!"

He retired to the embrasure of the large window of the boudoir. Earl
Douglas followed him thither, and let the heavy velvet curtain drop
behind them.

"Sire," said he, hardily and resolutely, "the question now is this:
Whose head would you rather give over to the executioner, mine or
the Earl of Surrey's? You have the choice between the two. You are
aware that I have ventured for a moment to deceive you. Well, send
me to the Tower then, and set free the noble Henry Howard, that he
may henceforth disturb your sleep and poison your days; that he may
further court the love of the people, and perhaps some day rob your
son of the throne that belongs to him. Here is my head, sire; it is
forfeited to the headsman's axe, and Earl Surrey is free!"

"No, he is not free, and never shall be!" said the king, grinding
his teeth.

"Then, my king, I am justified; and instead of being angry with me,
you will thank me? It is true I have played a hazardous game, but I
did so in the service of my king. I did it because I loved him, and
because I read on your lofty clouded brow the thoughts that begirt
with darkness my master's soul, and disturbed the sleep of his
nights. You wanted to have Henry Howard in your power; and this
crafty and hypocritical earl knew how to conceal his guilt so
securely under the mask of virtue and loftiness of soul! But I knew
him, and behind this mask I had seen his face distorted with passion
and crime. I wanted to unmask him; but for this, it was necessary
that I should deceive first him, and then for the hour even
yourself. I knew that he burned with an adulterous love for the
queen, and I wanted to avail myself of the madness of this passion,
in order to bring him surely and unavoidably to a richly-deserved
punishment. But I would not draw the pure and exalted person of the
queen into this net with which we wanted to surround Earl Surrey. I
was obliged, then, to seek a substitute for her; and I did so. There
was at your court a woman whose whole heart belongs, after God, to
the king alone; and who so much adores him, that she would be ready
at any hour gladly to sacrifice for the king her heart's blood, her
whole being--ay, if need be, even her honor itself--a woman, sire,
who lives by your smile, and worships you as her redeemer and
savior--a woman whom you might, as you pleased, make a saint or a
strumpet; and who, to please you, would be a shameless Phyrne or a
chaste veiled nun."

"Tell me her name, Douglas," said the king, "tell me it! It is a
rare and precious stroke of fortune to be so loved; and it would be
a sin not to want to enjoy this good fortune."

"Sire, I will tell you her name when you have first forgiven me,"
said Douglas, whose heart leaped for joy, and who well understood
that the king's anger was already mollified and the danger now
almost overcome. "I said to this woman: 'You are to do the king a
great service; you are to deliver him from a powerful and dangerous
foe! You are to save him from Henry Howard!' 'Tell me what I must
do!' cried she, her looks beaming with joy. 'Henry Howard loves the
queen. You must be the queen to him. You must receive his letters,
and answer them in the queen's name. You must grant him interviews
by night, and, favored by the darkness of the night, make him
believe that it is the queen whom he holds in his arms. He must be
convinced that the queen is his lady-love; and in his thoughts, as
in his deeds, he must be placed before the king as a traitor and
criminal whose head is forfeited to the headsman's axe. One day we
will let the king be a witness of a meeting that Henry Howard
believes he has with the queen; it will then be in his power to
punish his enemy for his criminal passion, which is worthy of
death!' And as I thus spoke to the woman, sire, she said with a sad
smile: 'It is a disgraceful and dishonorable part that you assign
me; but I undertake it, for you say I may thereby render a service
to the king. I shall disgrace myself for him; but he will perhaps
bestow upon me in return a gracious smile; and then I shall be
abundantly rewarded.'"

"But this woman is an angel!" cried the king, ardently--"an angel
whom we should kneel to and adore. Tell me her name, Douglas!"

"Sire, as soon as you have forgiven me! You know now all my guilt
and all my crime. For, as I bade that noble woman, so it came to
pass, and Henry Howard has gone to the Tower in the firm belief that
it was the queen whom he just now held in his arms."

"But why did you leave me in this belief, Douglas? Why did you fill
my heart with wrath against the noble and virtuous queen also?"

"Sire, I dared not reveal the deception to you before you had
sentenced Surrey, for your noble and just moral sense would have
been reluctant to punish him on account of a crime that he had not
committed; and in your first wrath you would also have blamed this
noble woman who has sacrificed herself for her king."

"It is true," said the king, "I should have misjudged this noble
woman, and, instead of thanking her, I should have destroyed her."

"Therefore, my king, I quietly allowed you to make out an order for
the queen's incarceration. But you remember well, sire, I begged you
to return to your apartments before the queen was arrested. Well,
now, there I should have disclosed to you the whole secret, which I
could not tell you in the presence of that woman. For she would die
of shame if she suspected that you knew of her love for the king, so
pure and self-sacrificing, and cherished in such heroic silence."

"She shall never know it, Douglas! But now at length satisfy my
desire. Tell me her name."

"Sire, you have forgiven me, then? You are no longer angry with me
that I dared to deceive you?"

"I am no longer angry with you, Douglas; for you have acted rightly.
The plan, which you have contrived and carried out with such happy
results, was as crafty as it was daring."

"I thank you, sire; and I will now tell you the name. That woman,
sire, who at my wish gave herself up a sacrifice to this adulterous
earl, who endured his kisses, his embraces, his vows of love, in
order to render a service to her king--that woman was my daughter,
Lady Jane Douglas!"

"Lady Jane!" cried the king. "No, no, this is a new deception. That
haughty, chaste, and unapproachable Lady Jane--that wonderfully
beautiful marble statue really has then a heart in her breast, and
that heart belongs to me? Lady Jane, the pure and chaste virgin, has
made for me this prodigious sacrifice, of receiving this hated
Surrey as her lover, in order, like a second Delilah, to deliver him
into my hand? No, Douglas, you are lying to me. Lady Jane has not
done that!"

"May it please your majesty to go yourself and take a look at that
fainting woman, who was to Henry Howard the queen."

The king did not reply to him; but he drew back the curtain and
reentered the cabinet, in which the queen was waiting with John
Heywood.

Henry did not notice them. With youthful precipitation he crossed
the cabinet and the hall. Now he stood by the figure of Geraldine
still lying on the floor.

She was no longer in a swoon. She had long since regained her
consciousness; and terrible were the agonies and tortures that rent
her heart. Henry Howard had incurred the penalty of the headsman's
axe, and it was she that had betrayed him.

But her father had sworn to her that she should save her lover.

She durst not die then. She must live to deliver Henry Howard.

There were burning, as it were, the fires of hell in her poor heart;
but she was not at liberty to heed these pains. She could not think
of herself--only of him--of Henry Howard, whom she must deliver,
whom she must save from an ignominious death.

For him she sent up her fervent prayers to God; for him her heart
trembled with anxiety and agony, as the king now advanced to her,
and, bending down, gazed into her eyes with a strange expression, at
once scrutinizing and smiling.

"Lady Jane," said he then, as he presented her his hand, "arise from
the ground and allow your king to express to you his thanks for your
sublime and wonderful sacrifice! Verily, it is a fair lot to be a
king; for then one has at least the power of punishing traitors, and
of rewarding those that serve us. I have to-day done the one, and I
will not neglect to do the other also. Stand up, then, Lady Jane; it
does not become you to lie on your knees before me."

"Oh, let me kneel, my king," said she, passionately; "let me beseech
you for mercy, for pity! Have compassion, King Henry--compassion on
the anxiety and agony which I endure. It is not possible that this
is all a reality! that this juggling is to be changed into such
terrible earnest! Tell me, King Henry--I conjure you by the agonies
which I suffer for your sake--tell me, what will you do with Henry
Howard? Why have you sent him to the Tower?"

"To punish the traitor as he deserves," said the king, as he cast a
dark and angry look across at Douglas, who had also approached his
daughter, and was now standing close by her.

Lady Jane uttered a heartrending cry, and sank down again, senseless
and completely exhausted.

The king frowned. "It is possible," said he--"and I almost believe
it--that I have been deceived in many ways this evening, and that
now again my guilelessness has been played upon in order to impose
upon me a charming story. However, I have given my word to pardon;
and it shall not be said that Henry the Eighth, who calls himself
God's vicegerent, has ever broken his word; nor even that he has
punished those whom he has assured of exemption from punishment. My
Lord Douglas, I will fulfil my promise. I forgive you."

He extended his hand to Douglas, who kissed it fervently. The king
bent down closer to him. "Douglas," whispered he, "you are as
cunning as a serpent; and I now see through your artfully-woven web!
You wanted to destroy Surrey, but the queen was to sink into the
abyss with him. Because I am indebted to you for Surrey, I forgive
you what you have done to the queen. But take heed to yourself, take
heed that I do not meet you again on the same track; do not ever try
again, by a look, a word, ay, even by a smile, to cast suspicion on
the queen. The slightest attempt would cost you your life! That I
swear to you by the holy mother of God; and you know that I have
never yet broken that oath. As regards Lady Jane, we do not want to
consider that she has misused the name of our illustrious and
virtuous consort in order to draw this lustful and adulterous earl
into the net which you had set for him; she obeyed your orders,
Douglas; and we will not now decide what other motives besides have
urged her to this deed. She may settle that with God and her own
conscience, and it does not behoove us to decide about it."

"But it behooves me, perhaps, my husband, to ask by what right Lady
Jane has dared to appear here in this attire, and to present to a
certain degree a counterfeit of her queen?" asked Catharine in a
sharp tone. "I may well be allowed to ask what has made my maid of
honor, who left the festive hall sick, now all at once so well that
she goes roaming about the castle in the night time, and in a dress
which seems likely to be mistaken for mine? Sire, was this dress
perchance a craftily-devised stratagem, in order to really confound
us with one another? You are silent, my lord and king. It is true,
then, they have wanted to carry out a terrible plot against me; and,
without the assistance of my faithful and honest friend, John
Heywood, who brought me here, I should without doubt be now
condemned and lost, as the Earl of Surrey is."

"Ah, John, it was you then that brought a little light into this
darkness?" cried the king, with a cheerful laugh, as he laid his
hand on Heywood's shoulder. "Now, verily, what the wise and prudent
did not see, that the fool has seen through!"

"King Henry of England," said John Heywood, solemnly, "many call
themselves wise, and yet they are fools; and many assume the mask of
folly, because fools are allowed to be wise."

"Kate," said the king, "you are right; this was a bad night for you,
but God and the fool have saved you and me. We will both be thankful
for it. But it is well if you do as you before wished, and ask and
inquire nothing more concerning the mysteries of this night. It was
brave in you to come here, and I will be mindful of it. Come, my
little queen, give me your arm and conduct me to my apartments. I
tell you, child, it gives me joy to be able to lean on your arm, and
see your dear sprightly face blanched by no fear or terrors of
conscience. Come, Kate, you alone shall lead me, and to you alone
will I trust myself."

"Sire, you are too heavy for the queen," said the fool, as he put
his neck under the other arm. "Let me share with her the burden of
royalty."

"But before we go," said Catharine, "I have, my husband, one
request. Will you grant it?"

"I will grant you everything that you may ask, provided you will not
require me to send you to the Tower."

"Sire, I wish to dismiss my maid of honor, Lady Jane Douglas, from
my service--that is all," said the queen, as her eyes glanced with
an expression of contempt, and yet at the same time of pain, at the
form of her friend of other days, prostrate on the floor.

"She is dismissed!" said the king. "You will choose another maid of
honor to-morrow. Come, Kate!"

And the king, supported by his consort and John Heywood, left the
room with slow and heavy steps.

Earl Douglas watched them with a sullen, hateful expression. As the
door closed after them he raised his arm threateningly toward
heaven, and his trembling lips uttered a fierce curse and
execration.

"Vanquished! vanquished again!" muttered he, gnashing his teeth.
"Humbled by this woman whom I hate, and whom I will yet destroy!
Yes, she has conquered this time; but we will commence the struggle
anew, and our envenomed weapon shall nevertheless strike her at
last!"

Suddenly he felt a hand laid heavily on his shoulder, and a pair of
glaring, flaming eyes gazed at him.

"Father," said Lady Jane, as she threw her right hand threateningly
toward heaven--"father, as true as there is a God above us, I will
accuse you yourself to the king as a traitor--I will betray to him
all your accursed plots--if you do not help me to deliver Henry
Howard!"

Her father looked with an expression almost melancholy in her face,
painfully convulsed and pale as marble. "I will help you!" said he.
"I will do it, if you will help me also, and further my plans."

"Oh, only save Henry Howard, and I will sign myself away to the
devil with my heart's blood!" said Jane Douglas, with a horrible
smile. "Save his life, or, if you have not the power to do that,
then at least procure me the happiness of being able to die with
him."


CHAPTER XXXII.

UNDECEIVED.


Parliament, which had not for a long time now ventured to offer any
further opposition to the king's will--Parliament had acquiesced in
his decree. It had accused Earl Surrey of high treason; and, on the
sole testimony of his mother and his sister, he had been declared
guilty of lese majeste and high treason. A few words of discontent
at his removal from office, some complaining remarks about the
numerous executions that drenched England's soil with blood--that
was all that the Duchess of Richmond had been able to bring against
him. That he, like his father, bore the arms of the Kings of
England--that was the only evidence of high treason of which his
mother the Duchess of Norfolk could charge him. [Footnote: Tytler,
p. 402. Burnet, vol. i, p. 95.]

These accusations were of so trivial a character, that the
Parliament well knew they were not the ground of his arrest, but
only a pretext for it--only a pretext, by which the king said to his
pliant and trembling Parliament: "This man is innocent; but I will
that you condemn him, and therefore you will account the accusation
sufficient."

Parliament had not the courage to oppose the king's will. These
members of Parliament were nothing more than a flock of sheep, who,
in trembling dread of the sharp teeth of the dog, go straight along
the path which the dog shows them.

The king wanted them to condemn the Earl of Surrey, and they
condemned him.

They summoned him before their judgment-seat, and it was in vain
that he proved his innocence in a speech spirited and glowing with
eloquence. These noble members of Parliament would not see that he
was innocent.

It is true, indeed, there were a few who were ashamed to bow their
heads so unreservedly beneath the king's sceptre, which dripped with
blood like a headsman's axe. There were still a few to whom the
accusation appeared insufficient; but they were outvoted; and in
order to give Parliament a warning example, the king, on the very
same day, had these obstinate ones arrested and accused of some
pretended crime. For this people, enslaved by the king's cruelty and
savage barbarity, were already so degenerate and debased in self-
consciousness, that men were always and without trouble found, who,
in order to please the king and his bloodthirstiness and
sanctimonious hypocrisy, degraded themselves to informers, and
accused of crime those whom the king's dark frown had indicated to
them as offenders.

So Parliament had doomed the Earl of Surrey to die, and the king had
signed his death-warrant.

Early next morning he was to be executed; and in the Tower-yard the
workmen were already busy in erecting the scaffold on which the
noble earl was to be beheaded.

Henry Howard was alone in his cell. He had done with life and
earthly things. He had set his house in order and made his will; he
had written to his mother and sister, and forgiven them for their
treachery and accusation; he had addressed a letter to his father,
in which he exhorted him, in words as noble as they were touching,
to steadfastness and calmness, and bade him not to weep for him, for
death was his desire, and the grave the only refuge for which he
longed.

He had then, as we have said, done with life; and earthly things no
longer disturbed him. He felt no regret and no fear. Life had left
him nothing more to wish; and he almost thanked the king that he
would so soon deliver him from the burden of existence.

The future had nothing more to offer him; why then should he desire
it? Why long for a life which could be for him now only an isolated,
desolate, and gloomy one? For Geraldine was lost to him! He knew not
her fate; and no tidings of her had penetrated to him through the
solitary prison walls. Did the queen still live? Or had the king in
his wrath murdered her on that very night when Henry was carried to
the Tower, and his last look beheld his beloved lying at her
husband's feet, swooning and rigid.

What had become of the queen--of Henry Howard's beloved Geraldine?
He knew nothing of her. He had hoped in vain for some note, some
message from her; but he had not dared to ask any one as to her
fate. Perhaps the king desisted from punishing her likewise. Perhaps
his murderous inclination had been satisfied by putting Henry Howard
to death; and Catharine escaped the scaffold. It might, therefore,
have been ruinous to her, had he, the condemned, inquired after her.
Or, if she had gone before him, then he was certain of finding her
again, and of being united with her forevermore beyond the grave.

He believed in a hereafter, for he loved; and death did not affright
him, for after death came the reunion with her, with Geraldine, who
either was already waiting for him there above, or would soon follow
him.

Life had nothing more to offer him. Death united him to his beloved.
He hailed death as his friend and savior, as the priest who was to
unite him to his Geraldine. He heard the great Tower clock of the
prison which with threatening stroke made known the hour; and each
passing hour he hailed with a joyous throb of the heart. The evening
came and deep night descended upon him--the last night that was
allotted to him-the last night that separated him from his
Geraldine.

The turnkey opened the door to bring the earl a light, and to ask
whether he had any orders to give. Heretofore it had been the king's
special command not to allow him a light in his cell; and he had
spent these six long evenings and nights of his imprisonment in
darkness. But to-day they were willing to give him a light; to-day
they were willing to allow him everything that he might still
desire. The life which he must leave in a few hours was to be once
more adorned for him with all charms and enjoyments which he might
ask for. Henry Howard had but to wish, and the jailer was ready to
furnish him everything.

But Henry Howard wished for nothing; he demanded nothing, save that
they would leave him alone-save that they would remove from his
prison this light which dazzled him, and which opposed to his
enrapturing dreams the disenchanting reality.

The king, who had wanted to impose a special punishment in
condemning him to darkness-the king had, contrary to his intention,
become thereby his benefactor. For with darkness came dreams and
fantasies. With the darkness came Geraldine.

When night and silence were ail around him, then there was light
within; and an enchanting whisper and a sweet, enticing voice
resounded within him. The gates of his prison sprang open, and on
the wings of thought Henry Howard soared away from that dismal and
desolate place. On the wings of thought he came to her-to his
Geraldine.

Again she was by him, in the large, silent hall. Again night lay
upon them, like a veil concealing, blessing, and enveloping them;-
and threw its protection over their embraces and their kisses.
Solitude allowed him to hear again the dear music of her voice,
which sang for him so enchanting a melody of love and ecstasy.

Henry Howard must be alone, so that he can hear his Geraldine. Deep
darkness must surround him, so that his Geraldine can come to him.

He demanded, therefore, for his last night, nothing further than to
be left alone, and without a light. The jailer extinguished the
light and left the cell. But he did not shove the great iron bolt
across the door. He did not put the large padlock on it, but he only
left the door slightly ajar, and did not lock it at all.

Henry Howard took no notice of this. What cared he, whether this
gate was locked or no-he who no longer had a desire for life and
freedom!

He leaned back on his seat, and dreamed with eyes open. There below
in the yard they were working on the scaffold which Henry Howard was
to ascend as soon as day dawned. The dull monotony of the strokes of
the hammers fell on his ear. Now and then the torches, which lighted
the workmen at their melancholy task, allowed to shine up into his
cell a pale glimmer of light, which danced on the walls in ghost-
like shapes.

"There are the ghosts of all those that Henry has put to death,"
thought Henry Howard; "they gather around me; like will-o'-the-
wisps, they dance with me the dance of death, and in a few hours I
shall be forever theirs."

The dull noise of hammers and saws continued steadily on, and Henry
Howard sank deeper and deeper in reverie.

He thought, he felt, and desired nothing but Geraldine. His whole
soul was concentrated in that single thought of her. It seemed to
him he could bid his spirit see her, as though he could command his
senses to perceive her. Yes, she was there; he felt-he was conscious
of her presence. Again he lay at her feet, and leaned his head on
her knee, and listened again to those charming revelations of her
love.

Completely borne away from the present, and from existence, he saw,
he felt, only her. The mystery of love was perfected, and, under the
veil of night, Geraldine had again winged her way to him, and he to
her.

A happy smile played about his lips, which faltered forth rapturous
words of greeting. Overcome by a wonderful hallucination, he saw his
beloved approaching him; he stretched out his arms to clasp her; and
it did not arouse him when he felt instead of her only the empty
air.

"Why do you float away from me again, Geraldine?" asked he, in a low
tone. "Wherefore do you withdraw from my arms, to whirl with the
will-o'-the-wisps in the death-dance? Come, Geraldine, come; my soul
burns for you. My heart calls you with its last faltering throb.
Come, Geraldine, oh, come!"

What was that? It was as though the door were gently opened, and the
latch again gently fastened. It was as though a foot were moving
softly over the floor-as though the shape of a human form shaded for
a moment the flickering light which danced around the walls.

Henry Howard saw it not.

He saw naught but his Geraldine, whom he with so much fervency and
longing wished by his side. He spread his arms; he called her with
all the ardor, all the enthusiasm of a lover.

Now he uttered a cry of ecstasy. His prayer of love was answered.
The dream had become a reality. His arms no longer clasped the empty
air; they pressed to his breast the woman whom he loved, and for
whom he was to die.

He pressed his lips to her mouth and she returned his kisses. He
threw his arms around her form, and she pressed him fast, fast to
her bosom.

Was this a reality? Or was it madness that was creeping upon him and
seizing upon his brain, and deceiving him with fantasies so
enchanting?

Henry Howard shuddered as he thought this, and, falling upon his
knees, he cried in a voice trembling with agony and love:
"Geraldine, have pity on me! Tell me that this is no dream, that I
am not mad--that you are really--you are Geraldine--you--the king's
consort, whose knees I now clasp! Speak, oh speak, my Geraldine!"

"I am she!" softly whispered she. "I am Geraldine--am the woman whom
you love, and to whom you have sworn eternal truth and eternal love!
Henry Howard, my beloved, I now remind you of your oath! Your life
belongs to me. This you have vowed, and I now come to demand of you
that which is my own!"

"Ay, my life belongs to you, Geraldine! But it is a miserable,
melancholy possession, which you will call yours only a few hours
longer."

She threw her arms closely around his neck; she raised him to her
heart; she kissed his mouth, his eyes. He felt her tears, which
trickled like hot fountains over his face; he heard her sighs, which
struggled from her breast like death-groans.

"You must not die!" murmured she, amid her tears. "No, Henry, you
must live, so that I too can live; so that I shall not become mad
from agony and sorrow for you! My God, my God, do you not then feel
how I love you? Know you not, then, that your life is my life, and
your death my death?"

He leaned his head on her shoulder, and, wholly intoxicated with
happiness, he scarcely heard what she was speaking.

She was again there! What cared he for all the rest?

"Geraldine," softly whispered he, "do you recollect still how we
first met each other? how our hearts were united in one throb, how
our lips clung to each other in one kiss? Geraldine, my life, my
loved one, we then swore that naught could separate us, that our
love should survive the grave! Geraldine, do you remember that
still?"

"I remember it, my Henry! But you shall not die yet; and not in
death, but in life, shall your love for me be proved! Ay, we will
live, live! And your life shall be my life, and where you are, there
will I be also! Henry, do you remember that you vowed this to me
with a solemn oath!"

"I remember it, but I cannot keep my word, my Geraldine! Hear you
how they are sawing and hammering there below? Know you what that
indicates, dearest?"

"I know it, Henry! It is the scaffold that they are building there
below. The scaffold for you and me. For I too will die if you will
not live; and the axe that seeks your neck shall find mine also, if
you wish not that we both live!"

"Do I wish it! But how can we, beloved?"

"We can, Henry, we can! All is ready for the flight! It is all
arranged, everything prepared! The king's signet-ring has opened to
me the gates of the prison; the omnipotence of gold has won over
your jailer. He will not see it, when two persons instead of one
leave this dungeon. Unmolested and without hinderance, we will both
leave the Tower by ways known only to him, over secret corridors and
staircases, and will go aboard a boat which is ready to take us to a
ship, which lies in the harbor prepared to sail, and which as soon
as we are aboard weighs anchor and puts to sea with us. Come, Henry,
come! Lay your arm in mine, and let us leave this prison!"

She threw both her arms around his neck, and drew him forward. He
pressed her fast to his heart and whispered: "Yes, come, come, my
beloved! Let us fly! To you belongs my life, you alone!"

He raised her up in his arms, and hastened with her to the door. He
pushed it hastily open with his foot and hurried forward down the
corridor; but having arrived just at the first turn he reeled back
in horror.

Before the door wore standing soldiers with shouldered arms. There
stood also the lieutenant of the Tower, and two servants behind him
with lighted candles. Geraldine gave a scream, and with anxious
haste rearranged the thick veil that had slipped from her head.

Henry Howard also had uttered a cry, but not on account of the
soldiers and the frustrated flight.

His eyes, stretched wide open, stared at this figure at his side,
now so closely veiled.

It seemed to him as though like a spectre a strange face had risen
up close by him--as though it were not the beloved head of the queen
that rested there on his shoulder. He had seen this face only as a
vision, as the fantasy of a dream; but he knew with perfect
certainty that it was not her countenance, not the countenance of
his Geraldine.

The lieutenant of the Tower motioned to his servants, and they
carried the lighted candles into the earl's cell.

Then he gave Henry Howard his hand and silently led him back into
the prison.

Henry Howard exhibited no reluctance to follow him; but his hand had
seized Geraldine's arm, and he drew her along with him; his eye
rested on her with a penetrating expression, and seemed to threaten
her.

They were now again in the room which they had before left with such
blessed hopes.

The lieutenant of the Tower motioned to the servants to retire, then
turned with solemn earnestness to Earl Surrey.

"My lord," said he, "it is at the king's command that I bring you
these lights. His majesty knows all that has happened here this
night. He knew that a plot was formed to rescue you; and while they
believed they were deceiving him, the plotters themselves were
deceived. They had succeeded under various artful false pretences in
influencing the king to give his signet-ring to one of his lords.
But his majesty was already warned, and he already knew that it was
not a man, as they wanted to make him believe, but a woman, who
came, not to take leave of you, but to deliver you from prison.--My
lady, the jailer whom you imagined that you had bribed was a
faithful servant of the king. He betrayed your plot to me; and it
was I who ordered him to make a show of favoring your deed. You will
not be able to release Earl Surrey; but if such is your command, I
will myself see you to the ship that lies in the harbor for you
ready to sail. No one will hinder you, my lady, from embarking on
it; Earl Surrey is not permitted to accompany you!--My lord, soon
the night is at an end, and you know that it will be your last
night. The king has ordered that I am not to prevent this lady, if
she wishes to spend this night with you in your room. But she is
allowed to do so only on the condition that the lights in your room
remain burning. That is the king's express will, and these are his
own words: 'Tell Earl Surrey that I allow him to love his Geraldine,
but that he is to open his eyes to see her! That he may see, you
will give him a light; and I command him not to extinguish it so
long as Geraldine is with him. Otherwise he may confound her with
another woman; for in the dark one cannot distinguish even a
harlequin from a queen!'--You have now to decide, my lord, whether
this lady remains with you, or whether she goes, and the light shall
be put out!"

"She shall remain with me, and I very much need the light!" said
Earl Surrey; and his penetrating look rested steadily on the veiled
figure, which shook at his words, as if in an ague.

"Have you any other wish besides this, my lord?"

"None, save that I may be left alone with her."

The lieutenant bowed and left the room.

They wore now alone again, and stood confronting each other in
silence. Naught was heard but the beating of their hearts, and the
sighs of anguish that burst from Geraldine's trembling lips.

It was an awful, a terrible pause. Geraldine would gladly have given
her life could she thereby have extinguished the light and veiled
herself in impenetrable darkness.

But the earl would see. With an angry, haughty look, he stepped up
to her, and, as with commanding gesture lie raised his arm,
Geraldine shuddered and submissively bowed her head.

"Unveil your face!" said he, in a tone of command. She did not stir.
She murmured a prayer, then raised her clasped hands to Henry and in
a low moan, said: "Mercy! mercy!"

He extended his hand and seized the veil.

"Mercy!" repeated she, in a voice of still deeper supplication--of
still greater distress.

But he was inexorable. He tore the veil from her face and stared at
her. Then with a wild shriek he reeled back and covered his face
with his hands.

Jane Douglas durst not breathe or stir. She was pale as marble; her
large, burning eyes were fastened with an unutterable expression of
entreaty upon her lover, who stood before her with covered head, and
crushed with anguish. She loved him more than her life, more than
her eternal salvation; and yet she it was that had brought him to
this hour of agony.

At length Earl Surrey let his hands fall from his face, and with a
fierce movement dashed the tears from his eyes.

As he looked at her, Jane Douglas wholly involuntarily sank upon her
knees, and raised her hands imploringly to him. "Henry Howard," said
she, in a low whisper, "I am Geraldine! Me have you loved; my
letters have you read with ecstasy, and to me have you often sworn
that you loved my mind yet more than my appearance. And often has my
heart been filled with rapture, when you told me you would love me
however my face might change, however old age or sickness might
alter my features. You remember, Henry, how I once asked you whether
you would cease to love me, if now God suddenly put a mask before my
face, so that you could not recognize my features. You replied to
me: 'Nevertheless, I should love and adore you; for what in you
ravishes me, is not your face, but you yourself--yourself with your
glorious being and nature. It is your soul and your heart which can
never change, which lie before me like a holy book, clear and
bright!' That was your reply to me then, as you swore to love me
eternally. Henry Howard, I now remind you of your oath! I am your
Geraldine. It is the same soul, the same heart; only God has put a
mask upon my face!"

Earl Surrey had listened to her with eager attention, with
increasing amazement.

"It is she! It is really!" cried he, as she ceased. "It is
Geraldine!"

And wholly overcome, wholly speechless with anguish, he sank into a
seat.

Geraldine flew to him; she crouched at his feet; she seized his
drooping hand and covered it with kisses. And amid streaming tears,
often interrupted by her sighs and her sobs, she recounted to him
the sad and unhappy history of her love; she unveiled before him the
whole web of cunning and deceit, that her father had drawn around
them both. She laid her whole heart open and unveiled before him.
She told him of her love, of her agonies, of her ambition, and her
remorse. She accused herself; but she pleaded her love as an excuse,
and with streaming tears, clinging to his knees, she implored him
for pity, for forgiveness.

He thrust her violently from him, and stood up in order to escape
her touch. His noble countenance glowed with anger: his eyes darted
lightning; his long flowing hair shaded his lofty brow and his face
like a sombre veil. He was beautiful in his wrath, beautiful as the
archangel Michael trampling the dragon beneath his feet. And thus he
bent down his head toward her; thus he gazed at her with flashing
and contemptuous looks.

"I forgive you?" said he. "Never will that be! Ha, shall I forgive
you?--you, who have made my entire life a ridiculous lie, and
transformed the tragedy of my love into a disgusting farce? Oh,
Geraldine, how I have loved you; and now you have become to me a
loathsome spectre, before which my soul shudders, and which I must
execrate! You have crushed my life, and even robbed my death of its
sanctity; for now it is no longer the martyrdom of my love, but only
the savage mockery of my credulous heart. Oh, Geraldine, how
beautiful it would have been to die for you!--to go to death with
your name upon my lips!--to bless you!--to thank you for my happy
lot, as the axe was already uplifted to smite off my head! How
beautiful to think that death does not separate us, but is only the
way to an eternal union; that we should lose each other but a brief
moment here, to find each other again forevermore!"

Geraldine writhed at his feet like a worm trodden upon; and her
groans of distress and her smothered moans were the heartrending
accompaniment of his melancholy words.

"But that is now all over!" cried Henry Howard; and his face, which
was before convulsed with grief and agony, now glowed again with
wrath. "You have poisoned my life and my death; and I shall curse
you for it, and my last word will be a malediction on the harlequin
Geraldine!"

"Have pity!" groaned Jane. "Kill me, Henry; stamp my head beneath
your feet; only let this torture end!"

"Nay, no pity!" yelled he, wildly; "no pity for this impostor, who
has stolen my heart and crept like a thief into my love! Arise, and
leave this room; for you fill me with horror; and when I behold you,
I feel only that I must curse you! Ay, a curse on you and shame,
Geraldine! Curse on the kisses that I have impressed on your lips--
on the tears of rapture that I have wept on your bosom. When I
ascend the scaffold, I will curse you, and my last words shall be:
'Woe to Geraldine!--for she is my murderess!'"

He stood there before her with arm raised on high, proud and great
in his wrath. She felt the destroying lightning of his eyes, though
she durst not look up at him, but lay at his feet moaning and
convulsed, and concealing her face in her veil, as she shuddered at
her own picture.

"And this be my last word to you Geraldine," said Henry Howard,
panting for breath: "Go hence under the burden of my curse, and
live--if you can!"

She unveiled her head, and raised her countenance toward him. A
contemptuous smile writhed about her deathly pale lips. "Live!" said
she. "Have we not sworn to die with each other? Your curse does not
release me from my oath, and when you descend into the grave, Jane
Douglas will stand upon its brink, to wail and weep until you make a
little place for her there below; until she has softened your heart
and you take her again, as your Geraldine, into your grave. Oh,
Henry! in the grave, I no longer wear the face of Jane Douglas--that
hated face, which I would tear with my nails. In the grave, I am
Geraldine again. There I may again lie close to your heart, and
again you will say to me: 'I love not your face and your external
form! I love you yourself; I love your heart and mind; and that can
never change; and can never be otherwise!'"

"Silence!" said he, roughly; "silence, if you do not want me to run
mad! Cast not my own words in my face. They defile me, for falsehood
has desecrated and trodden them in the mire. No! I will not make
room for you in my grave. I will not again call you Geraldine. You
are Jane Douglas, and I hate you, and I hurl my curse upon your
criminal head! I tell you--"

He suddenly paused, and a slight convulsion ran through his whole
frame.

Jane Douglas uttered a piercing scream, and sprang from her knees.

Day had broken; and from the prison-tower sounded the dismal,
plaintive stroke of the death-bell.

"Do you hear, Jane Douglas?" said Surrey. "That bell summons me to
death. You it is that has poisoned my last hour. I was happy when I
loved you. I die in despair, for I despise and hate you."

"No, no, you dare not die!" cried she, clinging to him with
passionate anguish. "You dare not go to the grave with that fierce
curse upon your lips. I cannot be your murderess. Oh, it is not
possible that they will put you to death--you, the beautiful, the
noble and the virtuous Earl Surrey. My God, what have you done to
excite their wrath? You are innocent; and they know it. They cannot
execute you; for it would be murder! You have committed no offence;
you have been guilty of nothing; no crime attaches to your noble
person. It is indeed no crime to love Jane Douglas, and me have you
loved--me alone."

"No, not you," said he proudly; "I have nothing to do with Lady Jane
Douglas. I loved the queen, and I believed she returned my love.
That is my crime."

The door opened: and in solemn silence the lieutenant of the Tower
entered with the priests and his assistants. In the door was seen
the bright-red dress of the headsman, who was standing upon the
threshold with face calm and unmoved.

"It is time!" solemnly said the lieutenant.

The priest muttered his prayers, and the assistants swung their
censers. Without, the death-bell kept up its wail; and from the
court was heard the hum of the mob, which, curious and bloodthirsty
as it ever is, had streamed hither to behold with laughing mouth the
blood of the man who but yesterday was its favorite.

Earl Surrey stood there a moment in silence. His features worked and
were convulsed, and a deathlike pallor covered his cheeks.

He trembled, not at death, but at dying. It seemed to him that he
already felt on his neck the cold broad-axe which that frightful man
there held in his hand. Oh, to die on the battle-field--what a boon
it would have been! To come to an end on the scaffold--what a
disgrace was this!

"Henry Howard, my son, are you prepared to die?" asked the priest.
"Have you made your peace with God? Do you repent of your sins, and
do you acknowledge death as a righteous expiation and punishment? Do
you forgive your enemies, and depart hence at peace with yourself
and with mankind?"

"I am prepared to die," said Surrey, with a proud smile; "the other
questions, my father, I will answer to my God."

"Do you confess that you were a wicked traitor? And do you beg the
forgiveness of your noble and righteous, your exalted and good king,
for the blasphemous injury to his sacred majesty?"

Earl Surrey looked him steadily in the eye. "Do you know what crime
I am accused of?"

The priest cast down his eyes, and muttered a few unintelligible
words.

With a haughty movement of the head, Henry Howard turned from the
priest to the lieutenant of the Tower.

"Do you know my crime, my lord?" said he.

But the lord lieutenant also dropped his eyes, and remained silent.

Henry Howard smiled. "Well, now, I will tell you. I have, as it
becomes me, my father's son, borne the arms of our house on my
shield and over the entrance of my palace, and it has been
discovered that the king bears the same arms that we do. That is my
high treason! I have said that the king is deceived in many of his
servants, and often promotes his favorites to high honors which they
do not deserve. That is my offence against his majesty; and it is
that for which I shall lay my head upon the block. [Footnote: These
two insignificant accusations were the only points that could be
made out against the Earl of Surrey. Upon these charges, brought by
his mother and sister, he was executed.--Tytler, p. 492; Burnet,
vol. I, p. 75; Leti, vol. I, p. 108.] But make yourself easy; I
shall myself add to my crimes one more, so that they may be grievous
enough to make the conscience of the righteous and generous king
quiet. I have given up my heart to a wretched and criminal love, and
the Geraldine whom I have sung in many a poem, and have celebrated
even before the king, was nothing but a miserable coquettish
strumpet!"

Jane Douglas gave a scream, and sank upon the ground as if struck by
lightning.

"Do you repent of this sin, my son?" asked the priest. "Do you turn
your heart away from this sinful love, in order to turn it to God?"

"I not only repent of this love, but I execrate it! and now, my
father, let us go; for you see, indeed, my lord is becoming
impatient. He bears in mind that the king will find no rest until
the Howards also have gone to rest. Ah, King Henry! King Henry! Thou
callest thyself the mighty king of the world, and yet thou tremblest
before the arms of thy subject! My lord, if you go to the king to-
day, give him Henry Howard's greeting; and tell him, I wish his bed
may be as easy to him as the grave will be to me. Now, come, my
lords! It is time."

With head proudly erect and calm step, he turned to the door. But
now Jane Douglas sprang from the ground; now she rushed to Henry
Howard and clung to him with all the might of her passion and agony.
"I leave you not!" cried she, breathless and pale as death. "You
dare not repulse me, for you have sworn that we shall live and die
together."

He hurled her from him in fierce wrath, and drew himself up before
her, lofty and threatening.

"I forbid you to follow me!" cried he, in a tone of command. She
reeled back against the wall and looked at him, trembling and
breathless.

He was still lord over her soul; she was still subject to him in
love and obedience. She could not therefore summon up courage to
defy his command.

She beheld him as he left the room and passed down the corridor with
his dreadful train; she heard their footsteps gradually die away;
and then suddenly in the yard sounded the hollow roll of the drum.

Jane Douglas fell on her knees to pray, but her lips trembled so
much that she could find no words for her prayer.

The roll of the drum ceased in the court below, and only the death-
bell still continued to wail and wail. She heard a voice speaking
loud and powerful words.

It was his voice; it was Henry Howard that was speaking. And now
again the hollow roll of the drums drowned his voice.

"He dies! He dies, and I am not with him!" cried she, with a shriek;
and she gathered herself up, and as if borne by a whirlwind she
dashed out of the room, through the corridor, and down the stairs.

There she stood in the court. That dreadful black pile above there,
in the midst of this square crowded with men--that was the scaffold.
Yonder she beheld him prostrate on his knees. She beheld the axe in
the headsman's hand; she saw him raise it for the fatal stroke.

She was a woman no longer, but a lioness! Not a drop of blood was in
her cheeks. Her nostrils were expanded and her eyes darted
lightning.

She drew out a dagger that she had concealed in her bosom, and made
a path through the amazed, frightened, yielding crowd.

With one spring she had rushed up the steps of the scaffold. She now
stood by him on the top of it--close by that kneeling figure.

There was a flash through the air. She heard a peculiar whiz--then a
hollow blow. A red vapor-like streak of blood spurted up, and
covered Jane Douglas with its crimson flood.

"I come, Henry, I come!" cried she, with a wild shout. "I shall be
with thee in death!" And again there was a flash through the air. It
was the dagger that Jane Douglas plunged into her heart.

She had struck well. No sound--no groan burst from her lips. With a
proud smile she sank by her lover's headless corpse, and with a last
dying effort she said to the horrified headsman: "Let me share his
grave! Henry Howard, in life and in death I am with thee!"


CHAPTER XXXIII.

NEW INTRIGUES.


Henry Howard was dead; and now one would have thought the king might
be satisfied and quiet, and that sleep would no longer flee from his
eyelids, since Henry Howard, his great rival, had closed his eyes
forever; since Henry Howard was no longer there, to steal away his
crown, to fill the world with the glory of his deeds, to dim the
genius of the king by his own fame as a poet.

But the king was still dissatisfied. Sleep still fled from his
couch.

The cause of this was that his work was only just half done. Henry
Howard's father, the Duke of Norfolk, still lived. The cause of this
was, that the king was always obliged to think of this powerful
rival; and these thoughts chased sleep from his eyelids. His soul
was sick of the Howards; therefore his body suffered such terrible
pains. If the Duke of Norfolk would close his eyes in death, then
would the king also be able to close his again in refreshing sleep!
But this court of peers--and only by such a court could the duke be
judged--this court of peers was so slow and deliberate! It worked
far less rapidly, and was not near so serviceable, as the Parliament
which had so quickly condemned Henry Howard. Why must the old Howard
bear a ducal title? Why was he not like his son, only an earl, so
that the obedient Parliament might condemn him?

That was the king's inextinguishable grief, his gnawing pain, which
made him raving with fury and heated his blood, and thereby
increased the pains of his body.

He raved and roared with impatience. Through the halls of his palace
resounded his savage vituperation. It made every one tremble and
quake, for no one was sure that it was not he that was to fall that
day a victim to the king's fury. No one could know whether the
king's ever-increasing thirst for blood would not that day doom him.

With the most jealous strictness the king, from his sick-couch,
watched over his royal dignity; and the least fault against that
might arouse his wrath and bloodthirstiness. Woe to those who wanted
still to maintain that the pope was the head of the Church! Woe to
those who ventured to call God the only Lord of the Church, and
honored not the king as the Church's holy protector! The one, like
the other, were traitors and sinners, and he had Protestants and
Roman Catholics alike executed, however near they stood to his own
person, and however closely he was otherwise bound to them.

Whoever, therefore, could avoid it, kept himself far from the
dreaded person of the king; and whoever was constrained by duty to
be near him, trembled for his life, and commended his soul to God.

There were only four persons who did not fear the king, and who
seemed to be safe from his destroying wrath. There was the queen,
who nursed him with devoted attention, and John Heywood, who with
untiring zeal sustained Catharine in her difficult task, and who
still sometimes succeeded in winning a smile from the king. There
were, furthermore, Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, and Earl Douglas.

Lady Jane Douglas was dead. The king had therefore forgiven her
father, and again shown himself gracious and friendly to the deeply-
bowed earl. Besides, it was such an agreeable and refreshing feeling
to the suffering king to have some one about him who suffered yet
more than he himself! It comforted him to know that there could be
agonies yet more horrible than those pains of the body under which
he languished. Earl Douglas suffered these agonies; and the king saw
with a kind of delight how his hair turned daily more gray, and his
features became more relaxed and feeble. Douglas was younger than
the king, and yet how old and gray his face was beside the king's
well-fed and blooming countenance!

Could the king have seen the bottom of his soul, he would have had
less sympathy with Earl Douglas's sorrow.

He considered him only as a tender father mourning the death of his
only child. He did not suspect that it was less the father that
Jane's painful death had smitten, than the ambitious man, the
fanatical Roman Catholic, the enthusiastic disciple of Loyola, who
with dismay saw all his plans frustrated, and the moment drawing
nigh when he would be divested of that power and consideration which
he enjoyed in the secret league of the disciples of Jesus. With him,
therefore, it was less the daughter, for whom he mourned, than the
king's seventh wife. And that Catharine wore the crown, and not his
daughter--not Jane Douglas--his it was that he could never forgive
the queen.

He wanted to take vengeance on the queen for Jane's death; he wanted
to punish Catharine for his frustrated hopes, for his desires that
she had trampled upon. But Earl Douglas durst not himself venture to
make another attempt to prejudice the king's mind against his
consort. Henry had interdicted him from it under the penalty of his
wrath. With words of threatening, he had warned him from such an
attempt; and Earl Douglas very well knew that King Henry was
inflexible in his determination, when the matter under consideration
was the execution of a threatened punishment, Yet what Douglas durst
not venture, that Gardiner could venture--Gardiner, who, thanks to
the capriciousness of the sick king, had for the few days past
enjoyed again the royal favor so unreservedly that the noble
Archbishop Cranmer had received orders to leave the court and retire
to his episcopal residence at Lambeth.

Catharine had seen him depart with anxious forebodings; for Cranmer
had ever been her friend and her support. His mild and serene
countenance had ever been to her like a star of peace in the midst
of this tempest-tossed and passion-lashed court life; and his gentle
and noble words had always fallen like a soothing balm on her poor
trembling heart.

She felt that with his departure she lost her noblest support, her
strengthening aid, and that she was now surrounded only by enemies
and opponents. True, she still had John Heywood, the faithful
friend, the indefatigable servant; but since Gardiner had exercised
his sinister influence over the king's mind, John Heywood durst
scarcely risk himself in Henry's presence. True, she had also Thomas
Seymour, her lover; but she knew and felt that she was everywhere
surrounded by spies and eavesdroppers, and that now it required
nothing more than an interview with Thomas Seymour--a few tender
words--perchance even only a look full of mutual understanding and
love, in order to send him and her to the scaffold.

She trembled not for herself, but for her lover. That made her
cautious and thoughtful. That gave her courage never to show Thomas
Seymour other than a cold, serious face; never to meet him otherwise
than in the circle of her court; never to smile on him; never to
give him her hand.

She was, however, certain of her future. She knew that a day would
come on which the king's death would deliver her from her burdensome
grandeur and her painful royal crown; when she should be free--free
to give her hand to the man whom alone on earth she loved, and to
become his wife.

She waited for that day, as the prisoner does for the hour of his
release; but like him she knew that a premature attempt to escape
from her dungeon would bring her only ruin and death, and not
freedom.

She must be patient and wait. She must give up all personal
intercourse with her lover; and even his letters John Heywood could
bring her but very seldom, and only with the greatest caution. How
often already had not John Heywood conjured her to give up this
correspondence also! how often had he not with tears in his eyes
besought her to renounce this love, which might one day be her ruin
and her death! Catharine laughed at his gloomy forebodings, and
opposed to his dark prophecies a bravery reliant on the future, the
joyous courage of her love.

She would not die, for happiness and love were awaiting her; she
would not renounce happiness and love, for the sake of which she
could endure this life in other respects--this life of peril, of
resignation, of enmity, and of hatred.

But she wanted to live in order to be happy hereafter. This thought
made her brave and resolute; it gave her courage to defy her enemies
with serene brow and smiling lip; it enabled her to sit with bright
eye and rosy cheeks at the side of her dreaded and severe husband,
and, with cheerful wit and inexhaustible good-humor, jest away the
frown from his brow, and vexation from his soul.

But just because she could do this, she was a dangerous antagonist
to Douglas and Gardiner. Just on that account, it was to be their
highest effort to destroy this beautiful young woman, who durst defy
them and weaken their influence with the king. If they could but
succeed in rendering the king's mind more and more gloomy; if they
could but completely fill him again with fanatical religious zeal;
then, and then only, could they hope to attain their end; which end
was this: to bring back the king as a contrite, penitent, and humble
son of the only saving mother Church, and to make him again, from a
proud, vain, and imperious prince, an obedient and submissive son of
the pope.

The king was to renounce this vain and blasphemous arrogance of
wishing to be himself head of his Church. He was to turn away from
the spirit of novelty and heresy, and again become a faithful and
devout Catholic.

But in order that they might attain this end, Catharine must be
removed from him; he must no longer behold her rosy and beautiful
face, and no longer allow himself to be diverted by her sensible
discourse and her keen wit.

"We shall not be able to overthrow the queen," said Earl Douglas to
Gardiner, as the two stood in the king's anteroom, and as
Catharine's cheerful chit-chat and the king's merry laugh came
pealing to them from the adjoining room. "No, no, Gardiner, she is
too powerful and too crafty. The king loves her very much; and she
is such an agreeable and refreshing recreation to him."

"Just on that account we must withdraw her from him," said Gardiner,
with a dark frown. "He must turn away his heart from this earthly
love; and after we shall have mortified this love in him, this
savage and arrogant man will return to us and to God, contrite and
humble." But we shall not be able to mortify it, friend. It is so
ardent and selfish a love.

"So much the greater will be the triumph, if our holy admonitions
are successful in touching his heart, Douglas. It is true he will
suffer very much if he is obliged to give up this woman. But he
needs precisely this suffering in order to become contrite and
penitent. His mind must first be entirely darkened, so that we can
illuminate it with the light of faith. He must first be rendered
perfectly isolated and comfortless in order to bring him back to the
holy communion of the Church, and to, find him again accessible to
the consolations of that faith which alone can save."

"Ah," sighed Douglas, "I fear that this will be a useless struggle.
The king is so vain of his self-constituted high-priesthood!"

"But he is such a weak man, and such a great sinner!" said Gardiner,
with a cold smile. "He trembles so much at death and God's judgment,
and our holy mother the Church can give him absolution, and by her
holy sacraments render death easy to him. He is a wicked sinner and
has stings of conscience. This it is that will bring him back again
to the bosom of the Catholic Church."

"But when will that come to pass? The king is sick, and any day may
put an end to his life. Woe to us, if he die before he has given the
power into our hands, and nominated us his executors! Woe to us, if
the queen is appointed regent, and the king selects the Seymours as
her ministers! Oh, my wise and pious father, the work that you wish
to do must be done soon, or it must remain forever unaccomplished."

"It shall be done this very day," said Gardiner, solemnly; and
bending down closer to the earl's ear, he continued: "we have lulled
the queen into assurance and self-confidence, and by this means she
shall be ruined this very day. She relies so strongly on her power
over the king's disposition, that she often summons up courage even
to contradict him, and to set her own will in opposition to his.
That shall be her ruin this very day! For mark well, earl; the king
is now again like a tiger that has been long fasting. He thirsts for
blood! The queen has an aversion to human blood, and she is
horrified when she hears of executions. So we must manage that these
opposing inclinations may come into contact, and contend with each
other."

"Oh, I understand now," whispered Douglas; "and I bow in reverence
before the wisdom of your highness. You will let them both contend
with their own weapons."

"I will point out a welcome prey to his appetite for blood, and give
her silly compassion an opportunity to contend with the king for his
prey. Do you not think, earl, that this will be an amusing
spectacle, and one refreshing to the heart, to see how the tiger and
dove struggle with each other? And I tell you the tiger thirsts so
much for blood! Blood is the only balm that he applies to his aching
limbs, and by which alone he imagines that he can restore peace and
courage to his tortured conscience and his dread of death. Ah, ha!
we have told him that, with each new execution of a heretic, one of
his great sins would be blotted out, and that the blood of the
Calvinists serves to wash out of his account-book some of his evil
deeds. He would be so glad to be able to appear pure and guiltless
before the tribunal of his God! Therefore he needs very much
heretical blood. But hark--the hour strikes which summons me to the
royal chamber! There has been enough of the queen's laughing and
chit-chat. We will now endeavor to banish the smile forever from her
face. She is a heretic; and it is a pious work, well pleasing to
God, if we plunge her headlong into ruin!"

"May God be with your highness, and assist you by His grace, that
you may accomplish this sublime work!"

"God will be with us, my son, since for Him it is that we labor and
harass ourselves. To His honor and praise we bring these
misbelieving heretics to the stake, and make the air re-echo with
the agonizing shrieks of those who are racked and tortured. That is
music well pleasing to God; and the angels in heaven will triumph
and be glad when the heretical and infidel Queen Catharine also has
to strike up this music of the damned. Now I go to the holy labor of
love and godly wrath. Pray for me, my son, that I may succeed.
Remain here in the anteroom, and await my call; perhaps we shall
need you. Pray for us, and with us. Ah, we still owe this heretical
queen a grudge for Anne Askew. To-day we will pay her. Then she
accused us, to-day we will accuse her, and God and His host of
saints and angels are with us."

And the pious and godly priest crossed himself, and with head humbly
bowed and a soft smile about his thin, bloodless lips, strode
through the hall in order to betake himself to the king's chamber.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE KING AND THE PRIEST.


"God bless and preserve your majesty!"said Gardiner as he entered,
to the king, who just then was sitting with the queen at the chess-
board. With frowning brow and compressed lips he looked over the
game, which stood unfavorable for him, and threatened him with a
speedy checkmate.

It was not wise in the queen not to let the king win; for his
superstitious and jealous temper looked upon such a won game of
chess as withal an assault on his own person. And he who ventured to
conquer him at chess was always to Henry a sort of traitor that
threatened his kingdom, and was rash enough to attempt to seize the
crown.

The queen very well knew that, but--Gardiner was right--she was too
self-confident. She trusted a little to her power over the king; she
imagined he would make an exception in her favor. And it was so dull
to be obliged ever to be the losing and conquered party at this
game; to permit the king always to appear as the triumphant victor,
and to bestow on his game praise which he did not deserve. Catharine
wanted to allow herself for once the triumph of having beaten her
husband. She fought him man to man; she irritated him by the ever-
approaching danger. The king, who at the beginning had been
cheerful, and laughed when Catharine took up one of his pieces--the
king now no longer laughed. It was no more a game. It was a serious
struggle; and he contended with his consort for the victory with
impassioned eagerness. Catharine did not even see the clouds which
were gathering on the king's brow. Her looks were directed only to
the chess-board; and, breathless with expectation and glowing with
eagerness, she considered the move she was about to make.

But Gardiner was very well aware of the king's secret anger; and he
comprehended that the situation was favorable for him.

With soft, sneaking step he approached the king, and, standing
behind him, looked over the game.

"You are checkmated in four moves, my husband!" said the queen with
a cheerful laugh, as she made her move.

A still darker frown gathered on the king's brow, and his lips were
violently compressed.

"It is true, your majesty," said Gardiner. "You will soon have to
succumb. Danger threatens you from the queen."

Henry gave a start, and turned his face to Gardiner with an
expression of inquiry. In his exasperated mood against the queen,
the crafty priest's ambiguous remark struck him with double
keenness.

Gardiner was a very skilful hunter; the very first arrow that he
shot had hit. But Catharine, too, had heard it whiz. Gardiner's
slow, ambiguous words had startled her from her artless security;
and as she now looked into the king's glowing, excited face, she
comprehended her want of prudence.

But it was too late to remedy it. The king's checkmate was
unavoidable; and Henry himself had already noticed his defeat.

"It is all right!" said the king, impetuously. "You have won,
Catharine, and, by the holy mother of God! you can boast of the rare
good fortune of having vanquished Henry of England!"

"I will not boast of it, my noble husband!" said she, with a smile.
"You have played with me as the lion does with the puppy, which he
does not crush only because he has compassion on him, and he pities
the poor little creature. Lion, I thank you. You have been
magnanimous to-day. You have let me win."

The king's face brightened a little. Gardiner saw it. He must
prevent Catharine from following up her advantage further.

"Magnanimity is an exalted, but a very dangerous virtue," said he,
gravely; "and kings above all things dare not exercise it; for
magnanimity pardons crimes committed, and kings are not here to
pardon, but to punish."

"Oh, no, indeed," said Catharine; "to be able to be magnanimous is
the noblest prerogative of kings; and since they are God's
representatives on earth, they too must exercise pity and mercy,
like God himself."

The king's brow again grew dark, and his sullen looks stared at the
chess-board.

Gardiner shrugged his shoulders, and made no reply. He drew a roll
of papers out of his gown and handed it to the king.

"Sire," said he, "I hope you do not share the queen's views; else it
would be bad for the quiet and peace of the country. Mankind cannot
be governed by mercy, but only through fear. Your majesty holds the
sword in his hands. If you hesitate to let it fall on evil-doers,
they will soon wrest it from your hands, and you will be powerless!"

"Those are very cruel words, your highness!" exclaimed Catharine,
who allowed herself to be carried away by her magnanimous heart, and
suspected that Gardiner had come to move the king to some harsh and
bloody decision.

She wanted to anticipate his design; she wanted to move the king to
mildness. But the moment was unpropitious for her.

The king, whom she had just before irritated by her victory over
him, felt his vexation heightened by the opposition which she
offered to the bishop; for this opposition was at the same time
directed against himself. The king was not at all inclined to
exercise mercy; it was, therefore, a very wicked notion of the
queen's to praise mercy as the highest privilege of princes.

With a silent nod of the head, he took the papers from Gardiner's
hands, and opened them.

"Ah," said he, running over the pages, "your highness is right; men
do not deserve to be treated with mercy, for they are always ready
to abuse it. Because we have for a few weeks lighted no fagot-piles
and erected no scaffolds, they imagine that we are asleep; and they
begin their treasonable and mischievous doings with redoubled
violence, and raise their sinful fists against us, in order to mock
us. I see here an accusation against one who has presumed to say
that there is no king by the grace of God; and that the king is a
miserable and sinful mortal, just as well as the lowest beggar.
Well, we will concede this man his point--we will not be to him a
king by the grace of God, but a king by the wrath of God! We will
show him that we are not yet quite like the lowest beggar, for we
still possess at least wood enough to build a pile of fagots for
him."

And as the king thus spoke, he broke out into a loud laugh, in which
Gardiner heartily chimed.

"Here I behold the indictment of two others who deny the king's
supremacy," continued Henry, still turning over the leaves of the
papers. "They revile me as a blasphemer, because I dare call myself
God's representative--the visible head of His holy Church; they say
that God alone is Lord of His Church, and that Luther and Calvin are
more exalted representatives of God than the king himself. Verily we
must hold our royalty and our God-granted dignity very cheap, if we
should not punish these transgressors, who blaspheme in our sacred
person God Himself."

He continued turning over the leaves. Suddenly a deep flush of anger
suffused his countenance, and a fierce curse burst from his lips. He
threw the paper on the table, and struck it with his clenched fist.
"Are all the devils let loose, then?" yelled he, in wrath. "Does
sedition blaze so wildly in my land, that we have no longer the
power to subdue it? Here a fanatical heretic on the public street
has warned the people not to read that holy book which I myself,
like a well-intentioned and provident father and guardian, wrote for
my people, and gave it them that they might be edified and exalted
thereby. And this book that felon has shown to the people, and said
to them: 'You call that the king's book; and you are right; for it
is a wicked book, a work of hell, and the devil is the king's
sponsor!' Ah, I see well we must again show our earnest and angry
face to this miserable, traitorous rabble, that it may again have
faith in the king. It is a wretched, disgusting, and contemptible
mob--this people! They are obedient and humble only when they
tremble and feel the lash. Only when they are trampled in the dust,
do they acknowledge that we are their master; and when we have
racked them and burnt, they have respect for our excellency. We
must, however, brand royalty on their bodies so that they may be
sensible of it as a reality. And by the eternal God, we will do
that! Give me the pen here that I may sign and ratify these
warrants. But dip the pen well, your highness, for there are eight
warrants, and I must write my name eight times. Ah, ah, it is a hard
and fatiguing occupation to be a king, and no day passes without
trouble and toil!"

"The Lord our God will bless this toil to you!" said Gardiner,
solemnly, as he handed the king the pen.

Henry was preparing to write, as Catharine laid her hand on his, and
checked him.

"Do not sign them, my husband," said she, in a voice of entreaty.
"Oh, by all that is sacred to you, I conjure you not to let yourself
be carried away by your momentary vexation; let not the injured man
be mightier in you than the righteous king. Let the sun set and rise
on your wrath; and then, when you are perfectly calm, perfectly
composed--then pronounce judgment on these accused. For consider it
well, my husband, these are eight death-warrants that you are here
about to sign; and with these few strokes of the pen, you will tear
eight human beings from life, from family, and from the world; you
will take from the mother, her son; from the wife, her husband; and
from the infant children, their father. Consider it, Henry; it is so
weighty a responsibility that God has placed in your hand, and it is
presumptuous not to meet it in holy earnestness and undisturbed
tranquillity of mind."

"Now, by the holy mother!" cried the king, striking vehemently upon
the table, "I believe, forsooth, you dare excuse traitors and
blasphemers of their king! You have not heard then of what they are
accused?"

"I have heard it," said Catharine, more and more warmly; "I have
heard, and I say, nevertheless, sign not those death-warrants, my
husband. It is true these poor creatures have grievously erred, but
they erred as human beings. Then let your punishment also be human.
It is not wise, O king, to want to avenge so bitterly a trifling
injury to your majesty. A king must be exalted above reviling and
calumny. Like the sun, he must shine upon the just and the unjust,
no one of whom is so mighty that he can cloud his splendor and dim
his glory. Punish evil-doers and criminals, but be noble and
magnanimous toward those who have injured your person."

"The king is no person that can be injured!" said Gardiner. "The
king is a sublime idea, a mighty, world-embracing thought. Whoever
injures the king, has not injured a person, but a divinely
instituted royalty--the universal thought that holds together the
whole world!"

"Whoever injures the king has injured God!" yelled the king; "and
whoever seizes our crown and reviles us, shall have his hand struck
off, and his tongue torn out, as is done to atheists and
patricides!"

"Well, strike off their hand then, mutilate them; but do not kill
them!" cried Catharine, passionately. "Ascertain at least whether
their crime is so grievous as they want to make you believe, my
husband. Oh, it is so easy now to be accused as a traitor and
atheist! All that is needed for it is an inconsiderate word, a
doubt, not as to God, but to his priests and this Church which you,
my king, have established; and of which the lofty and peculiar
structure is to many so new and unusual that they ask themselves in
doubt whether that is a Church of God or a palace of the king, and
that they lose themselves in its labyrinthine passages, and wander
about without being able to find the exit."

"Had they faith," said Gardiner, solemnly, "they would not lose
their way; and were God with them, the entrance would not be closed
to them."

"Oh, I well know that YOU are always inexorable!" cried Catharine,
angrily. "But it is not to you either that I intercede for mercy,
but to the king; and I tell you, sir bishop, it would be better for
you, and more worthy of a priest of Christian love, if you united
your prayers with mine, instead of wanting to dispose the king's
noble heart to severity. You are a priest; and you have learned in
your own life that there are many paths that lead to God, and that
we, one and all, doubt and are perplexed which of them is right."

"How!" screamed the king, as he rose from his seat and gazed at
Catharine with angry looks. "You mean, then, that the heretics also
may find themselves on a path that leads to God?"

"I mean," cried she, passionately, "that Jesus Christ, too, was
called an atheist, and executed. I mean that Stephen was stoned by
Paul, and that, nevertheless, both are now honored as saints and
prayed to as such. I mean, that Socrates was not damned because he
lived before Christ, and so could not be acquainted with his
religion; and that Horace and Julius Caesar, Phidias and Plato, must
yet be called great and noble spirits, even though they were
heathen. Yes, my lord and husband, I mean that it behooves us well
to exercise gentleness in matters of religion, and that faith is not
to be obtruded on men by main force as a burden, but is to be
bestowed upon them as a benefit through their own conviction."

"So you do not hold these eight accused to be criminals worthy of
death?" asked Henry with studied calmness, and a composure
maintained with difficulty.

"No, my husband! I hold that they are poor, erring mortals, who seek
the right path, and would willingly travel it; and who, therefore,
ask in doubt all along, 'Is this the right way?'"

"It is enough!" said the king, as he beckoned Gardiner to him, and,
leaning on his arm, took a few steps across the room. "We will speak
no more of these matters. They are too grave for us to wish to
decide them in the presence of our gay young queen. The heart of
woman is always inclined to gentleness and forgiveness. You should
have borne that in mind, Gardiner, and not have spoken of these
matters in the queen's presence."

"Sire, it was, however, the hour that you appointed for consultation
on these matters."

"Was it the hour!" exclaimed the king, quickly. "Well, then we did
wrong to devote it to anything else than grave employments; and you
will pardon me, queen, if I beg you to leave me alone with the
bishop. Affairs of state must not be postponed."

He presented Catharine his hand, and with difficulty, and yet with a
smiling countenance, conducted her to the door. As she stopped, and,
looking him in the eye with an expression inquiring and anxious,
opened her lips to speak to him, he made an impatient gesture with
his hand, and a dark frown gathered on his brow.

"It is late," said he, hastily, "and we have business of state."

Catharine did not venture to speak; she bowed in silence and left
the room. The king watched her with sullen brow and angry looks.
Then he turned round to Gardiner.

"Now," asked he, "what do you think of the queen?"

"I think," said Gardiner, so slowly and so deliberately that each
word had time to penetrate the king's sensitive heart like the prick
of a needle--"I think that she does not deem them criminals that
call the holy book which you have written a work of hell; and that
she has a great deal of sympathy for those heretics who will not
acknowledge your supremacy."

"By the holy mother, I believe she herself would speak thus, and
avow herself among my enemies, if she were not my wife!" cried the
king, in whose heart rage began already to seethe like lava in a
volcano.

"She does it already, although she is your wife, sire! She imagines
her exalted position renders her unamenable, and protects her from
your righteous wrath; therefore she does what no one else dares do,
and speaks what in the mouth of any other would be the blackest
treason."

"What does she? and what says she?" cried the king. "Do not hesitate
to tell me, your highness. It behooves me well to know what my wife
does and says."

"Sire, she is not merely the secret patroness of heretics and
reformers, but she is also a professor of their faith. She listens
to their false doctrine with eager mind, and receives the cursed
priests of this sect into her apartments, in order to hear their
fanatical discourse and hellish inspiration. She speaks of these
heretics as true believers and Christians; and denominates Luther
the light that God has sent into the world to illuminate the gloom
and falsehood of the Church with the splendor of truth and love--
that Luther, sire, who dared write you such shameful and insulting
letters, and ridiculed in such a brutal manner your royalty and your
wisdom."

"She is a heretic; and when you say that, you say everything!"
screamed the king. The volcano was ripe for an eruption, and the
seething lava must at last have an outlet. "Yes, she is a heretic!"
repeated the king; "and yet we have sworn to exterminate these
atheists from our land."

"She very well knows that she is secure from your wrath," said
Gardiner, with a shrug of his shoulders. "She relies on the fact
that she is the queen, and that in the heart of her exalted husband
love is mightier than the faith."

"Nobody shall suppose that he is secure from my wrath, and no one
shall rely on the security afforded him by my love. She is a proud,
arrogant, and audacious woman!" cried the king, whose looks were
just then fixed again on the chess-board, and whose spite was
heightened by the remembrance of the lost game. "She ventures to
brave us, and to have a will other than ours. By the holy mother, we
will endeavor to break her stubbornness, and bend her proud neck
beneath our will! Yes, I will show the world that Henry of England
is still the immovable and incorruptible. I will give the heretics
an evidence that I am in reality the defender and protector of the
faith and of religion in my land, and that nobody stands too high to
be struck by my wrath, and to feel the sword of justice on his neck.
She is a heretic; and we have sworn to destroy heretics with fire
and sword. We shall keep our oath."

"And God will bless you with His blessing. He will surround your
head with a halo of fame; and the Church will praise you as her most
glorious pastor, her exalted head."

"Be it so!" said the king, as with youthful alacrity he strode
across the room; and, stepping to his writing-table, with a vigorous
and fleet hand he wrote down a few lines. Gardiner stood in the
middle of the room with his hands folded; and his lips murmured in
an undertone a prayer, while his large flashing eyes were fastened
on the king with a curious and penetrating expression.

"Here, your highness," the king then said, "take this paper--take it
and order everything necessary. It is an arrest-warrant; and before
the night draws on, the queen shall be in the Tower."

"Verily, the Lord is mighty in you!" cried Gardiner, as he took the
paper; "the heavenly hosts sing their hallelujah and look down with
rapture on the hero who subdues his own heart to serve God and the
Church."

"Take it and speed you!" said the king, hastily. "In a few hours
everything must be done. Give Earl Douglas the paper, and bid him go
with it to the lord-lieutenant of the Tower, so that he himself may
repair hither with the yeomen of the guard. For this woman is yet a
queen, and even in the criminal I will still recognize the queen.
The lord-lieutenant himself must conduct her to the Tower. Hasten
then, say I! But, hark you, keep all this a secret, and let nobody
know anything of it till the decisive moment arrives. Otherwise her
friends might take a notion to implore my mercy for this sinner; and
I abhor this whining and crying. Silence, then, for I am tired and
need rest and sleep. I have, as you say, just done a work well
pleasing to God; perhaps He may send me, as a reward for it,
invigorating and strengthening sleep, which I have now so long
desired in vain."

And the king threw back the curtains of his couch, and, supported by
Gardiner, laid himself on the downy cushion.

Gardiner drew the curtains again, and thrust the fatal paper into
his pocket. Even in his hands it did not seem to him secure enough.
What! might not some curious eye fasten on it, and divine its
contents? Might not some impertinent and shameless friend of the
queen snatch this paper from him, and carry it to her and give her
warning? No, no, it was not secure enough in his hands. He must hide
it in the pocket of his gown. There, no one could find it, no one
discover it.

So there he hid it. In the gown with its large folds it was safe;
and, after he had thus concealed the precious paper, he left the
room with rapid strides, in order to acquaint Earl Douglas with the
glorious result of his plans.

Not a single time did he look back. Had he done so, he would have
sprung back into that room as a tiger pounces on his prey. He would
have plunged, as the hawk stoops at the dove, at that piece of white
paper that lay there on the floor, exactly on the spot where
Gardiner was before standing when he placed into his pocket the
arrest-warrant written by the king.

Ah, even the gown of a priest is not always close enough to conceal
a dangerous secret; and even the pocket of a bishop may sometimes
have holes in it.

Gardiner went away with the proud consciousness of having the order
of arrest in his pocket; and that fatal paper lay on the floor in
the middle of the king's chamber.

"Who will come to pick it up? Who will become the sharer of this
dangerous secret? To whom will this mute paper proclaim the shocking
news that the queen has fallen into disgrace, and is this very day
to be dragged to the Tower as a prisoner?

All is still and lonely in the king's apartment. Nothing is
stirring, not even the heavy damask curtains of the royal couch.

The king sleeps. Even vexation and anger are a good lullaby; they
have so agitated and prostrated the king, that he has actually
fallen asleep from weariness.

Ah, the king should have been thankful to his wife for his vexation
at the lost game of chess, and his wrath at Catharine's heretical
sentiments. These had fatigued him; these had lulled him to sleep.

The warrant of arrest still lay on the floor. Now, quite softly,
quite cautiously, the door opens. Who is it that dares venture to
enter the king's room unsummoned and unannounced?

There are only three persons who dare venture that: the queen,
Princess Elizabeth, and John Heywood the fool. Which of the three is
it?

It is Princess Elizabeth, who comes to salute her royal father.
Every forenoon at this hour she had found the king in his room.
Where was he then to-day? As she looked around the room with an
inquiring and surprised air, her eye fell on that paper which lay
there on the floor. She picked it up, and examined it with childish
curiosity. What could this paper contain? Surely it was no secret--
else, it would not lie here on the floor.

She opened it and read. Her fine countenance expressed horror and
amazement; a low exclamation escaped her lips. But Elizabeth had a
strong and resolute soul; and the unexpected and the surprising did
not dull her clear vision, nor cloud her sharp wit. The queen was in
danger. The queen was to be imprisoned. THAT, this dreadful paper
shrieked in her ear; but she durst not allow herself to be stunned
by it. She must act; she must warn the queen.

She hid the paper in her bosom, and light as a zephyr she floated
away again out of the chamber.

With flashing eyes and cheeks reddened by her rapid race Elizabeth
entered the queen's chamber; with passionate vehemence she clasped
her in her arms and tenderly kissed her.

"Catharine, my queen, and my mother," said she, "we have sworn to
stand by and protect each other when danger threatens us. Fate is
gracious to me, for it has given into my hand the means of making
good my oath this very day. Take that paper and read! It is an order
for your imprisonment, made out by the king himself. When you have
read it, then let us consider what is to be done, and how we can
avert the danger from you."

"An order of imprisonment!" said Catharine, with a shudder, as she
read it. "An order of imprisonment--that is to say, a death-warrant!
For when once the threshold of that frightful Tower is crossed, it
denotes that it is never to be left again; and if a queen is
arrested and accused, then is she also already condemned. Oh, my
God, princess, do you comprehend that--to have to die while life
still throbs so fresh and warm in our veins? To be obliged to go to
death, while the future still allures us with a thousand hopes, a
thousand wishes? My God, to have to descend into the desolate prison
and into the gloomy grave, while the world greets us with alluring
voices, and spring-tide has scarcely awoke in our heart!"

Streams of tears burst from her eyes, and she hid her face in her
trembling hands.

"Weep not, queen," whispered Elizabeth, herself trembling and pale
as death. "Weep not; but consider what is to be done. Each minute,
and the danger increases; each minute brings the evil nearer to us."

"You are right," said Catharine, as she again raised her head, and
shook the tears from her eyes. "Yes, you are right; it is not time
to weep and wail. Death is creeping upon me; but I--I will not die.
I live still; and so long as there is a breath in me I will fight
against death. God will assist me; God will help me to overcome this
danger also, as I have already done so many others."

"But what will you do? where can you begin? You know not the
accusation. You know not who accuses you, nor with what you are
charged."

"Yet I suspect it!" said the queen, musingly. "When I now recall to
mind the king's angry countenance, and the malicious smile of that
malignant priest, I believe I know the accusation. Yes--everything
is now clear to me. Ah, it is the heretic that they would sentence
to death. Well, now, my lord bishop, I still live; and--we will see
which of us two will gain the victory!"

With proud step and glowing cheeks she hurried to the door.
Elizabeth held her hack. "Whither are you going?" cried she, in
astonishment.

"To the king!" said she, with a proud smile. "He has heard the
bishop; now he shall hear me also. The king's disposition is fickle
and easily changed. We will now see which cunning is the stronger--
the cunning of the priest or the cunning of the woman. Elizabeth,
pray for me. I go to the king; and you will either see me free and
happy, or never again."

She imprinted a passionate kiss on Elizabeth's lips, and hurriedly
left the chamber.


CHAPTER XXXV.

CHESS-PLAY.


It was many days since the king had been as well as he was to-day.
For a long time he had not enjoyed such refreshing sleep as on the
day when he signed the warrant for the queen's imprisonment. But he
thought nothing at all about it. Sleep seemed to have obliterated
all recollection of it from his memory. Like an anecdote which you
listen to, and smile at for the moment, but soon forget, so had the
whole occurrence vanished again from him. It was an anecdote of the
moment--a transient interlude--nothing further.

The king had slept well, and he had no care for anything else. He
stretched himself, and lay lounging on his couch, thinking with
rapture how fine it would be if he could enjoy such sweet and
refreshing repose every day, and if no bad dreams and no fear would
frighten away sleep from his eyes. He felt very serene and very
good-humored; and had any one now come to beg a favor of the king,
he would have granted it in the first joy after such invigorating
sleep. But he was alone; no one was with him; he must repress his
gracious desires. But no. Was it not as though something were
stirring and breathing behind the curtains? The king threw back the
curtains, and a soft smile flitted over his features; for before his
bed sat the queen. There she sat with rosy cheeks and sparkling
eyes, and greeted him with a roguish smile.

"Ah, Kate, it is you!" cried the king. "Well, now, I understand how
it happened that I have had such a sound and refreshing sleep! You
stood by as my good angel, and scared the pains and bad dreams away
from my couch."

And as he said this, he reached out his hand and tenderly stroked
her velvet cheek. He did not at all recollect that he had already,
as it were, devoted that charming head to the scaffold, and that in
a few hours more those bright eyes were to behold naught but the
night of the dungeon. Sleep, as we have said, had lulled to rest
also the recollection of this; and the evil thoughts had not yet
awoke again in him. To sign an order of arrest or a death-warrant
was with the king such a usual and every-day matter, that it
constituted no epoch in his life, and neither burdened him with
troubles of conscience nor made his heart shudder and tremble.

But Catharine thought of it, and as the king's hand stroked her
cheek, it was as though death were just then touching her, never
again to release her. However, she overcame this momentary horror,
and had the courage to preserve her serene and innocent air.

"You call me your good angel, my husband," said she, with a smile;
"but yet I am nothing more than your little Puck, who bustles about
you, and now and then makes you laugh with his drolleries."

"And a dear little Puck you are, Katie," cried the king, who always
gazed upon his wife's rosy and fresh countenance with real
satisfaction.

"Then I will prove myself this very day your Puck, and allow you no
more repose on your couch," said she, as she made a mock effort to
raise him up. "Do you know, my husband, why I came here? A butterfly
has tapped at my window. Only think now, a butterfly in winter! That
betokens that this time winter is spring; and the clerk of the
weather above there has confounded January with March. The butterfly
has invited us, king; and only see! the sun is winking into the
window to us, and says we have but to come out, as he has already
dried the walks in the garden below, and called forth a little grass
on the plat. And your rolling chair stands all ready, my lord and
husband, and your Puck, as you see, has already put on her furs, and
clad herself in armor against the winter, which, however, is not
there!"

"Well, then, help me, my dearest Puck, so that I can arise, and obey
the command of the butterfly and the sun and my lovely wife," cried
the king, as he put his arm around Catharine's neck, and slowly
raised himself from the couch.

She busied herself about him with officious haste; she put her arm
tenderly on his shoulder and supported him, and properly arranged
for him the gold chain, which had slipped out of place on his
doublet, and playfully plaited the lace ruff which was about his
neck.

"Is it your order, my husband, that your servants come?--the master
of ceremonies, who, without doubt, awaits your back in the anteroom-
-the lord bishop--who a while ago made such a black-looking face at
me? But how! my husband, your face, too, is now in an eclipse? How?
Has your Puck perchance said something to put you out of tune?"

"No, indeed!" said the king, gloomily; but he avoided meeting her
smiling glance and looking in her rosy face.

The evil thoughts had again awoke in him; and he now remembered the
warrant of arrest that he had given Gardiner. He remembered it, and
he regretted it. For she was so fair and lovely--his young queen;
she understood so well by her jests to smooth away care from his
brow, and affright vexation from his soul--she was such an agreeable
and sprightly pastime, such a refreshing means of driving away
ennui.

Not for her sake did he regret what he had done, but only on his own
account. From selfishness alone, he repented having issued that
order for the queen's imprisonment. Catharine observed him. Her
glance, sharpened by inward fear, read his thoughts on his brow, and
understood the sigh which involuntarily arose from his breast.

She again seized courage; she might succeed in turning away by a
smile the sword that hung over her head.

"Come, my lord and husband," said she, cheerfully, "the sun beckons
to us, and the trees shake their heads indignantly because we are
not yet there."

"Yes, come, Kate," said the king, rousing himself with an effort
from his brown study; "come, we will go down into God's free air.
Perhaps He is nearer to us there, and may illuminate us with good
thoughts and wholesome resolutions. Come, Kate."

The queen gave him her arm, and, supported on it, the king advanced
a few steps. But suddenly Catharine stood still; and as the king
fastened on her his inquiring look, she blushed and cast down her
eyes.

"Well!" asked the king, "why do you linger?"

"Sire, I was considering your words; and what you say about the sun
and wholesome resolutions has touched my heart and startled my
conscience. My husband, you are right; God is there without, and I
dare not venture to behold the sun, which is God's eye, before I
have made my confession and received absolution. Sire, I am a great
sinner, and my conscience gives me no rest. Will you be my
confessor, and listen to me?"

The king sighed. "Ah," thought he, "she is hurrying to destruction,
and by her own confession of guilt she will make it impossible for
me to hold her guiltless!"

"Speak!" said he aloud.

"First," said she, with downcast eyes--"first, I must confess to you
that I have to-day deceived you, my lord and king. Vanity and sinful
pride enticed me to this; and childish anger made me consummate what
vanity whispered to me. But I repent, my king; I repent from the
bottom of my soul, and I swear to you, my husband--yes, I swear to
you by all that is sacred to me, that it is the first and only time
that I have deceived you. And never will I venture to do it again,
for it is a dismal and awful feeling to stand before you with a
guilty conscience."

"And in what have you deceived us, Kate?" asked the king; and his
voice trembled.

Catharine drew from her dress a small roll of paper, and, humbly
bowing, handed it to the king. "Take and see for yourself, my
husband," said she.

With hurried hand the king opened the paper, and then looked in
utter astonishment, now at its contents, and now at the blushing
face of the queen.

"What!" said he, "you give me a pawn from the chess-board! What does
that mean?"

"That means," said she, in a tone of utter contrition--"that means,
that I stole it from you, and thereby cheated you out of your
victory. Oh, pardon me, my husband! but I could no longer endure to
lose always, and I was afraid you would no more allow me the
pleasure of playing with you, when you perceived what a weak and
contemptible antagonist I am. And behold, this little pawn was my
enemy! It stood near my queen and threatened her with check, while
it discovered check to my king from your bishop. You were just going
to make this move, which was to ruin me, when Bishop Gardiner
entered. You turned away your eyes and saluted him. You were not
looking on the game. Oh, my lord and husband, the temptation was too
alluring and seductive; and I yielded to it. Softly I took the pawn
from the board, and slipped it into my pocket. When you looked again
at the game, you seemed surprised at first; but your magnanimous and
lofty spirit had no suspicion of my base act; so you innocently
played on; and so I won the game of chess. Oh, my king, will you
pardon me, and not be angry with me?" The king broke out into a loud
laugh, and looked with an expression of tenderness at Catharine, who
stood before him with downcast eyes, abashed and blushing. This
sight only redoubled his merriment, and made him again and again
roar out with laughter.

"And is that all your crime, Kate?" asked he, at length, drying his
eyes. "You have stolen a pawn from me--this is your first and only
deception?"

"Is it not indeed great enough, sire? Did I not purloin it because I
was so high-minded as to want to win a game of chess from you? Is
not the whole court even now acquainted with my splendid luck? And
does it not know that I have been the victor to-day, whilst yet I
was not entitled to be so--whilst I deceived you so shamefully?"

"Now, verily," said the king, solemnly, "happy are the men who are
not worse deceived by their wives than you have deceived me to-day;
and happy are the women whose confessions are so pure and innocent
as yours have been to-day! Do but lift up your eyes again, my Katie;
that sin is forgiven you; and by God and by your king it shall be
accounted to you as a virtue."

He laid his hand on her head, as if in blessing, and gazed at her
long and silently. Then, said he, laughingly:

"According to this, then, my Kate, I should have been the victor of
to-day, and not have lost that game of chess."

"No," said she, dolefully, "I must have lost it, if I had not stolen
the pawn."

Again the king laughed. Catharine said, earnestly:

"Do but believe me, my husband, Bishop Gardiner alone was the cause
of my fall. Because he was by, I did not want to lose. My pride
revolted to think that this haughty and arrogant priest was to be
witness of my defeat. In mind, I already saw the cold and
contemptuous smile with which he would look down on me, the
vanquished; and my heart rose in rebellion at the thought of being
humbled before him. And now I have arrived at the second part of my
fault which I want to confess to you to-day. Sire, I must
acknowledge another great fault to you. I have grievously offended
against you to-day, in that I contradicted you, and withstood your
wise and pious words. Ah, my husband, it was not done to spite you,
but only to vex and annoy the haughty priest. For I must confess to
you, my king, I hate this Bishop of Winchester--ay, yet more--I have
a dread of him; for my foreboding heart tells me that he is my
enemy, that he is watching each of my looks, each of my words, so
that he can make from them a noose to strangle me. He is the evil
destiny that creeps up behind me and would one day certainly destroy
me, if your beneficent hand and your almighty arm did not protect
me.

Oh, when I behold him, my husband, I would always gladly fly to your
heart, and say to you: 'Protect me, my king, and have compassion on
me! Have faith in me and love me; for if you do not, I am lost! The
evil fiend is there to destroy me.'"

And, as she thus spoke, she clung affectionately to the king's side,
and, leaning her head on his breast, looked up to him with a glance
of tender entreaty and touching devotion.

The king bent down and kissed her brow. "Oh, sancta simplicitas,"
softly murmured he--"she knows not how nigh she is to the truth, and
how much reason she has for her evil forebodings!" Then he asked
aloud: "So, Kate, you believe that Gardiner hates you?"

"I do not believe it, I know it!" said she. "He wounds me whenever
he can; and though his wounds are made only with pins, that comes
only from this, that he is afraid that you might discover it if he
drew a dagger on me, whilst you might not notice the pin with which
he secretly wounds me. And what was his coming here to-day other
than a new assault on me? He knows very well--and I have never made
a secret of it--that I am an enemy to this Roman Catholic religion
the pope of which has dared to hurl his ban against my lord and
husband; and that I seek with lively interest to be instructed as to
the doctrine and religion of the so-called reformers."

"They say that you are a heretic," said the king, gravely.

"Gardiner says that! But if I am so, you are so too, my king; for
your belief is mine. If I am so, so too is Cranmer, the noble
Archbishop of Canterbury; for he is my spiritual adviser and helper.
But Gardiner wishes that I were a heretic, and he wants me likewise
to appear so to you. See, my husband, why it was that he laid those
eight death-warrants before you awhile ago. There were eight, all
heretics, whom you were to condemn--not a single papist among them;
and yet I know that the prisons are full of papists, who, in the
fanaticism of their persecuted faith, have spoken words just as
worthy of punishment as those unfortunate ones whom you were to-day
to send from life to death by a stroke of your pen. Sire, I should
have prayed you just as fervently, just as suppliantly, had they
been papists whom you were to sentence to death! But Gardiner wanted
a proof of my heresy; and therefore he selected eight heretics, for
whom I was to oppose your hard decree."

"It is true," said the king, thoughtfully; "there was not a single
papist among them! But tell me, Kate--are you really a heretic, and
an adversary of your king?"

With a sweet smile she looked deep into his eyes, and humbly crossed
her arms over her beautiful breast.

"Your adversary!" whispered she. "Are you not my husband and my
lord? Was not the woman made to be subject to the man? The man was
created after the likeness of God, and the woman after the likeness
of man. So the woman is only the man's second self; and he must have
compassion on her in love; and he must give her of his spirit, and
influence her understanding from his understanding. Therefore your
duty is to instruct me, my husband; and mine is, to learn of you.
And of all the women in the world, to no one is this duty made so
easy as to me; for God has been gracious to me and given me as my
husband a king whose prudence, wisdom, and learning are the wonder
of all the world." [Footnote: The queen's own words, as they have
been given by all historical writers. See on this point Burnet, vol.
I, p. 84; Tytler, p. 413; Larrey's "Histoire d'Angleterre," vol. II,
p. 201; Leti, vol. I, p. 154, (death-sign) Historical. The king's
own words.] "What a sweet little flatterer you are, Kate!" said the
king, with a smile; "and with what a charming voice you want to
conceal the truth from us! The truth is, that you yourself are a
very learned little body, who has no need at all to learn anything
from others, but who would be well able to instruct others."

"Oh, if it is so, as you say," cried Catharine, "well, then would I
teach the whole world to love my king as I do, and to be subject to
him in humility, faithfulness, and obedience, as I am."

And as she thus spoke, she threw both her arms about the king's
neck, and leaned her head with a languishing expression upon his
breast.

The king kissed her, and pressed her fast to his heart. He thought
no longer of the danger that was hovering over Catharine's head; he
thought only that he loved her, and that life would be very
desolate, very tedious and sad without her.

"And now, my husband," said Catharine, gently disengaging herself
from him--"now, since I have confessed to you and received
absolution from you--now let us go down into the garden, so that
God's bright sun may shine into our hearts fresh and glad. Come, my
husband, your chair is ready; and the bees and the butterflies, the
gnats and the flies, have already practised a hymn, with which they
are going to greet you, my husband."

Laughing and jesting, she drew him along to the adjoining room,
where the courtiers and the rolling-chair were standing ready; and
the king mounted his triumphal car, and allowed himself to be rolled
through the carpeted corridors, and down the staircases, transformed
into broad inclined planes of marble, into the garden.

The air had the freshness of winter and the warmth of spring. The
grass like a diligent weaver was already beginning to weave a carpet
over the black level of the square; and already here and there a
tiny blossom, curious and bashful, was peeping out and appeared to
be smiling in astonishment at its own premature existence. The sun
seemed so warm and bright; the heavens were so blue!

At the king's side went Catharine, with such rosy cheeks and
sparkling eyes. Those eyes were always directed to her husband; and
her charming prattle was to the king like the melodious song of
birds, and made his heart leap for pleasure and delight. But how?
What noise all at once drowned Catharine's sweet prattle? And what
was it that flashed up there at the end of that large alley which
the royal pair with their suite had just entered?

It was the noise of soldiers advancing; and shining helmets and
coats-of-mail flashed in the sunlight.

One band of soldiers held the outlet from the alley; another
advanced up it in close order. At their head were seen striding
along Gardiner and Earl Douglas, and at their side the lieutenant of
the Tower.

The king's countenance assumed a lowering and angry expression and
his cheeks were suffused with crimson. With the quickness of youth
he rose from his chair, and, raised to his full height, he looked
with flaming eyes at the procession.

The queen seized his hand and pressed it to her breast.

"Ah," said she, with a low whisper, "protect me, my husband, for
fear already overpowers me again! It is my enemy--it is Gardiner--
that comes, and I tremble."

"You shall no longer tremble before him, Kate!" said the king. "Woe
to them, that dare make King Henry's consort tremble! I will speak
with Gardiner."

And almost roughly pushing aside the queen, the king, utterly
heedless in his violent excitement of the pain of his foot, went in
a quick pace to meet the advancing troop.

He ordered them by his gesture to halt, and called Gardiner and
Douglas to him. "What want you here? And what means this strange
array?" asked he, in a rough tone.

The two courtiers stared at him with looks of amazement, and durst
not answer him.

"Well!" asked the king, with ever-rising wrath, "will you at length
tell me by what right you intrude into my garden with an armed host-
-specially at the same hour that I am here with my consort? Verily,
there is no sufficient excuse for such a gross violation of the
reverence which you owe your king and master; and I marvel, my lord
master of ceremonies, that you did not seek to prevent this
indecorum!"

Earl Douglas muttered a few words of apology, which the king did not
understand, or did not want to understand.

"The duty of a master of ceremonies is to protect his king from
every annoyance, and you, Earl Douglas, offer it to me yourself.
Perchance you want thereby to show that you are weary of your
office. Well, then, my lord, I dismiss you from it, and that your
presence may not remind me of this morning's transaction, you will
leave the court and London! Farewell, my lord!"

Earl Douglas, turning pale and trembling, staggered a few steps
backward, and gazed at the king with astonishment. He wanted to
speak, but Henry, with a commanding wave of the hand, bade him be
silent.

"And now for you, my lord bishop!" said the king, and his eyes were
turned on Gardiner with an expression so wrathful and contemptuous,
that he turned pale and looked down to the ground. "What means this
strange train with which the priest of God approaches his royal
master to-day? And under what impulse of Christian love are you
going to hold to-day a heretic hunt in the garden of your king?"

"Sire," said Gardiner, completely beside himself, "your majesty well
knows why I come; it was at your majesty's command that I with Earl
Douglas and the lieutenant of the Tower came, in order to--"

"Dare not to speak further!" yelled the king, who became still more
angry because Gardiner would not understand him and comprehend the
altered state of his mind. "How dare you make a pretence of my
commands, whilst I, full of just amazement, question you as to the
cause of your appearance? That is to say, you want to charge your
king with falsehood. You want to excuse yourself by accusing me. Ah,
my worthy lord bishop, this time you are thwarted in your plan, and
I disavow you and your foolish attempt. No! there is nobody here
whom you shall arrest; and, by the holy mother of God, were your
eyes not blind, you would have seen that here, where the king is
taking an airing with his consort, there could be no one whom these
catchpolls had to look for! The presence of the royal majesty is
like the presence of God; it dispenses happiness and peace about it;
and whoever is touched by his glory, is graced and sanctified
thereby."

"But, your majesty," screamed Gardiner, whom anger and disappointed
hope had made forgetful of all considerations, "you wanted me to
arrest the queen; you yourself gave me the order for it; and now
when I come to execute your will--now you repudiate me."

The king uttered a yell of rage, and with lifted arm moved some
steps toward Gardiner.

But suddenly he felt his arm held back. It was Catharine, who had
hurried up to the king. "Oh, my husband," said she, in a low
whisper, "whatever he may have done, spare him! Still he is a priest
of the Lord; and so let his sacred robe protect him, though
perchance his deeds condemn him!"

"Ah, do you plead for him?" cried the king. "Really, my poor wife,
you suspect not how little ground you have to pity him, and to beg
my mercy for him. [Footnote: The king's own words,--See Leti, vol.
I, p. 133,] But you are right. We will respect his cassock, and
think no more of what a haughty and intriguing man is wrapped in
it.--But beware, priest, that you do not again remind me of that. My
wrath would then inevitably strike you; and I should have as little
mercy for you as you say I ought to show to other evil-doers. And in
as much as you are a priest, be penetrated with a sense of the
gravity of your office and the sacredness of your calling. Your
episcopal see is at Winchester, and I think your duties call you
thither. We no longer need you, for the noble Archbishop of
Canterbury is coming back to us, and will have to fulfil the duties
of his office near us and the queen. Farewell!"

He turned his back on Gardiner, and, supported on Catharine's arm,
returned to his rolling-chair.

"Kate," said he, "just now a lowering cloud stood in your sky, but,
thanks to your smile and your innocent face, it has passed
harmlessly over. We thinks we still owe you special thanks for this;
and we would like to show you that by some office of love. Is there
nothing that would give you special delight, Kate?"

"Oh, yes," said she, with fervor. "Two great desires burn in my
heart."

"Then name them, Kate; and, by the mother of God, if it is in the
power of a king to fulfil them, I will do it."

Catharine seized his hand and pressed it to her heart.

"Sire," said she, "they wanted to have you sign eight death-warrants
to-day. Oh, my husband, make of these eight criminals eight happy,
thankful subjects; teach them to love that king whom they have
reviled--teach their children, their wives and mothers to pray for
you, whilst you restore life and freedom to these fathers, these
sons and husbands, and while you, great and merciful, like Deity,
pardon them."

"So shall it be!" cried the king, cheerfully. "Our hand shall have
to-day no other work than to rest in yours; and we will spare it
from making these eight strokes of the pen. The eight evil-doers are
pardoned; and they shall be free this very day."

With an exclamation of rapturous delight Catharine pressed Henry's
hand to her lips, and her face shone with pure happiness.

"And your second wish?" asked the king.

"My second wish," said she, with a smile, "pleads for the freedom of
a poor prisoner--for the freedom of a human heart, sire."

The king laughed. "A human heart? Does that then run about on the
street, so that it can be caught and made a prisoner of?"

"Sire, you have found it, and incarcerated it in your daughter's
bosom. You want to put Elizabeth's heart in fetters, and by an
unnatural law compel her to renounce her freedom of choice. Only
think--to want to bid a woman's heart, before she can love, to
inquire first about the genealogical tree, and to look at the coat-
of-arms before she notices the man!"

"Oh, women, women, what foolish children you are, though!" cried the
king, laughingly. "The question is about thrones, and you think
about your hearts! But come, Kate, you shall still further explain
that to me; and we will not take back our word, for we have given it
you from a free and glad heart."

He took the queen's arm, and, supported on it, walked slowly up the
alley with her. The lords and ladies of the court followed them in
silence and at a respectful distance; and no one suspected that this
woman, who was stepping along so proud and magnificent, had but just
now escaped an imminent peril of her life; that this man, who was
leaning on her arm with such devoted tenderness, had but a few hours
before resolved on her destruction. [Footnote: All this plot
instigated by Gardiner against the queen is, in minutest details,
historically true, and is found substantially the same in all
historical works.] And whilst chatting confidentially together they
both wandered through the avenues, two others with drooping head and
pale face left the royal castle, which was to be to them henceforth
a lost paradise. Sullen spite and raging hate were in their hearts,
but yet they were obliged to endure in silence; they were obliged to
smile and to seem harmless, in order not to prepare a welcome feast
for the malice of the court. They felt the spiteful looks of all
these courtiers, although they passed by them with down-cast eyes.
They imagined they heard their malicious whispers, their derisive
laughter; and it pierced their hearts like the stab of a dagger.

At length they had surmounted it--at length the palace lay behind
them, and they were at least free to pour out in words the agony
that consumed them--free to be able to break out into bitter
execrations, into curses and lamentations.

"Lost! all is lost!" said Earl Douglas to himself in a hollow voice.
"I am thwarted in all my plans. I have sacrificed to the Church my
life, my means, ay, even my daughter, and it has all been in vain.
And, like a beggar, I now stand on the street forsaken and without
comfort; and our holy mother the Church will no longer heed the son
who loved her and sacrificed himself for her, since he was so
unfortunate, and his sacrifice unavailing."

"Despair not!" said Gardiner, solemnly. "Clouds gather above us; but
they are dispersed again. And after the day of storm, comes again
the day of light. Our day also will come, my friend. Now, we go
hence, our heads strewn with ashes, and bowed at heart; but, believe
me, we shall one day come again with shining face and exultant
heart; and the flaming sword of godly wrath will glitter in our
hands, and a purple robe will enfold us, dyed in the blood of
heretics whom we offer up to the Lord our God as a well-pleasing
sacrifice. God spares us for a better time; and our banishment,
believe me, friend, is but a refuge that God has prepared for us
this evil time which we are approaching."

"You speak of an evil time, and nevertheless you hope, your
highness?" asked Douglas, gloomily.

"And nevertheless I hope!" said Gardiner, with a strange and
horrible smile, and, bending down closer to Douglas, he whispered:
"the king has only a few days more to live. He does not suspect how
near he is to his death, and nobody has the courage to tell him. But
his physician has confided it to me. His vital forces are consumed,
and death stands already before his door to throttle him."

"And when he is dead," said Earl Douglas, shrugging his shoulders,
"his son Edward will be king, and those heretical Seymours will
control the helm of state! Call you that hope, your highness?"

"I call it so."

"Do you not know that Edward, young as he is, is nevertheless a
fanatical adherent of the heretical doctrine, and at the same time a
furious opponent of the Church in which alone is salvation?"

"I know it, but I know also that Edward is a feeble boy; and there
is current in our Church a holy prophecy which predicts that his
reign is only of short duration. God only knows what his death will
be, but the Church has often before seen her enemies die a sudden
death. Death has been often before this the most effective ally of
our holy mother the Church. Believe me, then, my son and hope, for I
tell you Edward's rule will be of short duration. And after him she
will ascend the throne, the noble and devout Mary, the rigid
Catholic, who hates heretics as much as Edward loves them. Oh,
friend, when Mary ascends the throne, we shall rise from our
humiliation, and the dominion will be ours. Then will all England
become, as it were, a single great temple, and the fagot-piles about
the stake are the altars on which we will consume the heretics, and
their shrieks of agony are the holy psalms which we will make them
strike up to the honor of God and His holy Church. Hope for this
time, for I tell you it will soon come."

"If you say so, your highness, then it will come to pass," said
Douglas, significantly. "I will then hope and wait. I will save
myself from evil days in Scotland, and wait for the good."

"And I go, as this king by the wrath of God has commanded, to my
episcopal seat. The wrath of God will soon call Henry hence. May his
dying hour be full of torment, and may the Holy Father's curse be
realized and fulfilled in him! Farewell! We go with palms of peace
forced on us; but we will return with the naming sword, and our
hands will be dripping with heretic blood."

They once more shook hands and silently departed, and before evening
came on they had both left London. [Footnote: Gardiner's prophecy
was soon fulfilled. A few days after Gardiner had fallen into
disgrace Henry, the Eighth died, and his son Edward, yet a minor,
ascended the throne. But his rule was of brief duration. After a
reign of scarcely six years, he died a youth of the age of sixteen
years, and his sister Mary, called the Catholic, ascended the
throne. Her first act was to release Gardiner, who under Edward's
reign had been confined as a prisoner in the Tower, and to appoint
him her minister, and later, to the place of lord chancellor. He was
one of the most furious persecutors of the Reformers. Once he said
at a council in the presence of the bigoted queen; "These heretics
have a soul so black that it can be washed clean only in their own
blood." He it was, too, who urged the queen to such severe and
odious measures against the Princess Elizabeth, and caused her to be
a second time declared a bastard and unworthy of succeeding to the
throne. When Mary died, Gardiner performed, in Westminster Abbey,
where she was entombed, the service for the dead in the presence of
her successor, Queen Elizabeth. Gardiner's discourse was an
enthusiastic eulogium of the deceased queen, and he set forth, as
her special merit, that she hated the heretics so ardently and had
so many of them executed. He closed with an invective against the
Protestants, in which he so little spared the young queen, and spoke
of her in such injurious terms, that he was that very day committed
to prison.--Leti. vol. I, p. 314.] A short time after this eventful
walk in the garden of Whitehall, the queen entered the apartments of
the Princess Elizabeth, who hastened to meet her with a burst of
joy, and clasped her wildly in her arms.

"Saved!" whispered she. "The danger is overcome, and again you are
the mighty queen, the adored wife!"

"And I have you to thank that I am so, princess! Without that
warrant of arrest which you brought me, I was lost. Oh, Elizabeth,
but what a martyrdom it was! To smile and jest, whilst my heart
trembled with dread and horror; to appear innocent and
unembarrassed, whilst it seemed to me as if I heard already the whiz
of the axe that was about to strike my neck! Oh, my God, I passed
through the agonies and the dread of a whole lifetime in that one
hour! My soul has been harassed till it is wearied to death, and my
strength is exhausted. I could weep, weep continually over this
wretched, deceitful world, in which to wish right and to do good
avail nothing; but in which you must dissemble and lie, deceive and
disguise yourself, if you do not want to fall a victim to wickedness
and mischief. But ah, Elizabeth, even my tears I dare shed only in
secret, for a queen has no right to be melancholy. She must seem
ever cheerful, ever happy and contented; and only God and the still,
silent night know her sighs and her tears."

"And you may let me also see them, queen," said Elizabeth, heartily;
"for you well know you may trust and rely on me."

Catharine kissed her fervently. "You have done me a great service
to-day, and I have come," said she, "to thank you, not with sounding
words only, but by deeds. Elizabeth, your wish will be fulfilled.
The king will repeal the law which was to compel you to give your
hand only to a husband of equal birth."

"Oh," cried Elizabeth, with flashing eyes, "then I shall, perhaps,
some day be able to make him whom I love a king." Catharine smiled.
"You have a proud and ambitious heart," said she. "God has endowed
you with extraordinary ability. Cultivate it and seek to increase
it; for my prophetic heart tells me that you are destined to become,
one day, Queen of England. [Footnote: Catharine's own words.--See
Leti, vol. I, p. 172.] But who knows whether then you will still
wish to elevate him whom you now love, to be your husband? A queen,
as you will be, sees with other eyes than those of a young,
inexperienced maiden. Perchance I may not have done right in moving
the king to alter this law; for I am not acquainted with the man
that you love; and who knows whether he is worthy that you should
bestow on him your heart, so innocent and pure?"

Elizabeth threw both her arms about Catharine's neck, and clung
tenderly to her. "Oh," said she, "he would be worthy to be loved
even by you, Catharine; for he is the noblest and handsomest
cavalier in the whole world; and though he is no king, yet he is a
king's brother-in-law, and will some day be a king's uncle."

Catharine felt her heart, as it were, convulsed, and a slight tremor
ran through her frame. "And am I not to learn his name?" asked she.

"Yes, I will tell you it now; for now there is no longer danger in
knowing it. The name of him whom I love, queen, is Thomas Seymour."

Catharine uttered a scream, and pushed Elizabeth passionately away
from her heart. "Thomas Seymour?" cried she, in a menacing tone.
"What! do you dare love Thomas Seymour?"

"And why should I not dare?" asked the young girl in astonishment.
"Why should I not give him my heart, since, thanks to your
intercession, I am no longer bound to choose a husband of equal
birth? Is not Thomas Seymour one of the first of this land? Does not
all England look on him with pride and tenderness? Does not every
woman to whom he deigns a look, feel herself honored? Does not the
king himself smile and feel more pleased at heart, when Thomas
Seymour, that young, bold, and spirited hero, stands by his side?"

"You are right!" said Catharine, whose heart every one of these
enthusiastic words, lacerated like the stab of a dagger--"yes, you
are right. He is worthy of being loved by you--and you could hit
upon no better choice. It was only the first surprise that made me
see things otherwise than they are. Thomas Seymour is the brother of
a queen: why then should he not also be the husband of a royal
princess?"

With a bashful blush, Elizabeth hid her smiling face in Catharine's
bosom. She did not see with what an expression of alarm and agony
the queen observed her; how her lips were convulsively compressed,
and her cheeks covered with a death-like pallor.

"And he?" asked she, in a low tone. "Does Thomas Seymour love you?"

Elizabeth raised her head and looked at the questioner in amazement
"How!" said she. "Is it possible, then, to love, if you are not
loved?"

"You are right," sighed Catharine. "One must be very humble and
silly to be able to do that."

"My God! how pale you are, queen!" cried Elizabeth, who just now
noticed Catharine's pale face. "Your features are distorted; your
lips tremble. My God! what does this mean?"

"It is nothing!" said Catharine, with a smile full of agony. "The
excitement and alarm of to-day have exhausted my strength. That is
all. Besides, a new grief threatens us, of which you as yet know
nothing. The king is ill. A sudden dizziness seized him, and made
him fall almost lifeless at my side. I came to bring you the king's
message; now duty calls me to my husband's sickbed. Farewell,
Elizabeth."

She waved a good-by to her with her hand, and with hurried step left
the room. She summoned up courage to conceal the agonies of her
soul, and to pass proud and stately through the halls. To the
courtiers bowing before her, she would still be the queen, and no
one should suspect what agony was torturing her within like flames
of fire. But at last arrived at her boudoir--at last sure of being
overheard and observed by no one--she was no longer the queen, but
only the agonized, passionate woman.

She sank on her knees, and cried, with a heart-rending wail of
anguish: "My God, my God, grant that I may become mad, so that I may
no longer know that he has forsaken me!"


CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE CATASTROPHE.


After days of secret torture and hidden tears, after nights of
sobbing anguish and wailing sorrow, Catharine had at last attained
to inward peace; she had at last taken a firm and decisive
resolution.

The king was sick unto death; and however much she had suffered and
endured from him, still he was her husband; and she would not stand
by his deathbed as a perjured and deceitful woman; she would not be
constrained to cast down her eyes before the failing gaze of the
dying king. She would renounce her love--that love, which, however,
had been as pure and chaste as a maiden's prayer--that love, which
was as unapproachably distant as the blush of morn, and yet had
stood above her so vast and brilliant, and had irradiated the gloomy
pathway of her life with celestial light.

She would make the greatest of sacrifices; she would give her lover
to another. Elizabeth loved him. Catharine would not investigate and
thoroughly examine the point, whether Thomas Seymour returned her
love, and whether the oath he had taken to her, the queen, was
really nothing more than a fancy of the brain, or a falsehood. No,
she did not believe it; she did not believe that Thomas Seymour was
capable of treachery, of double-dealing. But Elizabeth loved him;
and she was young and beautiful, and a great future lay before her.
Catharine loved Thomas Seymour strongly enough not to want to
deprive him of this future, but gladly to present herself a
sacrifice to the happiness of her lover. What was she--the woman
matured in grief and suffering--in comparison with this youthful and
fresh blossom, Elizabeth? What had she to offer her beloved further
than a life of retirement, of love, and of quiet happiness? When
once the king is dead and sets her free, Edward the Sixth ascends
the throne; and Catharine then is nothing more than the forgotten
and disregarded widow of a king; while Elizabeth, the king's sister,
may perhaps bring a crown as her dower to him whom she loves.

Thomas Seymour was ambitious. Catharine knew that. A day might come
when he would repent of having chosen the widow of a king instead of
the heiress to a throne.

Catharine would anticipate that day. She would of her own free-will
resign her lover to Princess Elizabeth. She had by a struggle
brought her mind to this sacrifice; she had pressed her hands firmly
on her heart, so as not to hear how it wailed and wept.

She went to Elizabeth, and said to her with a sweet smile: "To-day I
will bring your lover to you, princess. The king has fulfilled his
promise. He has to-day with his last dying strength signed this act,
which gives you liberty to choose your husband, not from the ranks
of princes alone, but to follow your own heart in your choice. I
will give this act to your lover, and assure him of my assistance
and aid. The king is suffering very much to-day, and his
consciousness fails more and more. But be certain, if he is in a
condition to hear me, I will spend all my powers of persuasion in
inclining him to your wish, and in moving him to give his consent to
your marriage with Earl Sudley. I now go to receive the earl. So
tarry in your room, princess, for Seymour will soon come to bring
you the act."

Whilst she thus spoke, it seemed to her as though her heart were
pierced by red-hot daggers; as though a two-edged sword were
cleaving her breast. But Catharine had a strong and courageous soul.
She had sworn to herself to endure this torture to the end; and she
endured it. No writhing of her lips, no sigh, no outcry, betrayed
the pain that she was suffering. And if, indeed, her cheeks were
pale, and her eye dim, they were so because she had spent nights
watching by her husband's sick-bed, and because she was mourning for
the dying king.

She had the heroism to embrace tenderly this young maiden to whom
she was just going to present her love as a sacrifice, and to listen
with a smile to the enthusiastic words of gratitude, of rapture and
expectant happiness which Elizabeth addressed to her.

With tearless eyes and firm step she returned to her own apartments;
and her voice did not at all tremble, as she bade the chamberlain in
attendance to summon to her the master of horse, Earl Sudley. Only
she had a feeling as though her heart was broken and crushed; and
quite softly, quite humbly, she whispered: "I shall die when he is
gone. But so long as he is here, I will live; and he shall not have
a suspicion of what I suffer!"

And while Catharine suffered so dreadfully, Elizabeth was jubilant
with delight and rapture; for at last she stood at the goal of her
wishes, and this very day she was to become the betrothed of her
lover. Oh, how slow and sluggish crept those minutes along! How many
eternities had she still to wait before he would come--he, her
lover, and soon her husband! Was he already with the queen? Could
she expect him already? She stood as if spellbound at the window,
and looked down into the courtyard. Through that great gateway over
there he must come; through that door yonder he must go, in order to
reach the queen's apartments.

She uttered an exclamation, and a glowing blush flitted across her
face. There, there, he was. Yonder drew up his equipage; his gold-
laced lackeys opened the door and he alighted. How handsome he was,
and how magnificent to look upon! How noble and proud his tall
figure! How regularly beautiful his fresh, youthful face! How saucy
the haughty smile about his mouth; and how his eyes flamed and
flashed and shone in wantonness and youthful happiness. His look
glanced for a moment at Elizabeth's window. He saluted her, and then
entered the door leading to the wing of the palace of Whitehall
occupied by the queen. Elizabeth's heart beat so violently that she
felt almost suffocated. Now he must have reached the great
staircase--now he was above it--now he was entering the queen's
apartments--he traverses the first, the second, the third chamber.
In the fourth Catharine was waiting for him.

Elizabeth would have given a year of her life to hear what Catharine
would say to him, and what reply he would make to the surprising
intelligence--a year of her life to be able to see his rapture, his
astonishment, and his delight. He was so handsome when he smiled, so
bewitching when his eyes blazed with love and pleasure.

Elizabeth was a young, impulsive child. She had a feeling as if she
must suffocate in the agony of expectation; her heart leaped into
her mouth; her breath was stifled in her breast, she was so
impatient for happiness.

"Oh, if he does not come soon I shall die!" murmured she. "Oh, if I
could only at least see him, or only hear him!" All at once she
stopped; her eyes flashed up, and a bewitching smile flitted across
her features. "Yes," said she, "I will see him, and I will hear him.
I can do it, and I will do it. I have the key which the queen gave
me, and which opens the door that separates my rooms from hers. With
that key I may reach her bed-chamber, and next to the bed-chamber is
her boudoir, in which, without doubt, she will receive the earl. I
will enter quite softly, and, hiding myself behind the hanging which
separates the bed-chamber from the boudoir, I shall be able to see
him, and hear everything that he says!"

She laughed out loud and merrily, like a child, and sprang for the
key, which lay on her writing-table. Like a trophy of victory she
swung it high above her on her hand and cried, "I will see him!"
Then light, joyful, and with beaming eye, she left the room.

She had conjectured rightly. Catharine received the earl in her
boudoir. She sat on the divan standing opposite the door which led
into the reception-room. That door was open, and so Catharine had a
perfect view of the whole of that large space. She could see the
earl as he traversed it. She could once more enjoy, with a rapture
painfully sweet, his proud beauty, and let her looks rest on him
with love and adoration. But at length he crossed the threshold of
the boudoir; and now there was an end of her happiness, of her sweet
dream, and of her hopes and her rapture. She was nothing more than
the queen, the wife of a dying king; no longer Earl Seymour's
beloved, no longer his future and his happiness.

She had courage to greet him with a smile; and her voice did not
tremble when she bade him shut the door leading into the hall, and
drop the hanging. He did so, gazing at her with looks of surprise.
He did not comprehend that she dared give him an interview; for the
king was still alive, and even with his tongue faltering in death he
might destroy them both.

Why did she not wait till the morrow? On the morrow the king might
be already dead; and then they could see each other without
constraint and without danger. Then was she his, and naught could
longer stand in the way between them and happiness. Now, when the
king was near his death--now he loved her only--he loved but
Catharine. His ambition had decided his heart. Death had become the
judge over Seymour's double affection and divided heart, and with
King Henry's death Elizabeth's star had also paled.

Catharine was the widow of a king; and without doubt this tender
husband had appointed his young and adored wife Regent during the
minority of the Prince of Wales. Catharine then would have still
five years of unlimited sway, of royal authority and sovereign
power. If Catharine were his wife, then would he, Thomas Seymour,
share this power; and the purple robes of royalty, which rested on
her shoulders, would cover him also; and he would help her bear that
crown which doubtless might sometimes press heavily on her tender
brow. He would, in reality, be the regent, and Catharine would be so
only in name. She, the Queen of England, and he, king of this queen.
What a proud, intoxicating thought was that! And what plans, what
hopes might not be twined with it! Five years of sway--was not that
a time long enough to undermine the throne of the royal boy and to
sap his authority? Who could conjecture whether the people, once
accustomed to the regency of the queen, might not prefer to remain
under her sceptre, instead of committing themselves to this feeble
youth? The people must be constrained so to think, and to make
Catharine, Thomas Seymour's wife, their reigning queen.

The king was sick unto death, and Catharine was, without doubt, the
regent--perchance some day the sovereign queen.

Princess Elizabeth was only a poor princess, entirely without a
prospect of the throne; for before her came Catharine, came Edward,
and finally Mary, Elizabeth's eldest sister. Elizabeth had not the
least prospect of the throne, and Catharine the nearest and best
founded.

Thomas Seymour pondered this as he traversed the apartments of the
queen; and when he entered her presence, he had convinced himself
that he loved the queen only, and that it was she alone whom he had
always loved. Elizabeth was forgotten and despised. She had no
prospect of the throne--why, then, should he love her?

The queen, as we have said, ordered him to shut the door of the
boudoir and to drop the hanging. At the same moment that he did
this, the hanging of the opposite door, leading into the sleeping
apartment, moved--perhaps only the draught of the closing door had
done it. Neither the queen nor Seymour noticed it. They were both
too much occupied with themselves. They saw not how the hanging
again and again gently shook and trembled. They saw not how it was
gently opened a little in the middle; nor did they see the sparkling
eyes which suddenly peeped through the opening in the hanging; nor
suspected they that it was the Princess Elizabeth who had stepped
behind the curtain, the better to see and hear what was taking place
in the boudoir.

The queen had arisen and advanced a few steps to meet the earl. As
she now stood before him--as their eyes met, she felt her courage
sink and her heart fail.

She was compelled to look down at the floor to prevent him from
seeing the tears which involuntarily came into her eyes. With a
silent salutation she offered him her hand. Thomas Seymour pressed
it impulsively to his lips, and looked with passionate tenderness
into her face. She struggled to collect all her strength, that her
heart might not betray itself. With a hurried movement she withdrew
her hand from him, and took from the table a roll of paper
containing the new act of succession signed by the king.

"My lord," said she, "I have called you hither, because I would like
to intrust a commission to you. I beg you to carry this parchment to
the Princess Elizabeth, and be pleased to deliver it to her. But
before you do that, I will make you acquainted with its contents.
This parchment contains a new law relative to the succession, which
has already received the sanction of the king. By virtue of this,
the royal princesses are no longer under the necessity of uniting
themselves with a husband who is a sovereign prince, if they wish to
preserve their hereditary claim on the throne unimpaired. The king
gives the princesses the right to follow their own hearts; and their
claim to the succession is not to suffer thereby, if the husband
chosen is neither a king nor a prince. That, my lord, is the
contents of this parchment which you are to carry to the princess,
and without doubt you will thank me for making you the messenger of
these glad tidings."

"And why," asked he, in astonishment--"why does your majesty believe
that this intelligence should fill me with special thankfulness?"

She collected all her powers; she prayed to her own heart for
strength and self-control.

"Because the princess has made me the confidante of her love, and
because I am consequently aware of the tender tie which binds you to
her," said she, gently; and she felt that all the blood had fled
from her cheeks.

The earl looked into her face in mute astonishment. Then his
inquiring and searching glance swept all around the room.

"We are overheard, then?" asked he, in a low voice.

"We are not alone?"

"We are alone," said Catharine, aloud. "Nobody can hear us, and God
alone is witness of our conversation."

Elizabeth, who stood behind the hanging, felt her cheeks glow with
shame, and she began to repent what she had done. But she was
nevertheless, as it were, spellbound to that spot. It was certainly
mean and unworthy of a princess to eavesdrop, but she was at that
time but a young girl who loved, and who wanted to observe her
lover. So she stayed; she laid her hand on her anxiously-throbbing
heart, and murmured to herself: "What will he say? What means this
anxious dread that comes over me?"

"Well," said Thomas Seymour, in an entirely altered tone, "if we are
alone, then this mask which hides my face may fall; then the cuirass
which binds my heart may he loosened. Hail, Catharine, my star and
my hope! No one, you say, hears us, save God alone; and God knows
our love, and He knows with what longing, and what ecstasy, I have
sighed for this hour--for this hour, which at length again unites me
to you. My God, it is an eternity since I have seen you, Catharine;
and my heart thirsted for you as a famishing man for a refreshing
draught. Catharine, my beloved, blessed be you, that you have at
last called me to you!"

He opened his arms for her, but she repulsed him sharply. "You are
mistaken in the name, earl," said she, bitterly. "You say Catharine,
and mean Elizabeth! It is the princess that you love: to Elizabeth
belongs your heart, and she has devoted her heart to you. Oh, earl,
I will favor this love, and be certain I will not cease from prayer
and supplication till I have inclined the king to your wishes, till
he has given his consent to your marriage with the Princess
Elizabeth."

Thomas Seymour laughed. "This is a masquerade, Catharine; and you
still wear a mask over your beautiful and charming face. (Oh, away
with that mask, queen! I want to behold you as you are. I want to
see again your own beautiful self; I want to see the woman who
belongs to me, and who has sworn to be mine, and who has, with a
thousand sacred oaths, vowed to love me, to be true to me, and to
follow me as her husband and her lord. Or how, Catharine! Can you
have forgotten your oath? Can you have become untrue to your own
heart? Do you want to cast me away, and throw me, like a ball of
which you are tired, to another?"

"Oh," said she, quite unconsciously, "I--I can never forget and
never be untrue."

"Well, then, my Catharine, the bride and wife of my future, what
then are you speaking to me of Elizabeth?--of this little princess,
who sighs for love as the flower-bud for the sun, and takes the
first man whom she finds in her way for the sun after which she
pines? What care we for Elizabeth, my Catharine? And what have we to
do with that child in this hour of long-wished-for reunion?"

"Oh, he calls me a child!" murmured Elizabeth. "I am nothing but a
child to him!" And she pressed her hands on her mouth in order to
repress her cry of anger and anguish, and to prevent them from
hearing her teeth, which were chattering as though she were in a
chill.

With irresistible force Thomas Seymour drew Catharine into his arms.
"Avoid me no longer," said he, in tender entreaty. "The hour has
come which is finally to determine our destiny! The king is at the
point of death, and my Catharine will at length be free--free to
follow her own heart. At this hour I remind you of your oath! Do you
remember still that day when you referred me to this hour? Do you
still know, Catharine, how you vowed to be my wife and to receive me
as the lord of your future? Oh, my beloved, that crown which weighed
down your head will soon be taken away. Now I yet stand before you
as your subject, but in a few hours it will be your lord and your
husband that stands before you; and he will ask: 'Catharine, my
wife, have you kept with me the faith you swore to me? Have you been
guiltless of perjury in respect of your vows and your love? Have you
preserved my honor, which is your honor also, clear from every spot;
and can you, free from guilt, look me in the eye?"

He gazed at her with proud, flashing eyes, and before his commanding
look her firmness and her pride melted away like ice before the
sunshine. Again he was the master, whose right it was to rule her
heart; and she again the lowly handmaid, whose sweetest happiness it
was to submit and bow to the will of her lover.

"I can look you frankly in the eye," murmured she, "and no guilt
burdens my conscience. I have loved naught but you, and my God only
dwells near you in my heart." Wholly overcome, wholly intoxicated
with happiness, she leaned her head upon his shoulder, and as he
clasped her in his arms, as he covered with kisses her now
unresisting lips, she felt only that she loved him unutterably, and
that there was no happiness for her except with him.

It was a sweet dream, a moment of most exquisite ecstasy. But it was
only a moment. A hand was laid violently on her shoulder, a hoarse
angry voice called her name; and as she looked up, she encountered
the wild glance of Elizabeth, who stood before her with deathly pale
cheeks, with trembling lips, with expanded nostrils, and eyes
darting flashes of wrath and hatred.

"This, then, is the friendly service which you swore to me?" said
she, gnashing her teeth. "Did you steal into my confidence, and with
scoffing mouth spy out the secrets of my heart, in order to go away
and betray them to your paramour? That you might in his arms
ridicule this pitiable maiden, who allowed herself for the moment to
be betrayed by her heart, and took a felon for an honorable man!
Woe, woe to you, Catharine, for I tell you I will have no compassion
on the adulteress, who mocks at me, and betrays my father!"

She was raving; completely beside herself with anger, she dashed
away the hand which Catharine laid on her shoulder, and sprang back
from the touch of her enemy like an irritated lioness.

Her father's blood fumed and raged within her, and, a true daughter
of Henry the Eighth, she concealed in her heart only bloodthirsty
and revengeful thoughts.

She cast on Thomas Seymour a look of dark wrath, and a contemptuous
smile played about her lips. "My lord," said she, "you have called
me a child who allows herself to be easily deceived, because she
longs so much for the sun and for happiness. You are right: I was a
child; and I was foolish enough to take a miserable liar for a
noble-man, who was worthy of the proud fortune of being loved by a
king's daughter. Yes, you are right; that was a childish dream.
Thanks to you, I have now awoke from it; and you have matured the
child into a woman, who laughs at the folly of her youth, and
despises to-day what she adored yesterday. I have nothing to do with
you; and you are even too insignificant and too contemptible for my
anger. But I tell you, you have played a hazardous game, and you
will lose. You courted a queen and a princess, and you will gain
neither of them: not the one, for she despises you; not the other,
for she ascends the scaffold!"

With a wild laugh she was hurrying to the door, but Catharine with a
strong hand held her back and compelled her to remain. "What are you
going to do?" asked she, with perfect calmness and composure.

"What am I going to do?" asked Elizabeth, her eyes flashing like
those of a lioness. "You ask me what I will do? I will go to my
father, and tell him what I have here witnessed! He will listen to
me; and his tongue will still have strength enough to pronounce your
sentence of death! Oh, my mother died on the scaffold, and yet she
was innocent. We will see, forsooth, whether you will escape the
scaffold--you, who are guilty!"

"Well, then, go to your father," said Catharine; "go and accuse me.
But first you shall hear me. This man whom I loved, I wanted to
renounce, in order to give him to you. By the confession of your
love, you had crushed my happiness and my future. But I was not
angry with you. I understood you heart, for Thomas Seymour is worthy
of being loved. But you are right; for the king's wife it was a
sinful love, however innocent and pure I may have been. On that
account I wanted to renounce it; on that account I wanted, on the
first confession from you, to silently sacrifice myself. You
yourself have now made it an impossibility. Go, then, and accuse us
to your father, and fear not that I will belie my heart. Now, that
the crisis has come, it shall find me prepared; and on the scaffold
I will still account myself blest, for Thomas Seymour loves me!"

"Ay, he loves you, Catharine!" cried he, completely overcome and
enchanted by her noble, majestic bearing.

"He loves you so warmly and ardently, that death with you seems to
him an enviable lot; and he would not exchange it for any throne nor
for any crown."

And as he thus spoke, he put his arms around Catharine's neck, and
impetuously drew her to his heart.

Elizabeth uttered a fierce scream, and sprang to the door. But what
noise was that which all at once drew nigh; which suddenly, like a
wild billow, came roaring on, and filled the anterooms and the
halls? What were these affrighted, shrieking voices calling? What
were they screaming to the queen, and the physicians, and the
priest?

Elizabeth stopped amazed, and listened. Thomas Seymour and
Catharine, arm linked in arm, stood near her. They scarcely heard
what was taking place; they looked at each other and smiled, and
dreamed of love and death and an eternity of happiness.

Now the door flew open; there was seen John Heywood's pale face:
there were the maids of honor and the court officials. And all
shrieked and all wailed: "The king is dying! He is struck with
apoplexy! The king is at the point of death!"

"The king calls you! The king desires to die in the arms of his
wife!" said John Heywood, and, as he quietly pushed Elizabeth aside
and away from the door as she was pressing violently forward, he
added: "The king will see nobody but his wife and the priest; and he
has authorized me to call the queen!"

He opened the door; and through the lines of weeping and wailing
court officials and servants, Catharine moved on, to go to the
death-bed of her royal husband.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

"LE ROI EST MORT--VIVE LA REINE!"


King Henry lay a-dying. That life full of sin, full of blood and
crime, full of treachery and cunning, full of hypocrisy and
sanctimonious cruelty--that life was at last lived out. That hand,
which had signed so many death-warrants, was now clutched in the
throes of death. It had stiffened at the very moment when the king
was going to sign the Duke of Norfolk's death-warrant. [Footnote:
historical. The king's own words.--Leti, vol. I, p. 16.] And the
king was dying with the gnawing consciousness that he had no longer
the power to throttle that enemy whom he hated. The mighty king was
now nothing more than a feeble, dying old man, who was no longer
able to hold the pen and sign this death-warrant for which he had so
long hankered and hoped. Now it lay before him, and he no longer had
the power to use it. God, in His wisdom and His justice, had decreed
against him the most grievous and horrible of punishments; He had
left him his consciousness; He had not crippled him in mind, but in
body only. And that motionless and rigid mass which, growing chill
in death, lay there on the couch of purple trimmed with gold--that
was the king--a king whom agony of conscience did not permit to die,
and who now shuddered and was horrified in view of death, to which
he had, with relentless cruelty, hunted so many of his subjects.

Catharine and the Archbishop of Canterbury, the noble Cranmer, stood
at his bedside: and whilst in convulsive agony he grasped
Catharine's hands, he listened to the devout prayers which Cranmer
was saying over him.

Once he asked with mumbling tongue: "My lord, what kind of a world
then is that where those who condemn others to die, are condemned to
die themselves?"

And as the pious Cranmer, touched by the agonies and tortures of
conscience which he read in the king's looks, and full of pity for
the dying tyrant, sought to comfort him, and spoke to him of the
mercy of God which has compassion on every sinner, the king groaned
out: "No, no! No mercy for him who knew no mercy!"

At length this awful struggle of death with life was ended; and
death had vanquished life. The king had closed his eyes to earth, to
open them again there above, as a guilt-laden sinner in the presence
of God.

For three days his death was kept a secret. They wanted first to
have everything arranged, and to fill up the void which his death
must make. They wanted, when they spoke to the people of the dead
king, to show them also at the same time the living king. And since
they knew that the people would not weep for the dead, they were to
rejoice for the living; since they would sing no funeral psalms,
they were to let their hymns of joy resound.

On the third day the gates of Whitehall were thrown open, and a
gloomy funeral train moved through the streets of London. In dead
silence the populace saw borne past them the coffin of the king,
before whom they had trembled so much, and for whom they now had not
a word of mourning or of pity--no tears for the dead who for seven-
and-thirty years had been their king.

They were bearing the coffin to Westminster Abbey to the splendid
monument which Wolsey had built there for his royal master. But the
way was long, and the panting horses with black housings, which drew
the hearse, had often to stop and rest. And all of a sudden, as the
carriage stood still on one of the large open squares, blood was
seen to issue from the king's coffin. It streamed down in crimson
currents and flowed over the stones of the streets. The people with
a shudder stood around and saw the king's blood flowing, and thought
how much blood he had spilt on that same spot, for the coffin was
standing on the square where the executions were wont to take place,
and where the scaffolds were erected and the stakes set. As the
people stood gazing at the blood which flowed from the king's
coffin, two dogs sprang forth from the crowd and, with greedy
tongue, licked the blood of King Henry the Eighth. But the people,
shuddering and horror-stricken, fled in all directions, and talked
among themselves of the poor priest who a few weeks before was
executed here on this very spot, because he would not recognize the
king as the supreme lord of the Church and God's vicegerent; of that
unfortunate man who cursed the king, and on the scaffold said: "May
the dogs one day drink the blood of this king who has shed so much
innocent blood!" And now the curse of the dying man had found its
fulfilment, and the dogs had drunk the king's blood. [Footnote:
Historical.--See Tytler, p. 481.]

When the gloomy funeral train had left the palace of Whitehall, when
the king's corpse no longer infected the halls with its awful stench
of corruption, and the court was preparing to do homage to the boy
Edward as the new king, Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley, entered the
room of the young royal widow. He came in a magnificent mourning
suit, and his elder brother, Edward Seymour, and Cranmer, archbishop
of Canterbury, walked by his side.

With a blush and a sweet smile, Catharine bade them welcome.

"Queen," said Thomas Seymour with solemn air, "I come to-day to
claim of you the fulfilment of your vow! Oh, do not cast down your
eyes, nor blush for shame. The noble archbishop knows your heart,
and he knows that it is as pure as the heart of a maiden, and that
an unchaste thought has never sullied your pure soul. And my brother
would not be here, had he not faith in and respect for a love which
has preserved itself so faithful and constant amidst storms and
dangers. I have selected these two noble friends as my suitors, and
in their presence I will ask you: 'Queen Catharine, the king is
dead, and no fetters longer bind your heart; will you not give it me
as my own? Will you accept me as your husband, and sacrifice for me
your royal title and your exalted position?'"

With a bewitching smile she gave him her hand. "You well know,"
whispered she, "that I sacrifice nothing for you, but receive from
you all of happiness and love that I hope for."

"Will you then, in the presence of these two friends, accept me as
your future husband, and plight me your vow of truth and love?"

Catharine trembled and cast down her eyes with the bashfulness of a
young girl. "Alas!" whispered she, "do you not then see my mourning
dress? Is it becoming to think of happiness, while the funeral
lamentations have scarcely died away?"

"Queen Catharine," said Archbishop Cranmer, "let the dead bury their
dead! Life also has its rights; and man should not give up his claim
on happiness, for it is a most holy possession. You have endured
much and suffered much, queen, but your heart is pure and without
guilt; therefore you may now, with a clear conscience, bid welcome
to happiness also. Do not delay about it. In God's name I have come
to bless your love, and give to your happiness a holy consecration."

"And I," said Edward Seymour, "I have begged of my brother the honor
of being allowed to accompany him in order to say to your majesty
that I know how to duly appreciate the high honor which you show our
family, and that, as your brother-in-law, I shall ever be mindful
that you were once my queen and I your subject."

"But I," cried Thomas Seymour, "I would not delay coming to you, in
order that I might show you that love only brings me to you, and
that no other consideration could induce me. The king's will is not
yet opened, and I know not its contents. But however it may
determine with respect to all of us, it cannot diminish or increase
my happiness in possessing you. Whatever you may be, you will ever
be to me only the adored woman, the ardently loved wife; and only to
assure you of this, I have come this very day."

Catharine extended her hand to him with a bewitching smile. "I have
never doubted of you, Seymour," whispered she, "and never did I love
you more ardently than when I wanted to renounce you."

She bowed her head on her lover's shoulder, and tears of purest joy
bedewed her cheeks. The Archbishop of Canterbury joined their hands,
and blessed them as betrothed lovers; and the elder Seymour, Earl
Hertford, bowed and greeted them as a betrothed couple.

On that very same day the king's will was opened. In the large
gilded hall, in which King Henry's merry laughter and thundering
voice of wrath had so often resounded, were now read his last
commands. The whole court was assembled, as it was wont to be for a
joyous festival; and Catharine once more sat on the royal throne.
But the dreaded tyrant, the bloodthirsty King Henry the Eighth, was
no longer at her side; but the poor pale boy, Edward, who had
inherited from his father neither energy nor genius, but only his
thirst for blood and his canting hypocrisy. At his side stood his
sisters, the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth. Both were pale and of a
sad countenance; but with both, it was not for their father that
they were grieving.

Mary, the bigoted Roman Catholic, saw with horror and bitter anguish
the days of adversity which were about to befall her church; for
Edward was a fanatical opponent of the Roman Catholic religion, and
she knew that he would shed the blood of the papists with relentless
cruelty. On this account it was that she mourned.

But Elizabeth, that young girl of ardent heart--she thought neither
of her father nor of the dangers threatening the Church; she thought
only of her love, she felt only that she had been deprived of a
hope, of an illusion--that she had awoke from a sweet and enchanting
dream to the rude and barren reality. She had given up her first
love, but her heart bled and the wound still smarted.

The will was read. Elizabeth looked toward Thomas Seymour during
this solemn and portentous reading. She wanted to read in his
countenance the impression made on him by these grave words, so
pregnant with the future; she wanted to search the depths of his
soul, and to penetrate the secret thoughts of his heart. She saw how
he turned pale when, not Queen Catharine, but his brother, Earl
Hertford, was appointed regent during Edward's minority; she saw the
sinister, almost angry look which he threw at the queen; and with a
cruel smile she murmured:

"I am revenged! He loves her no longer!"

John Heywood, who was standing behind the queen's throne, had also
observed the look of Thomas Seymour, yet not like Elizabeth, with a
rejoicing, but with a sorrowful heart, and he dropped his head upon
his breast and murmured: "Poor Catharine! He will hate her, and she
will be very unhappy."

But she was still happy. Her eye beamed with pure delight when she
perceived that her lover was, by the king's will, appointed High
Admiral of England and guardian of the young king. She thought not
of herself, but only of him, of her lover; and it filled her with
the proudest satisfaction to see him invested with places of such
high honor and dignity.

Poor Catharine! Her eye did not see the sullen cloud which still
rested on the brow of her beloved. She was so happy and so innocent,
and so little ambitious! For her this only was happiness, to be her
lover's, to be the wife of Thomas Seymour.

And this happiness was to be hers. Thirty days after the death of
King Henry the Eighth she became the wife of the high admiral,
Thomas Seymour, Earl of Sudley. Archbishop Cranmer solemnized their
union in the chapel at Whitehall, and the lord protector, now Duke
of Somerset, formerly Earl of Hertford, the brother of Thomas
Seymour, was the witness of this marriage, which was, however, still
kept a secret, and of which there were to be no other witnesses.
When, however, they resorted to the chapel for the marriage,
Princess Elizabeth came forward to meet the queen, and offered her
hand.

It was the first time they had met since the dreadful day on which
they confronted each other as enemies--the first time that they had
again seen each other eye to eye.

Elizabeth had wrung this sacrifice from her heart. Her proud soul
revolted at the thought that Thomas Seymour might imagine that she
was still grieving for him, that she still loved him. She would show
him that her heart was entirely recovered from that first dream of
her youth--that she had not the least regret or pain.

She accosted him with a haughty, cold smile, and presented Catharine
her hand. "Queen," said she, "you have so long been a kind and
faithful mother to me, that I may well once more claim the right of
being your daughter. Let me, therefore, as your daughter, be present
at the solemn transaction in which you are about to engage; and
allow me to stand at your side and pray for you, whilst the
archbishop performs the sacred service, and transforms the queen
into the Countess of Sudley. May God bless you, Catharine, and give
you all the happiness that you deserve!"

And Princess Elizabeth knelt at Catharine's side, as the archbishop
blest this new marriage tie. And while she prayed her eye again
glided over toward Thomas Seymour, who was standing there by his
young wife. Catharine's countenance beamed with beauty and
happiness, but upon Thomas Seymour's brow still lay the cloud that
had settled there on that day when the king's will was opened--that
will which did not make Queen Catharine regent, and which thereby
destroyed Thomas Seymour's proud and ambitious schemes.

And that cloud remained on Thomas Seymour's brow. It sank down lower
and still lower. It soon overshadowed the happiness of Catharine's
love, and awakened her from her short dream of bliss.

What she suffered, how much of secret agony and silent woe she
endured, who can wish to know or conjecture? Catharine had a proud
and a chaste soul. She concealed from the world her pain and her
grief, as bashfully as she had once done her love. Nobody suspected
what she suffered and how she struggled with her crushed heart.

She never complained; she saw bloom after bloom fall from her life;
she saw the smile disappear from her husband's countenance; she
heard his voice, at first so tender, gradually harden to harsher
tones; she felt his heart growing colder and colder, and his love
changing into indifference, perhaps even into hate.

She had devoted her whole heart to love, but she felt day by day,
and hour by hour, that her husband's heart was cooling more and
more. She felt, with dreadful heartrending certainty, she was his
with all her love.

But he was no longer hers.

And she tormented her heart to find out why he no longer loved her--
what she had been guilty of, that he turned away from her. Seymour
had not the delicacy and magnanimity to conceal from her his inward
thoughts; and at last she comprehended why he neglected her.

He had hoped that Catharine would be Regent of England, that he then
would be consort of the regent. Because it had not happened so his
love had died.

Catharine felt this, and she died of it. But not suddenly, not at
once, did death release her from her sorrows and racking tortures.
Six months she had to suffer and struggle with them. After six
months she died.

Strange rumors were spread at her death; and John Heywood never
passed by Earl Seymour without gazing at him with an angry look, and
saying: "You have murdered the beautiful queen! Deny it, if you
can!"

Thomas Seymour laughed, and did not consider it worth his while to
defend himself against the accusations of the fool. He laughed,
notwithstanding he had not yet put off the mourning he wore for
Catharine.

In these mourning garments he ventured to approach the Princess
Elizabeth, to swear to her his ardent love, and sue for her hand.
But Elizabeth repelled him with coldness and haughty contempt; and,
like the fool, the princess also said: "You have murdered Catharine!
I cannot be the wife of a murderer!"

And God's justice punished the murderer of the innocent and noble
Catharine; and scarcely three months after the death of his wife,
the high admiral had to ascend the scaffold, and was executed as a
traitor.

By Catharine's wish, her books and papers were given to her true
friend John Heywood, and he undertook with the greatest care an
examination of the same. He found among her papers many leaves
written by herself, many verses and poems, which breathed forth the
sorrowfulness of her spirit. Catharine herself had collected them
into a book, and with her own hand she had given to the book this
title: "Lamentations of a Sinner."

Catharine had wept much as she penned these "Lamentations"; for in
many places the manuscript was illegible, and her tears had
obliterated the characters.

John Heywood kissed the spots where the traces of her tears
remained, and whispered: "The sinner has by her suffering been
glorified into a saint; and these poems are the cross and the
monument which she has prepared for her own grave. I will set up
this cross, that the good may take comfort, and the wicked flee from
it." And he did so. He had the "Lamentations of a Sinner" printed;
and this book was the fairest monument of Catharine.