Very generally the wind-up of the season of fun and frolic consists
of what is called a "Veglione," or "great making a night of it,"
which means a masked ball at the theatre. And the great central
chandelier does not begin to descend into the body of the house, to
have its lights flapped out by the handkerchiefs of the revellers
amid a last frantic rondo, till some four hours after midnight. But
in provincial Ravenna, a Pope's city under the rule of a Cardinal
Legate, there is--or was in the days when the Pope held sway there--
no Veglione. Its place was supplied, as far as "the society" of the
city was concerned, by a ball at the "Circolo dei Nobili."

It was not, therefore, till four o'clock in the morning, or perhaps
even a little later, that the lights would be extinguished on the
night in question at the "Circolo dei Nobili," and Carnival would,
in truth, be over, and the tired holiday-makers would go home to
their beds.

A few hours more remained, and the revelry was at its height, and
the dancers danced as knowing that their minutes were numbered.

There had been a ball on the previous night at the Palazzo of the
Marchese Lamberto di Castelmare. But the scene at the Circolo was a
much more brilliant, animated, and varied one than that of the night
before at the Castelmare palace. The Marchese Lamberto was the
wealthiest noble in Ravenna, and--putting aside his friend the
Cardinal Legate--was, in many other respects, the first and foremost
man of the city. He was a bachelor of some fifty years old. And
bachelors' houses and bachelors' balls have the reputation of
enjoying the privilege of a somewhat freer and more unreserved
gaiety and jollity than those of their neighbours more heavily
weighted with the cares and responsibilities of life. But such was
not the case at the Palazzo Castelmare. Presided over on such
occasions as that of the great annual Carnival ball by a widowed
sister-in-law of the Marchese, the Castelmare palace was the most
decorous and respectable house, as its master was the most decorous
and respectable man, in Ravenna.

Not that it was a dull house. The Marchese Lamberto, though a grave
and dignified personage in the eyes of the "jeunesse doree" of
Ravenna, was looked up to as one of the best loved, as well as most
respected, men in the city. And there was not a member of the
"society" who would not have been sadly hurt at not being invited to
the great annual Carnival ball at the Castelmare palace. But the
same degree of laissez aller jollity would not have been "de mise"
there as was permissible at the Circolo. The fun was not so fast and
furious as it was wont to be at the club of the nobles on the last
night of Carnival.

The whole society were at the latter gathering. All the nobles of
Ravenna were the hosts. and everybody was there solely and entirely
to amuse and enjoy themselves. Host and guests, indeed, were almost
identical. There were but few persons present, and those strangers
to the town, who did not belong to their own class.

To the Marchese, on the previous night, most of the company had
contented themselves with going in "domino." At the Circolo ball a
very large proportion of the dancers were in costume. The Conte
Leandro Lombardoni,--lady-killer, Don Juan, and poet, whose fortunes
and misfortunes in these characters had made him the butt of the
entire society, and had perhaps contributed, together with his well-
known extraordinarily pronounced propensity for cramming himself
with pastry, to give him the pale, puffed, pasty face, swelling
around a pair of pale fish-like eyes, that distinguished him,--the
Conte Leandro Lombardoni; indeed, had gone to the Castelmare palace
as "Apollo," in a costume which young Ludovico Castelmare, the
Marchese Lamberto's nephew, would insist on mistaking for that of
Aesop; and had now, according to a programme perfectly well known
previously throughout the city, come to the Circolo as "Dante." The
Tuscan "lucco," or long flowing gown, had at least the advantage of
concealing from the public eye much that the Apollo costume had
injudiciously exhibited.

Ludovico Castelmare had adopted the costume of a Venetian noble of
the sixteenth century; and very strikingly handsome he looked in
that most picturesque of all dresses. The Marchese Lamberto was at
the ball, of course, but not in costume. Perhaps the most striking
figure in the rooms, however, was one of those few persons who have
been mentioned as present, but not belonging to Ravenna, or to the
class of its nobles. This was a lady, well known at that day
throughout Italy as Bianca Lalli--"La Lalli," or "La Bianca," in
theatrical parlance--for she was one of the first singers of the
day. Special circumstances--to be explained at a future page--had
rendered it possible for remote little Ravenna to secure the
celebrated artist for the Carnival, which was now expiring. The
Marchese Lamberto, who, among many other avocations and occupations,
all of them contributing in some way or other to the welfare and
advantage of his native city, was a great lover and connoisseur of
music, and patron of the theatre, had been mainly instrumental in
bringing La Lalli to Ravenna. The engagement had been a most
successful one. The "Diva Bianca" had sung through the Carnival,
charming all ears and hearts in Ravenna with her voice, and all eyes
with her very remarkable and fascinating beauty. And now, on this
last night of the festive season, she was the cynosure of all eyes
at the ball.

Bianca had, as it so happened, also chosen a Venetian costume of the
same period as that of Ludovico--about the middle of the sixteenth
century. In truth, it was mere chance that had led to this
similarity. And neither of them, as it happened, had mentioned to
the other the dress they intended to wear. Bianca, in fact, used as
she was to wear costumes of all sorts, and to outshine all beauties
near her in all or any of them, had thought nothing about her dress,
till the evening before; and then had consulted the Marchese
Lamberto on the subject: but had been so much occupied with him
during nearly the whole of that evening at his ball, that she had
not said a word about it to any one else.

It could not but seem, however, to everybody that the Marchese
Ludovico and La Lalli had agreed together to represent a pair
belonging to the most gorgeous and picturesque days of Venetian
history. And a most magnificently handsome pair they made. Bianca's
dress, or at least the general appearance and effect of it, will
readily be imagined by those acquainted with the full-length
portraits of Titian or Tintoretto. A more strictly "proper" costume
no lady could wish to wear. And the jeunesse doree of Ravenna, who
had thought it likely that the Diva would appear as some light-
skirted Flora, or high-kirtled Diana, were altogether disappointed.

But there was much joking and raillery about the evident and notable
pair-ship of Ludovico and Bianca; and it came to pass that, almost
without any special intention on their own part, they were thrown
much together, and danced together frequently. And this, under the
circumstances, was still more the case than it would have otherwise
been, in consequence of the Marchese Lamberto not dancing. It was a
long time since he had done so. There were many men dancing less
fitted than he, as far as appearance and capability, and even as far
as years went, to join in such amusements. Nevertheless, all Ravenna
would have been almost as much surprised to see the Marchese
Lamberto dressed in mumming costume, and making one among Carnival
revellers, as to see the Cardinal himself doing the same things. He
had made for himself a social position, and a life so much apart
from any such levities, that his participation in them would have
seemed a monstrosity.

It may be doubted, however, whether on this occasion, at least, the
dignified Marchese was satisfied with the position he had thus made
for himself. It would have been too absurd and remarkable for La
Bianca to have abstained from dancing and attached herself to him in
the ball-room, instead of consorting with the younger folks. Of
course that was entirely out of the question. But none the less for
that was the evening a time of cruel suffering and martyrdom to the
Marchese. Of course he believed that the adoption of so singularly
similar a costume by Bianca and his nephew was the result of pre-
arranged agreement. And the thought, and all that his embittered
fancy built upon the thought, were making everything around him, and
all the prospect of his life before him, utterly intolerable to him.

Ludovico and Bianca had been dancing together for the third time--a
waltz fast and furious, which they had kept up almost incessantly
till the music had ceased. Heated and breathless, he led her out of
the ball-room to get some refreshment. There was a large supper-room
which, on the cessation of the waltz, immediately became crowded by
other couples bent on a similar errand. But there had also been
established a little subsidiary buffet in a small cabinet at the
furthest end of the suite of rooms, for the purpose of drawing off
some of the crowd from the main supper-room. And thither Ludovico
led Bianca, thinking to avoid the crush of people rushing in to the
larger room.

The young Marchese--the "Marchesino," as he was often called, to
distinguish him from his uncle, the Marchese Lamberto--was one of
the small committee of the Circolo, who had had the management of
all the arrangements for the ball; and was, accordingly, well aware
of the whereabouts of this little "succursale" to the supper-room.
But it is probable that the existence of it was unknown to the great
majority of the company. At all events, so it happened, that when
Ludovico and Bianca reached it, it was wholly untenanted, save by
Dante, in his long red gown, solitarily occupied in cramming himself
with pastry.

"What, Dante in exile!" cried Ludovico. "Pray, Sir Poet, which
bolgia was set apart for those who are lost by the `peccato della
gola?' or is a bilious fit in the more immediate future bolgia
fearful enough?"

"It is not so bad a bolgia as that appointed some other sins," said
the Conte Leandro, with mouth stuffed with cake, as he moved out of
room.

"What an animal it is!" said Ludovico, laughing, as he gave Bianca a
glass of champagne, and filled another for himself.

"Take some of this woodcock pie, Signora Bianca? You must be starved
by this time; and I can recommend it."

"How so? You have not tasted it yourself yet."

"No; but I am going to do so. And my recommendation is based on my
knowledge of the qualities of our woodcocks. They are the finest in
the world. The marshes in the neighbourhood of the Pineta breed them
in immense quantities."

"Oh, I have heard so much of the Pineta. They say it is so lovely."

"The most beautiful forest in the world. And this is just the time
when it is in its greatest beauty,--the early spring, when the wild
flowers are all beginning to blossom, and the birds are all singing.
There is nothing like our Pineta!"

"I should so like to see it. It does seem really a shame to leave
Ravenna without ever having seen the Pineta."

"Oh, you must not dream of doing so. You must make a little
excursion one of these fine spring days. It is just the time for it.
Some morning, the earlier the better. But I dare say your habits are
not very matutinal, Signora?"

"Well, not very, for the most part. But I would willingly make them
matutinal for such a purpose at any time. How far is it?"

