Perhaps the snow storm with its bewildering whiteness had turned our
heads a little. That, or something else, started us off, making rhymes.
After great efforts, amidst much laughter and profound knitting of
brows, we produced what, in the innocence of youth, we called a
poem!--an epic, on our adventure. I still preserve the old scrawl of it,
in several different youthful hands, on crumpled sheets of yellowed
paper. It has little value as poesy, but I would not part with it for
autograph copies of the masterpieces of Kipling, or Aldrich.

It must have been akin to snow-madness, for I remember that Thomas who
never attempted a line of poetry before, nor since, led off with the
following stanzas:--

    "Four boys went off to look for sheep,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    And the trouble they had would make you weep,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.

    "They searched the pasture high and low,
    Then to Dunham's Open they tried to go.
    But the sky was dark and the wind did blow
    And the woods was dim with whirling snow.

    "They lost their way and got turned round,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny co'nan.
    It's a wonder now they ever were found.
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.

    "The storm howled round them wild and drear.
    Stoss Pond did then by chance appear.
    They all declared 'twas 'mazing queer.
    'We're lost,' said Captain Ad, 'I fear.'"

Then either Kate or Ellen put forth a fifth and sixth stanza:--

    "But Halse espied an old log camp,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    And into it they all did tramp,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.

    "'Here's beans,' said Tom. 'Here's salt,' said Ad.
    'Boiled beans don't go so very bad,
    When nothing else is to be had.
    Let's eat our beans and not be sad.'"

I cannot say, certainly, who was responsible for these next stanzas, but
the handwriting is a little like my own at that age.

    "They ate their beans and sang a song,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    And wished the night was not so long,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.

    "Said Ad, 'What makes that whining noise?'
    'By jinks!' cried Tom, 'That's Tyro, boys!'
    But when he looked, without a care,
    In crawled a little beezling bear!"

There is a great deal more, not less than twenty stanzas; but a few will
suffice. Besides, too, I shrink from presenting the more faulty ones. To
strangers they will be merely the immature efforts of nameless young
folks; but for me a halo of memories glorifies each halting versicle.
The one where the tree fell runs as follows. It was Addison's; and in
his now distant home, he will anathematize me for exposing his youthful
bad grammar.

    "But the night grew wild and wilder still,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    The forest roared like an old grist-mill,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.

    "At last there came a fearful crack!
    A big pine tree had broke its back.
    Down it fell, with a frightful smack!
    And missed the camp by just a snack!"

Theodora alone made a stanza or two more in keeping with that finer
sentiment which the occasion might have inspired in us.

    "And we who sat and watched at home,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan;
    And wondered why they did not come,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    What dread was ours through that long night,
    That they had perished was our fear,
    Scarce could we check the anxious tear,
    Nor slept at all till morning light.

    "But safe from storm and falling tree,
    Co'day, co'day, co'nanny, co'nan.
    Their faces dear again we see,
    Co'day, co'day co'nanny, co'nan.
    They slept mid perils all unseen,
    Some Guardian Hand protecting well;
    E'en though the mighty tree trunks fell,
    The little camp stood safe between."

After dinner, Mr. Edwards with Asa Doane went after the sheep, and by
tramping a path in advance of the flock, drove them home to the barns.

Next day Asa and Halse took a bushel basket, with a bran sack to tie
over it, and went to Adger's camp, to liberate and fetch home the little
"beezling bear," but found that bruin junior had upset the barrel and
made his escape.

THE END OF BOOK FIRST.



    +---------------------------------------+
    |          Transcriber's Note           |
    |                                       |
    | Page 191 murk changed to Murch        |
    | Page 344 defence changed to defense   |
    | Page 405 offences changed to offenses |
    +---------------------------------------+