'Oh,' said Jane, hoping to make a diversion, 'Wat Greenwood came back
about a quarter of an hour ago, and he--'

Mr. Devereux proceeded without attending to her, 'As I came down the
hill from the club-dinner, old Mrs. Gage came out of Naylor's house,
and her daughter with her, in great anger, calling me to account for
having spoken of her in a most unbecoming way, calling her the sour
Gage, and trying to set the Squire against them.'

'Oh, that abominable chattering woman!' Jane exclaimed; 'and Betsy
Wall too, I saw her all alive about something.  What a nuisance such
people are!'

'In short,' said Mr. Devereux, 'I heard an exaggerated account of all
that passed here on the subject the other day.  Now, Jane, am I doing
you any injustice in thinking that it must have been through you that
this history went abroad into the village?'

'Well,' said Jane, 'I am sure you never told us that it was any
secret.  When a story is openly told to half a dozen people they
cannot be expected to keep it to themselves.'

'I spoke uncharitably and incautiously,' said he, 'I am willing to
confess, but it is nevertheless my duty to set before you the great
matter that this little fire has kindled.'

'Why, it cannot have done any great harm, can it?' asked Jane, the
agitation of her voice and laugh betraying that she was not quite so
careless as she wished to appear.  'Only the sour Gage will ferment a
little.'

'Oh, Jane!  I did not expect that you would treat this matter so
lightly.'

'But tell me, what harm has it done?' asked she.

'Do you consider it nothing that the poor child should remain
unbaptized, that discord should be brought into the parish, that
anger should be on the conscience of your neighbour, that he should
be driven from the church?'

'Is it as bad as that?' said Jane.

'We do not yet see the full extent of the mischief our idle words may
have done,' said Mr. Devereux.

'But it is their own fault, if they will do wrong,' said Jane; 'they
ought not to be in a rage, we said nothing but the truth.'

'I wish I was clear of the sin,' said her cousin.

'And after all,' said Jane, 'I cannot see that I was much to blame; I
only talked to Mrs. Appleton, as I have done scores of times, and no
one minded it.  You only laughed at me on Saturday, and papa and
Eleanor never scolded me.'

'You cannot say that no one has ever tried to check you,' said the
Rector.

'And how was I to know that that mischief-maker would repeat it?'
said Jane.

'I do not mean to say,' said Mr. Devereux, 'that you actually
committed a greater sin than you may often have done, by talking in a
way which you knew would displease your father.  I know we are too
apt to treat lightly the beginnings of evil, until some sudden sting
makes us feel what a serpent we have been fostering.  Think this a
warning, pray that the evil we dread may be averted; but should it
ensue, consider it as a punishment sent in mercy.  It will be better
for you not to come to school to-morrow; instead of the references
you were to have looked out, I had rather you read over in a humble
spirit the Epistle of St. James.'

Jane's tears by this time were flowing fast, and finding that she no
longer attempted to defend herself, her cousin said no more.  He
joined the others, and Jane, escaping to her own room, gave way to a
passionate fit of crying.  Whether her tears were of true sorrow or
of anger she could not have told herself; she was still sobbing on
her bed when the darkness came on, and her two little sisters came in
on their way to bed to wish her good-night.

'Oh, Jane, Jane! what is the matter? have you been naughty?' asked
the little girls in great amazement.

'Never mind,' said Jane, shortly; 'good-night,' and she sat up and
wiped away her tears.  The children still lingered.  'Go away, do,'
said she.  'Is Robert gone?'

'No,' said Phyllis, 'he is reading the newspaper.'

Phyllis and Adeline left the room, and Jane walked up and down,
considering whether she should venture to go down to tea; perhaps her
cousin had waited till the little girls had gone before he spoke to
Mr. Mohun, or perhaps her red eyes might cause questions on her
troubles; she was still in doubt when Lily opened the door, a lamp in
her hand.

'My dear Jenny, are you here?  Ada told me you were crying, what is
the matter?'

'Then you have not heard?' said Jane.

'Only Robert began just now, "Poor Jenny, she has been the cause of
getting us into a very awkward scrape," but then Ada came to tell me
about you, and I came away.'

'Yes,' said Jane, angrily, 'he will throw all the blame upon me, when
I am sure it was quite as much the fault of that horrible Mrs.
Appleton, and papa will be as angry as possible.'

'But what has happened?' asked Lily.

'Oh! that chatterer, that worst of gossipers, has gone and told the
Naylors and Mrs. Gage all we said about them the other day.'

'So you told Mrs. Appleton?' said Lily; 'so that was the reason you
were so obliging about the marking thread.  Oh, Jane, you had better
say no more about Mrs. Appleton!  And has it done much mischief?'

'Oh!  Mrs. Gage "pitched" into Robert, as Wat Greenwood would say,
and the christening is off again.'

'Jane, this is frightful,' said Lily; 'I do not wonder that you are
unhappy.'

'Well, I daresay it will all come right again,' said Jane; 'there
will only be a little delay, papa and Robert will bring them to their
senses in time.'

'Suppose the baby was to die,' said Lily.

'Oh, it will not die,' said Jane, 'a great fat healthy thing like
that likely to die indeed!'

'I cannot make you out, Jane,' said Lily.  'If I had done such a
thing, I do not think I could have a happy minute till it was set
right.'

'Well, I told you I was very sorry,' said Jane, 'only I wish they
would not all be so hard upon me.  Robert owns that he should not
have said such things if he did not wish them to be repeated.'

'Does he?' cried Lily.  'How exactly like Robert that is, to own
himself in fault when he is obliged to blame others.  Jane, how could
you hear him say such things and not be overcome with shame?  And
then to turn it against him!  Oh, Jane, I do not think I can talk to
you any more.'

'I do not mean to say it was not very good of him,' said Jane.

'Good of him--what a word!' cried Lily.  'Well, good-night, I cannot
bear to talk to you now.  Shall I say anything for you downstairs?'

'Oh, tell papa and Robert I am very sorry,' said Jane.  'I shall not
come down again, you may leave the lamp.'

On her way downstairs in the dark Lilias was led, by the example of
her cousin, to reflect that she was not without some share in the
mischief that had been done; the words which report imputed to Mr.
Devereux were mostly her own or Jane's.  There was no want of candour
in Lily, and as soon as she entered the drawing-room she went
straight up to her father and cousin, and began, 'Poor Jenny is very
unhappy; she desired me to tell you how sorry she is.  But I really
believe that I did the mischief, Robert.  It was I who said those
foolish things that were repeated as if you had said them.  It is a
grievous affair, but who could have thought that we were doing so
much harm?'

'Perhaps it may not do any,' said Emily.  'The Naylors have a great
deal of good about them.'

'They must have more than I suppose, if they can endure what Robert
is reported to have said of them,' said Mr. Mohun.

'What did you say, Robert,' said Lily, 'did you not tell them all was
said by your foolish young cousins?'

'I agreed with you too much to venture on contradicting the report;
you know I could not even deny having called Mrs. Gage by that name.'

'Oh, if I could do anything to mend it!' cried Lily.

But wishes had no effect.  Lilias and Jane had to mourn over the full
extent of harm done by hasty words.  After the more respectable men
had left the Mohun Arms on the evening of Whit-Monday, the rest gave
way to unrestrained drunkenness, not so much out of reckless self-
indulgence, as to defy the clergyman and the squire.  They came to
the front of the parsonage, yelled and groaned for some time, and
ended by breaking down the gate.

This conduct was repeated on Tuesday, and on many Saturdays
following; some young trees in the churchyard were cut, and abuse of
the parson written on the walls the idle young men taking this
opportunity to revenge their own quarrels, caused by Mr. Devereux's
former efforts for their reformation.

On Sunday several children were absent from school; all those
belonging to Farmer Gage's labourers were taken away, and one man was
turned off by the farmers for refusing to remove his child.

Now that the war was carried on so openly, Mr. Mohun considered it
his duty to withdraw his custom from one who chose to set his pastor
at defiance.  He went to the forge, and had a long conversation with
the blacksmith, but though he was listened to with respect, it was
not easy to make much impression on an ignorant, hot-tempered man,
who had been greatly offended, and prided himself on showing that he
would support the quarrel of his wife and her relations against both
squire and parson; and though Mr. Mohun did persuade him to own that
it was wrong to be at war with the clergyman, the effect of his
arguments was soon done away with by the Gages, and no ground was
gained.

Mr. Gage's farm was unhappily at no great distance from a dissenting
chapel and school, in the adjoining parish of Stoney Bridge, and
thither the farmer and blacksmith betook themselves, with many of the
cottagers of Broom Hill.

One alone of the family of Tom Naylor refused to join him in his
dissent, and that was his sister, Mrs. Eden, a widow, with one little
girl about seven years old, who, though in great measure dependent
upon him for subsistence, knew her duty too well to desert the
church, or to take her child from school, and continued her even
course, toiling hard for bread, and uncomplaining, though often munch
distressed.  All the rest of the parish who were not immediately
under Mr. Mohun's influence were in a sad state of confusion.

Jane was grieved at heart, but would not confess it, and Lilias was
so restless and unhappy, that Emily was quite weary of her
lamentations.  Her best comforter was Miss Weston, who patiently
listened to her, sighed with her over the evident sorrow of the
Rector, and the mischief in the parish, and proved herself a true
friend, by never attempting to extenuate her fault.


CHAPTER VI--THE NEW FRIEND


'Maidens should be mild and meek,
Swift to hear, and slow to speak.'

Miss Weston had been much interested by what she heard respecting
Mrs. Eden, and gladly discovered that she was just the person who
could assist in some needlework which was required at Broom Hill.
She asked Lilias to tell her where to find her cottage, and Lily
replied by an offer to show her the way; Miss Weston hesitated,
thinking that perhaps in the present state of things Lily had rather
not see her; but her doubts were quickly removed by this speech, 'I
want to see her particularly.  I have been there three times without
finding her.  I think I can set this terrible matter right by
speaking to her.'

Accordingly, Lilias and Phyllis set out with Alethea and Marianne one
afternoon to Mrs. Eden's cottage, which stood at the edge of a long
field at the top of the hill.  Very fast did Lily talk all the way,
but she grew more silent as she came to the cottage, and knocked at
the door; it was opened by Mrs. Eden herself, a pale, but rather
pretty young woman, with a remarkable gentle and pleasing face, and a
manner which was almost ladylike, although her hands were freshly
taken out of the wash-tub.  She curtsied low, and coloured at the
sight of Lilias, set chairs for the visitors, and then returned to
her work.

'Oh! Mrs. Eden,' Lily began, intending to make her explanation, but
feeling confused, thought it better to wait till her friend's
business was settled, and altered her speech into 'Miss Weston is
come to speak to you about some work.'

Mrs. Eden looked quite relieved, and Alethea proceeded to appoint the
day for her coming to Broom Hill, and arrange some small matters,
during which Lily not only settled what to say, but worked herself
into a fit of impatience at the length of Alethea's instructions.
When they were concluded, however, and there was a pause, her words
failed her, and she wished that she was miles from the cottage, or
that she had never mentioned her intentions.  At last she stammered
out, 'Oh! Mrs. Eden--I wanted to speak to you about--about Mr.
Devereux and your brother.'

Mrs. Eden bent over her wash-tub, Miss Weston examined the shells on
the chimney-piece, Marianne and Phyllis listened with all their ears,
and poor Lily was exceedingly uncomfortable.

'I wished to tell you--I do not think--I do not mean--It was not his
saying.  Indeed, he did not say those things about the Gages.'

'I told my brother I did not think Mr. Devereux would go for to say
such a thing,' said Mrs. Eden, as much confused as Lily.

'Oh! that was right, Mrs. Eden.  The mischief was all my making and
Jane's.  We said those foolish things, and they were repeated as if
it was he.  Oh! do tell your brother so, Mrs. Eden.  It was very good
of you to think it was not Cousin Robert.  Pray tell Tom Naylor.  I
cannot bear that things should go on in this dreadful way.'

'Indeed, Miss, I am very sorry,' said Mrs. Eden.

'But, Mrs Eden, I am sure that would set it right again,' said Lily,
'are not you?  I would do anything to have that poor baby
christened.'

Lily's confidence melted away as she saw that Mrs. Eden's tears were
falling fast, and she ended with, 'Only tell them, and we shall see
what will happen.'

'Very well, Miss Lilias,' said Mrs. Eden.  'I am very sorry.'

'Let us hope that time and patience will set things right,' said Miss
Weston, to relieve the embarrassment of both parties.  'Your brother
must soon see that Mr. Devereux only wishes to do his duty.'

Alethea skilfully covered Lily's retreat, and the party took leave of
Mrs. Eden, and turned into their homeward path.

Lily at first seemed disposed to be silent, and Miss Weston therefore
amused herself with listening to the chatter of the little girls as
they walked on before them.

'There are only thirty-six days to the holidays,' said Phyllis; 'Ada
and I keep a paper in the nursery with the account of the number of
days.  We shall be so glad when Claude, and Maurice, and Redgie come
home.'

'Are they not very boisterous?' said Marianne.

'Not Maurice,' said Phyllis.

'No, indeed,' said Lily, 'Maurice is like nobody else.  He takes up
some scientific pursuit each time he comes home, and cares for
nothing else for some time, and then quite forgets it.  He is an odd-
looking boy too, thick and sturdy, with light flaxen hair, and dark,
overhanging eyebrows, and he makes the most extraordinary grimaces.'

'And Reginald?' said Alethea.

'Oh! Redgie is a noble-looking fellow.  But just eleven, and taller
than Jane.  His complexion so fair, yet fresh and boyish, and his
eyes that beautiful blue that Ada's are--real blue.  Then his hair,
in dark brown waves, with a rich auburn shine.  The old knights must
have been just like Redgie.  And Claude--Oh! Miss Weston, have you
ever seen Claude?'

'No, but I have seen your eldest brother.'

'William?  Why, he has been in Canada these three years.  Where could
you have seen him?'

'At Brighton, about four years ago.'

'Ah! the year before he went.  I remember that his regiment was
there.  Well, it is curious that you should know him; and did you
ever hear of Harry, the brother that we lost?'

'I remember Captain Mohun's being called away to Oxford by his
illness,' said Alethea.

'Ah, yes!  William was the only one of us who was with him, even papa
was not there.  His illness was so short.'

'Yes,' said Alethea, 'I think it was on a Tuesday that Captain Mohun
left Brighton, and we saw his death in the paper on Saturday.'

'William only arrived the evening that he died.  Papa was gone to
Ireland to see about Cousin Rotherwood's property.  Robert, not
knowing that, wrote to him at Beechcroft; Eleanor forwarded the
letter without opening it, and so we knew nothing till Robert came to
tell us that all was over.'

'Without any preparation?'

'With none.  Harry had left home about ten days before, quite well,
and looking so handsome.  You know what a fine-looking person William
is.  Well, Harry was very like him, only not so tall and strong, with
the same clear hazel eyes, and more pink in his cheeks--fairer
altogether.  Then Harry wrote, saying that he had caught one of his
bad colds.  We did not think much of it, for he was always having
coughs.  We heard no more for a week, and then one morning Eleanor
was sent for out of the schoolroom, and there was Robert come to tell
us.  Oh! it was such a thunderbolt.  This was what did the mischief.
You know papa and mamma being from home so long, the elder boys had
no settled place for the holidays; sometimes they stayed with one
friend, sometimes with another, and so no one saw enough of them to
find out how delicate poor Harry really was.  I think papa had been
anxious the only winter they were at home together, and Harry had
been talked to and advised to take care; but in the summer and autumn
he was well, and did not think about it.  He went to Oxford by the
coach--it was a bitterly cold frosty day--there was a poor woman
outside, shivering and looking very ill, and Harry changed places
with her.  He was horribly chilled, but thinking he had only a common
cold, he took no care.  Robert, coming to Oxford about a week after,
found him very ill, and wrote to papa and William, but William
scarcely came in time.  Harry just knew him, and that was all.  He
could not speak, and died that night.  Then William stayed at Oxford
to receive papa, and Robert came to tell us.'

'It must have been a terrible shock.'

'Such a loss--he was so very good and clever.  Every one looked up to
him--William almost as much as the younger ones.  He never was in any
scrape, had all sorts of prizes at Eton, besides getting his
scholarship before he was seventeen.'

Whenever Lily could get Miss Weston alone, it was her way to talk in
this manner.  She loved the sound of her own voice so well, that she
was never better satisfied than when engrossing the whole
conversation.  Having nothing to talk of but her books, her poor
people, and her family, she gave her friend the full benefit of all
she could say on each subject, while Alethea had kindness enough to
listen with real interest to her long rambling discourses, well
pleased to see her happy.

The next time they met, Lilias told her all she knew or imagined
respecting Eleanor, and of her own debate with Claude, and ended,
'Now, Miss Weston, tell me your opinion, which would you choose for a
sister, Eleanor or Emily?'

'I have some experience of Miss Mohun's delightful manners, and none
of Mrs. Hawkesworth's, so I am no fair judge,' said Alethea.

'I really have done justice to Eleanor's sterling goodness,' said
Lily.  'Now what should you think?'

'I can hardly imagine greater proofs of affection than Mrs.
Hawkesworth has given you,' said Miss Weston, smiling.

'It was because it was her duty,' said Lilias.  'You have only heard
the facts, but you cannot judge of her ways and looks.  Now only
think, when Frank came home, after seven years of perils by field and
flood--there she rose up to receive him as if he had been Mr. Nobody
making a morning call.  And all the time before they were married, I
do believe she thought more of showing Emily how much tea we were to
use in a week than anything else.'

'Perhaps some people might have admired her self-command,' said
Alethea.

'Self-command, the refuge of the insensible?  And now, I told you
about dear Harry the other day.  He was Eleanor's especial brother,
yet his death never seemed to make any difference to her.  She
scarcely cried:  she heard our lessons as usual, talked in her quiet
voice--showed no tokens of feeling.'

'Was her health as good as before?' asked Miss Weston.

'She was not ill,' said Lily; 'if she had, I should have been
satisfied.  She certainly could not take long walks that winter, but
she never likes walking.  People said she looked ill, but I do not
know.'

'Shall I tell you what I gather from your history?'

'Pray do.'

'Then do not think me very perverse, if I say that perhaps the grief
she then repressed may have weighed down her spirits ever since, so
that you can hardly remember any alteration.'

'That I cannot,' said Lily.  'She is always the same, but then she
ought to have been more cheerful before his death.'

'Did not you lose him soon after your mother?' said Alethea.

'Two whole years,' said Lily.  'Oh! and aunt, Robert too, and Frank
went to India the beginning of that year; yes, there was enough to
depress her, but I never thought of grief going on in that quiet dull
way for so many years.'

'You would prefer one violent burst, and then forgetfulness?'

'Not exactly,' said Lily; 'but I should like a little evidence of it.
If it is really strong, it cannot be hid.'

Little did Lily think of the grief that sat heavy upon the spirit of
Alethea, who answered--'Some people can do anything that they
consider their duty.'

'Duty:  what, are you a duty lover?' exclaimed Lilias.  'I never
suspected it, because you are not disagreeable.'

'Thank you,' said Alethea, laughing, 'your compliment rather
surprises me, for I thought you told me that your brother Claude was
on the duty side of the question.'

'He thinks he is,' said Lily, 'but love is his real motive of action,
as I can prove to you.  Poor Claude had a very bad illness when he
was about three years old; and ever since he has been liable to
terrible headaches, and he is not at all strong.  Of course he cannot
always study hard, and when first he went to school, every one
scolded him for being idle.  I really believe he might have done
more, but then he was so clever that he could keep up without any
trouble, and, as Robert says, that was a great temptation; but still
papa was not satisfied, because he said Claude could do better.  So
said Harry.  Oh! you cannot think what a person Harry was, as high-
spirited as William, and as gentle as Claude; and in his kind way he
used to try hard to make Claude exert himself, but it never would do-
-he was never in mischief, but he never took pains.  Then Harry died,
and when Claude came home, and saw how changed things were, how gray
papa's hair had turned, and how silent and melancholy William had
grown, he set himself with all his might to make up to papa as far as
he could.  He thought only of doing what Harry would have wished, and
papa himself says that he has done wonders.  I cannot see that Henry
himself could have been more than Claude is now; he has not spared
himself in the least, his tutor says, and he would have had the
Newcastle Scholarship last year, if he had not worked so hard that he
brought on one of his bad illnesses, and was obliged to come home.
Now I am sure that he has acted from love, for it was as much his
duty to take pains while Harry was alive as afterwards.'

'Certainly,' said Miss Weston, 'but what does he say himself?'

'Oh! he never will talk of himself,' said Lily.

'Have you not overlooked one thing which may be the truth,' said
Alethea, as if she was asking for information, 'that duty and love
may be identical?  Is not St. Paul's description of charity very like
the duty to our neighbour?'

'The practice is the same, but not the theory,' said Lily.

'Now, what is called duty, seems to me to be love doing unpleasant
work,' said Miss Weston; 'love disguised under another name, when
obliged to act in a way which seems, only seems, out of accordance
with its real title.'

'That is all very well for those who have love,' said Lily.  'Some
have not who do their duty conscientiously--another word which I
hate, by the bye.'

'They have love in a rough coat, perhaps,' said Alethea, 'and I
should expect it soon to put on a smoother one.'


CHAPTER VII--SIR MAURICE


'Shall thought was his, in after time,
Thus to be hitched into a rhyme;
The simple sire could only boast
That he was loyal to his cost,
The banished race of kings revered,
And lost his land.'

The holidays arrived, and with them the three brothers, for during
the first few weeks of the Oxford vacation Claude accompanied Lord
Rotherwood on visits to some college friends, and only came home the
same day as the younger ones.

Maurice did not long leave his sisters in doubt as to what was to be
his reigning taste, for as soon as dinner was over, he made Jane find
the volume of the Encyclopaedia containing Entomology, and with his
elbows on the table, proceeded to study it so intently, that the
young ladies gave up all hopes of rousing him from it.  Claude threw
himself down on the sofa to enjoy the luxury of a desultory talk with
his sisters; and Reginald, his head on the floor, and his heels on a
chair, talked loud and fast enough for all three, with very little
regard to what the damsels might be saying.

'Oh! Claude,' said Lily, 'you cannot think how much we like Miss
Weston, she lets us call her Alethea, and--'

Here came an interruption from Mr. Mohun, who perceiving the position
of Reginald's dusty shoes, gave a loud 'Ah--h!' as if he was scolding
a dog, and ordered him to change them directly.

'Here, Phyl!' said Reginald, kicking off his shoes, 'just step up and
bring my shippers, Rachel will give them to you.'

Away went Phyllis, well pleased to be her brother's fag.

'Ah!  Redgie does not know the misfortune that hangs over him,' said
Emily.

'What?' said Reginald, 'will not the Baron let Viper come to the
house?'

'Worse,' said Emily, 'Rachel is going away.'

'Rachel?' cried Claude, starting up from the sofa.

'Rachel?' said Maurice, without raising his eyes.

'Rachel!  Rachel! botheration!' roared Reginald, with a wondrous
caper.

'Yes, Rachel,' said Emily; 'Rachel, who makes so much of you, for no
reason that I could ever discover, but because you are the most
troublesome.'

'You will never find any one to mend your jackets, and dress your
wounds like Rachel,' said Lily, 'and make a baby of you instead of a
great schoolboy.  What will become of you, Redgie?'

'What will become of any of us?' said Claude; 'I thought Rachel was
the mainspring of the house.'

'Have you quarrelled with her, Emily?' said Reginald.

'Nonsense,' said Emily, 'it is only that her brother has lost his
wife, and wants her to take care of his children.'

'Well,' said Reginald, 'her master has lost his wife, and wants her
to take care of his children.'

'I cannot think what I shall do,' said Ada; 'I cry about it every
night when I go to bed.  What is to be done?'

'Send her brother a new wife,' said Maurice.

'Send him Emily,' said Reginald; 'we could spare her much better.'

'Only I don't wish him joy,' said Maurice.

'Well, I hope you wish me joy of my substitute,' said Emily; 'I do
not think you would ever guess, but Lily, after being in what Rachel
calls quite a way, has persuaded every one to let us have Esther
Bateman.'

'What, the Baron?' said Claude, in surprise.

'Yes,' said Lily, 'is it not delightful?  He said at first, Emily was
too inexperienced to teach a young servant; but then we settled that
Hannah should be upper servant, and Esther will only have to wait
upon Phyl and Ada.  Then he said Faith Longley was of a better set of
people, but I am sure it would give one the nightmare to see her
lumbering about the house, and then he talked it over with Robert and
with Rachel.'

'And was not Rachel against it, or was she too kind to her young
ladies?'

'Oh! she was cross when she talked it over with us,' said Lily; 'but
we coaxed her over, and she told the Baron it would do very well.'

'And Robert?'

'He was quite with us, for he likes Esther as much as I do,' said
lily.

'Now, Lily,' said Jane, 'how can you say he was quite with you, when
he said he thought it would be better if she was farther from home,
and under some older person?'

'Yes, but he allowed that she would be much safer here than at home,'
said Lily.

'But I thought she used to be the head of all the ill behaviour in
school,' said Claude.

'Oh! that was in Eleanor's time,' said Lily; 'there was nothing to
draw her out, she never was encouraged; but since she has been in my
class, and has found that her wishes to do right are appreciated and
met by affection, she has been quite a new creature.'

'Since she has been in MY class,' Claude repeated.

'Well,' said Lily, with a slight blush, 'it is just what Robert says.
He told her, when he gave her her prize Bible on Palm Sunday, that
she had been going on very well, but she must take great care when
removed from those whose influence now guided her, and who could he
have meant but me?  And now she is to go on with me always.  She will
be quite one of the old sort of faithful servants, who feel that they
owe everything to their masters, and will it not be pleasant to have
so sweet and expressive a face about the house?'

'Do I know her face?' said Claude.  'Oh yes!  I do.  She has black
eyes, I think, and would be pretty if she did not look pert.'

'You provoking Claude!' cried Lily, 'you are as bad as Alethea, who
never will say that Esther is the best person for us.'

'I was going to inquire for the all-for-love principle,' said Claude,
'but I see it is in full force.  And how are the verses, Lily?  Have
you made a poem upon Michael Moone, or Mohun, the actor, our uncle,
whom I discovered for you in Pepys's Memoirs?'

'Nonsense,' said Lily; 'but I have been writing something about Sir
Maurice, which you shall hear whenever you are not in this horrid
temper.'

The next afternoon, as soon as luncheon was over, Lily drew Claude
out to his favourite place under the plane-tree, where she proceeded
to inflict her poem upon his patient ears, while he lay flat upon the
grass looking up to the sky; Emily and Jane had promised to join them
there in process of time, and the four younger ones were, as usual,
diverting themselves among the farm buildings at the Old Court.

Lily began:  'I meant to have two parts about Sir Maurice going out
to fight when he was very young, and then about his brothers being
killed, and King Charles knighting him, and his betrothed, Phyllis
Crossthwayte, embroidering his black engrailed cross on his banner,
and then the taking the castle, and his being wounded, and escaping,
and Phyllis not thinking it right to leave her father; but I have not
finished that, so now you must hear about his return home.'


'A romaunt in six cantos, entitled Woe woe,
By Miss Fanny F. known more commonly so,'


muttered Claude to himself; but as Lily did not understand or know
whence his quotation came, it did not hurt her feelings, and she went
merrily on:-


''Tis the twenty-ninth of merry May;
Full cheerily shine the sunbeams to-day,
   Their joyous light revealing
Full many a troop in garments gay,
With cheerful steps who take their way
   By the green hill and shady lane,
While merry bells are pealing;
And soon in Beechcroft's holy fane
The villagers are kneeling.
Dreary and mournful seems the shrine
Where sound their prayers and hymns divine;
   For every mystic ornament
   By the rude spoiler's hand is rent;
   Scarce is its ancient beauty traced
   In wood-work broken and defaced,
   Reft of each quaint device and rare,
   Of foliage rich and mouldings fair;
   Yet happy is each spirit there;
      The simple peasantry rejoice
   To see the altar decked with care,
      To hear their ancient Pastor's voice
   Reciting o'er each well-known prayer,
   To view again his robe of white,
   And hear the services aright;
   Once more to chant their glorious Creed,
   And thankful own their nation freed
   From those who cast her glories down,
   And rent away her Cross and Crown.
   A stranger knelt among the crowd,
   And joined his voice in praises loud,
   And when the holy rites had ceased,
   Held converse with the aged Priest,
   Then turned to join the village feast,
   Where, raised on the hill's summit green,
   The Maypole's flowery wreaths were seen;
   Beneath the venerable yew
   The stranger stood the sports to view,
   Unmarked by all, for each was bent
   On his own scheme of merriment,
   On talking, laughing, dancing, playing -
   There never was so blithe a Maying.
   So thought each laughing maiden gay,
   Whose head-gear bore the oaken spray;
   So thought that hand of shouting boys,
   Unchecked in their best joy--in noise;
   But gray-haired men, whose deep-marked scars
   Bore token of the civil wars,
   And hooded dames in cloaks of red,
   At the blithe youngsters shook the head,
   Gathering in eager clusters told
   How joyous were the days of old,
   When Beechcroft's lords, those Barons bold,
   Came forth to join their vassals' sport,
   And here to hold their rustic court,
   Throned in the ancient chair you see
   Beneath our noble old yew tree.
   Alas! all empty stands the throne,
   Reserved for Mohun's race alone,
   And the old folks can only tell
   Of the good lords who ruled so well.
   "Ah!  I bethink me of the time,
   The last before those years of crime,
   When with his open hearty cheer,
   The good old squire was sitting here."
   "'Twas then," another voice replied,
   "That brave young Master Maurice tried
   To pitch the ball with Andrew Grey -
   We ne'er shall see so blithe a day -
      All the young squires have long been dead."
   "No, Master Webb," quoth Andrew Grey,
      "Young Master Maurice safely fled,
   At least so all the Greenwoods say,
   And Walter Greenwood with him went
   To share his master's banishment;
   And now King Charles is ruling here,
   Our own good landlord may be near."
   "Small hope of that," the old man said,
   And sadly shook his hoary head,
   "Sir Maurice died beyond the sea,
   Last of his noble line was he."
   "Look, Master Webb!" he turned, and there
   The stranger sat in Mohun's chair;
   At ease he sat, and smiled to scan
   The face of each astonished man;
   Then on the ground he laid aside
   His plumed hat and mantle wide.
   One moment, Andrew deemed he knew
   Those glancing eyes of hazel hue,
   But the sunk cheek, the figure spare,
   The lines of white that streak the hair -
   How can this he the stripling gay,
   Erst, victor in the sports of May?
   Full twenty years of cheerful toil,
   And labour on his native soil,
   On Andrew's head had left no trace -
      The summer's sun, the winter's storm,
   They had but ruddier made his face,
      More hard his hand, more strong his form.
   Forth from the wandering, whispering crowd,
   A farmer came, and spoke aloud,
   With rustic bow and welcome fair,
   But with a hesitating air -
   He told how custom well preserved
   The throne for Mohun's race reserved;
   The stranger laughed, "What, Harrington,
   Hast thou forgot thy landlord's son?"
   Loud was the cry, and blithe the shout,
   On Beechcroft hill that now rang out,
   And still remembered is the day,
   That merry twenty-ninth of May,
   When to his father's home returned
   That knight, whose glory well was earned.
   In poverty and banishment,
   His prime of manhood had been spent,
   A wanderer, scorned by Charles's court,
   One faithful servant his support.
   And now, he seeks his home forlorn,
   Broken in health, with sorrow worn.
   And two short years just passed away,
   Between that joyous meeting-day,
   And the sad eve when Beechcroft's bell
   Tolled forth Sir Maurice's funeral knell;
And Phyllis, whose love was so constant and tried,
Was a widow the year she was Maurice's bride;
Yet the path of the noble and true-hearted knight,
Was brilliant with honour, and glory, and light,
And still his descendants shall sing of the fame
Of Sir Maurice de Mohun, the pride of his name.'


'It is a pity they should sing of it in such lines as those last
four,' said Claude.  'Let me see, I like your bringing in the real
names, though I doubt whether any but Greenwood could have been found
here.'

'Oh! here come Emily and Jane,' said Lily, 'let me put it away.'

'You are very much afraid of Jane,' said Claude.

'Yes, Jane has no feeling for poetry,' said Lily, with simplicity,
which made her brother smile.

Jane and Emily now came up, the former with her work, the latter with
a camp-stool and a book.  'I wonder,' said she, 'where those boys
are!  By the bye, what character did they bring home from school?'

'The same as usual,' said Claude.  'Maurice's mind only half given to
his work, and Redgie's whole mind to his play.'

'Maurice's talent does not lie in the direction of Latin and Greek,'
said Emily.

'No,' said Jane, 'it is nonsense to make him learn it, and so he
says.'

'Perhaps he would say the same of mathematics and mechanics, if as
great a point were made of them,' said Lily.

'I think not,' said Claude; 'he has more notion of them than of Latin
verses.'

'Then you are on my side,' said Jane, triumphantly.

'Did I say so?' said Claude.

'Why not?' said Jane.  'What is the use of his knowing those stupid
languages?  I am sure it is wasting time not to improve such a genius
as he has for mechanics and natural history.  Now, Claude, I wish you
would answer.'

'I was waiting till you had done,' said Claude.

'Why do you not think it nonsense?' persisted Jane.

'Because I respect my father's opinion,' said Claude, letting himself
fall on the grass, as if he had done with the subject.

'Pooh!' said Jane, 'that sounds like a good little boy of five years
old!'

'Very likely,' said Claude.

'But you have some opinion of your own,' said Lily.

'Certainly.'

'Then I wish you would give it,' said Jane.

'Come, Emily,' said Claude, 'have you brought anything to read?'

'But your opinion, Claude,' said Jane.  'I am sure you think with me,
only you are too grand, and too correct to say so.'

Claude made no answer, but Jane saw she was wrong by his countenance;
before she could say anything more, however, they were interrupted by
a great outcry from the Old Court regions.

'Oh,' said Emily, 'I thought it was a long time since we had heard
anything of those uproarious mortals.'

'I hope there is nothing the matter,' said Lily.

'Oh no,' said Jane, 'I hear Redgie's laugh.'

'Aye, but among that party,' said Emily, 'Redgie's laugh is not
always a proof of peace:  they are too much in the habit of acting
the boys and the frogs.'

'We were better off,' said Lily, 'with the gentle Claude, as Miss
Middleton used to call him.'

'Miss Molly, as William used to call him with more propriety,' said
Claude, 'not half so well worth playing with as such a fellow as
Redgie.'

'Not even for young ladies?' said Emily.

'No, Phyllis and Ada are much the better for being teased,' said
Claude.  'I am convinced that I never did my duty by you in that
respect.'

'There were others to do it for you,' said Jane.

'Harry never teased,' said Emily, 'and William scorned us.'

'His teasing was all performed upon Claude,' said Lily, 'and a great
shame it was.'

'Not at all,' said Claude, 'only an injudicious attempt to put a
little life into a tortoise.'

'A bad comparison,' said Lily; 'but what is all this?  Here come the
children in dismay!  What is the matter, my dear child?'

This was addressed to Phyllis, who was the first to come up at full
speed, sobbing, and out of breath, 'Oh, the dragon-fly!  Oh, do not
let him kill it!'

'The dragon-fly, the poor dear blue dragon-fly!' screamed Adeline,
hiding her face in Emily's lap, 'Oh, do not let him kill it! he is
holding it; he is hurting it!  Oh, tell him not!'

'I caught it,' said Phyllis, 'but not to have it killed.  Oh, take it
away!'

'A fine rout, indeed, you chicken,' said Reginald; 'I know a fellow
who ate up five horse-stingers one morning before breakfast.'

'Stingers!' said Phyllis, 'they do not sting anything, pretty
creatures.'

'I told you I would catch the old pony and put it on him to try,'
said Reginald.

In the meantime, Maurice came up at his leisure, holding his prize by
the wings.  'Look what a beautiful Libellulla Puella,' said he to
Jane.

'A demoiselle dragon-fly,' said Lily; 'what a beauty! what are you
going to do with it?'

'Put it into my museum,' said Maurice.  'Here, Jane, put it under
this flower-pot, and take care of it, while I fetch something to kill
it with.'

'Oh, Maurice, do not!' said Emily.

'One good squeeze,' said Reginald.  'I will do it.'

'How came you be so cruel?' said Lily.

'No, a squeeze will not do,' said Maurice; 'it would spoil its
beauty; I must put it ever the fumes of carbonic acid.'

'Maurice, you really must not,' said Emily.

'Now do not, dear Maurice,' said Ada, 'there's a dear boy; I will
give you such a kiss.'

'Nonsense; get out of the way,' said Maurice, turning away.

'Now, Maurice, this is most horrid cruelty,' said Lily; 'what right
have you to shorten the brief, happy life which--'

'Well,' interrupted Maurice, 'if you make such a fuss about killing
it, I will stick a pin through it into a cork, and let it shift for
itself.'

Poor Phyllis ran away to the other end of the garden, sat down and
sobbed, Ada screamed and argued, Emily complained, Lily exhorted
Claude to interfere, while Reginald stood laughing.

'Such useless cruelty,' said Emily.

'Useless!' said Maurice.  'Pray how is any one to make a collection
of natural objects without killing things?'

'I do not see the use of a collection,' said Lily; 'you can examine
the creatures and let them go.'

'Such a young lady's tender-hearted notion,' said Reginald.

'Who ever heard of a man of science managing in such a ridiculous
way?'

'Man of science!' exclaimed Lily, 'when he will have forgotten by
next Christmas that insects ever existed.'

It was not convenient to hear this speech, so Maurice turned an empty
flower-pot over his prisoner, and left it in Jane's care while he
went to fetch the means of destruction, probably choosing the lawn
for the place of execution, in order to show his contempt for his
sisters.

'Fair damsel in boddice blue,' said Lily, peeping in at the hole at
the top of the flower-pot, 'I wish I could avert your melancholy
fate.  I am very sorry for you, but I cannot help it.'

'You might help it now, at any rate,' muttered Claude.

'No,' said Lily, 'I know Monsieur Maurice too well to arouse his
wrath so justly.  If you choose to release the pretty creature, I
shall be charmed.'

'You forget that I am in charge,' said Jane.

'There is a carriage coming to the front gate,' cried Ada.  'Emily,
may I go into the drawing-room?  Oh, Jenny, will you undo my brown
holland apron?'

'That is right, little mincing Miss,' said Reginald, with a low bow;
'how fine we are to-day.'

'How visitors break into the afternoon,' said Emily, with a languid
turn of her head.

'Jenny, brownie,' called Maurice from his bedroom window, 'I want the
sulphuric acid.'

Jane sprang up and ran into the house, though her sisters called
after her, that she would come full upon the company in the hall.

'They shall not catch me here,' cried Reginald, rushing off into the
shrubbery.

'Are you coming in, Claude?' said Emily.

'Send Ada to call me, if there is any one worth seeing,' said Claude

'They will see you from the window,' said Emily.

'No,' said Claude, 'no one ever found me out last summer, under these
friendly branches.'

The old butler, Joseph, now showed himself on the terrace; and the
young ladies, knowing that he had no intention of crossing the lawn,
hastened to learn from him who their visitors were, and entered the
house.  Just then Phyllis came running back from the kitchen garden,
and without looking round, or perceiving Claude, she took up the
flower-pot and released the captive, which, unconscious of its peril,
rested on a blade of grass, vibrating its gauzy wings and rejoicing
in the restored sunbeams.

'Fly away, fly away, you pretty creature,' said Phyllis; 'make haste,
or Maurice will come and catch you again.  I wish I had not given you
such a fright.  I thought you would have been killed, and a pin stuck
all through that pretty blue and black body of yours.  Oh! that would
be dreadful.  Make haste and go away!  I would not have caught you,
you beautiful thing, if I had known what he wanted to do.  I thought
he only wanted to look at your beautiful body, like a little bit of
the sky come down to look at the flowers, and your delicate wings,
and great shining eyes.  Oh! I am very glad God made you so
beautiful.  Oh! there is Maurice coming.  I must blow upon you to
make you go.  Oh, that is right--up quite high in the air--quite
safe,' and she clapped her hands as the dragon-fly rose in the air,
and disappeared behind the laurels, just as Maurice and Reginald
emerged from the shrubbery, the former with a bottle in his hand.

'Well, where is the Libellulla?' said he.

'The dragon-fly?' said Phyllis.  'I let it out.'

'Sold, Maurice!' cried Reginald, laughing at his brother's disaster.

'Upon my word, Phyl, you are very kind!' said Maurice, angrily.  'If
I had known you were such an ill-natured crab--'

'Oh!  Maurice dear, don't say so,' exclaimed Phyllis.  'I thought I
might let it out because I caught it myself; and I told you I did not
catch it for you to kill; Maurice, indeed, I am sorry I vexed you.'

'What else did you do it for?' said Maurice.  'It is horrid not to be
able to leave one's things a minute--'

'But I did not know the dragon-fly belonged to you, Maurice,' said
Phyllis.

'That is a puzzler, Mohun senior,' said Reginald.

'Now, Redgie, do get Maurice to leave off being angry with me,'
implored his sister.

'I will leave off being angry,' said Maurice, seeing his advantage,
'if you will promise never to let out my things again.'

'I do not think I can promise,' said Phyllis.

'O yes, you can,' said Reginald, 'you know they are not his.'

'Promise you will not let out any insects I may get,' said Maurice,
'or I shall say you are as cross as two sticks.'

'I'll tell you what, Maurice,' said Phyllis, 'I do wish you would not
make me promise, for I do not think I CAN keep it, for I cannot bear
to see the beautiful live things killed.'

'Nonsense,' said Maurice, fiercely, 'I am very angry indeed, you
naughty child; promise--'

'I cannot,' said Phyllis, beginning to cry.

'Then,' said Maurice, 'I will not speak to you all day.'

'No, no,' shouted Reginald, 'we will only treat her like the horse-
stinger; you wanted a puella, Maurice--here is one for you, here,
give her a dose of the turpentine.'

'Yes,' said Maurice, advancing with his bottle; 'and do you take the
poker down to Naylor's to be sharpened, it will just do to stick
through her back.  Oh! no, not Naylor's--the girls have made a hash
there, as they do everything else; but we will settle her before they
come out again.'

Phyllis screamed and begged for mercy--her last ally had deserted
her.

'Promise!' cried the boys.

'Oh, don't!' was all her answer.

Reginald caught her and held her fast, Maurice advanced upon her, she
struggled, and gave a scream of real terror.  The matter was no joke
to any one but Reginald, for Maurice was very angry and really meant
to frighten her.

'Hands off, boys, I will not have her bullied,' said Claude, half
rising.

Maurice gave a violent start, Reginald looked round laughing, and
exclaimed, 'Who would have thought of Claude sneaking there?' and
Phyllis ran to the protecting arm, which he stretched out.  To her
great surprise, he drew her to him, and kissed her forehead, saying,
'Well done, Phyl!'

'Oh, I knew he was not going to hurt me,' said Phyllis, still panting
from the struggle.

'To be sure not,' said Maurice, 'I only meant to have a little fun.'

Claude, with his arm still round his sister's waist, gave Maurice a
look, expressing, 'Is that the truth?' and Reginald tumbled head over
heels, exclaiming, 'I would not have been Phyl just them.'

Ada now came running up to them, saying, 'Maurice and Redgie, you are
to come in; Mr. and Mrs. Burnet heard your voices, and begged to see
you, because they never saw you last holidays.'

'More's the pity they should see us now,' said Maurice.

'I shall not go,' said Reginald.

'Papa is there, and he sent for you,' said Ada.

'Plague,' was the answer.

'See what you get by making such a row,' said Claude.  'If you had
been as orderly members of society as I am--'

'Oh, but Claude,' said Ada, 'papa told me to see if I could find you.
Dear Claude, I wish,' she proceeded, taking his hand, and looking
engaging, 'I wish you would put your arm round me as you do round
Phyl.'

'You are not worth it, Ada,' said Reginald, and Claude did not
contradict him.


CHAPTER VIII--THE BROTHERS


'But smiled to hear the creatures he had known
So long were now in class and order shown -
Genus and species.  "Is it meet," said he,
"This creature's name should one so sounding be -
'Tis but a fly, though first-born of the spring,
Bombylius Majus, dost thou call the thing?"

It was not till Sunday, that Lily's eager wish was fulfilled, of
introducing her friend and her brothers; but, as she might have
foreseen, their first meeting did not make the perfections of either
party very clear to the other.  Claude never spoke to strangers more
than he could help, Maurice and Reginald were in the room only a
short time; so that the result of Miss Weston's observations, when
communicated in reply to Lily's eager inquiries, was only that Claude
was very like his father and eldest brother, Reginald very handsome,
and Maurice looked like a very funny fellow.

On Monday, Reginald and Maurice were required to learn what they had
always refused to acknowledge, that the holidays were not intended to
be spent in idleness.  A portion of each morning was to be devoted to
study, Claude having undertaken the task of tutor--and hard work he
found it; and much did Lily pity him, when, as not unfrequently
happened, the summons to the children's dinner would bring him from
the study, looking thoroughly fagged--Maurice in so sulky a mood that
he would hardly deign to open his lips--Reginald talking fast enough,
indeed, but only to murmur at his duties in terms, which, though they
made every one laugh, were painful to hear.  Then Claude would take
his brothers back to the study, and not appear for an hour or more,
and when he did come forth, it was with a bad headache.  Sometimes,
as if to show that it was only through their own fault that their
tasks were wearisome, one or both boys would finish quite early, when
Reginald would betake himself to the schoolroom and employ his idle
time in making it nearly impossible for Ada and Phyllis to learn, by
talking, laughing, teasing the canary, overturning everything in
pursuing wasps, making Emily fretful by his disobedience, and then
laughing at her, and, in short, proving his right to the title he had
given himself at the end of the only letter he had written since he
first went to school, and which he had subscribed, 'Your affectionate
bother, R. Mohun.'  So that, for their own sake, all would have
preferred the inattentive mornings.

Lily often tried to persuade Claude to allow her to tell her father
how troublesome the boys were, but never with any effect.  He once
took up a book he had been using with them, and pointing to the name
in the first page, in writing, which Lily knew full well, 'Henry
Mohun,' she perceived that he meant to convince her that it was
useless to try to dissuade him, as he thought the patience and
forbearance his brother had shown to him must be repaid by his not
shrinking from the task he had imposed upon himself with his young
brothers, though he was often obliged to sit up part of the night to
pursue his own studies.

If Claude had rather injudiciously talked too much to Lilias of 'her
principle,' and thus kept it alive in her mind, yet his example might
have made its fallacy evident.  She believed that what she called
love had been the turning point in his character, that it had been
his earnest desire to follow in Henry's steps, and so try to comfort
his father for his loss, that had roused him from his indolence; but
she was beginning to see that nothing but a sense of duty could have
kept up the power of that first impulse for six years.  Lily began to
enter a little into his principle, and many things that occurred
during these holidays made her mistrust her former judgment.  She saw
that without the unvarying principle of right and wrong, fraternal
love itself would fail in outward acts and words.  Forbearance,
though undeniably a branch of love, could not exist without constant
remembrance of duty; and which of them did not sometimes fail in
kindness, meekness, and patience?  Did Emily show that softness,
which was her most agreeable characteristic, in her whining reproofs-
-in her complaints that 'no one listened to a word she said'--in her
refusal to do justice even to those who had vainly been seeking for
peace?  Did Lily herself show any of her much valued love, by the
sharp manner in which she scolded the boys for roughness towards
herself? or for language often used by them on purpose to make her
displeasure a matter of amusement?  She saw that her want of command
of temper was a failure both in love and duty, and when irritated,
the thought of duty came sooner to her aid than the feeling of love.

And Maurice and Reginald were really very provoking.  Maurice loved
no amusement better than teasing his sisters, and this was almost the
only thing in which Reginald agreed with him.  Reginald was
affectionate, but too reckless and violent not to be very
troublesome, and he too often flew into a passion if Maurice
attempted to laugh at him; the little girls were often frightened and
made unhappy; Phyllis would scream and roar, and Ada would come
sobbing to Emily, to be comforted after some rudeness of Reginald's.
It was not very often that quarrels went so far, but many a time in
thought, word, and deed was the rule of love transgressed, and more
than once did Emily feel ready to give up all her dignity, to have
Eleanor's hand over the boys once more.  Claude, finding that he
could do much to prevent mischief, took care not to leave the two
boys long together with the elder girls.  They were far more
inoffensive when separate, as Maurice never practised his tormenting
tricks when no one was present to laugh with him, and Reginald was
very kind to Phyllis and Ada, although somewhat rude.

It was a day or two after they returned that Phyllis was leaning on
the window-sill in the drawing-room, watching a passing shower, and
admiring the soft bright tints of a rainbow upon the dark gray mass
of cloud.  'I do set my bow in the cloud,' repeated she to herself
over and over again, until Adeline entering the room, she eagerly
exclaimed, 'Oh Ada, come and look at this beautiful rainbow, green,
and pink, and purple.  A double one, with so many stripes, Ada.  See,
there is a little bit more green.'

'There is no green in a rainbow,' said Ada.

'But look, Ada, that is green.'

'It is not real green.  Blue, red, and yellow are the pragmatic
colours,' said Ada, with a most triumphant air.  'Now are not they,
Maurice?' said she, turning to her brother, who was, as usual, deep
in entomology.

'Pragmatic, you foolish child,' said he.  'Prismatic you mean.  I am
glad you remember what I tell you, however; I think I might teach you
some science in time.  You are right in saying that blue, red, and
yellow are the prismatic colours.  Now do you know what causes a
rainbow?'

'It is to show there is never to be another flood,' said Phyllis,
gravely.

'Oh, I did not mean that,' said Maurice, addressing himself to Ada,
whose love of hard words made him deem her a promising pupil, and
whom he could lecture without interruption.  'The rainbow is caused
by--'

'But, Maurice!' exclaimed Phyllis, remaining with mouth wide open.

'The rainbow is occasioned by the refraction of the rays of the sun
in the drops of water of which a cloud is composed.'

'But, Maurice!' again said Phyllis.

'Well, what do you keep on "but, Mauricing," about?'

'But, Maurice, I thought it said, "I do set my bow in the cloud."  Is
not that right?  I will look.'

'I know that, but I know the iris, or rainbow, is a natural
phenomenon occasioned by the refraction.'

'But, Maurice, I can't bear you to say that;' and poor Phyllis sat
down and began to cry.

Ada interfered.  'Why, Maurice, you believe the Bible, don't you?'

This last speech was heard by Lilias, who just now entered the room,
and greatly surprised her.  'What can you be talking of?' said she.

'Only some nonsense of the children's,' said Maurice, shortly.

'But only hear what he says,' cried Ada.  'He says the rainbow was
not put there to show there is never to be another flood!'

'Now, Lily,' said Maurice, 'I do not think there is much use in
talking to you, but I wish you to understand that all I said was,
that the rainbow, or iris, is a natural phenomenon occasioned by the
refraction of the solar--'

'You will certainly bewilder yourself into something dreadful with
that horrid science,' said Lily.  'What is the matter with Phyl?'

'Only crying because of what I said,' answered Maurice.  'So
childish, and you are just as bad.'

'But do you mean to say,' exclaimed Lily, 'that you set this human
theory above the authority of the Bible?'

'It is common sense,' said Maurice; 'I could make a rainbow any day.'

Whereupon Phyllis cried the more, and Lily looked infinitely shocked.
'This is philosophy and vain deceit,' said she; 'the very thing that
tends to infidelity.'

'I can't help it--it is universally allowed,' said the boy doggedly.

It was fortunate that the next person who entered the room was
Claude, and all at once he was appealed to by the four disputants,
Lily the loudest and most vehement.  'Claude, listen to him, and tell
him to throw away these hateful new lights, which lead to everything
that is shocking!'

'Listen to him, with three ladies talking at once?' said Claude.
'No, not Phyl--her tears only are eloquent; but it is a mighty war
about the token of peace and LOVE, Lily.'

'The love would be in driving these horrible philosophical
speculations out of Maurice's mind,' said Lily.

'No one can ever drive out the truth,' said Maurice, with provoking
coolness.  'Don't let her scratch out my eyes, Claude.'

'I am not so sure of that maxim,' said Claude.  'Truth is chiefly
injured--I mean, her force weakened, by her own supporters.'

'Then you agree with me,' said Maurice, 'as, in fact, every rational
person must.'

'Then you are with me,' said Lily, in the same breath; 'and you will
convince Maurice of the danger of this nonsense.'

'Umph,' sighed Claude, throwing himself into his father's arm-chair,
''tis a Herculean labour!  It seems I agree with you both.'

'Why, every Christian must be with me, who has not lost his way in a
mist of his own raising,' said Lilias.

'Do you mean to say,' said Maurice, 'that these colours are not
produced by refraction?  Look at them on those prisms;' and he
pointed to an old-fashioned lustre on the chimney-piece.  'I hope
this is not a part of the Christian faith.'

'Take care, Maurice,' and Claude's eyes were bent upon him in a
manner that made him shrink.  And he added, 'Of course I do believe
that chapter about Noah.  I only meant that the immediate cause of
the rainbow is the refraction of light.  I did not mean to be
irreverent, only the girls took me up in such a way.'

'And I know well enough that you can make those colours by light on
drops of water,' said Lily.

'So you agreed all the time,' said Claude.

'But,' added Lily, 'I never liked to know it; for it always seemed to
be explaining away the Bible, and I cannot bear not to regard that
lovely bow as a constant miracle.'

'You will remember,' said Claude, 'that some commentators say it
should be, "I HAVE set my bow in the cloud," which would make what
already existed become a token for the future.

'I don't like that explanation,' said Lily.

'Others say,' added Claude, 'that there might have been no rain at
all till the windows of heaven were opened at the flood, and, in that
case, the first recurrence of rain must have greatly alarmed Noah's
family, if they had not been supported and cheered by the sight of
the rainbow.'

'That is reasonable,' said Maurice.

'I hate reason applied to revelation,' said Lily.

'It is a happier state of mind which does not seek to apply it,' said
Claude, looking at Phyllis, who had dried her tears, and stood in the
window gazing at him, in the happy certainty that he was setting all
right.  Maurice respected Claude for his science as much as his
character, and did not make game of this observation as he would if
it had been made by one of his sisters, but he looked at him with an
odd expression of perplexity.  'You do not think ignorant credulity
better than reasonable belief?' said he at length.

'It is not I only who think most highly of child-like unquestioning
faith, Maurice,' said Claude--'faith, that is based upon love and
reverence,' added he to Lily.  'But come, the shower is over, and
philosophers, or no philosophers, I invite you to walk in the wood.'

'Aye,' said Maurice, 'I daresay I can find some of the Arachne
species there.  By the bye, Claude, do you think papa would let me
have a piece of plate-glass, eighteen by twenty, to cover my case of
insects?'

'Ask, and you will discover,' said Claude.

Accordingly, Maurice began the next morning at breakfast, 'Papa, may
I have a piece of plate-glass, eighteen by--?'

But no one heard, for Emily was at the moment saying, 'The Westons
are to dine here to-day.'

Claude and Maurice both looked blank.

'I persuaded papa to ask the Westons,' said Lily, 'because I am
determined that Claude shall like Alethea.'

'You must expect that I shall not, you have given me so many orders
on the subject,' said Claude.

'Take care it has not the same effect as to tell Maurice to like a
book,' said Emily; 'nothing makes his aversion so certain.'

'Except when he takes it up by mistake, and forgets that it has been
recommended to him,' said Claude.

'Take care, Redgie, with your knife; don't put out my eyes in your
ardour against that wretched wasp.  Wat Greenwood may well say "there
is a terrible sight of waspses this year."'

'I killed twenty-nine yesterday,' said Reginald.

'And I will tell you what I saw,' said Phyllis; 'I was picking up
apples, and the wasps were flying all round, and there came a
hornet.'

'Vespa Crabro!' cried Maurice; 'oh, I must have one!'

'Well, what of the hornet?' said Mr. Mohun.

'I'll tell you what,' resumed Phyllis, 'he saw a wasp flying, and so
he went up in the air, and pounced on the poor wasp as the hawk did
on Jane's bantam.  So then he hung himself up to the branch of a tree
by one of his legs, and held the wasp with the other five, and began
to pack it up.  First he bit off the yellow tail, then the legs, and
threw them away, and then there was nothing left but the head, and so
he flew away with it to his nest.'

'Which way did he go?' said Maurice.

'To the Old Court,' answered Phyllis; 'I think the nest is in the
roof of the old cow-house, for they were flying in and out there
yesterday, and one was eating out the wood from the old rails.'

'Well,' said Mr. Mohun, 'you must show me a hornet hawking for wasps
before the nest is taken, Phyllis; I suppose you have seen the wasps
catching flies?'

'Oh yes, papa! but they pack them up quite differently.  They do not
hang by one leg, but they sit down quite comfortably on a branch
while they bite off the wings and legs.'

'There, Maurice,' said Mr. Mohun, 'I had rather hear of one such
well-observed fact than of a dozen of your hard names and impaled
insects.'

Phyllis looked quite radiant with delight at his approbation.

'But, papa,' said Maurice, 'may I have a piece of plate-glass,
eighteen by twenty?'

'When you observe facts in natural history, perhaps I may say
something to your entomology,' said Mr. Mohun.

'But, papa, all my insects will be spoilt if I may not have a piece
of glass, eighteen by--'

He was interrupted by the arrival of the post-bag, which Jane, as
usual, opened.  'A letter from Rotherwood,' said she; 'I hope he is
coming at last.'

'He is,' said Claude, reading the letter, 'but only from Saturday
till Wednesday.'

'He never gave us so little of his good company as he has this
summer,' said Emily.

'You will have them all in the autumn, to comfort you,' said Claude,
'for he hereby announces the marvellous fact, that the Marchioness
sends him to see if the castle is fit to receive her.'

'Are you sure he is not only believing what he wishes?' said Mr.
Mohun.

'I think he will gain his point at last,' said Claude.

'How stupid of him to stay no longer!' said Reginald.

'I think he has some scheme for this vacation,' said Claude, 'and I
suppose he means to crowd all the Beechcroft diversions of a whole
summer into those few days.'

'Emily,' said Mr. Mohun, 'I wish him to know the Carringtons; invite
them and the Westons to dinner on Tuesday.'

'Oh don't!' cried Reginald.  'It will be so jolly to have him to take
wasps' nests; and may I go out rabbit-shooting with him?'

'If he goes.'

'And may I carry a gun?'

'If it is not loaded,' said his father.

'Indeed, I would do no mischief,' said Reginald.

'Let me give you one piece of advice, Reginald,' said Mr. Mohun, with
a mysterious air--'never make rash promises.'

Lilias was rather disappointed in her hopes that Miss Weston and
Claude would become better acquainted.  At dinner the conversation
was almost entirely between the elder gentlemen; Claude scarcely
spoke, except when referred to by his father or Mr. Devereux.  Miss
Weston never liked to incur the danger of having to repeat her
insignificant speeches to a deaf ear, and being interested in the
discussion that was going on, she by no means seconded Lily's attempt
to get up an under-current of talk.  In general, Lily liked to listen
to conversation in silence, but she was now in very high spirits, and
could not be quiet; fortunately, she had no interest in the subject
the gentlemen were discussing, so that she could not meddle with
that, and finding Alethea silent and Claude out of reach, she turned
to Reginald, and talked and tittered with him all dinner-time.

In the drawing-room she had it all her own way, and talked enough for
all the sisters.

'Have you heard that Cousin Rotherwood is coming?'

'Yes, you said so before dinner.'

'We hope,' said Emily, 'that you and Mr. Weston will dine here on
Tuesday.  The Carringtons are coming, and a few others.'

'Thank you,' said Alethea; 'I daresay papa will be very glad to
come.'

'Have you ever seen Rotherwood?' said Lilias.

'Never,' was the reply.

'Do not expect much,' said Lily, laughing, though she knew not why;
'he is a very little fellow; no one would suppose him to be twenty,
he has such a boyish look.  Then he never sits down--'

'Literally?' said Emily.

'Literally,' persisted Lily; 'such a quick person you never did see.'

'Is he at Oxford?'

'Oh yes! it was all papa's doing that he was sent to Eton.  Papa is
his guardian.  Aunt Rotherwood never would have parted with him.'

'He is the only son,' interposed Emily.

'Uncle Rotherwood put him quite in papa's power; Aunt Rotherwood
wanted to keep him at home with a tutor, and what she would have made
of him I cannot think,' said Lily; and regardless of Emily's warning
frowns, and Alethea's attempt to change the subject, she went on:
'When he was quite a child he used to seem a realisation of all the
naughty Dicks and Toms in story-books.  Miss Middleton had a perfect
horror of his coming here, for he would mind no one, and played
tricks and drew Claude into mischief; but he is quite altered since
papa had the management of him--Oh! such talks as papa has had with
Aunt Rotherwood--do you know, papa says no one knows what it is to
lose a father but those who have the care of his children, and Aunt
Rotherwood is so provoking.'

Here Alethea determined to put an end to this oration, and to Emily's
great relief, she cut short the detail of Lady Rotherwood's offences
by saying, 'Do you think Faith Longley likely to suit us, if we took
her to help the housemaid?'

'Are you thinking of taking her?' cried Lily.  'Yes, for steady,
stupid household work, Faith would do very well; she is just the
stuff to make a servant of--"for dulness ever must be regular"--I
mean for those who like mere steadiness better than anything more
lovable.'

As Alethea said, laughing, 'I must confess my respect for that
quality,' Mr. Devereux and Claude entered the room.

'Oh, Robert!' cried Lily, 'Mrs. Weston is going to take Faith Longley
to help the housemaid.'

'You are travelling too fast, Lily,' said Alethea, 'she is only going
to think about it.'

'I should be very glad,' said Mr. Devereux, 'that Faith should have a
good place; the Longleys are very respectable people, and they
behaved particularly well in refusing to let this girl go and live
with some dissenters at Stoney Bridge.'

'I like what I have seen of the girl very much,' said Miss Weston.

'In spite of her sad want of feeling,' said Robert, smiling, as he
looked at Lily.

'Oh! she is a good work-a-day sort of person,' said Lily, 'like all
other poor people, hard and passive.  Now, do not set up your
eyebrows, Claude, I am quite serious, there is no warmth about any
except--'

'So this is what Lily is come to!' cried Emily; 'the grand supporter
of the poor on poetical principles.'

'The poor not affectionate!' said Alethea.

'Not, compared within people whose minds and affections have been
cultivated,' said Lily.  'Now just hear what Mrs. Wall said to me
only yesterday; she asked for a black stuff gown out of the clothing
club, "for," said she, "I had a misfortune, Miss;" I thought it would
be, "and tore my gown," but it was, "I had a misfortune, Miss, and
lost my brother."'

'A very harsh conclusion on very slight grounds,' said Mr. Devereux.

'Prove the contrary,' said Lily.

'Facts would scarcely demonstrate it either way,' said Mr. Devereux.
'They would only prove what was the case with individuals who chanced
to come in our way, and if we are seldom able to judge of the depth
of feeling of those with whom we are familiar, how much less of those
who feel our presence a restraint.'

'Intense feeling mocks restraint,' said Lily.

'Violent, not intense,' said Mr. Devereux.  'Besides, you talk of
cultivating the affections.  Now what do you mean?  Exercising them,
or talking about them?'

'Ah!' said Emily, 'the affection of a poor person is more tried; we
blame a poor man for letting his old mother go to the workhouse,
without considering how many of us would do the same, if we had as
little to live upon.'

'Still,' said Alethea, 'the same man who would refuse to maintain her
if poor, would not bear with her infirmities if rich.'

'Are the poor never infirm and peevish?' said Mr. Devereux.

'Oh! how much worse it must be to bear with ill-temper in poverty,'
said Emily, 'when we think it quite wonderful to see a young lady
kind and patient with a cross old relation; what must it be when she
is denying herself, not only her pleasure, but her food for her sake;
not merely sitting quietly with her all day, and calling a servant to
wait upon her, but toiling all day to maintain her, and keeping awake
half the night to nurse her?'

'Those are realities, indeed,' said Alethea; 'our greatest efforts
seem but child's play in comparison.'

Lilias could hardly have helped being sobered by this conversation if
she had attended to it, but she had turned away to repeat the story
of Mrs. Walls to Jane, and then, fancying that the others were still
remarking upon it, she said in a light, laughing tone, 'Well, so far
I agree with you.  I know of a person who may well be called one of
ourselves, who I could quite fancy making such a speech.'

'Whom do you mean?' said Mr. Devereux.  Alethea wished she did not
know.

'No very distant relation,' said Jane.

'Do not talk nonsense, Jane,' said Claude, gravely.

'No nonsense at all, Claude,' cried Jane in her very very pertest
tone, 'it is exactly like Eleanor; I am sure I can see her with her
hands before her, saying in her prim voice, "I must turn my old black
silk and trim it with crape, for I have had a misfortune, and lost my
brother."'

'Lilias,' said Miss Weston, somewhat abruptly, 'did you not wish to
sing with me this evening?'

And thus she kept Lilias from any further public mischief that
evening.

Claude, exceedingly vexed by what had passed, with great injustice,
laid the blame upon Miss Weston, and instead of rendering her the
honour which she really deserved for the tact with which she had put
an end to the embarrassment of all parties, he fancied she was
anxious to display her talents for music, and thus only felt fretted
by the sounds.

Mr. Weston and his daughter intended to walk home that evening, as it
was a beautiful moonlight night.

'Oh, let us convoy you!' exclaimed Lilias; 'I do long to show Alethea
a glow-worm.  Will you come, Claude?  May we, papa?  Feel how still
and warm it is.  A perfect summer night, not a breath stirring.'

Mr. Mohun consented, and Lily almost hurried Alethea upstairs, to put
on her bonnet and shawl.  When she came down she found that the
walking party had increased.  Jane and Reginald would both have been
in despair to have missed such a frolic; Maurice hoped to fall in
with the droning beetle, or to lay violent hands on a glow-worm;
Emily did not like to be left behind, and even Mr. Mohun was going,
being in the midst of an interesting conversation with Mr. Weston.
Lily, with an absurd tragic gesture, told Alethea that amongst so
many, such a crowd, all the grace and sweet influence of the walk was
ruined.  The 'sweet influence' was ruined as far as Lily was
concerned, but not by the number of her companions.  It was the
uneasy feeling caused by her over-strained spirits and foolish
chattering that prevented her from really entering into the charm of
the soft air, the clear moon, the solemn deep blue sky, the few
stars, the white lilies on the dark pond, the long shadows of the
trees, the freshness of the dewy fields.  Her simplicity, and her
genuine delight in the loveliness of the scene, was gone for the
time, and though she spoke much of her enjoyment, it was in a high-
flown affected style.

When the last good-night had been exchanged, and Lily had turned
homeward, she felt the stillness which succeeded their farewells
almost oppressive; she started at the dark shadow of a tree which lay
across the path, and to shake off a sensation of fear which was
coming over her, she put her arm within Claude's, exclaiming, 'You
naughty boy, you will be stupid and silent, say what I will.'

'I heard enough to-night to strike me dumb,' said Claude.

For one moment Lily thought he was in jest, but the gravity of his
manner showed her that he was both grieved and displeased, and she
changed her tone as she said, 'Oh!  Claude, what do you mean?'

'Do you not know?' said Claude.

'What, you mean about Eleanor?' said Lily; 'you must fall upon Miss
Jenny there--it was her doing.'

'Jane's tongue is a pest,' said Claude; 'but she was not the first to
speak evil falsely of one to whom you owe everything.  Oh!  Lily, I
cannot tell you how that allusion of yours sounded.'

'What allusion?' asked Lily in alarm, for she had never seen her
gentle brother so angry.

'You know,' said he.

'Indeed, I do not,' exclaimed Lily, munch frightened.  'Claude,
Claude, you must mistake, I never could have said anything so very
shocking.'

'I hope I do,' said Claude; 'I could hardly believe that one of the
little ones who cannot remember him, could have referred to him in
that way--but for you!'

'Him?' said Lilias.

'I do not like to mention his name to one who regards him so
lightly,' said Claude.  'Think over what passed, if you are
sufficiently come to yourself to remember it.'

After a little pause Lily said in a subdued voice, 'Claude, I hope
you do not believe that I was thinking of what really happened when I
said that.'

'Pray what were you thinking of?'

'The abstract view of Eleanor's character.'

'Abstract nonsense!' said Claude.  'A fine demonstration of the rule
of love, to go about the world slandering your sister!'

'To go about the world!  Oh!  Claude, it was only Robert, one of
ourselves, and Alethea, to whom I tell everything.'

'So much the worse.  I always rejoiced that you had no foolish young
lady friend to make missish confidences to.'

'She is no foolish young lady friend,' said Lilias, indignant in her
turn; 'she is five years older than I am, and papa wishes us to be
intimate with her.'

'Then the fault is in yourself,' said Claude.  'You ought not to have
told such things if they were true, and being utterly false--'

'But, Claude, I cannot see that they are false.'

'Not false, that Eleanor cared not a farthing for Harry!' cried
Claude, shaking off Lily's arm, and stopping short.

'Oh!--she cared, she really did care,' said Lily, as fast as she
could speak.  'Oh!  Claude, how could you think that?  I told you I
did not mean what really happened, only that--Eleanor is cold--not as
warm as some people--she did care for him, of course she did--I know
that--I believe she loved him with all her heart--but yet--I mean she
did not--she went on as usual--said nothing--scarcely cried--looked
the same--taught us--never--Oh! it did not make half the difference
in her that it did in William.'

'I cannot tell how she behaved at the time,' said Claude, 'I only
know I never had any idea what a loss Harry was till I came home and
saw her face.  I used never to trouble myself to think whether people
looked ill or well, but the change in her did strike me.  She was
bearing up to comfort papa, and to cheer William, and to do her duty
by all of us, and you could take such noble resignation for want of
feeling!'

Lilias looked down and tried to speak, but she was choked by her
tears; she could not bear Claude's displeasure, and she wept in
silence.  At last she said in a voice broken by sobs, 'I was unjust--
I know Eleanor was all kindness--all self-sacrifice--I have been very
ungrateful--I wish I could help it--and you know well, Claude, how
far I am from regarding dear Harry with indifference--how the thought
of him is a star in my mind--how happy it makes me to think of him at
the end of the Church Militant Prayer; do not believe I was dreaming
of him.'

'And pray,' said Claude, laughing in his own good-humoured way,
'which of us is it that she is so willing to lose?'

'Oh! Claude, no such thing,' said Lily, 'you know what I meant, or
did not mean.  It was nonsense--I hope nothing worse.'  Lily felt
that she might take his arm again.  There was a little silence, and
then Lily resumed in a timid voice, 'I do not know whether you will
be angry, Claude, but honestly, I do not think that if--that Eleanor
would be so wretched about you as I should.'

'Eleanor knew Harry better than you did; no, Lily, I never could have
been what Harry was, even if I had never wasted my time, and if my
headaches had not interfered with my best efforts.'

'I do not believe that, say what you will,' said Lily.

'Ask William, then,' said Claude, sighing.

'I am sure papa does not think so,' said Lily; 'no, I cannot feel
that Harry is such a loss when we still have you.'

'Oh! Lily, it is plain that you never knew Harry,' said Claude.  'I
do not believe you ever did--that is one ting to be said for you.'

'Not as you did,' said Lily; 'remember, he was six years older.  Then
think how little we saw of him whilst they were abroad; he was always
at school, or spending the holidays with Aunt Robert, and latterly
even farther off, and only coming sometimes for an hour or two to see
us.  Then he used to kiss us all round, we went into the garden with
him, looked at him, and were rather afraid of him; then he walked off
to Wat Greenwood, came back, wished us good-bye, and away he went.'

'Yes,' said Claude, 'but after they came home?'

'Then he was a tall youth, and we were silly girls,' said Lilias; 'he
avoided Miss Middleton, and we were always with her.  He was good-
natured, but he could not get on with us; he did very well with the
little ones, but we were of the wrong age.  He and William and
Eleanor were one faction, we were another, and you were between both-
-he was too old, too sublime, too good, too grave for us.'

'Too grave!' said Claude; 'I never heard a laugh so full of glee,
except, perhaps, Phyllis's.'

'The last time he was at home,' continued Lily, 'we began to know him
better; there was no Miss Middleton in the way, and after you and
William were gone, he used to walk with us, and read to us.  He read
Guy Mannering to us, and told us the story of Sir Maurice de Mohun;
but the loss was not the same to us as to you elder ones; and then
sorrow was almost lost in admiration, and in pleasure at the terms in
which every one spoke of him.  Claude, I have no difficulty in not
wishing it otherwise; he is still my brother, and I would not change
the feeling which the thought of his death gives me--no, not for
himself in life and health.'

'Ah!' sighed Claude, 'you have no cause for self-reproach--no reason
to lament over "wasted hours and love misspent."'

'You will always talk of your old indolence, as if it was a great
crime,' said Lily.

'It was my chief temptation,' said Claude.  'As long as we know we
are out of the path of duty it does not make much difference whether
we have turned to the right hand or to the left.'

'Was it Harry's death that made you look upon it in this light?' said
Lily.

'I knew it well enough before,' said Claude, 'it was what he had
often set before me.  Indeed, till I came home, and saw this place
without him, I never really knew what a loss he was.  At Eton I did
not miss him more than when he went to Oxford, and I did not dwell on
what he was to papa, or what I ought to be; and even when I saw what
home was without him, I should have contented myself with miserable
excuses about my health, if it had not been for my confirmation; then
I awoke, I saw my duty, and the wretched way in which I had been
spending my time.  Thoughts of Harry and of my father came
afterwards; I had not vigour enough for them before.'

Here they reached the house, and parted--Claude, ashamed of having
talked of himself for the first time in his life, and Lily divided
between shame at her own folly and pleasure at Claude's having thus
opened his mind.

Jane, who was most in fault, escaped censure.  Her father was
ignorant of her improper speech.  Emily forgot it, and it was not
Claude's place to reprove his sisters, though to Lily he spoke as a
friend.  It passed away from her mind like other idle words, which,
however, could not but leave an impression on those who heard her.

An unlooked-for result of the folly of this evening was, that Claude
was prevented from appreciating Miss Weston He could not learn to
like her, nor shake off an idea, that she was prying into their
family concerns; he thought her over-praised, and would not even give
just admiration to her singing, because he had once fancied her eager
to exhibit it.  It was unreasonable to dislike his sister's friend
for his sister's folly, but Claude's wisdom was not yet arrived at
its full growth, and he deserved credit for keeping his opinion to
himself.


CHAPTER IX--THE WASP


'Whom He hath blessed and called His own,
He tries them early, look and tone,
   Bent brow and throbbing heart,
Tries them with pain.'

The next week Lily had the pleasure of fitting out Faith Longley for
her place at Mrs. Weston's.  She rejoiced at this opportunity of
patronising her, because in her secret soul she felt that she might
have done her a little injustice in choosing her own favourite Esther
in her stead.  Esther's popularity at the New Court, however, made
Lilias confident in her own judgment; the servants liked her because
she was quick and obliging, Mr. Mohun said she looked very neat,
Phyllis liked her because a mischance to her frock was not so brave
an offence with her as with Rachel, and Ada was growing very fond of
her, because she was in the habit of bestowing great admiration on
her golden curls as she arranged them, and both little girls were
glad not to be compelled to put away the playthings they took out.

Maurice and Reginald had agreed to defer their onslaught on the wasps
till Lord Rotherwood's arrival, and the war was now limited to
attacks on foraging parties.  Reginald most carefully marked every
nest about the garden and farm, and, on his cousin's arrival on
Saturday evening, began eagerly to give him a list of their
localities.  Lord Rotherwood was as ardent in the cause as even
Reginald could desire, and would have instantly set out with him to
reconnoitre had not the evening been rainy.

Then turning to Claude, he said, 'But I have not told you what
brought me here; I came to persuade you to make an expedition with me
up the Rhine; I set off next week; I would not write about it,
because I knew you would only say you should like it very much, but--
some but, that meant it was a great deal too much trouble.'

'How fast the plan has risen up,' said Claude, 'I heard nothing of it
when I was with you.'

'Oh! it only came into my head last week, but I do not see what there
is to wait for, second thoughts are never best.'

'Oh! Claude, how delightful,' said Lily.

Claude stirred his tea meditatively, and did not speak.

'It is too much trouble, I perceive,' said Lord Rotherwood; 'just as
I told you.'

'Not exactly,' said Claude.

Lord Rotherwood now detailed his plan to his uncle, who said with a
propitious smile, 'Well, Claude, what do you think of it?

'Mind you catch a firefly for me,' said Maurice.

'Why don't you answer, Claude?' said Lilias; 'only imagine seeing
Undine's Castle!'

'Eh, Claude?' said his father.

'It would be very pleasant,' said Claude, slowly, 'but--'

'What?' said Mr. Mohun.

'Only a but,' said the Marquis.  'I hope he will have disposed of it
by the morning; I start next Tuesday week; I would not go later for
the universe; we shall be just in time for the summer in its beauty,
and to have a peep at Switzerland.  We shall not have time for Mont
Blanc, without rattling faster than any man in his senses would do.
I do not mean to leave any place till I have thoroughly seen twice
over everything worth seeing that it contains.'

'Then perhaps you will get as far as Antwerp, and spend the rest of
the holidays between the Cathedral and Paul Potter's bull.  No, I
shall have nothing to say to you at that rate,' said Claude.

'Depend upon it, it will be you that will wish to stand still when I
had rather be on the move,' said the Marquis.

'Then you had better leave me behind.  I have no intention of being
hurried over the world, and never having my own way,' said Claude,
trying to look surly.

'I am sure I should not mind travelling twice over the world to see
Cologne Cathedral, or the field of Waterloo,' said Lily.

'Let me only show him my route,' said Lord Rotherwood.  'Redgie, look
in my greatcoat pocket in the hall for Murray's Handbook, will you?'

'Go and get it, Phyl,' said Reginald, who was astride on the window-
sill, peeling a stick.

Away darted Lord Rotherwood to fetch it himself, but Phyllis was
before him; her merry laugh was heard, as he chased her round the
hall to get possession of his book, throwing down two or three cloaks
to intercept her path.  Mr. Mohun took the opportunity of his absence
to tell Claude that he need not refuse on the score of expense.

'Thank you,' was all Claude's answer.

Lord Rotherwood returned, and after punishing the discourteous
Reginald by raising him up by his ears, he proceeded to give a full
description of the delights of his expedition, the girls joining
heartily with him in declaring it as well arranged as possible, and
bringing all their knowledge of German travels to bear upon it.
Claude sometimes put in a word, but never as if he cared much about
the matter, and he was not to be persuaded to give any decided answer
as to whether he would accompany the Marquis.

The next morning at breakfast Lord Rotherwood returned to the charge,
but Claude seemed even more inclined to refuse than the day before.
Lilias could not divine what was the matter with him, and lingered
long after her sisters had gone to school, to hear what answer he
would make; and when Mr. Mohun looked at his watch, and asked her if
she knew how late it was, she rose from the breakfast-table with a
sigh, and thought while she was putting on her bonnet how much less
agreeable the school had been since the schism in the parish.  And
besides, now that Faith and Esther, and one or two others of her best
scholars, had gone away from school, there seemed to be no one of any
intelligence or knowledge left in the class, except Marianne Weston,
who knew too much for the others, and one or two clever inattentive
little girls:  Lily almost disliked teaching them.

Phyllis and Adeline were in Miss Weston's class, and much did they
delight in her teaching.  There was a quiet earnestness in her manner
which attracted her pupils, and fixed their attention, so as scarcely
to allow the careless room for irreverence, while mere cleverness
seemed almost to lose its advantage in learning what can only truly
be entered into by those whose conduct agrees with their knowledge.

Phyllis never dreamt that she could be happy while standing still and
learning, till Miss Weston began to teach at the Sunday school.
Obedience at school taught her to acquire habits of reverent
attention, which gradually conquered the idleness and weariness which
had once possessed her at church.  First, she learnt to be interested
in the Historical Lessons, then never to lose her place in the
Psalms, then to think about and follow some of the Prayers; by this
time she was far from feeling any fatigue at all on week-days; she
had succeeded in restraining any contortions to relieve herself from
the irksomeness of sitting still, and had her thoughts in tolerable
order through the greater part of the Sunday service, and now it was
her great wish, unknown to any one, to abstain from a single yawn
through the whole service, including the sermon!

Her place (chosen for her by Eleanor when first she had begun to go
to Church, as far as possible from Reginald) was at the end of the
seat, between her papa and the wall.  This morning, as she put her
arm on the book-board, while rising from kneeling, she felt a sudden
thrill of sharp pain smear her left elbow, which made her start
violently, and would have caused a scream, had she not been in
church.  She saw a wasp fall on the ground, and was just about to put
her foot on it, when she recollected where she was.  She had never in
her life intentionally killed anything, and this was no time to begin
in that place, and when she was angry.  The pain was severe--more so
perhaps than any she had felt before--and very much frightened, she
pulled her papa's coat to draw his attention.  But her first pull was
so slight that he did not feel it, and before she gave a second she
remembered that she could not make him hear what was the matter,
without more noise than was proper.  No, she must stay where she was,
and try to bear the pain, and she knew that if she did try, help
would be given her.  She proceeded to find out the Psalm and join her
voice with the others, though her heart was beating very fast, her
forehead was contracted, and she could not help keeping her right
hand clasped round her arm, and sometimes shifting from one foot to
the other.  The sharpness of the pain soon went off; she was able to
attend to the Lessons, and hoped it would soon be quite well; but as
soon as she began to think about it, it began to ache and throb, and
seemed each moment to be growing hotter.  The sermon especially tried
her patience, her cheeks were burning, she felt sick and hardly able
to hold up her head, yet she would not lean it against the wall,
because she had often been told not to do so.  She was exceedingly
alarmed to find that her arm had swelled so much that she could
hardly bend it, and it had received the impression of the gathers of
her sleeve; she thought no sermon had ever been so long, but she sat
quite still and upright, as she could not have done, had she not
trained herself unconsciously by her efforts to leave off the trick
of kicking her heels together.  She did not speak till she was in the
churchyard, and then she made Emily look at her arm.

'My poor child, it is frightful,' said Emily, 'what is the matter?'

'A wasp stung me just before the Psalms,' said Phyllis, 'and it goes
on swelling and swelling, and it does pant!'

'What is the matter?' asked Mr. Mohun.

'Papa, just look,' said Emily, 'a wasp stung this dear child quite
early in the service, and she has been bearing it all this time in
silence.  Why did you not show me, Phyl?'

'Because it was in church,' said the little girl.

'Why, Phyllis, you are a very Spartan,' said Lord Rotherwood.

'Something better than a Spartan,' said Mr. Mohun.  'Does it give you
much pain now, my dear?'

'Not so bad as in church,' said Phyllis, 'only I am very tired, and
it is so hot.'

'We will help you home, then,' said Mr. Mohun.  As he took her up in
his arms, Phyllis laughed, thanked him, replied to various inquiries
from her sisters and the Westons--laughed again at sundry jokes from
her brothers, then became silent, and was almost asleep, with her
head on her papa's shoulder, by the time they reached the hall-door.
She thought it very strange to be laid down on the sofa in the
drawing-room, and to find every one attending to her.  Mrs. Weston
bathed her forehead with lavender-water, and Lily cut open the sleeve
of her frock; Jane fetched all manner of remedies, and Emily pitied
her.  She was rather frightened:  she thought such a fuss would not
be made about her unless she was very ill; she was faint and tired,
and was glad when Mrs. Weston proposed that they should all come
away, and leave her to go to sleep quietly.

Marianne was so absorbed in admiration of Phyllis that she did not
speak one word all the way from church to the New Court, and stood in
silence watching the operations upon her friend, till Mrs. Weston
sent every one away.

Adeline rather envied Phyllis; she would willingly have endured the
pain to be made of so much importance, and said to be better than a
Spartan, which must doubtless be something very fine indeed!

Phyllis was waked by the bells ringing for the afternoon service;
Mrs. Weston was sitting by her, reading, Claude came to inquire for
her, and to tell her that as she had lost her early dinner, she was
to join the rest of the party at six.  To her great surprise she felt
quite well and fresh, and her arm was much better; Mrs. Weston pinned
up her sleeve, and she set off with her to church, wondering whether
Ada would remember to tell her what she had missed that afternoon at
school.  Those whose approbation was valuable, honoured Phyllis for
her conduct, but she did not perceive it, or seek for it; she did not
look like a heroine while running about and playing with Reginald and
the dogs in the evening, but her papa had told her she was a good
child, Claude had given her one of his kindest smiles, and she was
happy.  Even when Esther was looking at the mark left by the sting,
and telling her that she was sure Miss Marianne Weston would have not
been half so good, her simple, humble spirit came to her aid, and she
answered, 'I'll tell you what, Esther, Marianne would have behaved
much better, for she is older, and never fidgets, and she would not
have been angry like me, and just going to kill the wasp.'


CHAPTER X--COUSIN ROTHERWOOD


'We care not who says
   And intends it dispraise,
That an Angler to a fool is next neighbour.'

In the evening Lord Rotherwood renewed his entreaties to Claude to
join him on his travels.  He was very much bent on taking him, for
his own pleasure depended not a little on his cousin's company.
Claude lay on the glassy slope of the terrace, while Lord Rotherwood
paced rapidly up and down before him, persuading him with all the
allurements he could think of, and looking the picture of impatience.
Lily sat by, adding her weight to all his arguments.  But Claude was
almost contemptuous to all the beauties of Germany, and all the
promised sights; he scarcely gave himself the trouble to answer his
tormentors, only vouchsafing sometimes to open his lips to say that
he never meant to go to a country where people spoke a language that
sounded like cracking walnuts; that he hated steamers; had no fancy
for tumble-down castles; that it was so common to travel; there was
more distinction in staying at home; that the field of Waterloo had
been spoilt, and was not worth seeing; his ideas of glaciers would be
ruined by the reality; and he did not care to see Cologne Cathedral
till it was finished.

On this Lily set up an outcry of horror.

'One comfort is, Lily,' said Lord Rotherwood, 'he does not mean it;
he did not say it from the bottom of his heart.  Now, confess you did
not, Claude.'

Claude pretended to be asleep.

'I see plainly enough,' said the Marquis to Lily, 'it is as Wat
Greenwood says, "Mr. Reynold and the grapes."'

'But it is not,' said Lily, 'and that is what provokes me; papa says
he is quite welcome to go if he likes, and that he thinks it will do
him a great deal of good, but that foolish boy will say nothing but
"I will think about it," and "thank you"'

'Then I give him up as regularly dense.'

'It is the most delightful plan ever thought of,' said Lily, 'so
easily done, and just bringing within his compass all he ever wished
to see.'

'Oh! his sole ambition is to stretch those long legs of his on the
grass, like a great vegetable marrow,' said Lord Rotherwood.  'It is
vegetating like a plant that makes him so much taller than any
rational creature with a little animal life.'

'I think Jane has his share of curiosity,' said Lily, 'I am sure I
had no idea that anything belonging to us could be so stupid.'

'Well,' said the Marquis, 'I shall not go.'

'No?' said Lily.

'No, I shall certainly not go.'

'Nonsense,' said Claude, waking from his pretended sleep, 'why do you
not ask Travers to go with you?  He would like nothing better.'

'He is a botanist, and would bore me with looking for weeds.  No, I
will have you, or stay at home.'

Claude proposed several others as companions, but Lord Rotherwood
treated them all with as much disdain as Claude had shown for
Germany, and ended with 'Now, Claude, you know my determination, only
tell me why you will not go?'

'Then I do tell you, Rotherwood, the truth is, that those boys,
Maurice and Reginald, are perfectly unmanageable when they are left
alone with the girls.'

'Have a tutor for them,' said the Marquis.

'Very much obliged to you they would be for the suggestion,' said
Claude.

'Oh! but Claude,' said Lily.

'I really cannot go.  They mind no one but the Baron and me, and
besides that, it would be no small annoyance to the house; ten tutors
could not keep them from indescribable bits of mischief.  I undertook
them these holidays, and I mean to keep them.'

Lilias was just flying off to her father, when Claude caught hold of
her, saying, 'I desire you will not,' and she stood still, looking at
her cousin in dismay.

'It is all right,' cried the Marquis, joyfully, 'it is only to set
off three weeks later.'

'Oh! I thought you would not go a week later for the universe,' said
Claude, smiling.

'Not for the Universe, but for U-,' said Lord Rotherwood.

'Worthy of a companion true, of the University of Gottingen,' said
Claude; 'but, Rotherwood, do you really mean that it will make no
difference to you?'

'None whatever; I meant to spend three weeks with my mother at the
end of the tour, and I shall spend them now instead.  I only talked
of going immediately, because nothing is done at all that is not done
quickly, and I hate delays, but it is all the same, and now it stands
for Tuesday three weeks.  Now we shall see what he says to Cologne,
Lily.'

Claude sprung up, and began talking over arrangements and
possibilities with zest, which showed what his wishes had been from
the first.  All was quickly settled, and as soon as his father had
given his cordial approbation to the scheme, it was amusing to see
how animated and active Claude became, and in how different a style
he talked of the once slighted Rhine.

Lord Rotherwood told the boys that their brother was a great deal too
good for them, but they never troubled themselves to ask in what
respect; Lilias took very great delight in telling Emily of the
sacrifice which he had been willing to make, and looked forward to
talking it over with Alethea, but she refrained, as long as he was at
home, as she knew it would greatly displease him, and she had heard
enough about missish confidences.

The Marquis of Rotherwood was certainly the very reverse of his
chosen travelling companion, in the matter of activity.  He made an
appointment with the two boys to get up at half-past four on Monday
morning for some fishing, before the sun was too high--Maurice not
caring for the sport, but intending to make prize of any of the
'insect youth' which might prefer the sunrise for their gambols; and
Reginald, in high delight at the prospect of real fishing, something
beyond his own performances with a stick and a string, in pursuit of
minnows in the ditches.  Reginald was making contrivances for tying a
string round his wrist and hanging the end of it from the window,
that Andrew Grey might give it a pull as he went by to his work, to
wake him, when Lord Rotherwood exclaimed, 'What! cannot you wake
yourself at any time you please?'

'No,' said Reginald, 'I never heard of any one that could.'

'Then I advise you to learn the art; in the meantime I will call you
to-morrow.'

Loud voices and laughter in the hall, and the front door creaking on
its hinges at sunrise, convinced the household that this was no vain
boast; before breakfast was quite over the fishermen were seen
approaching the house.  Lord Rotherwood was an extraordinary figure,
in an old shooting jacket of his uncle's, an enormous pair of
fishing-boots of William's, and the broad-brimmed straw hat, which
always hung up in the hall, and was not claimed by any particular
owner.

Maurice displayed to Jane the contents of two phials, strange little
creatures, with stranger names, of which he was as proud as Reginald
of his three fine trout.  Lord Rotherwood did not appear till he had
made himself look like other people, which he did in a surprisingly
short time.  He began estimating the weight of the fish, and talking
at his most rapid rate, till at last Claude said, 'Phyllis told us
just now that you were coming back, for that she heard Cousin
Rotherwood talking, and it proved to be Jane's old turkey cock
gobbling.'

'No bad compliment,' said Emily, 'for Phyllis was once known to say,
on hearing a turkey cock, "How melodiously that nightingale sings."'

'No, no! that was Ada,' said Lilias.

'I could answer for that,' said Claude.  'Phyllis is too familiar
with both parties to mistake their notes.  Besides, she never was
known to use such a word as melodiously.'

'Do you remember,' said the Marquis, 'that there was some great
lawyer who had three kinds of handwriting, one that the public could
read, one that only his clerk could read, and one that nobody could
read?'

'I suppose I am the clerk,' said Claude, 'unless I divide the honour
with Florence.'

'I do not think I am unintelligible anywhere but here,' said Lord
Rotherwood.  'There is nothing sufficiently exciting at home, if
Grosvenor Square is to be called home.'

'Sometimes you do it without knowing it,' said Lily.

'Yes,' said Claude, 'when you do not exactly know what you are going
to say.'

'Then it is no bad plan,' said Lord Rotherwood.  'People are
satisfied, and you don't commit yourself.'

'I'll tell you what, Cousin Rotherwood,' exclaimed Phyllis, 'your
hand is bleeding.'

'Is it?  Thank you, Phyllis, I thought I had washed it off:  now do
find me some sealing-wax--India-rub her--sticking-plaster, I mean.'

'Oh!  Rotherwood,' said Emily, 'what a bad cut, how did it happen?'

'Only, I am the victim to Maurice's first essay in fishing.'

'Just fancy what an awkward fellow Maurice is,' said Reginald, 'he
had but one throw, and he managed to stick the hook into Rotherwood's
hand.'

'One of those barbed hooks?  Oh! Rotherwood, how horrid!' said Emily.

'And he cut it out with his knife, and caught that great trout with
it directly,' said Reginald.

'And neither half drowned Maurice, nor sent him home again?' asked
Lily.

'I contented myself with taking away his weapon,' said the Marquis;
'and he wished for nothing better than to poke about in the gutters
for insects; it was only Redgie that teased him into the nobler
sport.'

Emily was inclined to make a serious matter of the accident, but her
cousin said ten words while she said one, and by the time her first
sentence was uttered, she found him talking about his ride to
Devereux Castle.

He and Claude set out as soon as breakfast was over, and came back
about three o'clock; Claude was tired with the heat, and betook
himself to the sofa, where he fell asleep, under pretence of reading,
but the indefatigable Marquis was ready and willing to set out with
Reginald and Wat Greenwood to shoot rabbits.

Dinner-time came, and Emily sat at the drawing-room window with
Claude and Lilias, lamenting her cousin's bad habits.  'Nothing will
ever make him punctual,' said she.

'I am in duty bound to let you say nothing against him,' said Claude.

'It is very good-natured in him to wait for you,' said Lily, 'but it
would be horribly selfish to leave you behind.'

'Delay is his great horror,' said Claude, 'and the wonder of his
character is, that he is not selfish.  No one had ever better
training for it.'

'He does like his own way very much,' said Lilias.

'Who does not?' said Claude.

'Nothing shows his sense so much,' said Emily, 'as his great
attachment to papa--the only person who ever controlled him.'

'And to Claude--his opposite in everything,' said Lilias.

'I think he will tire you to death in Germany,' said Emily.

'Never fear,' said Claude, 'my vis inertiae is enough to
counterbalance any amount of restlessness.'

'Here they come,' said Lily; 'how Wat Greenwood is grinning at
Rotherwood's jokes!'

'A happy day for Wat,' said Emily.  'He will be quite dejected if
William is not at home next shooting season.  He thinks you a
degenerate Mohun, Claude.'

'He must comfort himself with Redgie,' said Claude.

'Rotherwood is only eager about shooting in common with everything
else,' said Lily, 'but Redgie, I fear, will care for nothing else.'

Lord Rotherwood came in, accounting for being late, as, in passing
through a harvest field, he could not help attempting to reap.  The
Beechcroft farming operations had been his especial amusement from
very early days, and his plans were numerous for farming on a grand
scale as soon as he should be of age.  His talk during dinner was of
turnips and wheat, till at length Mr. Mohun asked him what he thought
of the appearance of the castle.  He said it was very forlorn; the
rooms looked so dreary and deserted that he could not bear to be in
them, and had been out of doors almost all the time.  Indeed, he was
afraid he had disappointed the housekeeper by not complimenting her
as she deserved, for the freezing dismal order in which she kept
everything.  'And really,' said he, 'I must go again to-morrow and
make up for it, and Emily, you must come with me and try to devise
something to make the unhappy place less like the abode of the Prince
of the Black Islands.'

Emily willingly promised to go, and she went on talking to him, and
telling him whom he was to meet on the next day, when an unusual
silence making her look up, she beheld him more than half asleep.

Reginald fidgeted and sighed, and Maurice grew graver and graver as
they thought of the wasps.  Maurice wanted to take a nest entire, and
began explaining his plan to Claude.

'You see, Claude, burning some straw and then digging, spoils the
combs, as Wat does it; now I have got some puff-balls and sulphur to
put into the hole, and set fire to them with a lucifer match, so as
to stifle the wasps, and then dig them out quietly to-morrow
morning.'

'It is all of no use, if that Rotherwood will do nothing but sleep,'
said Reginald, in a disconsolate tone.

'You should not have made him get up at four,' said Emily.

'Who!  I?' exclaimed the Marquis.  'I never was wider awake.  What
are you waiting for, Reginald?  I thought you were going to take
wasps' nests.'

'You are much too tired, I am sure,' said Emily.

'Tired! not in the least, I have done nothing to-day to tire me,'
said Lord Rotherwood, walking up and down the room to keep himself
awake.

The whole party went out, and found Wat Greenwood waiting for them
with a bundle of straw, a spade, and a little gunpowder.  Maurice
carried a basket containing all his preparations, on which Wat looked
with supreme contempt, telling him that his puffs were too green to
make a smeech.  Maurice, not condescending to argue the point, ran on
to a nest which Reginald had marked on one of the green banks of the
ancient moat.

'Take care that the wasps are all come in; mind what you are about,
Maurice,' called his father.

'Master Maurice,' shouted Wat, 'you had better take a green bough.'

'Never mind, Wat,' said Lord Rotherwood, 'he would not stay long
enough to use it if he had it.'

Reginald ran after Maurice, who had just reached the nest.

'There is one coming in, the evening is so warm they are not quiet
yet.'

'I'll quiet them,' said Maurice, kneeling down, and putting his first
puff-ball into the hole.

Reginald stood by with a sly smile, as he pulled a branch off a
neighbouring filbert-tree.  The next moment Maurice gave a sudden
yell, 'The wasps! the wasps!' and jumping up, and tripping at his
first step, rolled down the bank, and landed safely at Lord
Rotherwood's feet.  The shouts of laughter were loud, but he regarded
them not, and as soon as he recovered his feet, rushed past his
sisters, and never stopped till he reached the house.  Redgie stood
alone, in the midst of a cloud of wasps, beating them off with a
bough, roaring with laughter, and calling Wat to bring the straw to
burn them.

'No, no, Redgie, come away, leave them for Maurice to try again,'
said his father.

'The brute, he stung me,' cried Reginald, knocking down a wasp or two
as he came down.  'What is this?' added he, as he stumbled over
something at the bottom of the slope.  'Oh!  Maurice's basket; look
here--laudanum--did he mean to poison the wasps?'

'No,' said Jane, 'to cure their stings.'

'The poor unhappy quiz!' cried Reginald.

While the others were busy over a nest, Mr. Mohun asked Emily how the
boy got at the medicine chest.  Emily looked confused, and said she
supposed Jane had given him a bottle.

'Jane is too young to be trusted there,' said Mr. Mohun, 'I thought
you knew better; do not let the key be out of your possession again.'

After a few more nests had been taken in the usual manner, they
returned to the house.  Maurice was lying on the sofa reading the
Penny Magazine, from which he raised his eyes no more that evening,
in spite of all the jokes which flew about respecting wounded
knights, courage, and the balsam of Fierabras.  He called Jane to
teach her how flies were made, and as soon as tea was over he went to
bed.  Reginald, after many yawns, prepared to follow his example, and
as he was wishing his sisters good-night, Emily said, 'Now, Redgie,
do not go out at such a preposterous hour to-morrow morning.'

'What is that to you?' was Reginald's courteous inquiry.

'I do not wish to see every one fast asleep to-morrow evening,' said
Emily, and she looked at her cousin, whose head was far back over his
chair.

'He is a Trojan,' said Reginald.

'Is a Trojan better than a Spartan?' asked Ada, meditatively.

'Helen thought so,' said Claude.

'"When Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug of war,"' muttered the
Marquis.

'You are all talking Greek,' said Jane.

'Arabic,' said Claude.

As far as it could be comprehended, Lord Rotherwood's answer related
to Maurice and the wasps.

'There,' said Emily, 'what is to be done if he is in that condition
to-morrow?'

'I am not asleep; what makes you think I am?'

'I wish you would sit in that great chair,' said Emily, 'I am afraid
you will break your neck; you look so uncomfortable, I cannot bear to
see you.'

'I never was more comfortable in my life,' said Lord Rotherwood,
asleep while finishing the sentence; but this time, happily with his
elbows on the table, and his head in a safer position.

The next day was spent rather more rationally.  Lord Rotherwood met
with a book of Irish Tales, with which he became so engrossed that he
did not like to leave it when Emily and Claude were ready to ride to
Devereux Castle with him.  When there he was equally eager and
vehement about each matter that came under consideration, and so many
presented themselves, that Emily began to be in agonies lest she
should not be at home in time to dress and receive her guests.  They
did, however, reach the house before Lilias, who had been walking
with Miss Weston, came in, and when she went upstairs, she found
Emily full of complaints at the inconvenience of having no Rachel to
assist her in dressing, and to see that everything was in order, and
that Phyllis was fit to appear when she came down in the evening;
but, by the assistance of Lily and Jane, she got over her troubles,
and when she went into the drawing-room, she was much relieved to
find her two gentlemen quite safe and dressed.  She had been in great
fear of Lord Rotherwood's straying away to join in some of Reginald's
sports, and was grateful to the Irish book for keeping him out of
mischief.

Emily was in her glory; it was the first large dinner-party since
Eleanor had gone, and though she pitied herself for having the
trouble of entertaining the people, she really enjoyed the feeling
that she now appeared as the mistress of New Court, with her cousin,
the Marquis, by her side, to show how highly she was connected.  And
everything went off just as could be wished.  Lord Rotherwood talked
intelligibly and sensibly, and Mr. Mohun's neighbour at dinner had a
voice which he could hear.  Lily's pleasure was not less than her
sister's, though of a different kind.  She delighted in thinking how
well Emily did the honours, in watching the varied expression of Lord
Rotherwood's animated countenance, in imagining Claude's forehead to
be finer than that of any one else, and in thinking how people must
admire Reginald's tall, active figure, and very handsome face.  She
was asked to play, and did tolerably well, but was too shy to sing,
nor, indeed, was Reginald encouraging.  'What is the use of your
singing, Lily?  If it was like Miss Weston's, now--'

Reginald had taken a great fancy to Miss Weston; he stood by her all
the evening, and afterwards let her talk to him, and then began to
chatter himself, at last becoming so confidential as to impart to her
the grand object of his ambition, which was to be taller than Claude!

The next morning Lord Rotherwood left Beechcroft, somewhat to Emily's
relief; for though she was very proud of him, and much enjoyed the
dignity of being seen to talk familiarly with him, yet, when no
strangers were present, and he became no more than an ordinary
cousin, she was worried by his incessant activity, and desire to see,
know, and do everything as fast and as thoroughly as possible.  She
could not see the use of such vehemence; she liked to take things in
a moderate way, and as Claude said, much preferred the passive to the
active voice.  Claude, on the contrary, was ashamed of his
constitutional indolence, looked on it as a temptation, and struggled
against it, almost envying his cousin his unabated eagerness and
untiring energy, and liking to be with him, because no one else so
effectually roused him from his habitual languor.  His indolence was,
however, so much the effect of ill health, that exertion was
sometimes scarcely in his power, especially in hot weather, and by
the time his brothers' studies were finished each day, he was unfit
for anything but to lie on the grass under the plane-tree.

The days glided on, and the holidays came to an end; Maurice spent
them in adding to his collection of insects, which, with Jane's
assistance, he arranged very neatly; and Reginald and Phyllis
performed several exploits, more agreeable to themselves than
satisfactory to the more rational part of the New Court community.
At the same time, Reginald's devotion to Miss Weston increased; he
never moved from her side when she sang, did not fail to be of the
party when she walked with his sisters, offered her one of his own
puppies, named his little ship 'Alethea,' and was even tolerably
civil to Marianne.

At length the day of departure came; the boys returned to school,
Claude joined Lord Rotherwood, and the New Court was again in a state
of tranquillity.


CHAPTER XI--DANCING


'Prescribe us not our duties.'

'Well, Phyllis,' said her father, as he passed through the hall to
mount his horse, 'how do you like the prospect of Monsieur le Roi's
instructions?'

'Not at all, papa,' answered Phyllis, running out to the hall door to
pat the horse, and give it a piece of bread.

'Take care you turn out your toes,' said Mr. Mohun.  'You must learn
to dance like a dragon before Cousin Rotherwood's birthday next
year.'

'Papa, how do dragons dance?'

'That is a question I must decide at my leisure,' said Mr. Mohun,
mounting.  'Stand out of the way, Phyl, or you will feel how horses
dance.'

Away he rode, while Phyllis turned with unwilling steps to the
nursery, to be dressed for her first dancing lesson; Marianne Weston
was to learn with her, and this was some consolation, but Phyllis
could not share in the satisfaction Adeline felt in the arrival of
Monsieur le Roi.  Jane was also a pupil, but Lily, whose
recollections of her own dancing days were not agreeable, absented
herself entirely from the dancing-room, even though Alethea Weston
had come with her sister.

Poor Phyllis danced as awkwardly as was expected, but Adeline seemed
likely to be a pupil in whom a master might rejoice; Marianne was
very attentive and not ungraceful, but Alethea soon saw reason to
regret the arrangement that had been made, for she perceived that
Jane considered the master a fair subject for derision, and her 'nods
and becks, and wreathed smiles,' called up corresponding looks in
Marianne's face.

'Oh Brownie, you are a naughty thing!' said Emily, as soon as M. le
Roi had departed.

'He really was irresistible!' said Jane.

'I suppose ridicule is one of the disagreeables to which a dancing-
master makes up his mind,' said Alethea.

'Yes,' said Jane, 'one can have no compunction in quizzing that
species.'

'I do not think I can quite say that, Jane,' said Miss Weston.

'This man especially lays himself open to ridicule,' said Jane; 'do
you know, Alethea, that he is an Englishman, and his name is King,
only he calls himself Le Roi, and speaks broken English!'

Though Alethea joined in the general laugh, she did not feel quite
satisfied; she feared that if not checked in time, Jane would proceed
to actual impertinence, and that Marianne would be tempted to follow
her example, but she did not like to interfere, and only advised
Marianne to be on her guard, hoping that Emily would also speak
seriously to her sister.

On the next occasion, however, Jane ventured still farther; her
grimaces were almost irresistible, and she had a most comical manner
of imitating the master's attitudes when his eye was not upon her,
and putting on a demure countenance when he turned towards her, which
sorely tried Marianne.

'What shall I do, Alethea?' said the little girl, as the sisters
walked home together; 'I do not know how to help laughing, if Jane
will be so very funny.'

'I am afraid we must ask mamma to let us give up the dancing,'
replied Alethea; 'the temptation is almost too strong, and I do not
think she would wish to expose you to it.'

'But, Alethea, why do not you speak to Jane?' asked Marianne; 'no one
seems to tell her it is wrong; Miss Mohun was almost laughing.'

'I do not think Jane would consider that I ought to find fault with
her,' said Alethea.

'But you would not scold her,' urged Marianne; 'only put her in mind
that it is not right, not kind; that Monsieur le Roi is in authority
over her for the time.'

'I will speak to mamma,' said Alethea, 'perhaps it will be better
next time.'

And it was better, for Mr. Mohun happening to be at home, was dragged
into the dancing-room by Emily and Ada.  Once, when she thought he
was looking another way, Jane tried to raise a smile, but a stern
'Jane, what are you thinking of?' recalled her to order, and when the
lesson was over her father spoke gravely to her, telling her that he
thought few things more disgusting in a young lady than impertinence
towards her teachers; and then added, 'Miss Weston, I hope you keep
strict watch over these giddy young things.'

Awed by her father, Jane behaved tolerably well at that time and the
next, and Miss Weston hoped her interference would not be needed, but
as if to make up for this restraint, her conduct a fortnight after
was quite beyond bearing.  She used every means to make Marianne
laugh, and at last went so far as to pretend to think that M. le Roi
had not understood what she said in English, and to translate it into
French.  Poor Marianne looked imploringly at her sister, and Alethea
hoped that Emily would interpose, but Emily was turning away her head
to conceal a laugh, and Miss Weston was obliged to give Jane a very
grave look, which she perfectly understood, though she pretended not
to see it.  When the exercise was over Miss Weston made her a sign to
approach, and said, 'Jane, do you think your papa would have liked--'

'What do you mean?' said Jane, 'I have not been laughing.'

'You know what I mean,' said Alethea, 'and pray do not be displeased
if I ask you not to make it difficult for Marianne to behave
properly.'

Jane drew up her head and went back to her place.  She played no more
tricks that day, but as soon as the guests were gone, began telling
Lilias how Miss Weston had been meddling and scolding her.

'And well you must have deserved it,' said Lily.

'I do not say that Jenny was right,' said Emily, 'but I think Miss
Weston might allow me to correct my own sister in my own house.'

'You correct Jane!' cried Lily, and Jane laughed.

'I only mean,' said Emily, 'that it was not very polite, and papa
says the closest friendship is no reason for dispensing with the
rules of politeness.'

'Certainly not,' said Lily, 'the rules of politeness are rules of
love, and it was in love that Alethea spoke; she sees how sadly we
are left to ourselves, and is kind enough to speak a word in season.'

'Perhaps,' said Jane, 'since it was in love that she spoke, you would
like to have her for our reprover for ever, and I can assure you more
unlikely things have happened.  I have heard it from one who can
judge.'

'Let me hear no more of this,' said Emily, 'it is preposterous and
ridiculous, and very disrespectful to papa.'

Jane for once, rather shocked at her own words, went back to what had
been said just before.

'Then, perhaps, you would like to have Eleanor back again?'

'I am sure you want some one to put you in mind of your duty,' said
Lily.

'Eleanor and duty!' cried Emily; 'you who thought so much of the
power of love!'

'Of Emily and love, she would say, if it sounded well,' said Jane.

'I cannot see what true love you or Jane are showing now,' said Lily,
'it is no kindness to encourage her pertness, or to throw away a
friendly reproof because it offends your pride.'

'Nobody reproved me,' replied Emily; 'besides, I know love will
prevail; for my sake Jane will not expose herself and me to a
stranger's interference.'

'If you depend upon that, I wish you joy,' said Lilias, as she left
the room.

'What a weathercock Lily is!' cried Jane, 'she has fallen in love
with Alethea Weston, and echoes all she says.'

'Not considering her own inconsistency,' said Emily.

'That Alethea Weston,' exclaimed Jane, in an angry tone;--but Emily,
beginning to recover some sense of propriety, said, 'Jenny, you know
you were very ill-bred, and you made it difficult for the little ones
to behave well.'

'Not our own little ones,' said Jane; 'honest Phyl did not understand
the joke, and Ada was thinking of her attitudes; one comfort is, that
I shall be confirmed in three weeks' time, and then people cannot
treat me as a mere child--little as I am.'

'Oh!  Jane,' said Emily, 'I do not like to hear you talk of
confirmation in that light way.'

'No, no,' said Jane, 'I do not mean it--of course I do not mean it--
don't look shocked--it was only by the bye--and another by the bye,
Emily, you know I must have a cap and white ribbons, and I am afraid
I must make it myself.'

'Ay, that is the worst of having Esther,' said Emily, 'she and Hannah
have no notion of anything but the plainest work; I am sure if I had
thought of all the trouble of that kind which having a young girl
would entail, I would never have consented to Esther's coming.'

'That was entirely Lily's scheme,' said Jane.

'Yes; it is impossible to resist Lily, she is so eager and anxious,
and it would have vexed her very much if I had opposed her, and that
I cannot bear; besides, Esther is a very nice girl, and will learn.'

'There is Robert talking to papa on the green,' said Jane; 'what a
deep conference; what can it be about?'

If Jane had heard that conversation she might have perceived that she
could not wilfully offend, even in what she thought a trifling
matter, without making it evident, even to others, that there was
something very wrong about her.  At that moment the Rector was saying
to his uncle, 'I am in doubt about Jane, I cannot but fear she is not
in a satisfactory state for confirmation, and I wished to ask you
what you think?'

'Act just as you would with any of the village girls,' said Mr.
Mohun.

'I should be very sorry to do otherwise,' said Mr. Devereux; 'but I
thought you might like, since every one knows that she is a
candidate, that she should not be at home at the time of the
confirmation, if it is necessary to refuse her.'

'No,' said Mr. Mohun, 'I should not wish to shield her from the
disgrace.  It may be useful to her, and besides, it will establish
your character for impartiality.  I have not been satisfied with all
I saw of little Jane for some time past, and I am afraid that much
passes amongst my poor girls which never comes to my knowledge.  Her
pertness especially is probably restrained in my presence.'

'It is not so much the pertness that I complain of,' said Mr.
Devereux, 'for that might be merely exuberance of spirits, but there
is a sort of habitual irreverence, which makes one dread to bring her
nearer to sacred tings.'

'I know what you mean,' said Mr. Mohun, 'and I think the pertness is
a branch of it, more noticed because more inconvenient to others.'

'Yes,' said Mr. Devereux, 'I think the fault I speak of is most
evident; when there is occasion to reprove her, I am always baffled
by a kind of levity which makes every warning glance aside.'

'Then I should decidedly say refuse her,' said Mr. Mohun.  'It would
be a warning that she could not disregard, and the best chance of
improving her.'

'Yet,' said Mr. Devereux, 'if she is eager for confirmation, and
regards it in its proper light, it is hard to say whether it is right
to deny it to her; it may give her the depth and earnestness which
she needs.'

'Poor child,' said Mr. Mohun, 'she has great disadvantages; I am
quite sure our present system is not fit for her.  Things shall be
placed on a different footing, and in another year or two I hope she
may be fitter for confirmation.  However, before you finally decide,
I should wish to have some conversation with her, and speak to you
again.

'That is just what I wish,' said Mr. Devereux.


CHAPTER XII--THE FEVER


'Jane borrowed maxims from a doubting school,
And took for truth the test of ridicule.'

The question of Jane's confirmation was decided in an unexpected
manner; for the day after Mr. Mohun's conversation with his nephew
she was attacked by a headache and sore throat, spent a feverish
night, and in the morning was so unwell that a medical man was sent
for from Raynham.  On his arrival he pronounced that she was
suffering from scarlet fever, and Emily began to feel the approach of
the same complaint.

Phyllis and Adeline were shut up in the drawing-room, and a system of
quarantine established, which was happily brought to a conclusion by
a note from Mrs. Weston, who kindly begged that they might be sent to
her at Broomhill, and Mr. Mohun gladly availing himself of the offer,
the little girls set off, so well pleased to make a visit alone, as
almost to forget the occasion of it.  Mrs. Weston had extended her
invitation to Lilias, but she begged to be allowed to remain with her
sisters, and Mr. Mohun thought that she had been already so much
exposed to the infection that it was useless for her to take any
precautions.

She was therefore declared head nurse; and it was well that she had
an energetic spirit, and so sweet a temper, that she was ready to
sympathise with all Emily's petulant complaints, and even to find
fault with herself for not being in two places at once.  Two of the
maids were ill, and the whole care of Emily and Jane devolved upon
her, with only the assistance of Esther.

Emily was not very seriously ill, but Jane's fever was very high, and
Lily thought that her father was more anxious than he chose to
appear.  Of Jane's own thoughts little could be guessed; she was
often delirious, and at all times speaking was so painful that she
said as little as possible.

Lily's troubles seemed at their height one Sunday afternoon, while
her father was at church.  She had been reading the Psalms and
Lessons to Emily, and she then rose to return to Jane.

'Do not go,' entreated Emily.

'I will send Esther.'

'Esther is of no use.'

'And therefore I do not like to leave her so long alone with Jane.
Pray spare me a little smile.'

'Then come back soon.'

Lily was glad to escape with no more objections.  She found Jane
complaining of thirst, but to swallow gave her great pain, and she
required so much attendance for some little time, that Emily's bell
was twice rung before Esther could be spared to go to her.

She soon came back, saying, 'Miss Mohun wants you directly, Miss
Lilias.'

'Tell her I will come presently,' said Lily, who had one hand pressed
on Jane's burning temples, while the other was sprinkling her with
ether.

'Stay,' said Jane, faintly, and Esther left the room.

Jane drew her breath with so much difficulty that a dreadful terror
seized upon Lily, lest she should be suffocated.  She raised her
head, and supported her till Esther could bring more pillows.  Esther
brought a message from Emily to hasten her return; but Jane could not
be left, and the grateful look she gave her as she arranged the
pillows repaid her for all her toils.  After a little time Jane
became more comfortable, and said in a whisper, 'Dear Lily, I wish I
was not so troublesome.'

Back came Esther at this moment, saying, 'Miss Emily says she is
worse, and wants you directly, Miss Lilias.'

Lily hurried away to Emily's room, and found what might well have
tried her temper.  Emily was flushed indeed, and feverish, but her
breathing was smooth and even, and her hand and pulse cool and slow,
compared with the parched burning hands, and throbbings, too quick to
count, which Lily had just been watching.

'Well, my dear Emily, I am sorry you do not feel better; what can I
do for you?'

'How can I be better while I am left so long, and Esther not coming
when I ring?  What would happen if I were to faint away?'

'Indeed, I am very sorry,' said Lily; 'but when you rang, poor Jenny
could spare neither of us.'

'How is poor Jenny?' said Emily.

'Her throat is very bad, but she is quite sensible now, and wishes to
have me there.  What did you want, Emily?'

'Oh!  I wish you would draw the curtain, the light hurts me; that
will do--no--now it is worse, pray put it as it was before.  Oh!
Lily, if you knew how ill I am you would not leave me.'

'Can I do anything for you--will you have some coffee?'

'Oh! no, it has a bad taste, I am sure it is carelessly made.'

'Shall I make you some fresh, with the spirit lamp?'

'No, I am tired of it.  I wonder if I might have some tamarinds?'

'I will ask as soon as papa comes from church.'

'Is he gone to church? how could he go when we are all so ill?'

'Perhaps he was doing us more good at church than he could at home.
You will be glad to hear, Emily, that he has sent for Rachel to come
and help us.'

'Oh! has he? but she lives so far off, and gets her letters so
seldom, I don't reckon at all upon her coming.  If she could come
directly it would be a comfort.'

'It would, indeed,' said Lily; 'she would know what to do for Jane.'

'Lily, where is the ether?  You are always taking it away.'

'In Jane's room; I will fetch it.'

'No, no, if you once get into Jane's room I shall never see you back
again.'

Now Emily knew that Jane was very ill, and Lily's pale cheeks, heavy
eyes, and failing voice, might have reminded her that two sick
persons were a heavy charge upon a girl of seventeen, without the
addition of her caprices and fretfulness.  And how was it that the
kind-hearted, affectionate Emily never thought of all this?  It was
because she had been giving way to selfishness for nineteen years;
and now the contemplation of her own sufferings was quite enough to
hide from her that others had much to bear; and illness, instead of
teaching her patience and consideration, only made her more exacting
and querulous.

To Lily's unspeakable relief, Miss Weston accompanied Mr. Mohun from
church, and offered to share her attendance.  No one knew what it
cost Alethea to come into the midst of a scene which constantly
reminded her of the sisters she had lost, but she did not shrink from
it, and was glad that her parents saw no objection to her offering to
share Lily's toils.  Her experience was most valuable, and relieved
Lilias of the fear that was continually haunting her, lest her
ignorance might lead to some fatal mistake.  The next day brought
Rachel, and both patients began to mend.  Jane's recovery was quicker
than Emily's, for her constitution was not so languid, and having no
pleasure in the importance of being an invalid, she was willing to
exert herself, and make the best of everything, while Emily did not
much like to be told that she was better, and thought it cruel to
hint that exertion would benefit her.  Both were convalescent before
the fever attacked Lily, who was severely ill, but not alarmingly so,
and her gentleness and patience made Alethea delight in having the
care of her.  Lily was full of gratitude to her kind friend, and felt
quite happy when Alethea chanced one day to call her by the name of
Emma; she almost hoped she was taking the place of that sister, and
the thought cheered her through many languid hours, and gave double
value to all Alethea's kindness.  She did not feel disposed to repine
at an illness which brought out such affection from her friend, and
still more from her father, who, when he came to see her, would say
things which gave her a thrill of pleasure whenever she thought of
them.

It happened one day that Jane, having finished her book, looked round
for some other occupation; she knew that Miss Weston had walked to
Broomhill; Rachael was with Lilias, and there was no amusement at
hand.  At last she recollected that her papa had said in the morning,
that he hoped to see her and Emily in the schoolroom in the course of
the day, and hoping to meet her sister, she resolved to try and get
there.  The room had been Mr. Mohun's sitting-room since the
beginning of their illness, and it looked so very comfortable that
she was glad she had come, though she was so tired she wondered how
she should get back again.  Emily was not there, so she lay down on
the sofa and took up a little book from the table.  The title was
Susan Harvey, or Confirmation, and she read it with more interest as
she remembered with a pang that this was the day of the confirmation,
to which she had been invited; she soon found herself shedding tears
over the book, she who had never yet been known to cry at any story,
however affecting.  She had not finished when Mr. Devereux came in to
look for Mr. Mohun, and finding her there, was going away as soon as
he had congratulated her on having left her room, but she begged him
to stay, and began asking questions about the confirmation.

'Were there many people?'

'Three hundred.'

'Did the Stoney Bridge people make a disturbance?'

'No.'

'How many of our people?'

'Twenty-seven.'

'Did all the girls wear caps?'

'Most of them.'

Jane was rather surprised at the shortness of her cousin's answers,
but she went on, as he stood before the fire, apparently in deep
thought.

'Was Miss Burnet confirmed?  She is the dullest girl I ever knew, and
she is older than I am.  Was she confused?'

'She was.'

'Did you give Mary Wright a ticket?'

'No.'

'Then, of course, you did not give one to Ned Long.  I thought you
would never succeed in making him remember which is the ninth
commandment.'

'I did not refuse him.'

'Indeed! did he improve in a portentous manner?'

'Not particularly.'

'Well, you must have been more merciful than I expected.'

'Indeed!'

'Robert, you must have lost the use of your tongue, for want of us to
talk to.  I shall be affronted if you go into a brown study the first
day of seeing me.'

He smiled in a constrained manner, and after a few minutes said, 'I
have been considering whether this is a fit time to tell you what
will give you pain.  You must tell me if you can bear it.'

'About Lily, or the little ones?'

'No, no! only about yourself.  Your father wished me to speak to you,
but I would not have done so on this first meeting, but what you have
just been saying makes me think this is the best occasion.'

'Let me know; I do not like suspense,' said Jane, sharply.

'I think it right to tell you, Jane, that neither your father nor I
thought it would be desirable for you to be confirmed at this time.'

'Do you really mean it?' said Jane.

'Look back on the past year, and say if you sincerely think you are
fit for confirmation.'

'As to that,' said Jane, 'the best people are always saying that they
are not fit for these things.'

'None can call themselves worthy of them; but I think the conscience
of some would bear them witness that they had profited so far by
their present means of grace as to give grounds for hoping that they
would derive benefit from further assistance.'

'Well, I suppose I must be very bad, since you see it,' said Jane, in
a manner rather more subdued; 'but I did not think myself worse than
other people.'

'Is a Christian called, only to be no worse than others?'

'Oh no!  I see, I mean--pray tell me my great fault.  Pertness, I
suppose--love of gossip?'

'There must be a deeper root of evil, of which these are but the
visible effects, Jane.'

'What do you mean, Robert?' said Jane, now seeming really impressed.

'I think, Jane, that the greatest and most dangerous fault of your
character is want of reverence.  I think it is want of reverence
which makes you press forward to that for which you confess yourself
unfit; it is want of reverence for holiness which makes you not care
to attain it; want of reverence for the Holy Word that makes you
treat it as a mere lesson; and in smaller matters your pertness is
want of reverence for your superiors; you would not be ready to
believe and to say the worst of others, if you reverenced what good
there may be in them.  Take care that your want of reverence is not
in reality want of faith.'

Jane's spirits were weak and subdued.  It was a great shock to her to
hear that she was not thought worthy of confirmation; her faults had
never been called by so hard a name; she was in part humbled, and in
part grieved, and what she thought harshness in her cousin; she
turned away her face, and did not speak.  He continued, 'Jane, you
must not think me unkind, your father desired me to talk to you, and,
indeed, the time of recovery from sickness is too precious to be
trifled away.'

Jane wept bitterly.  Presently he said, 'It grieves me to have been
obliged to speak harshly to you, you must forgive me if I have talked
too much to you, Jane.'

Jane tried to speak, but sobs prevented her, and she gave way to a
violent fit of crying.  Her cousin feared he had been unwise in
saying so much, and had weakened the effect of his own words.  He
would have been glad to see tears of repentance, but he was afraid
that she was weeping over fancied unkindness, and that he might have
done what might be hurtful to her in her weak state.  He said a few
kind words, and tried to console her, but this change of tone rather
added to her distress, and she became hysterical.  He was much vexed
and alarmed, and, ringing the bell, hastened to call assistance.  He
found Esther, and sent her to Jane, and on returning to the
schoolroom with some water, he found her lying exhausted on the sofa;
he therefore went in search of his uncle, who was overlooking some
farming work, and many were the apologies made, and many the
assurances he received, that it would be better for her in the end,
as the impression would be more lasting.

Jane was scarcely conscious of her cousin's departure, or of Esther's
arrival, but after drinking some water, and lying still for a few
moments, she exclaimed, 'Oh, Robert! oh, Esther! the confirmation!'
and gasped and sobbed again.  Esther thought she had guessed the
cause of her tears, and tried to comfort her.

'Ah! Miss Jane, there will be another confirmation some day; it was a
sad thing you were too ill, to be sure, but--'

'Oh! if I had--if he would not say--if he had thought me fit.'

Esther was amazed, and asked if she should call Miss Weston, who was
now with Lilias.

'No, no!' cried Jane, nearly relapsing into hysterics.  'She shall
not see me in this state.'

Esther hardly knew what to do, but she tried to soothe and comfort
her by following what was evidently the feeling predominating in
Jane's mind, as indicated by her broken sentences, and said, 'It was
a pity, to be sure, that Mr. Devereux came and talked so long, he
could not know of your being so very weak, Miss Jane.'

'Yes,' said Jane, faintly, 'I could have borne it better if he had
waited a few days.'

'Yes, Miss, when you had not been so very ill.  Mr. Devereux is a
very good gentleman, but they do say he is very sharp.'

'He means to be kind,' said Jane, 'but I do not think he has much
consideration, always.'

'Yes, Miss Jane, that is just what Mrs. White said, when--'

Esther's speech was cut short by the entrance of Miss Weston.  Jane
started up, dashed off her tears, and tried to look as usual, but the
paleness of her face, and the redness of her eyes, made this
impossible, and she was obliged to lie down again.  Esther left the
room, and Miss Weston did not feel intimate enough with Jane to ask
any questions; she gave her some sal volatile, talked kindly to her
of her weakness, and offered to read to her; all the time leaving an
opening for confidence, if Jane wished to relieve her mind.  The book
which lay near her accounted, as she thought, for her agitation, and
she blamed herself for having judged her harshly as deficient in
feeling, now that she found her so much distressed, because illness
had prevented her confirmation.  Under this impression she honoured
her reserve, while she thought with more affection of Lily's open
heart.  Jane, who never took, or expected others to take, the most
favourable view of people's motives, thought Alethea knew the cause
of her distress, and disliked her the more, as having witnessed her
humiliation.

Such was Jane's love of gossip that the next time she was alone with
Esther she asked for the history of Mrs. White, thus teaching her
maid disrespect to her pastor, indirectly complaining of his
unkindness, and going far to annul the effect of what she had learnt
at school.  Perhaps during her hysterics Jane's conduct was not under
control, but subsequent silence was in her power, and could she be
free from blame if Esther's faults gained greater ascendency?

The next day Mr. Mohun attempted to speak to Jane, but being both
frightened and unhappy, she found it very easy and natural, as well
as very convenient, to fall into hysterics again, and her father was
obliged to desist, regretting that, at the only time she was subdued
enough to listen to reproof, she was too weak to bear it without
injury.  Rachel, who was nearly as despotic among the young ladies as
she had been in former times in the nursery, now insisted on Emily's
going into the schoolroom, and when there, she made rapid progress.
Alethea was amused to see how Jane's decided will and lively spirit
would induce Emily to make exertions, which no persuasions of hers
could make her think other than impossible.

A few days more, and they were nearly well again; and Lilias so far
recovered as to be able to spare her kind friend, who returned home
with a double portion of Lily's love, and of deep gratitude from Mr.
Mohun; but these feelings were scarcely expressed in words.  Emily
gave her some graceful thanks, and Jane disliked her more than ever.

It was rather a dreary time that now commenced with the young ladies;
they were tired of seeing the same faces continually, and dispirited
by hearing that the fever was spreading in the village.  The autumn
was far advanced, the weather was damp and gloomy, and the sisters
sat round the fire shivering with cold, feeling the large room dreary
and deserted, missing the merry voices of the children, and much
tormented by want of occupation.  They could not go out, their hands
were not steady enough to draw, they felt every letter which they had
to write a heavy burden; neither Emily nor Lily could like
needlework; they could have no music, for the piano at the other end
of the room seemed to be in an Arctic Region, and they did little but
read novels and childish stories, and play at chess or backgammon.
Jane was the best off.  Mrs. Weston sent her a little sock, with a
request that she would make out the way in which it was knit, in a
complicated feathery pattern, and in puzzling over her cotton, taking
stitches up and letting them down, she made the time pass a little
less heavily with her than with her sisters.


CHAPTER XIII--A CURIOSITY MAP


'Keek into the draw-well,
      Janet, Janet,
There ye'll see your bonny sell,
      My jo Janet.'

It was at this time that Lady Rotherwood and her daughter arrived at
Devereux Castle, and Mr. Mohun was obliged to go to meet her there,
leaving his three daughters to spend a long winter evening by
themselves, in their doleful and dismal way, as Lily called it.

The evening had closed in, but they did not ring for candles, lest
they should make it seem longer; and Jane was just beginning to laugh
at Emily for the deplorable state of her frock and collar, tumbled
with lying on the sofa, when the three girls all started at the
unexpected sound of a ring at the front door.

With a rapid and joyful suspicion who it might be, Emily and Lilias
sprang to the door, Jane thrust the poker into the fire, in a
desperate attempt to produce a flame, drove an arm-chair off the
hearth-rug, whisked an old shawl out of sight, and flew after them
into the hall, just as the deep tones of a well-known voice were
heard greeting old Joseph.

'William!' cried the girls.  'Oh! is it you?  Are you not afraid of
the scarlet fever?'

'No, who has it?'

'We have had it, but we are quite well now.  How cold you are!'

'But where is my father?'

'Gone to Hetherington with Robert, to meet Aunt Rotherwood.  Come
into the drawing-room.'

Here Emily glided off to perform a hurried toilette.

'And the little ones?'

'At Broomhill.  Mrs. Weston was so kind as to take them out of the
way of the infection,' said Lily.

'Oh!  William, those Westons!'

'Westons, what Westons?  Not those I knew at Brighton?'

'The very same,' said Lily.  'They have taken the house at Broomhill.
Oh! they have been so very kind, I do not know what would have become
of us without Alethea.'

'Why did you not tell me they were living here?  And you like them?'

'Like them!  No one can tell the comfort Alethea has been.  She came
to us and nursed us, and has been my great support.'

'And Phyllis and Ada are with them?'

'Yes, they have been at Broomhill these six weeks, and more.'

Here Emily came in and told William that his room was ready, and
Rachel on the stairs wishing to see the Captain.

'How well he looks!' cried Lily, as he closed the door; 'it is quite
refreshing to see any one looking so strong and bright.'

'And more like Sir Maurice than ever,' said Emily.

'Ah! but Claude is more like,' said Lily, 'because he is pale.'

'Well,' said Jane, 'do let us in the meantime make the room look more
fit to be seen before he comes down.'

The alacrity which had long been wanting to Lilias and Jane had
suddenly returned, and they succeeded in making the room look
surprisingly comfortable, compared with its former desolate aspect,
before William came down, and renewed his inquiries after all the
family.

'And how is my father's deafness?' was one of his questions.

'Worse,' said Emily.  'I am afraid all the younger ones will learn to
vociferate.  He hears no one well but ourselves.'

'Oh! and Alethea Weston,' said Lily.  'Her voice is so clear and
distinct, that she hardly ever raises it to make him hear.  And have
you ever heard her sing?'

'Yes, she sings very well.  I cannot think why you never told me they
were living here.'

'Because you never honour us with your correspondence,' said Emily;
'if you had vouchsafed to write to your sisters you could not have
escaped hearing of the Westons.'

'And has Mr. Weston given up the law?'

'No, he only came home in the vacation,' said Emily.  'Did you know
they had lost two daughters?'

'I saw it in the paper.  Emma and Lucy were nice girls, but not equal
to Miss Weston.  What a shock to Mrs. Weston!'

'Yes, she quite lost her health, and the doctors said she must move
into the country directly.  Mrs. Carrington, who is some distant
connection, told them of this place, and they took it rather
hastily.'

'Do they like it?'

'Oh yes, very much!' said Emily.  'Mrs. Weston is very fond of the
garden, and drives about in the pony-carriage, and it is quite
pleasant to see how she admires the views.'

'And,' added Lily, 'Alethea walks with us, and sings with me, and
teaches at school, and knows all the poor people.'

'I must go and see those children to-morrow,' said William.

The evening passed very pleasantly; and perhaps, in truth, Captain
Mohun and his sisters were surprised to find each other so agreeable;
for, in the eyes of the young ladies, he was by far the most awful
person in the family.

When he had been last at home Harry's recent death had thrown a gloom
over the whole family, and he had especially missed him.  Himself
quick, sensible, clever, and active, he was intolerant of opposite
qualities, and the principal effect of that visit to Beechcroft was
to make all the younger ones afraid of him, to discourage poor
Claude, and to give to himself a gloomy remembrance of that home
which had lost its principal charms in his mother and Harry.

He had now come home rather from a sense of duty than an expectation
of pleasure, and he was quite surprised to find how much more
attractive the New Court had become.  Emily and Lilias were now
conversible and intelligent companions, better suited to him than
Eleanor had ever been, and he had himself in these four years
acquired a degree of gentleness and consideration which prevented him
from appearing so unapproachable as in days of old.  This was
especially the case with regard to Claude, whose sensitive and rather
timid nature had in his childhood suffered much from William's boyish
attempts to make him manly, and as he grew older, had almost felt
himself despised; but now William appreciated his noble qualities,
and was anxious to make amends for his former unkindness.

Claude came home from Oxford, not actually ill, but in the ailing
condition in which he often was, just weak enough to give his sisters
a fair excuse for waiting upon him, and petting him all day long.
About the same time Phyllis and Adeline came back from Broomhill, and
there was great joy at the New Court at the news that Mrs.
Hawkesworth was the happy mother of a little boy.

Claude was much pleased by being asked by Eleanor to be godfather to
his little nephew, whose name was to be Henry.  Perhaps he hoped,
what Lilias was quite sure of, that Eleanor did not think him
unworthy to stand in Harry's place.

The choice of the other sponsors did not meet with universal
approbation.  Emily thought it rather hard that Mr. Hawkesworth's
sister, Mrs. Ridley, should have been chosen before herself, and both
she and Ada would have greatly preferred either Lord Rotherwood, Mr.
Devereux, or William, to Mr. Ridley, while Phyllis had wanderings of
her own how Claude could be godfather without being present at the
christening.

One evening Claude was writing his answer to Eleanor, sitting at the
sofa table where a small lamp was burning.  Jane, attracted by its
bright and soft radiance, came and sat down opposite to him with her
work.

'What a silence!' said Lily, after about a quarter of an hour.

'What made you start, Jane?' said William.

'Did I?' said Jane.

'My speaking, I suppose,' said Lily, 'breaking the awful spell of
silence.'

'How red you look, Jane.  What is the matter?' said William.

'Do I?' asked Jane, becoming still redder.

'It is holding your face down over that baby's hood,' said Emily,
'you will sacrifice the colour of your nose to your nephew.'

Claude now asked Jane for the sealing-wax, folded up his letter,
sealed it, put on a stamp, and as Jane was leaving the room at
bedtime, said, 'Jenny, my dear, as you go by, just put that letter in
the post-bag.'

Jane obeyed, and left the room.  Claude soon after took the letter
out of the bag, went to Emily's door, listened to ascertain that Jane
was not there, and then knocked and was admitted.

'I could not help coming,' said he, 'to tell you of the trap in which
Brownie has been caught.'

'Ah!' said Lily, 'I fancied I saw her peeping slyly at your letter.'

'Just so,' said Claude, 'and I hope she has experienced the truth of
an old proverb.'

'Oh! tell us what you have said,' cried the sisters.

Claude read, 'Jane desires me to say that a hood for the baby shall
be sent in the course of a week, and she hopes that it may be worn at
the christening.  I should rather say I hope it may be lost in the
transit, for assuredly the head that it covers must be infected with
something far worse than the scarlet fever--the fever of curiosity,
the last quality which I should like my godson to possess.  My only
consolation is, that he will see the full deformity of the vice, as,
poor little fellow, he becomes acquainted with "that worst of
plagues, a prying maiden aunt."  If Jane was simply curious, I should
not complain, but her love of investigation is not directed to what
ought to be known, but rather to find out some wretched subject for
petty scandal, to blacken every action, and to add to the weight of
every misdeed, and all for the sake of detailing her discoveries in
exchange for similar information with Mrs. Appleton, or some equally
suitable confidante.'

'Is that all?' said Lily.

'And enough, too, I hope,' said Claude.

'It ought to cure her!' cried Emily.

'Cure her!' said Claude, 'no such thing; cures are not wrought in
this way; this is only a joke, and to keep it up, I will tell you a
piece of news, which Jane must have spied out in my letter, as I had
just written it when I saw her eyes in a suspicious direction.  It
was settled that Messieurs Maurice and Redgie are to go for two hours
a day, three times a week, to Mr. Stevens, during the holidays.'

'The new Stoney Bridge curate?' said Emily.

'I am very glad you are not to be bored by them,' said Lily, 'but how
they will dislike it!'

'It is very hard upon them,' said Claude, 'and I tried to prevent it,
but the Baron was quite determined.  Now I will begin to talk about
this plan, and see whether Jenny betrays any knowledge of it.'

'Oh! it will be rare!' cried Lily; 'but do not speak of it before the
Baron or William.'

'Let it be at luncheon,' said Emily, 'you know they never appear.  Do
you mean to send the letter?'

'Not that part of it,' said Claude, 'you see I can tear off the last
page, and it is only to add a new conclusion.  Good-night.'

Jane had certainly not spent the evening in an agreeable manner; she
had not taken her seat at Claude's table with any evil designs
towards his letter, but his writing was clear and legible, and her
eye caught the word 'Maurice;' she wished to know what Claude could
be saying about him, and having once begun, she could not leave off,
especially when she saw her own name.  When aware of the compliments
he was paying her, she looked at him, but his eyes were fixed on his
pen, and no smile, no significant expression betrayed that he was
aware of her observations; and even when he gave her the letter to
put into the post-bag he looked quite innocent and unconcerned.  On
the other hand, she did not like to think that he had been sending
such a character of her to Eleanor in sober sadness; it was
impossible to find out whether he had sent the letter; she could not
venture to beg him to keep it back, she could only trust to his good-
nature.

At luncheon, as they had agreed, Lily began by asking where her papa
and William were gone?  Claude answered, 'To Stoney Bridge, to call
upon Mr. Stevens; they mean to ask him to dine one day next week, to
be introduced to his pupils.'

'Is he an Oxford or Cambridge man?' asked Lily.

'Oxford,' exclaimed Jane, quite forgetting whence she had derived her
information, 'he is a fellow of--'

'Indeed?' said Lily; 'how do you know that?'

'Why, we have all been talking of him lately,' said Jane.

'Not I,' said Emily, 'why should he interest us?'

'Because he is to tutor the boys,' said Jane.

'When did you hear that he is to tutor the boys?' asked Lily.

'When you did, I suppose,' said Jane, blushing.

'You did, did you?' said Claude.  'I feel convinced, if so, that you
must really be what you are so often called, a changeling.  I heard
it, or rather read it first at Oxford, where the Baron desired me to
make inquiries about him.  You were, doubtless, looking over my
shoulder at the moment.  This is quite a discovery.  We shall have to
perform a brewery of egg-shells this evening, and put the elf to
flight with a red-hot poker, and what a different sister Jane we
shall recover, instead of this little mischief-making sprite, so
quiet, so reserved, never intruding her opinion, showing constant
deference to all her superiors--yes, and to her inferiors, shutting
her eyes to the faults of others, and when they come before her,
trying to shield the offender from those who regard them as merely
exciting news.'

Claude's speech had become much more serious than he intended, and he
felt quite guilty when he had finished, so that it was not at all an
undesirable interruption when Phyllis and Adeline asked for the story
of the brewery of egg-shells.

Emily and Lilias kindly avoided looking at Jane, who, after fidgeting
on her chair and turning very red, succeeded in regaining outward
composure.  She resolved to let the matter die away, and think no
more about it.

When Mr. Mohun and William came home, they brought the news that Lady
Rotherwood had invited the whole party to dinner.

'I am very glad we are allowed to see them,' said Emily, 'I am quite
tired of being shut up.'

'If it was not for the Westons we might as well live in Nova Zembla,'
said Jane.

'I am glad you damsels should know a little more of Florence,' said
Mrs. Mohun.

'Yes,' said Claude, 'cousins were made to be friends.'

'In that case one ought to be able to choose them,' said William.

'And know them,' said Emily.  'We have not seen Florence since she
was eleven years old.'

'Cousin or not,' said Lilias, 'Florence can hardly be so much my
friend as Alethea.'

'Right, Lily,' said William, 'stand up for old friends against all
the cousins in the universe.'

'Has Alethea a right to be called an old friend?' said Emily; 'does
three quarters of a year make friendship venerable?'

'No one can deny that she is a tried friend,' said Lilias.

'But pray, good people,' said Claude, 'what called forth those vows
of eternal constancy? why was my innocent general observation
construed into an attack upon Miss Weston?'

'Because there is something invidious in your tone,' said Lily.

'What kind of girl is that Florence?' asked William.

'Oh! a nice, lively, pleasant girl,' said Claude.

'I cannot make out what her pursuits are,' said Lily; 'Rotherwood
never talks of her reading anything.'

'She has been governessed and crammed till she is half sick of all
reading,' said Claude, 'of all study--ay, and all accomplishments.'

'So that is the friend you recommend, Lily!' said William.

'Well, Claude, that is what I call a great shame,' said Emily.

'Stay,' said Claude, 'you have heard but half my story, I say that
this is the reaction.  Florence has no lack of sense, and if you
young ladies are wise, you may help her to find the use of it.'

Claude's further opinion did not transpire, as dinner was announced,
and nothing more was said about Lady Florence till the girls had an
opportunity of judging for themselves.  She had a good deal of her
brother's vivacity, with gentleness and grace, which made her very
engaging, and her perfect recollection of the New Court, and of
childish days, charmed her cousins.  Lady Rotherwood was very kind
and affectionate, and held out hopes of many future meetings.  The
next day Maurice and Reginald came home from school, bringing a
better character for diligence than usual, on which they founded
hopes that the holidays would be left to their own disposal.  They
were by no means pleased with the arrangement made with Mr. Stevens
and most unwillingly did they undertake the expedition to Stony
Bridge, performing the journey in a very unsociable manner.  Maurice
was no horseman, and chose to jog on foot through three miles of
lane, while Reginald's pony cantered merrily along, its master's head
being intent upon the various winter sports in which William and Lord
Rotherwood allowed him to share.  Little did Maurice care for such
diversions; he was, as Adeline said, studying another 'apology.'
This time it was phrenology, for which the cropped heads of Lilias
and Jane afforded unusual facility.  There was, however, but a
limited supply of heads willing to be fingered, and Maurice returned
to the most abiding of his tastes, and in an empty room at the Old
Court laboured assiduously to find the secret of perpetual motion.

A few days before Christmas Rachel Harvey again took leave of
Beechcroft, with a promise that she would make them another visit
when Eleanor came home.  Before she went she gave Emily a useful
caution, telling her it was not right to trust her keys out of her
own possession.  It was what Miss Mohun never would have done, she
had never once committed them even to Rachel.

'With due deference to Eleanor,' said Emily, with her winning smile,
'we must allow that that was being over cautious.'

Rachel smiled, but her lecture was not averted by the compliment.

'It might have been very well since you have known me, Miss Emily,
but I do not know what would have come of it, if I had been too much
trusted when I was a giddy young thing like Esther; that girl comes
of a bad lot, and if anything is to be made of her, it is by keeping
temptation out of her way, and not letting her be with that mother of
hers.'

Rachel had rather injured the effect of her advice by behaving too
like a mistress during her visit; Emily had more than once wished
that all servants were not privileged people, and she was more
offended than convinced by the remonstrance.


CHAPTER XIV--CHRISTMAS


   'Slee, sla, slud,
   Stuck in the mud,
O! it is pretty to wade through a flood,
   Come, wheel round,
   The dirt we have found,
Would he an estate at a farthing a pound.'

Lily's illness interrupted her teaching at the village school for
many weeks, and she was in no great haste to resume it.  Alethea
Weston seemed to enjoy doing all that was required, and Lily left it
in her hands, glad to shut her eyes as much as possible to the
disheartening state the parish had been in ever since her former
indiscretion.

The approach of Christmas, however, made it necessary for her to
exert herself a little more, and her interest in parish matters
revived as she distributed the clothing-club goods, and in private
conference with each good dame, learnt the wants of her family.  But
it was sad to miss several names struck out of the list for non-
attendance at church; and when Mrs. Eden came for her child's
clothing, Lily remarked that the articles she chose were unlike those
of former years, the cheapest and coarsest she could find.

St. Thomas's day was marked by the custom, called at Beechcroft
'gooding.'  Each mother of a family came to all the principal houses
in the parish to receive sixpence, towards providing a Christmas
dinner, and it was Lily's business to dispense this dole at the New
Court.  With a long list of names and a heap of silver before her,
she sat at the oaken table by the open chimney in the hall, returning
a nod or a smiling greeting to the thanks of the women as they came,
one by one, to receive the little silver coins, and warm themselves
by the glowing wood fire.

Pleasant as the task was at first, it ended painfully.  Agnes Eden
appeared, in order to claim the double portion allotted to her
mother, as a widow.  This was the first time that Mrs. Eden had asked
for the gooding-money, and Lily knew that it was a sign that she must
be in great distress.  Agnes made her a little courtesy, and crept
away again as soon as she had received her shilling; but Mrs. Grey,
who was Mrs. Eden's neighbour, had not quite settled her penny-club
affairs, and remained a little longer.  An unassuming and lightly-
principled person was Mrs. Grey, and Lily enjoyed a talk with her,
while she was waiting for the purple stuff frock which Jane was
measuring off for Kezia.  They spoke of the children, and of a few
other little matters, and presently something was said about Mrs.
Eden; Lily asked if the blacksmith helped her.

'Oh! no, Miss Lilias, he will do nothing for her while she sends her
child to school and to church.  He will not speak to her even.  Not a
bit of butter, nor a morsel of bacon, has been in her house since
Michaelmas, and what she would have done if it was not for Mr.
Devereux and Mrs. Weston, I cannot think.'

Lilias, much shocked by this account of the distress into which she
and Jane had been the means of bringing the widow, reported it to her
father and to the Rector; entreating the former to excuse her rent,
which he willingly promised to do, and also desired his daughters to
give her a blanket, and tell her to come to dine house whenever any
broth was to be given away.  Mr. Devereux, who already knew of her
troubles, and allowed her a small sum weekly, now told his cousins
how much the Greys had assisted her.  Andrew Grey had dug up and
housed her winter's store of potatoes, he had sought work for her,
and little Agnes often shared the meals of his children.  The Greys
had a large family, very young, so that all that they did for her was
the fruit of self-denial.  Innumerable were the kindnesses which they
performed unknown to any but the widow and her child.  More, by a
hundred times, did they assist her, than the thoughtless girls who
had occasioned her sufferings, though Lily was not the only one who
felt that nothing was too much for them to do.  Nothing, perhaps,
would have been too much, except to bear her in mind and steadily aid
her in little things; but Lily took no account of little things,
talked away her feelings, and thus all her grand resolutions produced
almost nothing.  Lord Rotherwood sent Mrs. Eden a sovereign, the
girls newly clothed little Agnes, Phyllis sometimes carried her the
scraps of her dinner, Mrs. Eden once came to work at the New Court,
and a few messes of broth were given to her, but in general she was
forgotten, and when remembered, indolence or carelessness too often
prevented the Miss Mohuns from helping her.  In Emily's favourite
phrase, each individual thing was 'not worth while.'

When Lilias did think it 'worth while,' she would do a great deal
upon impulse, sometimes with more zeal than discretion, as she proved
by an expedition which she took on Christmas Eve.  Mr. Mohun did not
allow the poor of the village to depend entirely on the gooding for
their Christmas dinner, but on the 24th of December a large mess of
excellent beef broth was prepared at the New Court, and distributed
to all his own labourers, and the most respectable of the other
cottagers.

In the course of the afternoon Lily found that one portion had not
been given out.  It was that which was intended for the Martins, a
poor old rheumatic couple, who lived at South End, the most distant
part of the parish.  Neither of them could walk as far as the New
Court, and most of their neighbours had followed Farmer Gage, and had
therefore been excluded from the distribution, so that there was no
one to send.  Lily, therefore, resolved herself to carry the broth to
them, if she could find an escort, which was not an easy matter, as
the frost had that morning broken up, and a good deal of snow and
rain had been falling in the course of the day.  In the hall she met
Reginald, just turned out of Maurice's workshop, and much at a loss
for employment.

'Redgie,' said she, 'you can do me a great kindness.'

'If it is not a bore,' returned Reginald.

'I only want you to walk with me to South End.'

'Eh?' said Reginald; 'I thought the little Misses were too delicate
to put their dear little proboscises outside the door.'

'That is the reason I ask you; I do not think Emily or Jane would
like it, and it is too far for Claude.  Those poor old Martins have
not got their broth, and there is no one to fetch it for them.'

'Then do not be half an hour putting on your things.'

'Thank you; and do not run off, and make me spend an hour in hunting
for you, and then say that I made you wait.'

'I will wait fast enough.  You are not so bad as Emily,' said
Reginald, while Lily ran upstairs to equip herself.  When she came
down, she was glad to find her escort employed in singeing the end of
the tail of the old rocking-horse at the fire in the hall, so that
she was not obliged to seek him in the drawing-room, where her plans
would probably have met with opposition.  She had, however,
objections to answer from an unexpected quarter.  Reginald was much
displeased when she took possession of the pitcher of broth.

'I will not walk with such a thing as that,' said he, 'it makes you
look like one of the dirty girls in the village.'

'Then you ought, like the courteous Rinaldo, to carry it for me,'
said Lily.

'I touch the nasty thing!  Faugh!  Throw it into the gutter, Lily.'

He made an attempt to dispose of it in that manner, which it required
all Lily's strength to withstand, as well as an imploring 'Now,
Redgie, think of the poor old people.  Remember, you have promised.'

'Promised!  I never promised to walk with a greasy old pitcher.  What
am I to do if we meet Miss Weston?'

Lily contrived to overcome Reginald's refined notions sufficiently to
make him allow her to carry the pitcher; and when he had whistled up
two of the dogs, they proceeded merrily along the road, dirty and wet
though it was.  Their walk was not entirely without adventures;
first, they had to turn back in the path by the river side, which
would have saved them half a mile, but was now flooded.  Then, as
they were passing through a long lane, which led them by Edward
Gage's farm, a great dog rushed out of the yard, and fell upon the
little terrier, Viper.  Old Neptune flew to the rescue, and to the
great alarm of Lily, Reginald ran up with a stick; happily, however,
a labourer at the same time came out with a pitchfork, and beat off
the enemy.  These two delays, together with Reginald's propensity for
cutting sticks, and for breaking ice, made it quite late when they
arrived at South End.  When there, they found that a kind neighbour
had brought the old people their broth in the morning, and intended
to go for her own when she came home from her work in the evening.
It was not often that Lily went to South End; the old people were
delighted to see her, and detained her for some time by a long story
about their daughter at service, while Reginald looked the picture of
impatience, drumming on his knee, switching the leg of the table, and
tickling Neptune's ears.  When they left the cottage it was much
later and darker than they had expected; but Lily was unwilling again
to encounter the perils of the lane, and consulted her brother
whether there was not some other way.  He gave notice of a cut across
some fields, which would take them into the turnpike road, and Lily
agreeing, they climbed over a gate into a pathless turnip field.
Reginald strode along first, calling to the dogs, while Lily
followed, abstaining from dwelling on the awkward circumstance that
every step she took led her farther from home, and rejoicing that it
was so dark that she could not see the mud which plastered the edge
of her petticoats.  After plodding through three very long fields,
they found themselves shut in by a high hedge and tall ditch.

'That fool of a farmer!' cried Reginald.

'What is to be done?' said Lily, disconsolately.

'There is the road,' said Reginald.  'How do you propose to get into
it?'

'There was a gap here last summer,' said the boy.

'Very likely!  Come back; try the next field; it must have a gate
somewhere.'

Back they went, after seeing the carrier's cart from Raynham pass by.

'Redgie, it must be half-past five!  We shall never be in time.  Aunt
Rotherwood coming too!'

After a desperate plunge through a swamp of ice, water, and mud, they
found themselves at a gate, and safely entered the turnpike road.

'How it rains!' said Lily.  'One comfort is that it is too dark for
any one to see us.'

'Not very dark, either,' said Reginald; 'I believe there is a moon if
one could see it.  Ha! here comes some one on horseback.  It is a
gray horse; it is William.'

'Come to look for us,' said Lily.  'Oh, Redgie!'

'Coming home from Raynham,' said Reginald.  'Do not fancy yourself so
important, Lily.  William, is that you?'

'Reginald!' exclaimed William, suddenly checking his horse.  'Lily,
what is all this?'

'We set out to South End, to take the broth to the old Martins, and
we found the meadows flooded, which made us late; but we shall soon
be at home,' said Lily, in a make-the-best-of-it tone.

'Soon?  You are a mile and a half from home now, and do you know how
late it is?'

'Half-past five,' said Lily.

'Six, at least; how could you be so absurd?'  William rode quickly
on; Reginald laughed, and they plodded on; at length a tall dark
figure was seen coming towards them, and Lily started, as it
addressed her, 'Now what is the meaning of all this?'

'Oh, William, have you come to meet us?  Thank you; I am sorry--'

'How were you to come through the village in the dark, without some
one to take care of you?'

'I am taking care of her,' said Reginald, affronted.

'Make haste; my aunt is come.  How could you make the people at home
so anxious?'

William gave Lily his arm, and on finding she was both tired and wet,
again scolded her, walked so fast that she was out of breath, then
complained of her folly, and blamed Reginald.  It was very
unpleasant, and yet she was very much obliged to him, and exceedingly
sorry he had taken so much trouble.

They came home at about seven o'clock.  Jane met them in the hall,
full of her own and Lady Rotherwood's wonderings; she hurried Lily
upstairs, and--skilful, quick, and ready--she helped her to dress in
a very short time.  As they ran down Reginald overtook them, and they
entered the drawing-room as the dinner-bell was ringing.  William did
not appear for some time, and his apologies were not such as to
smooth matters for his sister.

Perhaps it was for this very reason that Mr. Mohun allowed Lily to
escape with no more than a jesting reproof.  Lord Rotherwood wished
to make his cousin's hardihood and enterprise an example to his
sister, and, in his droll exaggerating way, represented such walks as
every-day occurrences.  This was just the contrary to what Emily
wished her aunt to believe, and Claude was much diverted with the
struggle between her politeness to Lord Rotherwood and her desire to
maintain the credit of the family.

Lady Florence, though liking Lilias, thought this walk extravagant.
Emily feared Lilias had lost her aunt's good opinion, and prepared
herself for some hints about a governess.  It was untoward; but in
the course of the evening she was a little comforted by a proposal
from Lady Rotherwood to take her and Lilias to a ball at Raynham,
which was to take place in January; and as soon as the gentlemen
appeared, they submitted the invitation to their father, while Lady
Rotherwood pressed William to accompany them, and he was refusing.

'What are soldiers intended for but to dance!' said Lord Rotherwood.

'I never dance,' said William, with a grave emphasis.

'I am out of the scrape,' said the Marquis.  'I shall be gone before
it takes place; I reserve all my dancing for July 30th.  Well, young
ladies, is the Baron propitious?'

'He says he will consider of it,' said Emily.

'Oh then, he will let you go,' said Florence, 'people never consider
when they mean no.'

'No, Florence,' said her brother, 'Uncle Mohun's "consider of it" is
equivalent to Le Roi's "avisera."'

'What is he saying?' asked Lily, turning to listen.  'Oh, that my wig
is in no ball-going condition.'

'A wreath would hide all deficiencies,' said Florence; 'I am
determined to have you both.'

'I give small hopes of both,' said Claude; 'you will only have
Emily.'

'Why do you think so, Claude?' cried both Florence and Lilias.

'From my own observation,' Claude answered, gravely.

'I am very angry with the Baron,' said Lord Rotherwood; 'he is grown
inhospitable:  he will not let me come here to-morrow--the first
Christmas these five years that I have missed paying my respects to
the New Court sirloin and turkey.  It is too bad--and the Westons
dining here too.'

'Cousin Turkey-cock, well may you be in a passion,' muttered Claude,
as if in soliloquy.

Lord Rotherwood and Lilias both caught the sound, and laughed, but
Emily, unwilling that Florence should see what liberties they took
with her brother, asked quickly why he was not to come.

'I think we are much obliged to him,' said Florence, 'it would be too
bad to leave mamma and me to spend our Christmas alone, when we came
to the castle on purpose to oblige him.'

'Ay, and he says he will not let me come here, because I ought to
give the Hetherington people ocular demonstration that I go to
church,' said Lord Rotherwood.

'Very right, as Eleanor would say,' observed Claude.

'Very likely; but I don't care for the Hetherington folks; they do
not know how to make the holly in the church fit to be seen, and they
will not sing the good old Christmas carols.  Andrew Grey is worth
all the Hetherington choir put together.'

'Possibly; but how are they to mend, if their Marquis contents
himself with despising them?' said Claude.

'That is too bad, Claude.  When you heard how submissively I listened
to the Baron, and know I mean to abide by what he said, you ought to
condole with me a little, if you have not the grace to lament my
absence on your own account.  Why, I thought myself as regular a part
of the feast as the mince-pies, and almost as necessary.'

Here a request for some music put an end to his lamentations.  Lilias
was vexed by the uncertainty about the ball, and was, besides, too
tired to play with spirit.  She saw that Emily was annoyed, and she
felt ready to cry before the evening was over; but still she was
proud of her exploit, and when, after the party was gone, Emily began
to represent to her the estimate that her aunt was likely to form of
her character, she replied, 'If she thinks the worse of me for
carrying the broth to those poor old people, I am sure I do not wish
for her good opinion.'

Mr. Mohun was not propitious when the question of Lily's going to the
ball was pressed upon him.  He said that he thought her too young for
gaieties, and, besides, that late hours never agreed with her, and he
advised her to wait for the 30th of July.

Lilias knew that it was useless to say any more.  She was much
disappointed, and at the same time provoked with herself for caring
about such a matter.  Her temper was out of order on Christmas Day;
and while she wondered why she could not enjoy the festival as
formerly, with thoughts fitted to the day, she did not examine
herself sufficiently to find out the real cause of her uncomfortable
feelings.

The clear frost was only cold; the bright sunshine did not rejoice
her; the holly and the mistletoe seemed ill arranged; and none of the
pleasant sights of the day could give her such blitheness as once she
had known.

She was almost angry when she saw that the Westons had left off their
mourning, declaring that they did not look like themselves; and her
vexation came to a height when she found that Alethea actually
intended to go to the ball with Mrs. Carrington.  The excited manner
in which she spoke of it convinced Mr. Mohun that he had acted wisely
in not allowing her to go, since the very idea seemed to turn her
head.


CHAPTER XV:  MINOR MISFORTUNES


'Loving she is, and tractable though wild.'

In a day or two Lady Rotherwood and her daughter called at the New
Court.  On this occasion Lilias was employed in as rational and lady-
like a manner as could be desired--in practising her music in the
drawing-room; Emily was reading, and Ada threading beads.

Lady Rotherwood greeted her nieces very affectionately, gave a double
caress to Adeline, stroked her pretty curls, admired her beadwork,
talked to her about her doll, and then proceeded to invite the whole
family to a Twelfth-Day party, given for their especial benefit.  The
little Carringtons and the Weston girls were also to be asked.  Emily
and Lilias were eagerly expressing their delight when suddenly a
trampling, like a charge of horse, was heard in the hall; the door
was thrown back, and in rushed Reginald and Phyllis, shouting, 'Such
fun!--the pigs are in the garden!'

At the sight of their aunt they stopped short, looking aghast, and
certainly those who beheld them partook of their consternation.
Reginald was hot and gloveless; his shoes far from clean; his brown
curls hanging in great disorder from his Scotch cap; his handkerchief
loose; his jacket dusty--but this was no great matter, since, as
Emily said, he was 'only a boy.'  His bright open smile, the rough,
yet gentleman-like courtesy of his advance to the Marchioness, his
comical roguish glance at Emily, to see if she was very angry, and to
defy her if she were, and his speedy exit, all greatly amused Lady
Florence, and made up for what there might have been of the wild
schoolboy in his entrance.

Poor Phyllis had neither the excuse of being a schoolboy nor the
good-humoured fearlessness that freed her brother from embarrassment,
and she stood stock-still, awkward and dismayed, not daring to
advance; longing to join in the pig-chase, yet afraid to run away,
her eyes stretched wide open, her hair streaming into them, her
bonnet awry, her tippet powdered with seeds of hay, her gloves torn
and soiled, the colour of her brown holland apron scarcely
discernible through its various stains, her frock tucked up, her
stockings covered with mud, and without shoes, which she had taken
off at the door.

'Phyllis,' said Emily, 'what are you thinking of?  What makes you
such a figure?  Come and speak to Aunt Rotherwood.'

Phyllis drew off her left-hand glove, and held out her hand, making a
few sidelong steps towards her aunt, who gave her a rather reluctant
kiss.  Lily bent her bonnet into shape, and pulled down her frock,
while Florence laughed, patted her cheek, and asked what she had been
doing.

'Helping Redgie to chop turnips,' was the answer.

Afraid of some further exposure, Emily hastily sent her away to be
made fit to be seen, and Lady Rotherwood went on caressing Ada and
talking of something else.  Emily had no opportunity of explaining
that this was not Phyllis's usual condition, and she was afraid that
Lady Rotherwood would never believe that it was accidental.  She was
much annoyed, especially as the catastrophe only served to divert Mr.
Mohun and Claude.  Of all the family William and Adeline alone took
her view of the case.  Ada lectured Phyllis on her 'naughtiness,' and
plumed herself on her aunt's evident preference, but William was not
equally sympathetic.  He was indeed as fastidious as Emily herself,
and as much annoyed by such misadventures; but he maintained that she
was to blame for them, saying that the state of things was not such
as it should be, and that the exposure might be advantageous if it
put her on her guard in future.

It appeared as if poor Phyllis was to be punished for the vexation
which she had caused, for in the course of her adventures with
Reginald she caught a cold, which threatened to prevent her from
being of the party on Twelfth-Day.  She had a cough, which did not
give her by any means as much inconvenience as the noise it
occasioned did to other people.  Every morning and every evening she
anxiously asked her sisters whether they thought she would be allowed
to go.  Another of the party seemed likely to fail.  On the 5th of
January Claude came down to breakfast later even than usual; but he
had no occasion to make excuses, for his heavy eyes, the dark lines
under them, his pale cheeks, and the very sit of his hair, were sure
signs that he had a violent headache.  He soon betook himself to the
sofa in the drawing-room, attended by Lily, with pillows, cushions,
ether, and lavender.  Late in the afternoon the pain diminished a
little, and he fell asleep, to the great joy of his sister, who sat
watching him, scarcely daring to move.

Suddenly a frightful scream and loud crash was heard in the room
above them.  Claude started up, and Lily, exclaiming, 'Those tiresome
children!' hurried to the room whence the noise had come.

Reginald, Phyllis, and Ada, all stood there laughing.  Reginald and
Phyllis had been climbing to the top of a great wardrobe, by means of
a ladder of chairs and tables.  While Phyllis was descending her
brother had made some demonstration that startled her, and she fell
with all the chairs over her, but without hurting herself.

'You naughty troublesome child,' cried Lily, in no gentle tone.  'How
often have you been told to leave off such boyish tricks!  And you
choose the very place for disturbing poor Claude, with his bad
headache, making it worse than ever.'

Phyllis tried to speak, but only succeeded in giving a dismal howl.
She went on screaming, sobbing, and roaring so loud that she could
not hear Lily's attempts to quiet her.  The next minute Claude
appeared, looking half distracted.  Reginald ran off, and as he
dashed out of the room, came full against William, who caught hold of
him, calling out to know what was the matter.

'Only Phyllis screaming,' said Lily.  'Oh, Claude, I am very sorry!'

'Is that all?' said Claude.  'I thought some one was half killed!'

He sank into a chair, pressing his hand on his temples, and looking
very faint.  William supported him, and Lily stood by, repeating, 'I
am very sorry--it was all my fault--my scolding--'

'Hush,' said William, 'you have done mischief enough.  Go away,
children.'

Phyllis had already gone, and the next moment thrust into Lily's hand
the first of the medicaments which she had found in the drawing-room.
The faintness soon went off, but Claude thought he had better not
struggle against the headache any longer, but go to bed, in hopes of
being better the next day.  William went with him to his room, and
Lilias lingered on the stairs, very humble, and very wretched.
William soon came forth again, and asked the meaning of the uproar.

'It was all my fault,' said she; 'I was vexed at Claude's being
waked, and that made me speak sharply to Phyllis, and set her
roaring.'

'I do not know which is the most inconsiderate of you,' said William.

'You cannot blame me more than I deserve,' said Lily.  'May I go to
poor Claude?'

'I suppose so; but I do not see what good you are to do.  Quiet is
the only thing for him.'

Lily, however, went, and Claude gave her to understand that he liked
her to stay with him.  She arranged his blinds and curtains
comfortably, and then sat down to watch him.  William went to the
drawing-room to write a letter.  Just as he had sat down he heard a
strange noise, a sound of sobbing, which seemed to come from the
corner where the library steps stood.  Looking behind them, he beheld
Phyllis curled up, her head on her knees, crying bitterly.

'You there!  Come out.  What is the matter now?'

'I am so very sorry,' sighed she.

'Well, leave off crying.'  She would willingly have obeyed, but her
sobs were beyond her own control; and he went on, 'If you are sorry,
there is no more to be said.  I hope it will be a lesson to you
another time.  You are quite old enough to have more consideration
for other people.'

'I am very sorry,' again said Phyllis, in a mournful note.

'Be sorry, only do not roar.  You make that noise from habit, I am
convinced, and you may break yourself off it if you choose.'

Phyllis crept out of the room, and in a few minutes more the door was
softly opened by Emily, returning from her walk.

'I thought Claude was here.  Is he gone to bed?  Is his head worse?'

'Yes, the children have been doing their best to distract him.
Emily, I want to know why it is that those children are for ever in
mischief and yelling in all parts of the house.'

'I wish I could help it,' said Emily, with a sigh; 'they are very
troublesome.'

'There must be great mismanagement,' said her brother.

'Oh, William!  Why do you think so?'

'Other children do not go on in this way, and it was not so in
Eleanor's time.'

'It is only Phyllis,' said Emily.

'Phyllis or not, it ought not to be.  What will that child grow up,
if you let her be always running wild with the boys?'

'Consider, William, that you see us at a disadvantage; we are all
unsettled by this illness, and the children have been from home.'

'As if they learnt all these wild tricks at Broomhill!  That excuse
will not do, Emily.'

'And then they are always worse in the holidays,' pleaded Emily.

'Yes, there are reasons to be found for everything that goes wrong;
but if you were wise you would look deeper.  Now, Emily, I do not
wish to be hard upon you, for I know you are in a very difficult
position, and very young for such a charge, but I am sure you might
manage better.  I do not think you use your energies.  There is no
activity, nor regularity, nor method, about this household.  I
believe that my father sees that this is the case, but it is not his
habit to find fault with little things.  You may think that,
therefore, I need not interfere, but--'

'Oh, William!  I am glad--'

'But remember that comfort is made up of little things.  And, Emily,
when you consider how much my father has suffered, and how desolate
his home must be at the best, I think you will be inclined to exert
yourself to prevent him from being anxious about the children or
harassed by your negligence.'

'Indeed, William,' returned Emily, with many tears, 'it is my most
earnest wish to make him comfortable.  Thank you for what you have
said.  Now that I am stronger, I hope to do more, and I will really
do my best.'

At this moment Emily was sincere; but the good impulse of one instant
was not likely to endure against long cherished habits of selfish
apathy.

Claude did not appear again till the middle of the next day.  His
headache was nearly gone, but he was so languid that he gave up all
thoughts of Devereux Castle that evening.  Lord Rotherwood, who
always seemed to know what was going on at Beechcroft, came to
inquire for him, and very unwillingly allowed that it would be better
for him to stay at home.  Lilias wished to remain with him; but this
her cousin would not permit, saying that he could not consent to lose
three of the party, and Florence would be disappointed in all her
plans.  Neither would Claude hear of keeping her at home, and she was
obliged to satisfy herself with putting his arm-chair in his
favourite corner by the fire, with the little table before it,
supplied with books, newspaper, inkstand, paper-knife, and all the
new periodicals, and he declared that he should enjoy the height of
luxury.

Phyllis considered it to be entirely her fault that he could not go,
and was too much grieved on that account to have many regrets to
spare for herself.  She enjoyed seeing Adeline dressed, and hearing
Esther's admiration of her.  And having seen the party set off, she
made her way into the drawing-room, opening the door as gently as
possible, just wide enough to admit her little person, then shutting
it as if she was afraid of hurting it, she crept across the room on
tiptoe.  She started when Claude looked up and said, 'Why, Phyl, I
have not seen you to-day.'

'Good morning,' she mumbled, advancing in her sidelong way.

Claude suspected that she had been more blamed the day before than
the occasion called for, and wishing to make amends he kissed her,
and said something good-natured about spending the evening together.

Phyllis, a little reassured, went to her own occupations.  She took
out a large heavy volume, laid it on the window-seat, and began to
read.  Claude was interested in his own book, and did not look up
till the light failed him.  He then, closing his book, gave a long
yawn, and looked round for his little companion, almost thinking,
from the stillness of the room, that she must have gone to seek for
amusement in the nursery.

She was, however, still kneeling against the window-seat, her elbows
planted on the great folio, and her head between her hands, reading
intently.

'Little Madam,' said he, 'what great book have you got there?'

'As You Like It,' said Phyllis.

'What! are you promoted to reading Shakspeare?'

'I have not read any but this,' said Phyllis.  'Ada and I have often
looked at the pictures, and I liked the poor wounded stag coming down
to the water so much, that I read about it, and then I went on.  Was
it wrong, Claude? no one ever told me not.'

'You are welcome to read it,' said Claude, 'but not now--it is too
dark.  Come and sit in the great chair on the other side of the fire,
and be sociable.  And what do you think of 'As You Like It?''

'I like it very much,' answered Phyllis, 'only I cannot think why
Jacks did not go to the poor stag, and try to cure it, when he saw
its tears running into the water.'

To save the character of Jacks, Claude gravely suggested the
difficulty of catching the stag, and then asked Phyllis her opinion
of the heroines.

'Oh! it was very funny about Rosalind dressing like a man, and then
being ready to cry like a girl when she was tired, and then
pretending to pretend to be herself; and Celia, it was very kind of
her to go away with Rosalind; but I should have liked her better if
she had stayed at home, and persuaded her father to let Rosalind stay
too.  I am sure she would if she had been like Ada.  Then it is so
nice about Old Adam and Orlando.  Do not you think so, Claude?  It is
just what I am sure Wat Greenwood would do for Redgie, if he was to
be turned out like Orlando.'

'It is just what Wat Greenwood's ancestor did for Sir Maurice Mohun,'
said Claude.

'Yes, Dame Greenwood tells us that story.'

'Well, Phyl, I think you show very good taste in liking the scene
between Orlando and Adam.'

'I am glad you like it, too, Claude.  But I will tell you what I like
best,' exclaimed the little girl, springing up, 'I do like it, when
Orlando killed the lioness and the snake,--and saved Oliver; how glad
he must have been.'

'Glad to have done good to his enemy,' said Claude; 'yes, indeed.'

'His enemy! he was his brother, you know.  I meant it must be so very
nice to save anybody--don't you think so, Claude?'

'Certainly.'

'Claude, do you know there is nothing I wish so much as to save
somebody's life.  It was very nice to save the dragon-fly; and it is
very nice to let flies out of spiders' webs, only they always have
their legs and wings torn, and look miserable; and it was very nice
to put the poor little thrushes back into their nest when they
tumbled out, and then to see their mother come to feed them; and it
was very pleasant to help the poor goose that had put its head
through the pales, and could not get it back.  Mrs. Harrington said
it would have been strangled if I had not helped it.  That was very
nice, but how delightful it would be to save some real human person's
life.'

Claude did not laugh at the odd medley in her speech, but answered,
'Well, those little things train you in readiness and kindness.'

'Will they?' said Phyllis, pressing on to express what had long been
her earnest wish.  'If I could but save some one, I should not mind
being killed myself--I think not--I hope it is not naughty to say so.
I believe there is something in the Bible about it, about laying down
one's life for one's friend.'

'There is, Phyl, and I quite agree with you; it must be a great
blessing to have saved some one.'

'And little girls have sometimes done it, Claude.  I know a story of
one who saved her little brother from drowning, and another waked the
people when the house was on fire.  And when I was at Broomhill,
Marianne showed me a story of a young lady who helped to save the
Prince, that Prince Charlie that Miss Weston sings about.  I wish the
Prince of Wales would get into some misfortune--I should like to save
him.'

'I do not quite echo that loyal wish,' said Claude.

'Well, but, Claude, Redgie wishes for a rebellion, like Sir
Maurice's, for he says all the boys at his school would be one
regiment, in green velvet coats, and white feathers in their hats.'

'Indeed! and Redgie to be Field Marshal?'

'No, he is to be Sir Reginald Mohun, a Knight of the Garter, and to
ask the Queen to give William back the title of Baron of Beechcroft,
and make papa a Duke.'

'Well done! he is to take good care of the interests of the family.'

'But it is not that that I should care about,' said Phyllis.  'I
should like it better for the feeling in one's own self; I think all
that fuss would rather spoil it--don't you, Claude?'

'Indeed, I do; but Phyllis, if you only wish for that feeling, you
need not look for dangers or rebellions to gain it.'

'Oh! you mean the feeling that very good people indeed have--people
like Harry--but that I shall never be.'

'I hope you mean to try, though.'

'I do try; I wish I was as good as Ada, but I am so naughty and so
noisy that I do not know what to do.  Every day when I say my prayers
I think about being quiet, and not idling at my lessons, and
sometimes I do stop in time, and behave better, but sometimes I
forget, and I do not mind what I am about, and my voice gets loud,
and I let the things tumble down and make a noise, and so it was
yesterday.'  Here she looked much disposed to cry.

'No, no, we will not have any crying this evening,' said Claude.  'I
do not think you did me much mischief, my head ached just as much
before.'

'That was a thing I wanted to ask you about:  William says my crying
loud is all habit, and that I must cure myself of it.  How does he
mean?  Ought I to cry every day to practise doing it without
roaring?'

'Do you like to begin,' said Claude, laughing; 'shall I beat you or
pinch you?'

'Oh! it would make your head bad again,' said Phyllis; 'but I wish
you would tell me what he means.  When I cry I only think about what
makes me unhappy.'

'Try never to cry,' said Claude; 'I assure you it is not pleasant to
hear you, even when I have no headache.  If you wish to do anything
right, you must learn self-control, and it will be a good beginning
to check yourself when you are going to cry.  Do not look melancholy
now.  Here comes the tea.  Let me see how you will perform as tea-
maker.'

'I wish the evening would not go away so fast!'

'And what are we to do after tea?  You are queen of the evening.'

'If you would but tell me a story, Claude.'

They lingered long over the tea-table, talking and laughing, and when
they had finished, Phyllis discovered with surprise that it was
nearly bedtime.  The promised story was not omitted, however, and
Phyllis, sitting on a little footstool at her brother's feet, looked
up eagerly for it.

'Well, Phyl, I will tell you a true history that I heard from an
officer who had served in the Peninsular War--the war in Spain, you
know.'

'Yes, with the French, who killed their king.  Lily told me.'

'And the Portuguese were helping us.  Just after we had taken the
town of Ciudad Rodrigo, some of the Portuguese soldiers went to find
lodgings for themselves, and, entering a magazine of gunpowder, made
a fire on the floor to dress their food.  A most dangerous thing--do
you know why?'

'The book would be burnt,' said Phyllis.

'What book, you wise child?'

'The Magazine; I thought a magazine was one of the paper books that
Maurice is always reading.'

'Oh!' said Claude, laughing, 'a magazine is a store, and as many
different things are stored in those books, they are called
magazines.  A powder magazine is a store of barrels of gunpowder.
Now do you see why it was dangerous to light a fire?'

'It blows up,' said Phyllis; 'that was the reason why Robinson Crusoe
was afraid of the lightning.'

'Right, Phyl, and therefore a candle is never allowed to be carried
into a powder magazine, and even nailed shoes are never worn there,
lest they should strike fire.  One spark, lighting on a grain of
gunpowder, scattered on the floor, might communicate with the rest,
make it all explode, and spread destruction everywhere.  Think in
what fearful peril these reckless men had placed, not only
themselves, but the whole town, and the army.  An English officer
chanced to discover them, and what do you think he did?'

'Told all the people to run away.'

'How could he have told every one, soldiers, inhabitants, and all?
where could they have gone?  No, he raised no alarm, but he ordered
the Portuguese out of the building, and with the help of an English
sergeant, he carried out, piece by piece, all the wood which they had
set on fire.  Now, imagine what that must have been.  An explosion
might happen at any moment, yet they had to walk steadily, slowly,
and with the utmost caution, in and out of this place several times,
lest one spark might fly back.'

'Then they were saved?' cried Phyllis, breathlessly; 'and what became
of them afterwards?'

'They were both killed in battle, the officer, I believe, in Badajoz,
and the sergeant sometime afterwards.'

Phyllis gave a deep sigh, and sat silent for some minutes.  Next,
Claude began a droll Irish fairy-tale, which he told with spirit and
humour, such as some people would have scorned to exert for the
amusement of a mere child.  Phyllis laughed, and was so happy, that
when suddenly they heard the sound of wheels, she started up,
wondering what brought the others home so soon, and was still more
surprised when Claude told her it was past ten.

'Oh dear! what will papa and Emily say to me for being up still?  But
I will stay now, it would not be fair to pretend to be gone to bed.'

'Well said, honest Phyl; now for the news from the castle.'

'Why, Claude,' said his eldest brother, entering, 'you are alive
again.'

'I doubt whether your evening could have been pleasanter than ours,'
said Claude.

'Phyl,' cried Ada, 'do you know, Mary Carrington's governess thought
I was Florence's sister.'

'You look so bright, Claude,' said Jane, 'I think you must have taken
Cinderella's friend with the pumpkin to enliven you.'

'My fairy was certainly sister to a Brownie,' said Claude, stroking
Phyllis's hair.

'Claude,' again began Ada, 'Miss Car--'

'I wish Cinderella's fairy may be forthcoming the day of the ball,'
said Lily, disconsolately.

'And William is going after all,' said Emily.

'Indeed! has the great Captain relented?'

'Yes.  Is it not good of him?  Aunt Rotherwood is so much pleased
that he consents to go entirely to oblige her.'

'Sensible of his condescension,' said Claude.  'By the bye, what
makes the Baron look so mischievous?'

'Mischievous!' said Emily, looking round with a start, 'he is looking
very comical, and so he has been all the evening.'

'What?  You thought mischievous was meant in Hannah's sense, when she
complains of Master Reginald being very mischie-vi-ous.'

Ada now succeeded in saying, 'The Carringtons' governess called me
Lady Ada.'

'How could she bring herself to utter so horrid a sound?' said
Claude.

'Ada is more cock-a-hoop than ever now,' said Reginald; 'she does not
think Miss Weston good enough to speak to.'

'But, Claude, she really did, she thought I was Florence's sister,
and she said I was just like her.'

'I wish you would hold your tongue, or go to bed,' said William, 'I
have heard nothing but this nonsense all the way home.'

While William was sending off Ada to bed, and Phyllis was departing
with her, Lily told Claude that the Captain had been most agreeable.
'I feared,' said she, 'that he would be too grand for this party, but
he was particularly entertaining; Rotherwood was quite eclipsed.'

'Rotherwood wants Claude to set him off,' said Mr. Mohun.  'Now,
young ladies, reserve the rest of your adventures for the morning.'

Adeline had full satisfaction in recounting the governess's mistake
to the maids, and in hearing from Esther that it was no wonder, 'for
that she looked more like a born lady than Lady Florence herself!'

Lilias's fit of petulance about the ball had returned more strongly
than ever; she partly excused herself to her own mind, by fancying
she disliked the thought of the lonely evening she was to spend more
than that of losing the pleasure of the ball.  Mr. Mohun would be
absent, conducting Maurice to a new school, and Claude and Reginald
would also be gone.

Her temper was affected in various ways; she wondered that William
and Emily could like to go--she had thought that Miss Weston was
wiser.  Her daily occupations were irksome--she was cross to Phyllis.

It made her very angry to be accused by the young brothers of making
a fuss, and Claude's silence was equally offensive.  It was upon
principle that he said nothing.  He knew it was nothing but a
transient attack of silliness, of which she was herself ashamed; but
he was sorry to leave her in that condition, and feared Lady
Rotherwood's coming into the neighbourhood was doing her harm, as
certainly as it was spoiling Ada.  The ball day arrived, and it was
marked by a great burst of fretfulness on the part of poor Lilias,
occasioned by so small a matter as the being asked by Emily to write
a letter to Eleanor.  Emily was dressing to go to dine at Devereux
Castle when she made the request.

'What have I to say?  I never could write a letter in my life, at
least not to the Duenna--there is no news.'

'About the boys going to school,' Emily suggested.

'As if she did not know all about them as well as I can tell her.
She does not care for my news, I see no one to hear gossip from.  I
thought you undertook all the formal correspondence, Emily?'

'Do you call a letter to your sister formal correspondence!'

'Everything is formal with her.  All I can say is, that you and
William are going to the ball, and she will say that is very silly.'

'Eleanor once went to this Raynham ball; it was her first and last,'
said Emily.

'Yes, not long before they went to Italy; it will only make her
melancholy to speak of it--I declare I cannot write.'

'And I have no time,' said Emily, 'and you know how vexed she is if
she does not get her letter every Saturday.'

'All for the sake of punctuality, nothing else,' said Lily.  'I
rather like to disappoint fidgety people--don't you, Emily?'

'Well,' said Emily, 'only papa does not like that she should be
disappointed.'

'You might have written, if you had not dawdled away all the
morning.'

This was true, and it therefore stung Emily, who complained that Lily
was very unkind.  Lily defended herself sharply, and the dispute was
growing vehement, when William happily cut it short by a summons to
Emily to make haste.

When they were gone Lily had time for reflection.  Good-temper was so
common a virtue, and generally cost her so little effort, that she
took no pains to cultivate it, but she now felt she had lost all
claim to be considered amiable under disappointment.  It was too late
to bear the privation with a good grace.  She was heartily ashamed of
having been so cross about a trifle, and ashamed of being
discontented at Emily's having a pleasure in which she could not
share.  Would this have been the case a year ago?  She was afraid to
ask herself the question, and without going deep enough into the
history of her own mind to make her sorrow and shame profitable, she
tried to satisfy herself with a superficial compensation, by making
herself particularly agreeable to her three younger sisters, and by
writing a very long and entertaining letter to Eleanor.

She met Emily with a cheerful face the next day, and listened with
pleasure to her history of the ball; and when Mr. Mohun returned home
he saw that the cloud had passed away.  But, alas!  Lilias neglected
to take the only means of preventing its recurrence.

The next week William departed.  Before he went he gave his sisters
great pleasure by desiring them to write to him, and not to let him
fall into his ancient state of ignorance respecting the affairs of
Beechcroft.

'Mind,' was his farewell speech, 'I expect you to keep me au courant
du jour.  I will not be in the dark about your best friends and
neighbours when I come home next July.'


CHAPTER XVI--VANITY AND VEXATION


'And still I have to tell the same sad tale
Of wasted energies, and idle dreams.'

Devereux Castle now became the great resort of the Miss Mohuns.  They
were always sure of a welcome there.  Lady Rotherwood liked to
patronise them, and Florence was glad of their society.

This was quite according to the wishes of Emily, who now had nothing
left to desire, but that the style of dress suitable, in her opinion,
to the granddaughter of the Marquis of Rotherwood, was more in
accordance with the purse of the daughter of the Esquire of
Beechcroft.  It was no part of Emily's character to care for dress.
She was at once too indolent and too sensible; she saw the vulgarity
of finery, and only aimed at simplicity and elegance.  During their
girlhood Emily and Lilias had had no more concern with their clothes
than with their food; Eleanor had carefully taught them plain
needlework, and they had assisted in making more than one set of
shirts; but they had nothing to do with the choice or fashion of
their own apparel.  They were always dressed alike, and in as plain
and childish a manner as they could be, consistently with their
station.  On Eleanor's marriage a suitable allowance was given to
each of them, in order that they might provide their own clothes, and
until Rachel left them they easily kept themselves in very good trim.
When Esther came Lily cheerfully took the trouble of her own small
decorations, considering it as her payment for the pleasure of having
Esther in the house.  Emily, however, neglected the useful 'stitch in
time,' till even 'nine' were unavailing.  She soon found herself
compelled to buy new ready-made articles, and expected Lilias to do
the same.  But Lilias demurred, for she was too wise to think it
necessary to ruin herself in company with Emily, and thus the two
sisters were no longer dressed alike.  A constant fear tormented
Emily lest she should disgrace Lady Rotherwood, or be considered by
some stranger as merely a poor relation of the great people, and not
as the daughter of the gentleman of the oldest family in the county.
She was, therefore, anxious to be perfectly fashionable, and not to
wear the same things too often, and in her disinterested desire to
maintain the dignity of the family the allowance which she received
at Christmas melted away in her hands.

Lily, though exempt from this folly, was not in a satisfactory state
of mind.  She was drawn off from her duties by a kind of spell.  It
was not that she liked Florence's society better than her home
pursuits.

Florence was indeed a very sweet-tempered and engaging creature; but
her mind was not equal to that of Lilias, and there was none of the
pleasure of relying upon her, and looking up to her, which Lilias had
learnt to enjoy in the company of her brother Claude, and of Alethea
Weston.  It was only that Lily's own mind had been turned away from
her former occupations, and that she did not like to resume them.
She had often promised herself to return to her really useful
studies, and her positive duties, as soon as her brothers were gone;
but day after day passed and nothing was done, though her visits to
the cottages and her lessons to Phyllis were often neglected.  Her
calls at Devereux Castle took up many afternoons.  Florence
continually lent her amusing books, her aunt took great interest in
her music, and she spent much time in practising.  The mornings were
cold and dark, and she could not rise early, and thus her time
slipped away, she knew not how, uselessly and unsatisfactorily.  The
three younger ones were left more to themselves, and to the maids.
Jane sought for amusement in village gossip, and the little ones,
finding the nursery more agreeable than the deserted drawing-room,
made Esther their companion.

Mr. Mohun had, at this time, an unusual quantity of business on his
hands; he saw that the girls were not going on well, but he had
reasons for not interfering at present, and he looked forward to
Eleanor's visit as the conclusion of their trial.

'I cannot think,' said Marianne Weston one day to her sister, 'why
Mr. Mohun comes here so often.'

Alethea told her he had some business with their mamma, and she
thought no more of the matter, till she was one day questioned by
Jane.  She was rather afraid of Jane, who, as she thought, disliked
her, and wished to turn her into ridicule; so it was with no
satisfaction that she found herself separated from the others in the
course of a walk, and submitted to a cross-examination.

Jane asked, in a mysterious manner, who had been at Broomhill that
morning.

'Mr. Mohun,' said Marianne.

'What did he go there for?' said Jane.

'Alethea says he has some business with mamma.'

'Then you did not hear what it was?'

'I was not in the room.'

'Are you never there when he comes?'

'Sometimes.'

'And is Alethea there?'

'Oh yes!'

'His business must be with her too.  Cannot you guess it?'

'No,' said Marianne, looking amazed.

'How can you be so slow?'

'I am not sure that I would guess if I could,' said Marianne, 'for I
do not think they wish me to know.'

'Oh! nonsense, it is fine fun to find out secrets,' said Jane.  'You
will know it at last, you may be sure, so there can be no harm in
making it out beforehand, so as to have the pleasure of triumph when
the wise people vouchsafe to admit you into their confidence; I am
sure I know it all.'

'Then please do not tell me, Jane, I ought not to hear it.'

'Little Mrs. Propriety,' said Jane, 'you are already assuming all the
dignity of my Aunt Marianne, and William's Aunt Marianne--oh! and of
little Henry's Great-aunt Marianne.  Now,' she added, laughing, 'can
you guess the secret?'

Marianne stood still in amazement for a moment, and then exclaimed,
'Jane, Jane! you do not mean it, you are only trying to tease me.'

'I am quite serious,' said Jane.  'You will see that I am right.'

Here they were interrupted, and as soon as she returned from her walk
Marianne, perplexed and amazed, went to her mother, and told her all
that Jane had said.

'How can she be so silly?' said Mrs. Weston.

'Then it is all nonsense, as I thought,' said Marianne, joyfully.  'I
should not like Alethea to marry an old man.'

'Mr. Mohun is very unlikely to make himself ridiculous,' said Mrs.
Weston.  'Do not say anything of it to Alethea; it would only make
her uncomfortable.'

'If it had been Captain Mohun, now --' Marianne stopped, and blushed,
finding her speech unanswered.

A few days after, Mr. Mohun overtook Marianne and her mother, as he
was riding home from Raynham, and dismounting, led his horse, and
walked on with them.  Either not perceiving Marianne, or not caring
whether she heard him, he said,

'Has Miss Weston received the letter she expected?'

'No,' said Mrs. Weston, 'she thinks, as there is no answer, the
family must be gone abroad, and very probably they have taken Miss
Aylmer with them; but she has written to another friend to ask about
them.'

'From all I hear,' said Mr. Mohun, 'I should prefer waiting to hear
from her, before we make further inquiries; we shall not be ready
before midsummer, as I should wish my eldest daughter to assist me in
making this important decision.'

'In that case,' said Mrs. Weston, 'there will be plenty of time to
communicate with her.  I can see some of the friends of the family
when I go to London, for we must not leave Mr. Weston in solitude
another spring.'

'Perhaps I shall see you there,' said Mr. Mohun.  'I have some
business in London, and I think I shall meet the Hawkesworths there
in May or June.'

After a little more conversation Mr. Mohun took his leave, and as
soon as he had ridden on, Marianne said, 'Oh! mamma, I could not help
hearing.'

'My dear,' said Mrs. Weston, 'I know you may be trusted; but I should
not have told you, as you may find such a secret embarrassing when
you are with your young friends.'

'And so they are to have a governess?'

'Yes; and we are trying to find Miss Aylmer for them.'

'Miss Aylmer!  I am glad of it; how much Phyllis and Ada will like
her!'

'Yes, it will be very good for them; I wish I knew the Grants'
direction.'

'Well, I hope Jane will not question me any more; it will be very
difficult to manage, now I know the truth.'

But poor Marianne was not to escape.  Jane was on the watch to find
her alone, and as soon as an opportunity offered, she began:-

'Well, auntie, any discoveries?'

'Indeed, Jane, it is not right to fancy Mr. Mohun can do anything so
absurd.'

'That is as people may think,' said Jane.

'I wish you would not talk in that way,' said Marianne.

'Now, Marianne,' pursued the tormentor, 'if you can explain the
mystery I will believe you, otherwise I know what to think.'

'I am certain you are wrong, Jane; but I can tell you no more.'

'Very well, my good aunt, I am satisfied.'

Jane really almost persuaded herself that she was right, as she
perceived that her father was always promoting intercourse with the
Westons, and took pleasure in conversing with Alethea.  She twisted
everything into a confirmation of her idea; while the prospect of
having Miss Weston for a stepmother increased her former dislike; but
she kept her suspicions to herself for the present, triumphing in the
idea that, when the time came, she could bring Marianne as a witness
of her penetration.

The intercourse between the elder Miss Mohuns and Miss Weston was,
however, not so frequent as formerly; and Alethea herself could not
but remark that, while Mr. Mohun seemed to desire to become more
intimate, his daughters were more backward in making appointments
with her.  This was chiefly remarkable in Emily and Jane.  Lilias was
the same in openness, earnestness, and affection; but there was
either a languor about her spirits or they were too much excited, and
her talk was more of novels, and less of poor children than formerly.
The constant visits to Devereux Castle prevented Emily and Lilias
from being as often as before at church, and thus they lost many
walks and talks that they used to enjoy in the way home.  Marianne
began to grow indignant, especially on one occasion, when Emily and
Lily went out for a drive with Lady Rotherwood, forgetting that they
had engaged to take a walk with the Westons that afternoon.

'It is really a great deal too bad,' said she to Alethea; 'it is
exactly what we have read of in books about grandeur making people
cast off their old friends.'

'Do not be unfair, Marianne,' said Alethea.  'Lady Florence has a
better right to--'

'Better right!' exclaimed Marianne.  'What, because she is a
marquis's daughter?'

'Because she is their cousin.'

'I do not believe Lilias really cares for her half as much as for
you,' said Marianne.  'It is all because they are fine people.'

'Nay, Marianne, if our cousins were to come into this neighbourhood,
we should not be as dependent on the Mohuns as we now feel.'

'I hope we should not break our engagements with them.'

'Perhaps they could not help it.  When their aunt came to fetch them,
knowing how seldom they can have the carriage, it would have been
scarcely civil to say that they had rather take a walk with people
they can see any day.'

'Last year Lilias would have let Emily go by herself,' said Marianne.
'Alethea, they are all different since that Lady Rotherwood came--all
except Phyl.  Ada is a great deal more conceited than she was when
she was staying here; she pulls out her curls, and looks in the glass
much more, and she is always talking about some one having taken her
for Lady Florence's sister.  And, Alethea, just fancy, she does not
like me to go through a gate before her, because she says she has
precedence!'

Alethea was much amused, but she would not let Marianne condemn the
whole family for Ada's folly.  'It will all come right,' said she,
'let us be patient and good-humoured, and nothing can be really
wrong.'

Though Alethea made the best of it to her sister, she could not but
feel hurt, and would have been much more so if her temper had been
jealous or sentimental.  Almost in spite of herself she had bestowed
upon Lilias no small share of her affection, and she would have been
more pained by her neglect if she had not partaken of that spirit
which 'thinketh no evil, but beareth all things, believeth all
things, hopeth all things, and endureth all things.'

Lilias was not satisfied with either herself, her home, her sisters,
or her school; she was far from being the fresh, happy creature that
she had been the year before.  She had seen the fallacy of her
principle of love, but in her self-willed adherence to it she had
lost the strong sense and habit of duty which had once ruled her; and
in a vague and restless frame of mind, she merely sought from day to
day for pleasure and idle occupation.  Lent came, but she was not
roused, she was only more uncomfortable when she saw the Rector, or
Alethea, or went to church.  Alethea's unfailing gentleness she felt
almost as a rebuke; and Mr. Devereux, though always kind and good-
natured, had ceased to speak to her of those small village matters in
which she used to be prime counsellor.

