They shook hands, and she sent her excuses to Lady Lucy for having been
too much occupied to call, asking whether she was still in town.

'Only till Thursday,' he said, 'when I take her to join my aunt, who is
to show her the Rhine.'

'Do not you go with them?'

'I have not decided. It depends upon circumstances. Did not I hear
something of your family visiting Germany?'

'Perhaps they may,' said Theodora, dryly. He began to study the
portrait, and saw some likeness, but was distressed by something in the
drawing of the mouth.

'Yes,' said Theodora, 'I know it is wrong; but Miss Piper could not see
it as I did, and her alterations only made it worse, till I longed to be
able to draw.'

'I wonder if I might venture,' said Lord St. Erme, screwing up his eye,
and walking round the picture. 'I am sure, with your artist eye, you
must know what it is not to be able to keep your hands off.'

'Not I,' said Theodora, smiling. 'Pencils are useless tools to me. But
it would be a great benefit to the picture, and Miss Piper will fancy it
all her own.'

'You trust me, then?' and he turned to ask for a piece of chalk, adding,
'But is it not too bold a measure without the subject?'

'He is in the carriage, with his nurse;' and Theodora, unable to resist
so material an improvement to her gift, brought him in, and set him up
on the counter opposite to a flaming picture of a gentleman in a red
coat, which he was pleased to call papa, and which caused his face to
assume a look that was conveyed to the portrait by Lord St. Erme, and
rendered it the individual Johnnie Martindale, instead of merely a pale
boy in a red sash.

Theodora was too much gratified not to declare it frankly, and to say
how much charmed his mother would be; and she was pleased by a remark of
Lord St. Erme, that showed that his poet mind comprehended that wistful
intelligence that gave a peculiar beauty to Johnnie's thin white face.

She thought to pay off her obligations by an immediate visit to his
sister, while she knew him to be safe out of the way; and, driving to
Mrs. Delaval's, she sent her nephew home, intending to walk back.

Lady Lucy was alone, and she found her a gentle, simple-hearted girl,
with one sole affection, namely, for the brother, who was the whole
world to her; and taking Miss Martindale, on his word, as an object of
reverence and admiration. It was impossible not to thaw towards her: and
when Theodora spoke of the embellishment of the portrait, she needed
no more to make her spring up, and fetch a portfolio to exhibit her
brother's drawings. Admirable they were; sketches of foreign scenery,
many portraits, in different styles, of Lady Lucy herself, and the
especial treasure was a copy of Tennyson, interleaved with illustrations
in the German style, very fanciful and beautiful. Theodora was, however,
struck by the numerous traces she saw of the Lalla Rookh portrait. It
was there as the dark-eyed Isabel; again as Judith, in the Vision of
Fair Women; it slept as the Beauty in the Wood; and even in sweet St.
Agnes, she met it refined and purified; so that at last she observed,
'It is strange how like this is to my mother.'

'I think it must be,' said Lady Lucy; 'for I was quite struck by your
likeness to St. Erme's ideal sketches.'

Rather annoyed, Theodora laughed, and turning from the portfolio, asked
if she did not also draw?

'A little; but mine are too bad to be looked at.'

Theodora insisted, and the drawings were produced: all the best had
been done under Lord St. Erme's instruction. The affection between the
brother and sister touched her, and thinking herself neglectful of a
good little girl, she offered to take the desired walk at once. While
Lady Lucy was preparing, however, the brother came home, and oh! the
inconvenient satisfaction of his blushing looks.

Yet Theodora pardoned these, when he thanked her for being kind to his
sister; speaking with a sort of parental fondness and anxiety of his
wish to have Lucy with him, and of his desire that she should form
friendships that would benefit her.

Never had he spoken with so much reality, nor appeared to so much
advantage; and it was in his favour, too, that Theodora contrasted this
warm solicitude for his young sister with the indifference of her own
eldest brother. There was evidently none of the cold distance that was
the grievance of her home.

'Lady Lucy is almost out of the school-room,' she said. 'You will soon
be able to have her with you in the country.'

'There are certainly some considerations that might make me resolve on
an English winter,' said Lord St. Erme.

'Every consideration, I should think.'

'Fogs and frosts, and clouds, that hang like a weight on the whole
frame,' said Lord St. Erme, shivering.

'Healthy, freshening mists, and honest vigorous frosts to brace one for
service,' said Theodora, smiling.

'O, Miss Martindale!' cried Lady Lucy, entering, 'are you persuading St.
Erme to stay all the year in England? I do so wish he would.'

'Then you ought to make him,' said Theodora.

'If Miss Martindale were to express a wish or opinion--'

She saw it was time to cut him short. 'Every one's opinion must be the
same,' she said.

'O,' cried Lucy, 'of course Italy is pleasanter. It is selfish to
wish to keep him here; but if I had my will, we would live together at
Wrangerton, and have such nice poor people.'

'A "chateau en Espagne" indeed, my little sister. Wrangerton is a most
forlorn place, an old den of the worst period of architecture, set down
just beyond the pretty country, but in the programme of all the tourists
as a show place; the third-rate town touching on the park, and your nice
poor people not even the ordinary English peasantry, but an ill-disposed
set of colliers.'

Theodora looked, but did not speak.

'Miss Martindale thinks me a laggard, but she hears my excuse.'

'If they are ill-disposed,' said Theodora, in her low, severe voice
(she could not help it), 'it is for want of influence from the right
quarter.'

'My agent tells me they are perfectly impracticable.'

'Knights of old liked something impracticable.' She was almost ready
to check herself; but there was something inspiriting in the idea of
awakening this youth, who seemed to catch at her words as if she were a
damsel sending forth a champion. His reply was--

'Those were days worth living for. Then the knight's devoir was poetry
in real life.'

'Devoir is always poetry in real life,' said Theodora. 'What is it but
the work ready to hand? Shrinking from it is shrinking from the battle.
Come, Lady Lucy, I will not detain you.'

Lord St. Erme seemed about to say something as he shook hands, but it
did not come. The walk was passed by the simple-hearted Lucy discoursing
of the events by which she counted her eras, namely, his visits. Her
perfect brother was her only theme.


CHAPTER 20


     Yet learn the gamut of Hortensio.

     --Taming of the Shrew


Mrs. Nesbit was recommended to spend some months at Baden Baden; and
Theodora formed a design, which highly pleased Arthur and Violet, of
spending this time, while the family were absent, and while Arthur was
in Scotland, as hostess at Martindale to Violet and the children.

After seeing Arthur off to Windsor for the next fortnight, Theodora
had begun writing to propose the scheme to her father, when she was
interrupted by the announcement of Lord St. Erme.

To visit her alone was a strong measure, and she put on a panoply of
dignified formality. He began to say he had brought a German book, to
show her a poem of which their conversation had reminded him.

'I understand very little German,' said she, coldly. 'I once had a
German governess whom I disliked so much that I took a disgust to the
language.'

'There is so much that is beautiful and untranslatable in its
literature, that I am sure it would recompense you.'

'I do not like the German tone of mind. It is vapoury and unreal.'

'I should like to show you cause to alter your opinion, but--'

'This is English,' said Theodora, as her eye fell on a paper of verses
that marked the place.

'Ah, Lucy made me put it in. A few lines that occurred to me after
watching Mrs. Martindale's little boy.'

Thankful that they were not inspired by Venus's little boy, she glanced
over them, and saw they were in his best style, simple and pretty
thoughts on the child's content, wherever he traced any symbol of his
father.

'Poor little Johnnie is highly flattered,' she said. 'His mamma will be
delighted.'

He begged her attention to the German poem, she glanced onward as
he read, watching for shoals ahead, and spied something about a
"hochbeseeltes madchen" inspiring a "Helden sanger geist", and grew
hotter and hotter till she felt ready to box his ears for intoning
German instead of speaking plain English, and having it over. A cotton
umbrella arose before her eyes, she heard the plashing gravel, and an
honest voice telling her she was a grand creature in great need of being
broken in.

The critical stanza had commenced, the reader's voice trembled; Theodora
did not heed, her mind was in the avenue at home. An opening door
startled them.

'Mr. and Mrs. Albert Moss.'

Her brother's brother-in-law! the son and partner of Lord St. Erme's
steward! Was it thus his suit was to be checked?

There was no recognition; he went on reading his German to himself,
while Albert presented Mrs. Albert Moss, resplendent in bridal finery,
and displaying her white teeth in a broad smile, as with a nod,
half-gracious, half-apologetic, she said, 'I fear we interrupt a lesson;
but we will not inconvenience you; we will go at once to our dear
convalescent.'

'Thank you, you do not interrupt me, and I do not think my sister is
dressed yet. Indeed, I doubt whether I ought to allow her to see any
one.'

'O, you cannot be so cruel!' cried Mrs. Moss, holding up her hands;
'one little peep! our only day in town.'

'Yes,' said Albert. 'I could not but gratify my Louisa's anxiety to be
introduced to her new relatives.'

'I am afraid you must be disappointed, for my brother is with his
regiment at Windsor, and my sister is still so weak that she ought to
have no excitement.'

'And we have only a few hours in town. The inexorable claims of business
have recalled us to Wrangerton.'

The Earl looked up surprised, as if the word had recalled him from the
clouds.

'You have been in Wales, I think,' said Theodora. 'Were you pleased?'

'Oh, I was enraptured!' exclaimed the bride; 'the sublime and romantic
could be carried no higher! It makes me quite discontented with our home
scenery.

'Your sister would not approve of that,' said Theodora to Albert;' she
can bear no slight to Helvellyn.'

'I forget--is there a view of Helvellyn from Wrangerton?' said Lord St.
Erme, still somewhat dreamily.

Mrs. Moss started at hearing such good English from the German master,
and patronizingly said, 'Yes. Helvellyn is monarch of our picturesque.
Do you ever come northwards?'

'Not so often as, perhaps, I ought. I am afraid I know more of the Alps
than of Helvellyn.'

'I am sure,' continued the voluble lady, 'if ever you thought of such
a scheme when the season is over, it would be well worth your while.
I could reckon up many respectable families, who with such
introductions--let me see, there are the Joneses, and the Dunlops, and
the Evelyns, to say nothing of my new sisters, the Miss Mosses.'

'I have no doubt it is a very good neighbourhood,' said Lord St. Erme,
rising. 'I must go, or we shall miss the train. Can you tell me how soon
you expect Lord Martindale?'

'About the tenth or eleventh,' said Theodora.

'Thank you. Then I must wish you good-bye--'

'And I must thank you in my sister's name for the pleasure she will take
in what you have done for her little boy. Remember me to Lady Lucy.'

That name was a revelation to Albert, and the door had scarcely closed
before he exclaimed--'Surely, Miss Martindale, that could not be Lord
St. Erme!'

'Yes, it was.'

'Well!' cried Mrs. Moss, 'there was something decidedly the aristocrat
in his moustache!'

Albert could not recover from his vexation at having missed such a
chance, and was nearly setting off in pursuit of his lordship. Theodora
was glad to escape for a moment, on the plea of seeing whether Violet
could receive a visit.

In her absence the bride began--'I can't see that she is so handsome,
after all! And I should be ashamed to wear such a dress as that!'

'Distinguished people have freaks, my love. Bless me! if I had but known
the Earl!'

'I see how it is,' said the wife; 'a proud Countess we shall have.'

'If one of the girls had but been here! Every one of them is prettier
than this Miss Martindale. Who knows?'

'Ah! I shall take care in a friendly way to let your sister know how her
own family feel at her keeping aloof--'

'I do not believe it is her fault, poor child,' said Albert. 'Martindale
has set this haughty young lady to keep guard over her--'

'We shall see,' said the bride. 'I am not used to be refused, and once
with your sister, I will discover all her secrets.'

Fortunately for Violet, Theodora had found her so much exhausted by
the fatigue of dressing, that she thought it safest, considering what
a bride it was, not to divulge her presence in the house; and she came
down with this intelligence, trying to compensate for it by civility,
and by showing the children.

Mrs. Moss was not easily repulsed, she begged Miss Martindale to
reconsider her verdict.

'I must not relent; I am accountable to the doctor and to my brother.'

'It shall not be your fault. You shall know nothing of it. I will find
my way. Ah! I'm a giddy young thing. Nothing can stop me!' and she
stepped forward, laughing affectedly, and trying to look arch.

'I cannot permit this. It might do serious harm,' said Theodora, obliged
to stand in her path, and to put on such a look of haughty command, that
she was positively subdued and frightened, and went back to her seat
in a meek state of silence, whence she only recovered to overwhelm poor
Johnnie with her attentions. He cried and was sent away, and Mrs.
Moss was obliged to be satisfied with the baby, though she looked as
dignified and as little to be taken liberties with as any Martindale of
them all.

They lingered on, hoping to weary out Miss Martindale's patience, or
that some chance might reveal their presence to Violet; but in vain;
Theodora's politeness was exemplary, and she endured Mrs. Albert Moss's
familiarity so well, that when at length they departed, the last words
were a parting whisper, 'Good morning, Miss Martindale. If we had known
what we interrupted--but ah! I have gone through those things so lately,
that I know how to feel for you, and can keep your secret.'

'There is no subject of secrecy that I know of,' said Theodora, more
coldly than ever.

Hateful woman! Poor Violet! There, now, it will be all over the country
that I am engaged to him! I must take him now, or I hope he will give it
up on discovering my connections! Then I can despise him. Foolish man!
why could he not say what he wanted? I should have got rid of him then;
I was in the mood! However, he is out of the way for the present. Now to
make the best of it with Violet.

Violet was grieved, both for her own sake and the vexation at home, but
she so sweetly acquiesced in its having been right, and was so sure that
her sister meant nothing but kindness, that Theodora, knowing that she
herself could not have submitted with anything like patience, admired
and loved her more than ever.

The gentleness and quietness of her demeanour were a refreshment to
Theodora's tossed and undecided mind; and in administering to her
comfort and pleasure, the anxieties and remorse subsided into a
calm like her own. How delightful was the day of her introduction to
Johnnie's portrait; her admiration, and tearful gratitude to the kind
deviser of the gift, were the greatest pleasure Theodora had known for
months; the discussion of every feature, the comparison of Johnnie
with it, the history of the difficulties, and of his papa's assistance,
seemed a never-ending treat to both giver and receiver. The poem, too;
it was very amusing to see how she could hardly believe that original
verses could possibly be written on her boy, and then when set to guess
whose they were, she began with a hesitating 'Miss Marstone is the only
person near who makes verses, and these are too pretty to be hers.'

'Ah! if you would follow Emma's advice, and call the baby Osyth, after
the first Prioress, you might have a chance from that quarter.'

It could not be Mr. Fotheringham, the only poet she could think of, and
she could only beg to be told.

'There is one whom a Wrangerton woman should not forget.'

'Lord St. Erme! You ARE laughing at me, Theodora. He never even saw
Johnnie!'

Theodora explained the two meetings, anxious to see her way of thinking.
'It is a wonderful thing!' was her first remark. 'Who would have told me
how it would be three years ago? They are very pretty.'

'I do not think you like them the better for being his,' said Theodora.

'I ought,' said Violet; 'no other great man ever seems to me so grand as
our own Earl.'

'I want your real feeling.'

'You know,' said Violet, smiling, 'I cannot think them done only for
Johnnie's sake--'

'And, therefore, they do not please you.'

'Not exactly that; but--if you don't mind my saying so, I feel as if I
had rather--it might be better--I don't want to be ungrateful, but if
you were getting into a scrape for the sake of pleasing me, I should be
sorry. Forgive me, Theodora, you made me say so.'

'You are consideration itself,' said Theodora, affectionately. 'Never
mind, he is out of the way. We will let him go off poetizing to Germany;
and under your wing at home, I will get into no more mischief.'

That was a pleasant prospect, and Violet reposed on the thought of the
enjoyment of Martindale without its formidable inhabitants; trying in
it to forget the pain of parting with her husband for a month, and her
longings to spend it at her own home, and see Johnnie strengthened by
Helvellyn breezes; while to Theodora it seemed like the opening into
peace and goodness.

One forenoon, Violet, on coming down-stairs, found her sister writing
extremely fast, and seeing an envelope on the table in Lord Martindale's
writing, asked if it was his answer to Theodora's plan.

'Yes.'

'Ah!' said Violet, perceiving something was amiss, 'they have spared you
to me a long time already.'

'Don't be uneasy,' said Theodora; 'I'll settle it.'

'But,' exclaimed Violet, 'I could not bear that you should be with me if
they want you.'

'That is not it; papa has something in his head; I will settle it.'

Violet knew what was indicated by the over-erectness of Theodora's
head. To be the cause of family discussion was frightful, but she had a
nervous dread of thwarting Theodora.

'I wish you would not look at me,' exclaimed Theodora.

'I beg your pardon,' sighed she.

'What's the use of that when I know you are not satisfied, and do not
trust me?'

'Don't be angry with me,' implored Violet, with a quivering voice,
and tears of weakness in her eyes. 'I cannot help it. I do not want to
interfere, but as it is for me, I must beg you to tell me you are not
pressing to stay with me when Lady Martindale wishes for you.'

'No one ever wants me. No, but papa thinks that you and I cannot be
trusted together. He says he cannot leave me with one who has so little
authority.'

That indignant voice contrasted with the gentle answer, 'I do not
wonder; I have always thought if I had been older and better able to
manage--'

'No such thing!' exclaimed Theodora; 'you are the only person who ever
exercised any control over me.'

'O, hush! you do not know what you are saying.'

'It is the truth, and you know it. When you choose, every one yields to
you, and so do I.'

'Indeed, I did not know it,' said Violet, much distressed. 'I am very
sorry if I am overbearing; I did not think I was.'

Theodora fairly laughed at such a word being applied to the mild,
yielding creature, who looked so pale and feeble. 'Very domineering,
indeed!' she said. 'No, no, my dear, it is only that you are always
right. When you disapprove, I cannot bear to hurt and grieve you,
because you take it so quietly.'

'You are so very kind to me.'

'So, if papa wishes me to come to good, he had better leave me to you.'

'I don't think that ought to be,' said Violet, feebly.

'What, not that you should be my only chance--that you should calm me
and guide me when every one else has failed--'

'Theodora, dear, I do not think I ought to like to hear you say so. It
cannot be safe for you to submit to me rather than to your father.'

'He never had any moral power over me. He never convinced me, nor led
me to yield my will,' said Theodora, proud perhaps of her voluntary
submission to her gentle sister-in-law, and magnifying its extent; but
Violet was too right-minded, in her simplicity, to be flattered by an
allegiance she knew to be misplaced.

'I should not like baby to say so by and by,' she whispered.

'There's an esprit de corps in parents,' cried Theodora, half angrily;
'but Helen will never be like me. She will not be left to grow up
uncared for and unloved till one-and-twenty, and then, when old enough
for independence, be for the first time coerced and reproached. If
people never concern themselves about their children, they need not
expect the same from them as if they had brought them up properly.'

'That is a sad thought,' pensively said the young mother.

'I declare you shall hear the letter, that you may own that it is
unreasonable--unbearable!' And she read--

'"I have been considering your request to spend the time of our absence
at home with Mrs. Martindale, but I cannot think fit to comply with it.
Arthur's income is fully sufficient to provide change of air for his
family; and he ought not to expect always to leave his wife on other
people's hands, while he is pursuing his own diversions."'

Theodora was glad to see that this did rouse Violet's indignation.

'Oh! he does not know. Do tell him it was all your kindness! Tell him
that Arthur is not going for long. He must not think such things.'

'He thinks much more injustice,' said Theodora. 'Listen:--"After so long
an absence, it is high time you should rejoin us; and, considering what
has occurred, you cannot be surprised that I should be unwilling to
leave you with one so young and of so little authority over you. Though
I acquit her of all blame for your indiscretions--" (There, Violet, I
hope you are much obliged to him!) "I should not have consented to your
remaining with her up to the present time, if it had not been a case of
urgent necessity, as I wish to have you under my own eye." (As if he had
ever made any use of it?) "You might as well be alone here as with
her; and, after your late conduct, I cannot put the confidence in
your prudence that I should desire. Violet has, I have no doubt, acted
amiably; and her youth, inexperience, and gentleness fully excuse her
in my eyes for having been unable to restrain you; but they are reasons
sufficient to decide me on not leaving you with her at present. We shall
be in London on Monday, the 11th, and I wish you to be in readiness to
join us when we embark for Ostend on the following evening. Give my kind
love to Violet, and tell her I am glad she is going on well, and that I
am much pleased with my grand-daughter's intended name." There, Violet,
what do you think of that?'

'Pray make him understand that Arthur wanted a change very much, and
will not be long gone.'

'Arthur! You cannot feel for any one else!'

'I did not mean to be selfish!' said Violet, sorry for having seemed to
be wanting in sympathy.

'No, indeed! You never think what would become of you left alone, with
two babies that cannot walk!'

'Never mind me, I shall manage very well, I don't like to have a
disturbance made on my account. I cannot think how you can hesitate
after such a letter as this.'

'That is the very thing. He would never have dared to say these things
to my face! Now let me tell you. I know I have been much to blame; you
made me feel it. You are taming me; and if he leaves me to you I may
be more dutiful when he comes back. But if he strains his new notion of
authority too far, and if you throw me off, I shall be driven to do what
will grieve and disappoint you.'

'But surely,' said Violet, 'it cannot be the right beginning of being
dutiful to resist the first thing that is asked of you.'

'You wish me to go to be fretted and angered! to be without one
employment to drown painful thoughts, galled by attempts at controlling
me; my mind poisoned by my aunt, chilled by my mother--to be given up to
my worse nature, without perhaps even a church to go to!'

'It is very hard,' said Violet; 'but if we are to submit, it cannot be
only when we see fit. Would it not be better to make a beginning that
costs you something?'

'And lose my hope of peaceful guidance!'

'I do believe,' said Violet, 'that if you go patiently, because it is
your duty, that you will be putting yourself under the true guidance;
but for you to extort permission to stay with me, when your father
disapproves, would be only following your own way. I should be afraid. I
will not undertake it, for it would not be right, and mischief would be
sure to ensue.'

'Then you give me up?'

'Give you up! dear, dear sister;' and Violet rose and threw her arms
round Theodora. 'No, indeed! When I am so glad that I may love you as
I always wished! I shall think of you, and write to you, and pray for
you,' whispered she. 'All I can I will do for you, but you must not say
any more of staying with me now. I can help you better in my right place
than out of it.'

Theodora returned the caress and quitted the room, leaving Violet to her
regrets and fears. It was a great sacrifice of herself, and still worse,
of her poor little pale boy, and she dreaded that it might be the ruin
of the beneficial influence which, to her amazement, she found ascribed
to her, in the most unexpected quarter. It had gone to her heart to
refuse Theodora's kindness, and all that was left for her was to try to
still her fluttering, agitated spirits by the consciousness that she had
striven to do right, and by the prayer that all might work for good.

Indeed, it was very remarkable how, in this critical period of
Theodora's life, when repentance was engaged in so severe a conflict
with her long-nourished pride and passion, in all the tossings of
her mind she had, as it were, anchored herself to her docile, gentle
sister-in-law, treating her like a sort of embodiment of her better
mind. Violet's serenity and lowliness seemed to breathe peace on a
storm-tossed ocean; and her want of self-assertion to make Theodora
proud of submitting to her slightest wish without a struggle. Those
vehement affections were winding themselves about her and her children;
and the temper that had flown into fierce insubordination at the first
control from lawful authority, laid itself at the feet of one whose
power was in meekness. It was the lion curbed by the maiden; but because
the subjection was merely a caprice, it was no conquest of self-will.


CHAPTER 21


     But when the self-abhorring thrill
     Is past, as pass it must,
     When tasks of life thy spirit fill
     Risen from thy tears and dust,
     Then be the self-renouncing will
     The seal of thy calm trust.

     --Lyra Apostolica


Arthur quitted London the day after his little girl's christening,
talking of being absent only a fortnight, before taking his wife to
Windsor; and promising to return at once, if she should find herself in
the least unwell or dispirited. She was delighted to be well enough
not to spoil his sport, and Theodora was too anxious to have him at a
distance from Mr. Gardner to venture on any remonstrance.

It was the day the family were to come to London, and he left orders
with the ladies to say 'all that was proper', but the twelfth of August
was to him an unanswerable reason for immediate departure.

Theodora and Violet went to receive the party in the house in Belgrave
Square, both silent, yet conscious of each other's feelings. Theodora
paced the room, while Violet leant back in a great blue damask chair,
overcome by the beatings of her heart; and yet, when the carriage
arrived, it was she who spoke the word of encouragement: 'Your father is
so kind, I know he forgives us!'

Theodora knew Violet thought her own weakness and inefficiency needed
pardon, and therefore could bear the saying, and allow it to turn her
defiant shame into humility.

Mrs. Nesbit came in, supported between Lord and Lady Martindale, and
as Theodora hastened to wheel round the large arm-chair, and settle the
cushions for her, her eye glanced in keen inquiry from one niece to
the other, and they felt that she was exulting in the fulfilment of her
prediction.

Lord Martindale kissed his daughter with grave formality; and, as if
to mark the difference, threw much warm affection into his greeting of
Violet, and held her hand for some moments, while he asked solicitously
if she were well and strong, and inquired for her little ones.

She made Arthur's excuses and explanations, but broke off, blushing and
disconcerted, by that harsh, dry cough of Mrs. Nesbit's, and still
more, by seeing Lord Martindale look concerned. She began, with nervous
eagerness and agitation, to explain that it was an old engagement, he
would not be away long, and then would take her out of town--she was
hardly yet ready for a journey. From him she obtained kind smiles, and
almost fatherly tenderness; from Lady Martindale the usual ceremonious
civility. They asked her to dinner, but she was not equal to this; they
then offered to send her home in the carriage, and when she refused,
Lord Martindale said he would walk back with her, while Theodora
remained with her mother.

He was much displeased with his son for leaving her, especially when he
saw how delicate and weak she still looked; and he was much annoyed
at being unable to prevent it, without giving Arthur a premium for
selfishness; so that all he could do was to treat her with a sort of
compassionate affection, increased at each of her unselfish sayings.

'My dear,' he said, 'I wish to have a little conversation with you,
when it suits you. I am anxious to hear your account of this unfortunate
affair.'

'Very well;' but he felt her arm tremble.

'You must not alarm yourself. You are the last person deserving of
blame. I am only sorry that you should have had so much to harass you.'

'O, Theodora has been so very kind to me.'

'I rejoice to hear it; but tell me, will this evening or to-morrow
morning suit you best?'

'Thank you, to-morrow, if you please,' said Violet, glad to defer the
evil day.

At that moment she was astonished by the sudden apparition of Lord St.
Erme, and still more by his shaking hands with her. She thanked him for
his touches to her little boy's portrait; he smiled, rejoiced that she
did not think he had spoilt it, and remarked upon the likeness. Lord
Martindale, who knew him but slightly, listened in surprise; and having
now come to her own door, she bade them farewell, and entered the house.

Theodora came back much later than Violet had expected, with a flush on
her cheek, and hurry and uncertainty in her manner. She had previously
made a great point of their spending this last evening alone together,
but her mood was silent. She declared herself bent on finishing the
volume of Miss Strickland's "Queens", which they were reading together,
and went on with it till bed-time without intermission, then wished
Violet good night without another word.

But Violet was no sooner in bed than Theodora came in, in her
dressing-gown, and sat down at her feet, looking at her, but hardly
answering the few words she ventured to speak. It was not till the clock
struck twelve that she rose from her seat.

'Well, I must go; but I don't know how to tear myself from the sight of
you. I feel as if I was driven from the only place where I ever might be
good.'

'No,' whispered Violet; 'wherever our duty lies, we can be good.'

'I could, if you were with me, to calm me, and tell me such things.'

'You do not want me to tell you them. You have the Bible and Prayer
Book.'

'I never saw the right way to follow them; till now, when it was
gleaming on me, I have to go away.'

'The same grace that has shown you your way so far, dearest, will go on
to show you further, if you follow it on, even though the way be hard!'

'The grace may be with you--it is!' said Theodora, in a heavy, hopeless
manner; 'but oh! Violet, think how long I have been driving it away!'

Violet sat up, took her hand, pressed it between both hers, and with
tears exclaimed: 'You must not speak so. If you had not that grace,
should you be sorry now?'

'I don't know. I can hope and see my way to peace when you look at me,
or speak to me; but why should I be forced into the desert of my own
heart, to loneliness and temptation?'

'If you are really resting on me, instead of on the only true help,
perhaps it is better you should be left to it. Theodora, dearest, may I
tell you something about myself? When first I saw my difficulties, and
could not get at mamma, I felt as if there was no one to help me, but
somehow it grew up. I saw how to find out guidance and comfort in the
Bible and in such things, and ever since I have been so much happier.'

'How did you find it out?'

'John helped me; but I think it comes without teaching from without, and
there is my hope for you, Theodora.'

'Them that are meek shall He guide in judgment, and such as are gentle,
them shall He learn His way,' murmured Theodora, hanging over her, with
tears fast dropping.

'He shows Himself to those who will follow Him, and yield their own
will,' said Violet.

'Good night! Oh! what shall I do when I have not you to send me to bed
comforted? I had more to say to you, but you have smoothed it all, and I
cannot ruffle it up again.'

A night of broken sleep, and perplexed waking thoughts, was a bad
preparation for the morning's conference. Lord Martindale came to
breakfast, and, as before, reserved all his kindness for Violet and the
children. Theodora disappeared when the little ones were carried away,
and he began the conversation by saying to Violet, 'I am afraid you have
had a great deal of trouble and vexation.'

She replied by warm assurances of Theodora's kindness; whence he led
her to tell the history of the rupture, which she did very mournfully,
trying to excuse Theodora, but forbidden, by justice to Percival;
and finding some relief in taking blame to herself for not having
remonstrated against that unfortunate expedition to the races.

'No, my dear, it was no fault of yours. It was not from one thing more
than another. It was owing to unhappy, unbroken temper. Take care
of your children, my dear, and teach them submission in time.' Then
presently resuming: 'Is it your idea that she had any attachment to poor
Fotheringham?'

'Much more than she knew at the time,' said Violet.

'Ha! Then you do not think she has given encouragement to that
absurd-looking person, Lord St. Erme?'

'Lord St. Erme!' cried Violet, startled.

'Yes; when I parted with you yesterday, he walked back with me, and
proceeded to declare that he had been long attached to her, and to ask
my sanction to his following us to Germany to pay his addresses.'

'Surely he has not spoken to her?'

'No; he said something about not presuming, and of having been
interrupted. I could only tell him that it must rest with herself. There
is no objection to the young man, as far as I know, though he is an
idle, loitering sort of fellow, not what I should have thought to her
taste.'

'I do not believe she likes him,' said Violet.

'You do not? I cannot make out. I told her that she was at liberty to
do as she pleased; I only warned her neither to trifle with him, nor to
rush into an engagement without deliberation, but I could get nothing
like an answer. She was in one of her perverse fits, and I have no
notion whether she means to accept him or not.'

'I do not think she will.'

'I cannot say. No one knows, without a trial, what the notion of a
coronet will do with a girl. After all her pretensions she may be the
more liable to the temptation. I have not told her aunt, that she may
be the more unbiassed. Not that I say anything against him, it is
everything desirable in the way of connection, and probably he is an
amiable good sort of man. What do you know of him! Are you intimate with
him?'

Violet explained the extent of their acquaintance. 'I do not see my way
through it,' said Lord Martindale. 'I wish I could be clear that it is
not all coquetry. I wish John was at home.'

'I do not think,' said Violet, gathering courage--'I do not think you
know how much Theodora wishes to be good.'

'I wish she was half as good as you are, my dear!' said Lord Martindale,
as if he had been speaking to a child. And he talked to her warmly of
her own concerns, and hopes of her visiting Martindale on their return;
trying to divest himself of a sense of inhospitality and harshness,
which grew on him whenever he looked at her slender figure, and the
varying carnation of her thin cheek.

She felt herself obliged to set forth to call on Lady Martindale.
Theodora was busy, packing up, and could not accompany her;
unfortunately for her, since Mrs. Nesbit took the opportunity of
examining her on the same subject, though far from doing it in the
same manner; commenting with short sarcastic laughs, censuring Mr.
Fotheringham for trying to domineer, but finding much amusement in
making out the grounds of his objection to Mrs. Finch, and taking
pleasure in bringing, by her inquiries, a glow of confusion and distress
on Violet's cheeks. Next she began to blame her for having visited
such an imprudent person; and when Lady Martindale ventured to suggest
something about her not knowing, and Mrs. Finch having formerly been
a friend of the family, she put her down. 'Yes, my dear, we are not
blaming Mrs. Arthur Martindale. We know it is not possible for every one
to be fastidious. The misfortune was in Miss Martindale's being brought
into society which could not be expected to be select.'

Violet did not think herself called upon to stay to be insulted, and
rose to take leave, but did not escape without further taunts. 'So you
are to be in London alone for the next month?'

'Perhaps only for a fortnight!'

'I can promise you that it will be a month. Young men are not apt to
spend more time at home than they can help. I am sorry to interfere
with your scheme of being installed at Martindale, but it is out of the
question. Theodora's absence has been much felt by the curate, and our
past experience has prepared us for anything. I hope you will take care
of yourself.'

Mrs. Nesbit, as she lost her power of self-command and her cleverness,
without parting with her bitterness of spirit, had pitiably grown worse
and worse, so that where she would once have been courteously sarcastic,
she was now positively insolent.

It was too much for Lady Martindale, who, as she saw Violet colour
deeply, and tremble as she left the room, followed her to the head
of the stairs, and spoke kindly. 'You must not imagine, my dear, that
either my aunt, or any of us, find fault with you. We all know that
you are inexperienced, and that it is not easy to cope with Theodora's
eccentricity of character.'

Violet, still very weak, could have been hysterical, but luckily was
able to command herself, though, 'thank you!' was all she could say.

'Of course, though such things are unfortunate, we cannot regret the
match; Lord Martindale and I are quite convinced that you acted amiably
by all parties. Good-bye, my dear; I am sorry I have not time to call
and see the children.'

'Shall I send them to you when they wake?' said Violet, pleased that
they were at length mentioned.

'Thank you, my dear,' said Lady Martindale, as if much tempted. 'I am
afraid not, it might be too much for my aunt. And yet, I should have
liked to see the little girl.'

'She is such a beauty,' said Violet, much brightened. 'So exactly like
her papa.'

'I should like to see her! You have your carriage here, of course!'

'No; I walked.'

'Walked, my dear!' said Lady Martindale, dismayed.

Violet explained how short the distance was; but Lady Martindale seemed
not to know how to let her go, nor how to relinquish the thought of
seeing her grand-daughter. At last she said, as if it was a great
resolution, lowering her voice, 'I wonder if I could walk back with you,
just to see her.'

She took Violet into her room while she put on her bonnet, much as
if she feared being found out; and in passing the drawing-room door,
gathered her dress together so as to repress its rustling.

Wonder of wonders, to find Lady Martindale actually on foot by her side!
She went up at once to the nursery, where the children were asleep. At
Johnnie she looked little, but she hung over the cot where lay the
round plump baby face of little Helen. Though dreadfully afraid of being
missed, she seemed unable to turn away from the contemplation.

'My dear,' said she, in an agitated voice, as they left the nursery,
'you must not keep these children here in London. You must not sacrifice
their health. It is the first consideration. Don't let them stay in that
hot nursery! Pray do not.'

'We shall be in the country soon,' said Violet.

'Why not at once? Does expense prevent you? Tell me, my dear, what it
would cost. I always have plenty to spare. Would £100 do it? and you
need tell no one. I could give you £200,' said Lady Martindale, who
had as little idea of the value of money as any lady in her Majesty's
dominions. 'I must have that dear little girl in the country. Pray take
her to Ventnor. How much shall I give you?'

Much surprised, and more touched, Violet, however, could not accept the
offer. She felt that it would be casting a slight on Arthur; and she
assured Lady Martindale that she hoped soon to leave London, and how
impossible it was for her to move house without Arthur. It seemed to be
a great disappointment, and opened to Violet a fresh insight into Lady
Martindale's nature; that there was a warm current beneath, only stifled
by Mrs. Nesbit's power over a docile character. There seemed to be hopes
that they might love each other at last! In the midst there was a knock
at the door, and Lord Martindale entered, much surprised, as well as
pleased, to find his wife there, though put in some perplexity by her
instantly appealing to him to tell Violet that it was very bad for the
children to remain in town, and asking if it could not be managed to
send them to the sea-side. He made a grave but kind reply, that he was
sorry for it himself, but that Violet had assured him it would not be
for long; and Lady Martindale (who did not seem able to understand
why the lady of the house could not make everything give way to her
convenience)--now becoming alive to the fear of her aunt's missing her,
and taking to heart her stolen expedition--hurried him off with her at
once. It was not till after their departure that Violet discovered that
he had been trying to atone for deficiencies, by costly gifts to herself
and her children.

All this time Theodora had been in her own room, packing, as she said,
but proceeding slowly; for there was a severe struggle of feelings, and
she could not bear that it should be seen. In the pain of parting with
Violet, she shrank from her presence, as if she could not endure to
prolong the space for last words.

They came at last. Theodora sat ready for her journey, holding her
god-daughter in her arms, and looking from her to Violet, without a
word; then gazing round the room, which had been the scene of such
changes of her whole mind.

At last she spoke, and it was very different from what Violet expected,

'Violet, I will try to endure it; but if I cannot--if you hear of me as
doing what you will disapprove, will you refrain from giving me up, and
at least be sorry for me?'

After what Lord Martindale had said, Violet could guess at her meaning.
'Certainly, dear Theodora. You would not do it if it was wrong?'

'You know what I mean?'

'I think I do.'

'And you are not infinitely shocked?'

'No; for you would not do it unless you could rightly.'

'How do you mean?'

'Not if there was--anything remaining--of the former--'

'You are a good little thing, Violet,' said Theodora, trying to laugh;
'nearly as simple as your daughter. You will save her a great deal of
trouble, if you tame her while she is young.'

Then came a pause, lasting till Theodora thought she heard the carriage.

'You will forgive me if I accept him?'

'I shall know it is all right. I trust you, dear sister.'

'Tell me something to help me!'

Violet drew out Helen's cross. 'Be patient, be patient,' she said. 'The
worse things are, the more of the cross to be borne.'

Theodora held out her hand for it. 'I hope I am mending,' said she, as
she gave it back with a melancholy smile. 'It does not give me the
bad jealous thoughts I had when first I knew you possessed it. Tell me
something to make me patient.'

'May I tell you what came into my head after you were talking last night
of not seeing your way, and wanting to be led. I thought of a verse in
Isaiah.' Violet found the place and showed it.

'Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His
servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? Let him trust in
the name of the Lord and stay upon his God.'

'Thank you, Violet,' said Theodora, looking on to the next verse. 'I
will try to be patient; I will try not to kindle a fire for myself. But
if they tease me much, if I am very weary--'

The summons cut her short--Lord Martindale ran up to hasten her; a
fervent embrace--she was gone!

And Violet, with worn-out strength and spirits, remained to find how
desolate she was--left behind in dreary summer London. There was nothing
for it but to be as foolish as in old times, to lie down on the sofa and
cry herself to sleep. She was a poor creature, after all, and awoke to
weariness and headache, but to no repining; for she had attained to
a spirit of thankfulness and content. She lay dreamily, figuring
to herself Arthur enjoying himself on the moors and mountains, till
Helvellyn's own purple cap came to brighten her dreams.


CHAPTER 22


     Sigh no more, lady, lady, sigh no more,
     Men were deceivers ever,
     One foot on shore and one on land,
     To one thing constant never.

     --Percy's Reliques


'So, you say Miss Martindale has left town?'

'Yes; Violet writes me that the family passed through London, and took
her to the continent on Tuesday.'

'Then let Annette know she is to be ready to come with me to town on
Monday. We shall see if it is the young lady's doing, or whether Mrs.
Martindale intends to give herself airs with her father and sister.'

'Poor dear,' sighed the good care-worn mother, 'I do long to hear of
her; but may I not write first? I should not like to get the dear child
into trouble.'

'On no account write, or we shall have some excuse about
pre-engagements. I shall take Annette at once, and see with my own eyes.
Martindale can never have the face to hinder her from asking her own
sister to stay in the house, when once she is there.'

'I hope he is kind to her!' said Mrs. Moss. 'I long to hear whether she
is quite recovered; and she says so little of herself. She will be glad
to see her sister, and yet, one does not like to seem pushing.'

'Never you mind,' said the acute, sharp-faced attorney, putting her
aside as if she was presuming beyond her sphere; 'only you get Annette
ready. Since we found such a match for Violet, she is bound to help off
her sisters; and as to Annette, a jaunt is just what is wanting to
drive that black coat out of her head. I wish he had never come near the
place. The girl might have had the Irish captain, if she had not been
running after him and his school. Tell her to be ready on Monday.'

Meek Mrs. Moss never dared to question her husband's decision; and she
had suffered too much anxiety on her daughter's account, not to rejoice
in the prospect of a trustworthy report, for Violet's letters were
chiefly descriptions of her children.

There was much soreness in the Moss family respecting Violet, and two
opinions with regard to her; some inclining to believe her a fine lady,
willing to discard her kindred; others thinking her not a free agent,
but tyrannized over by Miss Martindale, and neglected by her husband.
So Annette, who had pined and drooped under the loss of the twin-like
companionship of her sister, was sent out as on an adventure, in much
trepidation and mysterious dread of Captain Martindale, by no means
consistent with the easy good nature of his days of courtship. And thus
her first letter was written and received with such feelings as attend
that of an explorer of a new country.


'Cadogan-place, August 19th.

'Well, dearest mamma, I am writing from Violet's house. Yes, she is her
own sweet self, our precious flower still--nobody must think anything
else--she is not changed one bit, except that she is terribly pale and
thin; but she calls herself quite well, and says that if I had seen
her when Johnny was five weeks old, I should give her credit now. But
Matilda will say I cannot write a comprehensible letter, so I will begin
regularly.

'We slept at Uncle Christopher's, and after an early breakfast walked
here. The man did not think his mistress could see any one, but when he
heard who we were, showed us to the drawing-room, and there was Violet,
quite alone, breakfasting by herself, for he is gone to Scotland! Poor
dear girl! When she saw us, she gave a little scream, and flew up to me,
clinging round my neck, and sobbing as she did on her wedding-day; it
was as if the two years were nothing. However, in a moment, she composed
herself, and said it was silly, but there was still a sob in her throat,
and she was shy and constrained as she used to be with papa, in old
times. She says she would not tell us Captain Martindale was going to
Scotland, because of not tantalizing us with his passing so near, but I
fear it is that she will not confess how often she is left alone. I am
so glad we are come, now he is out of the way. She has asked us to stay
while papa has to be in London, and I shall, but papa finds it more
convenient to sleep at Uncle Christopher's. If we are not here oftener,
I am sure it is no fault of hers; and her husband cannot be displeased
with this little visit--at least he ought not. She sent for the
children; the babe was asleep, but Johnnie came, and oh! how curious it
seemed to hear the voice calling her mamma, and see the little creature
holding out his arms to go to her. I felt, indeed, how long we have been
apart--it was our own Violet, and yet some one else. You would have been
amused to see how altered she was by having her son in her arms; how the
little morsel seemed to give her confidence, and the shy stiffness went
away, and she looked so proud and fond, and smiled and spoke with ease.
There was the dear little fair fellow standing on her lap, leaning
against her shoulder, with his arm round her neck, hiding his face when
I looked at him too much. She said he was puzzled not to see the aunt
he knew, and how I grudged his knowing any aunt better than me! They
do look lovely together, and so much alike; but I could cry to see them
both so white and wan; not a shade of her pretty colour on her cheek,
and the little darling so very tiny and weak, though he is as clever as
possible, and understands all you say to him. If I had but got them both
in our fresh north countree!

'Papa could not stay, and as soon as he was gone, she set her boy down
on the sofa, and threw her arms round my neck, and we were like wild
things--we kissed, and screamed, and laughed, and cried, till poor
Johnnie was quite frightened. "Now, Annette, come and see," said Violet,
and took me up-stairs to the nursery, and there half-waking, under
the archway of her cradle, lay, like a little queen, that beautiful
creature, Helen, opening her black eyes just as we came up, and moving
her round arms. How I longed for mamma to see her, and to see Violet's
perfect look of happiness as she lifted her out and said, "Now, is not
she worth seeing?" and then Sarah came up. Violet says Sarah threatened
to go away, when there were two to be always racketing, but when it came
to the point, could not leave Johnnie, whom she keeps in great order,
and treats with much ceremony, always calling him Master John. She
believes Sarah disapproves of poor Helen altogether, as an intruder upon
Johnnie's comfort; and she is quite savage at admiration of her, as if
it was a slight on him; but she has turned out an admirable nurse, in
her own queer way. Such a morning as we have had, chattering so fast!
all about you all. I am sure she loves us as much as ever, and I do not
believe she is unhappy. She talks of her husband as if they were happy,
and he has given her such quantities of pretty things, and I hear of so
much that seems as if she was on comfortable terms with them all. I am
satisfied about her, pray be so too, dear mamma.

'I am writing while waiting for her to drive to fetch my things
from Uncle Christopher's--She tells me to finish without minding her
visitor--I was interrupted by Sarah's bringing Johnnie down, and he was
very good with me, but presently a gentleman was announced, without
my catching his name. I feared Johnnie would cry, but he sprang with
delight, and the stranger saying, "Ha! master, you recollect me?" took
him in his arms. I said my sister would come directly, and he gave a
good-natured nod, and muttered half to himself, "Oh! another of the
genus Viola. I am glad of it." I cannot make him out; he must be a
relation, or one of the other officers. Violet did not know he was
there, and came in with the baby in her arms; he stepped towards her,
saying, "So you have set up another! Man or woman?" and then asked if
she was another flower. Violet coloured, as she spoke low, and said,
"Her name is Helen." I must ask Violet the meaning, for he looked
gravely pleased, and answered gratefully, "That is very good of you." "I
hope she will deserve it," Violet said, and was introducing me, but he
said Johnnie had done him that honour. He has been talking of Captain
Martindale (calling him Arthur), and telling curious things he has
seen in Ireland. He is very amusing, bluff, and odd, but as if he was
a distinguished person. Now I see that Violet is altered, and grown
older--he seems to have such respect for, and confidence in her; and she
so womanly and self-possessed, entering into his clever talk as Matilda
would, yet in the simple way she always had. You would be proud to see
her now--her manners must be perfection, I should think; so graceful and
dignified, so engaging and quiet. I wish Louisa had seen her. What are
they talking of now?

'Violet.--How did you find Pallas Athene?

'Unknown.--Alas, poor Pallas! With the judgment of the cockney who
buttered his horse's hay, the ragged boy skinned her mice and plucked
her sparrows in my absence. The consequence was her untimely end. I was
met by my landlady with many a melancholy "Ah, sir!" and actually the
good creature had had her stuffed.

'Violet.--Poor Pallas! then the poor boy has lost his employment?

'Unknown.--Happily, his honesty and his grief so worked upon my
landlady, that she has taken him as an errand boy. So that, in fact,
Minerva may be considered to have been the making of his fortune.

'I leave this for a riddle for the sisters. I am longing to ask Violet
who this gentleman is who seems to know all the negroes so well.'
(Scratched out.) 'What nonsense I have written! I was listening to some
letters they were reading from the Mr. Martindale in the West Indies.
Violet tells me to finish with her dearest love.

'Your most affectionate,

'A. Moss.


'P.S.--He will come to-morrow to take us to a private view of the Royal
Academy, before the pictures are removed.'


The same post carried a letter from Violet to her husband, communicating
the arrival of her guests, and telling him she knew that he could not
wish her not to have Annette with her for these few days, and that it
did make her very happy.

Having done this, she dismissed doubts, and, with a clear conscience,
gave herself up to the enjoyment of her sister's visit, each minute
of which seemed of diamond worth. Perhaps the delights were the more
intense from compression; but it was a precious reprieve when Arthur's
answer came, rejoicing at Violet's having a companion, and hoping that
she would keep her till his return, which he should not scruple to
defer, since she was so well provided for. He had just been deliberating
whether he could accept an invitation to the Highlands.

If the wife was less charmed than her sister, she knew that, under any
circumstances, she would have had to consent, after the compliment had
been paid of asking whether she could spare him; and it was compensation
enough that he should have voluntarily extended her sister's visit.

Annette, formerly the leader of her younger sister, was often pleasantly
surprised to find her little Violet become like her elder, and that
not only from situation, but in mind. With face and figure resembling
Violet's, but of a less uncommon order, without the beauteous complexion
and the natural grace, now enhanced by living in the best society,
Annette was a very nice-looking, lady-like girl, of the same refined
tone of mind and manners; and having had a longer space of young
ladyhood, she had more cultivation in accomplishments and book
knowledge, her good taste saving her from being spoilt, even by her
acquiescence in Matilda's superiority. She saw, however, that Violet
had more practical reflection, and though in many points simple and
youthful, was more of a woman than herself; and it was with that sweet,
innocent feeling, which ought not to bear the same name as pride, that
she exulted in the superiority of her beloved sister. Selfish jealousies
or petty vanities were far from her; it was like a romance to hear
Violet describe the splendours of Martindale, or the gaieties of
London; and laugh over the confession of the little perplexities as to
proprieties, and the mistakes and surprises, which she trusted she had
not betrayed.

Still Violet missed the power of fully reciprocating her sister's
confidence. Annette laid open every home interest and thought, but
Violet had no right to disclose the subjects that had of late engrossed
her, and at every turn found a separation, something on which she must
not be communicative.

The view of the Exhibition was happily performed under Mr.
Fotheringham's escort. Annette, thanks to Lord St. Erme's gallery, had
good taste in pictures; she drew well, and understood art better than
her sister, who rejoiced in bringing out her knowledge, and hearing her
converse with Percy. They had the rooms to themselves, and Annette was
anxious to carry away the outline of one or two noted pictures. While
she was sketching, Percy wandered to another part of the room, and stood
fixedly before a picture. Violet came to see what he was looking at.
It was a fine one by Landseer of a tiger submitting to the hand of the
keeper, with cat-like complacency, but the glare of the eye and curl of
the tail manifesting that its gentleness was temporary.

'It may be the grander animal,' muttered he; 'but less satisfactory for
domestic purposes.'

'What did you say?' asked Violet, thinking it addressed to her.

'That is a presumptuous man,' he said, pointing to the keeper. 'If he
trusts in the creature's affection, some day he will find his mistake.'

He flung himself round, as if he had done with the subject, and his tone
startled Violet, and showed her that more was meant than met the ear.
She longed to tell him that the creature was taming itself, but she
did not dare, and he went back to talk to Annette, till it ended in his
promising to come to-morrow, to take them to the Ellesmere gallery.

'That's the right style of woman,' soliloquized Percy, as he saw the
carriage drive off. 'Gentleness, meekness, and a dash of good sense, is
the recipe for a rational female--otherwise she is a blunder of nature.
The same stamp as her sister, I see; nothing wanting, but air and the
beauty, which, luckily for Arthur, served for his bait.'

When he came, according to appointment, Annette was in the drawing-room,
unable to desist from touching and retouching her copy of her nephew's
likeness, though Violet had long ago warned her to put it away, and to
follow her up to dress.

He carried the portrait to the light. 'M. Piper,' he read. 'That little
woman! That mouth is in better drawing than I could have thought her
guilty of.'

'Oh! those are Lord St. Erme's touches,' said unconscious Annette.
'He met Miss Martindale taking it to be framed, and he improved it
wonderfully. He certainly understood the little face, for he even wrote
verses on it.'

Here Violet entered, and Annette had to hurry away for her bonnet. Percy
stood looking at the drawing.

'So, Johnnie has a new admirer,' he said. Violet was sorry that he
should hear of this; but she laughed, and tried to make light of it.

'I hear he is in Germany.'

'Yes; with his sister and their aunt.'

'Well,' said Percy, 'it may do. There will be no collision of will, and
while there is one to submit, there is peace. A tigress can be generous
to a puppy dog.'

'But, indeed, I do not think it likely.'

'If she is torturing him, that is worse.'

Violet raised her eyes pleadingly, and said, in a low, mournful tone: 'I
do not like to hear you speak so bitterly.'

'No,' he said, 'it is not bitterness. That is over. I am thankful to
have broken loose, and to be able to look back on it calmly, as a past
delusion. Great qualities ill regulated are fearful things; and though
I believe trials will in time teach her to bring her religious principle
to bear on her faults, I see that it was an egregious error to think
that she could be led.'

He spoke quietly, but Violet could not divest herself of the impression
that there was more acute personal feeling than he was aware of. In the
Ellesmere gallery, he led them to that little picture of Paul Potter's,
where the pollard willows stand up against the sunset sky, the evening
sunshine gleaming on their trunks, upon the grass, and gilding the backs
of the cows, while the placid old couple look on at the milking, the
hooded lady shading her face with her fan.

'There's my notion of felicity,' said he.

'Rather a Dutch notion,' said Violet.

'Don't despise the Dutch,' said Percy. 'Depend upon it, that respectable
retired burgomaster and his vrow never had words, as we Brogden folk
say.'

'I think you would find that very stupid,' said Violet.

'Not I,' said Percy. 'When I want to pick a quarrel, I can get it
abroad.'

'When?' said Annette, smiling.

'Yes, I like to keep my teeth and claws sharpened,' said Percy; but one
wants repose at home. That burgomaster is my model.'

He continued to find sights for them, showing Violet more lions of
London than had ever come in her way. One day, when a thunder-storm
hindered their going to the Zoological Gardens, he stayed the whole
afternoon reading to them. In the midst, Violet thought of last
September's storm; she looked up--an idea flashed upon her!

'How delightful! How well they suit! I shall have my Annette close to
me! They can marry at once! My father will be satisfied. How happy they
will be! It will be the repose he wants. Dear Annette, what will she not
be under his training!' The joyous impulse was to keep him to dinner;
but she had scruples about inviting him in Arthur's absence, and
therefore only threw double warmth into her farewells. Her spirits were
up to nonsense pitch, and she talked and laughed all the evening with
such merriment as Annette had hardly ever known in her.

But when she was alone, and looked her joy in the face, she was amazed
to find how she had been forgetting Theodora, whose affairs had lately
been uppermost. Annette might be worth a hundred Theodoras: but that did
not alter right and justice.

If Theodora was accepting the Earl! Violet knew he was at Baden; he
could not yet have been dismissed: and the sister-in-law had proved
a disappointing correspondent, her nature being almost as averse to
letter-writing as was Arthur's. Let her marry him, and all would be
well. The question, however, really lay between Percy and Annette
themselves; and Violet thought he had made a wise discovery in
preferring her gentle, yielding sister to the former lady of his choice.
Matters might take their course; Arthur would be gratified by this
testimony to her family's perfections; John would rejoice in whatever
was for his friend's real happiness; to herself, in every way, it would
be complete felicity.

Still she hesitated. She had heard of pique driving persons to make
a fresh choice, when a former attachment appeared obliterated by
indignation, only to revive too late, and to be the misery of all
parties. Percy's late words, harsh when he fancied them indifferent,
made her doubtful whether it might not be so in his case. In his sound
principle she had entire confidence, but he might be in error as to the
actual state of his sentiments; and she knew that she should dread, for
the peace of mind of all parties, his first meeting, as her sister's
husband, with either Miss Martindale, or the Countess of St. Erme.

She decided that Annette ought to hear the whole, so as to act with her
eyes open. If she had been engaged, she should never have heard what
was past, but she should not encourage him while ignorant of the
circumstances, and, these known, Violet had more reliance on her
judgment than on her own. The breach of confidence being thus justified,
Violet resolved, and as they sat together late in the evening, found
an opportunity of beginning the subject. 'We used to expect a closer
connection with him, or I should never have learnt to call him Percy--'

'You told me about poor Mr. Martindale.'

'Yes, but this was to have been a live connection. He was engaged to
Theodora.'

Violet was satisfied that the responding interjection was more surprised
and curious than disappointed. She related the main features of the
story, much to Annette's indignation.

'Why, Violet, you speak as if you were fond of her!'

'That I am. If you knew how noble and how tender she can be! So generous
when most offended! Oh! no one can know her without a sort of admiring
love and pity.'

'I do not understand. To me she seems inexcusable.'

'No, no, indeed, Annette! She has had more excuse than almost any one.
It makes one grieve for her to see how the worse nature seems to have
been allowed to grow beyond her power, and how it is like something
rending her, when right and wrong struggle together for the mastery.'

So many questions ensued, that Violet found her partial disclosure had
rendered the curtain over Martindale affairs far less impenetrable; but
she had spoken no sooner than was needful, for the very next morning's
post brought an envelope, containing a letter for Miss Moss, and a few
lines addressed to herself:--


'My Dear Mrs. Martindale,--Trust me. I have discovered my error, and
have profited by my lesson. Will you give the enclosed to your sister? I
know you will act as kindly as ever by

'Yours, &c.,

'A. P. F.'


So soon! Violet had not been prepared for this. She gasped with wonder
and suspense, as she laid the letter before the place where Annette had
been sitting, and returned to her seat as a spectator, though far from
a calm one: that warmhearted note had made her wishes his earnest
partisans, and all her pulses throbbed with the desire that Annette
might decide in favour of him; but she thought it wrong to try to
influence her, and held her peace, though her heart leapt into her mouth
at her sister's exclamation on seeing the letter, and her cheeks glowed
when the flush darted into Annette's.

She glanced in a sort of fright over the letter, then looked for help to
Violet, and held it to her. 'Oh, Violet! do you know?'

'Yes, I have a note myself. My darling Annette!'

Annette threw herself down by her side, and sat on the floor, studying
her face while she read the note, which thus commenced:--


'My Dear Miss Moss,--You will say that our acquaintance is too short to
warrant my thus addressing you; but your sister knows me as well as most
people; and in knowing your sister, and seeing your resemblance to her,
I know you. If AM=VM, and VM=Wordsworth's "spirit yet a woman too," then
AM=the same.'

From this curious opening he proceeded to a more ordinary and very
earnest entreaty for her consent to his applying to her father.

'Well, Violet!'

'How exactly like him!'

'How highly he does esteem you!' said Annette; 'but if he thinks me like
you he would find his mistake. After what you told me--so soon! Oh, I
wish it had not happened! Violet, do tell me what to do.'

'I don't think any one can advise in a matter like this.'

'Oh! don't say so, Violet; you know the people, and I don't. Pray say
something.'

'He is a most excellent, admirable person,' said Violet, in an unmeaning
tone.

'Yes, I know that, but--'

'Really, I think nothing but your own feeling should decide.'

'Ah! you did not hesitate when you were asked!' said Annette, sighing;
and Violet at once blushed, smiled, and sighed, as she spoke her quick
conscious 'No, no!'

'Such a romance cannot always be expected,' said Annette, a little
mournfully. 'He is everything estimable, in spite of his oddness. But
then, this affair--so recent! Violet' (impatiently), 'what DO you think?
what do you wish?'

'What I wish? To have my own Annette near me. For two such people to
belong to each other! Don't you know what I like? But the question is
what you wish.'

'Yes!' sighed Annette.

'I don't think you wish it much,' said Violet, trying to get a view of
her face.

'I don't know whether I ought to make up my mind. I am not much inclined
to anything. But I dare say it would turn out well. I do like him very
much. But Miss Martindale! Now, Violet, will you not tell me what you
think? Take pity on me.'

'Annette,' said Violet, not without effort, 'I see you have not the
feeling that would make you unhappy in giving him up, so I may speak
freely. I am afraid of it. I cannot be certain that he is so completely
cured of his old attachment as he supposes himself to be while the anger
is fresh. He is as good as possible--quite sincere, and would never
willingly pain you, whatever he may feel. But his affection for Theodora
was of long standing; and without any one's fault there might be worries
and vexations--'

'Yes, yes,' said Annette, in a voice that reassured her.

'I think it wiser not, and perhaps more honourable to Theodora. Hitherto
I have been wishing that it might yet be made up again. If you had been
disposed that way, I should have been anxious,--as you seem doubtful, I
fancy it would be safer--'

'O, Violet, I am so glad! It is a great relief to me.'

'But, you know, it is only I that say so.'

'Better you than a hundred! My doubt was this. You know there are a
great many of us, and papa wants to see us well married. He has talked
more about it since you went. Now this is not romantic; but I was
considering whether, for the sake of the rest, I ought not to try
whether I could like him. But what you have said sets me quite at ease
in refusing him.'

'Poor Percy!' said Violet. 'I am afraid he will be vexed.'

'And it is a great compliment, though that is to you. He takes me on
trust from you.'

'And he took me on trust from John,' said Violet. 'I wish he had known
you before Theodora.'

'I only hope papa will never hear of it,' said Annette, shrinking. 'How
fortunate that he was not here. I shall tell no one at home.'

'If it had not been for Theodora,' sighed Violet, 'I know nothing that
would have been more delightful. It was too charming to come true!'

'Violet,' said Annette, with her face averted, 'don't be sorry, for I
could not have been glad of it now; though for their sakes I might have
tried to work myself into the feeling. I cannot help telling you, though
you will think it more wrong in me, for I shall never see HIM again, and
he never said anything.'

'I know whom you mean,' whispered Violet, rightly divining it was Mr.
Fanshawe.

'Don't call it anything,' said Annette, with her head drooping. 'I would
not have told even you, but to console you about this. Nothing ever
passed, and I was silly to dwell on the little things they laughed at me
about, but I cannot help thinking that if he had seen any prospect--'

'I wonder if John could--' Violet checked herself.

'O, don't say anything about it!' cried Annette, frightened. 'It may
be only my foolish fancy--but I cannot get it out of my mind. You see
I have no one to talk over things with now you are gone. I have lost my
pair in you, so I am solitary among them, and perhaps that has made me
think of it the more.'

'Dearest! But still I think you ought to try to draw away your mind from
it.'

'You do not think I ought to try to like Mr. Fotheringham?'

'Indeed, under present circumstances, I could not wish that.'

'But do you think me very wrong for considering whether I could? I hope
not, dear Violet,' said Annette, who shared her sister's scrupulous,
self-distrustful character, and had not, like her, been taught, by stern
necessity, to judge for herself.

'No, indeed,' said Violet; 'but, since that is settled, he ought to know
it at once, and not to be kept in suspense.'

It was not until after much affectionate exhortation that Violet could
rouse her sister from talking rather piteously over the perplexity
it would have been if his case or hers had been otherwise, arguing
to excuse herself in her own eyes for the notion of the marriage for
expediency, and describing the displeasure that the knowledge of the
rejection would produce at home. It was the first time she had had to
act for herself, and either she could not resolve to begin, or liked
to feel its importance. Perhaps she was right in saying that Mr.
Fotheringham would be disappointed if he supposed her Violet's equal,
for though alike in lowliness, amiability, and good sense, she had not
the same energy and decision.

At last the letter was begun, in the style of Matilda and the "Polite
Letter Writer" combined, though the meek-spirited Annette peeped through
in the connecting links of the set phrases. Violet, who was appealed to
at every stage, would fain have substituted the simple words in which
Annette spoke her meaning; but her sister was shocked. Such ordinary
language did not befit the dignity of the occasion nor Matilda's pupil;
and Violet, as much overruled as ever by respect for her elder sisters,
thought it an admirable composition.

'May I see yours?' asked Annette, resting before making her fair copy.

'And welcome, but it is not worthy of yours.'


'My Dear Mr. Fotheringham,--I wish with all my heart it could be--I am
very sorry it must not. Pray say nothing to my father: it would only
put her to needless pain. I beg your pardon for not being able to do
anything for you. You know how glad I should have been if I had not been
obliged to perceive that it would not be really right or kind to either.
Only do let me thank you for liking my dear sister, and forgive us if
you are grieved. I am very, very sorry.

'Yours, very sincerely,

'V. H. MARTINDALE.'


Annette raised her eyes in surprise. 'Ah!' said Violet, 'it is of no
use for me to try to write like Matilda. I did once, but I am not clever
enough; it looked so silly and affected, that I have been ashamed to
remember it ever since. I must write in the only way I can.'

Her sister wanted to tear up her letter as a piece of affectation,
but this she would not allow. It made her feel despairing to think
of spending two hours more over it, and she hoped that she would be
satisfied with the argument that the familiar style employed by Mrs.
Martindale towards an old friend might not be suited to Annette Moss
when rejecting his suit.

Each sentence underwent a revision, till Violet, growing as impatient
as was in her nature, told her at last that he would think more of the
substance than of the form.

Next, she had to contend against Annette's longing to flee home at once,
by Theodora's own saying, 'London was wide enough for both;' and more
effectually by suggesting that a sudden departure would be the best
means of proclaiming the adventure. It was true enough that Mr.
Fotheringham was not likely to molest her. No more was heard of him
till, two days after, the owl's provider brought a parcel with a
message, that Mr. Fotheringham had given up his lodging and was going to
Paris. It contained some books and papers of John's, poor little Pallas
Athene herself, stuffed, and directed to Master J. Martindale, and a
book in which, under his sister's name, he had written that of little
Helen. Violet knew he had intended making some residence at Paris, to be
near the public libraries, and she understood this as a kind, forgiving
farewell. She could understand his mortification, that he, after casting
off the magnificent Miss Martindale, should be rejected by this little
humble country girl; and she could not help thinking herself ungrateful,
so that the owl, which she kept in the drawing-room, as the object
of Johnnie's tender strokings, always seemed to have a reproachful
expression in its round glass eyes.

The hope of seeing the expediency of her decision waxed fainter, when
she received the unexpected honour of a letter from Lord Martindale,
who, writing to intrust her with some commission for John, added some
news. 'I have had the great pleasure of meeting with my cousin,
Hugh Martindale,' he said; 'who, since the death of his wife, has so
overworked himself in his large town parish, as to injure his eyesight,
and has been ordered abroad for his health. It does not appear that he
will ever be fit to return to his work at Fieldingsby, and I am in hopes
of effecting an exchange which may fix him at Brogden in the stead of
Mr. Wingfield. When you are of my age, you will understand the pleasure
I have in returning to old times. Theodora has likewise been much with
him, and I trust may be benefited by his advice. At present she has not
made up her mind to give any definite answer to Lord St. Erme, and
since I believe she hesitates from conscientious motives, I am the less
inclined to press her, as I think the result will be in his favour.
I find him improve on acquaintance. I am fully satisfied with his
principles and temper, he has extensive information, and might easily
become a valuable member of society. His sister, Lady Lucy, spends much
of her time with us, and appears to be an amiable pleasing girl.'

Lord Martindale evidently wished it to be forgotten that he had called
Lord St. Erme absurd-looking.

Violet sighed, and tried to counterbalance her regrets by hopes that
John would have it in his power to patronize his chaplain. However,
these second-hand cares did not hinder her from thriving and prospering
so that she triumphed in the hopes of confuting the threat that she
would not recover in London, and she gloried in the looks with which she
should meet Arthur. A dozen times a day she told her little ones that
papa was coming home, till Johnnie learnt to repeat it; and then she
listened in ecstasy as the news took a fresh charm from his lips.

She went to meet Arthur at the station; but instead of complimenting
her on the renewed carnation of her cheeks, as perhaps, in her pretty
conjugal vanity, she had expected, when she had taken such pains with
her pink ribbons, he gazed straight before him, and presently said,
abruptly, 'Is your sister here?'

Had she been displeasing him the whole time? She only breathed a faint
'Yes.'

'Is Fotheringham in town?'

'No; he is gone to Paris.'

'Then it is humbug, as I thought. I met that precious Miss Gardner in
the train going to Worthbourne, and she would have me believe you were
getting up a match between those two! A fine story,--not a year since
he proposed to Theodora! There was she congratulating me on the
satisfaction it must be to Mrs. Martindale!'

'So she wanted to make mischief between us,' said Violet, much hurt.

'Mischief is meat and drink to her. But not a jot did I believe, I tell
you, silly child. You are not wasting tears on that crocodile tongue!
I had a mind to tell her to her face that Percy is made of different
stuff; and for my own Violet blossom--'

The tears dropped bright and happy. 'Though, dear Arthur, it was true,
as far as Percy was concerned. Annette has had to refuse him.'

'A wise girl!' exclaimed Arthur, in indignant surprise. 'But Percy! I
could not have believed it. Why would she not have him?'

'Chiefly from thinking it not right to accept him. I hope I did not do
wrong in telling her all about it. I thought it only fair, and she did
not care enough for him to make the refusal an effort.'

'I should think not! The fickle dog. To go and take up with--No
disrespect to Annette,--but after Theodora! So soon, too!'

'I fancied it more pique than inconstancy. There is so much anger about
him that I suspect there is more affection than he knows.'

'And you think that mends matters,' said Arthur, laughing. 'Well, I hope
Theodora will marry St. Erme at once, so as to serve him right. I am
sure she will if she hears of this.'

'And I am afraid Miss Gardner will write to her.'

'That she will, with nice histories of you and me and Annette. And she
will tell them at Worthbourne till old Sir Antony disinherits Percy. No
more than he deserves!'

She might well be glad of the part she had taken, now that she found
her husband so much more alive to the affront to his sister than she
had expected. He was in high good-humour, and talked merrily of his
expedition, proceeding even to such a stretch of solicitude as to say he
supposed 'the brats were all right, as he had heard nothing of them.'

His greeting to Annette was warm and cordial, he complimented her on
her sister's recovered looks, and tried to extort a declaration that
she looked just like what she had been when he took her from Wrangerton.
Annette peeped out under her eyelashes, smiled, and shook her head
timidly.

'Ha! What's your treason, Miss Annette? Does not she look as well as
ever?'

'Better, in some ways,' said Annette, looking at Violet, glowing and
smiling, with her husband's hand on her shoulder.

'And what in others!'

'I like to look at her better than ever, but I cannot say she is not
paler and thinner.'

'Yes, and sober and matronly. That I am!' said Violet, drawing herself
up. 'I must stand on my dignity now I have two children. Don't I look
old and wise, Annette?'

'Not a bit now,' said Annette.

There was an end of Annette's doubt and dread of her grand
brother-in-law. He talked and laughed, took her on pleasant expeditions,
and made much of her with all his ready good-nature, till her heart was
quite won. She did not leave them till just as they were departing for
Windsor, and as she looked back from her railway carriage, at Violet and
her husband, arm-in-arm, she sighed a sigh on her own account, repented
of as soon as heaved, as she contrasted her own unsatisfactory home with
their happiness.

But the heart knoweth its own bitterness, and Annette little guessed
at the grief that lurked in the secret springs of her sister's joy,
increasing with her onward growth in the spirit that brought her sure
trust and peace. It was the want of fellowship with her husband, in her
true and hidden life. She could not seek counsel or comfort from above,
she could not offer prayer or thanksgiving, she could not join in the
highest Feast, without finding herself left alone, in a region whither
he would not follow. It was a weariness to him. In the spring she had
had hopes. At Easter, an imploring face, and timid, 'Won't you come?'
had made him smile, and say he was not so good as she, then sigh, and
half promise, 'Next time, when he had considered.' But next time he had
had no leisure for thinking; she should do as she liked with him when
they got into the country. And since that, some influence that she could
not trace seemed, as she knew by the intuition of her heart, rather than
the acknowledgment of her mind, to have turned him away; the distaste
and indifference were more evident, and he never gave her an opening for
leading to any serious subject. It was this that gave pain even to her
prayers, and added an acuter pang to every secret anxiety.

'When his children are older, and he feels that they look up to him'
thought Violet, hopefully, and in the meantime she prayed.


CHAPTER 23


     Not so, bold knight, no deed of thine
      Can ever win my hand;
     That hope, poor youth, thou must resign,
      For barriers 'twixt us stand.
     Yet what doth part us I will now reveal,
      Nor, noblest one, from thee the truth conceal.

     --FOUQUE


Arthur guessed rightly. Miss Gardner's first leisure was spent in
writing her tidings to Theodora.

It was on a strange state of mind that they fell. Theodora had gone
abroad, softened and conscious of her faults, but her indomitable will
boiling up at each attempt to conquer them; knowing that her fate hung
in the balance, but helpless in the power of her own pride and temper.
Miserable, and expecting to be more wretched, her outward demeanour,
no longer checked by Violet, was more than ever harsh, capricious, and
undutiful, especially under her present deprivation of the occupations
that had hitherto been channels of kindly feeling.

She was less patient than formerly with her aunt, who was in truth more
trying. Quickly gathering the state of affairs with regard to Lord St.
Erme, she was very angry with Lord Martindale for not having consulted
her, and at the same time caressed her great-niece beyond endurance.
Besides, it was unbearable to hear sweet Violet scoffed at. Theodora
spoke hastily in her defence; was laughed at for having been gained
over; replied vehemently, and then repented of losing temper with one
so aged and infirm. Her attention to Mrs. Nesbit had been one of her
grounds of self-complacency; but this had now failed her--distance was
the only means of keeping the peace and Theodora left her chiefly to her
companion, Mrs. Garth, a hard-looking, military dame, who seemed so well
able to take care of herself, that there was none of the compassion that
had caused Theodora to relieve poor little Miss Piper.

It was not long before Lord St. Erme persuaded his aunt that her tour
in Germany would not be complete without a visit to Baden-Baden. Mrs.
Delaval and Lady Martindale immediately began to be as intimate as was
possible with the latter. Theodora intended to stand aloof, and to be
guarded and scornful; but Lady Lucy was such an engaging, affectionate,
honest-hearted little thing, regarding Miss Martindale with all her
brother's enthusiastic devotion, and so grateful for the slightest
notice, that it really was impossible to treat her with the requisite
cold dignity.

And to admit Lady Lucy to her friendship was much the same thing as
admitting the brother. 'St. Erme' was the one engrossing subject of the
young girl's thoughts and discourse, and it was soon plain that not a
conversation passed but was reported to him. If Theodora expressed an
opinion, 'St. Erme's' remarks on it were certain to be brought to her
the next day; if a liking or a wish, he was instantly taking measures
for its gratification. She might try to keep him at a distance,
but where was the use of it when, if his moustached self was safely
poetizing in the Black Forest, his double in blue muslin was ever at her
elbow?

By and by it was no longer a moustached self. The ornaments were shaved
off, and she heartily wished them on again. What could be said when Lucy
timidly begged to know how she liked the change in St. Erme's face, and
whether she shared her regrets for his dear little moustache? Alas! such
a sacrifice gave him a claim, and she felt as if each departed hair was
a mesh in the net to ensnare her liberty.

And what could she say when Lucy WOULD talk over his poems, and try to
obtain her sympathy in the matter of that cruel review which had cut
the poor little sister to the heart? It had been so sore a subject in
London, that she could not then bear to speak of it, and now, treating
it like a personal attack on his character, she told how 'beautifully
St. Erme bore it,' and wanted Miss Martindale to say how unjust
and shocking it was. Yet Miss Martindale actually, with a look
incomprehensible to poor Lucy, declared that there was a great deal of
truth in it.

However, in process of time, Lucy came back reporting that her brother
thought so too, and that he had gathered many useful hints from it; but
that he did not mean to attend to poetry so much, he thought it time
to begin practical life; and she eagerly related his schemes for being
useful and distinguishing himself.

It was not easy to help replying and commenting on, or laughing at,
plans which showed complete ignorance of English life, and then Theodora
found herself drawn into discussions with Lord St. Erme himself, who
took her suggestions, and built his projects with a reference to her, as
his understood directress and assistant; till she grew quite frightened
at what she had let him take for granted, and treated him with a fresh
fit of coldness and indifference, soon thawed by his sister. She could
not make up her mind to the humiliating confession by which alone she
could have dismissed him, and the dominion she should enjoy with him
appeared more and more tempting as she learnt to know him better, and
viewed him as a means of escape from her present life. If it had not
been for recollections of Violet, she would have precipitated the step,
in order to end her suspense, but that perfect trust that she would not
accept him unless she could do so with a clear conscience always held
her back.

It was at this juncture that, one day when walking with her father,
there was a sudden stop at the sight of another elderly gentleman. 'Ha!
Hugh!' 'What, you here, Martindale!' were mutually exclaimed, there
was an ardent shaking of hands, and she found herself introduced to a
cousin, whom she had not seen since she was a child.

He and her father had been like brothers in their boyhood, but the
lines they had since taken had diverged far and wide. The hard-working
clergyman had found himself out of his element in visits to Martindale,
had discontinued them, and almost even his correspondence, so that Lord
Martindale had heard nothing of his cousin since his wife's death, two
years ago, till now, when he met him on the promenade at Baden, sent
abroad to recruit his worn-out health and eyesight.

All have either felt or beheld, how two such relations, on the verge of
old age, meet and refresh themselves with looking back, beyond the tract
of middle life, to the days shared together in youth! Lord Martindale
had not looked so bright, nor talked and laughed so much for years,
as over his boyish reminiscences, and his wanderings up and down the
promenade with his cousin seemed as if nothing could terminate them.

Clergymen and school-loving young ladies have a natural affinity,
and Theodora found a refuge from the Delavals and an opportunity for
usefulness. She offered to read to Cousin Hugh, she talked over parish
matters, and after relieving her mind with a conversation on the
question of how much the march of intellect ought to penetrate into
country schools, it was wonderful how much more equable and comfortable
she became. The return to the true bent of her nature softened her on
every side; and without the least attempt to show off, she was so free
from the morose dignity with which she had treated her own family since
going abroad, that Mr. Hugh Martindale could hardly believe the account
of her strange ungovernable character, as it was laid before him by her
father, in his wish for counsel.

He watched her anxiously, but made no attempt to force her confidence,
and let her talk to him of books, school discipline, parish stories,
and abstruse questions as much as she pleased, always replying in a
practical, sobering tone, that told upon her, and soothed her almost
like Violet's mild influence, and to her great delight, she made him
quite believe in Violet's goodness, and wish to be acquainted with her.

But all the time, Lord St. Erme was treated as her acknowledged suitor.
Perhaps Mr. Martindale thought it might be better if she were safely
married; or, at any rate, only knowing her personally as a high-minded
person of much serious thought, he believed her to be conscientiously
waiting to overcome all doubts, and honoured her scruples: while it
might be, that the desire for his good opinion bound Theodora the more
to Lord St. Erme, for with all her sincerity, she could not bear the
idea of his discovering the part she was playing, at the very time she
was holding such conversations on serious subjects. The true history
of her present conduct was that she could not endure to be known as the
rejected and forsaken of Mr. Fotheringham, and thus, though outwardly
tamer, she was more melancholy at heart, fast falling into a state of
dull resignation; if such a name can be applied to mere endurance of the
consequences of her own pride and self-will.

Now came Jane Gardner's letter. Theodora read it through, then, with
calm contempt, she tore it up, lighted a taper, and burnt it to ashes.

'There, Jane!' said she, as it shrivelled, black and crackling, 'there
is all the heed I take. Violet would no more allow me to be supplanted
than Percy could be inconstant.'

Inconstant! Where was her right so to term him? Was he not released, not
merely by the cold 'Very well,' which seemed to blister her lips in the
remembrance, but by her whole subsequent course? That thought came like
the stroke of a knife, and she stood motionless and stunned. Love of
Percival Fotheringham was a part of herself! Certain from her confidence
in Violet that Jane's news was untrue, the only effect of hearing it was
to reveal to her like a flash that her whole heart was his. He had loved
her in spite of her faults. Suppose he should do so still! Her spirits
leapt up at this glimpse of forfeited unattainable joy; but she beheld a
forlorn hope. At least she would restore herself to a condition in which
she might meet him without despairing shame. The impulse was given,
and eager to obey it, while it still buoyed her above the dislike to
self-abasement, she looked round for the speediest measure, caring
little what it might be.

Her father was reading his letters in the next room, when, with flushed
cheek, and voice striving for firmness, she stood before him, saying,
'It is time to put an end to this. Will you let Lord St. Erme know that
it cannot be!'

'Now, Theodora!' exclaimed the much-astonished Lord Martindale, 'what is
the meaning of this?'

'It cannot be,' repeated Theodora. 'It must be put a stop to.'

'What has happened! Have you heard anything to change your mind?'

'My mind is not changed, but I cannot have this going on.'

'How is this? You have been encouraging him all this time, letting him
come here--'

'I never asked him to come here,' said Theodora, temper coming in, as
usual.

'Theodora! Theodora! did I not entreat you to tell me what you wished,
when I first heard of this in London? Could I get a reasonable answer
from you?'

Theodora was silent.

'Do you know what the world thinks of young ladies who go on in this
manner?'

'Let it think as it may, I cannot accept him, and you must tell him so,
papa--'

'No, indeed. I will not be responsible for such usage! It must be your
own doing,' said Lord Martindale, thoroughly displeased. 'I should be
ashamed to look him in the face!'

Theodora turned to leave the room.

'What are you going to do?' asked her father.

'I am going to write to Lord St. Erme.'

'Come back, Theodora. I must know that you are not going to carry
further this ill-usage of a most excellent man, more sincerely attached
to you than you deserve. I insist on knowing what you intend to say to
him.'

To insist was not the way to succeed with Theodora.

'I do not exactly know,' said she.

'I wish I knew what to do with you!' sighed Lord Martindale, in anger,
grief, and perplexity. 'You seem to think that people's affections are
made to serve for your vanity and sport, and when you have tormented
them long enough, you cast them off!'

Theodora drew her head up higher, and swelled at the injustice. It was
at that moment that Lord St. Erme entered the room. She went forward to
meet him, and spoke at once. 'I am glad you are here,' said she, proudly
pleased that her father should see her vindication from the charge of
trifling. 'You are come to hear what I had been desiring my father to
tell you. I have used you very ill, and it is time to put a stop to it.'

Lord St. Erme looked from her to her father in wonder and dismay.

'First understand,' said Lord Martindale, 'that this is no doing of
mine; I am heartily grieved, but I will leave you. Perhaps you may
prevail on this wilful girl--'

Theodora began a protest, and desired him to remain; but he would not,
and she found herself alone with her bewildered lover.

'What is this? what have I done?' he began.

'You have done nothing,' said she. 'It is all my own fault. The truth
will be a cure for your regrets, and I owe you an explanation. I was
engaged to one whom I had known from childhood, but we disputed--my
temper was headstrong. He rejected me, and I thought I scorned him, and
we parted. You came in my way while I was angry, before I knew that I
can never lose my feelings towards him. I know I have seemed to trifle
with you; but false shame hindered me from confessing how matters really
stood. You ought to rejoice in being freed from such as I am.'

'But with time!' exclaimed Lord St. Erme, in broken words. 'May I not
hope that time and earnest endeavours--?'

'Hope nothing,' said Theodora. 'Every one would tell you you have had a
happy escape.'

'And is this all? My inspiration!--you who were awakening me to a sense
of the greatness of real life--you who would have led me and aided me to
a nobler course--'

'That is open to you, without the evils I should have entailed on you.
I could never have returned your feelings, and it would have been misery
for both. You will see it, when you come to your senses, and rejoice.'

'Rejoice! If you knew how the thought of you is entwined in every
aspiration, and for life!'

'Do not talk so,' said Theodora. 'It only grieves me to see the pain I
have given; but it would be worse not to break off at once.'

'Must it be so?' said he, lingering before his fleeting vision.

'It must. The kindest thing by both of us is to cut this as short as
possible.'

'In that, as in all else, I obey. I know that a vain loiterer, like
myself, had little right to hope for notice from one whose mind was bent
on the noblest tasks of mankind. You have opened new views to me, and
I had dared to hope you would guide me in them; but with you or without
you, my life shall be spent in them.'

'That will be some consolation for the way I have treated you,' said
Theodora.

His face lighted up. 'My better angel!' he said, 'I will be content to
toil as the knights of old, hopelessly, save that if you hear of me
no longer as the idle amateur, but as exerting myself for something
serviceable, you will know it is for your sake.'

'It had better be for something else,' said Theodora, impatiently. 'Do
not think of me, nor delude yourself with imagining you can win me by
any probation.'

'I may earn your approval--'

'You will earn every one's,' she interrupted. 'Put mine out of your
head. Think of life and duty, and their reward, as they really are, and
they will inspirit you better than any empty dream of me.'

'It is vain to tell me so!' said the Earl, looking at her glancing eye
and earnest countenance. 'You will ever seem to beckon me forwards.'

'Something better will beckon you by and by, if you will only begin.
Life is horrid work--only endurable by looking after other people, and
so you will find it. Now, let us have done with this. Wish your sister
good-bye for me, and tell her that I beg her to forgive me for the pain
I have given you. I am glad you have her. She will make you happy--I
have only tormented those I loved best; so you are better off with her.
Good-bye. Shake hands, to show that you forgive me.'

'I will not harass you by pertinacity,' said poor Lord St. Erme,
submissively. 'It has been a happy dream while I was bold enough to
indulge in it. Farewell to it, though not, I trust, to its effects.'

Lingering as he held her hand, he let it go; then, returning to the
grasp, bent and kissed it, turned away, as if alarmed at his own
presumption, and hastened from the room.

She flung herself into her father's chair to consider of seeing Lady
Lucy, of writing to Violet, of breaking the tidings to her aunt, of
speaking to her Cousin Hugh; but no connected reflection could be
summoned up--nothing but visions of an Athenian owl, and green cotton
umbrella. At length the sound of the opening door made her start up.

'Have I interrupted you?' asked her cousin. 'I thought I should find
your father here.'

'I do not know where he is,' said Theodora. 'Can I do anything for you?
Oh! I beg your pardon; I had forgotten it was time to read to you.'

'You know I always hoped that you would not make it a burden.'

'If you knew the relief it is to be of any sort of use,' returned she,
hastily setting his chair, and fetching the books.

Perhaps her attention wandered while she read, for they had hardly
finished before she looked up and said, 'That always puts me in mind of
Arthur's wife. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is so entirely
her adorning--her beauty only an accessory.'

'Yes; I wish I knew her,' said Mr. Martindale.

'Oh! how I wish she was here!' sighed Theodora.

'For any special reason?'

'Yes; I want her to soften and help me. She seems to draw and smooth
away the evil, and to keep me from myself. Nothing is so dreary where
she is.'

'I should not have expected to hear you, at your age, and with your
prospects, talk of dreariness.'

'That is all over,' said Theodora. 'I have told him that it cannot be. I
am glad, for one reason, that I shall not seem to deceive you any more.
Has papa told you what he thinks my history!'

'He has told me of your previous affair.'

'I wonder what is his view?'

'His view is one of deep regret; he thinks your tempers were
incompatible.'

Theodora laughed. 'He has a sort of termagant notion of me.'

'I am afraid you do no justice to your father's affection and anxiety.'

'It is he who does me no justice,' said Theodora.

'Indeed, I do not think that can be your sister's teaching,' said Mr.
Martindale.

'I wish she was here!' said Theodora, again. 'But now you have heard my
father's story, you shall hear mine;' and with tolerable fairness,
she related the history of the last few months. The clergyman was much
interested in the narrative of this high-toned mind,--'like sweet bells
jangled,' and listened with earnest and sorrowful attention. There was
comfort in the outpouring; and as she spoke, the better spirit so far
prevailed, that she increasingly took more blame to herself, and threw
less on others. She closed her confession by saying, 'You see, I may
well speak of dreariness.'

'Of dreariness for the present,' was the answer; 'but of hope. You put
me in mind of some vision which I have read of, where safety and peace
were to be attained by bowing to the dust, to creep beneath a gateway,
the entrance to the glorious place. You seem to me in the way of
learning that lesson.'

'I have bent to make the avowal I thought I never could have spoken,'
said Theodora.

'And there is my hope of you. Now for the next step.'

'The next! what is it?'

'Thankfully and meekly to accept the consequences of these sad errors.'

'You mean this lonely, unsatisfactory life?'

'And this displeasure of your father.'

'But, indeed, he misjudges me.'

'Have you ever given him the means of forming a different judgment?'

'He has seen all. If I am distrusted, I cannot descend to justify
myself.'

'I am disappointed in you, Theodora. Where is your humility?'

With these words Mr. Martindale quitted her. He had divined that her
feelings would work more when left to themselves, than when pressed, and
so it proved.

The witness within her spoke more clearly, and dislike and loathing of
her proceedings during the last year grew more strongly upon her. The
sense of her faults had been latent in her mind for months past, but the
struggle of her external life had kept it down, until now it came forth
with an overpowering force of grief and self-condemnation. It was
not merely her sins against Mr. Fotheringham and Lord St. Erme that
oppressed her, it was the perception of the wilful and rebellious life
she had led, while making so high a profession.

Silently and sadly she wore through the rest of the day, unmolested
by any remark from the rest of the family, but absorbed in her own
thoughts, and the night passed in acute mental distress; with longings
after Violet to soothe her, and to open to her hopes of the good and
right way of peace.

With morning light came the recollection that, after all, Violet would
rejoice in what she had just done. Violet would call it a step in the
right direction; and she had promised her further help from above and
within, when once she should have had patience to take the right move,
even in darkness. 'She told me, if I put my trust aright, and tried to
act in obedience, I should find a guide!'

And, worn out and wearied with the tossings of her mind, Theodora
resolved to have recourse to the kind clergyman who had listened to her
confidence. Perhaps he was the guide who would aid her to conquer
the serpents that had worked her so much misery; and, after so much
self-will, she felt that there would be rest in submitting to direction.

She sought him out, and joined his early walk.

'Help me,' she said; 'I repent, indeed I do. Teach me to begin afresh,
and to be what I ought. I would do anything.'

'Anything that is not required of you, Theodora, or anything that is?'

'Whatever you or Violet required of me,' said she, 'that I would do
readily and gladly, cost me what it might.'

'It is not for me to require anything,' said Mr. Martindale. 'What
I advise you is to test the sincerity of your repentance by humbling
yourself to ask your father's forgiveness.'

He watched her face anxiously, for his hopes of her almost might be said
to depend upon this. It was one of those efforts which she made with
apparent calmness. 'You and Violet ask the same thing,' she said; 'I
will.'

'I am glad to hear you say this. I could not think you going on right
while you denied him the full explanation of your conduct.'

'Did you mean that I should tell him all?' exclaimed Theodora.

'It would be a great relief to his mind. Few fathers would have left you
such complete liberty of action, consented to your engagement, and then
acted so kindly and cautiously in not forcing on you this, for which he
had begun to wish ardently. You have grieved him extremely, and you owe
it to him to show that this has not all been caprice.'

I have promised,' repeated Theodora.

'Your second effort,' said Mr. Martindale, encouragingly. They were
nearly opposite an hotel, where a carriage was being packed. Theodora
turned, he understood her, and they walked back; but before they could
quit the main road, the travellers rolled past them. Lord St. Erme
bowed. Theodora did not look up; but when past asked if any one was with
him.

'Yes; his sister.'

'I am glad of it,' said Theodora. 'She is an excellent little thing, the
very reverse of me.'

Without failure of resolution, Theodora returned to breakfast, her
mind made up to the effort, which was more considerable than can be
appreciated, without remembering her distaste to all that bore the
semblance of authority, and the species of proud reserve that had
prevented her from avowing to her father her sentiments respecting Mr.
Fotheringham, even in the first days of their engagement; and she
was honest enough to feel that the manner, as well as the subject of
conversation, must show the sincerity of her change. She would not let
herself be affronted into perverseness or sullenness, but would try to
imagine Violet looking on; and with this determination she lingered in
the breakfast-room after her mother and cousin had left it.

'Papa,' said she, as he was leaving the room, 'will you listen to me?'

'What now, Theodora?' said poor Lord Martindale, expecting some of those
fresh perplexities that made him feel the whole family to blame.

It was not encouraging, but she had made up her mind. 'I have behaved
very ill about all this, papa; I want you to forgive me.'

He came nearer to her, and studied her face, in dread lest there should
be something behind. 'I am always ready to forgive and listen to you,'
he said sadly.

She perceived that she had, indeed, given him much pain, and was
softened, and anxious for him to be comforted by seeing that her fault,
at least, was not the vanity and heartlessness that he supposed.

'It was very wrong of me to answer you as I did yesterday,' she said. 'I
know it was my own fault that Lord St. Erme was allowed to follow us.'

'And why did you consent!'

'I don't know. Yes, I do, though; but that makes it worse. It was
because my perverse temper was vexed at your warning me,' said Theodora,
looking down, much ashamed.

'Then you never meant to accept him!' exclaimed her father.

'No, not exactly that; I thought I might,' said she, slowly, and with
difficulty.

'Then what has produced this alteration?'

'I will tell you,' said she, recalling her resolution. 'I did not know
how much I cared for Percy Fotheringham. Yesterday there came a foolish
report about his forming another attachment. I know it was not true;
but the misery it gave me showed me that it would be sin and madness to
engage myself to another.'

Lord Martindale breathed more freely. 'Forgive me for putting the
question, it is a strange one to ask now: were you really attached to
Percy Fotheringham?'

'With my whole heart,' answered Theodora, deliberately.

'Then why, or how--'

'Because my pride and stubbornness were beyond what any man could bear,'
she answered. 'He did quite right: it would not have been manly to
submit to my conduct. I did not know how bad it was till afterwards, nor
how impossible it is that my feelings towards him should cease.'

'And this is the true history of your treatment of Lord St. Erme!'

'Yes. He came at an unlucky moment of anger, when Violet was ill, and
could not breathe her saving influence over me, and I fancied--It was
very wrong, and I was ashamed to confess what I have told you now.'

'Have you given him this explanation?'

'I have.'

'Well, I am better satisfied. He is a most generous person, and told me
he had no reason to complain of you.'

'Yes, he has a noble character. I am very sorry for the manner in which
I have treated him, but there was nothing to be done but to put an end
to it. I wish I had never begun it.'

'I wish so too!' said Lord Martindale. 'He is grievously disappointed,
and bears it with such generous admiration of you and such humility on
his own part, that it went to my heart to talk to him, especially while
feeling myself a party to using him so ill.'

'He is much too good for me,' said Theodora, 'but I could not accept him
while I contrasted him with what I have thrown away. I can only repent
of having behaved so badly.'

'Well! after all, I am glad to hear you speak in this manner,' said her
father.

'I know I have been much to blame,' said Theodora, still with her head
bent down and half turned away. 'Ever since I was a child, I have been
undutiful and rebellious. Being with Violet has gradually brought me to
a sense of it. I do wish to make a fresh beginning, and to ask you to
forgive and bear with me.'

'My dear child!' And Lord Martindale stepped to her side, took her hand,
and kissed her.

No more was needed to bring the drops that had long been swelling in
her eyes; she laid her head on his shoulder, and felt how much she had
hitherto lost by the perverseness that had made her choose to believe
her father cold and unjust.

There was another trial for the day. The departure of Lord St. Erme and
his sister revealed the state of affairs to the rest of the world; Mrs.
Delaval came to make Lady Martindale a parting visit, and to lament over
their disappointment, telling how well Lord St. Erme bore it, and how
she had unwillingly consented to his taking his sister with him to
comfort him at that dull old place, Wrangerton.

Lady Martindale, as usual, took it very quietly. She never put herself
into collision with her daughter, and did not seem to care about her
freaks otherwise than as they affected her aunt. Mrs. Nesbit, who had
thought herself on the point of the accomplishment of her favourite
designs, was beyond measure vexed and incensed. She would not be
satisfied without seeing Theodora, reproaching her, and insisting on
hearing the grounds of her unreasonable conduct.

Theodora was silent.

Was it as her mother reported, but as Mrs. Nesbit would not believe,
that she had so little spirit as to be still pining after that
domineering, presuming man, who had thrown her off after she had
condescended to accept him?

'I glory in saying it is for his sake,' replied Theodora.

Mrs. Nesbit wearied herself with invectives against the Fotheringhams
as the bane of the family, and assured Theodora that it was time to lay
aside folly; her rank and beauty would not avail, and she would never be
married.

'I do not mean to marry,' said Theodora.

'Then remember this. You may think it very well to be Miss Martindale,
with everything you can desire; but how shall you like it when your
father dies, and you have to turn out and live on your own paltry five
thousand pounds! for not a farthing of mine shall come to you unless I
see you married as I desire.'

'I can do without it, thank you,' said Theodora.

Mrs. Nesbit burst into a passion of tears at the ingratitude of her
nephews and nieces. Weeping was so unusual with her that Lady Martindale
was much terrified, sent Theodora away and did her utmost to soothe and
caress her; but her strength and spirits were broken, and that night she
had another stroke. She was not in actual danger, but was a long time
in recovering even sufficiently to be moved to England; and during
this period Theodora had little occupation, except companionship to her
father, and the attempt to reduce her temper and tame her self-will. Mr.
Hugh Martindale went to take possession of the living of Brogden, and
she remained a prisoner at Baden, striving to view the weariness and
enforced uselessness of her life, as he had taught her, in the light of
salutary chastisement and discipline.


PART III


     Heartsease In thy heart shall spring
      If content abiding,
     Where, beneath that leafless tree,
      Life's still stream is gliding.
     But, transplanted thence, it fades,
      For it bloometh only
     Neath the shadow of the Cross,
      In a valley lonely.

     --J. E. L.


CHAPTER 1


     Love, hope, and patience, these must be thy graces,
     And in thine own heart let them first keep school.

     --COLERIDGE


The avenue of Martindale budded with tender green, and in it walked
Theodora, watching for the arrival of the sister-in-law, scarcely seen
for nearly four years.

Theodora's dress was of the same rigid simplicity as of old, her figure
as upright, her countenance as noble, but a change had passed over her;
her bearing was less haughty; her step, still vigorous and firm, had
lost its wilfulness, the proud expression of lip had altered to one of
thought and sadness, and her eyes had become softer and more melancholy.
She leaned against the tree where the curate had brought her the first
tidings of Arthur's marriage, and she sighed, but not as erst with
jealousy and repining.

There was, indeed, an alteration--its beginning may not be traced, for
the seed had been sown almost at her birth, and though little fostered,
had never ceased to spring. The first visible shoot had been drawn forth
by Helen Fotheringham; but the growth, though rapid, had been one-sided;
the branches, like those of a tree in a sea-wind, all one way, blown
aside by gusts of passion and self-will. In its next stage, the attempt
to lop and force them back had rendered them more crooked and knotty,
till the enterprise had been abandoned as vain. But there was a soft
hand that had caressed the rugged boughs, softened them with the dews of
gratitude and affection, fanned them with gales from heaven, and gently
turned them to seek training and culture, till the most gnarled and
hardened had learnt patiently to endure the straightening hand and
pruning knife.

Under such tranquil uneventful discipline, Theodora had spent the last
four years, working with all her might at her labours in the parish,
under Mr. Hugh Martindale, and what was a far more real effort,
patiently submitting when family duties thwarted her best intentions.
Parish work was her solace, in a somewhat weary life, isolated from
intimate companionship.

She had, indeed, Mr. Hugh Martindale for a guide and adviser, and to her
father she was a valuable assistant and companion; but her mother was
more than ever engrossed by the care of Mrs. Nesbit; her eldest brother
was still in the West Indies and Arthur only seen in fleeting visits, so
short that it had never been convenient for his family to accompany him,
nor had Theodora even been spared to attend Violet, when a little girl,
now nearly two years old, had been added to her nursery.

Letters ill supplied the lack of personal intercourse: Theodora did
not write with ease, and Violet could not pour herself out without
reciprocity; so that though there was a correspondence, it languished,
and their intimacy seemed to be standing still. Another great and heavy
care to Theodora was a mistrust of Arthur's proceedings. She heard of
him on the turf, she knew that he kept racers; neither his looks nor
talk were satisfactory; there were various tokens of extravagance;
and Lord Martindale never went to London without bringing back some
uncomfortable report.

Very anxious and sad at heart, she hoped to be better satisfied by
judging for herself; and after long wearying for a meeting, her wishes
were at length in the way of fulfilment--Arthur's long leave was to be
spent at home.

The carriage turned in at the lodge gates. She looked up--how
differently from the would-be careless air with which she had once
watched! But there was disappointment--she saw no brother! In a moment
Violet had descended from the carriage, and warmly returned her embrace;
and she was kissing the little shy faces that looked up to her, as all
got out to walk up the avenue.

'But where is Arthur?'

'He is soon coming,' said the soft sweet voice. 'He would not let us
wait for him.'

'What! Has he not got his leave?'

'Yes; but he is going to stay with some of his friends. Mr. Herries came
yesterday and insisted.'

Theodora thought there was a mournful intonation, and looked anxiously
at her face. The form and expression were lovely as ever; but the bright
colouring had entirely faded, the cheeks were thin, and the pensive
gentleness almost mournful. A careworn look was round the eyes and
mouth, even while she smiled, as Theodora gave a second and more
particular greeting to the children.

Johnnie was so little changed that she exclaimed at finding the same
baby face. His little delicate features and pure fair skin were as white
as ever; for not a spring had gone by without his falling under the
grasp of his old enemy the croup; and his small slight frame was the
more slender from his recent encounter with it. But he was now a
very pretty boy, his curls of silken flax fringing his face under his
broad-leafed black hat, and contrasting with his soft dark eyes, their
gentle and intelligent expression showing, indeed, what a friend and
companion he was to his mother; and it was with a shy smile, exactly
like hers, that he received his aunt's notice.

'And Helen, my godchild, I have not looked at her! Where are you?'

But the tread of country turf seemed to have put wildness into little
Helen. She had darted off, and hidden behind a tree, peeping out with
saucy laughter flashing in her glorious black eyes, and dimpling in the
plump roseate cheeks round which floated thick glossy curls of rich dark
chestnut. Theodora flew to catch her; but she scampered round another
tree, shouting with fun, till she was seized and pressed fast in her
aunt's arms and called a mischievous puss, while Theodora exulted in the
splendour of her childish beauty, exuberant with health and spirits. The
moment she was released, with another outcry of glee, she dashed off
to renew the frolic, with the ecstasy of a young fawn, while the round
fat-faced Annie tumbled after her like a little ball, and their aunt
entered into the spirit of the romp, and pursued them with blitheness
for the moment like their own. Johnnie, recovering his mamma's hand,
walked soberly beside her, and when invited to join in the sport, looked
as if he implored to be excused. Violet, rather anxiously, called them
to order as they came near the house, consigned Annie to Sarah, and
herself took Helen's hand, observing, gravely, that they must be very
good.

'One thing,' she half-whispered; 'I once had a hint from Miss Piper that
Mrs. Nesbit did not like Lady Martindale to be called grandmamma. What
do you think?'

'What nonsense! Mamma ought to be proud of her grandchildren, and my
aunt will probably never see them or hear them at all. She never comes
out of the room.'

'Indeed! Is she so much more infirm?'

'Yes, very much aged. Her mind has never been quite itself since the
last stroke, though I can hardly tell the difference, but I think it has
softened her.'

'I suppose Lady Martindale is very much with her!'

'Almost always. She seems to cling to our presence, and I am never quite
secure that Mrs. Garth does not domineer over her in our absence, but
with all my watching I cannot discover. My aunt says nothing against
her, but I sometimes fancy she is afraid of her.'

'Poor Mrs. Nesbit. She must be altered indeed!'

'She is altered, but I never am clear how far it is any real change,
or only weakness. One comfort is, that she seems rather to like Cousin
Hugh's coming to read to her twice a week. How he will delight in these
creatures of yours.'

'Ah! we know him,' said Violet. 'You know he comes to us if he is in
London. How pleasant it must be for you.'

'Ah, very unlike the days when poor Mr. Wingfield used to come to ask
me how to manage the parish,' said Theodora, between a laugh and a sigh.
'When did you hear from John?'

'His godson had a letter from him on his birthday.'

'O, Johnnie! that was an honour! Could you write and answer him?'

'Mamma helped me,' whispered the boy, while eyes and mouth lengthened
into a bright blushing smile.

'Steady, Helen, my child! Quiet!' exclaimed Violet, as the little girl's
delight grew beyond bounds at the sight of the peacock sunning himself
on the sphinx's head, and Johnnie was charmed with the flowers in the
parterre; and with 'look but not touch' cautions, the two were trusted
to walk together hand-in-hand through the gravelled paths.

'The spirits will break out in little skips!' said Theodora, watching
Helen. 'She preserves her right to be called a splendid specimen! What a
pair they are!'

'Poor Helen! I shall be in dread of an outbreak all the time we are
here,' said Violet; 'but she means to be good, and every one cannot be
like Johnnie.'

'Ah! Johnnie one speaks of with respect.'

'I don't know what I should do but for him,' said Violet, with her sad
smile; 'he is so entirely my companion, and I suppose he seems more
forward in mind from being so much in the drawing-room.'

'Well! he is come to a time of life to merit his papa's notice.'

'More than the rest,' said Violet; 'but unluckily he is a little bit of
a coward, and is afraid when papa plays with him. We make resolutions,
but I really believe it is a matter of nerves, and that poor Johnnie
cannot help it.'

'What! Arthur is rough and teasing?'

'He does not understand this sort of timidity; he is afraid of Johnnie's
not being manly; but I believe that would come if his health would but
be stronger. It is very unlucky,' said Violet, 'for it vexes papa, and I
think it hurts Johnnie, though I am always forced to blame him for being
so silly. One comfort is, that it does not in the least interfere with
Johnnie's affection--he admires him almost as he used when he was a
baby.'

They were at the foot of the steps, where Charles Layton, now a brisk
page, was helping to unpack the carriage, more intelligently than many a
youth with the full aid of his senses.

Lord Martindale met them with his grave kind welcome, which awed even
Helen into quiet and decorum, though perhaps, from the corners of her
eyes, she was spying the Scagliola columns as places for hide-and-seek.
She opened them to their roundest extent as her grandmamma came
down-stairs, and she tried to take shelter behind her brother from the
ceremonious kiss, while Johnnie tightly squeezed his aunt's hand, and
Lady Martindale was quite as much afraid of them as they could be of
her.

So began the visit--a very different one from any Violet had hitherto
paid at Martindale. Theodora's room was now her chief resort in the
morning, and there Johnnie went through his lessons with almost too
precocious ease and delight, and Helen was daily conquered over Mrs.
Barbauld. There they were sure to be welcome, though they were seldom
seen downstairs. Johnnie used to appear in the space before dinner, very
demure and well-behaved, and there seemed to be a fellow-feeling arising
between him and his grandfather, who would take possession of him if
he met him out-of-doors, and conduct him to any sight suited to his
capacity; but who was so much distressed at his forwardness in intellect
and his backwardness in strength, that Violet hardly dared to hold a
conversation about him for fear of a remonstrance on letting him touch a
book.

One day Mrs. Nesbit suddenly said to Theodora, 'Arthur's wife and
children are here, are not they?'

'Yes; Violet would have come to see you, but we doubted if you were
equal to it.'

'I have nothing to say to Mr. Moss's daughter, but bring that eldest boy
here, I want to see him.'

Theodora stepped out into the gallery, where Johnnie was often to be
found curled up in the end window, poring over and singing to himself
the "White Doe of Rylstone", which he had found among his uncle's books.

She led him in, exhorting him not to be shy, and to speak out boldly in
answer to Aunt Nesbit; but perhaps this only frightened him more. Very
quiet and silent, he stood under his aunt's wing with eyes cast down,
answering with a trembling effort the questions asked in that sharp
searching tone.

'His mother all over!' she said, motioning him away; but, the next day,
she sent for him again. Poor Johnnie did not like it at all; he could
hardly help shuddering at her touch, and at night begged his mamma not
to send him to Aunt Nesbit; for he could not bear it without her. She
had to represent that Aunt Nesbit was old and ill, and that it would
be unkind not to go to her: but then came the difficult question, 'Why
don't you go, mamma?' However, when his compassionate feelings were
aroused, he bore it better; and though he never got beyond standing
silently by her chair for ten minutes, replying when spoken to, and
once or twice reading a few sentences, or repeating some verses, when
Theodora thought it would please her, it was evident that his visit had
become the chief event of her day. One day she gave him a sovereign,
and asked what he would do with it. He blushed and hesitated, and she
suggested, 'Keep it, that will be the wisest.'

'No,' came with an effort, and an imploring glance at Aunt Theodora.

'Well, then, what? Speak out like a man!' Still reluctant, but it was
brought out at last: 'Cousin Hugh told us about the poor sick Irish
children that have no potatoes. May I give it to him to send them?'

'Never mind the Irish children. This is for yourself.'

'Myself?' Johnnie looked up, bewildered, but with a sudden thought,
'Oh! I know, Aunt Theodora, won't it buy that pretty work-basket to
give mamma on her birthday? She said she could not afford it. And Helen
wanted the great donkey in the shop-window. Oh! I can get Helen the
great donkey; thank you, Aunt Nesbit!'

The next day Aunt Nesbit received Johnnie by giving him five sovereigns
to take to Cousin Hugh for the Irish, desiring him to say it was his own
gift; and while Johnnie scrupulously explained that he should say that
she gave it to him to give, she began to instruct him that he would be a
rich man by and by, and must make a handsome and yet careful use of
his money. 'Shall I?' said Johnnie, looking up, puzzled, at his younger
aunt.

'Yes, that you will,' replied Mrs. Nesbit. 'What shall you do then?'

'Oh! then I shall buy mamma and my sisters everything they want, and
mamma shall go out in the carriage every day.

'She can do that now,' said Theodora, who had expected less commonplace
visions from her nephew.

'No,' said Johnnie, 'we have not got the carriage now. I mean, we have
no horses that will draw it.'

It was another of those revelations that made Theodora uneasy; one of
those indications that Arthur allowed his wife to pinch herself, while
he pursued a course of self-indulgence. She never went out in the
evening, it appeared, and he was hardly ever at home; her dress, though
graceful and suitable, had lost that air of research and choiceness that
it had when everything was his gift, or worn to please his eye; and as
day after day passed on without bringing him, Theodora perceived that
the delay was no such extraordinary event as to alarm her; she was
evidently grieved, but it was nothing new. It was too plain that Arthur
gave her little of his company, and his children none of his attention,
and that her calmness was the serenity of patience, not of happiness.

This was all by chance betrayed; she spoke not of herself, and the
nightly talks between the two sisters were chiefly of the children. Not
till more than a week had passed to renew their intimacy, did Theodora
advert to any subject connected with the events of her memorable stay in
London, and then she began by asking, 'What did I overhear you telling
papa about Lord St. Erme?'

'I was speaking of his doings at Wrangerton.'

'Tell me.'

'Oh! they are admirable. You know he went there with that good little
Lady Lucy, and they set to work at once, doing everything for the
parish--'

'Do your sisters know Lady Lucy?'

'Very little; it is only formal visiting now and then. She leads a very
retired life, and they know her best from meeting her at the schools and
cottages.'

'Good little girl! I knew there was something in her!'

'She is always with her brother, walking and riding and writing for him,
carrying out all his views.'

'I saw how he came forward about those poor colliery children. Such a
speech, as that, was turning his talents to good account, and I am glad
to hear it is not all speechifying.'

'No, indeed, it is real self-denial. The first thing he did was to take
his affairs into his own hands, so that my father has comparatively
nothing to do with them. He found them in a bad state, which papa could
not help, with him living abroad, and attending to nothing, only sending
for money, whatever papa could say. So there was a great outlay wanted
for church and schools for the collieries at Coalworth, and nothing to
meet it, and that was the way he came to sell off all the statues and
pictures.'

'Did he? Well done, Lord St. Erme!' cried Theodora. 'That was something
like a sacrifice.'

'O yes! My sisters say they could have cried to see the cases go by
the windows, and I cannot help grieving to think of those rooms being
dismantled. I am glad they have kept the little Ghirlandajo, that is the
only one remaining.'

'I honour them,' said Theodora.

'And it was for the sake of such a set,' proceeded Violet; 'there is a
bad Chartist spirit among those colliers, and they oppose him in every
way; but he says it is his own fault for having neglected them so long,
and goes on doing everything for them, though they are as surly and
sullen as possible.

Theodora looked thoughtful. 'Poor Lord St. Erme! Yes, he has found
a crusade! I wish--! Well, I ought to be thankful that good has been
brought out of evil. I deserved no such thing. Violet, I wish he would
marry one of your sisters!'

'O no, don't wish that. I am glad there is no chance of it. Ranks
had better not be confounded,' said Violet, with a sad seriousness of
manner.

'You have just had a wedding in the family. A satisfactory one, I hope?'

'Yes, I think so. Mamma and Annette like Mr. Hunt very much. They say
there is such a straightforward goodness about him, that they are sure
dear Olivia will be happy.'

'Was there any difficulty about it!'

'Why--Matilda and Albert seemed to think we should not think it grand
enough,' said Violet, half-smiling. 'He is a sort of great farmer on his
own estate, a most beautiful place. He is quite a gentleman in manners,
and very well off, so that my father made no difficulty, and I am very
glad of it. Olivia is the very person to enjoy that free country life.'
Violet sighed as if town life was oppressive.

'To be sure! If one could be a farmer's daughter without the pretension
and vulgarity, what a life it would be! That was my favourite notion
when I used to make schemes with poor Georgina Gardner. Do you ever hear
what she is doing, Violet? They have quite left off writing to me.'

'Last time I heard of them they were in Italy.'

'Going on in the old way, I fear. Poor Georgina! she was sadly thrown
away. But, at least, that Mark is not with them.'

'O no,' said Violet, sighing more deeply this time; 'he is always about
in London.'

'Ah! you see more of him than you wish, I fear?'

'I see very little of him. Arthur would not ask him to our house at
Chichester for the Goodwood races, and it was such an escape!'

'I am glad at least Arthur does not trouble you with him.'

Violet sat with her forehead resting on her hand, and there was a short
space of thoughtful silence. It resulted in Theodora's saying, in a sad,
low, humble tone, her eyes looking straight into the red fire, 'Do you
ever hear of Mr. Fotheringham?'

'I believe he is still at Paris,' said Violet. 'I only hear of him
through John, who said he had been thinking of going to Italy. When he
came through London, after Lady Fotheringham's death, he left his card,
but we were at Chichester. Have you seen that last article of his?'

'What, that on modern novels? I was almost sure it was his, and yet I
doubted. It was like and yet not like him.'

'It was his,' said Violet. 'He always has his things sent to me. I am
glad you observed the difference. I thought it so much kinder and less
satirical than his writings used to be.'

'It was so,' exclaimed Theodora. 'There were places where I said to
myself, "This cannot be his; I know what he would have said," and yet it
was too forcible and sensible to have been written by any one else.'

'The strength is there, but not the sort of triumph in sarcasm that
sometimes made one sorry,' said Violet; 'and were you not struck by his
choice of extracts! I have fancied a different strain in his writings of
late.'

Theodora squeezed Violet's hand. 'I feared I had hardened him,' she
said. 'Thank you, good night.'


CHAPTER 2


     St. Osyth's well is turned aside.

     --CRABBE


On the first convenient day, Lord Martindale sent Violet to call at
Rickworth Priory, a visit which she was the more desirous of making,
as Emma's correspondence, after languishing for awhile, had ceased,
excepting that she sent a fresh allegory of Miss Marstone's to Johnnie
on each birthday; and the Brandons having given up coming to London for
the season, she scarcely knew anything about them, excepting through
Theodora, who reported that they retired more and more from society, and
that Miss Marstone was much with them.

Theodora would have accompanied Violet, but she was sure that her
absence would be a boon to Emma, whom she had of late tried in vain to
draw out; and, besides, one of the housemaids was ill, and Theodora,
whom her Cousin Hugh called the mother of the maids, wished not to be
away at the doctor's visit. So little Johnnie was his mother's only
companion; but she was disappointed in her hopes of introducing him to
his godmother. To her surprise Lady Elizabeth was alone, Emma was at
Gothlands with her friend Miss Marstone.

'They were very kind in asking me,' said Lady Elizabeth, 'and so was
Emma about leaving me; but I do not wish to be a drag upon her.'

'Oh! how can you say so?' exclaimed Violet.

'It did not suit,' said Lady Elizabeth. 'The uncle, old Mr. Randal, is
an old-fashioned, sporting squire, and the other Miss Marstones are gay
ladies. I felt myself out of my element when I was there before; but now
I almost wish I was with her.'

'You must miss her very much, indeed.'

'It is what we must all come to, my dear,' said Lady Elizabeth, looking
at the young mother, with her boy leaning against her knee, deep in a
book of illustrations. 'You have a good many years to look forward to
with your little flock; but, one way or other, they will go forth from
us.'

Lady Elizabeth thought Johnnie too much absorbed to hear; but Violet
found his hand lightly squeezing hers.

'I thought you at least had kept your daughter,' she said.

'Emma will be five-and-twenty in the autumn.'

'But, oh! Lady Elizabeth, I thought--'

'I cannot tell, my dear. I hope Emma's arrangements may be such that we
may go on together as before.'

'How do you mean?' exclaimed Violet, confounded.

'Her judgment is sound,' continued Lady Elizabeth, 'if she will only use
it; and when it comes to the point, Miss Marstone's may be the same.'

'Is she gone to Gothlands to settle her plans?'

'Yes; I could not well have gone with her, for we have four little
orphan girls in the house, whom I could not well leave to the servants.
That is quite as I wish, if the rest could be added without Theresa
Marstone making this her home, and introducing all the plans they talk
of.'

'She could not introduce anything to make you uncomfortable!'

'It is not so much comfort that I mean, my dear. I do not think that I
should object to giving up some of the servants, though in my time it
was thought right to keep up an establishment. Perhaps a family of women
are not called upon to do things in the same style, and there is no
doubt that our means may be better employed. We have too many luxuries,
and I would not wish to keep them. No, if it was entirely Emma's doing.
I should be satisfied; but there is more influence from Miss Marstone
than I quite like. I cannot fully rely on her judgment, and I think she
likes to manage.'

'She could never presume to manage in your house!'

'Emma's house, my dear.'

'But that is the same.'

Lady Elizabeth sighed, and made a movement with her head, then said,
'All that they think right and conscientious they will do, I am sure,
but the worst of it is that Theresa has friends who are not of our
Communion, and she does speak strongly of things that do not accord
with her notions. I cannot go along with her, and I must confess she
sometimes alarms me.

'And does Emma think with her entirely?'

'I fear--I mean I think she does; and, by the bye, my dear, do you know
anything of a Mr. Gardner?'

'I do know a Mr. Mark Gardner.'

'That is his name. He is staying in the neighbourhood of Gothlands,
and seems very deep in their counsels. I am afraid he is leading them
farther than Theresa Marstone herself would have gone.'

'Oh, then, he cannot be the same person. I meant a very different
style of man, a cousin to those Miss Gardners who used to be friends of
Theodora.'

'Ah! I meant to ask you about Miss Gardner and Percival Fotheringham.
What! you have not heard?'

'No, nothing. What do you mean?'

'Married.'

'Married! No, never!'

'I thought you would have known, all about it, and I was anxious to hear
what kind of connection it was for Percival.'

'Do tell me, how did you hear of it? When was it?'

'Not long ago, in Italy. I heard of it the other day from my nephew,
Edward Howard, who is just returned, and he told me that Mrs. Finch was
leading a dashing life at Florence, and that her sister had just married
Mr. Fotheringham, "the author."'

'O, I do not know how to think it possible! Yet it is such an uncommon
name.'

'Do you know whether his name is Antony?'

'Yes, it is his first name. I remember Arthur's laughing at him for
being ashamed of it, as he said.'

'That confirms it. I asked Edward if the Christian name was Percival,
and he said it was Antony, and some such name, but he could not be
sure.'

'Ah! there would be a confusion owing to his being always called Percy.'

'He said, too, that it was a good match for Miss Gardner, as he was heir
to an estate in Yorkshire.'

'Worthbourne! Then I am afraid it must be too true. The author, too!'

'So Edward was told.'

'I must write and ask John Martindale. He will be sure to know the whole
history.'

The rest of the visit and the homeward drive were like a dream. Violet
was lost in amazement, compassion, and disappointment, and in the debate
how Theodora should be informed. Should she wait till there were further
particulars to confirm it! But when she thought it over, there seemed no
more wanting. She knew that Percy had been thinking of visiting Italy a
year ago, and the name, the authorship, and connection with Worthbourne
swept away all doubt. As to making inquiries, she did not know Arthur's
present address; and even if she had had it, she would have shrunk from
saying anything that should lead to one additional conversation with
Mark Gardner; besides which, Arthur had a fashion of never answering any
question asked by letter.

Nor could Violet venture to delay. It was better that such tidings
should come from sympathizing lips than through the gossip of the
neighbourhood; and Theodora ought to be aware of them as soon as
possible, that she might no longer cherish the shade of her affection.
Alas! that he should have done this at the very moment when she had
truly become worthy of him, or, at least, of what he had once been!

At night, when Theodora came to linger over her fire, the intelligence
was reluctantly and hesitatingly spoken; Violet's eyes were bent down,
for she knew how little that spirit could brook that its suffering
should be marked.

Theodora stood up before her, at her full height, with flashing eye and
indignant voice: 'Do you think I believe it? No, indeed! I may have lost
him for ever, but he would never lose himself. I scorn this as I did
Jane Gardner's own story that you were going to marry him to your
sister. I knew you both too well.'

Violet put her arm round Theodora. 'Dearest, I am the more afraid that
we must believe this, because he was not always constant. He did think
of Annette.'

'Think of her! What do you mean! Did he make her an offer!'

'Yes. I would never have told you if I did not think it might help you
in this.'

'I don't want help,' said Theodora, raising her head and turning from
Violet. 'Let him do as he likes.'

But, ere she had made two steps towards the door, her breast heaved with
a convulsive sob. She threw herself on the ground, and rested her
face on Violet's lap. The sobs came at long intervals, with a tight,
oppressed sound. Much alarmed, Violet caressed her, and tried to soothe
her with gentle words, and at last they unlocked her lips.

'It is not myself! Oh, no! I knew I had forfeited him long ago. I had
proved myself unworthy. I had no right to hope. But that he should have
changed--let his clear sense be blinded by her art! He, to whom I could
have looked up all my life!--who was so noble in rejecting me!'

The large drops had gathered and flowed, seeming to scald their course
down her cheeks. 'O Violet! I wish your sister had married him! Then
he would have been happy--he would not have degraded himself. Oh! what
change can have come over him?'

'You know Lady Fotheringham was fond of Jane Gardner, and he might have
taken her upon her word.'

'As if Percy would see with any old woman's eyes, when once he came in
contact with her! No, I see but one explanation. It must have been I who
lowered his estimate of woman. Well I might do so, when I treated like
a toy the happiness he had confided to me. I, on whom he had fixed his
ardent soul for so many years past. No wonder he learnt to hold all
women cheap alike! O, that summer of madness! If I have dimmed the
brightness of that noble nature!'

'Dear, dear Theodora, what can I say to comfort you? She may be altered;
he may have improved her.'

'She is not capable of it,' said Theodora; 'there is nothing in her but
time-serving and selfishness. And he, with that large true heart, so
detesting falsehood--he must either be wretched or deceived--debased!
No, there is no comfort--there never will be.'

'Except the best sort,' tenderly whispered Violet. Theodora rested her
head on her hands, and remained perfectly still for some moments, then
looked up, and spoke in a depressed voice.

'I cannot talk any more. I feel shattered from head to foot. I must be
quiet.'

'Then, dearest, pray go to bed at once, and I will come and see you.'

'I cannot. I undertook to give Maria her draught at one o'clock. May I
stay here while you go to bed?'

'Anything, dearest, dearest sister.'

'Only let me be in the room with you, and be quiet.'

She would not, as Violet entreated, lie down on the bed beside her,
but remained seated on the floor, her eyes riveted on the fire, never
looking round, her face stupefied, her hands hanging motionless, like
one stunned; and when Violet's anxious gaze was closed by irresistible
sleep, that dark head was still motionless before the fire.

Her mind was indeed a blank, sensible of nothing but the effect of the
shock. The phrase now and then occurred, 'Percy is married to Jane;'
but her perceptions were so sluggish that she scarcely knew that it
concerned her. She seemed to have forgotten who Percy was, and to shrink
from recalling the remembrance. There was a repose in this state of
stupor which she was reluctant to break; and after the great clock, so
melancholy in the silence, had tolled half-past twelve, her sensations
were absorbed in the dread of hearing One! the summons to exertion.

The single note pealed out, and died quivering slowly away; she rose,
lighted her candle, and quitted the room, feeling as if the maid's
illness and the doctor's directions belonged to some period removed by
ages.


CHAPTER 3


     This house of splendour and of princely glory
     Doth now stand desolated, the affrighted servants
     Rush forth through all its doors.  I am the last
     Therein.

     --Wallenstein


Theodora was no sooner in the gallery than she was recalled to the
present. There was a strange gleam of light reflected on the avenue.
Roused at once to action, she hurried towards the window. The fire was
within the house. She pushed open the door leading to Mrs. Nesbit's
apartments. Light was flashing at every chink of the bed-room door. She
threw it back. Out rolled a volume of smoke, the glare of flame burst on
her, the curtains were blazing! 'Aunt! Aunt Nesbit, are you there?
she cried, in tones low with horror and choked with smoke; she plunged
between the burning curtains, felt that she had a hold of something,
dragged it out, found it move and gasp, bore it from the room, and,
depositing it on a couch in the gallery, only then could perceive that
it was indeed Mrs Nesbit, uninjured, though half-suffocated.

Mrs. Garth, who slept in the adjoining room, with the door open, had
been waked by her call, and came running out. An old soldier, she had
full self-possession, and was at once effective, and it was well, for
she exclaimed, 'Miss Martindale, you are on fire,' just as the light and
the scorching were revealing the same to herself. There was no time for
personal terror, barely for pain, the fire was crushed out between them
by the help of a woollen table-cover, they scarcely knew how, they only
saw that the draught had increased the blaze in the room, and dense
clouds of smoke came bursting out upon them.

Mrs. Nesbit clung terrified to her niece, but Theodora, with a word or
two of encouragement, freed herself from her grasp, and leaving her
to Mrs. Garth's care, flew up the nursery stairs. She must have the
children in their mother's sight before the alarm should reach her.
Sarah's first waking impulse was to growl, that Master Johnnie would
catch his death of cold, but the next moment she was equal to any
emergency; and the little ones were at their mother's door just as
she was opening it, thinking the noise more than Maria's illness could
occasion, and setting forth to see whether there was anything amiss in
the nursery. Theodora put Annie into her arms. 'All safe. It is only the
north wing. Don't be frightened. Stay where you are.'

Violet could only obey, thankful at having her three around her,
and trying to keep her terror from being visible enough to increase
Johnnie's exceeding alarm, or to frighten Helen out of her happy state
of inquisitive excitement and curiosity.

Theodora had hurried to call her parents. They were already in motion.
Lord Martindale's first care was for Violet and the children, Lady
Martindale's for her aunt, and almost instantly she was embracing and
supporting the pale shrunken figure, now feebly tottering along the
gallery, forsaken by Mrs. Garth, who had gone back to secure her own
valuables.

By this time, the gallery was full of screaming maids, whom Sarah had,
with difficulty, prevented from leaping at once from attic windows; and
staring men, hallooing for water, which no one brought, except little
Helen, who, escaping from her mother's room, ran barefooted into the
midst, holding aloft the water-bottle triumphantly, and very indignant
at being captured, and carried back in the butler's arms.

The fire was spreading so fast that Lord Martindale decided on removing
all the helpless to the gardener's house at the end of the pleasure
ground. He came himself to call Violet, told her not to be alarmed, and,
taking his grandson in his arms, led the way. Mrs. Nesbit was carried on
a mattress between two of the servants, Lady Martindale walking beside
her, absorbed in trying to guard her from injury or alarm; Annie, asleep
and unconscious, was in her mother's arms, and Theodora carried
the amused and chattering Helen. At the foot of the stairs, Violet
exclaimed, 'My cross, I must not leave it!' and would have turned, but
Theodora prevented her. 'I know where it is,' she said, 'I am going to
see how they are moving Maria;' and putting Helen into the nearest pair
of arms, she ran back.

Harrison's successor, Mr. Armstrong and his wife were on foot, and ready
to receive them. Their spare bed was for Mrs. Nesbit, in their own the
three children were placed. In all his haste, Lord Martindale paused
till he could lay his little shivering ice-cold charge in the bed, and
see him hide his head in his mother's bosom. 'Good boy!' he said, 'I
told him not to cry for you, and he has not made a sound, though I have
felt him trembling the whole way. Take care of him.'

Little did she need the recommendation, though it sent a thrill of
gladness through her that it should have been made at such a time. She
had great apprehension of the effect of the shock on the child's tender
frame and timid nature, his obedience and self-command seeming almost
to enhance the excess of terror. The shuddering horror and convulsive
clinging were beyond control, and were renewed whenever a fresh glare
broke out from the burning house; to turn him away from the window,
or to put up blinds and curtains made it worse, for the shadows of the
trees, flickering mysteriously, seemed still more terrific. His sister
screamed with excitement and delight at each brighter burst of flame,
till she suddenly laid down her head and fell fast asleep; but still his
nervous trembling continued at intervals, and his mother could not leave
him, nor cease from saying consoling words of his heavenly Guardian,
the only means that soothed him, especially when his sighing exclamation
recurred, 'O, if papa was but here!' the tune to which her heart was
throbbing throughout that dreadful night. She felt guilty of being
useless, but he was her first care, and her power of real service was
small: so she could only hang over him, and as she watched the healthful
sleep of her little girls, join her prayers and thanksgivings with his,
that all papa's treasures were safe. Not till the flames were dying
down, morning twilight showing cold and gray, and Sarah coming in with
bundles of rescued garments, was Johnnie's mind free enough to unclasp
his hand, and show something fast held in it. 'Aunt Helen's cross,
mamma; I thought I might keep hold of it, because I was frightened.'

Her caresses lulled him at last to sleep, while she grieved at
Theodora's having gone in search of the cross. She knew of her safety
from Sarah, who reported that she had been working like any ten; but she
had not yet seen her, and the silence and suspense became oppressive.

Theodora had hardly spent a moment in seeking the cross, she tied on
Violet's bonnet over the hair falling round her, hurried to assist in
carrying the sick maid to a bed made up for her at the stables, and
then, missing the dumb page from among the servants, she rushed back
to look for him, dashed up the stairs through thick smoke, found him
asleep, and crossing a floor that almost burnt her foot, she shook
him awake, and saw him too in safety. She bethought her of her brother
John's possessions, now that the living were all secure; she hurried
into the work, she tore down his prints and pictures, carried them and
his books out,--desks, drawers, weights she would never have dreamt of
lifting, were as nothing to her. Many times did her father meet her,
exclaim and urge her to desist, and to go to Armstrong's; she said she
was just going: he went in one of the thousand directions in which he
was called at once, and presently again encountered her, where he least
expected it, coming out of a cloud of smoke with a huge pile of books
in her arms! On she worked, regardless of choking, blinding
smoke--regardless of the glare of flame--never driven from the field but
by a deluge from a fire-engine; when stumbling down-stairs, guided by
the banisters, she finally dismayed her father, who thought her long
ago in safety, by emerging from the house, dragging after her a
marble-topped chess table, when half the upper windows were flashing
with flame.

Then he locked her arm into his, and would not let her stir from his
side.

Water had been the great deficiency. Fire-engines were slow in coming,
and the supply from the fountains was as nothing, so that the attempt
had necessarily been to carry out property rather than to extinguish the
fire. Sarah, after coolly collecting all that belonged to her mistress
or the children, had taken the command of Miss Altisidora Standaloft,
(who usually regarded her as vulgarity personified,) scolded away her
hysterics, and kept guard over her, while she packed up her lady's
jewels and wardrobe, not until then allowing her the luxury of shrieking
at every jet of flame. The other servants and the villagers had worked
with hearty goodwill below stairs; and when Theodora had time to look
around, the pleasure-ground presented a strange scene. Among the trodden
plants and shrubs lay heaps of furniture, sofas, chairs lying tumbled
here and there, with plate, pictures, statues, ornaments heaped in wild
confusion, crowds of people, in every variety of strange dishabille,
gathered round; two long lines of them handing bucket after bucket,
with machine-like regularity, from the fountain; others removing the
furniture from the terrace; cushions, ormolu, fine china, handed out of
the lower windows; the whole seen by the wild lurid light that flashed
from the windows above, strangely illuminating the quiet green trees,
and bringing out every tiny leaf and spray by its fierce brilliancy,
that confused every accustomed shadow, while the clouds of smoke rolled
down as if to wither all around.

And above the rushing roaring sound! the thunder of falling ceilings;
the red light within some familiar windows; the gray sky reflected in
others, till, after a few uncertain flickers, the glow awoke in them
also. Then arose the whiter gusts of vapour, when water, hissing and
boiling, contended with fire.

In vain! the flame surmounted! Shouts, cries! Lord Martindale pushing
nearer, calling to all for heaven's sake to come out, leave all, only
come out; men rushing from the doors, leaping from the lower windows;
one dark figure emerging at the moment before a tremendous crash shook
the earth beneath their feet; the fire seemed for a moment crushed out,
then clouds of smoke rose wilder and denser, yellowed by the light of
the morning; the blaze rushed upwards uncontrolled, and the intensity of
brightness, behind and above the walls, glared on the mass of awe-struck
faces. There was not a movement, not a word, not a sound, save that of
the roaring flame.

The first voice was Lord Martindale's: 'Are all out? Is every one safe?'

'Yes, my lord, all but the claret of 1826,' said that last to escape,
half-clad, grimy, and singed, only in courteous voice, the butler.

'Thank God!' said Lord Martindale, fervently. 'And, Simmonds, thank you
for what you have done to-night;' and he heartily shook the butler's
hand.

'Oh, my lord, if it had been more! If that claret was but safe, I should
feel I had done my duty,' said Simmonds, almost overcome, but giving
place to Mr. Hugh Martindale, who, just released from a chain of buckets
in the kitchen yard, was coming up to wring his cousin's hand, say there
seemed no more to be done, and repeat his congratulations on the safety
of life and limb. But a fresh alarm arose, lest the fire might extend to
the stabling; and in watching the horses led out, the spreading of wet
tarpaulins on the roof, the engines playing on the burning mass in
the house, and the flames rising with diminishing fierceness in the
intervals of the bursts of steam, there was such intense excitement that
no one could think of aught but the sight before them.

At last there was a touch on Lord Martindale's arm; a message from the
gardener's house that he must come directly: Mrs. Nesbit was in a fit.

The morning dewiness and calmness of the garden had a curious effect,
as they walked hastily through it, out of sight of the confusion on the
lawn; everything looked so blue and pale, especially Violet, who came
down to meet them.

'I have sent for Mr. Legh,' she said. 'It is very terrible. She is quite
insensible, but--'

She broke off suddenly. Theodora had sat down, untied her bonnet, then
tried to rise, but tottered, and sank senseless on the floor.

Her father lifted her, so as to place her with her head on Violet's lap.
Violet removed the bonnet, the hair came with it, burnt off in masses,
the very eyelashes and brows were singed, the forehead, cheeks, and neck
frightfully reddened and blistered. Lord Martindale took her hands
to chafe them: they were bleeding, and purple from bruises, the arms
scorched and burnt--injuries overlooked in the excitement, but ready to
repay themselves after her five hours' violent and incessant exertion.
It was a frightfully long swoon; and her father, almost in despair,
had sent a second messenger for medical aid before Violet could look
up consolingly, and direct his attention to the signs of returning
animation. She presently half opened her eyes, perceived in whose arms
she lay, and who was bending over her--she heard his fond words; but
reviving no further, closed her eyes, without attempting to speak.

Lord Martindale could no longer delay going up-stairs. There the scene
was most distressing; there was complete insensibility, with a tendency
to convulsive movement, a condition so plainly hopeless that he would
fain have removed his wife, hitherto so unaccustomed to any spectacle of
suffering. But Lady Martindale was not to be detached from her who
had absorbed her affection from infancy. Wrapped in that one idea, she
hardly heard his representations of their daughter's state, and, with
piteous looks, repelled his assurances that her care was unavailing, and
ought to be relinquished to Mrs. Garth and the maids. He was obliged
at length to desist, and returned just as Violet and Mr. Martindale had
succeeded in moving Theodora to a slippery horse-hair sofa. She looked
up and replied, 'Better, thank you,' to his first inquiry; but when
asked if she was in pain, was forced to answer, 'Yes, not much,' and
closed her eyes, as if she only wished not to be disturbed.

They held council over her: Mr. Martindale urged taking her at once to
his parsonage; he would find the carriage, and Violet should bring her,
leaving the children to follow under Sarah's charge when they should
awake. Violet only demurred at leaving Lady Martindale; but Lord
Martindale authoritatively told her, that it was not fit for her to
be in Mrs. Nesbit's room, and he should be much obliged to her to see
Theodora properly taken care of.

The transit was serious, every one longed to have it over, but dreaded
the arrival of the carriage, which came before it was expected. Resolute
as ever, Theodora astonished them by springing at once on her feet,
disdaining aid, but she had hardly taken a step, before she faltered,
and was just falling, when her father caught her in his arms and carried
her to the carriage, where Violet was ready to uphold her sinking head.
Mr. Martindale took the short way, and was at home before them, to lift
her out, and transport her at once to her room. Since the marriage of
Pauline, Theodora had given up a personal attendant, and no ladies'
maids were forthcoming, except Miss Standaloft, whose nerves could not
endure the sight of Mrs. Nesbit, far less of Miss Martindale, so the
whole business of undressing fell upon Violet, and the rector's little
under-maid, who, having been a school-girl, was of course devoted
to Miss Martindale. A difficult task it was, for besides the burns,
bruises, and faintness, every muscle and sinew were so strained and
tender from the violent exertion, and the blows she had unconsciously
received, that the gentlest touch and slightest movement were severely
painful. Violet was most grateful for her never-failing resolution.
Every move was made unhesitatingly the moment it was requisite, and not
a complaint was uttered, scarcely even a confession of suffering; on
anxious inquiry, 'Never mind, it can't be helped,' was the utmost reply,
given in a blunt, almost annoyed manner, as if she could not bear to be
disturbed out of that silence of endurance.

In the same manner, between stupefaction and fortitude, the surgeon's
visit was gone through, and Violet heard from him that there was no
serious consequence to be apprehended, provided fever could be averted.
Violet, much alarmed as to the effect of the tidings of the previous
night, thought it right to mention that she had undergone a severe
shock, and perceived that he thought it greatly increased the chance
of serious illness; but he could do nothing but insist on tranquillity;
and, as Theodora had now fallen into an exhausted sleep, he returned to
his other patient.

The hours seemed to have forgotten their reckoning; it was to Violet as
if she had been years without looking after her children, and when
she found it was only half-past nine, she was dismayed to think of the
length of day yet to come. Leaving Theodora's sleep to be guarded by the
little maid, she ventured down. The dumb boy was watching, with tearful
eyes, at the foot of the stairs, his whole face one question about Miss
Martindale. Answering him reassuringly on the slate, she opened the
dining-room door, and a refreshing sight met her eyes. Round the
breakfast-table sat her own three, from their glossy heads to their
little shining shoes, in order trim, as if no disaster had ever come
near them;--little Annie on Cousin Hugh's knee; Helen's tongue going
as fast as ever; Johnnie in shy good behaviour. A general cry of joy
greeted her, and they were in an instant around her, telling of the
wonders of the lawn, how the dying gladiator was lying on the blue
damask bed, and the case of stuffed humming-birds on the top of the
kitchen dresser, and the poor peacock so frightened that he hid himself
in the laurels, and would not come near them.

All alarms had gone away like a dream of the night, and the day had
dawned on the happy creatures in all its freshness and newness, which
their elders would fain have shared, but the necessity of attending to
them had something reviving in it, and Violet could not look at them
without renewed thrills of thankfulness. It was like rescued mariners
meeting after a shipwreck, when her father-in-law came in and embraced
her and the children affectionately, with a special caress for Johnnie,
'the best little boy he ever saw.' He looked worn and depressed, and
Violet hastened to help Mr. Martindale in setting breakfast before him,
while he anxiously bade her rest, hoped she had not been hurt by all
she had undergone; and asked for Theodora, whose illness, and his wife's
despair at her aunt's condition, were the chief actual distress. For the
rest, he was so thankful that no life had been lost, as to have hardly a
thought to bestow on the ruin and destruction.

There was now time for the question, how did the fire begin? Mrs.
Nesbit, before her attack came on, had said, that wishing to take a
draught, and not liking to call Mrs. Garth, she had drawn the light near
to the curtains, and had, doubtless, left it there. It seemed as if
Mrs. Garth had taught her to dread disturbing her at night, and now
Lady Martindale shrank with horror from letting her even approach the
patient.

But how had Mrs. Nesbit been rescued without the slightest burn, and
what had occasioned Theodora's injuries? Not till Violet began to
explain did it dawn on her what a heroine she was describing. All had
been so simply and fearlessly done, that it had not struck her till she
heard it in her own narration.

Lord Martindale was much affected. 'My brave girl!' he said; 'then under
Providence the safety of every one of us is owing to her. I wish she was
awake that I might tell her so this minute!'

It was delightful to see how this seemed to compensate for everything;
and, indeed, he said it was almost worth while to have been burnt out
for the sake of seeing how nobly every one had behaved, servants and
neighbours, rich and poor, working alike at the risk of their lives, and
he was positively overcome as he spoke of the warm sympathy that met him
on all sides, testifying the universal respect and affection with
which he was regarded. Notes and messages were coming in from all the
neighbourhood to intreat to be allowed to shelter his family; but it was
impossible to move at present, and his views were fixed on occupying the
house which had so long stood empty.

'Arthur can have a room fitted up there directly,' he said. 'Where is
he, my dear? How soon can he come?'

Violet was obliged to confess her ignorance. He had said he should be
going about, and had given her no address. Much vexed, Lord Martindale
forbore to distress her by remarks, and replied to his cousin's question
whether the house was insured--

'For twenty thousand pounds, but that is nothing like the amount of
damage. I hardly know how we shall meet it. I must have John at home to
settle matters. How strange it is to look back. I remember as if it was
yesterday, when John was born, Mrs. Nesbit insisting on my pulling down
the poor old house, to make the place fit, as she said, for my son's
inheritance, and there is an end of it! Who would have told her that
she would burn it down herself, poor woman? She always detested the
old hall. Don't you remember the stags' antlers, Hugh? Ay, Johnnie, you
would have wondered at those--a dozen stags' heads with branching horns
in the hall.'

'Oh! tell me, grandpapa! Was it where you lived when you were a little
boy?'

'Ay, Johnnie,' said Lord Martindale, pausing to take him on his
knee. 'Cousin Hugh could tell you how we went on together there! Such
jackdaws' nests as used to be in the chimneys--'

'I do believe,' said his cousin, 'you have more regret at this moment
for the old house than for this one!'

'Well! when I think of going home, the old red pediment with the white
facings always comes into my mind, as it used to look up the avenue,
when we came back for the holidays. Those old shields with the
martlets--see, Johnnie, like that--' holding up the crest on a spoon,
'where the martins used to build their nests over the windows, were such
as I never saw anywhere else. I found one of them lying about at the
farm the other day.'

'Do you remember the hornet's nest in the wall of the garden--?'

'What a garden that was! They have never found any pear equal to that
jargonelle, where you ate twenty the first day of the holidays. What do
you think of that, Johnnie?'

'Ay, Johnnie, and I can tell you of something grandpapa did,' retorted
Mr. Hugh Martindale; and to Violet's diversion, the two old cousins
continued to make Johnnie an excuse for bringing up their boyish
memories, which seemed to rise on them the more vividly, now that the
great mansion no longer obstructed their view. It was complete oblivion
of everything else, and seemed to do infinite good to Lord Martindale,
but soon it was interrupted; Lady Elizabeth had driven over to beg to
carry the whole party back to Rickworth with her, or at least to take
home Violet and the children; but this could not be; Violet could not
leave Theodora, and though Lord Martindale pressed her to consult her
own comfort by removing, he was evidently gratified by her begging to
be allowed to remain at the parsonage. He then returned to his wife, and
Lady Elizabeth, after offers of every service in her power, took leave,
while Violet returned to her charge.

Theodora awoke with less fever than they had ventured to hope, and
quite composed, though much surprised with her first acquaintance with
illness, and not even comprehending that she could not get up, till the
pain of the attempt corroborated Violet's assurance.

'How base it is,' said she, 'not to be able to do a few hours' work
without having to take to one's bed. I flattered myself I was not so
despicably weak, for a woman.'

'You might be satisfied,' said Violet, her heart too full to say more.

'Not while your Sarah walks about as if nothing had happened.'

'Where should any of us be but for you?' said Violet, bending over her.

'There's not an inch of me fit for kissing!' exclaimed Theodora, turning
away.

'Lord Martindale will soon come to tell you what he thinks of it.'

'Papa! Where is he? I don't remember him since we went down to
Armstrong's. Yes, I do though!' she paused, 'but I can't think of
it. Crying would be worse. What a queer thing fainting is! I used to
speculate what it was like.'

'How do you like it?' said Violet, perceiving her mood.

'Tolerably, in some respects; but it makes one's memory hazy. What has
become of mamma? I suppose she is afraid of the sight of my visage.'

'Oh! no, no!'

'My aunt, of course! How could I forget! Mrs. Armstrong spoke of
her being ill. Was it another stroke!' said Theodora, alarmed as her
recollection returned, and Violet was obliged to tell the whole.

'My poor mother!' said Theodora, gravely, 'I wish I could help--'

There was a knock at the door. Miss Standaloft stood hesitating and
making signs to Violet.

'Is there any news of Mrs. Nesbit?' asked Theodora. 'There can be only
one thing to hear. Is it over?'

It was, and the end had been quiet. Theodora drew a long breath, and
repeated, 'Poor mamma!'

'Do you want me? Do you think I might go to her!' said Violet. 'She has
no one with her but the gentlemen.'

'I should be very glad if you were there. Only don't hurt yourself, or
Arthur will be angry; and to have you to nurse would be more than could
be borne. My poor aunt! I think she softened at the last, and she loved
us all very much at one time.'

'I am glad she was kind to Johnnie,' said Violet.

Miss Altisidora was induced to sit on the other side the curtain,
intending to call Sarah if anything was wanted, and Violet walked across
the park, dreading to enter for the first time the presence of the
shadow of death, fearing in her lowliness to intrude or presume, but
drawn onwards by the warmhearted yearning to perform a daughter's part,
if perchance her husband's mother could derive the least solace from her
attentions.

She crossed the trodden grass, and gazed on the ruin of the abode that
had once almost oppressed her with its grandeur. Past away! and with
it, she whose hopes and schemes were set on the aggrandizement of the
family--she had gone where earthly greatness was weighed in its true
balance! And the lime trees budded, new and young in their spring
greenness, as when the foundation-stone was laid!

Violet thought how she had been taught to look on this as her boy's
inheritance, and therewith came the prayer that he might win his true
inheritance, made without hands, ever spring-like and beyond the power
of the flame! She looked up at the shell, for it was no more, she only
recognized the nursery windows by their bars; the woodwork was charred,
the cement blackened by the fire, where yesterday Helen's and Annie's
faces had been watching her return! A sick horror passed over her as she
thought how much had depended on Theodora's watchful night, and imagined
what might have awaited Arthur!

Then with hopeful, grateful anticipation, she looked to his coming,
and his greeting after such perils endured in his absence. 'O, will not
thankfulness bring him those thoughts! It must! He must join with me,
when he owns the mercy and sees our children safe. Oh! then blessings on
this night's danger! Let me see, he will learn it from the paper!
When can he come? Oh! how his looks and one word from him will reward
Theodora!'

She felt as if her happy anticipation had been selfish when she came
near the cottage with its blinded windows. Lord Martindale was speaking
to some one, but turned at once to her. 'You here, my dear? You have
heard?'

'Yes, I have; but Theodora and I thought as Lady Martindale has no maid
here, that I had better come and see if I could do anything for her. Can
I?' said she, with her humble sweetness.

'I cannot tell, my dear,' he answered. 'She attends to nothing, and has
not been able to shed tears. We cannot rouse her. Indeed, I am sorry you
came; you ought to be resting.'

'O, no, we both wished it. Should I be troublesome to her?'

'No, indeed, my dear child,' said he, affectionately. 'It is a great
relief to me that you should be with her, for here is much that I must
attend to, and I wish nothing so much as to get her to the parsonage.
The carriage is waiting, but she will not hear of coming away, and I do
not know how to leave her here.'

So saying, he led her into the room; Violet gave one shrinking glance
towards the bed, while the chill of awe shot through her veins; but
the chief thought was needed for her who sat rigid and motionless, with
fixed tearless eyes, and features in cold stillness more than ever like
marble. Violet felt as if that deathly life was more painful to look
upon than death itself, and her hand trembled in Lord Martindale's
grasp; he pressed it closer, and going up to his wife, said, 'Anna, my
dear, here is our child Violet so kind as to come and see you.'

Lady Martindale made a courteous movement, as if by mechanism, but
without looking up. He was delaying, unable to leave them thus, though
he was much wanted below stairs.

'I will stay while you go,' whispered Violet, though she longed to keep
him, for that presence filled her with trembling, and promising speedy
return, he departed.

For some minutes she could venture nothing, and the silence in which
she heard only the beatings of her own heart seemed more than she
could bear; but at last she collected herself, and an impulse suddenly
occurring to her, she ventured to touch her mother-in-law, and said,
'Theodora has been asking for you.'

Lady Martindale shook her head. 'I cannot come, I cannot leave her.'

'Poor Theodora is so much hurt!' pleaded Violet; 'you will be surprised
to see how she is scorched! Such arms and hands, that she cannot help
herself--and she wants cold applications continually.'

Lady Martindale once looked attentive, but a glance at her aunt brought
back her face of silent misery. Violet was perplexed, but strove
on--'Poor Theodora! I hope you will come to her. She wants care very
much. Did you know that it was in saving her that she was so sadly
burnt?'

'No: was it?'

'Yes; she snatched her out through the burning curtains. That was the
way Theodora's hair was all burnt off, and her arms are so blistered!'
continued Violet, controlling her trembling, and speaking as when she
was persuading one of the children--'Poor Theodora! Will you not come
and see her?'

'Where is she?'

'She is at the parsonage. They are ready to take us.'

'Oh, no! I cannot go. You go to her.'

'Pray, pray come with me. Theodora is so ill! It would do her so much
good to see you; and we are afraid of her being anxious or distressed,
lest she should have fever. Won't you come?'

A motion, as if she could not bear this, made Violet fear she must
desist, and she paused for a short interval, then said, 'SHE was very
fond of Theodora.'

'Oh! Yes, yes--'

'She would not like her to be left so long.'

'I thought you were taking care of her.'

'Oh, yes! but I cannot be the same as you would. One always wants one's
mother so much in illness.'

'She was always a mother to me!' The tears came at last, and she wept
unrestrainedly; while Violet hung over her with soft caressing words
of sympathy that cannot be detailed, till the first grief had had its
course, and she again tried the experiment of repeating Theodora's name,
and saying how much she was suffering.

Lady Martindale did not reply, but suffered Violet to put on her cloak,
and gradually lead her from the room, saying at each pause something of
'poor Theodora.'

The deed was done; it might be by importunity, but it was worth
achieving, even at the risk of being vexatious. Lord Martindale could
hardly believe his eyes when he saw his wife on her way to the carriage,
and Theodora was equally astonished when she appeared at her bedside.

It was a new thing to see one, hitherto healthy and independent, so
completely prostrated; and no more was needed to awaken the natural
affection so long stifled or thrust aside. Lady Martindale was greatly
shocked, and, perhaps magnifying her daughter's illness, had no room for
any other thought. She wished to do everything for her herself--would
hardly admit Violet's assistance--and took every care, with skilfulness
that was marvellous in one trained to ineffectiveness.

To Theodora her attendance was a new and exquisite repose. It was the
first taste of her mother's love, and made her content to be helpless;
as there she lay, murmuring thanks, and submitting to be petted with a
grateful face of childlike peace, resting in her mother's affection, and
made happy by the depth of warm feeling in her father's words.

'It is a good speculation to be ill,' said she, with a smile of strong
feeling when they had bidden her good night, and left her to Violet, who
was to sleep on a mattress on the floor.


CHAPTER 4


     Will you walk into my parlour?' said a spider to a fly.

     --MARY HOWITT


And where was Arthur?

Spending the day with his sporting friends, much to his own
satisfaction, till in the evening, greatly against his will, he was
taken out to dine with an old Mr. Randall, of Gothlands, the master of
the hounds.

His nieces, the Misses Marstone, were the ladies of the
house--well-dressed people, a little 'passees', but apparently not
having found it out. Arthur watched the arrivals hoping that the order
of precedence might not consign him to the flow of talk, of which he
had already had quite a sufficiency, when, to his surprise, two ladies,
evidently at home, entered together.

One--thin, sallow, spectacled--was, as he knew, an inhabitant; but the
other--small, slight, and retiring, and, in spite of clinging unfresh
muslin and shrinking figure, with the unmistakable air of high breeding,
was a most unexpected sight. At least, thought he, here was one lady
who would not bore him, and making his way to her, he inquired for
Lady Elizabeth. Emma, on the other hand, asked after Violet; and it was
curious that both questions were put and answered with constraint, as if
each was conscious of being something like a truant.

Another surprise. 'Mr. Gardner.' In walked Mark himself, and, after
shaking hands with the elder Miss Marstone, came towards Emma and her
friend, and was received with cordial familiarity. He entered into
conversation with Arthur, drawing a little further from Miss Brandon at
each step, till having brought him close to old Mr. Randall, and placed
him under the infliction of a long prose about the hounds, he retreated,
and was soon again in conversation with the two friends, Emma's face
raised and lighted up with eagerness.

Colonel Martindale had no escape from the head of the table and the
eldest of the Misses Marstone. Resigning himself to his fate, he made
talk; and, though now broader, redder, and somewhat coarser in feature
and complexion than he had been a few years ago, he looked so gay and
unencumbered, that his neighbour speculated as to whether he could be
the eldest son, and resolved to discover what her sister, Sarah Theresa,
knew of him.

'It is so pleasant when friends meet unexpectedly,' said she. 'I did not
know you were acquainted with either of our guests.'

'Miss Brandon is a near neighbour of my father, and a great friend of
Mrs. Martindale.'

Death to any incipient scheme of Miss Marstone; but she smiled on,
and remarked, 'A very amiable girl, and a beautiful place, is it not,
Rickworth?'

'Very pretty, a fine property,' said Arthur, talking as if in his
sleep, for he had caught Mark Gardner's voice saying something about an
oratory.

'My sister is often staying there,' proceeded the lady. 'You know Miss
Brandon's scheme of restoring the Priory?'

'I did not know that was anything more than talk.'

'I used to think so,' said Miss Marstone; 'but both she and my
sister Sarah treat it quite seriously, and Mr. Gardner is their prime
counsellor.'

Arthur started, and with difficulty refrained from laughing.

'Ah! I believe he has been a little wild, but that is all over now. He
has taken quite a different turn now, and given up everything of that
sort--throws himself into all their views.'

'Indeed!' said Arthur, who knew to his cost that if the reform had taken
place at all, it must have been of extremely recent date.

'O, yes, I assure you. He is staying with the curate, Mr. Silworth.'

'Ha! that is an old name at school.'

'Yes; he was an old schoolfellow--a very good man, to whose persuasions
everything is owing.'

She pointed him out, and the first glance was a revelation to Arthur,
who recognized him as the boy who, at school, had been the most easily
taken in. He soon understood the state of affairs. Mark, clever,
gentlemanly in appearance, and apt at catching the tone of the society
around him, was making a bold stroke--had persuaded his kind-hearted,
simple friend to believe him a sincere penitent, and to introduce him
as such to the ladies at Gothlands, from whom he caught the talk most
pleasing to them. At present it was all ecclesiastical aesthetics, and
discontent with the existing system, especially as regarded penitence;
by and by, when his hold should be secure, he would persuade the heiress
that she had been the prime instrument in his conversion, and that she
had gained his heart.

A bit of rhapsody from Miss Sarah Theresa, and poor Emma's embellished
and animated countenance, were sufficient indications that they were
smoothly gliding into the snare; and accustomed as Arthur was to see
Mark Gardner in a very different aspect, he was astonished at his
perfect performance of his part--the humility and deference befitting
the sense of his errors, and conversation so entirely at home in all
their peculiar language and predilections, that Arthur was obliged to
feel for the betting-book in his own pocket to convince himself that
he was still deeply involved with this most admirable and devoted of
penitents. He could not help, as he took leave, giving a knowing look,
conveying how easily he could spoil his game.

However, Arthur was in reality much annoyed. Of late years his easy
temper had well-nigh surrendered itself to the ascendency of Mark
Gardner; and though dissatisfied, remorseful, and anxious, he had
allowed himself to be led farther and farther into extravagance. The
sight of his home excited regrets, therefore he shunned it; and though
weary and discontented in his chains, he was devoid of force or will to
break them, and a sort of torpor seemed to make it impossible for him to
resist Mark Gardner. Their money matters were much entangled. They had
entered into a partnership for keeping horses for the turf, and there
was a debt shared between them, the amount of which Arthur dreaded to
investigate.

That Gardner should obtain a rich wife would be the greatest relief to
Colonel Martindale; but he had rather it should have been any heiress in
the world but Emma Brandon. He had a friendly feeling towards her, and a
respect for her mother, that made him shrink from allowing her to become
a victim, especially when he would himself be the gainer; and, on the
other hand, he could not endure to betray a friend,--while he knew that
his wife, his father, and his sister would be horrified at his secrecy.

After a night spent in execrating the dinner-party, he received a call
from Mr. Gardner, who, without being aware that he took any interest
in Miss Brandon, came to put him upon his guard, but found him less
manageable than usual. Arthur made a formidable description of Lady
Elizabeth's discretion, underrated the value of Rickworth, and declared
that it would be so tied up that Mark would gain nothing but a dull,
plain little wife. Not thus deterred, Mark only asked of him discretion;
and when, trying to cloak his earnest under faltering jest, he declared
that he had a regard for the Brandons, and should get into a scrape
with his father, his friend held out the allurement of freedom from his
difficulties, but was obliged to touch on this lightly, for Arthur's
honour was ready to take fire at the notion of being bought. It ended
in Gardner's treating the matter as if he had engaged not to betray
him, and being hardly gainsaid, otherwise than by a sort of bantering
proviso, that in case of an appeal direct, he could not be expected to
vouch for Mark's entire and disinterested reformation.

With an intense dislike to the world in general, Arthur was considering
how to prevent his wife from meeting Lady Elizabeth, and how to be out
of the way before the report should spread of Mark's addresses, when
everything else was driven from his mind by the arrival of the papers,
with the announcement of the fire at Martindale.

The safety of the infant family of the Honourable Lieutenant-Colonel
Martindale was the first news that met his eye; next, that of the
death of Mrs. Nesbit,--the chief thought that occupied him in his hasty
homeward journey.

He had been taught to think himself her heir; and though never forgiven
for his marriage, hoped that the will might not have been altered,
and considered that, whether it were in his favour or not, so large
a property coming into the family could not fail to render his
circumstances more easy, by enabling his father to augment his
allowance, which, though ample in itself, appeared far from sufficient
to a man with expensive tastes and an increasing family. The hope of
independence, and of not being obliged to wish success to Gardner, was
an opening into liberty and happiness.

By night he was at the parsonage, and Violet in his arms as soon as the
door was opened. That moment was perfect--he was so eagerly tender, so
solicitous lest she should have been injured by terror or exertion, so
shocked at her peril in his absence. In the fulness of her heart she
even asked him to come and see the children safely asleep.

'Now? What should I do that for?'

There was no unkindness, but the full felicity of the evening was
marred.

There was no room for him at the parsonage, and an apartment in the
empty house had been fitted up for him, so that she only saw him for
an hour of confused talk over the events of the fire, and Theodora's
condition, which was very uncomfortable; for though the fever was
slight, the burns and bruises were in an unsatisfactory state, and eyes,
arms, and hands of very little use. She was patient, and resolute as
ever, and so grateful to her nurses that waiting on her was a pleasure.

In fact, attendance on her was the only resource for occupying Lady
Martindale, who, when not thus engaged, was listless and dejected,
attending to nothing that passed around her, and sometimes giving way
to inconsolable bursts of grief. It was as if her aunt had been her one
idea in life, and without her she could turn to nothing else. Violet
was very anxious to prevent the children from molesting her, and in much
dread of their troubling her, now that all were in such close quarters.
It was trying to be engaged with Theodora, and to hear the little feet
and voices where they were not intended to be.

But when she was able to hasten to the rescue, she beheld Helen in Lady
Martindale's lap, and Johnnie by her side, all three intent on making
bouquets; and all apologies and proposals to fetch them away were
replied to by assurances of their goodness, and the pleasure afforded by
their company.

It appeared that while playing in the garden, the little brother and
sister had been, as it were, fascinated by watching her fixed melancholy
figure in the drawing-room. Again and again they had peeped in at the
window, striving to forget, but ever attracted by the sweet compassion
of their hearts; till at last, after much pausing and whispering, they
had betaken themselves to the corner of the garden where Cousin Hugh had
given permission to gather as they liked, and at the expense of his own
small fingers, Johnnie had pulled the first bud of sweet-brier. Lady
Martindale had felt a soft touch, and heard a little timid, coaxing
voice--'Grandmamma, may we? Would you like this little, young rose?'
while towards her was raised a face delicate and glowing with pale pink
like the bud itself.

Grandchildren and flower were at once in her bosom. Warm, womanly
child-love had been forced down to a far corner of her heart; but there
it was, and like the rod piercing to the hidden spring, that fragrant
gift of love touched it home, and thenceforth it was such fondling
as Violet almost feared might be spoiling, especially of Helen; who,
however unruly or exacting she might be, seemed only to endear herself
the more, and was visibly far more her grandmother's darling than her
gentle, well-behaved brother. This new affection for the children opened
her heart to their mother, on whom she leant more than she knew. To her
she talked of all her aunt's unwearied fondness and care, ever since she
had come into her hands an orphan in her infancy. There had been real
and entire devotion to each other on the part of the aunt and niece;
and the affection she had been able to inspire, together with the solemn
feelings towards the newly dead, gave her memory a softness that almost
enabled Violet to think of her in Lady Martindale's point of view,
forget her harshness, and the worldly pride for her niece and her
family, to which she had sacrificed their best happiness.

It was a melancholy retrospect. Mrs. Nesbit might be said to have
perfectly succeeded in the object of her life. She had formed her
beloved niece, like the fabled image of snow, moulded by the enchanter
and animated by no will but his, and had seen her attain the summit of
her wishes, universally admired and distinguished for every talent and
grace; while still completely under her influence, and as affectionate
and devoted as ever. Could any desire be more fully attained? But there
had ever been further craving, disappointment, combats, hatred,
avarice, disgust; and with all around that could make old age happy and
honourable, it had been a querulous melancholy struggle for power, spent
in clutching at the toys that had no pleasure in them--in trying to
force worldly advantages on those who cared not for them, then revenging
their indifference as a personal insult. She had sunk into the grave
without any one having the power to regret her save that one fond,
faithful niece, the one creature she had always regarded with genuine
unselfish affection.

Lord Martindale, whose wife she had ruled, and whose children had been
made unhappy by her, could hardly help owning to himself that her death
was a relief to him; and Arthur barely made a fair show of moderate
respect, in his anxiety for the property that would free him from
embarrassment. His first inquiry was whether the will were burnt. No,
it was in the hands of a lawyer, who would bring it on the day of the
funeral. Lord Martindale might look reprovingly at Arthur's eagerness,
but the matter was no less important to him. He had begun life with an
expenditure as large as his income could bear; and as his children
had grown up, and unprosperous times had come, he had not been able to
contract his expenses. Of late he had almost been in difficulty as to
the means of meeting the calls for the year, economy was a thing unknown
and uncomprehended by his wife; and the giving up the house in London
had been the only reduction he could accomplish. No one else in the
family had an idea of self-denial except Theodora, who, perceiving how
matters stood, had refused to have a maid of her own, and had begged him
no longer to keep a horse for her. Some change ought to be made, but
he had gone on in this unsatisfactory manner, trusting that at Mrs.
Nesbit's death all would be straight. Her West Indian estates and
accumulation of wealth must be bequeathed either to his wife or among
his children; and in either case he would be set at ease--either
relieved from supporting Arthur, or enabled to do so without difficulty.

The funeral took place in full grandeur. Lady Martindale had made it a
special request that every one would mourn as if for her mother, and it
was just one of the occasions when pomp was needed to supply the place
of grief.

The only real mourner shut herself up in her own room, whither Theodora
begged Violet to follow her. She found her stretched on her bed,
abandoned to grief. It was the sense of orphanhood; the first time
she had come so close to death and its circumstances, and it was
overpowering sorrow; but Violet had better learnt how to deal with her,
and could venture to caress and soothe--entreat her to remember how much
was left to love her--and then listen to what Lady Martindale began as
the rehearsal of her aunt's care to shield her from sorrow; but Violet
soon saw it was the outpouring of a pent-up grief, that had never dared
to come forth. The last time the vault had been opened it had been for
the infant she had lost, and just before for the little girls, who had
died in her absence. 'My dear,' she said, 'you do not know how it is all
brought back to me. It is as if your three darlings were the same I left
when we went abroad. Your sweet Helen is exactly like my precious little
Anna, whom I little thought I was never to see again! Oh, my babies!'

Violet was quite relieved to find this excessive grief was not spent on
her aunt, but that it was the long-restrained sorrow for an affliction
in which she could so much better sympathize. It had been of no avail
for Mrs. Nesbit, in mistaken kindness, and ignorance of a mother's
heart, to prevent her from ever adverting to her darlings; it had only
debarred her from the true source of comfort, and left the wound to ache
unhealed, while her docile outward placidity was deemed oblivion. The
fear of such sorrow had often been near Violet, and she was never able
to forget on how frail a tenure she held her firstborn; and from the
bottom of her heart came her soothing sympathy, as she led her on to
dwell on the thought of those innocents, in their rest and safety. Lady
Martindale listened as if it was a new message of peace; her tears were
softer, and she dwelt fondly on little Anna's pretty ways, speaking, and
Violet hearing, as if it had been a loss of to-day, instead of more than
thirty long years ago.

Lady Martindale opened a dressing-box, saying how relieved she had been
to find it safe, and from a secret drawer drew out a paper and showed
Violet some soft locks of chestnut hair. 'Their papa gave me these,' she
said. 'My dear aunt would not let me look at them--she thought it hurt
me; but I must see if Anna's hair is not just like Helen's.' And then
she begged Violet not to be alarmed at the resemblance, and kissed her
for saying she was glad of it, and had no fears on that score. She dwelt
on these reminiscences as if they were a solace of which she could never
taste enough, and did not cease talking over them till Lord Martindale
entered. Violet understood his feeling and the reserve hitherto shown
to him sufficiently to attempt breaking it down, and ventured, as
she quitted the room, to lay her hand on the little curl, and say,
'Grandmamma thinks Helen like her little Anna.'

Seeing Arthur leaning on the balusters, looking discomposed, she went
down to him. 'Where have you been!' he said, rather sulkily.

'With your mother; I hope she is growing more calm.'

'Very absurd of her to take it so much to heart!' said Arthur, entering
the drawing-room. 'Have you heard about this will?'

'No. What?'

'Never was such a will on this earth! It ought to be brought into court!
I verily believe the old hag studied to make it a parting emanation of
malice!'

'Oh, hush! hush!' cried Violet, shocked.

'It is all very well saying Hush, hush; but I should like to know what
you mean to live upon?'

'What has she done?'

'She has gone and left it all to that child!'

'What child?'

'My son--your boy John, I tell you; but, mark you, so as to do no good
to a living soul. Not a penny is he to touch till we are all dead, if we
starve meantime. She has tied it up to accumulate till my eldest son--or
John's, if he has one--comes to the title, and much good may it do him!'

'Poor little dear!' said Violet, inexpressibly pained by his tone.

'Anything but poor! It is £100,000 to begin with, and what will it
be when he gets it? Think of that doing nothing, and of us with no
dependence but the trumpery £5000 by the marriage settlements. It is
enough to drive one crazy.'

'It is a pity,' said Violet, frightened by his vehemence.

'It is an end of all chance for me. When she had always taught me to
look to it! It is absolute cheating.'

'Of late she never led us to expect anything.'

'No; and you never took pains to stand well with her. Some people--'

'O, Arthur, Arthur!'

'Well, don't be foolish! You could not help it. Her spitefulness was
past reckoning. To see her malice! She knew John and Theodora would not
let me be wronged, so she passes them over, and my mother too, for fear
it should be made up to me. Was ever man served so before? My own son,
as if to make it more aggravating!'

At an unlucky moment Johnnie ran in, and pulled his mother's dress.
'Mamma, may Helen dig in the bed by the garden door!'

'Go away!' said Arthur, impatiently. 'We can't have you bothering here.'

Though inattentive and indifferent to his children, he had never been
positively unkind, and the anger of his tone filled the timid child's
eyes with tears, as he looked appealingly at his mother, and moved away,
lingering, and beginning a trembling, 'but, mamma--'

'Don't stay here!' cried Arthur, in an indiscriminating fit of anger,
striking his hand on the table. 'Did I not order you to go this moment,
sir?'

Poor Johnnie fled, without hearing his mother's consoling 'I'll come;'
which only, with her look of grief, further irritated Arthur. 'Ay, ay!
That's always the way. Nothing but the boy, whenever I want you.'

Violet saw defence would make it worse, and tried to give him the
attention he required; though quivering with suppressed distress for his
harshness to his poor little boy, whom she could hardly help going at
once to comfort. She hardly heard his storming on about the unhappy
will, it only seemed to her like the apple of discord, and great was the
relief when it was ended by Lord Martindale's coming down, asking why
Johnnie was crying. She hoped this might cause Arthur some compunction,
but he only answered, gruffly, 'He was troublesome, he is always
fretting.'

Violet found the poor little fellow with tear-glazed face trying to
suppress the still heaving sobs, and be grateful to his grandmamma, who
had brought him into her room, and was trying to console him, though
unable to discover the secret of his woe. As he sprung to his mother's
lap, his grief broke forth afresh. His affection for his father was a
deep, distant, almost adoring worship; and the misery inflicted by those
looks and words was beyond what could be guessed, save by his mother.
He thought himself naughty, without knowing why, and could hardly be
soothed by her caresses and assurances that papa was not really angry,
but he must not interrupt another time.

'But, mamma, Helen wanted to dig up all Cousin Hugh's little green
things.'

Violet was thus reminded that she must seek after her daughter, whom
she found revelling in mischief, and was obliged to sentence to dire
disgrace, causing general commiseration, excepting that her papa,
ignorant that it was his own fault, declared children to be the greatest
plagues in the world.

She saw him no more in private, but grieved at his moodiness all the
evening, and at bed-time watched a red spark moving to and fro in the
garden. Her heavy sigh made Theodora ask what was the matter.

'I wish Arthur would not stay out in the dew. He has a little cough
already,' said she, putting forward the care that would best bear
mention.

'You used to be above caring for dews and night airs.'

'I must for him and Johnnie!' said Violet.

'Ah! what do you say to your son's prospects?'

'I don't suppose it will make much difference to him,' was the dejected
answer, Violet's eyes still following the red end of the cigar in the
darkness.

'Well! that is contempt for wealth! Fancy what will be in his hands. I
thought you would be moralizing on the way to bring him up to use it.'

'I have not thought of that,' said Violet; 'besides, it will be long
enough before he has it.'

'What! will it not be when he is of age!'

'No, when he comes to the title.'

'Oh! I see. Mamma did not understand that! She thought it absolutely
left to him. How is it, then?'

'It is put in trust till either he, or John's son, if he should have
one, comes to the title.'

'Then, it does you no good?'

'Only harm,' Violet could not help saying.

'How harm? It might be worse for you to have it.'

'Most likely,' said Violet's submissive voice. 'But it vexes Arthur so
much!' and the tears fell unseen.

'Well it may!' said Theodora. 'One cannot say what one thinks of it NOW,
but--Poor Arthur! I was very much afraid she was going to leave it to
me. Now I wish she had.'

'I wish so too.'

'It was silly of me to warn her that Arthur should have his share;
but after all, I don't regret it. I would not have had it on false
pretences. Did you hear when the will was dated?'

'September, 18--.'

'When Johnnie was a baby. Ah! I remember. Well, I am glad we all
forfeited it. I think it is more respectable. I only wish mamma had
come in for it, because she is the right person, and papa is a good deal
straitened. That really was a shame! Why did not she let them have it?'

'Arthur thinks it was for fear we should be helped.'

'No doubt,' said Theodora. 'Well. I wish--! It is a horrid thing to find
people worse after they are dead than one thought them. There! I have
had it out. I could not have borne to keep silence. Now, let us put the
disgusting money matter out of our heads for good and all. I did not
think you would have been distressed at such a thing, Violet.'

'I don't want it,' said Violet, amid her tears. 'It is Arthur's
disappointment, and the knowing I brought it on him.'

'Nonsense!' cried Theodora. 'If I had Arthur here, I would scold him
well; and as to you, he may thank you for everything good belonging
to him. Ten million fortunes would not be worth the tip of your little
finger to him, and you know he thinks so. Without you, and with this
money, he would be undone. Now, don't be silly! You have got your
spirits tired out, and sleep will make you a sensible woman.'

Violet was always the better for an affectionate scolding, and went
to bed, trusting that Arthur's disappointment might wear off with the
night. But his aunt's inheritance had been too much the hope of
his life, for him to be without a strong sense of injury, and his
embarrassments made the loss a most serious matter. He applied to his
father for an increase of allowance, but he could not have chosen a
worse time; Lord Martindale had just advanced money for the purchase of
his company, and could so ill afford to supply him as before, that but
for the sake of his family, he would have withdrawn part of his actual
income. So, all he obtained was a lecture on extravagance and neglect
of his wife and children; and thus rendered still more sullen, he became
impatient to escape from these grave looks and reproofs, and to return
to town before the disclosure of Mr. Gardner's courtship. He made it his
pretext that Violet was unwell and overworked in the general service;
and she was, in truth, looking very ill and harassed; but he was far
more the cause than were her exertions, and it was a great mortification
to be removed from his parents and sister when, for the first time, she
found herself useful to them, and for such an ungracious reason too,
just when they were so much drawn together by the dangers they
had shared, and the children seemed to be making progress in their
grandmother's affections. Poor Johnnie, too! it was hard to rob him of
another month of country air, just as he was gaining a little strength
and colour.

But pleading was useless; the mention of Johnnie revived the grievance,
and she was told she must not expect everything to give way to that boy
of hers; every one was ready enough to spoil him without his help.
He would not stay crammed into this small house, with the children
eternally in the way, and his father as black as thunder, with no
diversion, and obliged to sleep out in that den of a cottage, in a damp,
half-furnished room--an allegation hardly true, considering Violet's
care to see the room aired and fitted up to suit his tastes; but he was
determined, and she had not even the consolation of supposing care for
her the true reason; the only ground she could find for reconciling
herself to the measure was, that night walks were not mending his cough,
which, though so slight that he did not acknowledge it, and no one
else perceived it, still made her uneasy. Especially Violet felt the
ingratitude of leaving Theodora in her weak, half-recovered state;
but it was almost as if he had a sort of satisfaction in returning his
father's admonitions on the care of his wife, by making it a plea
for depriving them of her in their need, and he fixed his day without
remorse.


CHAPTER 5


     E'en in sleep, pangs felt before,
     Treasur'd long in memory's store,
     Bring in visions back their pain,
     Melt into the heart again.
     By it crost affections taught
     Chastened will and sobered thought.

     --AESCHYLUS.--Anstice


Arthur did not succeed in eluding Lady Elizabeth. She called the day
after the funeral, begging especially to see Mrs. Martindale. She looked
absent and abstracted, while Lord Martindale was talking to her, and
soon entreated Violet to come with her for a short drive.

No sooner were they in the carriage than she said, 'Violet, my dear, can
you or Arthur tell me anything of this Mr. Gardner?'

'I know very little of him personally,' said Violet, for he was too much
an associate of her husband's for her to be willing to expose him; 'but
are you sure we mean the same person?'

'Quite sure. Did you not hear that Arthur met him at Gothlands?'

'No; I have had very little talk with him since he came back, and this
fire has put everything out of our minds.'

'Of course it must, my dear. However, Arthur came with Mr. Herries to
dine there, and met Mr. Gardner as an old friend; so he must be the
same, and I am particularly anxious for some account of him. I must tell
you why--I know I am safe with you--but you will be very much surprised,
after all her declarations--'

'O, Lady Elizabeth, it cannot be that.'

'I have always been prepared for something of the sort. But what, my
dear?' seeing her agitation, and quickly infected by it.

'O, don't let her,' was all Violet could utter.

'Tell me! what is he?--what do you know of him? They spoke of him as
once having been extravagant--'

Violet drew a long breath, and tried to speak with composure. 'He is a
dreadful man, gambling, betting, dissipated--such a person that Arthur
never lets him come near me or the children. How could he dare think of
her?'

'Can it be the same?' said Lady Elizabeth, infinitely shocked, but
catching at the hope. 'This man is Lady Fotheringham's nephew.'

'Yes, he is,' said Violet sadly. 'There is no other cousin named Mark.
Why, don't you remember all the talk about Mrs. Finch?'

So little had Lady Elizabeth heeded scandal, that she had hardly known
these stories, and had not identified them with the name of Gardner.
Still she strove to think the best. 'Arthur will be able to tell me,'
she said; 'but every one seems fully satisfied of his reformation--the
curate of the parish and all. I do not mean that I could bear to think
of her being attached to a person who had been to blame. Her own account
of him alarmed me enough, poor dear child, but when I hear of the
clergyman, and Theresa Marstone, and all admiring his deep feeling of
repentance--'

'How can he be so wicked!' exclaimed Violet.

'You are convinced that he is not sincere?'

'Why, of course, one does not like to say anything uncharitable; but
there is something shocking in the notion of his talking of being good.
If he did repent he would know how horrible it would be for him to marry
Emma--'

'He does affect great humility. He declares that no one can be more
conscious of his unfitness than himself; but he was betrayed into this
confession of his sentiments--Emma's purity and devotedness, as Theresa
writes to me, having been such powerful instruments in leading him to
a better course. If it was not for poor Emma's fortune, one might trust
this more! Oh! Violet, I never so much was inclined to wish that her
brother had been spared!'

'But surely--surely Emma cannot like him?'

'I grieve to say that she and her friend have been in one of their fits
of enthusiasm. He seemed to accord with their idea of a penitent--only
longing for stricter rules than are to be found with us. From what I
have heard, I should have been much less surprised if he had become a
monk of La Trappe; in fact, I was almost afraid of it.'

'And does not this undeceive them?'

'No; poor Emma's only doubt is because she cannot bear to be unstable,
and to desert the work to which she was almost pledged; but she says she
is ashamed to perceive how much the sacrifice would cost her. She adds,
that decide as she may, he concurs with her in devoting everything to
the restoration of the Priory.'

'Poor Emma! He has debts enough to swallow two-thirds! And Miss
Marstone, what does she say?'

'His becoming a suitor seems to have been a surprise and disappointment
to her; but if she thinks him a pupil of her own, or expects to govern
the Priory in poor Emma's stead, she will be in his favour. No; I have
no hope from Theresa Marstone's discretion.'

'The rest of the family?'

'Theresa despises the others too much to attend to them. Mr. Randall
seems to be startled at the present aspect of affairs, and asks me to
come; and I should have set off this morning, but that I thought I might
learn something from you and Arthur.'

'Every one would tell you the same. He was expelled from the University,
and has gone on shockingly ever since, breaking his mother's heart! Poor
Emma! after dreading every gentleman!'

'I fear she has much to suffer. He made her think him not a marrying
man, and put her off her guard. Did you say he was agreeable?'

'Perhaps I might think so if I knew nothing about him; but I have always
had a repugnance to him, and it is all I can do not to dislike him more
than is right. If I saw him speak to Johnnie, I think I should!'

'And now tell me, for I ought to have every proof, if you know anything
that would convince Emma that this present repentance is assumed?'

Violet coloured excessively. 'Arthur could tell' she said, half choked,
and as Lady Elizabeth still waited, she was obliged to add, He was
active in the same way at the last races. I know there are things going
on still that a man who really meant to reform would have broken off.
Arthur could give you proofs.'

Violet could not bear to be more explicit. Her own secret feeling was
that Mr. Gardner was her husband's evil genius, leading him astray, and
robbing her of his affection, and she was not far mistaken. Sneers, as
if he was under her government, were often employed to persuade him to
neglect her, and continue his ruinous courses; and if she shrunk from
Gardner, he in return held her in malicious aversion, both as a counter
influence and as a witness against him. It was the constant enmity of
light to darkness, of evil to innocence.

The whole drive was spent in conversing on this engrossing theme; Lady
Elizabeth lamenting the intimacy with Sarah Theresa, a clever, and
certainly in many respects an excellent person, but with a strong taste
for singularity and for dominion, who had cultivated Emma's naturally
ardent and clinging nature into an exclusive worship of her; and, by
fostering all that was imaginative in her friends composition, had
led her to so exalted an estimate of their own ideal that they alike
disdained all that did not coincide with it, and spurned all mere common
sense. Emma's bashfulness had been petted and promoted as unworldly,
till now, like the holes in the philosopher's cloak, it was
self-satisfaction instead of humility. This made the snare peculiarly
dangerous, and her mother was so doubtful how far she would be guided,
as to take no comfort from Violet's assurances that Mr. Gardner's
character could be proved to be such that no woman in her senses could
think, a second time, of accepting him.

'I cannot tell,' said poor Lady Elizabeth; 'they will think all wiped
out by his reform. Emma speaks already of aiding him to redeem the past.
Ah! my dear,' in answer to a look, 'you have not seen my poor child
of late: you do not know how much more opinionative she has become, or
rather, Theresa has made her. I wish she could have been more with you.'

'I never was enough of a companion to her, said Violet. 'In my best days
I was not up to her, and now, between cares and children, I grow more
dull every day.'

'Your best days! my dear child. Why, how old are you?'

'Almost twenty-two,' said Violet; 'but I have been married nearly six
years. I am come into the heat and glare of middle life. Not that I
mean to complain,' said she, rousing her voice to cheerfulness; 'but
household matters do not make people companions for those who have their
youthfulness, and their readings, and schemes.'

'I wish Emma could have been drawn to take interest in your sound
practical life.'

'If she would make a friend of Theodora!'

'Yes, but the old childish fear of her is not gone; and Emma used to
think her rather wild and flighty, and so indeed did I; but how she is
changed! I have been much pleased with conversations with her of late.
Do you think it is owing to Mr. Hugh Martindale's influence?'

'In great part it is. What a blessing it is to them all to have him
here.'

'Ah! it has been one of the things that made me most dread Theresa, that
she will not like that good man.'

'What can she say against him?'

'I don't exactly understand them. They called him a thorough Anglican,
and said he did not feel the universal pulse! Now, I know it has been
unfortunate for Emma that our own vicar does not enter into these ways
of thinking; but I thought, when Mr. Hugh Martindale came into the
neighbourhood, that there would be some one to appeal to; but I believe
Theresa will trust to no one but of her own choosing.'

They had come back to the parsonage-gate, and Lady Elizabeth set Violet
down, promising to write as soon as she arrived at Gothlands; Arthur was
sauntering in the garden, and as soon as the carriage was out of sight,
came to meet her.

'O, Arthur, Lady Elizabeth wanted to speak to you. Cannot you catch
her?'

'I? No. Nonsense.'

'She wanted to ask you about Mr. Gardner. Was it he whom you met at
Gothlands?'

'Well, what of that?'

'Poor Lady Elizabeth! Is it not shocking that he has been making an
offer to Emma?'

'He has, has he? Well, and what is she going to do?'

'There can be but one answer,' said Violet. 'Lady Elizabeth came to hear
about him.'

'A fine chance for gossip for you.'

'I was forced to tell her,' said she, trying to hide the pain given
her by his contemptuous tone. 'I would not have spoken if I could have
helped it.'

'Ay!' said Arthur, 'as he says, set on a lady to talk of her husband's
friends.'

'But, oh! Arthur, what could I do? Think of poor Emma.'

'Emma is a fool.'

'Only you must not be angry with me. I would have said nothing without
cause, but when it comes to this,--and he is pretending to be reformed.'

'Well, so he might be if you would let him.'

'But, Arthur!' then eagerly seizing a new hope, 'you don't mean that he
is really improving? Oh! has he given up those horses, and released you?

He turned petulantly away. 'How can he? You have taken away any chance
of it now. You have done for him, and it is of no use to go on any more
about it.'

He marched off to his own abode, while she was obliged to sit down under
the verandah to compose herself before Theodora should see her.

Theodora perceived that much was amiss; but was spared much anxiety by
not being with the family, and able to watch her brother. The cottage
was completely furnished from the wreck of Martindale; but the removal
thither was deferred by her slow recovery. Though not seriously ill, she
had been longer laid up than had been anticipated in a person so healthy
and strong; the burns would not heal satisfactorily, and she was weak
and languid. It seemed as if the unsparing fatigues she had been in the
habit of undergoing; her immoderate country walks--her over late and
over early hours, had told on her frame, and rendered the effects of her
illness difficult to shake off. Or, thought Violet, those tidings might
be the secret cause, although she never referred to them, and continued
not merely patient, but full of vigour of mind, cheerful, and as
independent and enterprising as submission to orders permitted. Her
obedience to irksome rules was so ready and implicit, that Violet
marvelled, till she perceived that it was part of her system of combat
with self-will; and she took the departure of her sister in the same
manner, forbearing to harass Violet with lamentations; and when her
mother deplored it, made answer, 'It is my fault. If I had not persuaded
Arthur out of living at Brogden, we should be staying with them.'

As to the chance of permanent disfigurement, she treated it very coolly,
listening with indifference to her mother's frequent inquiries of the
surgeon. 'Never mind, mamma, you and Violet will keep up the beauty of
the family till Helen comes out.'

The first time she was able to come down-stairs was the last evening
before they were to depart. One of Arthur's sparks of kindly feeling
awoke when he beheld his once handsome, high-spirited sister, altered
and wrapped up, entering the room with an invalid step and air; and
though she tried to look about in a bright 'degage' manner, soon sinking
into the cushioned chair by the window with a sigh of languor. The
change was greater than he had anticipated from his brief visits to
her in her bed-room; and, recollecting the cause of the injuries, he
perceived the ingratitude of depriving her of Violet; but his contrition
came too late, for he had already exchanged his leave of absence with
another officer.

All that was in his power was to wait upon her with that engaging
attention that rendered him so good a nurse. He was his pleasantest
self, and she was so lively as to put every one else into good spirits.
It was pretty to see the universal pleasure in her recovery--the weeding
woman, going home late, and looking up at the window to see if she was
there, as Miss Helen had promised, and curtseying, hardly able to speak
for joy and grief together, when Theodora beckoned her to the window,
and asked after her children. The dumb page, too, had watched an hour
for her crossing the hall and when Arthur would have taken the tea
from him, to hand to her, he gave such a beseeching glance as was quite
irresistible, and the more affecting as Theodora's hands were not yet in
condition to converse with him, and she was forced to constitute Johnnie
her interpreter.

It was long since any of them had spent so happy an evening; and at
night Arthur insisted on helping her up-stairs, and said, 'I declare it
is a shame not to leave you Violet. Suppose you keep her till you are
all right again?'

'O, thank you, Arthur; but--' for Violet looked doubtful.

'Why, I thought you wanted to stay, Violet?' said Arthur.

'If you could.'

'Too late for that; but you must settle it between you before to-morrow
morning. Good night.'

Lady Martindale warmly pressed Violet to stay, and she found it much
worse to have personally to make the choice than to be only a piece of
property at Arthur's disposal. She was, however, firm, saying that he
would be uncomfortable without her; and she was grateful to Theodora for
perceiving her motives, and preventing further entreaties.

'You are right,' said Theodora, when her mother was gone. 'It would not
be fit to leave him with an empty house, so I must yield you up; but I
cannot bear to think of you in London.'

'I am used to it,' said Violet, with her patient smile.

'And it will not be four years before we meet again. I shall try hard to
come to you in the autumn.'

'How comfortable that would be! But you must not be uneasy about me, nor
put any one out of the way. I can get on very well, as long as I have
Johnnie.'

It was not till both had laid down to rest, and the room was dark, that
Theodora said, 'I understand it now. Her poor sister must have brought
her into some bad foreign society, from which he could only rescue her
by marrying her.'

So abrupt was this commencement that Violet had to recollect who was
meant, and so decided was the tone, that she asked, 'What have you
heard?'

'Nothing fresh; have you?'

'No. Arthur had heard nothing from Mr. Mark Gardner; and I am afraid we
shall hear no more till John answers my letter.'

'No matter; I have found out how it must have been. Lady Fotheringham,
of whom he made a sort of mother, always liked Jane. Depend upon it,
she was anxious about the way in which poor Georgina was reported to be
going on abroad, and told Percy, when she died, to try if he could do
anything to save Jane. You see he goes to Italy, and there finds, of
course, that there is no way of fulfilling his aunt's wishes but by
sacrificing himself.'

'You have arranged it all most fully!'

'See if I am not right--or, rather, you will not see; but I know that
was the way. It is his nature to be fantastically generous, as
some people would call it; and as long as he is the same Percival
Fotheringham, the rest is as nothing. I was unjust at the first moment.
Jane has a better nature, which he can develop. There is a sense of
religion to work on--a power of adaptation to those she is with, and if
what she has seen in Italy has shocked her and made her turn to him, he
may be the making of her. She is clever enough; and when she finds that
nothing but truth and honesty will succeed with him, she will learn them
at last.'

'How glad I am you take it in this way.'

'This quiet time has been good for me,' said Theodora. 'It would have
been maddening to have had no pause before waking to ordinary life.'

'Then the fire came at the right time for you.'

'Have you not read of men rushing into battle, hoping each shot would
strike them?'

'O, Theodora!'

'It did not last long. Don't be frightened. Woman fear, and the stifling
smell, and burning feel, and the sight of the red-hot gulf, were
enough to drive it off. I shall never forget the touch of the floor in
Charles's room! I thought of nothing but the fire. The feeling only came
back with the fainting. I remember a confused notion that I was glad to
be dying with you holding my head and papa so kind. How savage I felt
when every one would rouse me, and tell me I was better! I was in hopes
the world was all over with me; but I see I have a great deal to do
first, and the comfort of lying torpid here has been very great. I have
had time to be stunned, and to get a grasp of it and of my own mind.'

'Dear Theodora! It is indeed sometimes a blessing to be laid up. It
brings out so much kindness. It is the easiest of all the crosses.'

'I should not wonder if my rampant health had helped to make me the more
wayward,' said Theodora. 'I would not but have been ill for the sake
of the kindness from my father and mother. I was sure of you, but there
is--It has given me spirit to look out upon life.'

'I hope there is peace at least in the look.'

'There is. It is not worse than before, except the vanishing of a
lingering foolish hope, and that is safest. Repentance must always be
there. My life is like myself; the wounds may heal, but the marks will
remain and the freshness and glow will never return here. I am glad I
am so much altered. I should not like to be again within the pale of
attractive people.'

'It is strange to hear you say such things so calmly.'

'I made up my mind long ago. In following poor Georgina--or rather,
my own self-will--I threw away the bloom of life. Percy warned me that
those who reject light crosses have heavy loads imposed. I made what now
seems hardly a cross of reed, into a scourge! Oh, Violet! would that I
had done no harm but to myself by those races!'

'Hush!' said Violet's smothered voice.

'But for that,' said Theodora, recovering steadiness of tone, 'I should
bear everything peacefully. I was unworthy of Percy, and am better off
than I deserve. Oh, Violet! I have wished to thank you for making me
go to Baden, and promising that if I would submit, guidance would come.
There it was, the instant I really sought it. What would have become of
me if I had not been haunted by your look and your words? How many
times they saved me from accepting Lord St. Erme! And if I had, how my
self-will, and pride, and jealousy would have grown! and how wretched I
should be making him now!'

'It is much better as it is.'

'Yes, whatever pain I did give him by my very shameful usage, it would
have been far worse to have gone on. I was thankful that I was stopped.
Now I think I see my own life. There are my home duties; and oh! how
could I have spoken as I once did of papa! How shocking it must have
seemed to you!'

'I do not know what it was, but it was under great provocation, and you
did not understand him then.'

'No, you and Hugh drove me to him, and in seeing him pleased with
anything I can do for him, there is solid happiness. I have learnt to
enter into his affection and deep feeling and anxieties, and I would not
have missed these four years of reciprocity with him for anything! And
I shall get on better with mamma now. I fancy she has a different nature
after all, from what my aunt forced on her. Well, then, you know I
have long set up for a maiden aunt, and there is John, who might want
a housekeeper. Or if I am of no use to my own folks, there are the poor
always. Perhaps I may come to Emma Brandon's priory. It would be fine
discipline to be under Mother Theresa.

This unexpected pleasantry Violet could only answer by a groan.

'Seriously,' continued Theodora, 'my doubt would be whether it would be
right to turn to such a course only when one has nothing else to do. It
is a different thing from giving the energies and wishes and visions of
youth, as Emma has done. I could only offer the worn-out. But that
is speculation. There is present duty at home and in the village, and
brightness in your children, and my hopes are on John. I have used him
vilely, because he tried to teach me to take to you, and I do long
to see him and ask his pardon, and you will help me, so that he shall
believe in my sorrow, and we will be a sober old brother and sister
together.'

'I believe he wishes for nothing more. He will feel your having worked
for him, instead of saving anything of your own.'

'I had little to care for: my childhood had few recollections, and I had
nothing of Helen's. It was a pleasure to work for him. Do you know, when
I saw that marble chess-table which had belonged to the parsonage, and
which Percy had left in John's charge, a horrid feeling came that I
would not save it for Jane, and I left it. Then I remembered that was a
nasty spiteful bit of revenge, and I hated myself, and dashed in when I
really did know that it was not safe. I was altogether mad, I believe. I
felt desperate, and rather enjoyed facing danger for it. And then I
felt the heat of the fire from the gallery again, and the spout from the
fire-engine came, and the smoke was so thick that I missed my footing
with that great heavy thing, and fell down-stairs to the first landing,
and I believe that must have been what hurt my hand and side so much.'

Then as she heard Violet's tightened breath at the thought of the
frightful peril,

'Well for me I did not perish with these wild thoughts! I am glad I have
told you at last. I have felt as if I ought to confess it, and yet I was
ashamed. Is the thing safe?'

'Yes, I saw it at Brogden; but oh, to think of it!'

'I am glad it is safe; it was John's charge, and he ought to restore it:
but you will dream of it, like poor little Johnnie, if you take it so
much to heart. I should not have told you at night. Put it out of your
head, and let us sleep in peace.'

'Good night, dear sister. Thank you for talking to me. O, this is better
than the night we parted before.'

'As much better as it is to have found one's anchor than to be tossed at
the will of the waves. That was a frightful time. Thank heaven that you
made me feel for the cable! There is a dreary voyage to come, but after
all, every day we end the Creed with "The life everlasting."'


CHAPTER 6


     What have I?  Shall I dare to tell?
     A comfortless and hidden well,
     A well of love, it may be deep,
     I trust it is, and never dry.
     What matter if the waters sleep
     In silence and obscurity?

     --WORDSWORTH


Violet experienced the trials to which she knew she was returning.
For some time past her husband's habits had been growing less and less
domestic, and his disappointment alienated him still more. It was as
if Mrs. Nesbit had left behind her a drop of poison, that perverted and
envenomed the pride he used to take in his son, as heir to the family
honours, and made him regard the poor child almost in the light of a
rival, while he seemed to consider the others as burdens, and their
number a hardship and misfortune.

He was so impatient of interruption from them, that Violet kept them
carefully out of his way, while he was in the house, and this was seldom
for a long space of time. All the fancied trials of the first year of
her marriage seemed to have actually come upon her! She hardly saw him
from morning to night, and when he did spend an evening at home, he was
sullen and discontented, and found fault with everything. She was far
from well, but his days of solicitude were gone by, and he was too much
wrapped up in his own concerns to perceive her failure in strength,
and the effort it cost her to be cheerful. The children were her great
solace, but the toil of attending to them was almost beyond her powers,
and if it had not been for her boy, she felt as if she must have been
quite overwhelmed. Quiet, gentle, and thoughtful, he was a positive
assistance in the care of his sisters; and to read with him, hear his
remarks, watch his sweet obedience, and know herself the object of his
earnest affection, was her chief enjoyment, though even here there was
anxiety. His innocence and lovingness had something unearthly, and there
was a precocious understanding, a grave serious turn of mind, and a
want of childish mirth, which added to the fears caused by his fragile
health. Play was not nearly so pleasant to him as to sit by her, reading
or talking, or to act as her little messenger; and it was plain that he
missed fondness from his father almost as much as she did for him. To be
in the room with papa was his most earnest desire, and it saddened her
to see that little slight figure silent in the corner, the open book on
his lap, but his pale face, soft dark eyes, and parted lips, intent on
every movement of his father, till the instant a want was expressed, or
the least occasion for a service offered, there was a bound to execute
it, and the inattentive indifferent 'thank you' was enough to summon
up the rosy hue of delight. Would Arthur only have looked, how could he
have helped being touched? But he continued neglectful and unheeding,
while the child's affection seemed to thrive the more under disregard.

Violet's only satisfaction was in the absence of Mr. Gardner. She heard
constantly from Lady Elizabeth Brandon; but there was little that was
hopeful in that quarter. Emma's heart was more entirely in the power
of her suitor than even their fears had anticipated. She had kept so
entirely aloof from gentlemen, and so suspiciously repelled the most
ordinary attention, that when once she had permitted any intimacy the
novelty gave it a double charm. He had come upon her at first as one
bowed down with sorrow for the follies of his youth, seeking only for
the means of repairing what was past, and professing that happiness was
over, and all he could hope was to evidence the depth of his repentance
by his devotion and self-sacrifice in the cause of the Church. Then,
when at unawares he allowed it to be discovered by Theresa that the
heart, supposed to be awake only to remorse, had been gained by the
earnestness and excellence of her young friend, and that in her was the
most powerful means of consoling and aiding him, when he seemed sunk in
the depths of despair at having allowed his sentiments to transpire, and
only too much humiliated by the idea of being named together with Miss
Brandon, it was impossible but that Emma's gentle and enthusiastic
spirit should go more than half way to raise him from his despondency.
She could not believe his errors so great, after all; or even if they
were, who would not overlook them, and rejoice to have the power of
comforting such a penitent? Theresa Marstone, with a woman's latent love
of romance, was prime confidante to both, encouraged all, and delighted
in the prospect of being supreme in the Priory, and moulding the pattern
household of the pair formed and united under her auspices.

In the midst of such a dream as this, what chance had Lady Elizabeth
of convincing the friends that their penitent, scarcely persuaded to
relinquish plans of a hermitage, was a spendthrift adventurer, seeking
to repair his extravagance with the estates of Rickworth?

Emma shed indignant tears, and protested that it was cruel to bring up
his past faults; talked of the Christian duty of forgiving the returning
sinner; and when Lady Elizabeth showed that he had very recently
been engaged in his usual courses, Theresa, with a sensible face and
reasonable voice, argued that ordinary minds could not enter into the
power of the Church's work, and adduced many cases of equally sudden
change of life.

She did not mention whether there was always the heiress of ten thousand
a year ready as a reward.

The list of charges against Mark's character deepened every day, and
added to poor Lady Elizabeth's horror, but he always contrived to render
them as nothing to Emma. He had always confessed them beforehand, either
to her or to Theresa, with strong professions of sorrow, and so
softened and explained away, that they were ready to receive each
fresh accusation as an exaggeration of a fault long past, and deeply
regretted, and only admired their injured Mark the more. Lady Elizabeth
wrote to beg Violet to give her the clue which she had said Arthur
possessed to Mark's actual present character.

In much distress Violet wrote the letter, mentioning some disgraceful
transactions which she knew to have been taking place at the very time
when the good curate believed his friend sincerely repentant. She had
heard them, not from Arthur, but from Mrs Bryanstone, who always learnt
from her brother every such piece of gossip, but still, after what had
passed, and Lady Elizabeth's appeal direct to Arthur, she thought it
her duty to tell him before she sent the letter, and to ask if the facts
were correct.

It was a most unpleasant duty; but Arthur was not in such a mood as when
first she had mentioned the subject to him. He muttered something about
the intense folly of a woman who could believe a word out of Gardner's
mouth; said if Emma desired to be made miserable for life she could not
take a better way; wished he had never set eyes on the fellow, and then,
grumbling at Violet's begging him to read the letter, he cast his eye
over it, and said it was all true, and there was worse, too, if Lady
Elizabeth did but know it; but what this was he would not tell her. He
made no objection to her sending the letter, saying he supposed it
must be done, since she was asked; but it was all her doing, and Lady
Elizabeth might have gone to some one else; and inconsistently ended
with, 'After all, what's the use of making such an uproar about it? Such
things have happened twenty times before, and will again.'

'Not with my poor Emma, I hope. Imagine her with such a man as that!'

'Well! there are plenty of such couples. I wonder what would become of
the world if wives were not better than their husbands.'

Every rational person at Gothlands thought this letter conclusive; Emma
herself was shaken; but a walk in the shrubbery with Mark settled it
in her mind that his newly-formed wishes of amendment had then been
weak--he had not then seen her, he had not learnt so much as at present.
He had not been able to confess these deeds, because others, who had now
spoken, were concerned in them; but now it was a relief to be able to
tell all to his Emma! The end of it was, that Emma herself was almost
ready to press forward the marriage, so as to give him the means of
clearing himself from the debts, which, as he insinuated, were the true
cause of Colonel Martindale's accusations. He forgave him, however,
though if all was known of his dealings with Arthur Martindale--! And
then there was a long confidential talk with Theresa Marstone, after
which she told Lady Elizabeth that, though Mr. Gardner spared Emma's
feelings with regard to her friend, there could be no doubt that Colonel
Martindale had done much to lead him astray.

At last, as a dutiful concession, Emma resolved on a compromise, and put
him on his probation for a year. This was particularly inconvenient to
him, but he was very resigned and humble; 'perhaps he had hoped more
from her affection, but he knew it was his penalty, and must submit.
If there was but some religious house to which he could retire for the
intermediate space; for he dreaded the effect of being sent back to the
world.'

Theresa was wrought upon to counsel haste; but Emma had principle at the
bottom of her effervescence of folly, and was too right-minded, as well
as too timid, to act in direct opposition to her mother, however she
might be led to talk. Therefore they parted, with many tears on Emma's
part, and tender words and promises on Mark's. Lady Elizabeth had little
hope that he would not keep them; but she took advantage of the reprieve
to conduct Emma to make visits amongst her relations--sober people,
among whom sense was more likely to flourish, and among whom Mr. Gardner
could never dare to show himself.

He went, as he told Emma, to seek for some continental convent, where
perhaps he might be received as a boarder, and glean hints for the
Priory. Ordinary minds believed that his creditors being suspicious
of the delay of his marriage with the heiress, had contributed to this
resolution.

He spent a few days in London on his way, came to call on Colonel
Martindale, and was much with him, as Violet afterwards found, though
she did not know of it at the time.

She perceived the renewal of his influence in a project of which Arthur
began to talk, of leaving the army and establishing himself at Boulogne.
Though by rigid economy and self-denial she had continued to make the
original sum apportioned to her cover all household expenses, and his
promotion had brought an increase of income, Arthur declared that, with
such a family, his means were inadequate to the requirements of his
profession, and that unless his father could assist them further,
they must reside abroad. Lord Martindale treated the threat with great
displeasure, and to Violet it was like annihilation. When thankful for
Mark Gardner's absence, she was to be made to pursue him, probably in
order that he might continue to prey on Arthur in secret, and then, at
the year's end, bring them as witnesses that he had abstained from open
transgression; she was to see her husband become the idling Englishman
abroad, in the society most likely to be his ruin; to have her children
exposed to the disadvantages of a foreign education--what more was
wanting to her distress? She ventured to expostulate on their account;
but Arthur laughed, and told her they would learn French for nothing;
and when she spoke of the evils of bringing up a boy in France, it was
with the look which pained her so acutely, that she was answered, 'No
fear but that he will be looked after: he is of consequence in the
family.'

Never had the future looked so desolate; but sufficient unto the day was
the evil thereof. She had the root of peace and strength, and had long
been trained in patient trust and endurance. To pray, to strive, to
dwell on words of comfort, to bear in mind the blessings of the cross,
to turn resolutely from gloomy contemplations, and to receive thankfully
each present solace,--these were the tasks she set herself, and they
bore the fruit of consolation and hidden support. Her boy's affection
and goodness, the beauty and high health of her little girls, and the
kindlier moments when Arthur's better nature shone out, were balm and
refreshment, because she accepted them as gifts from the Fatherly Hand
that laid the trial upon her.

Her submissive distress so far worked on Arthur, that she heard no more
of the Boulogne scheme for the present, and she drove it out of her
mind, grateful for his silence, whether it was only from consideration
for her, or whether he had really relinquished the design, now that Mr.
Gardner was no longer near to maintain his ascendancy.

The summer was dreary at Brogden, as well as in Cadogan-place. Theodora
soon was able to call herself well, and to resume her usual avocations,
but she had not the same sense of energy and strength of body, and her
days were combats with inertness and fatigue. She did not slacken her
exertions, but they had no zest, and she suffered for them. Moreover,
she was uneasy about Arthur and his wife; and to partake her father's
confidence was to share his many anxieties, and to be perplexed by his
cares as well as her own. With her mother there were other difficulties.
Lady Martindale had been kept so far apart from her daughter, that now
it seemed as if they could not amalgamate, and when Theodora no longer
was ill, the old habit of reserve returned. Assiduously did Theodora
wait on her, read to her, and go out with her in the carriage; but still
without becoming familiar, or being able to cheer her spirits. In truth,
after having been for years an obedient attendant on her aunt, Lady
Martindale felt the blank of the want of occupation, and thus the sense
of her loss was ever renewed. Science, literature, and accomplishments
had been her pursuits, chiefly because her aunt led her to them, and
they had been gradually dropped with Mrs. Nesbit's interest in them. In
themselves they had no charm for her, and she turned from them now
as painfully recalling what she had lost. Dispirited, and without
employment, the natural consequence was that her health suffered, and
she became a prey to the varied torments of neuralgia, while Theodora
proved herself a better nurse than could have been expected for an
illness in which she only half believed.

Many hopes were fixed on John's return; but this was deferred,--he
was in the midst of church building, and establishing schemes to which
absence would be fatal, and he could only promise to come home next
year, when things should be put in train. To his sister he wrote a
letter so full of warm affectionate gratitude for her exertions in his
behalf, that she was positively soothed and refreshed, and reckoned the
more on beginning with him the fraternal union so long delayed, but to
which she looked as the solace of her future life.

As to Percival Fotheringham, there was no further explanation of his
marriage. John wrote to Violet that he had not heard from him for many
months, for it was difficult to keep up a correspondence between Barbuda
and the continental towns whither he was journeying. His last letter
had spoken of a tour in Italy in contemplation, and that in which he had
communicated Lady Fotheringham's death, mentioned some of her last
cares being for Jane and Georgina, and how she had tried to leave some
provision which might rescue the former from the necessity of following
her sister into the undesirable society she found abroad. This only
served to confirm Theodora's conjecture.

From other sources no intelligence was gained. London was empty, and
Violet saw no one likely to know anything of his movements; and when she
heard that Mark Gardner had been in town, and eagerly inquired whether
he had been asked, she found that Arthur had forgotten the whole matter.
Lady Elizabeth finished the letter, rejoicing in his departure, by
saying--'He confirms what I told you of the marriage of his cousin
and Mr. Fotheringham, and calls it a lucky thing for her. I had no
opportunity of hearing the particulars.' And, finally, Mrs. Bryanstone
had heard of Miss Gardner's marriage with one of the Fotheringhams of
Worthbourne, and only wanted Mrs. Martindale to strengthen her in the
belief that it was the dear, eccentric Crusader.


CHAPTER 7


     'Mid sombre shades of evening dim
       Upon the rock so lone, so drear,
     Scorning weak frame and sinking limb,
       My heart grows bright and bold of cheer;
     Out of the depths of stormy night
       My hope looks up with cloudless eyes,
     And to the one true deathless light,
       Its joyful pinions swiftly rise:
     Thanks to the seraph shape that beamed
       Benign upon my darkened breast,
     So for her service worthy deemed,
       My grateful heart abounds in rest.

     --FOUQUE'S Minstrel Love


'Wrangerton, August 20th.

'You must not be frightened, dearest Violet--Albert is safe; thanks to
that most noble-hearted, admirable Lord St. Erme, and above all, thanks
to Him who directed this dreadful stroke away from us. I hope you will
receive this before you see the newspaper. Mamma has gone up with them,
to help them to break it to poor Lady Lucy. May she be supported!

'The history, as far as I can toll you, is this:--The men at the
collieries have been as troublesome and insubordinate as ever, seeming
to think opposition to Lord St. Erme an assertion of their rights as
free-born Englishmen; and at last, finding it impossible to do anything
with them as long as they did not depend immediately upon himself,
he took the pits into his own hands when Mr. Shoreham went away, a
fortnight ago. It seems that Mr. Shoreham, knowing that he was going,
had let everything fall into a most neglected state, and the overlookers
brought reports to Albert that there were hardly any safety-lamps
used in the great pit, and that the galleries were so insufficiently
supported that there was great danger in continuing to work there.
However, the reports were contradictory, and after trying in vain to
settle what was to be done, Lord St. Erme rode this morning to the
collieries, to make a personal inspection, and insist on the men using
the Davy-lamp. After trying to dissuade him, Albert proposed to go down
with him; but he would not consent--he only smiled, and said there was
no need for it. It did not strike Albert till afterwards that he was
conscious of the risk, and would not allow another to share it! He was
waiting for him, not far from the shaft, when the earth seemed to give
way under his feet; there was a thundering sound, a great cry, and he
fell. When he recovered his footing, the mouth of the shaft was
gone, the scaffolding prostrate, the people around in horror and
consternation. The pit had fallen in, and there were at least twenty
men there, besides Lord St. Erme. Oh! how you will share that shuddering
thankfulness and sorrow, that we felt, when Albert galloped up to the
door and threw himself into the arm-chair, so unnerved by the shock that
he could not at first speak. Happily his wife was here, so she heard all
at once. He is gone with mamma and papa to tell the poor sister. Alas!
though we think most of her, there are many other sufferers.

'Three, o'clock.--Albert is come back. He says Lady Lucy met them in the
hall, pale and trembling, as if she had already worked herself into an
agony of fright. She begged them to tell her at once, and stood quite
still, only now and then moaning to herself, "Oh, St. Erme! St. Erme!"
Mamma took her by the hand, and tried to speak soothingly; but she did
not seem to attend, and presently looked up, flushed and quivering,
though she had been so still before, and declared that the whole might
not have fallen; she had heard of people being dug out alive; they must
begin at once, and she would go to the spot. There is no hope, Albert
says; even if not crushed, they must have perished from the foul air,
but the poor girl has caught fast hold of the idea, and insists on going
to Coalworth at once to urge it on. They cannot prevent her, and mamma
cannot bear that she should be alone, and means to go with her. The
carriage was ordered when Albert came here! Poor thing, there was never
fonder love between a brother and sister; she hardly had a thought that
did not centre in him. It breaks my heart to think how often we have
seen them walking arm-in-arm together, and said they might be taken for
a pair of lovers.

'Five o'clock.--Annette begs me to conclude her letter. My father has
returned home, and fetched her to Coalworth, to be with my mother, and
the poor young lady (already, I fear, Countess of St. Erme), who, he
tells us, continues buoyed up by the delusion that her brother may yet
be found alive, and is calling on all around to use the utmost exertions
for his recovery. I regret that I cannot go in Annette's stead; but I
cannot leave home in mamma's absence, as poor Louisa is much affected by
Albert's peril, and in so nervous a state that she will not hear of my
quitting her for a moment. We have indeed received a lesson, that no
rank, however exalted, can protect from the strokes of Providence, or
the uncertainties of human life. But the postman calls. Adieu.

'Your affectionate sister,

'Matilda Moss.'


(The last moral sentiment, be it observed, readied Miss Martindale,
rendered illegible by scrawls of ink from Violet's hand.)


'Coalworth, August 21st.

'Dearest Violet,--Matilda told you how I was sent for to come here. They
are working on,--relays relieving each other day and night; but no one
but poor Lady Lucy thinks there is any hope. Mr. Alder, the engineer,
says Lord St. Erme must have been in the farthest gallery, and they
cannot reach it in less than a week, so that if the other perils should
be escaped, there would be starvation. The real number lost is fourteen,
besides Lord St. Erme. It was a strange scene when I arrived at about
seven o'clock yesterday evening. The moor looking so quiet, and like
itself, with the heath and furze glowing in the setting sun, as if they
had no sympathy for us, till, when we came near the black heaps of coal,
we saw the crowd standing round,--then getting into the midst, there was
the great broken down piece of blackened soil and the black strong-armed
men working away with that life-and-death earnestness. By the ruins of
a shed that had been thrown down, there was a little group, Lady Lucy,
looking so fair and delicate, so unlike everything around, standing by
an old woman in a red cloak, whom she had placed in the chair that had
been brought for herself, the mother of one of the other sufferers.
Mamma and papa were with her; but nothing seems to comfort her so much
as going from one to the other of the women and children in the same
trouble with herself. She talks to them, and tries to get them to be
hopeful, and nurses the babies, and especially makes much of the old
woman. The younger ones look cheered when she tells them that history
which she dwells on so much, and seem as if they must believe her, but
the poor old dame has no hope, and tells her so. "'Tis the will of God,
my lady, don't ye take on so now. It will be all one when we come to
heaven, though I would have liked to have seen Willy again; but 'tis the
cross the Lord sends, so don't ye take on," and then Lady Lucy sits down
on the ground, and looks up in her face, as if her plain words did
her more good than anything we can say, or even the clergyman, who is
constantly going from one to the other. Whenever the men come to work,
or go away, tired out, Lady Lucy thanks them from the bottom of her
heart; and a look at her serves to inspirit and force them on to
wonderful exertions. But alas! what it must end in! We are at the house
that was Mr. Shoreham's, the nearest to the spot. It was hard work to
get poor Lady Lucy to come in last night. She stood there till long
after dark, when the stars were all out, and mamma could only get her
away by telling her, that her brother would be vexed, and that, if she
made herself ill, she would not be able to nurse him. She did not sleep
all night, and this morning she was out again with daylight, and we
were obliged to bring her out some breakfast, which she shared with the
fellow-sufferers round her, and would have taken nothing herself if
the old dame had not coaxed her, and petted her, calling her "My pretty
lady," and going back to her lecture on its being a sin to fret at His
will. Mamma and I take turns to be with her. When I came in, she was
sitting by the old woman, reading to her the Psalms, and the good old
creature saying at the end of each, "Yes, yes, He knows what is good for
them. Glory be to Him."

'Aug. 22nd.--As before. They have tried if they can open a way from the
old shaft, but cannot do it with safety. Lady Lucy still the same, but
paler and more worn, I think, less hopeful; I hope, more resigned.

'Aug. 23rd.--Poor Lucy was really tired out, and slept for two whole
hours in the heat of the noon, sitting on the ground by old Betty,
fairly overpowered. It was a touching sight; the old woman watching her
so sedulously, and all the rough people keeping such strict silence, and
driving off all that could disturb her. The pitmen look at her with
such compassionate reverence! The look and word she gives them are ten
thousand times more to them, I am sure, than the high pay they get for
every hour they work! Next Wednesday is the first day they can hope to
come to anything. This waiting is dreadful. Would that I could call it
suspense!

'Aug. 24th, Sunday.--She has been to church this morning. I did not
think she could, but at the sound of the bell, she looked up, and the
old woman too, they seemed to understand each other without a word, and
went together. The service was almost more than one could bear, but she
was composed, except at the references in the sermon to our state of
intense anxiety, and the need of submission. At the special mention in
the Litany of those in danger, I heard from beneath her hands clasped
over her face, that low moan of "O, brother, brother!" Still I think
when the worst comes, she will bear it better and be supported.

'Five o'clock.--THESE IS HOPE!--O Violet! We went to church again
this afternoon. The way leads past the old shaft. As we came by it in
returning, Lady Lucy stood still, and said she heard a sound. We could
hear nothing, but one of the wives said, "Yes, some one was working, and
calling down there." I flew to the main shaft, and called Mr. Alder. He
was incredulous, but Lady Lucy insisted. A man went down, and the sound
was certain. No words can be made out. They are working to meet them.
Lucy burst into tears, and threw her arms round my neck as soon as she
heard this man's report; but oh! thankful as we are, it is more cruel
than ever not to know who is saved, and this letter must go to-night
without waiting for more.

'25th.--He is alive, they say, but whether he can rally is most
uncertain. All night they worked on, not till six o'clock this morning
was any possibility of communication opened. Then questions were asked,
"How many were there?" "Fifteen, all living, but one much crushed." Oh!
the suspense, the heart-beating as those answers were sent up from the
depths of the tomb--a living tomb indeed; and how Lady Lucy pressed the
women's hard hands, and shed her tears of joy with them. But there was
a damp to her gladness. Next message was that Lord St. Erme bad
fainted--they could not tell whether he lived--he could not hold out any
longer! Then it was that she gave way, and indeed it was too agonizing,
but the old woman seemed better able to calm her than we could. Terrible
moments indeed! and in the midst there was sent up a folded paper that
had been handed out at the small aperture on the point of a tool, when
the poor things had first been able to see the lights of their rescuers.
It was to Lady Lucy; her brother had written it on the leaf of a
pocket-book, before their single lamp went out, and had given it in
charge to one of the men when he found his strength failing. She was too
dizzy and trembling to make out the pencil, and gave it to me to read to
her. I hope I am not doing wrong, for I must tell you how beautiful and
resigned a farewell it was. He said, in case this note ever came to her,
she must not grieve at the manner of his death--it was a comfort to him
to be taken, while trying to repair the negligence of earlier years;
they were a brave determined set of men who were with him, and she must
provide for their widows and children. There was much fond thought for
her, and things to console her, and one sentence you must have--"If ever
you meet with the "hoch-beseeltes Madchen", let her know that her knight
thanks and blesses her in his last hour for having roused him and sent
him forth to the battlefield. I would rather be here now than what I
was when she awoke me. Perhaps she will now be a friend and comforter to
you."

'I think those were the words. I could not help writing them. Poor Lucy
cried over the note, and we lowered down baskets of nourishment to be
handed in, but we heard only of Lord St. Erme's continued swoon, and it
was a weary while before the opening could be widened enough to help
the sufferers out. They were exhausted, and could work no more on their
side. But for him, it seems they would have done nothing; he was the
only one who kept his presence of mind when the crash came. One lamp
was not extinguished, and he made them at once consider, while the light
lasted, whether they could help themselves. One of the hewers knew that
they were not far from this old shaft, and happily Lord St. Erme had
a little compass hung to his watch, which he used to carry in his
wanderings abroad; this decided the direction, and he set them to
work, and encouraged them to persevere most manfully. He did not work
himself--indeed, the close air oppressed him much more than it did the
pitmen, and he had little hope for his own life, however it might end,
but he sat the whole time, supporting the head of the man who was hurt,
and keeping up the resolution of the others, putting them in mind of
the only hope in their dire distress, and guiding them to prayer and
repentance, such as might fit them for life or death. "He was more than
ten preachers, and did more good than forty discourses," said one man.
But he had much less bodily strength than they, though more energy and
fortitude, and he was scarcely sensible when the first hope of rescue
came. It seemed as if he had just kept up to sustain them till then,
and when they no longer depended on him for encouragement, he sank. The
moment came at last. He was drawn up perfectly insensible, together with
a great brawny-armed hewer, a vehement Chartist, and hitherto his great
enemy, but who now held him in his arms like a baby, so tenderly and
anxiously. As soon as he saw Lady Lucy, he called out, "Here he is,
Miss, I hope ye'll be able to bring him to. If all lords were like he
now!" and then his wife had hold of him, quite beside herself with joy;
but he shook her off with a sort of kind rudeness, and, exhausted as he
was, would not hear of being helped to his home, till he had heard the
doctors (who were all in waiting) say that Lord St. Erme was alive.
Lady Lucy was hanging over him in a sort of agony of ecstasy, and yet of
grief; but still she looked up, and put her little white hand into the
collier's big black one, and said, "Thank you," and then he fairly burst
out crying, and so his wife led him away. I saw Lord St. Erme for one
moment, and never was anything more death-like, such ghastly white,
except where grimed with coal-dust. They are in his room now, trying
to restore animation. He has shown some degree of consciousness, and
pressed his sister's hand, but all power of swallowing seems to be
gone, and the doctors are in great alarm. The others are doing well--the
people come in swarms to the door to ask for him.

'26th.--Comfort at last. He has been getting better all night, and this
morning the doctors say all danger is over. Mamma says she can hardly
keep from tears as she watches the happy placid looks of the brother and
sister, as he lies there so pale and shadowy, and she hangs over him, as
if she could never gaze at him enough. Several of the men, who were with
him, came to inquire for him early this morning; none of them suffered
half so much as he did. I went down to speak to them, and I am glad I
did; it is beautiful to see how he has won all their hearts, and to hear
their appreciation of his conduct. They say he tended the man who
was hurt as if he had been his mother, and never uttered one word of
complaint. "He told us," said one man, "God could hear us out of the
depth, as well as when we said our prayers in church; and whenever our
hearts were failing us, there was his voice speaking somewhat good to
cheer us up, or help us to mind that there was One who knew where we
were, and would have a care for us and our wives and children." "Bless
him," said another, "he has been the saving of our lives;" "Bless him;"
and they touched their hats and said Amen. I wish his sister could have
seen them!

'Five o'clock.--Mrs. Delaval is come, and there is no room nor need
for us, so we are going home. It is best, for mamma was nursing him all
night, and is tired out. He has improved much in the course of the day,
and they hope that he may soon be moved home. The pitmen want to carry
him back on his mattress on their shoulders. He has made himself king of
their hearts! He has been able to inquire after them, and Lady Lucy,
who forgets no one, has been down-stairs to see the old Betty. "Ah! my
pretty lady," she said, "you are not sorry now that you tried to take
the Lord's Cross patiently, and now, you see, your sorrow is turned into
joy." And then Lady Lucy would not have it called patience, and said she
had had no submission in her, and Betty answered her, "Ah! well, you
are young yet, and He fits the burden to the shoulder." How an adventure
like this brings out the truth of every character, as one never would
have known it otherwise. Who would have dreamt of that pattern of
saintly resignation in the Coalworth heath, or that Lady Lucy Delaval
would have found a poor old woman her truest and best comforter? and
this without the least forwardness on the old woman's part.

'Just going! Lady Lucy so warm-hearted and grateful--and Lord St. Erme
himself wished mamma good-bye in such a kind cordial manner, thanking
her for all she had done for his sister. I am sorry to go, so as not to
be in the way of seeing anything more of them, but it is time, for mamma
is quite overcome. So I must close up this last letter from Coalworth, a
far happier one than I thought to end with.

'Your most affectionate,

A. M.


'P. S.--Is he not a hero, equal to his "hoch-beseeltes Madchen"? I am
ashamed of having written to you what was never meant for other eyes,
but it will be safe with you. If you had seen how he used to waylay us,
and ask for our tidings from you after the fire, you would see I cannot
doubt who the "madchen" is. Is there no hope for him? The other affair
was so long ago, and who could help longing to have such minstrel-love
rewarded?'


That postscript did not go on to Brogden, though Annette's betrayal of
confidence had been suffered to meet the eye of the high-souled maiden.

The accounts of Lord St. Erme continued to improve, though his recovery
was but slow. To talk the adventure over was a never-failing interest
to Lady Martindale, who, though Theodora suppressed Annette's quotation,
was much of the opinion expressed in the postscript, and made some quiet
lamentations that Theodora had rejected him.

'No, we were not fit for each other,' she answered.

'You would not say so now,' said Lady Martindale. 'He has done things as
great as yourself, my dear.'

'I am fit for no one now,' said Theodora, bluntly.

'Ah, my dear!--But I don't know why I should wish you to marry; I could
never do without you.'

'That's the most sensible thing you have said yet, mamma.'

But Theodora wished herself less necessary at home, when, in a few weeks
more, she had to gather that matters were going on well from the large
round-hand note, with nursery spelling and folding, in which Johnnie
announced that he had a little brother.

An interval of peace to Violet ensued. Arthur did not nurse her as in
old times; but he was gentle and kind, and was the more with her as the
cough, which had never been entirely removed, was renewed by a chill in
the first cold of September. All went well till the babe was a week old,
when Arthur suddenly announced his intention of asking for a fortnight's
leave, as he was obliged to go to Boulogne on business.

Here was a fresh thunderbolt. Violet guessed that Mr. Gardner was there,
and was convinced that, whatever might be Arthur's present designs,
he would come back having taken a house at Boulogne. He answered her
imploring look by telling her not to worry herself; he hoped to get
'quit of the concern,' and, at any rate, could not help going. She
suggested that his cough would bear no liberties; he said, change of air
would take it off, and scouted her entreaty that he would consult Mr.
Harding. Another morning, a kind careless farewell, he was gone!

Poor Violet drew the coverlet over her head; her heart failed her, and
she craved that her throbbing sinking weakness and feverish anxiety
might bring her to her final rest. When she glanced over the future, her
husband deteriorating, and his love closed up from her; her children
led astray by evil influences of a foreign soil; Johnnie, perhaps, only
saved by separation--Johnnie, her precious comforter; herself far from
every friend, every support, without security of church ordinances--all
looked so utterly wretched that, as her pulses beat, and every sensation
of illness was aggravated, she almost rejoiced in the danger she felt
approaching.

Nothing but her infant's voice could have recalled her to a calmer mind,
and brought back the sense that she was bound to earth by her children.
She repented as of impatience and selfishness, called back her
resolution, and sought for soothing. It came. She had taught herself the
dominion over her mind in which she had once been so deficient. Vexing
cares and restless imaginings were driven back by echoes of hymns and
psalms and faithful promises, as she lay calm and resigned, in her
weakness and solitude, and her babe slept tranquilly in her bosom, and
Johnnie brought his books and histories of his sisters; and she could
smile in thankfulness at their loveliness of to-day, only in prayer
concerning herself for the morrow. She was content patiently to abide
the Lord.


CHAPTER 8


     But one, I wis, was not at home,
       Another had paid his gold away,
     Another called him thriftless loone,
       And bade him sharply wend his way.

     --Heir of Lynne


'He is done for. That wife of his may feel the consequence of meddling
in other folk's concerns. Not that I care for that now, there's metal
more attractive; but she has crossed me, and shall suffer for it.' These
short sentences met the ear of a broad-shouldered man in a rough coat,
as, in elbowing his way through the crowd on the quay at Boulogne, he
was detained for a moment behind two persons, whose very backs had all
the aspect of the dissipated Englishman abroad. Struggling past, he
gained a side view of the face of the speaker. It was one which he
knew; but the vindictive glare in the sarcastic eyes positively made him
start, as he heard the laugh of triumph and derision, in reply to some
remark from the other.

'Ay! and got enough to get off to Paris, where the old Finch has dropped
off his perch at last. That was all I wanted of him, and it was time
to wring him dry and have done with him. He will go off in consumption
before the year is out--'

As he spoke, the stranger turned on him an honest English face, the lips
compressed into an expression of the utmost contempt, while indignation
flashed in the penetrating gray eyes, that looked on him steadily.
His bold defiant gaze fell, quailing and scowling, he seemed to become
small, shrink away, and disappeared.

'When scamp number two looks round for scamp number one, he is lost
in the crowd,' muttered the traveller, half smiling; then, with a deep
breath, 'The hard-hearted rascal! If one could only wring his neck!
Heaven help the victim! though, no doubt, pity is wasted on him.'

He ceased his reflections, to enter the steamer just starting for
Folkestone, and was soon standing on deck, keeping guard over his
luggage. The sound of a frequent cough attracted his attention, and,
looking round, he saw a tall figure wrapped in great-coats leaning on
the leeward side of the funnel.

'Hollo! you here, Arthur! Where have you been?'

'What, Percy? How d'ye do?' replied a hoarse, languid voice.

'Is Mrs. Martindale here?'

'No.' He was cut short by such violent cough that he was obliged to rest
his forehead on his arm; then shivering, and complaining of the cold, he
said he should go below, and moved away, rejecting Percy's offered arm
with some impatience.

The weather was beautiful, and Percy stood for some time watching the
receding shore, and scanning, with his wonted keen gaze, the various
countenances of the passengers. He took a book from his pocket, but did
not read long; he looked out on the sea, and muttered to himself,
'What folly now? Why won't that name let one rest? Besides, he looked
desperately ill; I must go and see if they have made him comfortable in
that dog-hole below.'

Percy shook himself as if he was out of humour; and, with his hands in
his pockets, and a sauntering step, entered the cabin. He found Arthur
there alone, his head resting on his arms, and his frame shaken by the
suppressed cough.

'You seem to have a terrible cold. This is a bad time to be crossing.
How long have you been abroad?'

'Ten days.--How came you here?'

'I am going to Worthbourne. How are all your folks!'

'All well;' and coughing again, he filled up a tumbler with spirits and
water, and drank it off, while Percy exclaimed:

'Are you running crazy, to be feeding such a cough in this way?'

'The only thing to warm one,' said he, shuddering from head to foot.

'Yes, warm you properly into a nice little fever and inflammation. Why,
what a hand you have! And your pulse! Here, lie down at once,' as he
formed a couch with the help of a wrapper and bag. Arthur passively
accepted his care; but as the chill again crept through his veins, he
stretched out his hand for the cordial.

'I won't have it done!' thundered Percy. 'I will not look on and see you
killing yourself!'

'I wish I could,' murmured Arthur, letting his hand drop, as if unequal
to contest the point.

The conviction suddenly flashed on Percy that he was the victim! 'You
have got yourself into a scrape' he said.

'Scrape! I tell you I am ruined! undone!' exclaimed Arthur, rearing
himself up, as he burst out into passionate imprecations on Mark
Gardner, cut short by coughing.

'You! with your wife and little children entirely depending on you! You
have allowed that scoundrel, whose baseness you knew, to dupe you to
your own destruction!' said Percy, with slowness and severity.

Too ill and wretched to resent the reproach, Arthur sank his head with a
heavy groan, that almost disarmed Percy; then looking up, with sparkling
eyes, he exclaimed, 'No! I did not know his baseness; I thought him a
careless scape-grace, but not much worse than he has made me. I would
as soon have believed myself capable of the treachery, the unfeeling
revenge--' Again he was unable to say more, and struggling for
utterance, he stamped his foot against the floor, and groaned aloud with
rage and pain.

Percy persuaded him to lie down again, and could not refrain from
forcible expressions of indignation, as he recollected the sneering
exultation of Gardner's tone of triumph over one so open-hearted and
confiding.

It was a moment when sympathy unlocked the heart, and shame was lost
in the sense of injury. Nothing more was needed to call from Arthur the
history of his wrongs, as well as he was able to tell it, eking out with
his papers the incoherent sentences which he was unable to finish, so
that Percy succeeded in collecting, from his broken narration, an idea
of the state of affairs.

The horses, kept jointly at his expense and that of Gardner, had been
the occasion of serious debts; and on Gardner's leaving England, there
had been a pressure on Colonel Martindale that rendered him anxious to
free himself, even at the cost of his commission. Gardner, on the other
hand, had, it appeared, been desirous to have him at Boulogne, perhaps,
at first, merely as a means of subsistence during the year of probation,
and on the failure of the first attempt at bringing him thither, had
written to invite him, holding out as an inducement, that he was himself
desirous of being disembarrassed, in order that Miss Brandon might
find him clear of this entanglement, and representing that he had still
property enough to clear off his portion of the liability.

With this view Arthur had gone out to Boulogne to meet him, but had
found him dilatory in entering on business, and was drawn into taking
part in the amusements of the place; living in a state of fevered
excitement, which aggravated his indisposition and confused his
perceptions, so that he fell more completely than ever into the power
of his false friend, and was argued into relinquishing his project of
selling the horses, and into taking up larger sums for keeping them on.
In fact, the sensation that a severe cold was impending, and disgust at
the notion of being laid up in such company rendered him doubly facile;
and, in restless impatience to get away and avoid discussion, he acceded
to everything, and signed whatever Gardner pleased. Not till he was
on the point of embarking, after having gambled away most of his ready
money, did he discover that the property of which he had heard so much
was only a shadow, which had served to delude many another creditor; and
that they had made themselves responsible for a monstrous amount, for
which he was left alone to answer, while the first demand would be the
signal for a multitude of other claims. As they parted, Gardner
had finally thrown off the mask, and let him know that this was the
recompense of his wife's stories to the Brandons. She might say what she
pleased now, it mattered not; Mark was on his way to the rich widow of
Mr. Finch, and had wanted nothing of Arthur but to obtain the means of
going to her, and to be revenged on him.

So Arthur half-expressed, and his friend understood. Save for this
bodily condition, Percy could hardly have borne with him. His reckless
self-indulgence and blind folly deserved to be left to reap their
own fruit; yet, when he beheld their victim, miserable, prostrated by
illness and despair, and cast aside with scornful cruelty, he could
not, without being as cold-hearted as Gardner himself, refrain from kind
words and suggestions of consolation. 'Might not his father assist him?'

'He cannot if he would. Everything is entailed, and you know how my aunt
served us. There is no ready money to be had, not even the five thousand
pounds that is the whole dependence for the poor things at home in case
of my death, which may come soon enough for aught I care. I wish it was!
I wish we were all going to the bottom together, and I was to see none
of their faces again. It would be better for Violet than this.'

Percy could say little; but, though blunt of speech, he was tender of
heart. He did all in his power for Arthur's comfort, and when he helped
him on shore at Folkestone, recommended him to go to bed at once, and
offered to fetch Mrs. Martindale.

'She cannot come,' sighed Arthur; 'she has only been confined three
weeks.'

More shame for you, had Percy almost said; but he no longer opposed
Arthur's homeward instinct, and, finding a train ready to start, left
their luggage to its fate, and resolved not to lose sight of him till
he was safely deposited at his own house. Such care was in truth needed;
the journey was a dreadful one, the suffering increased every hour,
and when at length, in the dusk of the evening, they arrived in
Cadogan-place, he could hardly mount the stairs, even with Percy's
assistance.

It was the first time that Violet had left her chamber, and, as the
drawing-room door opened, she was seen sitting, pale and delicate, in
her low chair by the fire, her babe on her lap, and the other three at
her feet, Johnnie presiding over his sisters, as they looked at a book
of prints.

She started up in alarm as Arthur entered, leaning on Mr. Fotheringham,
and at once seized by a paroxysm of severe cough. Percy tried to assume
a reassuring tone. 'Here, you see, I have brought him home with one of
his bad colds. He will speak for himself presently.'

In a second she had placed the infant on the sofa, signed to Johnnie
to watch him, and drawn the arm-chair to the fire. Arthur sank into
it, throwing his arm round her for support, and resting his weary head
against her, as if he had found his refuge. Percy relieved her from
the two little girls, unclasping their frightened grasp on her dress
so gently and firmly, that, stranger though he was, Anna did not cry
on being taken in his arms, nor Helen resist his leading her out of the
room, and desiring her to take her sister up-stairs and to call their
nurse.

Returning, he found that necessity had brought strength and presence
of mind to their mother. She did not even tremble, though Arthur's only
words were, 'We are undone. If I die, forgive me.' Indeed, she hardly
took in the sense of what he said; she only caressed, and tried to
relieve him, assisted by Percy, who did not leave them till he had seen
Arthur safely in charge of Mr. Harding.

He then walked away to his old lodgings in Piccadilly, where he was
recognized with ecstasy by the quondam ragged-school boy, and was gladly
welcomed by his landlady, who could not rejoice enough at the sight of
his good-humoured face.

He divided his time between friendly gossip on her family affairs as she
bustled in and out, in civility to the cat, and in railing at
himself for thinking twice of such a selfish, ne'er-do-well as Arthur
Martindale. The image of that pale young mother and her little ones
pursued him, and with it the thought of the complicated distresses
awaiting her; the knowledge of the debts that would almost beggar her,
coming in the midst of her husband's dangerous illness.

Percy muttered to himself lines of 'Who comes here--a Grenadier,' made a
face, stretched himself, and called on himself to look on reasonableness
and justice. Arthur deserved no favour, because he had encumbered
himself with a helpless family, and then cruelly disregarded them.

'What does a man deserve who leaves his wife with a child of a week
old, to run after a swindler in foreign parts--eh, puss?' said he aloud,
viciously tweaking the old cat's whiskers; then, as she shook her ears
and drew back, too dignified to be offended, 'Ay, ay, while wheat and
tares grow together, the innocent must suffer for the guilty. The better
for both. One is refined, the other softened. I am the innocent sufferer
now,' added he; 'condole with me, pussy! That essay would have been
worth eighty pounds if it was worth a sixpence; and there's a loss for a
striving young man! I cannot go on to Worthbourne without recovering it;
and who knows how Jane will interpret my delay? While I live I'll never
carry another manuscript anywhere but in my pocket, and then we should
all go to the bottom together, according to poor Arthur's friendly wish.
Ha! that's not it sticking out of my great-coat pocket? No such good
luck-only those absurd papers of poor Arthur's. I remember I loaded my
coat on him when we were going to land. What a business it is! Let us
overhaul them a bit.'

He became absorbed in the contemplation, only now and then giving vent
to some vituperative epithet, till he suddenly dashed his hand on the
table with a force that startled the cat from her doze.

'Never mind, puss; you know of old

       'I care for nobody, and nobody cares for me.'

So now, good night, and there's an end of the matter.'

The first thing he did, next morning, was to walk to Cadogan-place, to
return the papers. He had long to wait before the door was opened;
and when James at length came, it was almost crying that he said that
Colonel Martindale was very ill; he had ruptured a blood-vessel that
morning, and was in the most imminent danger.

Mr. Fotheringham could see no one--could not be of any service.
He walked across the street, looked up at the windows, mused, then
exclaimed, 'That being the case, I had better go at once to Folkestone,
and rescue my bag from the jaws of the Custom-house.'


CHAPTER 9


     She left the gleam-lit fire-place,
       She came to the bedside,
     Her look was like a sad embrace,
       The gaze of one who can divine
     A grief, and sympathize.
     Sweet flower, thy children's eyes
       Are not more innocent than thine.

     --M. ARNOLD--Tristram and Yseulte.


At last there was a respite. The choking, stifling flow of blood, that,
with brief intervals, had for the last two hours threatened momentary
death, had been at length checked; the eyes were closed that had roamed
in helpless affright and agony from Violet to the doctors; and the
sufferer was lying, in what his wife would fain have deemed a slumber,
but the gasping respiration and looks of distress made it but too
evident that it was the stillness of exhaustion, enhanced by dread of
renewing the bleeding by word or motion.

There could be no concealment of the exceeding danger. His lungs had
never been strong; and the slight cough, which, contrary to his usual
habits, he had neglected all the summer, had been the token of mischief,
which his recent expedition had aggravated to a fearful extent. Even
the violent bleeding had not relieved the inflammation on the chest, and
Violet had collected from the physician's looks and words that it could
be hardly expected that he should survive the day.

Yet, through that dreadful morning, she had not failed in resolution or
composure: never once had her husband seen in her look, or heard in
her tone, aught but what might cheer and sustain him--never had
her fortitude or steadiness given way. She had not time to think of
consolation and support; but her habit of prayer and trust came to
her aid, and brought strength and support around her "in these great
waterfloods" of trouble. She was not forsaken in her hour of need.
Hitherto there had been no space for reflection; now his quiescent
state, though for the present so great a relief, brought the opportunity
of realizing his situation; but therewith arose thankfulness for the
space thus granted, and the power of praying that it might be blessed to
him whether for life or death.

In watchfulness and supplication, she sat beside him, with her babe,
much afraid that it should disturb him, and be unwelcome. However, when
some little sound made him aware of its presence, he opened his eyes,
moved his hand, as if to put back the covering that hid its face from
him, and presently signed to have it placed on the bed by his side. It
was a fine large dark boy, already so like him as to make the contrast
the more striking and painful, between the unconscious serenity of the
babe and the restless misery of the face of the father, laid low in the
strength of manhood, and with a look of wretched uneasiness, as if the
load on the mind was a worse torment than the weight on the labouring
breath. He, who usually hardly deigned a glance at his infants, now lay
gazing with inexpressible softness and sadness at the little sleeping
face; and Violet, while gratified by that look of affection, could not
help having it the more borne in on her mind, that death must be very
near. Were the well-springs of love, so long closed up, only opening
when he was about to leave his children for ever? If she could only have
heard him speak!

Presently, as if there was some sting of reproach in the impassive
features, he turned his head away abruptly, with a deep groan, and hid
his face. She took away the child, and there was another silence, which
she ventured to break now and then, by a few sentences of faith and
prayer, but without being able to perceive whether he attended. Suddenly
he started, as if thrilled in every vein, and glanced around with
terrified anxiety, of which she could not at first perceive the cause,
till she found it was the postman's knock. He held out his hand for the
letters, and cast a hurried look at their directions. None were for
him, but there was one in his sister's hand-writing. Violet did not feel
herself able to read it, and was laying it aside, when she saw his looks
following it. Her present world was so entirely in that room that she
had forgotten all beyond; and it only now occurred to her to say, 'Your
father? Do you wish for him? I will write.'

'Telegraph.' Even this whisper brought back the cough that was anguish
and terror.

It was already so late in the day, that though thus summoned, there was
no chance of Lord Martindale's arriving till the following evening; and
Violet's heart sank at reckoning up the space that must elapse, more
especially when she saw the perturbed eye, the startings at each sound,
the determination to know the business of every one who came to speak to
her--evident indications that there was some anxiety on his mind which
she could not comprehend.

Thus passed the day--between visits from desponding doctors and vain
measures for reducing the inflammation. At night Mr. Harding would have
prevailed on her to go to rest, promising to keep watch in her stead;
but she only shook her head, and said she could not. She had not seen,
and had scarcely thought of, the elder children all day; but at about
eleven o'clock at night she was startled by a sound of lamentable
crying,--Johnnie's voice in the nursery. The poor little boy's nerves
had been so much shaken by the fire at Martindale, that he had become
subject to night alarms, which sometimes showed their effect for the
whole subsequent day; and his mother stole away on hearing his cry,
leaving Arthur in Mr. Harding's charge, and hoping not to be missed.

Sarah was standing over Johnnie, half-coaxing, half-scolding while he
sat up in his little crib, shivering and sobbing, with chattering teeth,
and terrified exclamations about papa all over blood, lying dead under
the burning windows.

'There now, you have brought your poor mamma up!' said Sarah,
indignantly.

'Mamma, mamma!' and the cold trembling little creature clasped itself
upon her neck and bosom, still repeating the dreadful words. She carried
him to the fire, warmed him on her lap, caressed and soothed him, as his
understanding awoke, telling him that papa was safe in his own room,--he
was ill, very ill, and Johnnie must pray for him; but oh! he was alive,
safe in his own bed. But as Johnnie nestled to her, repeating, 'Say it
again, mamma, I was so frightened! I can't get it out of my head. Oh! is
papa safe?' there would come the thought that, with morning, the child
might have to hear that he was fatherless.

This dread, and the desire to efface the impression of the terrible
dream, induced her, when he had obediently struggled for composure, to
tell him that, on condition of perfect stillness, he might come down
with her, and have a little glimpse of papa. Wrapping him up, she
took him in by the open dressing-room door, to which Arthur's back
was turned, trusting to escape observation. But nothing eluded those
fever-lighted eyes, and they instantly fell upon the little trembling
figure, the quivering face and earnest gaze.

'I hope we have not disturbed you,' apologized Violet; 'we hoped you
would not hear us. Poor Johnnie woke up crying so much at your being
ill, that I ventured to bring him to have one look at you, for fear he
should not go to sleep again.'

She need not have feared. Even while she spoke Arthur held out
his hands, with a countenance that caused Johnnie, with a stifled
exclamation of 'Papa! papa!' to spring on the bed, and there he lay,
folded closely to his father's breast.

It was but for a moment. Violet had to lift the child hastily away,
to be carried off by Sarah, that he might not witness the terrible
suffering caused by the exertion and emotion; and yet, when this was
passed, she could not repent of what she had done, for one great grief
had thus been spared to herself and her boy.

She knew that to discover his son's ardent affection must be a poignant
reproach for his neglect and jealousy, and she grieved at once for him
and with him; but she could not understand half the feelings of bitter
anguish that she perceived in his countenance and gestures. She did
not know of his expectation that each ring of the bell might bring the
creditors' claims to heap disgrace upon him, nor how painful were the
thoughts of her and of the children, totally unprovided for, without
claim during his father's lifetime, even on his own scanty portion as
a younger son. He could only cast them on the mercy of his father and
brother; and what right had he to expect anything from them, after his
abuse of their kindness and forbearance? He thought of his neglect of
his patient devoted wife, whom he was leaving, with her little ones, to
struggle with poverty and dependence; he thought of his children growing
up to know him only as the improvident selfish father, who had doomed
them to difficulties, and without one tender word or kind look to
grace his memory. No wonder he turned, unable to brook the sight of his
unconscious babe; and that, when with morning little steps and voices
sounded above, such a look of misery came over his face, that Violet
hastened to order the children down to the dining-room, out of hearing.

Ere long, however, from the other room, appropriated to the baby, a face
peeped in, and Johnnie sprang to her side with earnest whispers: 'Mamma,
may I not say my prayers with you! I will not wake papa, but I can't
bear it without!' and the tears were in his eyes.

Violet's glance convinced her that this would be anything but
disturbing, and she consented. Johnnie thought his father asleep, but
she saw him watching the boy, as he stood with clasped hands, and eyes
in fixed steadfast gaze, repeating the Creed, so gravely and distinctly,
that not one of the whispering accents was lost. Looking upwards, as if
pursuing some thought far away, Johnnie said, 'Amen'; and then knelt,
breathing forth his innocent petitions, with their mention of father,
mother, sisters, and little brother; and therewith a large teardrop
gathered in the eyes fixed on him--but she would not seem to notice, and
bent her head over the boy, who, when his daily form was finished, knelt
on, and pressed her arm. 'Mamma,' he whispered, very low indeed, 'may I
say something for papa?' and on her assent, 'O God! make dear, dear papa
better, if it be Thy heavenly will, and let it be Thy heavenly will.'

Arthur's face was hidden; she only saw his fingers holding up the
covering with a quivering grasp. Johnnie rose up quite simply, and
letting him continue in the belief that his father slept, she allowed
him to go noiselessly away, after she had held him fast in her arms,
able to feel, even now, the comfort and blessing of her child.

Some little time had passed before Arthur looked up; then gazing round,
as if seeking something, he said, 'Where is he?'

'Johnnie? He is gone, he did not know you were awake. Shall I send for
him?'

'For all.'

They came; but he was made to feel that he had disregarded them too
long. They had never been familiarized with him; seldom saw him, and
were kept under restraint in his presence; and there was no intimacy to
counteract the fright inspired by his present appearance. Ghastly pale,
with a hectic spot on each cheek, with eyes unnaturally bright and
dilated, and a quantity of black hair and whiskers, he was indeed a
formidable object to the little girls; and Violet was more grieved than
surprised when Annie screamed with affright, and had to be carried away
instantly; and Helen backed, with her hands behind her, resisting all
entreaties and remonstrance, and unheeding his outstretched hand. The
child was of so determined and wilful a nature, that Violet dreaded
an outbreak if she were too much pressed, and was forced to let her
go--though much grieved, both for the distress that it gave Arthur, and
for the thought of how his daughter might remember it by and by.

They supposed that Johnnie had gone with his sisters, but at the end of
half an hour became aware that he had ever since been standing, almost
hidden by the curtain, satisfied with merely being in the room. The fair
face, so delicately tinted, the dark shady eyes, lovingly and pensively
fixed on his father, and the expression, half mournful, half awe-struck,
were a touching sight in so young a child, and Arthur seemed so to feel
it. He signed to him to come near; and with a flush, between joy and
fear, the little boy was instantly at his side. One hot hand enfolded
the small soft cool one, the other pressed fondly on the light silken
waves of hair. After thus holding him for some moments, he tried to
speak, in whispering breathless gasps of a word at a time.

'You'll comfort her!' and he looked towards his mother, 'You'll take
care of the others--will you?'

'If I can. God takes care of us,' said Johnnie, wistfully, as if
striving to understand, as he felt the pressure redoubled on hand and
head, as if to burn in what was uttered with such difficulty and danger.

'Tell your grandfather I trust you all to him. He must forgive. Say so
to him. You'll be a better son to him than I. When you know all, don't
remember it against me.'

He could say no more, it had brought on a fit of coughing and
breathlessness, through which he scarcely struggled. Silence was more
than ever enforced; but throughout the day the oppression was on the
increase, especially towards the evening, when he became excited by
the expectation of his father's arrival. He sat, pillowed high up, each
respiration an effort that spread a burning crimson over his face, while
eye and ear were nervously alert.

'Arthur is very ill, and begs to see you,' was the telegraphic message
that filled the cottage at Brogden with consternation. Lady Martindale
was too unwell to leave home, but Theodora was thankful to her father
for deciding that her presence was necessary for Violet's sake; indeed,
as they travelled in doubt and suspense, and she was continually
reminded of that hurried journey when her unchastened temper had been
the torment of herself and of her brother, she felt it an undeserved
privilege to be allowed to go to him at all. Instead of schemes of being
important, there was a crashing sense of an impending blow; she hardly
had the power to think or speculate in what form, or how heavily it
might fall. She had only room for anxiety to get forward.

They arrived; she hurried up the stairs, only catching James's words,
declaring his master no better.

She saw in the twilight a slight bending form, coming down, holding by
the balusters. Violet was in her arms, clasping her with a trembling,
almost convulsive tightness, without speaking.

'O, Violet, what is it? Is he so very ill?'

Lord Martindale hastened up at the same moment, and Violet recovering,
in a few words, spoken very low, but clearly, told of his condition,
adding, 'He has been watching for you all this time, he heard you come,
and wants you directly, but don't let him speak.'

She hung on Theodora's arm, and guided them up, as if hardly able to
stand. She opened the outer room door, and there (while the nurse had
taken her place) sat Johnnie on the rug, with the baby lying across his
lap, and his arms clasped tenderly round it. It was restless, and he
looked up to his mother, who bent down and took it in her arms, while
Lord Martindale passed on. Theodora stood appalled and overawed. This
was beyond even her fears.

'Thank you for coming,' said Violet, who had sunk into a chair.

'O, Violet, when?--how!--'

But a look of horror came over Violet; she started up, almost threw the
infant into Theodora's arms, and vanished into the other room. 'Oh! what
is it! What is the matter?' exclaimed Theodora.

'The cough, the blood,' said Johnnie, in a low voice; and turning away
with a suppressed sob he threw himself down, and hid his face on a
chair. She was in an agony to pass that closed door, but the baby was
fretting and kept her prisoner.

After some minutes had thus passed, her father appeared, and would have
gone on without seeing her, but she detained him by an imploring cry and
gasp, and entreated to hear what had happened.

'The blood-vessel again--I must send for Harding.'

'Shall I tell James to go?' inquired a little quiet voice, as Johnnie
lifted up his flushed face.

'Do so, my dear;' and as the little boy left the room, his grandfather
added, with the calmness of hopelessness, 'Poor child! it is of no use,
it must soon be over now;' and he was returning, when Theodora again
held him fast--'Papa! papa! I must see him, let me come!'

'Not yet,' said her father; 'the sight of a fresh person might hasten
it. If there is any chance, we must do nothing hazardous. I will call
you when they give up hope.'

Theodora was forced to relinquish her hold, for the baby screamed
outright, and required all her efforts to hush its cries that they
might not add fresh distress to the sick room. It seemed to make her own
misery of suspense beyond measure unendurable, to be obliged to control
herself so as to quiet the little creature by gentle movements, and to
have its ever-renewed wailings filling her ears, when her whole soul
hung on the sounds she could catch from the inner room. No one came to
relieve her; only Johnnie returned, listened for a moment at the door,
and dropped into his former position, and presently Mr. Harding passed
rapidly through the room.

Long, long she waited ere the door once more opened. Her father came
forth. Was it the summons? But he stopped her move towards the room.
'Not yet; the bleeding is checked.'

Then as Mr. Harding followed, they went out of the room in consultation,
and almost the next moment Violet herself glided in, touched Johnnie's
head, and said, 'Papa is better, darling;' then took the baby from
Theodora, saying, 'Thank you, you shall see him soon; she was again
gone, Johnnie creeping after, whither Theodora would have given worlds
to follow.

After another interval, he returned with a message that mamma begged
Aunt Theodora to be so kind as to go and make tea for grandpapa; she
thought dear papa was breathing a little more easily, but he must be
quite quiet now.

Obeying the sentence of banishment, she found her father sending off a
hasty express to give more positive information at home. 'We must
leave them to themselves a little while,' he said. 'There must be no
excitement till he has had time to rally. I thought he had better not
see me at first.'

'Is he worse than John has been?'

'Far worse. I never saw John in this immediate danger.'

'Did this attack begin directly after you came?'

'It was the effort of speaking. He WOULD try to say something about
racing debts--Gardner, papers in his coat-pocket, and there broke down,
coughed, and the bleeding came on. There is something on his mind,
poor--'

Theodora made a sign to remind him of Johnnie's presence; but the child
came forward. 'Grandpapa, he told me to tell you something,' and, with
eyes bent on the ground, the little fellow repeated the words like a
lesson by rote.

Lord Martindale was much overcome; he took his grandson on his knee, and
pressed him to his breast without being able to speak, then, as if to
recover composure by proceeding to business, he sent him to ask James
for the coat last worn by his papa, and bring the papers in the pocket.
Then with more agitation he continued, 'Yes, yes, that was what poor
Arthur's eyes were saying all the time. I could only promise to settle
everything and take care of her; and there was she, poor thing, with a
face like a martyr, supporting his head, never giving way, speaking now
and then so calmly and soothingly, when I could not have said a word. I
do believe she is almost an angel!' said Lord Martindale, with a burst
of strong emotion. 'Take care of her! She will not want that long! at
this rate. Harding tells me he is very anxious about her: she is not by
any means recovered, yet he was forced to let her sit up all last night,
and she has been on her feet this whole day! What is to become of her
and these poor children? It is enough to break one's heart!'

Here Johnnie came back. 'Grandpapa, we cannot find any papers. James has
looked in all the clothes papa wore when he came home, and he did not
bring home his portmanteau.'

'Come home! Where had he been?'

'I don't know. He was away a long time.'

