Produced by Jason Isbell, Irma Spehar, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


=THE LAUGHING
PRINCE=

A book of Jugoslav Fairy Tales
and Folk Tales.

RETOLD BY
PARKER FILLMORE

With illustrations and decorations by Jay Van Everen.


When Mr. Fillmore started his study of the folk lore of Eastern Europe,
he tapped a mine of treasure for children. The gorgeousness of the
imagery in the stories, their rollicking humor, the adventures, were
entirely new to child and adult readers. The stories in this third
volume reflect the folk lore of many races, for the country now known as
Jugoslavia has been one of the great highways and battlefields of the
world where Orient and Occident, Greek and Roman, Turk and Slav have
fought out their national aspirations. Basically, it has the Slavic
exuberance of imagination and humor, but it has also absorbed much of
the spirit and tales of the Near and Far East.

_Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc._
757 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK 17, N. Y.

80-120


_BY PARKER FILLMORE_

CZECHOSLOVAK FAIRY TALES
THE SHOEMAKER'S APRON

_Illustrated by Jan Matulka_


THE LAUGHING PRINCE

A Book of Jugoslav Fairy Tales and Folk Tales


BY

PARKER FILLMORE


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND DECORATIONS

BY

JAY VAN EVEREN


[Illustration]


NEW YORK

HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC.

COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY

PARKER FILLMORE

RENEWED BY LOUISE FILLMORE

0.1.68


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


TO BUTTON

[Illustration]

[Illustration]


NOTE


In calling this _A Book of Jugoslav Fairy Tales and Folk Tales_ I have
used the word Jugoslav in its literal sense of Southern Slav. The
Bulgars are just as truly Southern Slavs as the Serbs or Croats or any
other of the Slav peoples now included within the state of Jugoslavia.
Moreover in this case it would be particularly difficult to make the
literary boundaries conform strictly to the political boundaries since
much the same stories and folk tales are current among all these Slav
peoples of the Balkan Peninsula. The special student taking the variants
of the same story might discover special differences that would mark
each variant as the product of some one locality. The work of such a
student would have philological and ethnological value but not a very
strong appeal to the general reader. My appeal is first of all to the
general reader--to the child who loves fairy tales and to the adult who
loves them. I hope they will both find these stories entertaining and
amusing quite aside from any interest in their source.

Yet these tales as presented do give the reader a true idea of the
amazing vigor and the artistic inventiveness of the Jugoslav
imagination, and also of the various influences, Oriental and Northern
as well as Slavic, which have made that imagination what it is to-day.
Here are gay picaresque tales of adventure--how they go on and on and
on!--charming little stories of sentiment, a few folk tales of stark
simplicity and grim humor, one story showing a superficial Turkish
influence, and one spiritual allegory as deep and moving as anything in
the Russian.

The renderings in every case are my own and are not in any sense
translations. I have taken the old stories and retold them in a new
language. To do them justice in this new language I have found it
necessary to present them with a new selection of detail and with an
occasional shifting of emphasis. I do not mean by this that I have
invented detail in any unwarranted fashion. I haven't had to for any
folk tale, however bald, contains all sorts of things by implication.
The true story teller, it seems to me, is he who is able to grasp these
implications and turn them to his own use.

I must confess that the setting in which I have placed the famous old
Serbian nonsense story, _In my young days when I was an old, old man_,
is my own invention. The nonsense story needs a setting and as it
chanced I had one ready as I have long wanted to tell the world what was
back of the determination of that princess who refused to eat until some
one had made her laugh.

So far as I know most of these stories are not familiar to English
readers--certainly not in this form. Madame Mijatovich uses one of them
in her _Serbian Fairy Tales_, but I make no apology for offering a
sprightlier version. Nor do I apologize for presenting any stories that
may have been included somewhere among the indifferent translations to
which Andrew Lang lent his name.

I am of course deeply indebted to the various people who told me these
stories in the first place and to many scholarly folklorists, Jugoslav,
Czechoslovak, Bulgarian, German, and English whose books and reports I
have studied.

P. F.

_Decoration Day, 1921._

[Illustration]


CONTENTS


                                                          PAGE

THE LAUGHING PRINCE: The Story of the Boy Who
Could Talk Nonsense                                         1

BEAUTY AND THE HORNS: The Story of an Enchanted
Maiden                                                     27

THE PIGEON'S BRIDE: The Story of a Princess Who
Kissed and Told                                            51

THE LITTLE LAME FOX: The Story of the Youngest
Brother Who Found the Magic Grape-Vine and Married
the Golden Maiden                                          73

THE ENCHANTED PEAFOWL: The Story of the Golden
Apples, the Wicked Dragon, and the Magic Horse            107

THE DRAGON'S STRENGTH: The Story of the Youngest
Prince Who Killed the Sparrow                             139

THE LITTLE SINGING FROG: The Story of a Girl
Whose Parents were Ashamed of Her                         161

THE NIGHTINGALE IN THE MOSQUE: The Story of
the Sultan's Youngest Son and the Princess Flower o' the
World                                                     171

THE GIRL IN THE CHEST: The Story of the Third
Sister Who was Brave and Good                             201

THE WONDERFUL HAIR: The Story of a Poor Man
Who Dreamed of an Angel                                   219

THE BEST WISH: The Story of Three Brothers and an
Angel                                                     229

THE VILAS' SPRING: The Story of the Brother Who
Knew that Good was Stronger than Evil                     241

LORD AND MASTER: The Story of the Man Who Understood
the Language of the Animals                               253

THE SILVER TRACKS: The Story of the Poor Man Who
Befriended a Beggar                                       267


THE LAUGHING PRINCE

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Boy Who Could Talk Nonsense_


THE LAUGHING PRINCE


There was once a farmer who had three sons and one little daughter. The
eldest son was a studious boy who learned so much out of books that the
farmer said:

"We must send Mihailo to school and make a priest of him."

The second boy was a trader. Whatever you had he would get it from you
by offering you something else for it. And always what he gave you was
worth less than what you gave him.

"Jakov will make a fine peddler," the farmer said. "He's industrious and
sharp and some day he will probably be a rich man."

But Stefan, the farmer's youngest son, had no special talent and because
he didn't spend all his time with his nose in a book and because he
never made the best of a bargain his brothers scorned him. Militza, his
little sister, loved him dearly for he was kind and jolly and in the
evening he was always ready to tell her stories and play with her. But
the farmer, of course, listened to the older brothers.

"I don't know about poor Stefan," he used to say. "He's a good boy but
he talks nonsense. I suppose he'll have to stay on the farm and work."

Now the truth is the farm was a fine place for Stefan for he was strong
and lusty and he liked to plow and harvest and he had a wonderful way
with the animals. He talked to them as if they were human beings and the
horses all whinnied when he came near, and the cows rubbed their soft
noses against his shoulder, and as for the pigs--they loved him so much
that whenever they saw him they used to run squealing between his legs.

"Stefan is nothing but a farmer!" Mihailo used to say as though being a
farmer was something to be ashamed of.

And Jakov said:

"If the village people could see the pigs following him about, how
they'd laugh at him! I hope when I go to the village to live he won't be
visiting me all the time!"

Another thing the older brothers couldn't understand about Stefan was
why he was always laughing and joking. He did the work of two men but
whether he was working or resting you could always hear him cracking his
merry jokes and laughing his jolly laugh.

"I think he's foolish!" Mihailo said.

Jakov hoped that the village people wouldn't hear about his carryings
on.

"They'd laugh at him," he said, "and they'd laugh at us, too, because
we're his brothers."

But Stefan didn't care. The more they frowned at him, the louder he
laughed, and in spite of their dark looks he kept on cracking his merry
jokes and talking nonsense. And every evening after supper his little
sister, Militza, clapped her hands and cried:

"Now, Stefan, tell me a story! Tell me a story!"

"Father," Mihailo would say, "you ought to make him keep quiet! He's
foolish and all he does is fill Militza's head with nonsense!"

This always made Militza very indignant and she would stamp her little
foot and say:

"He isn't foolish! He knows more than any one! And he can do more things
than any one else and he's the handsomest brother in the world!"

You see Militza loved Stefan dearly and when you love a person of course
you think that person is wonderful. But the father supposed that Mihailo
must be right for Mihailo studied in books. So he shook his head and
sighed every time he thought of Stefan.

Now the kingdom in which the three brothers lived was ruled over by a
great Tsar who had an only daughter. In disappointment that he had no
son, the Tsar was having his daughter brought up as though she were a
boy. He sent all over the world for tutors and teachers and had the poor
girl taught statecraft and law and philosophy and all the other things
that the heir to the throne ought to know.

The Princess because she was an obedient girl and because she loved her
father tried to spend all her time in study. But the dry old scholars
whom the Tsar employed as teachers were not amusing companions for a
young girl and the first lady-in-waiting who was in constant attendance
was scarcely any better for she, too, was old and thin and very prim.

If the poor little Princess between her geography lesson and her
arithmetic lesson would peep for a moment into a mirror, the first
lady-in-waiting would tap her arm reprovingly and say:

"My dear, vanity is not becoming in a princess!"

One day the little Princess lost her temper and answered sharply:

"But I'm a girl even if I am a princess and I love to look in mirrors
and I love to make myself pretty and I'd love to go to a ball every
night of my life and dance with handsome young men!"

"You talk like the daughter of a farmer!" the first lady-in-waiting
said.

Then the Princess, because she lost her temper still further, said
something she should not have said.

"I wish I were the daughter of a farmer!" she declared. "Then I could
wear pretty ribbons and go dancing and the boys would come courting me!
As it is I have to spend all my time with funny old men and silly old
women!"

Now even if her tutors and teachers were funny looking old men, even if
the first lady-in-waiting was a silly old woman, the Princess should not
have said so. It hurt the feelings of the first lady-in-waiting and made
her angry and she ran off to the Tsar at once and complained most
bitterly.

"Is this my reward after all my years of loving service to your
daughter?" she asked. "It is true that I've grown old and thin looking
after her manners and now she calls me a silly old woman! And all the
learned wise men and scholars that you have gathered from the far
corners of the earth--she points her finger at them and calls them funny
old men!"

The fact is they were funny looking, most of them, but yet the first
lady-in-waiting was right: the Princess should not have said so.

"And think of her ingratitude to yourself, O Tsar!" the first
lady-in-waiting continued. "You plan to make her the heir to your throne
and yet she says she wishes she were a farmer's daughter so that she
could deck herself out in ribbons and have the boys come courting her! A
nice thing for a princess to say!"

The Tsar when he heard this fell into an awful rage. (The truth is
whatever temper the Princess had she inherited direct from her father.)

"Wow! Wow!" he roared, just that way. "Send the Princess to me at once.
I'll soon have her singing another tune!"

So the first lady-in-waiting sent the Princess to her father and as soon
as he saw her he began roaring again and saying:

"Wow! Wow! What do you mean--funny old men and silly old women?"

Now whenever the Tsar began roaring and saying, "Wow! Wow!" the Princess
always stiffened, and instead of being the sweet and obedient daughter
she usually was she became obstinate. Her pretty eyes would flash and
her soft pretty face would harden and people would whisper: "Mercy on
us, how much she looks like her father!"

"That's just what I mean!" the Princess said. "They're a lot of funny
old men and silly old women and I'm tired of them! I want to be amused!
I want to laugh!"

"Wow! Wow! Wow!" roared the Tsar. "A fine princess you are! Go straight
back to the schoolroom and behave yourself!"

So the little Princess marched out of the throne room holding her head
very high and looking so much like the Tsar that the first
lady-in-waiting was positively frightened.

The Princess went back to the schoolroom but she did not behave herself.
She was really very naughty. When the poor man who knew more than
anybody in the world about the influence of the stars upon the destinies
of nations came to give her a lesson, she threw his book out the window.
When the superannuated old general who was teaching her military
manoeuvers offered her a diagram on which the enemy was represented by
a series of black dots and our soldiers by a series of red dots, she
took the paper and tore it in two. And worst of all when the old scholar
who was teaching her Turkish--for a princess must be able to speak all
languages--dropped his horn spectacles on the floor, she deliberately
stepped on them and broke them.

When the Tsar heard all these things he just _wow-wowed_ something
terrible.

"Lock that young woman in her chamber!" he ordered. "Feed her on bread
and water until she's ready to apologize!"

But the Princess, far from being frightened by this treatment, calmly
announced:

"I won't eat even your old bread and water until you send me some one
who will make me laugh!"

Now this frightened the Tsar because he knew how obstinate the Princess
could be on occasions. (He ought to know, too, for the Princess had that
streak of obstinacy direct from himself.)

"This will never do!" he said.

He hurried to the Princess's chamber. He found her in bed with her
pretty hair spread out on the pillow like a golden fan.

"My dear," the Tsar said, "I was joking. You don't have to eat only
bread and water. You may have anything you want."

"Thank you," the Princess said, "but I'll never eat another bite of
anything until you send me some one who will make me laugh. I'm tired of
living in this gloomy old castle with a lot of old men and old women who
do nothing but instruct me and with a father who always loses his
temper and says, 'Wow! Wow!'"

"But it's a beautiful castle!" the poor Tsar said. "And I'm sure we're
all doing our very best to educate you!"

"But I want to be amused as well as educated!" the little Princess said.
And then, because she felt she was going to cry, she turned her face to
the wall and wouldn't say another word.

What was the Tsar to do? He called together his councilors and asked
them how was the Princess to be made to laugh. The councilors were wise
about state matters but not one of them could suggest a means of amusing
the Princess. The Master of Ceremonies did indeed begin to say something
about a nice young man but instantly the Tsar roared out such a
wrathful, "Wow! Wow!" that the Master of Ceremonies coughed and
pretended he hadn't spoken.

Then the Tsar called together the scholars and the teachers and the
first lady-in-waiting. He glared at them savagely and roared:

"Wow! Wow! A nice lot you are! I put you in charge of my daughter and
not one of you has sense enough to know that the poor child needs a
little amusement! I have a good mind to have you all thrown into the
dungeon!"

"But, Your Majesty," quavered one poor old scholar, "I was not employed
as a buffoon but as a teacher of astrology!"

"And I," another said, "as a teacher of languages!"

"And I as a teacher of philosophy!"

"Silence!" roared the Tsar. "Between you all you have about killed my
poor child! Now I ask you: With all your learning doesn't one of you
know how to make a young girl laugh?"

Apparently not one of them did, for no one answered.

"Not even you?" the Tsar said, looking at the first lady-in-waiting.

"When you called me to Court," the first lady-in-waiting answered,
drawing herself up in a most refined manner, "you said you wished me to
teach your daughter etiquette. As you said nothing about amusement,
quite naturally I confined myself to the subject of behavior. If I do
say it myself, no one has ever been more devoted to duty than I. I am
constantly saying to her: 'That isn't the way a princess should act!' In
fact for years there has hardly been a moment in the day when I haven't
corrected her for something!"

"Poor child!" groaned the Tsar. "No wonder she wants a change! Oh, what
fools you all are in spite of your learning! Don't you know that a young
girl is a young girl even if she is a Princess!"

Well, the scholars weren't any more help to the Tsar than the
councilors, and finally in desperation he sent heralds through the land
to announce that to any one who could make the Princess laugh he would
give three bags of gold.

Three bags of gold don't grow on the bushes every day and instantly all
the youths and men and old men who had stories that their sweethearts
and their wives and their daughters laughed at hurried to the castle.

One by one they were admitted to the Princess's chamber. They entered
hopefully but when they saw the Tsar sitting at one side of the door
muttering, "Wow! Wow!" in his beard, and the old first lady-in-waiting
at the other side of the door watching them scornfully, and the Princess
herself in bed with her lovely hair spread out like a golden fan on the
pillow, they forgot their funny stories and hemmed and hawed and
stammered and had finally, one after another, to be turned out in
disgrace.

One day went by and two and three and still the Princess refused to eat.
In despair the Tsar sent out his heralds again. This time he said that
to any one who would make the Princess laugh he would give the
Princess's hand in marriage and make him joint heir to the kingdom.

"I had expected to wed her to the son of some great Tsar," he sighed,
"but I'd rather marry her to a farmer than see her die of starvation!"

The heralds rode far and wide until every one, even the people on the
most distant farms, had heard of the Tsar's offer.

"I won't try again," said Mihailo, the oldest son of the farmer I've
already told you about. "When I went there the day before yesterday I
began telling her a funny story out of my Latin book but instead of
laughing she said: 'Oh, send him away!' So now she'll have to starve to
death for all of me!"

"Me, too!" said Jakov, the second son. "When I tried to tell her that
funny story of how I traded the moldy oats for the old widow's fat pig,
instead of laughing she looked me straight in the face and said:
'Cheat!'"

"Stefan ought to go," Mihailo suggested. "Maybe she'd laugh at him!
Everybody else does!"

He spoke sneeringly but Stefan only smiled.

"Who knows? Perhaps I will go. If I do make her laugh then, O my
brothers, the laugh will be on you for I shall become Tsar and you two
will be known as my two poor brothers. Ho! Ho! Ho! What a joke that
would be!"

Stefan laughed loud and heartily and his little sister joined him, but
his brothers looked at him sourly.

"He grows more foolish all the time!" they told each other.

When they were gone to bed, Militza slipped over to Stefan and whispered
in his ear:

"Brother, you must go to the Princess. Tell her the story that begins:
_In my young days when I was an old, old man_.... I think she'll just
have to laugh, and if she laughs then she can eat and she must be very
hungry by this time."

At first Stefan said no, he wouldn't go, but Militza insisted and
finally, to please her, he said he would.

So early the next morning he dressed himself in his fine Sunday shirt
with its blue and red embroidery. He put on his bright red Sunday sash
and his long shiny boots. Then he mounted his horse and before his
brothers were awake rode off to the Tsar's castle.

There he awaited his turn to be admitted to the Princess's chamber. When
he came in he was so young and healthy and vigorous that he seemed to
bring with him a little of the freshness of outdoors. The first
lady-in-waiting looked at him askance for without doubt he was a farmer
lad and his table manners probably were not good. Well, he was a farmer
lad and for that reason he didn't know that she was first
lady-in-waiting. He glanced at her once and thought: "What an ugly old
woman!" and thereafter he didn't think of her at all. He glanced
likewise at the Tsar and the Tsar reminded him of a bull of his own. He
wasn't afraid of the bull, so why be afraid of the Tsar?

Suddenly he saw the Princess lying in bed with her lovely hair spread
out on the pillow like a golden fan and for a moment he couldn't speak.
Then he knelt beside the bed and kissed her hand.

"Princess," he said, "I'm not learned and I'm not clever and I don't
suppose I can succeed where so many wise men have failed. And even if I
do make you laugh you won't have to marry me unless you want to because
the reason I really came was to please Militza."

"Militza?"

"Yes, Princess, my little sister, Militza. She loves me very much and so
she thinks the stories I tell are funny and she laughs at them. Last
night she said to me: 'Stefan, you must go to the Princess and tell her
the story that begins: _In my young days when I was an old, old
man_.... I think she'll just have to laugh and if she laughs then she
can eat and she must be very hungry by this time.'"

"I am," the Princess said, with a catch in her voice. Then she added: "I
think I like that little sister of yours and I think I like you, too. I
wish you would tell me the story that begins: _In my young days when I
was an old, old man_...."

"But, Princess, it's a very foolish story."

"The foolisher, the better!"

Just here the first lady-in-waiting tried to correct the Princess for of
course she should have said: "The more foolish, the better!" but the
Tsar shut her up with a black frown and one fierce, "Wow!"

"Well, then," Stefan began:

_In my young days when I was an old, old man I used to count my bees
every morning. It was easy enough to count the bees but not the beehives
because I had too many hives. One day when I finished counting I found
that my best bee was missing. At once I saddled a rooster and set out to
find him._

"Father!" cried the Princess. "Did you hear what Stefan said? He said he
saddled his rooster!"

"Umph!" muttered the Tsar, and the first lady-in-waiting said severely:

"Princess, do not interrupt! Young man, continue."

_His track led to the sea which I rode across on a bridge. The first
thing I saw on the other side of the sea was my bee. There he was in a
field of millet harnessed to a plow. "That's my bee!" I shouted to the
man who was driving him. "Is that so?" the man said, and without any
words he gave me back my bee and handed me a bag of millet to pay for
the plowing. I took the bag and tied it securely on the bee. Then I
unsaddled the rooster and mounted the bee. The rooster, poor thing, was
so tired that I had to take him by the hand and lead him along beside
us._

"Father!" the Princess cried, "did you hear that? He took the rooster by
the hand! Isn't that funny!"

"Umph!" grunted the Tsar, and the first lady-in-waiting whispered:

"Hush! Let the young man finish!"

_Whilst we were crossing the bridge, the string of the bag broke and all
my millet spilled out. When night came I tied the rooster to the bee and
lay down on the seashore to sleep. During the night some wolves came
and killed my bee and when I woke up I found that all the honey had run
out of his body. There was so much honey that it rose up and up until it
reached the ankles of the valleys and the knees of the mountains. I took
a hatchet and swam down to a forest where I found two deer leaping about
on one leg. I shot at the deer with my hatchet, killed them, and skinned
them. With the skins I made two leather bottles. I filled these with the
honey and strapped them over the rooster's back. Then I rode home. I no
sooner arrived home than my father was born. "We must have holy water
for the christening," I said. "I suppose I must go to heaven to fetch
some." But how was I to get there? I thought of my millet. Sure enough
the dampness had made it grow so well that its tops now reached the sky.
So all I had to do was to climb a millet stalk and there I was in
heaven. Up there they had mown down some of my millet which they baked
into a loaf and were eating with boiled milk. "That's my millet!" I
said. "What do you want for it?" they asked me. "I want some holy water
to christen my father who has just been born." So they gave me some holy
water and I prepared to descend again to earth. But on earth there was a
violent storm going on and the wind carried away my millet. So there I
was with no way of getting down. I thought of my hair. It was so long
that when I stood up it covered my ears and when I lay down it reached
all the way to earth. So I pulled out a hair, tied it to a tree of
heaven, and began descending by it. When it grew dark I made a knot in
the hair and just sat where I was. It was cold, so I took a needle which
I happened to have in my coat, split it up, and lighted a fire with the
chips._

"Oh, father!" the Princess cried, "Stefan says he split a needle into
kindling wood! Isn't he funny!"

"If you ask me--" the first lady-in-waiting began, but before she could
say more the Tsar reached over and stepped on her toe so hard that she
was forced to end her sentence with a little squeally, "Ouch!" The
Princess, you see, was smiling and the Tsar was hoping that presently
she would burst into a laugh. So he motioned Stefan to continue.

[Illustration: _Stefan Tells the Princess a Story_]

_Then I lay down beside the fire and fell asleep. While I slept a spark
from the fire fell on the hair and burned it through. I fell to earth
with such force that I sank into the ground up to my chest. I couldn't
budge, so I was forced to go home and get a spade and dig myself out. On
the way home I crossed a field_ _where the reapers were cutting corn.
The heat was so great that they had to stop work. "I'll get our mare," I
said, "and then you'll feel cooler." You know our mare is two days long
and as broad as midnight and she has willow trees growing on her back.
So I ran and got her and she cast such a cool shadow that the reapers
were at once able to go back to work. Now they wanted some fresh
drinking water, but when they went to the river they found it had frozen
over. They came back to me and asked me would I get them some water.
"Certainly," I said. I went to the river myself, then I took off my head
and with it I broke a hole in the ice. After that it was easy enough to
fetch them some water. "But where is your head?" they asked. "Oh!" I
said, "I must have forgotten it!"_

"Oh, father!" the Princess cried with a loud laugh, "he says he forgot
his head! Then, Stefan, what did you do? What did you do?"

_I ran back to the river and got there just as a fox was sniffing at my
skull. "Hi, there!" I said, pulling the fox's tail. The fox turned
around and gave me a paper on which was written these words: =NOW THE
PRINCESS CAN EAT FOR SHE HAS LAUGHED AND STEFAN AND HIS LITTLE SISTER
ARE VERY HAPPY.=_

"What nonsense!" the first lady-in-waiting murmured with a toss of her
head.

"Yes, beautiful nonsense!" the Princess cried, clapping her hands and
going off into peal after peal of merry laughter. "Isn't it beautiful
nonsense, father? And isn't Stefan a dear lad? And, father, I'm awfully
hungry! Please have some food sent in at once and Stefan must stay and
eat with me."

So the Tsar had great trays of food brought in: roast birds and
vegetables and wheaten bread and many kinds of little cakes and honey
and milk and fruit. And Stefan and the Princess ate and made merry and
the Tsar joined them and even the first lady-in-waiting took one little
cake which she crumbled in her handkerchief in a most refined manner.

Then Stefan rose to go and the Tsar said to him:

"Stefan, I will reward you richly. You have made the Princess laugh and
besides you have not insisted on her marrying you. You are a fine lad
and I shall never forget you."

"But, father," the Princess said, "I don't want Stefan to go. He amuses
me and I like him. He said I needn't marry him unless I wanted to but,
father, I think I want to."

"Wow! Wow!" the Tsar roared. "What! My daughter marry the son of a
farmer!"

"Now, father," the Princess said, "it's no use your _wow-wowing_ at me
and you know it isn't. If I can't marry Stefan I won't marry any one.
And if I don't marry any one I'm going to stop eating again. So that's
that!" And still holding Stefan's hand, the Princess turned her face to
the wall.

What could the poor Tsar do? At first he fumed and raged but as usual
after a day or two he came around to the Princess's way of thinking. In
fact it soon seemed to him that Stefan had been his choice from the
first and when one of his councilors remarked: "Then, Your Majesty,
there's no use sending word to the neighboring kings that the Princess
has reached a marriageable age and would like to look over their sons,"
the Tsar flew into an awful temper and roared:

"Wow! Wow! You blockhead! Neighboring kings, indeed, and their
good-for-nothing sons! No, siree! The husband I want for my daughter is
an honest farmer lad who knows how to work and how to play! That's the
kind of son-in-law we need in this kingdom!"

So Stefan and the little Princess were married and from that day the
castle was no longer gloomy but rang with laughter and merriment.
Presently the people of the kingdom, following the example of their
rulers, were laughing, too, and cracking jokes and, strange to say, they
soon found they were working all the better for their jollity.

Laughter grew so fashionable that even Mihailo and Jakov were forced to
take it up. They didn't do it very well but they practised at it
conscientiously. Whenever people talked about Stefan, they always pushed
forward importantly and said:

"Ho! Ho! Ho! Do you mean Stefan, the Laughing Prince? Ha! Ha! Ha! Why,
do you know, he's our own brother!"

As for Militza, the Princess had her come to the castle and said to her:

"I owe all my happiness to you, my dear, for you it was who knew that of
course I would laugh at Stefan's nonsense! What sensible girl
wouldn't?"


BEAUTY AND THE HORNS

[Illustration]

_The Story of an Enchanted Maiden_


BEAUTY AND THE HORNS


There was once a rich man who when he was dying called his son to his
bedside and said:

"Danilo, my son, I am leaving you my riches. The only thing I ask of you
is this: close your ears to all reports of an enchanted maiden who is
known as Peerless Beauty and when the time comes that you wish to marry
choose for wife some quiet sensible girl of your native village."

Now if the father had not mentioned Peerless Beauty all might have been
well. Danilo might never have heard of her and after a time he would
probably have fallen in love with a girl of his native village and
married her. As it was, after his father's death he kept saying to
himself:

"Peerless Beauty, the enchanted maiden of whom my father warned me! I
wonder is she really as beautiful as all that! I wonder where she
lives!"

He thought about her until he could think of nothing else.

"Peerless Beauty! Peerless Beauty! Oh, I must see this enchanted maiden
even if it costs me my life!"

His father had a brother, a wise old man, who was supposed to know
everything in the world.

"I will go to my uncle," the young man said. "Perhaps he will tell me
where I can find Peerless Beauty."

So he went to his uncle and said:

"My dear uncle, my father as he lay dying told me about a wonderful
maiden called Peerless Beauty. Can you tell me where she lives because I
want to see her for myself and judge whether she is as beautiful as my
father said."

His uncle looked at him gravely and shook his head.

"My poor boy, how can I tell you where that enchanted maiden lives when
I know it would mean death to you if ever you saw her? Think no more
about her but go, find some suitable maid in the village, and marry her
like a sensible young man."

But his uncle's words, far from dissuading Danilo, only excited him the
more.

"If my uncle knows where Peerless Beauty lives," he thought, "other men
also know."

So one by one he went to all the old men in the village and asked them
what they knew of Peerless Beauty. One by one they shook their heads and
told him that Peerless Beauty was no maiden for him to be thinking
about.

"Put her out of your mind," they said. "These enchanted maidens are a
snare to young men. What you want to do is marry some quiet industrious
girl here in the village and settle down like a sensible young man."

But the oftener Danilo heard this advice, the more firmly convinced he
became that it was just what he did not want to do.

"Time enough to settle down after I've seen Peerless Beauty," he told
himself. "She must be beautiful indeed, or all these old men would not
be so anxious to keep me from seeing her. Well, if they won't tell me
where she is, I'll go out in the world and find her for myself."

So he put on rich clothes as befitted his wealth, took a bag of the gold
his father had left him, mounted his horse, and rode off into the world.
Everywhere he went he made inquiries about Peerless Beauty and
everywhere he found old men who knew about the enchanted maiden but
would tell him nothing. Every one of them advised him to go home like a
sensible young man and think no more about her. But all they said only
made him the more determined to see the maiden for himself.

Finally one day as evening approached he came to a little hut in the
woods. At the door of the hut sat a poor old woman. She held out her
hand as he passed and begged an alms. Danilo, being a kind hearted young
man, gave her a gold piece.

"May God reward you!" the old woman said.

"Granny," Danilo asked, "can you tell me the way to Peerless Beauty?"

"Aye, my son, that I can but he is a rash youth who seeks that maiden!
It were better for you to turn back than to go on!"

"But I'm not going to turn back!" Danilo declared. "Whatever the outcome
I'm going to find Peerless Beauty and see for myself why all men fear
her."

When the old woman saw that Danilo was determined, she gave up pleading
with him and pointed out a faint trail in the forest which, she told
him, would lead him to Peerless Beauty's castle.

He slept that night in the old woman's hut and early next morning set
out on the forest trail. By afternoon he reached the castle.

"What do you want?" the guards demanded roughly.

"I want to see Peerless Beauty."

"Have you gold?" they asked him.

Danilo showed them his bag of ducats.

They led him into a hall of the castle and told him to put his gold on a
table. If he did so, perhaps Peerless Beauty would show herself and
perhaps she wouldn't.

Danilo did as the guards directed and then faced a curtain behind which,
they told him, Peerless Beauty was seated. The curtain opened a little,
but instead of showing her face Peerless Beauty extended only one
finger. However, that finger was so ravishingly beautiful that Danilo
almost fainted with delight. He would have stayed gazing on that one
enchanting finger for hours if the guards had not taken him roughly by
the shoulders and thrown him out of the castle.

"Come again when you've got more gold!" they shouted after him.

Like a man in a dream Danilo rode back to the old woman's hut.

"Now, my son, are you satisfied?" she asked him. "Are you ready now to
go home and settle down like a sensible young man?"

"Oh, granny!" Danilo raved. "Such a finger! I must see that finger again
if it cost me my whole fortune!"

He slept that night in the old woman's hut and the next day returned to
his native village. There he got another bag of the golden ducats which
his father had left him and at once started back to the castle of
Peerless Beauty.

This time that heartless maiden stripped him again of his gold, showed
him two of her enchanting fingers, and as before had her guards throw
him out of the castle.

"Come again when you've got more gold!" they shouted after him.

That's exactly what the poor young man did. He went back and back until
the fortune that his father had left him was entirely squandered. And
all he had seen of Peerless Beauty up to that time were the fingers of
one hand! Shouldn't you suppose that now with all his wealth lost he
would get over his foolish infatuation? Well, he didn't.

"I must go back again!" he kept telling himself.

His gold was gone but he still had his father's house. It was a big old
house with garrets and cellars.

"Perhaps if I hunt I shall find some treasures hidden away in odd
corners," Danilo said.

So he hunted upstairs and down. He opened old boxes and rummaged about
among the dark rafters. One day he came upon a funny looking little cap.

"I wonder whose this was," he thought to himself.

He went to a mirror and tried the cap on. Then a strange thing happened.
The moment the cap touched his head, Danilo disappeared.

"Ah!" he cried, "it's a magic cap and the moment I put it on I become
invisible! Now I can slip into Peerless Beauty's chamber and see her
lovely face!"

With his magic cap pulled tightly down over his forehead, he set off
once more for Peerless Beauty's castle. Sure enough he was able to pass
unseen the guards at the gate, he was able to go boldly into the great
hall, and beyond it through the curtain into Peerless Beauty's own
chamber.

The Beauty was seated with her back to the curtain and a serving maid
was combing out her hair for the night. It was lovely hair and it fell
down over Beauty's shoulders like a mantle of gold. At mere sight of it
Danilo was so overcome with emotion that he sighed.

"What's that?" Beauty cried. "There's some one in my chamber!"

The serving maid looked under the bed and behind the chairs and in the
corners.

"There's no one here, my lady."

"That's strange!" Beauty said. "I feel as though some one were looking
at me."

When Danilo saw the actual face of the enchanted maiden, it was all he
could do to keep from crying aloud. She was so unutterably beautiful
that he almost swooned away in ecstacy.

Presently the maiden went to bed and fell into an uneasy sleep. The
light of a single candle shed a faint radiance over her face making it
lovelier than ever. Through all the long hours of night Danilo stood
perfectly still, gazing at her, afraid almost to breathe lest he should
disturb her.

"Unless I win her for wife," he thought to himself, "I shall nevermore
be happy!"

When morning came the maiden awoke with a start and said:

"There's some one looking at me! Who is it? Who is it?"

"It's only your poor Danilo," a voice answered.

"Danilo? Who is Danilo?"

"The youth whom you have been treating so cruelly. But though you have
treated me cruelly, I love you still!"

"If you love me still," the maiden said, "let me see you."

Danilo took off the magic cap and there he stood, a handsome youth, at
the foot of her bed. Then the crafty maiden spoke him fair and Danilo
told her about the magic cap, and when she said to him that she repented
having treated him so cruelly and asked him to let her see the cap, the
poor young man was so dazzled by her beauty and her seeming kindness
that he handed it to her at once.

Instantly she clapped it on her head and disappeared. Then she laughed
in derision and called out loudly to the guards:

"Ho, there! Take out this young man and drive him forth! Let him return
when he has another treasure to offer me!"

So the guards dragged Danilo out and drove him away.

With no more gold, with no more magic cap, Danilo returned to his
father's house.

"Perhaps there are other treasures hidden away," he thought. "I'll
search further."

In his search he came upon an old pitcher and thinking it might be
silver he began rubbing it. Instantly there was a clap of thunder and a
company of soldiers appeared. Their captain saluted Danilo respectfully
and said:

"We are the servants of that magic pitcher. What does our master wish?"

"Magic pitcher?" stammered Danilo. "And am I your master?"

"Yes," said the captain, "you are our master as long as you hold the
magic pitcher in your hands."

"You may disappear now," Danilo said. "I will rub the pitcher when I
need you."

Delighted with this unexpected good fortune, he hurried off to the woods
to the hut of the old woman who had befriended him before. He showed her
the pitcher and demonstrated for her how it worked. Then he asked her to
carry a message to Peerless Beauty.

"Tell her," he said, "that unless she consents to marry me at once I'll
lead a mighty army against her, take her captive, and then send her off
in exile to that howling wilderness which people call the Donkeys'
Paradise."

"I will deliver your message," the old woman said, "on condition that
you promise me to be on your guard this time. Don't let the maiden trick
you again. She is under an enchantment that makes her cruel and crafty
and the enchantment will never be broken until she meets a man upon whom
her wiles have no effect."

"Trust me this time," Danilo said. "I've had my lesson."

So the old woman delivered the message and when Peerless Beauty
received it with scorn, Danilo at once set out for the castle with the
magic pitcher in his hand. He began rubbing and every time he rubbed a
company of soldiers appeared. Soon the castle was surrounded by a great
army and in fright and dismay Peerless Beauty sent out word that she was
ready to make an unconditional surrender.

When Danilo entered the castle he found her humble and meek.

"I have treated you cruelly," she said. "Now I am in your power, do with
me what you will." And she began weeping softly until the sight of her
tears drove Danilo distracted.

"Weep no more, dear lady!" he cried. "You have nothing to fear from me!
I love you! I am your slave!"

The Peerless one slowly dried her tears.

"If you love me as you say you do, you will tell me by what magic you
have raised this great army."

Then Danilo, forgetting the old woman's warning, took the magic pitcher
out of his shirt and showed the maiden how it worked.

"Ah!" she murmured wonderingly. "It looks like any old pitcher! Please,
Danilo, let me see it in my own hands."

Danilo handed her the pitcher and, quick as a flash, she rubbed it.
There was a clap of thunder, a company of soldiers appeared, and their
captain saluting her respectfully said:

"What does the mistress of the pitcher want?"

"Nay!" cried Danilo, "it is I who own the pitcher, not she!"

"We are the servants," the captain said, "of whoever holds the pitcher."

At that Peerless Beauty laughed loud and scornfully until the castle
rang with her merriment.

"Seize that wretch!" she said, pointing to Danilo. "Tie his hands and
drive him out in exile to the Donkeys' Paradise! Let him stay there
until he has another treasure to present me!"

So they drove Danilo out to the wilderness and left him there.

He wandered about for many days hungry and thirsty, subsisting on roots
and berries, and having for drink only the water that collected in the
hoof prints of the wild beasts.

"See what I've come to!" he cried aloud. "Why didn't I heed the old
woman's warning! If I had, I should have broken the evil enchantment
that binds my Peerless Beauty and all would have been well!"

One day as he wandered about he came upon a vine that was laden with
great clusters of luscious red grapes. He fell upon them ravenously and
ate bunch after bunch. Suddenly he felt something in his hair and
lifting his hands he found that horns had grown out all over his head.

"Fine grapes these are!" he exclaimed, "to bring out horns on a person's
head!"

However, he was so hungry that he kept on eating until his head was one
mass of horns.

The next day he found a vine that had clusters of white grapes. He began
eating the white grapes and he hadn't finished a bunch before the horns
all fell off his head.

"Ha!" he said. "The red grapes put horns on and the white grapes take
them off! That's a trick worth knowing!"

He took some reeds and fashioned two baskets one of which he filled with
red grapes and the other with white grapes. Then staining his face with
the dark juice of a leaf until he looked brown and sunburned like a
countryman, he went back to Peerless Beauty's castle. There he marched
up and down below the Peerless one's window crying his wares like a
huckster:

"Sweet grapes for sale! Who wants my fresh sweet grapes!"

Now it was not the season for grapes, so Peerless Beauty when she heard
the cry was surprised and said to her serving maid:

"Go quickly and buy me some grapes from that huckster and mind you don't
eat one yourself!"

The serving maid hurried out to Danilo and he sold her some of the red
grapes. As she carried them in, she couldn't resist the temptation of
slipping a few into her mouth. Instantly some horns grew out on her
head.

"That's to punish me for disobeying my mistress!" the poor girl cried.
"Oh, dear, what shall I do?"

She was afraid to show herself to Peerless Beauty, so she pretended she
was taken sick and she went to bed and pulled the sheet over her head
and sent in the grapes by another serving maid.

Peerless Beauty ate them all before she discovered their frightful
property. Then there was a great to-do, and cries of anger and of
fright, and a quick sending out of the guards to find the huckster. But
the huckster had disappeared.

What could Peerless Beauty do now? She tried to pull the horns out but
they wouldn't come. She tried to cut them off but they resisted the edge
of the sharpest knife. She was too proud to show herself with horns, so
she swathed her head with jewels and ribbons and pretended she was
wearing an elaborate head-dress.

Then she sent heralds through the land offering a huge reward to any one
who could cure her serving maid of some strange horns that had grown out
on her head. You see she thought if she could get hold of some one who
would cure the maid, then she could make him cure her, too.

Well, doctors and quacks and all sorts of people came and tried every
kind of remedy, but all in vain. The horns stayed firmly rooted.

A whole week went by and when the last of the quacks had come and gone,
Danilo, disguised as an old physician, presented himself and craved
audience with the Peerless one. He carried two small jars in his hands
one of which was filled with a conserve made from the white grapes and
the other with a conserve made from the red grapes.

Peerless Beauty, her horns swathed in silk and gleaming with jewels,
received him coldly.

"Are you one more quack?" she asked.

"Not a quack," he said, bowing low, "but a man who has happened upon a
strange secret of nature. I can cure your serving maid of her horns
provided she confess to me all her misdeeds and hand over to me anything
she has that does not belong to her."

Peerless Beauty had him shown to the room where the serving maid lay in
bed. The poor frightened girl at once confessed that she had stolen a
few of her mistress's grapes and eaten them. Danilo spoke kindly to her,
gave her some of the white grape conserve, and as soon as she had tasted
it the horns of course dropped off.

Thereupon Peerless Beauty led Danilo to her own chamber, ordered all her
people out, and then acknowledged that she, too, was suffering from
horns.

"I am sure I can cure you," Danilo told her, "provided you confess to me
all your misdeeds and hand over to me whatever you have that belongs to
some one else."

"I cheated a foolish young man out of five bags of gold," Peerless
Beauty said. "Here they are in this chest. Take them."

Danilo opened the chest and took out his own five bags of gold.

"Is that all?" he asked.

[Illustration: _The Magic Pitcher_]

"Yes, that is all."

Danilo gave her some of the red grape conserve and of course, instead of
the horns already on her head falling off, more grew on.

"You're not telling me the truth," Danilo said, "and I can't cure you.
There's no use my treating you further."

He turned to go and Peerless Beauty, in great fright, begged him to
stay.

"I do remember another misdeed," she confessed. "I took by trickery a
magic pitcher from the same foolish young man."

She gave Danilo the pitcher and he hid it in his shirt.

"Is that all?"

"Yes, that is all."

Danilo gave her some more of the red grape conserve and, of course, more
horns grew out on her head. Then he pretended to get angry.

"How can you expect to be cured when you don't tell me the truth? I told
you I could not cure you unless you confessed all!"

Peerless Beauty wanted much to keep the magic cap but when the strange
physician thundered and scowled and threatened again to leave her, more
horned than ever, she acknowledged that she had taken the cap, too, and
handed it over.

Regardless of Catalonia, a country so exceptional, it seems, for example,
a profound difference in the appearance and the statistics of two large
regions that are played: the Andalusia and New Castile in Estremadura.

Geographically, the first of these divisions is well below the other,
geographically, the Andalusias, despite the commercial advantage
of its coastline, have a great disadvantage of New Castile and
Estremadura.

In this region the soil is much like, spontaneous, amazingly fertile and
suitable for varied and valuable products. In Andalusia, with the
exception of the plains of Seville and Granada _Vega_, the valleys
are very low in general, wherever the ground is uneven, rocky,
surrounded by a labyrinth of hills, great hills, steep hills and
deep ramblas.

Thus, part of the habitable and usable Andalusias is very small
compared to its geographical extension.

And yet, where you can grow any plant that can be sustained either a
production, it is seen to appear in Andalusia, building up the children
Vallecitos plains or the most limited.

And as the ground is broken by countless prodigiously orographic inflections,
there has been a rare phenomenon: is life in all exploitable interstices
of the country, but condemned by nature, temporary isolation. In the
vast plains of Estremadura, the Channel and the upper Tajo, nature
has allowed the accumulation and easy communication of large masses,
as well as the cultivation in _continuidad_ very large scale.

And yet, the regions can not sustain the high social and economic
comparison with Andalusias, despite certain advantages from the
political and religious centers (Madrid and Toledo) and others which
are not insignificant.

What is the great superiority _efectiva_ of Andalusia? Is the higher
fertility - No. Is the largest exploitable land - Less. Is it under the
sea - they only directly benefit the peoples of the coast. Is the
infusion of African blood in the primitive race of Spain - Is it because
the institutions of feudalism, absolutism and Roman Catholicism later
could not be implanted in the Andalusias so deeply in the Castiles
- Sin aiming to give the solution, I must acknowledge the power of
contrast and interest that these phenomena have for the state.

For my part I would say that the quick look I have confirmed these contrasts,
rather than reading many books, in my liberal beliefs. Granada same
compared to the historic Granada Moruna, is eloquent testimony in
favor of the doctrine of justice , tolerance and progress.

Setentrional located to the side of the valley which irrigates the
primary Jenil, two at the foot of high hills, spurs of the mountain range
that divides the Darro, which runs through a deep bed, Granada has one
of the most picturesque, but it tastes lovely Eastern was able to
choose a seat for Andalusia capital.

Almost at the apex to form the Sierra Nevada east of Granada, was the
beautiful _Jenil_ whose little waves, wide valleys have inspired
so many poets; crosses the plain or famous _Veya_ , which is 40
kilometers in circumference, and collects the water coming down
from the mountains in _Dilao_ the _Monachi_ the _Alfacas_ the _Darro_
and other streams that fertile country.

Sierra to the east and south form a sort of semicircle, a branch off of
hills and slopes on the basis of which is a rare reclining Granada
poetic terms between two heights separated by cordons of the Darro.
The one holding the overlapping ridges on their _Alhambra_ and
_Jeneralife_; the other, more Western, it faces parallel and in line
in succession to give a seat chapel and workshop _Monte Santo_ and
strange _Albaicin_ neighborhood, populated by families of Gypsies.

The foot of the Alhambra and the city Albaicin extends on both banks of
the Darro and right Jenil, declining slope toward Vega.

Nothing but the strange appearance of the city, both Gothic, Arabic and
Gypsy -- artist and producer - religious and voluptuous, - rich
and ragged - and gardens full of miseries, and horrible, beautiful
- and animated corpses - hope and debris at the same time.

At this the Queen, ending the discussion every day with the same words,
would shake her head and declare:

"I tell you it isn't natural for a girl to be more interested in
embroidery than in a long line of handsome young suitors!"

The Princess was interested in her embroidery--there's no doubt about
that. She spent every moment she could in the tower-room, working and
singing. The tower was high up among the treetops. It was reached by
winding stairs so narrow and so many that no one any older than the
Princess would care to climb them. The Princess flew up them like a
bird, scarcely pausing for breath. At the top of the stairs was a
trap-door which was the only means of entrance into the tower-room. Once
in the tower-room with the bolt of the trap-door securely fastened, the
Princess was safe from interruption and could work away at her
embroidery to her heart's content. The tower had windows on all sides,
so the Princess as she sat at her embroidery frame could look out north,
east, south, and west.

The clouds sailed by in the sky, the wind blew and at once the leaves in
the treetops began murmuring and whispering among themselves, and the
birds that went flying all over the world would often alight on some
branch near the tower and sing to the Princess as she worked or chatter
some exciting story that she could almost understand.

"What!" the Princess would think to herself as she looked out north,
east, south, and west. "Leave my tower and my beautiful embroidery to
become the wife of some conceited young man! Never!"

From this remark you can understand perfectly well that the particular
young man of whom her father spoke had not yet come along. And I'm sure
you'll also know that shutting herself up in the tower-room and bolting
the trap-door was not going to keep him away when it was time for him to
come. Yet I don't believe that you'd have recognized him when he did
come any more than the Princess did. This is how it happened:

One afternoon when as usual she was working at her embroidery and
singing as she worked, suddenly there was a flutter of wings at the
eastern window and a lovely Pigeon came flying into the room. It circled
three times about the Princess's head and then alighted on the
embroidery frame. The Princess reached out her hand and the bird,
instead of taking fright, allowed her to stroke its gleaming neck. Then
she took it gently in her hands and fondled it to her bosom, kissing its
bill and smoothing its plumage with her lips.

"You beautiful thing!" she cried. "How I love you!"

"If you really love me," the Pigeon said, "have a bowl of milk here at
this same hour to-morrow and then we'll see what we'll see."

With that the bird spread its wings and flew out the western window.

The Princess was so excited that for the rest of the afternoon she
forgot her embroidery.

"Did the Pigeon really speak?" she asked herself as she stood staring
out the western window, "or have I been dreaming?"

The next day when she climbed the winding stairs she went slowly for she
carried in her hands a brimming bowl of milk.

"Of course it won't come again!" she said, and she made herself sit down
quietly before the embroidery frame and work just as though she expected
nothing.

But exactly at the same hour as the day before there was a flutter of
wings at the eastern window, the sound of a gentle _coo! coo!_ and there
was the Pigeon ready to be loved and caressed.

"You beautiful creature!" the Princess cried, kissing its coral beak and
smoothing its neck with her lips, "how I love you! And see, I have
brought you the bowl of milk that you asked for!"

The bird flew over to the bowl, poised for a moment on its brim, then
splashed into the milk as though to take a bath.

The Princess laughed and clapped her hands and then, as she looked, she
saw a strange thing happen. The bird's feathers opened like a shirt and
out of the feather shirt stepped a handsome youth.

(You remember I told you how surprised the Princess was going to be.
And you're surprised, too, aren't you?)

He was so handsome that all the Princess could say was, "Oh!"

He came slowly towards her and knelt before her.

"Dear Princess," he said, "do not be frightened. If it had not been for
your sweet words yesterday when you said you loved me I should never
have been able to leave this feather shirt. Do not turn from me now
because I am a man and not a pigeon. Love me still if you can, for I
love you. It was because I fell in love with you yesterday when I saw
you working at your embroidery that I flew in by the open window and let
you caress me."

For a long time the Princess could only stare at the kneeling youth, too
amazed to speak. He was so handsome that she forgot all about the pigeon
he used to be, she forgot her embroidery, she forgot everything. She
hadn't supposed that any young man in the whole world could be so
handsome! Why, just looking at him, she could be happy forever and ever
and ever!

"Would you rather I were still a pigeon?" the young man asked.

"No! No! No!" the Princess cried. "I like you ever so much better this
way!"

The young man gravely bowed his head and kissed her hand and the
Princess blushed and trembled and wished he would do it again. She had
never imagined that any kiss could be so wonderful!

They passed the afternoon together and it seemed to the Princess it was
the happiest afternoon of all her life. As the sun was sinking the youth
said:

"Now I must leave you and become a pigeon again."

"But you'll come back, won't you?" the Princess begged.

"Yes, I'll come back to-morrow but on one condition: that you don't tell
any one about me. I'll come back every day at the same hour but if ever
you tell about me then I won't be able to come back any more."

"I'll never tell!" the Princess promised.

Then the youth kissed her tenderly, dipped himself in the milk, went
back into his feather shirt, and flew off as a pigeon.

The next day he came again and the next and the next and the Princess
fell so madly in love with him that all day long and all night long,
too, she thought of nothing else. She no longer touched her embroidery
but day after day sat idle in the tower-room just awaiting the hour of
his arrival. And every day it seemed to the King and the Queen and all
the people about the Court that the Princess was becoming more and more
beautiful. Her cheeks kept growing pinker, her eyes brighter, her lovely
hair more golden.

"I must say sitting at that foolish embroidery agrees with her," the
King said.

"No, it isn't that," the Queen told him. "It's the big bowl of milk she
drinks every afternoon. You know milk is very good for the complexion."

"Milk indeed!" murmured the Princess to herself, and she blushed rosier
than ever at thought of her wonderful secret.

But a princess can't keep growing more and more beautiful without
everybody in the world hearing about it. The neighboring kings soon
began to feel angry and suspicious.

"What ails this Princess?" they asked among themselves. "Isn't one of
our sons good enough for her? Is she waiting for the King of Persia to
come as a suitor or what? Let us stand together on our rights and demand
to know why she won't consider one of our sons!"

So they sent envoys to the Princess's father and he saw at once that the
matter had become serious.

"My dear," he said to the Princess, "your mother and I have humored you
long enough. It is high time that you had a husband and I insist that
you allow the sons of neighboring kings to be presented to you next
week."

"I won't do it!" the Princess declared. "I'm not interested in the sons
of the neighboring kings and that's all there is about it!"

Her father looked at her severely.

"Is that the way for a princess to talk? Persist in this foolishness and
you may embroil your country in war!"

"I don't care!" the Princess cried, bursting into tears. "I can't marry
any of them, so why let them be presented?"

"Why can't you marry any of them?"

"I just can't!" the Princess insisted.

At first, in spite of the pleadings of both parents, she would tell them
no more, but her mother kept questioning her until at last in
self-defense the Princess confessed that she had a true love who came to
her in the tower every afternoon in the form of a pigeon.

"He's a prince," she told them, "the son of a distant king. At present
he is under an enchantment that turns him into a pigeon. When the
enchantment is broken he is coming as a prince to marry me."

"My poor child!" the Queen cried. "Think no more about this Pigeon
Prince! The enchantment may last a hundred years and then where will you
be!"

"But he is my love!" the Princess declared, "and if I can't have him I
won't have any one!"

When the King found that nothing they could say would move her from this
resolution, he sighed and murmured:

"Very well, my dear. If it must be so, it must be. This afternoon when
your lover comes, bring him down to me that I may talk to him."

But that afternoon the Pigeon did not come. Nor the next afternoon
either, nor the next, and then too late the Princess remembered his
warning that if she told about him he could never come back.

So now she sat in the tower-room idle and heartbroken, reproaching
herself that she had betrayed her lover and praying God to forgive her
and send him back to her. And the roses faded from her cheeks and her
eyes grew dull and the people about the Court began wondering why they
had ever thought her the most beautiful princess in the world.

At last she went to the King, her father, and said:

"As my love can no longer come back to me because I forgot my promise
and betrayed him, I must go out into the world and hunt him. Unless I
find him life will not be worth the living. So do not oppose me,
father, but help me. Have three pairs of iron shoes made for me and
three iron staffs. I will wander over the wide world until these are
worn out and then, if by that time I have not found him, I will come
home to you."

So the King had three pairs of iron shoes made for the Princess and
three iron staffs and she set forth on her quest. She traveled through
towns and cities and many kingdoms, over rough mountains and desert
places, looking everywhere for her enchanted love. But nowhere could she
find any trace of him.

At the end of the first year she had worn out the first pair of iron
shoes and the first iron staff. At the end of the second year she had
worn out the second pair of iron shoes and the second iron staff. At the
end of the third year, when she had worn out the third pair of iron
shoes and the third staff, she returned to her father's palace looking
thin and worn and sad.

"My poor child," the King said, "I hope now you realize that the Pigeon
Prince is gone forever. Think no more about him. Go back to your
embroidery and when the roses begin blooming in your cheeks again we'll
find some young prince for you who isn't enchanted."

But the Princess shook her head.

"Let me try one thing more, father," she begged, "and then if I don't
find my love I'll do as you say."

The King agreed to this.

"Well, then," the Princess said, "build a public bath-house and have the
heralds proclaim that the King's daughter will sit at the entrance and
will allow any one to bathe free of charge who will tell her the story
of the strangest thing he has ever heard or seen."

So the King built the bath-house and sent out his heralds far and wide.
Men and women from all over the world came and bathed and told the
Princess stories of this marvel and that, but never, alas, a word of an
enchanted pigeon.

The days went by and the Princess grew more and more discouraged.

"Isn't it sad," the courtiers began whispering, "how the Princess has
lost her looks! Do you suppose she ever was really beautiful or did we
just imagine it?"

And the neighboring kings when they heard this remarked softly among
themselves:

"It's just as well we didn't hurry one of our sons into a marriage with
this young woman!"

[Illustration: _The Princess Kissed Its Coral Beak_]

Now there was a poor widow who lived near the bath-house. She had a
daughter, a pretty young girl, who used to sit at the window and watch
the Princess as people came and told her their stories.

"Mother," the girl said one day, "every one in the world goes to the
bath-house and I want to go, too!"

"Nonsense!" the mother said. "What story could you tell the Princess?"

"But everybody else goes and I don't see why I can't!"

"Well, my dear," the mother promised, "you may just as soon as you see
or hear something strange. Talk no more about it now but go, fetch me a
pitcher of water from the town well."

The girl obediently took an empty pitcher and went to the town well.
Just as she had filled the pitcher she heard some one say:

"Mercy me, I fear I'll be late!"

She turned around and what do you think she saw? A rooster in wooden
shoes with a basket under his wing!

"I fear I'll be late! I fear I'll be late!" the rooster kept repeating
as he hurried off making a funny little clatter with his wooden shoes.

"How strange!" the girl thought to herself. "A rooster with wooden
shoes! I'm sure the Princess would love to hear about him! I'll follow
him and see what he does."

He went to a garden where he filled his basket with fresh
vegetables--with onions and beans and garlic. Then he hurried home to a
little house. The girl slipped in after him and hid behind the door.

"Thank goodness, I'm on time!" the rooster murmured.

He put a big bowl on the table and filled it with milk.

"There!" he said. "Now I'm ready for them!"

Presently twelve beautiful pigeons came flying in by the open door.
Eleven of them dipped in the bowl of milk, their feather shirts opened,
and out they stepped eleven handsome youths. But the Twelfth Pigeon
perched disconsolately on the windowsill and remained a pigeon. The
eleven laughed at him and said:

"Poor fellow, your bride betrayed you, didn't she? So you have to remain
shut up in your feather shirt while we go off and have a jolly time!"

"Yes," the Twelfth Pigeon said, "she broke her promise and now she goes
wandering up and down the world hunting for me. If she doesn't find me I
shall nevermore escape the feather shirt but shall have to fly about
forever as a pigeon. But I know she will find me for she will never
stop until she does. And when she finds me, then the enchantment will be
broken forever and I can marry her!"

The eleven youths went laughing arm in arm out of the house and in a few
moments the solitary Pigeon flew after them. Instantly the girl slipped
out from behind the door and hurried home with her pitcher of water.
Then she ran quickly across to the bath-house and all out of breath she
cried to the Princess:

"O Princess, I have such a wonderful story to tell you all about a
rooster with wooden shoes and twelve pigeons only eleven of them are not
pigeons but handsome young men and the twelfth one has to stay in his
feather shirt because--"

At mention of the enchanted pigeons, the Princess turned pale. She held
up her hand and made the girl pause until she had her breath, then she
questioned her until she knew the whole story.

"It must be my love!" the Princess thought to herself. "Thank God I have
found him at last!"

The next day at the same hour she went with the girl to the town well
and when the rooster clattered by in his wooden shoes they followed him
home and slipping into the house they hid behind the door and waited.
Presently twelve pigeons flew in. Eleven of them dipped in the milk and
came out handsome young men. The Twelfth sat disconsolately on the
window sill and remained a pigeon. The eleven laughed at him and twitted
him with having had a bride that had betrayed him. Then the eleven went
away laughing arm in arm. Before the Twelfth could fly after them, the
Princess ran out from behind the door and cried:

"My dear one, I have found you at last!"

The Pigeon flew into her hands and she took him and kissed his coral
beak and smoothed his gleaming plumage with her lips. Then she put him
in the milk and the feather shirt opened and her own true love stepped
out.

She led him at once to her father and when the King found him well
trained in all the arts a prince should know he accepted him as his
future son-in-law and presented him to the people.

So after all the Princess's mother was able to give her daughter the
gorgeous wedding she had planned for years and years. Preparations were
begun at once but the Queen insisted on making such vast quantities of
little round cakes and candied fruits and sweetmeats of all kinds that
it was three whole months before the wedding actually took place. By
that time the roses were again blooming in the Princess's cheeks, her
eyes were brighter than before, and her long shining hair was more
golden than ever.

All the neighboring kings were invited to the wedding and when they saw
the bride they shook their heads sadly and said among themselves:

"Lost her looks indeed! What did people mean by saying such a thing?
Why, she's the most beautiful princess in the world! What a pity she
didn't marry one of our sons!"

But when they met the Prince of her choice, they saw at once why the
Princess had fallen in love with him.

"Any girl would!" they said.

It was a big wedding, as I told you before, and the only guest present
who was not a king or a queen or a royal personage of some sort was the
poor girl who saw the rooster with wooden shoes in the first place. The
Queen, of course, had wanted only royalty but the Princess declared that
the poor girl was her dear friend and would have to be invited. So the
Queen, when she saw that the Princess was set on having her own way, had
the poor girl come to the palace before the wedding and decked her out
in rich clothes until people were sure that she was some strange
princess whom the bride had met on her travels.

"My dear," whispered the Princess as they sat down beside each other at
the wedding feast, "how beautiful you look!"

"But I'm not as beautiful as you!" the girl said.

The Princess laughed.

"Of course not! No one can be as beautiful as I am because I have the
secret of beauty!"

"Dear Princess," the poor girl begged, "won't you tell me the secret of
beauty?"

The Princess leaned over and whispered something in the poor girl's ear.

It was only one word:

"Happiness!"

[Illustration]


THE LITTLE LAME FOX


[Illustration]

_The Story of the Youngest Brother Who Found the Magic Grape-Vine and
Married the Golden Maiden_


THE LITTLE LAME FOX


There was once a wealthy farmer who had three sons. The oldest was a
selfish overbearing fellow. The second was a weak chap who always did
everything his brother suggested. The youngest whose name was Janko was
not as bright and clever as his brothers but he was honest and,
moreover, he had a good heart and in this world a good heart, you know,
is more likely to bring its owner happiness than wicked brains.

"That booby!" the oldest brother would say whenever he saw Janko. And
the second would snicker and repeat the ugly word, "Booby!"

The father was proud of his three sons and happy to see them grow up
strong and healthy.

"They're good boys," he'd say to himself, "and I'm a fortunate father."

Now there was one very curious thing about this farmer that nobody
understood. One of his eyes was always laughing and the other was always
weeping.

"What's the matter with your father's eyes?" people used to ask the
sons.

The sons didn't know any more than any one else. One day they were in
the garden discussing the matter among themselves.

"Why don't we just go and ask him?" Janko suggested.

"If anybody is to ask him, I will!" declared the oldest brother
importantly.

So he went indoors to his father and said:

"Father, people are forever talking about your eyes. Now I wish you
would tell me why one of them is always laughing and the other always
weeping."

"My eyes, indeed!" cried the farmer, and in a rage he snatched up a
knife and hurled it straight at his son. The young man dodged aside and
fled and the knife stuck in the door jamb.

All out of breath the oldest brother returned to the others but of
course he was ashamed to tell them what had happened. So he said to
them:

"If you want to know what's the matter with father's eyes, you'll have
to ask him yourselves."

So the second brother went in to the farmer and he had exactly the same
experience. When he came out he gave his older brother a wink and said
to Janko:

"Now it is your turn, Booby. Father is waiting for you."

So Janko went in to his father and said:

"You have told my brothers why one of your eyes is always laughing and
the other always weeping. Now please tell me for I, too, want to know."

In a rage the farmer snatched up the knife again and lifted his arm to
hurl it. But Janko stood perfectly still. Why should he turn and run
away as though he had done something wrong? He had only asked his father
a civil question and if his father did not wish to answer it, he could
tell him so.

The farmer when he saw that the boy was not to be frightened smiled and
laid the knife aside.

"Thank God," he said, "I have one son who is not a coward! I have been
waiting these many years to have my sons ask me this very question. My
right eye laughs because God has blessed me and made me rich and has
allowed my three sons to grow to manhood, strong and healthy. My left
eye weeps because I can never forget a Magic Grape-Vine which once grew
in my garden. It used to give me a bucket of wine every hour of the
twenty-four! One night a thief came and stole my Magic Vine and I have
never heard of it since. Do you wonder that my left eye weeps at the
memory of this wonderful Vine? Alas, the bucket of wine that used to
flow out of it every hour of the day and night--I have never tasted its
like since!"

"Father," Janko said, "dry your weeping eye! I and my brothers will go
out into the world and find your Magic Grape-Vine wherever it is
hidden!"

With that Janko ran out to his brothers and when they heard what he had
to say they laughed and called him, "Booby!" and asked him didn't he
suppose that they had already planned to do just this thing. Of course
they hadn't, but they were so jealous and ill-natured that they couldn't
bear the thought of his being the first to suggest anything.

"We mustn't lose any more time," Janko said.

"It doesn't matter how much time you lose, Mr. Booby! As for us we two
are going to start out to-morrow at sunrise."

"But, brothers," Janko begged, "please let me go, too!"

"No!" they told him shortly. "You can stay home and look after the
farm!"

But their father when he heard the discussion said, no, Janko was also
to go as he was the bravest of them all. After that the brothers,
because they didn't want their father to tell how they had been afraid
and run away, had to agree.

So the next morning early the three of them started out, each with a
wallet well-stocked with food.

"How are we going to get rid of the Booby?" the second one whispered.

"Trust me!" the oldest one whispered back with a wink.

Presently they came to a crossroads where three roads branched. Now the
oldest brother knew that after a short distance two of the roads came
together again. So he motioned the second brother slyly that he was to
take the middle road. Then he said:

"Brothers, let us part here and each take a different road. Do you
agree?"

"Yes," the other two said, "we agree."

"Then suppose Janko take the left-hand road."

"And I'll take the middle road," the second cried.

"And I," the eldest said, "will take the one that's left. So farewell,
brothers, and let us meet here in a year's time."

"God bless us all," Janko called out, "and grant that one of us may find
our dear father's Magic Grape-Vine."

The two older brothers of course met in a short time when their roads
joined and they had a good laugh to think how they had outwitted the
Booby.

"Time enough to look for that old Grape-Vine when we've had a little
fun!" the eldest said. "Let us sit down here and eat a bite and then
push on to the next village. There's an inn there where we can try our
luck at cards."

So they sat down by the roadside, opened their wallets, and laid out
some bread and cheese. Just then a Little Lame Fox came limping up on
three feet, and whimpering and fawning it begged for something to eat.

"Get out!" bawled the older brother and the second, picking up a handful
of stones, threw them at the Fox.

The little animal shied and then came timidly back, again begging for
something to eat.

"Let's kill it!" cried one of the brothers.

They both jumped up and tried to strike the little creature with their
sticks. The Fox limped off and they followed, hitting at it as they ran
and always just missing it. It was so weak and lame that they expected
every minute to overtake it and so kept on chasing it until it had led
them pretty far into the woods. Then suddenly it disappeared and there
was nothing left for the brothers to do but make their way back to the
roadside grumbling and cursing. In their absence some shepherd dogs had
found their open wallets and eaten all their food. So now they really
had something to curse about.

Janko meanwhile had been trudging along steadily on the third road. At
last when he began to feel hungry, he sat down by the wayside and opened
his wallet. Instantly the same Little Lame Fox came limping up and
whimpered and fawned and begged for something to eat.

"You poor little creature," Janko said, "are you hungry?"

He held out his hand coaxingly and the animal gave it a timid sniff.

"Of course I'll give you something to eat," Janko said. "There's enough
for both of us."

With that he divided his bread and cheese and gave the Little Fox half.
Then they ate together and the Little Fox allowed Janko to pat her head.

When they finished eating the Fox sat up on her haunches and said:

"Now, Janko, tell me about yourself. Who are you and where are you
going?"

The Fox seemed such a sensible little person that it didn't surprise
Janko in the least to have her sit up and talk. Janko's brothers would
have said that he hadn't sense enough to be surprised. But he had a good
heart, Janko had, and as you'll soon hear a good heart is a much better
guide for conduct than wicked brains.

Janko answered the Fox simply and truthfully. He told about his father
and his two brothers and about his father's weeping eye and the Magic
Grape-Vine for which he and his brothers were gone in search.

"You've been good to me," the Little Fox said. "You've shared your bread
with me and that makes us friends. So from now on if you'll be a brother
to me, I'll be a little sister to you."

Goodness knows Janko's own brothers weren't very good to him, but Janko
understood what the Little Fox meant and he agreed.

"Well then, brother," the Fox said, "I know where that Grape-Vine is and
I'm going to help you to get it. If you do just as I say I don't believe
you'll have any trouble. Now take hold of my tail and away we'll go."

So Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and sure enough away they
went. Whether they sailed through the air or just ran fleetly along the
ground I don't know. But I do know that they went a great distance and
that when they stopped Janko didn't feel in the least tired or
breathless.

"Now, my brother," the Little Fox said, "listen carefully to what I tell
you. The king of this country has a wonderful garden. In the midst of it
your father's Grape-Vine is planted. We are close to the garden now. It
is protected by twelve watches each of which is composed of twelve
guards. To get to the Grape-Vine you will have to pass them all. Now as
you approach each watch look carefully. If the eyes of all the guards
are open and staring straight at you, have no fear. They sleep with
their eyes open and they won't see you. But if their eyes are closed,
then be careful for when their eyes are closed they are awake and ready
to see you. You will find the Grape-Vine in the very center of the
garden. Standing near it you will see two spades, a wooden spade and a
golden spade. Take the wooden spade and dig up the Vine as quickly as
you can. Under no condition touch the golden spade. Now, Janko, do you
understand?"

Yes, Janko thought he understood. He slipped into the garden and the
first thing he saw were twelve fierce looking guards who were staring at
him with great round eyes. He was much frightened until he remembered
that the Little Fox had said that if their eyes were open they were fast
asleep. So he picked up courage and walked straight by them and sure
enough they didn't see him. He passed watch after watch in the same way
and at last reached the center of the garden. He saw the Grape-Vine at
once. There was no mistaking it for at that very moment it was pouring
out wine of itself into a golden bucket. Near it were two spades, Janko
in great excitement snatched up the first that came to his hand and
began to dig. Alas, it was the golden spade and as Janko drove it into
the earth it sent out a loud ringing sound that instantly woke the
guards. They came running from all directions with their eyes tightly
closed for now, of course, they were awake. They caught Janko and
dragged him to the king to whom they said:

"A thief! A thief! We found him trying to steal your Magic Grape-Vine!"

"My Magic Grape-Vine!" thundered the king. "Young man, what do you mean
trying to steal my Magic Grape-Vine?"

"Well, you see," Janko answered simply, "the Grape-Vine really belongs
to my father. It was stolen from him years ago and ever since then his
left eye has wept over the loss of it. Give me the Vine, O king, for if
you don't I shall have to come back and try again to steal it for it
belongs to my father and I have sworn to get it!"

The king frowned in thought and at last he said:

"I can't give away my precious Grape-Vine for nothing, young man, but I
tell you what I'll do: I'll give it to you provided you get for me the
Golden Apple-Tree that bears buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every
twenty-four hours."

With that Janko was dismissed and turned out of the garden.

The Little Fox was waiting for him and Janko had the shame of confessing
that he had forgotten the warning about the golden spade and had been
caught.

"But the king says he will give me the Grape-Vine provided I get for him
the Golden Apple-Tree that bears buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every
twenty-four hours."

"Well, brother," the Little Fox said, "you were good to me, so I'll help
you again. Take hold of my tail and away we'll go."

Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away they went a greater
distance than before. In spite of going so quickly it took them a long
time but whether it was weeks or months I don't know. Whichever it was
when they stopped Janko didn't feel in the least tired or breathless.

"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "here we are in another country
close to the king's garden where the Golden Apple-Tree grows. To reach
it you will have to pass twenty-four watches of twelve guards each.
Take care that you pass each guard as before when his eyes are wide open
and staring straight at you for that means he is asleep. When you reach
the Golden Apple-Tree you will see two long poles on the ground--a
wooden pole and a golden pole. Take the wooden pole and beat down some
of the golden fruit. Don't touch the golden pole. Remember!"

So Janko crept into the second garden and succeeded in passing all the
guards of the twenty-four watches when their eyes were wide open and
staring straight at him. He reached the Golden Apple-Tree and saw at
once the two long poles that were lying near it on the ground. Now
whether because he was excited or because he forgot what the Fox
said--he had a good heart, Janko had, but he was a little careless
sometimes--I don't know. But I do know that instead of taking the wooden
pole as the Fox had told him, he took the golden pole. At the first
stroke of the golden pole against the golden branches of the tree, the
golden branches sent out a loud clear whistle that woke all the sleeping
guards. Every last one of them came running to the Apple-Tree and in no
time at all they had captured poor Janko and carried him to their
master, the king.

"Trying to steal my Golden Apple-Tree, is he?" roared the king in a
great rage. "What do you want with my Golden Apple-Tree, young man?"

"Well, you see," Janko answered simply, "I have to have the Golden
Apple-Tree to exchange it for the Magic Grape-Vine that really belongs
to my father. It was stolen from him years ago and ever since then his
left eye has wept over the loss of it. Give me the Golden Apple-Tree, O
king, for if you don't I shall have to come back and try again to steal
it."

The king seemed impressed with Janko's words for after a moment he said:

"Janko, I can't give you the Golden Apple-Tree for nothing, but I tell
you what I'll do: I'll let you have it provided you get for me the
Golden Horse that can race around the world in twenty-four hours."

With that Janko was dismissed and turned out of the garden.

As usual the Little Fox was waiting for him and again Janko had the
shame of confessing that he had forgotten the warning about the golden
pole and had been caught.

"But the king says he will give me the Golden Apple-Tree provided I get
him the Golden Horse that can race around the world in twenty-four
hours. I wonder, dear Little Fox, will you help me again?"

"Yes, brother, I will help you again for you were good to me. Take hold
of my tail and away we'll go."

So Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away they went. How far
they went and how long they were gone I don't know, but it was a great
distance and a long time. However they arrived without feeling in the
least tired or breathless.

"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "this time listen carefully to what
I tell you. Here we are in another kingdom close to the king's own
stable where the Golden Horse is guarded by thirty-six watches of twelve
guards each. When night comes you must slip into the stable and pass all
those guards when they are asleep with their eyes wide open and staring
straight at you. When you reach the Golden Horse you will see hanging
beside him a golden bridle and a common bridle made of hempen rope. Slip
the hempen bridle over the Horse's head and lead him quietly out of the
stable. But mind you don't touch the golden bridle! This time don't
forget!"

Janko promised faithfully to remember what the Little Fox said and when
night came he crept into the stable and cautiously made his way through
the sleeping guards. He reached at last the stall of the Golden Horse.
It was the most beautiful horse in the world and the gleam of its
shining flanks was like sunshine in the dark stable.

Janko stroked its golden mane and whispered softly into its ear. The
horse responded to his touch and rubbed its muzzle against his shoulder.

Janko reached over to take the hempen bridle and then he paused. "It
would be an outrage," he thought to himself, "to put a common rope on
this glorious creature!"

Just think of it! For the third time Janko forgot the Little Fox's
warning! I have no excuse to make for him. I don't see how he could have
forgotten a third time! But he did. He took the golden bridle instead of
the hempen one and put it over the head of the Golden Horse. The Horse
neighed and instantly all the sleeping guards awoke and came running to
the stall. They caught Janko, of course, and when morning broke carried
him to their master, the king.

He questioned Janko as the others had done and Janko answered him
simply:

"You see I have to have the Golden Horse, O king, to exchange it for the
Golden Apple-Tree. And I have to have the Golden Apple-Tree to exchange
it for the Magic Grape-Vine that really belongs to my father. It was
stolen from him years ago and ever since then his left eye has wept over
the loss of it. Give me the Golden Horse, O king, for if you don't give
him to me I shall have to come back and try again to steal him."

"But, Janko," the king said, "I can't give you the Golden Horse for
nothing! But I tell you what I'll do: I will give him to you provided
you get for me the Golden Maiden who has never seen the sun."

With that Janko was dismissed and led out of the stable.

Janko really was awfully ashamed this time when he had again to confess
to the Little Fox that he had forgotten her warning and had touched the
golden bridle.

"Janko! Janko!" the Little Fox said. "Where are your wits! Now what
shall we do?"

Then Janko told the Little Fox of the king's offer:

"He will give me the Golden Horse provided I get for him the Golden
Maiden who has never seen the sun. Dear Little Fox, will you help me
this one time more? I know I am very stupid but I promise you faithfully
that this time I will not forget."

"Of course, brother," the Little Fox said, "I'll help you again. But
this will have to be the last time. If you forget this time I won't be
able to help you any more. Take hold of my tail and away we'll go."

So for the fourth time Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away
they went. They went and they went--I can't tell you how far! But they
weren't tired when they arrived, they weren't even breathless.

"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "listen carefully to what I tell
you. Here we are in another kingdom close to a great cavern where for
sixteen years the Golden Maiden has been kept a prisoner under the
enchantment of her wicked mother and never allowed to see the golden
light of the sun. There are forty-eight chambers in the cavern and each
chamber is guarded by a watch of twelve guards. Steal softly through
each chamber when the eyes of all the guards are wide open and staring
straight at you. In the last chamber of all you will find the Golden
Maiden playing in her Golden Cradle. Over the Cradle stands a fearful
ghost who will cry out to you to go away and threaten to kill you. But
don't be afraid. It is only an empty ghost which the wicked mother has
placed there to frighten men off from rescuing the Golden Maiden. Take
the Golden Maiden by the hand, put the Golden Cradle on your shoulder,
and hurry back to me. But one thing: As you leave each chamber be sure
to lock the door after you so that the guards when they wake cannot
follow you."

Janko crept into the cavern and cautiously made his way from chamber to
chamber through the wide-eyed guards. In the forty-eighth chamber he
found the Golden Maiden playing in her Golden Cradle. He ran to take her
when a horrible creature rose above the Cradle and in hollow tones
cried: "Back! Back! Back!" For a moment Janko was frightened, then he
remembered that the awful creature was only an empty ghost. So he went
boldly up to the Golden Cradle and sure enough the ghost faded away.

"You have come to rescue me, haven't you?" the Golden Maiden cried.

She gave Janko her hand and he helped her to her feet. Then he put the
Golden Cradle on his shoulder and together they hurried out from chamber
to chamber. And I am happy to tell you that this time Janko remembered
the Little Fox's warning and locked the door of every chamber as they
left it. So they reached the upper world safely and found the Little Fox
waiting for them.

"There's no time to lose," the Little Fox said. "Put the Cradle across
my back, Janko, and take hold of my tail with one hand and give your
other hand to the Golden Maiden and away we'll go."

Janko did as the Little Fox said and away they all three went.

When they reached the stable of the Golden Horse, the Little Fox said:

"It doesn't seem right to give the Golden Maiden to the king of the
Golden Horse unless she wants us to, does it?"

The Golden Maiden at once begged them to keep her.

"Don't give me to the king of the Golden Horse!" she said. "I want to
stay with Janko who has rescued me!"

"But unless I give up the Golden Maiden," Janko asked, "how can I get
the Golden Horse?"

"Perhaps I can help you," the Little Fox said. "Perhaps I can enchant
myself into looking like the Golden Maiden."

With that the Little Fox leaped up in the air, turned this way and that,
and lo! you might have thought her the Golden Maiden except that her
eyes were still fox's eyes.

"Now leave the Maiden outside here hidden in her Golden Cradle and take
me in to the master of the stable. Exchange me for the Golden Horse and
make off at once. Then pick up the Golden Maiden in her Golden Cradle
and ride away and soon I'll join you."

Janko did this very thing. He took in the fox maiden and exchanged her
for the Golden Horse and instantly rode off as the Little Fox had told
him.

The king of the stable at once called all his courtiers together and
showed them the fox maiden.

"See," he said, "this is the Golden Maiden who has never seen the sun!
She is the most beautiful maiden in the world and she now belongs to
me!"

The courtiers looked at her and admired her, but one of them a little
keener than the others said:

"Yes, she's very beautiful and all that but look at her eyes. They don't
look like maiden's eyes but like fox's eyes!"

Instantly at the word _fox_ the false maiden turned to a fox and went
scampering off.

"See what you've done!" cried the king in a fury. "You have changed my
Golden Maiden into a fox with your nonsense! You shall pay for this with
your life!" And he had him executed at once.

The Little Fox meantime had caught up with Janko and the Golden Maiden
and the Golden Horse. As they neared the garden of the king of the
Golden Apple-Tree the Fox said:

"It would be a pity to give away the Golden Horse. Rightly it belongs to
the Golden Maiden and was taken from her by her wicked mother."

"Don't give my Golden Horse away!" the Golden Maiden begged.

"But how else can I get the Golden Apple-Tree?" Janko asked.

"Perhaps I can help you," the Little Fox said. "Perhaps I can enchant
myself into looking like the Golden Horse."

With that the Little Fox leaped up in the air, turned this way and that,
and lo! you might have thought her the Golden Horse except that her tail
was still a fox's tail.

When they reached the garden of the Golden Apple-Tree, Janko left the
Golden Horse and the Golden Maiden outside and took the fox horse in to
the king.

The king was delighted and at once had his servants deliver to Janko the
Golden Apple-Tree.

When Janko was safely gone, the king called all his courtiers together
and showed them the fox horse.

"See my Golden Horse!" he said. "Isn't it the most beautiful horse in
the world!"

"It is! It is!" they all told him.

But one courtier, a little keener than the rest, remarked:

"What a curious tail for a horse to have! It is like a fox's tail!"

At the word _fox_ the false horse changed back into a fox and went
scampering off.

"See what you've done with your nonsense!" cried the king. "You have
lost me my Golden Horse and now you shall lose your own life!" And he
ordered the courtier to be executed at once.

The Fox soon caught up with the real Golden Horse and with Janko and the
Golden Maiden who were holding in their arms the Golden Cradle and the
Golden Apple-Tree.

"It will never do to give up the Golden Apple-Tree," the Fox said, "for
it, too, rightly belongs to the Golden Maiden. I'll have to see again if
I can help you."

So when they neared the garden of the Magic Grape-Vine, the Little Fox
leaped in the air, turned this way; and that, and lo! you might have
thought her the Golden Apple-Tree except that her fruit instead of being
round was long and pointed like a fox's head.

[Illustration: _The Golden Maiden, the Farmer and the Empty Ghost_]

Janko gave the king the fox tree and received in return the Magic
Grape-Vine that really belonged to his father and not to the king at
all. He hurried back to the Golden Maiden who was waiting for him with
the Golden Horse and the Golden Apple-Tree and the Golden Cradle and off
they all went.

The king was delighted with his fox tree and called his courtiers to
come and admire it.

"Beautiful! Beautiful!" they all said, and one of them examining the
fruit carefully remarked:

"But see these apples! They are not round like apples but long and
pointed like a fox's head!"

He had no sooner said the word _fox_ than the tree turned into a fox and
went scampering off.

"See what you've done with your nonsense!" cried the king. "You have
lost me my Golden Apple-Tree and now I shall lose you your head!" And he
ordered the courtier to be executed at once.

When the Fox caught up with the Golden Horse, she said to Janko:

"Now, my brother, it is time for us to part. You have the Magic
Grape-Vine and soon your father's left eye will no longer weep. Besides,
you are carrying home the Golden Maiden on her own Golden Horse and with
her Golden Apple-Tree and her Golden Cradle. God has blessed you in your
undertaking and will continue to bless you so long as you are good and
kind. Farewell now and think sometimes of your sister, the Little Lame
Fox."

Janko wept at thought of parting with the Little Fox and the Little Fox
promised him that she would help him again if ever he needed her. Then
she turned and trotted off into the woods and Janko rode homewards
without her.

When he reached the crossroads where he had parted from his brothers
just one year before he came upon a crowd of angry farmers belaboring
two men who had been robbing their barns. Janko found that the two men
were his own brothers who since he had seen them had fallen into bad
company, lost all their money at cards, and had finally taken to
thieving. Janko paid the farmers for the damage his brothers had done
them and took his brothers home with him.

You can imagine the old farmer's happiness at seeing all three of his
sons after a whole year's absence. It was even greater than his delight
at getting back his Magic Grape-Vine. But that doesn't mean that he
wasn't delighted to have back the Grape-Vine. At the first cup of wine
that the Vine poured him, his left eye ceased weeping and it was never
known to weep again.

He was delighted, too, at having the Golden Maiden in the house and
pleased when people came from far and near to see the Maiden's Golden
Horse and Golden Apple-Tree and Golden Cradle. He even began to hope
that she might marry one of his sons before some prince came along and
snatched her away. He thought the Maiden would make a wonderful bride
for the oldest. Unfortunately Janko had not told him what reprobates the
two older sons were, and the older brothers themselves had given their
father to understand that it was really they who had found the Magic
Grape-Vine and rescued the Golden Maiden. You see instead of being
grateful to Janko for having saved their necks from the angry farmers,
they hated him worse than ever.

"That Booby!" the older brother growled. "Just because he took the
left-hand road and found the Magic Grape-Vine he thinks himself so much
better than us! It was just luck--that's all it was! Any one who took
the left-hand road could have found the old Grape-Vine!"

"And do you notice the way the Golden Maiden always smiles on him?" the
other said. "The first thing we know she'll be marrying him and giving
him the Golden Horse and the Golden Apple-Tree and the Golden Cradle!
Then where will we be?"

"Brother," whispered the first, "let us make away with him!"

So they plotted together and they asked Janko to go hunting with them
the next day. Suspecting nothing Janko went. When they came to a deep
well in the woods they asked Janko to reach them a cup of water. As he
stooped over into the well they pushed him all the way in and drowned
him. That's the kind of brothers they were! Then they went home and
pretended to be surprised that Janko hadn't come home before them.

He didn't come that night or the next day either, and the Golden Maiden
grew sad and quiet, the Magic Grape-Vine no longer poured out its
precious wine every hour, the Golden Apple-Tree stopped putting forth
its buds and blossoms and golden fruit, and the Golden Horse languished
and drooped its lovely head.

"Everything goes wrong when Janko isn't here!" the farmer said. "Where
can he be?"

On the third day the Golden Maiden suddenly began to laugh and sing, the
Magic Grape-Vine again poured forth a bucket of precious wine every
hour, the Golden Apple-Tree put out buds and blossoms and golden fruit,
and the Golden Horse lifted its beautiful head and neighed loud and
happily. And do you know why? Because the Little Lame Fox had just
rescued Janko and brought him back to life! She pulled him out of the
well, and rolled him about on the ground, and worked over him until all
the water was emptied from his lungs and he was able to breathe again.

Then as he opened his eyes the Little Fox said:

"I told you, brother, I'd come again if you needed my help. I was just
in time for a little longer and I could never have brought you back to
life. And now, brother, the enchantment that held me is broken and I
need no longer go about as a Little Lame Fox. My mother was a wicked
witch and she enchanted me because she was angry with me for saving a
man whom she wanted to kill. So she turned me into a little fox and she
said I should have to remain a fox forever unless I succeeded in
bringing back to life my benefactor. You are my benefactor, Janko, for
you shared your bread and cheese with me the first time we met, and now
I have been able to bring you back to life."

As she spoke she changed into a lovely maiden.

"Good-by, Janko," she said. "Go home now and tell your father how your
evil brothers have treated you. Unless you do this they will plot
against the Golden Maiden and you may not be able to protect her."

So Janko and the maiden kissed each other as a brother and sister might
and the maiden went her way and Janko returned to his father's house.

The Golden Maiden and the old farmer were not in the least surprised to
see him for things were so happy again that they just knew it must be
because Janko was coming back. But his two brothers when they caught
sight of him alive and well were so frightened that they took to their
heels and ran off as fast as they could go and what's more they've never
shown themselves since. And good riddance, too, I say, for they were
wicked evil fellows and would only have injured Janko further if they
could.

When Janko told his father all the wicked things they had done, the old
farmer could scarcely believe his ears.

"And to think," he said, "I had been hoping the Golden Maiden would
marry one of them! Mercy me! Mercy me!"

"But, father," the Golden Maiden said--she called him _father_ now and
it pleased him mightily; "father, I should rather marry Janko!"

"Marry Janko!" the farmer cried. "Why, my dear, Janko is a stupid lad,
not nearly so clever as his two brothers!"

"I don't care if he is stupid. He's got a good heart and that's more
than the other two have. And besides that he's got a brave heart for he
rescued me from the dark cavern and he faced the awful ghost that stood
over my Golden Cradle. Why, father, I'd rather marry Janko than any
prince in the world!"

You can imagine Janko's feelings when he heard this!

"I'd feel like a prince if you did marry me, dear Golden One!" he cried.

Well, she did marry him, and sure enough he did feel like a prince. What
prince, I'd like to know, had a lovelier bride? None! And was there any
prince in the world whose bride brought him greater riches than the
Golden Apple-Tree, the Golden Horse, and Golden Cradle? No, not one! And
furthermore the farmer promised that, when he died, he would leave him
the Magic Grape-Vine.

So Janko lived happy and prosperous. And it all came about through his
having a good honest heart.

[Illustration]

THE ENCHANTED PEAFOWL

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Golden Apples, the Wicked Dragon, and the Magic
Horse_


THE ENCHANTED PEAFOWL


_Have you ever heard the story of the Peafowl who became a Queen and of
the Tsar's Youngest Son who married her? Well, here it is:_

There was once a Tsar who took great delight in his garden. Every
morning you could see him bending over his flowers or picking the fruit
of his favorite tree. This was an apple-tree that had the magic property
of bearing buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every twenty-four hours. It
was known as the golden apple-tree. In the morning the first thing when
he woke up the Tsar would look out his bedroom window to see that all
was well with his beloved tree.

One morning when as usual he looked out he was grieved to see that the
tree had been stripped of all the golden fruit which had ripened during
the night.

"Who has stolen my golden apples?" he cried.

The palace guards looked everywhere for some trace of the thief but
found nothing.

The next morning the same thing had happened and every morning
thereafter when the Tsar looked out of his bedroom window he saw that
the tree had again been stripped of its golden fruit.

He called his three sons to him and said:

"Is it seemly that a Tsar who has three able-bodied sons should be
robbed night after night of his golden apples? Are you willing that this
should happen and you do nothing about it?"

The eldest son who was a braggart said:

"My father, you need say no more. I myself will watch to-night and when
the thief appears I will overpower him and bring him to you."

So the eldest son watched that night, standing on guard under the
apple-tree and leaning against its trunk.

As midnight approached his eyes grew heavy and he fell asleep. While he
slept the golden apples ripened and were stolen and the next morning, as
usual, the branches were bare.

The second son who was a crafty youth laughed at his brother and said:

"To-night I will watch. I will pretend to be asleep and when the thief
appears I will jump upon him and overpower him."

So when night came the second son went on guard under the tree and in
order to deceive the thief he lay down on the ground and closed his
eyes. At first he stayed wide awake but as the hours dragged by he grew
tired and then, because he was in such a comfortable position, he too
fell soundly asleep. Midnight came and the apples ripened but the next
morning, when the second prince awoke, the tree had again been stripped
of its golden fruit.

The Tsar's Youngest Son now said:

"Father, let me go on guard to-night."

His brothers jeered and the Tsar shook his head.

"Nay, nay, my boy, why should you succeed where your older brothers have
failed? It is God's will that my golden apples should be stolen and I
must submit."

But the Youngest Son insisted that he, too, be given a chance to capture
the thief and at last the Tsar consented.

"I will sleep soundly the first part of the night," the Youngest Prince
thought to himself, "and with God's help wake up at midnight."

As soon as it was dark he had his bed carried outdoors and placed under
the apple-tree. Then after commending his undertaking to God he lay down
and fell soundly to sleep. Just before midnight he awoke. The apples
had ripened and were shining among the leaves like golden lanterns.

On the stroke of midnight there was a whirr of wings and nine beautiful
peafowl came flying down from the sky. Eight of them settled on the
branches of the apple-tree and began eating the golden fruit. The ninth
alighted beside the Young Prince and as she touched the ground changed
into a lovely maiden.

She was so beautiful and gentle that the Young Prince fell madly in love
with her and at once began wooing her with kisses and caresses. She
responded to his love and they spent the night together in great
happiness.

At the first streak of dawn she jumped up, saying:

"My dear one, I must leave you now!"

"But you will come again, won't you?" the Prince asked.

"Yes," she promised him. "To-night."

Suddenly the Prince remembered the golden apples. The peafowl in the
tree were about to eat the last of them.

"Can't you make them leave just one apple for my father?" the Prince
begged.

The maiden spoke to the birds and they flew down with two of the golden
apples, one for the Tsar and one for the Prince himself.

Then the maiden lifted her arms above her head, changed into a peafowl,
and with the other eight flew off into the morning sky.

The Prince carried the two apples to his father and the Tsar was so
delighted that he forgot to ask the Prince the particulars of his
adventure.

The next night the Prince again slept under the apple-tree and awoke
just before midnight to hear the whirr of wings and see the nine peafowl
come flying down from the sky. Eight of them settled on the branches of
the apple-tree and the ninth, as before, alighted beside him and as she
touched the earth changed into the lovely maiden of his heart. Again
they passed the night together in great happiness and in the early dawn
before she flew away the maiden gave him the last two of the golden
apples.

This went on night after night until the Prince's two elder brothers
were mad with jealousy and consumed with curiosity to know what happened
every night under the apple-tree. At last they went to an evil old woman
and bribed her to spy on the Young Prince.

"Find out what happens every night at the apple-tree," they told her,
"and we will reward you richly."

So the evil old woman hid herself near the apple-tree and that night
when the prince fell asleep she crept under his bed. Midnight came and
she heard the whirr of wings and presently she saw the white feet of a
lovely maiden touch the ground and she heard the prince say: "My love,
is it you?"

Then as the Prince and the maiden began kissing each other and
exchanging vows of love very slowly and cautiously she reached up her
hand from under the bed and groped around until she felt the maiden's
hair. Then with a scissors she snipped off a lock.

"Oh!" the maiden cried in terror. She jumped up, lifted her arms above
her head, changed into a peafowl, and without another word flew off with
the other eight and vanished in the sky.

In a fury the Prince searched about to see what had frightened his loved
one. He found the old woman under the bed and dragging her out by the
hair he struck her dead with his sword. And good riddance it was, too,
for she was an evil old thing and only caused mischief in the world.

But putting the evil old woman out of the way did not, alas, bring back
the lovely maiden. The Prince waited for her the next night and the next
and many following nights but she nevermore returned.

The magic apple-tree of course was no longer robbed of its golden fruit,
so the Tsar was happy once again and never tired of praising the valor
of his youngest son. But as for the prince, in spite of his father's
praise he grew sadder and sadder.

Finally he went to the Tsar and said:

"Father, I have lost the maiden whom I love and life without her is not
worth the living. Unless I go out in the world and find her I shall
die."

The Tsar tried to dissuade him but when he could not he mounted him on a
fine horse, gave him a serving man to accompany him, and sent him off
with his blessing.

The Prince and his man wandered hither and thither over the world
inquiring everywhere for news of nine peafowl one of whom was a lovely
maiden. They came at last to a lake on the shore of which lived an ugly
old woman with an only daughter.

"Nine peafowl," she repeated, "and one of them a lovely maiden! You must
mean the nine sisters, the enchanted princesses, who fly about as
peafowl. They come here every morning to bathe in the lake. What can you
want with them?"

The Prince told the old woman that one of them was his love and that
unless he married her he would die.

"Die, indeed!" scoffed the old woman. "That's no way for a handsome
young man to talk! I'll tell you what you ought to do: give up thought
of this peafowl princess and marry my daughter. Then I'll make you heir
to all my riches."

She called out her daughter who was as ugly as herself and cross and
ill-natured in the bargain. Just one look at her and the Prince said
firmly:

"No! If I can't marry my own dear love I won't marry any one!"

"Very well!" said the old woman shortly.

When the Prince's back was turned she called the serving man aside and
whispered:

"Will you do what I tell you if I pay you well?"

The serving man who was a mean greedy fellow nodded his head and the old
woman handed him a small bellows.

"Hide this in your shirt," she told him, "and don't let your master see
it. Then to-morrow morning when you go down to the lake with him to see
the nine peafowl slip it out and blow it on the back of his neck. Do
this and I'll give you a golden ducat."

The serving man took the bellows and did as the old woman directed. The
next morning down at the lake just as the nine peafowl came flying into
sight he crept up behind the Prince and blew the bellows on the back of
his neck. Instantly sleep overcame the Prince. His eyes closed, his head
drooped, and the reins fell from his hands.

Eight of the peafowl alighted on the water's edge, changed into lovely
maidens and went bathing in the lake, but the ninth flew straight down
to the Prince, fluttered her wings in his face and uttering sad cries
tried hard to arouse him.

The eight finished their baths, changed back into birds, and calling
their sister they all flew off together. Then and not till then did the
Prince awaken.

"Ah!" he cried, "how could I have fallen asleep just when the peafowl
appeared? Where are they now? Are they gone?"

"Yes," his man told him, "they're gone. Eight of them changed into
lovely maidens and went bathing in the lake but the ninth fluttered
about your head and tried in every way to arouse you. Even more alarming
signs Julian noted.

Was concerned to see that again Sabel received his former court favorite
sultana, and the wise and their offspring, with all the stars
parleras Wives and beggars in the parish, swarm there, he fled to
escape when approached, carrying within or suspicious packages under
the apron.

Perucho no longer hiding, before it was everywhere entangled in the
feet, and, in short, things were going to be around and they had been
before. I tried the good chaplain's own communion with each other
to mill-wheels, No telling what that meant _nada_, but the chance
is damn hard to open your eyes when I would not.

Madruga morning that a more usual to say his Mass, decided to warn
you Sabel had prepared the chocolate in half an hour.

Uselessly called his room, near the tower in which Julian was asleep.
Decreased with hopes of finding her in the kitchen, and going to
the big office next door to the archive, where Pedro had been
installed since the birth of his daughter, he saw leaving the girl
there in sleepy and careless dress.

The rules applicable to psychological conscience blamed required Sabel
be troubled: who was troubled Julián.

Not only troubled, but went back to his bedroom, felt a strange
sensation, as if he had downloaded a heavy blow to his legs broken.

Upon entering his room, he thought this or something similar: "Let's
see, who is handsome to say Mass today?".

XIX-No, it was not that handsome. Good Mass we would say, with heads
made a pot of crickets! To suppress the mutineers thoughts that beset
him, to adopt a strong resolution and valid, Julian did not dare
not to think of the holy sacrifice.

The thing was clear. Location: the year before last. I had to leave that
house thrown by the ugly vice, by the heinous crime. He was permitted to
remain there a moment or more. Unless all due respect, the trap had
been Christian marriage, in a way his work, and there was no trace of
home, but a bilge of corruption and sin. Elsewhere, as with the music.
.... Except that Well, things are easier to think of doing in this world.
Everything was a mountain to find a pretext, say, prepare luggage
....

The first time I thought of going there and it cost him some effort,
today, the idea alone caused him to leave the same effect as if the
soul is sent into a cloth soaked in cold water.

Why is so much disliked the prospect of leaving the Pazos? Well look,
he was a stranger in the house.

In other words, that strange ....

When you find
her, if you do just as she says she, too, will soon be free of all
enchantment. Then she will be made queen."

The Prince thanked the hermit and rode on. After three days he came to
the city of which the hermit had told him. He made his way to the palace
and into the Princess's presence. Sure enough the Princess was his own
dear love. She received him with joy, promised soon to marry him, and
gave over to him the keys of the palace.

"You shall now be master here," she told him, "to go where you like and
do as you like. There is only one thing that you must not do, only one
place where you must not go. Under the palace are twelve cellars. Here
are the keys to them all. Go into eleven of them whenever you will but
you must never open the door of the twelfth one. If you do a heavy
misfortune may fall upon both of us."

One day while the Princess was walking in the garden, the young Prince
thought he would go through the cellars. So, taking the keys, he
unlocked the cellars one after another until he had seen eleven of them.
Then he stood before the door of the twelfth wondering why the Princess
had warned him not to open it.

"I'll open it just a little," he thought to himself. "If there's
something inside that tries to get out, I'll close it quickly."

So he took the twelfth key, unlocked the twelfth door, and peeped inside
the twelfth cellar. It was empty except for one huge cask with an open
bunghole.

"I don't see anything in here to be afraid of," he said.

Just then he heard a groan from inside the cask and a voice called out
in a begging, whining tone:

"A cup of water, brother! A cup of water! I am dying of thirst!"

Now the Prince thought to himself that it was a terrible thing for any
living creature to be dying of thirst. So he hurried out, got a cup of
water, and poured it into the open bunghole. Instantly one of the three
iron hoops that bound the cask burst asunder and the voice inside the
cask said:

"Thank you, brother! Thank you! Now give me another cup! I am dying of
thirst!"

So the Prince poured in a second cup and the second iron hoop snapped
apart and when the voice still begged for more water he poured in a
third cup. The third hoop broke, the staves of the cask fell in, and a
horrid dragon sprang out. Before the Prince could move, he had flown
through the door of the twelfth cellar into the eleventh cellar, then
into the tenth cellar, the ninth cellar, the eight cellar, the seventh
cellar, the sixth, the fifth, the fourth, the third, the second, the
first, and so out into the garden. The Prince reached the garden just in
time to see the monster overpower the Princess.

"Alas, my dear one, what have you done?" cried the poor Princess as the
dragon carried her off. "The enchantment would soon have been broken and
I could have married you if only you had not gone into the twelfth
cellar!"

Heartbroken at what had happened, the Prince mounted his horse and
started off in pursuit of the dragon.

"I must do what I can to rescue my loved one," he said, "even if it
costs me my life."

He rode many days until he came to the castle of the dragon. The dragon
was out and the Princess received him with tears of joy.

"Come," he said to her, "let us escape before the dragon returns."

The Princess sighed and shook her head.

"How, my loved one, can we escape? The dragon rides a magic horse and
however fast we go he will be able to overtake us."

But the Prince insisted that they make the attempt. So she mounted with
him and off they went.

When the dragon arrived home and found her gone, he laughed a brutal
laugh and said to his horse:

"I suppose that foolish young Prince has been here and is trying to
carry her off. Shall we start after them now or wait till we've had our
supper?"

"We might as well eat," the horse said, "for we'll overtake them
anyway."

So they both ate and then the dragon mounted the magic horse and in no
time at all they had overtaken the fugitives.

"I ought to tear you to pieces," the dragon said to the Prince, "but I
won't this time because you gave me a cup of water. However, I warn you
not to try this foolishness again!"

With that he clutched the poor weeping Princess in his scaly arms and
carried her back to the castle.

What was the Prince to do now? He tried to plan some other way of
rescuing the Princess but he could think of none. In spite of the
dragon's threat he went back the next day and tried the same thing
again. Again the dragon overtook him and snatched back the Princess.

"I have spared you one time," he said to the Prince, "and I will spare
you this one time more for the sake of the water you gave me. But I warn
you if you come again I will tear you to pieces."

But what man worthy the name will accept such a warning when the safety
and happiness of his loved one is concerned? The next day while the
dragon was out the Prince again returned to the castle.

"It is plain," he said to the Princess, "that we can never escape until
we, too, get a magic horse. We must find out where the dragon got his.
To-night when he comes home, speak him fair and caress his head and when
he is in fine humor ask him about his horse--what kind of a horse it is
and where he got it. Then I will come back to-morrow at this same hour
and you can tell me."

So that night when the dragon came home the Princess allowed him to put
his head in her lap and she scratched him softly behind the ears and
petted him until he was purring like a giant cat.

"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh!" purred the dragon. "How happy we are here, just you
and I! What a foolish young man that Prince of yours is to think I'd let
him carry you off! Urrh! Urrh! Urrh!"

"Yes," the Princess agreed, "he is foolish or he would never suppose his
horse could outrace yours."

"Urrh! Urrh!" the dragon purred. "You're right! He seems to think my
horse is an ordinary horse. Why, I got my horse from the Old Woman of
the Mountain and the only other horse in the world that can outstrip him
is another horse that the Old Woman still has. The Prince would have a
hard time getting him!"

The Princess still scratching the dragon behind his ears, just where he
loved it most, asked softly:

"Why?"

"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh! Because the Old Woman will never give that horse away
until a man comes along who is able to guard for three nights in
succession the Old Woman's mare and foal. Any one who attempts this and
fails she kills. But even if a man were to succeed he would never get
the right horse for the old witch would palm off another on him. Urrh!
Urrh! Urrh! Oh, that feels good, my dear!"

"How would she do that?" the Princess asked.

"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh! You see she says to every man who undertakes to guard
the mare: 'If you succeed you may have any horse in my stable.' Then she
shows him twelve beautiful stallions with shiny coats, but she doesn't
show him a scrawny miserable looking beast that lies neglected on the
dung heap. Yet this is the magic horse and brother to mine."

Now the Princess knew all she needed to know and the next day when the
Prince came she told him what the dragon had said. So the Prince at once
set out to find the Old Woman of the Mountain.

He traveled three days over waste places and through strange lands. On
the first day as he was riding along the shores of a lake he heard a
little voice crying out:

"Help me, brother, help me and--who knows?--some day I may help you!"

The Prince looked down and saw a fish that was floundering on the sand.
He dismounted to get the fish and throw it back into the water.

"Take one of my scales," the fish said. "Then if ever you need my help
just rub the scale."

So the Prince, before he threw the fish into the lake, scraped off a
scale and tied it in a corner of his handkerchief. Then he rode on.

The second day a fox that had been caught in a trap called out to him:

"Help me, brother, help me and--who knows?--some day I may help you!"

The Prince opened the trap and the fox, before it limped away, gave the
Prince one of its hairs and said:

"If ever you need me, rub this hair."

The third day he met a raven that had fallen on a thorn and was pinned
to the ground.

"Help me, brother, help me!" the raven begged, "and--who knows?--some
day I may help you!"

The Prince lifted the raven off the thorn and the raven, before it flew
away, gave the Prince one of its feathers saying:

"If ever you need me, rub this feather."

So the Prince reached the house of the Old Woman of the Mountain with
the fish's scale, the fox's hair, and the raven's feather each safely
tied in a corner of his handkerchief.

The Old Woman of the Mountain was an ugly old witch with a long nose
that hooked down and a long chin that hooked up.

"Ha! Ha!" she cackled when she saw the Prince. "Another one that wants
service with the Old Woman, eh?"

"Yes," said the Prince.

"You know the conditions?" the Old Woman said. "Guard my mare and her
foal for three nights in succession and you may have any horse in my
stable. But if she escapes you, then your head is mine and I'll stick it
up there as a warning to other rash young men."

The Old Woman pointed to a high picket fence that surrounded the
courtyard. On every picket but one there was a grinning human skull. The
Prince looked and the only picket that had no skull called out:

"I want my skull, granny! I want my skull!"

The Old Woman gave a wicked laugh.

"You see," she said, "we were expecting you!"

When night fell the Prince led out the mare and her foal to a grassy
meadow. To make sure that she would not escape him, he mounted her.
Midnight came and he must have fallen asleep for suddenly he awoke to
find himself astride a rail with an empty bridle in his hand. In despair
he looked in all directions. At one end of the meadow was a pond.

"She may have gone there to drink," he said to himself.

At the pond he saw a hoofprint.

[Illustration: _The Old Woman of the Mountain and the Wonder Horse_]

"Ah," he thought, "if my fish were here, it could tell me."

He untied the corner of the handkerchief that had the fish scale, rubbed
the scale gently, and at once a little voice called out from the water:

"What is it, brother? Can I help you?"

"Can you tell me what has become of the Old Woman's mare and foal?"

"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into fish and are
down here in the water hiding amongst us. Strike the water three times
with the bridle and say: 'Mare of the Old Woman, come out!' That will
bring her!"

The Prince did this. There was a commotion in the water, a big fish and
a little fish leaped high in the air, fell on shore, and instantly
changed to mare and foal. When morning came the Prince drove them back
to the Old Woman.

She grinned and pretended to be pleased but, when she had the mare alone
in the stable, the Prince heard her beating the poor creature and
saying:

"Why didn't you do as I told you and hide among the fishes?"

"I did," whinnied the mare, "but the fishes are his friends and he found
me!"

"To-night," the Old Woman snarled, "hide among the foxes and this time
don't let him find you! Do you hear me? The foxes!"

The Prince remembered this and the second night when he awoke to find
himself again sitting astride a rail and holding an empty bridle in his
hand, he untied the second corner of his handkerchief, took out the
fox's hair, and rubbed it gently.

Instantly he heard a little bark and the fox's voice said:

"What is it, brother? Can I help you?"

"Can you tell me," the Prince asked, "what has become of the Old Woman's
mare and foal?"

"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into foxes and
are over in yonder woods now hiding among my people. Strike the earth
three times with the bridle and say: 'Mare of the Old Woman, come back!'
That will bring her!"

The Prince did this and instantly two foxes, a vixen and a cub, came
trotting out of the woods and when they reached the Prince they changed
back to mare and foal.

In the morning the Prince drove them home to the Old Woman. As before
she grinned and pretended to be pleased but when she had the mare alone
in the stable the Prince heard her giving the poor creature another
beating and saying:

"Why didn't you do as I told you and hide among the foxes?"

"I did," whinnied the mare, "but the foxes are his friends, too, and he
found me!"

"To-night," the Old Woman ordered, "hide among the ravens and this time
don't let him find you!"

The third night the Prince tried hard to stay awake but sleep again
overcame him and when he woke he found himself for the third time
sitting astride a rail and holding the empty bridle in his hand. But he
remembered the Old Woman's words and at once opened the third corner of
his handkerchief and taking out the raven's feather rubbed it gently.

There was a flutter of wings and a raven's hoarse voice said:

"Caw! Caw! What is it, brother? Can I help you?"

"Can you tell me what has become of the Old Woman's mare and foal?"

"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into ravens and
are perched in yonder tall fir tree hiding among my folk. Strike the
trunk of the tree three times with your bridle and say: 'Mare of the
Old Woman, come down!' That will bring her!"

The Prince went over to the fir tree, struck it three times with the
bridle and said:

"Mare of the Old Woman, come down!"

Instantly two ravens, a big one and a fledgling, fluttered to earth and
changed to mare and foal. So when morning came the Prince was able to
drive them back to the Old Woman and claim his reward.

The Old Woman was angry enough to kill him but she pretended to be
pleased and she smiled and grinned and she patted the Prince on the arm
and said:

"Aye, my son, but you are a hero! You have won the reward and you are
worthy of it. Choose now the finest horse in my stable. It is yours."

She drove the twelve handsome stallions out into the courtyard and urged
them on the Prince one after the other. But at each the Prince shook his
head.

"I am only a poor adventurer," he said. "Such horses as these are too
fine for me. Give me rather that poor mangy creature that lies over
yonder on the dung heap. That is the one I choose."

Then the Old Woman fell into an awful rage and shook and chattered and
begged the Prince not to take that horse.

"It would shame me," she said, "to have you ride off on that poor beast
which is half dead already! No, no, my son, you mustn't take him!"

"But that's the one I'm going to take," the Prince said firmly, "that
and none other!" He drew his sword and lifted it threateningly. "I have
won whatever horse I choose and now, Old Woman, if you do not keep your
bargain I shall strike you dead with this sword and stick up your
grinning skull on that empty picket!"

At that the empty picket began to shout:

"I want my skull! I want my skull!"

When the Old Woman of the Mountain saw that the Prince knew what he was
about, she gave up trying to deceive him and let him lead off the horse
he wanted. So the Prince walked away dragging the poor mangy creature
after him. When he was out of sight of the Old Woman's house, he turned
to the horse and began rubbing down his rough coat and patting his
wobbly legs.

"Now, my beauty," he said, "we'll see what you're made of!"

Under his hand the mangy beast changed to a glorious animal--one of
those wonder horses of the olden days that rise on the wind and gallop
with the clouds. Soon his coat shone like burnished gold and his tail
and mane streamed out like flames of fire.

"Ah, my master," the horse said, "I have been waiting for you this many
a day! We shall have glorious adventures together!"

Then the Prince mounted him and he rose on the wind and went so swiftly
that he covered in three minutes all the distance that it had taken the
Prince three days to go on an ordinary horse. Whiff! and there they were
at the dragon's castle and there was the Princess running out to welcome
them.

"Now, my dear one," the Prince said, lifting the Princess up in front of
him, "this time the dragon will not overtake us!"

The wonder horse rose on the wind and off they went.

When the dragon got home and found that the Princess had fled again, he
said to his horse:

"Shall we follow her at once or shall we eat supper first?"

"It's all one what we do," the horse said, "for we shall never overtake
her."

At that the dragon leaped upon his horse and, mounting on the wind,
started off in hot pursuit. Presently they caught sight of the other
horse carrying the Prince and the Princess but, try as he would, the
dragon's horse could not overtake the other. The dragon beat his horse
unmercifully and dug his sharp claws into the horse's tender flanks
until the horse in agony called out to the Prince's horse:

"Hold, brother, hold! Let me overtake you or this monster will kill me
with his cruelty!"

"Why do you carry such a monster?" the Prince's horse called back.
"Throw him from you and be rid of him forever!"

At that the dragon's horse reared suddenly and the dragon, losing his
balance, fell and was dashed to pieces on the rocks below.

And that was the end of that dragon!

Then the Princess wept but her tears were tears of joy for she knew now
that the enchantment that had bound her was broken forever. Never again
would she be changed into a peafowl at the whim of a wicked dragon,
never again be separated from her loved one. Presently she mounted the
dragon's horse and together she and the Prince returned to the beautiful
city. The people came out to meet them and when they heard of the
dragon's death a holiday was proclaimed and amidst music and dancing and
merrymaking the Princess married the Prince. Then she was made Queen of
that beautiful city and the Prince was made King. They ruled long and
wisely and better than that they lived happily for they loved each
other.

_So now you know the story of the Peafowl who became a Queen and of the
Tsar's Youngest Son who married her._

[Illustration]


THE DRAGON'S STRENGTH

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Youngest Prince Who Killed the Sparrow_


THE DRAGON'S STRENGTH


There was once a King who had three sons. One day the oldest son went
hunting and when night fell his huntsmen came riding home without him.

"Where is the prince?" the King asked.

"Isn't he here?" the huntsmen said. "He left us in midafternoon chasing
a hare near the Old Mill up the river. We haven't seen him since and we
supposed he must have come home alone."

When he hadn't returned the following day his brother, the second
prince, went out to search for him.

"I'll go to the Old Mill," he said to the King, "and see what's become
of him."

So he mounted his horse and rode up the river. As he neared the Old Mill
a hare crossed his path and the second prince being a hunter like his
brother at once gave chase. His attendant waited for his return but
waited in vain. Night fell and still there was no sign of the second
prince.

The attendant returned to the palace and told the King what had
happened. The King was surprised but not unduly alarmed and the
following day when the Youngest Prince asked to go hunting alone the
King suggested that he go in the direction of the Old Mill to find out
if he could what was keeping his brothers.

The Youngest Prince who had listened carefully to what his brothers'
attendants had reported decided to act cautiously. So when a hare
crossed his path as he approached the Old Mill, instead of giving it
chase, he rode off as though he were hunting other game. Later he
returned to the Old Mill from another direction.

He found an old woman sitting in front of it.

"Good evening, granny," he said in a friendly tone, pulling up his horse
for a moment's chat. "Do you live here? You know I thought the Old Mill
was deserted."

The old woman looked at him and shook her head gloomily.

"Deserted indeed! My boy, take an old woman's advice and don't have
anything to do with this old mill! It's an evil place!"

"Why, granny," the Prince said, "what's the matter with it?"

The old woman peered cautiously around and when she saw they were alone
she beckoned the Prince to come near. Then she whispered:

"A dragon lives here! A horrible monster! He takes the form of a hare
and lures people into the mill. Then he captures them. Some of them he
kills and eats and others he holds as prisoners in an underground
dungeon. I'm one of his prisoners and he keeps me here to work for him."

"Granny," the Youngest Prince said, "would you like me to rescue you?"

"My boy, you couldn't do it! You have no idea what a strong evil monster
the dragon is."

"If you found out something for me, granny, I think I might be able to
overcome the dragon and rescue you."

The old woman was doubtful but she promised to do anything the Youngest
Prince asked.

"Well then, granny, find out from the dragon where his strength is,
whether in his own body or somewhere else. Find out to-night and I'll
come back to-morrow at this same hour to see you."

So that night when the dragon came home, after he had supped and when
she was scratching his head to make him drowsy for bed, the old woman
said to him:

"Master, I think you're the strongest dragon in the world! Tell me now,
where does your strength lie--in your own beautiful body or somewhere
else?"

"You're right, old woman," the dragon grunted: "I am pretty strong as
dragons go. But I don't keep my strength in my own body. No, indeed!
That would be too dangerous. I keep it in the hearth yonder."

At that the old woman ran over to the hearth and, stooping down, she
kissed it and caressed it.

"O beautiful hearth!" she said, "where my master's strength is hidden!
How happy are the ashes that cover your stones!"

The dragon laughed with amusement.

"That's the time I fooled you, old woman! My strength isn't in the
hearth at all! It's in the tree in front of the mill."

The old woman at once ran out of the mill and threw her arms about the
tree.

"O tree!" she cried, "most beautiful tree in the world, guard carefully
our master's strength and let no harm come to it!"

Again the dragon laughed.

"I've fooled you another time, old woman! Come here and scratch my head
some more and this time I'll tell you the truth for I see you really
love your master."

So the old woman went back and scratched the dragon's head and the
dragon told her the truth about his strength.

"I keep it far away," he said. "In the third kingdom from here near the
Tsar's own city there is a deep lake. A dragon lives at the bottom of
the lake. In the dragon there is a wild boar; in the boar a hare; in the
hare a pigeon; in the pigeon a sparrow. My strength is in the sparrow.
Let any one kill the sparrow and I should die that instant. But I am
safe. No one but shepherds ever come to the lake and even they don't
come any more for the dragon has eaten up so many of them that the lake
has got a bad name. Indeed, nowadays even the Tsar himself is hard put
to it to find a shepherd. Oh, I tell you, old woman, your master is a
clever one!"

So now the old woman had the dragon's secret and the next day she told
it to the Youngest Prince. He at once devised a plan whereby he hoped to
overcome the dragon. He dressed himself as a shepherd and with crook in
hand started off on foot for the third kingdom. He traveled through
villages and towns, across rivers and over mountains, and reached at
last the third kingdom and the Tsar's own city. He presented himself at
the palace and asked employment as a shepherd.

The guards looked at him in surprise and said:

"A shepherd! Are you sure you want to be a shepherd?"

Then they called to their companions: "Here's a youth who wants to be a
shepherd!" And the word went through the palace and even the Tsar heard
it.

"Send the youth to me," he ordered.

"Do you really want to be my shepherd?" he asked the Youngest Prince.

The Youngest Prince said yes, he did.

"If I put you in charge of the sheep, where would you pasture them?"

"Isn't there a lake beyond the city," the Prince asked, "where the
grazing is good?"

"H'm!" said the Tsar. "So you know about that lake, too! What else do
you know?"

"I've heard the shepherds disappear."

"And still you want to try your luck?" the Tsar exclaimed.

Just then the Tsar's only daughter, a lovely Princess, who had been
looking at the young stranger, slipped over to her father and whispered:

"But, father, you can't let such a handsome young man as that go off
with the sheep! It would be dreadful if he never returned!"

The Tsar whispered back:

"Hush, child! Your concern for the young man's safety does credit to
your noble feelings. But this is not the time or the place for
sentiment. We must consider first the welfare of the royal sheep."

He turned to the Youngest Prince:

"Very well, young man, you may consider yourself engaged as shepherd.
Provide yourself with whatever you need and assume your duties at once."

"There is one thing," the Youngest Prince said; "when I start out
to-morrow morning with the sheep I should like to take with me two
strong boarhounds, a falcon, and a set of bagpipes."

"You shall have them all," the Tsar promised.

Early the next morning when the Princess peeped out of her bedroom
window she saw the new shepherd driving the royal flocks to pasture. A
falcon was perched on his shoulder; he had a set of bagpipes under his
arm; and he was leading two powerful boarhounds on a leash.

"It's a shame!" the Princess said to herself. "He'll probably never
return and he's such a handsome young man, too!" And she was so unhappy
at thought of never again seeing the new shepherd that she couldn't go
back to sleep.

Well, the Youngest Prince reached the lake and turned out his sheep to
graze. He perched the falcon on a log, tied the dogs beside it, and laid
his bagpipes on the ground. Then he took off his smock, rolled up his
hose, and wading boldly into the lake called out in a loud voice:

"Ho, dragon, come out and we'll try a wrestling match! That is, if
you're not afraid!"

"Afraid?" bellowed an awful voice. "Who's afraid?"

The water of the lake churned this way and that and a horrible scaly
monster came to the surface. He crawled out on shore and clutched the
Prince around the waist. And the Prince clutched him in a grip just as
strong and there they swayed back and forth, and rolled over, and
wrestled together on the shore of the lake without either getting the
better of the other. By midafternoon when the sun was hot, the dragon
grew faint and cried out:

"Oh, if I could but dip my burning head in the cool water, then I could
toss you as high as the sky!"

"Don't talk nonsense!" the Prince said. "If the Tsar's daughter would
kiss my forehead, then I could toss you twice as high!"

After that the dragon slipped out of the Prince's grasp, plunged into
the water, and disappeared. The Prince waited for him but he didn't show
his scaly head again that day.

When evening came, the Prince washed off the grime of the fight, dressed
himself carefully, and then looking as fresh and handsome as ever drove
home his sheep. With the falcon on his shoulder and the two hounds at
his heels he came playing a merry tune on his bagpipes.

The townspeople hearing the bagpipes ran out of their houses and cried
to each other:

"The shepherd's come back!"

The Princess ran to her window and, when she saw the shepherd alive and
well, she put her hand to her heart and said:

"Oh!"

Even the Tsar was pleased.

"I'm not a bit surprised that he's back!" he said. "There's something
about this youth that I like!"

The next day the Tsar sent two of his trusted servants to the lake to
see what was happening there. They hid themselves behind some bushes on
a little hill that commanded the lake. They were there when the shepherd
arrived and they watched him as he waded out into the water and
challenged the dragon as on the day before.

They heard the shepherd call out in a loud voice:

"Ho, dragon, come out and we'll try a wrestling match! That is, if
you're not afraid!"

And from the water they heard an awful voice bellow back:

"Afraid? Who's afraid?"

Then they saw the water of the lake churn this way and that and a
horrible scaly monster come to the surface. They saw him crawl out on
shore and clutch the shepherd around the waist. And they saw the
shepherd clutch him in a grip just as strong. And they watched the two
as they swayed back and forth and rolled over and wrestled together
without either getting the better of the other. By midafternoon when the
sun grew hot they saw the dragon grow faint and they heard him cry out:

"Oh, if I could only dip my burning head in the cool water, then I could
toss you as high as the sky!"

And they heard the shepherd reply:

"Don't talk nonsense! If the Tsar's daughter would kiss my forehead,
then I could toss you twice as high!"

Then they saw the dragon slip out of the shepherd's grasp, plunge into
the water, and disappear. They waited but he didn't show his scaly head
again that day.

So the Tsar's servants hurried home before the shepherd and told the
Tsar all they had seen and heard. The Tsar was mightily impressed with
the bravery of the shepherd and he declared that if he killed that
horrid dragon he should have the Princess herself for wife!

He sent for his daughter and told her all that his servants had reported
and he said to her:

"My daughter, you, too, can help rid your country of this monster if you
go out with the shepherd to-morrow and when the time comes kiss him on
the forehead. You will do this, will you not, for your country's sake?"

The Princess blushed and trembled and the Tsar, looking at her in
surprise, said:

"What! Shall a humble shepherd face a dragon unafraid and the daughter
of the Tsar tremble!"

"Father," the Princess cried, "it isn't the dragon that I'm afraid of!"

"What then?" the Tsar asked.

But what it was she was afraid of the Princess would not confess.
Instead she said:

"If the welfare of my country require that I kiss the shepherd on the
forehead, I shall do so."

So the next morning when the shepherd started out with his sheep, the
falcon on his shoulder, the dogs at his heels, the bagpipes under his
arm, the Princess walked beside him.

Her eyes were downcast and he saw that she was trembling.

"Do not be afraid, dear Princess," he said to her. "Nothing shall harm
you--I promise that!"

"I'm not afraid," the Princess murmured. But she continued to blush and
tremble and, although the shepherd tried to look into her eyes to
reassure her, she kept her head averted.

This time the Tsar himself and many of his courtiers had gone on before
and taken their stand on the hill that overlooked the lake to see the
final combat of the shepherd and the dragon.

When the shepherd and the Princess reached the lake, the shepherd put
his falcon on the log as before and tied the dogs beside it and laid his
bagpipes on the ground. Then he threw off his smock, rolled up his hose,
and wading boldly into the lake called out in a loud voice:

"Ho, dragon, come out and we'll try a wrestling match! That is, if
you're not afraid!"

"Afraid?" bellowed an awful voice. "Who's afraid?"

[Illustration: _Next Morning the Princess Peeped Out and Saw the
Shepherd_]

The water of the lake churned this way and that and the horrible scaly
monster came to the surface. He crawled to shore and clutched the
shepherd around the waist. The shepherd clutched him in a grip just
as strong and there they swayed back and forth and rolled over and
wrestled together on the shore of the lake without either getting the
better of the other. The Princess without the least show of fear stood
nearby calling out encouragement to the shepherd and waiting for the
moment when the shepherd should need her help.

By midafternoon when the sun was hot, the dragon grew faint and cried
out:

"Oh, if I could but dip my burning head in the cool water, then I could
toss you as high as the sky!"

"Don't talk nonsense!" the shepherd said. "If the Tsar's daughter would
kiss my forehead then I could toss you twice as high!"

Instantly the Princess ran forward and kissed the shepherd three times.
The first kiss fell on his forehead, the second on his nose, the third
on his mouth. With each kiss his strength increased an hundredfold and
taking the dragon in a mighty grip he tossed him up so high that for a
moment the Tsar and all the courtiers lost sight of him in the sky. Then
he fell to earth with such a thud that he burst.

Out of his body sprang a wild boar. The shepherd was ready for this and
on the moment he unleashed the two hounds and they fell on the boar and
tore him to pieces.

Out of the boar jumped a rabbit. It went leaping across the meadow but
the dogs caught it and killed it.

Out of the rabbit flew a pigeon. Instantly the shepherd unloosed the
falcon. It rose high in the air, then swooped down upon the pigeon,
clutched it in its talons, and delivered it into the shepherd's hands.

He cut open the pigeon and found the sparrow.

"Spare me! Spare me!" squawked the sparrow.

"Tell me where my brothers are," the shepherd demanded with his fingers
about the sparrow's throat.

"Your brothers? They are alive and in the deep dungeon that lies below
the Old Mill. Behind the mill there are three willow saplings growing
from one old root. Cut the saplings and strike the root. A heavy iron
door leading down into the dungeon will open. In the dungeon you will
find many captives old and young, your brothers among them. Now that I
have told you this are you going to spare my life?"

But the shepherd wrung the sparrow's neck for he knew that only in that
way could the monster who had captured his brothers be killed.

Well, now that the dragon was dead the Tsar and all his courtiers came
down from the hill and embraced the shepherd and told him what a brave
youth he was.

"You have delivered us all from a horrid monster," the Tsar said, "and
to show you my gratitude and the country's gratitude I offer you my
daughter for wife."

"Thank you," said the shepherd, "but I couldn't think of marrying the
Princess unless she is willing to marry me."

The Princess blushed and trembled just as she had blushed and trembled
the night before and that morning, too, on the way to the lake. She
tried to speak but could not at first. Then in a very little voice she
said:

"As a Princess I think it is my duty to marry this brave shepherd who
has delivered my country from this terrible dragon, and--and I think I
should want to marry him anyway."

She said the last part of her speech in such a very low voice that only
the shepherd himself heard it. But that was right enough because after
all it was intended only for him.

So then and there beside the lake before even the shepherd had time to
wash his face and hands and put on his smock the Tsar put the Princess's
hand in his hand and pronounced them betrothed.

After that the shepherd bathed in the lake and then refreshed and clean
he sounded his bagpipes and he and the Princess and the Tsar and all the
courtiers returned to the city driving the sheep before them.

All the townspeople came out to meet them and they danced to the music
of the bagpipes and there was great rejoicing both over the death of the
dragon and over the betrothal of the Princess and the brave shepherd.

The wedding took place at once and the wedding festivities lasted a
week. Such feasting as the townspeople had! Such music and dancing!

When the wedding festivities were ended, the shepherd told the Tsar who
he really was.

"You say you're a Prince!" the Tsar cried, perfectly delighted at this
news. Then he declared he wasn't in the least surprised. In fact, he
said, he had suspected as much from the first!

"Do you think it likely," he asked somewhat pompously, "that any
daughter of mine would fall in love with a man who wasn't a prince?"

"I think I'd have fallen in love with you whatever you were!" whispered
the Princess to her young husband. But she didn't let her father hear
her!

The Prince told the Tsar about his brothers' captivity and how he must
go home to release them, and the Tsar at once said that he and his
bride might go provided they returned as soon as possible.

They agreed to this and the Tsar fitted out a splendid escort for them
and sent them away with his blessing.

So the Prince now traveled back through the towns and villages of three
kingdoms, across rivers and over mountains, no longer a humble shepherd
on foot, but a rich and mighty personage riding in a manner that
befitted his rank.

When he reached the deserted mill, his friend the old woman was waiting
for him.

"I know, my Prince, you have succeeded for the monster has disappeared."

"Yes, granny, you are right: I have succeeded. I found the dragon in the
lake, and the boar in the dragon, and the rabbit in the boar, and the
pigeon in the rabbit, and the sparrow in the pigeon. I took the sparrow
and killed it. So you are free now, granny, to return to your home. And
soon all those other poor captives will be free."

He went behind the mill and found the three willow saplings. He cut them
off and struck the old root. Sure enough a heavy iron door opened. This
led down into a deep dungeon which was crowded with unfortunate
prisoners. The Prince led them all out and sent them their various ways.
He found his own two brothers among them and led them home to his
father.

There was great rejoicing in the King's house, and in the King's heart,
too, for he had given up hope of ever seeing any of his sons again.

The King was so charmed with the Princess that he said it was a pity
that she couldn't marry his oldest son so that she might one day be
Queen.

"The Youngest Prince is a capable young man," the King said, "and
there's no denying that he managed this business of killing the dragon
very neatly. But he is after all only the Youngest Prince with very
little hope of succeeding to the kingdom. If you hadn't married him in
such haste one of his older brothers might easily have fallen in love
with you."

"I don't regret my haste," the Princess said. "Besides he is now my
father's heir. But that doesn't matter for I should be happy with the
Youngest Prince if he were only a shepherd."


THE LITTLE SINGING FROG

[Illustration]

_The Story of a Girl Whose Parents Were Ashamed of Her_


THE LITTLE SINGING FROG


There was once a poor laborer and his wife who had no children. Every
day the woman would sigh and say:

"If only we had a child!"

Then the man would sigh, too, and say:

"It would be pleasant to have a little daughter, wouldn't it?"

At last they went on a pilgrimage to a holy shrine and there they prayed
God to give them a child.

"Any kind of a child!" the woman prayed. "I'd be thankful for a child of
our own even if it were a frog!"

God heard their prayer and sent them a little daughter--not a little
girl daughter, however, but a little frog daughter. They loved their
little frog child dearly and played with her and laughed and clapped
their hands as they watched her hopping about the house. But when the
neighbors came in and whispered: "Why, that child of theirs is nothing
but a frog!" they were ashamed and they decided that when people were
about they had better keep their child hidden in a closet.

So the frog girl grew up without playmates of her own age, seeing only
her father and mother. She used to play about her father as he worked.
He was a vine-dresser in a big vineyard and of course it was great fun
for the little frog girl to hop about among the vines.

Every day at noontime the woman used to come to the vineyard carrying
her husband's dinner in a basket. The years went by and she grew old and
feeble and the daily trip to the vineyard began to tire her and the
basket seemed to her to grow heavier and heavier.

"Let me help you, mother," the frog daughter said. "Let me carry
father's dinner to him and you sit home and rest."

So from that time on the frog girl instead of the old woman carried the
dinner basket to the vineyard. While the old man ate, the frog girl
would hop up into the branches of a tree and sing. She sang very sweetly
and her old father, when he petted her, used to call her his Little
Singing Frog.

Now one day while she was singing the Tsar's Youngest Son rode by and
heard her. He stopped his horse and looked this way and that but for the
life of him he couldn't see who it was who was singing so sweetly.

"Who is singing?" he asked the old man.

But the old man who, as I told you before, was ashamed of his frog
daughter before strangers, at first pretended not to hear and then, when
the young Prince repeated his question, answered gruffly:

"There's no one singing!"

But the next day at the same hour when the Prince was again riding by he
heard the same sweet voice and he stopped again and listened.

"Surely, old man," he said, "there is some one singing! It is a lovely
girl, I know it is! Why, if I could find her, I'd be willing to marry
her at once and take her home to my father, the Tsar!"

"Don't be rash, young man," the laborer said.

"I mean what I say!" the Prince declared. "I'd marry her in a minute!"

"Are you sure you would?"

"Yes, I'm sure!"

"Very well, then, we'll see."

The old man looked up into the tree and called:

"Come down, Little Singing Frog! A Prince wants to marry you!"

So the little frog girl hopped down from among the branches and stood
before the Prince.

"She's my own daughter," the laborer said, "even if she does look like a
frog."

"I don't care what she looks like," the Prince said. "I love her
singing and I love her. And I mean what I say: I'll marry her if she'll
marry me. My father, the Tsar, bids me and my brothers present him our
brides to-morrow. He bids all the brides bring him a flower and he says
he'll give the kingdom to the prince whose bride brings the loveliest
flower. Little Singing Frog, will you be my bride and will you come to
Court to-morrow bringing a flower?"

"Yes, my Prince," the frog girl said, "I will. But I must not shame you
by hopping to Court in the dust. I must ride. So, will you send me a
snow-white cock from your father's barnyard?"

"I will," the Prince promised, and before night the snow-white cock had
arrived at the laborer's cottage.

Early the next morning the frog girl prayed to the Sun.

"O golden Sun," she said, "I need your help! Give me some lovely clothes
woven of your golden rays for I would not shame my Prince when I go to
Court."

The Sun heard her prayer and gave her a gown of cloth of gold.

Instead of a flower she took a spear of wheat in her hand and then when
the time came she mounted the white cock and rode to the palace.

[Illustration: _This, the Bride of the Youngest Prince, Is My Choice_]

The guards at the palace gate at first refused to admit her.

"This is no place for frogs!" they said to her. "You're looking for a
pond!"

But when she told them she was the Youngest Prince's bride, they were
afraid to drive her away. So they let her ride through the gate.

"Strange!" they murmured to one another. "The Youngest Prince's bride!
She looks like a frog and that was certainly a cock she was riding,
wasn't it?"

They stepped inside the gates to look after her and then they saw an
amazing sight. The frog girl, still seated on the white cock, was
shaking out the folds of a golden gown. She dropped the gown over her
head and instantly there was no frog and no white cock but a lovely
maiden mounted on a snow-white horse!

Well, the frog girl entered the palace with two other girls, the
promised brides of the older princes. They were just ordinary girls both
of them. To see them you wouldn't have paid any attention to them one
way or the other. But standing beside the lovely bride of the Youngest
Prince they seemed more ordinary than ever.

The first girl had a rose in her hand. The Tsar looked at it and at her,
sniffed his nose slightly, and turned his head.

The second girl had a carnation. The Tsar looked at her for a moment and
murmured:

"Dear me, this will never do!"

Then he looked at the Youngest Prince's bride and his eye kindled and he
said:

"Ah! This is something like!"

She gave him the spear of wheat and he took it and held it aloft. Then
he reached out his other hand to her and had her stand beside him as he
said to his sons and all the Court:

"This, the bride of the Youngest Prince, is my choice! See how beautiful
she is! And yet she knows the useful as well as the beautiful for she
has brought me a spear of wheat! The Youngest Prince shall be the Tsar
after me and she shall be Tsarina!"

So the little frog girl of whom her parents were ashamed married the
Youngest Prince and when the time came wore a Tsarina's crown.

[Illustration]


THE NIGHTINGALE IN THE MOSQUE

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Sultan's Youngest Son and the Princess Flower o' the
World_


THE NIGHTINGALE IN THE MOSQUE


There was once a Sultan who was so pious and devout that he spent many
hours every day in prayer.

"For the glory of Allah," he thought to himself, "I ought to build the
most beautiful mosque in the world."

So he called together the finest artisans in the country and told them
what he wanted. He spent a third of his riches on the undertaking, and
when the mosque was finished everybody said:

"See now, our Sultan has built the most beautiful mosque in the world
for the greater glory of Allah!"

On the first day when the Sultan went to pray in the new mosque, a
Dervish who was sitting cross-legged at the entrance spoke to him in a
droning sing-song voice and said:

"Nay, but your mosque is not yet beautiful enough! There is something it
lacks and your prayers will be unavailing!"

The words of the holy man grieved the Sultan and he had the mosque torn
down and another built in its place even more beautiful.

"This is certainly the most beautiful mosque in the world!" the people
said, and the Sultan's heart was very happy on the first day as he went
in to pray.

But again the Dervish, seated at the entrance, said to him in his
droning, sing-song voice:

"Nay, but your mosque is not yet beautiful enough! There is something it
lacks and your prayers will be unavailing!"

At the holy man's words the Sultan had the second mosque torn down and a
third one built, the most beautiful of them all. But when it was
finished for a third time the Dervish droned out:

"Nay, but your mosque is not yet beautiful enough! There is something it
lacks and your prayers will be unavailing!"

"What can I do?" the Sultan cried. "I have spent all my riches and now I
have no means wherewith to build another mosque!"

He fell to grieving and nothing any one could say would comfort him.

His three sons came to him and said:

"Father, is there not something we can do for you?"

The Sultan sighed and shook his head.

"Nothing, my sons, unless indeed you were to find out for me why my
third mosque is not the most beautiful in the world."

"Brothers," the youngest suggested, "let us go to the Dervish and ask
him why it is that the third mosque is not yet beautiful enough. Perhaps
he will tell us what is lacking."

So they went to the Dervish and asked him what he meant by saying to the
Sultan that the third mosque was not yet beautiful enough and they
begged him to tell them what it was that was lacking.

The Dervish fixed his eyes in the distance and slightly swaying his body
back and forth answered them in his sing-song tone.

"The mosque is beautiful," he said, "and the fountain in its midst is
beautiful, but where is the glorious Nightingale Gisar? With the
Nightingale Gisar singing beside the fountain, then indeed would the
Sultan's third mosque be the most beautiful mosque in the world!"

"Only tell us where this glorious Nightingale is," the brothers begged,
"and we will get him if it costs us our lives!"

"I cannot tell you that," the Dervish droned. "You will have to go out
into the world and find him for yourselves."

So the three brothers returned to the Sultan and told him what the
Dervish had said.

"All your third mosque lacks to be the most beautiful mosque in the
world," they told him, "is the Nightingale Gisar singing beside the
fountain. So grieve no more, father. We, your three sons, will go out
into the world in quest of this glorious bird and within a year's time
we will return with the bird in our hands if so be that it is anywhere
to be found in all the wide world."

The Sultan blessed them and they set forth the three of them, side by
side. They traveled together until they reached a place where three
roads branched. Upon the stone of the left-hand road nothing was
written. Upon the stone of the middle road was the inscription: _Who
goes this way returns_. The inscription on the third stone read: _Who
goes this way shall meet many dangers and may never return_.

"Let us part here," the oldest brother said, "and each take a separate
road. Then if all goes well, let us meet here again on this same spot
one year hence. As our father's oldest son it would be wrong for me to
run unnecessary risks, so I will take the left-hand road."

"And I will take the middle road," the second brother cried.

The Youngest Brother laughed and said:

"That leaves the dangerous road for me! Very well, brothers, that's the
very road I wish to take for why should I leave home if it were not to
have adventures! Farewell then until we meet again in one year's time."

The oldest traveled his safe road until he reached a city where he
became a barber. He asked every man whose head he shaved:

"Do you know anything of the Nightingale Gisar?"

He never found any one who had even heard of the bird, so after a time
he stopped asking.

The second brother followed the middle road to a city where he settled
down and opened a coffee-house.

"Have you ever heard of a glorious Nightingale known as Gisar?" he asked
at first of every traveler who came in and sipped his coffee. Not one of
them ever had and as time went by the second brother gradually stopped
even making inquiries.

The Youngest Brother who took the dangerous road came to no city at all
but to a far-off desolate place without houses or highways or farms.
Wild creatures hid in the brush and snakes glided in and out among the
rocks. One day he came upon a wild woman who was combing her hair with a
branch of juniper.

"That isn't the way to comb your hair," the Youngest Brother said.
"Here, let me show you."

He took his own comb and smoothed out all the tangles in the wild
woman's hair until she was comfortable and happy.

"You have been very kind to me," she said. "Now isn't there something I
can do for you in return?"

"I am looking for the Nightingale Gisar. If you know where that glorious
bird is, tell me and that will more than repay me."

But the wild woman had never heard of the Nightingale Gisar.

"Only wild animals inhabit this desolate place," she said, "and a few
wild people like me. The Nightingale Gisar is not here."

"Then I must go farther," the Youngest Brother said.

This the wild woman begged him not to do.

"Beyond these mountains," she said, "is a wilder desert with fiercer
animals. Turn back while you can."

"No," the Youngest Brother insisted, "I'm going as God leads me."

So he left the wild woman and crossed the mountains. He went on and on
until he was footsore and weary. Then at last he came to the Tiger's
house.

The Tiger's wife met him.

"Be off, young man!" she warned him, "or the Tiger when he comes home
will eat you!"

"No!" said the Youngest Brother, "now I'm here I'm going to stay for I
have a question to ask the Tiger."

The Tiger's wife was making bread. When the dough was ready to go into
the oven, she leaned over the glowing embers of the fire and began to
brush them aside with her body.

"Stop!" the Youngest Brother cried. "You will burn yourself!"

"But how else can I brush aside the glowing embers?" the Tiger's wife
asked.

"I'll show you."

The Youngest Brother cut a branch from a tree outside and fashioned it
into a rough broom. Then he showed the Tiger's wife how to use it.

"Ah!" she said gratefully, "before this always when I've baked bread
I've been sick for ten days afterwards. Now I shall be sick no more for
you have taught me how to use a broom. In return let me hide you in a
dark corner and when the Tiger comes home I'll tell him how kind you
have been and perhaps he will not eat you."

So she hid the Youngest Brother in a dark corner and when the Tiger
came home she met him and said:

"See, I have baked bread to-day but I am not sick, for a youth has shown
me how I can brush aside the embers without burning myself."

The Tiger was overjoyed to hear that his wife had been able to bake
bread without being made sick and he swore to be a brother to him who
had taught her the use of a broom. So the Youngest Brother came out from
the dark corner where he was hiding and the Tiger made him welcome.

"What are you doing wandering about in this wild country?" the Tiger
asked.

"I am searching for the Nightingale Gisar and I have come to you to ask
you if you can tell me where I can find that glorious bird."

The Tiger had never heard of the Nightingale Gisar but he thought that
his oldest brother the Lion might know.

"Go straight on from here," he said, "until you come to the Lion's
house. His old wife stands outside facing the house with her long thin
old dugs thrown over her shoulders. Go up to her from behind and take
her dugs and put them in your mouth and suck them and when she asks you
who you are, say: 'Don't you know me, old mother? I'm your oldest cub.'
Then she will lead you in to the Lion who is so old that his eyelids
droop. Prop them open and when he sees you he will tell you what he
knows."

So the Youngest Brother went on to the Lion's house and he found the
Lion's old wife standing outside as the Tiger said he would. He did all
the Tiger had told him to do and when the Lion's wife asked him who he
was, he said: 'Don't you know me, old mother? I'm your oldest cub.' Then
the Lion's old wife led him in to the Lion and he propped open the
Lion's drooping eyelids and asked about the Nightingale Gisar.

The old Lion shook his head.

"I have never heard of the Nightingale Gisar. He has never sung in this
wild place. Turn back, young man, and seek him elsewhere. Beyond this is
a country of wilder creatures where you will only lose your life."

"That is as God wills," the Youngest Brother said.

With that he bade the old Lion and his old wife farewell and pushed on
into the farther wilds. The mountains grew more and more rugged, the
plains more parched and barren, and the Youngest Son was hard put to it
to find food from day to day.

Once when he was crossing a desert three eagles swooped down upon him
and it was all he could do to fight them off. He slashed at them with
his sword and succeeded in cutting off the beak of one, a wing of
another, and a leg of the third. He put these three things in his bag as
trophies.

He came at last to a hut where an old woman was baking cakes on the
hearth.

"God bless you, granny!" he said. "Can you give me a bite of supper and
shelter for the night?"

The old woman shook her head.

"My boy, you had better not stop here. I have three daughters and if
they were to come home and find you here, they'd kill you."

But the Youngest Brother insisted that he was not afraid and at last the
old woman let him stay. She hid him in the corner behind the firewood
and warned him to keep still.

Presently the three eagles whom he had maimed came flying into the hut.
The old woman put a bowl of milk on the table, the birds dipped in the
milk, and lo! their feather shirts opened and they stepped out three
maidens. One of them had lost her lips, one an arm, and the third a leg.

"Ah!" they cried to their mother, "see what has befallen us! If only the
youth who maimed us would return the beak and the wing and the leg that
he hacked off, we would tell him anything he wants to know."

At that the Youngest Brother stepped out from behind the firewood and
said:

"Tell me then where I can find the Nightingale Gisar and you shall have
back your beak and your wing and your leg."

He opened his bag and the maidens were overjoyed to see their beak and
their wing and their leg. Then they told the Youngest Brother all they
knew about the Nightingale Gisar.

"Far from here," they said, "there is a Warrior Princess, so beautiful
that men call her Flower o' the World. She has the Nightingale Gisar in
a golden cage hanging in her own chamber. The chamber door is guarded by
a lion and a wolf and a tiger for the Flower o' the World knows that she
will have to marry the man who steals from her the Nightingale Gisar."

"How can a man enter the chamber of the Flower o' the World?" the
Youngest Brother asked.

"For a few moments at midnight," the sisters told him, "the three
animals sleep. During those few moments a man could enter the chamber,
get the Nightingale Gisar, and escape. But even then he might not be
safe for the Flower o' the World might gather her army together and
pursue him."

"Now tell me how to reach the palace of that Warrior Princess, Flower o'
the World."

"You could never get there alone," they told him, "the way is too long
and the dangers are too many. Stay here with us for three months and at
the end of three months we will carry you thither on our wings."

So for three months the Youngest Brother stayed on in the hut with the
old woman and her three daughters. The three daughters flew in their
eagle shirts to the spring of the Water of Life and bathing in that
magic pool they made grow on again the beak and the wing and the leg
which the Youngest Brother had hacked off.

At the end of three months they carried the Youngest Brother on their
wings to the distant kingdom where the Warrior Princess, Flower o' the
World, lived.

At midnight they set him down in front of the palace and he slipped
unseen through the guards at the gate and through the halls of the
palace to the Princess's own chamber. The lion, the wolf, and the tiger
were asleep and he was able to push back the curtain before which they
were lying and creep up to the Princess's very bedside without being
discovered.

He looked once at the sleeping Flower o' the World and she was so
beautiful that he dared not look again for fear he should forget the
Nightingale Gisar and betray himself by crying out.

At the head of the bed were four lighted candles and at the foot four
unlighted ones. He blew out the lighted ones and lit the others. Then
quickly he took the golden cage in which the Nightingale Gisar was
perched asleep, unfastened it from the golden chain on which it was
hanging, and hurried out. The eagles were waiting for him and at once
they spread their wings and carried him away.

They put him down at the crossroads where he had parted from his
brothers just one year before. Then they bade him farewell and flew off
to their home in the desert.

"My brothers will probably be here in an hour or so," the Youngest Son
thought. "I had better wait for them."

He felt sleepy, so he lay down by the roadside and closed his eyes.

While he slept his brothers arrived and of course the first thing they
saw was the golden cage and the Nightingale Gisar.

Then envy and hatred filled their hearts and they began cursing and
complaining to think that he who was the Youngest had succeeded where
they had failed.

"We'll be the laughing-stock of the whole country!" they said, "if we
let him come home carrying the Nightingale Gisar! Let us take the bird
while he sleeps and hurry home with it. Then if he comes home later and
says it was he who really found the bird no one will believe him."

So they beat their brother into insensibility and tore his clothes to
rags to make him think that he had been set upon by robbers, and then
taking the golden cage and the Nightingale Gisar they hurried home and
presented themselves to their father, the Sultan.

"Here, O father," they said, "is the Nightingale Gisar! To get this
glorious bird for you we have endured all the perils in the world!"

"And your Youngest Brother," the Sultan asked, "where is he?"

"The Youngest? Think no more of him, father, for he is unworthy to be
your son. Instead of searching the wide world for the Nightingale Gisar,
he settled down in the first city he reached and lived a life of
idleness and ease. Some say he became a barber and some say he opened a
coffee-house and spent his days chatting with passing travelers. He has
not come home with us for no doubt it shames him to know that we have
succeeded where he has failed."

The Sultan was grieved to hear this evil report of his Youngest Son, but
he was overjoyed to have the Nightingale Gisar. He had the golden cage
carried to the mosque and hung beside the fountain in the court.

But imagine his disappointment when the bird refused to sing!

"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque," the Dervish said
in his droning sing-song voice, "and then the Nightingale will sing."

The Sultan immediately sent for his two sons. They came but still the
bird was silent.

"See now," the Sultan said, "my two sons are here and yet the bird is
silent."

But the Dervish would only repeat:

"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque and then the
Nightingale will sing."

The next day a youth in rags whom nobody knew entered the mosque to pray
and instantly the Nightingale began to sing.

A messenger was sent running to the Sultan with the news that the
Nightingale was singing. The Sultan hurried to the mosque but by the
time he got there the beggar youth was gone and the Nightingale had
stopped singing.

"Now that I'm here," cried the Sultan, "why does the bird not sing?"

The Dervish, swaying his body gently back and forth, made answer as
before:

"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque and then the
Nightingale will sing."

Thereafter every day when the beggar youth came to the mosque to pray
the Nightingale sang, and always when the Sultan approached the beggar
walked away and the bird stopped singing. At last people began
whispering:

"Strange that the Nightingale should sing only when that beggar youth is
near! And yet the Dervish says it will not sing unless he who found it
comes to the mosque! What can he mean?"

Report of the beggar youth reached the ears of the Sultan and he went to
the Dervish and questioned him.

"Why do you say that the Nightingale Gisar will not sing unless he who
found him comes to the mosque? Lo, here are my two sons who found him
and the bird remains silent, yet people tell me that when a certain
beggar comes to the mosque he sings. Why does he not sing when I and my
two sons come to pray?"

And always the Dervish made the same answer in the same sing-song voice:

"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque and then the
Nightingale will sing."

Soon a terrifying rumor spread through the land that a great Warrior
Princess called Flower o' the World was coming with a mighty army to
make war on the Sultan and to destroy his city. Her army far outnumbered
the Sultan's and when she encamped in a broad valley over against the
city the Sultan's people, seeing her mighty hosts, were filled with
dread and besought their ruler to make peace with the Princess at any
cost. So the Sultan called his heralds and sent them to her and through
them he said:

"Demand of me what you will even to my life but spare my city."

The Warrior Princess returned this answer:

"I will spare you and your city provided you deliver me your son who
stole from me the Nightingale Gisar. Him I shall have executed or let
live as it pleases me."

Now the Sultan's two sons knew that the Flower o' the World was fated to
marry the man who had stolen from her the Nightingale Gisar, so when
they heard the Princess's demand they were overjoyed thinking that she
would have to fall in love with one of them. So they disputed at great
length as to which of them had done the actual deed of taking the bird,
each insisting that it was he and not his brother. The Sultan himself
had finally to decide between them.

"You have told me," he said, "that you captured the bird together. As
that is the case and as I can't send you both to the Warrior Princess it
is only right that the older should go."

So under a splendid escort the oldest son rode to the tent of the
Warrior Princess. She bade him enter alone and when he appeared before
her she looked at him long and steadily. Then she said:

"Nay, but you are never the man who stole from me the Nightingale Gisar!
You would lack the courage to face the perils of the way!"

The oldest prince answered the Flower o' the World craftily:

"But how, Princess, if I did not steal from you the Nightingale Gisar
was I then able to bring back that glorious bird and hang his cage
beside the fountain in the mosque?"

But Flower o' the World was not to be deceived by such specious words.

"Tell me then," she said, "if it was you who stole my glorious
Nightingale, where did you find him hanging in his golden cage?"

The oldest prince could not answer this, so he said at random:

"I found his golden cage hanging in the cypress tree that grows in the
garden of your palace."

"Enough!" cried the Princess.

She clapped her hands and when her guards appeared she said to them:

"Have this man executed at once and let his head be sent to the Sultan
with the message: _This is the head of a liar and a coward! Send me at
once your son who stole my glorious Nightingale Gisar or I will march
against your city!_"

The Sultan was greatly shocked to receive this message together with the
head of his oldest son.

"Alas!" he cried, calling his second son, "would that I had listened to
you when you insisted that it was you and not your brother who actually
did the deed! Unhappily I listened to your brother! See now the awful
result of this mistake! Go you now to this heartless Princess whom men
call Flower o' the World or else our poor defenseless city will have to
pay the penalty."

So the second prince was taken to the tent of the Warrior Maiden and she
put to him the same questions and he fared even worse than his brother
had fared. So his head, too, was sent to the Sultan with this message:

"_Send me no more liars and cowards but the son who actually did steal
from me my glorious Nightingale Gisar._"

In despair the Sultan went to the mosque to pray. As he bowed his head
he heard the Nightingale burst forth in song. Then when he looked up he
saw a beggar youth standing near the fountain.

When his prayers were finished the Sultan went outside to the Dervish
and said to him:

"The Warrior Princess, Flower o' the World, demands that I send her
another son. I know not where my Third Son is. What shall I do?"

Without looking at the Sultan the Dervish answered in his sing-song
voice:

"Send her the son for whom the Nightingale sings."

The Sultan turned away in disappointment, not understanding what the
Dervish meant, but one of his attendants plucked his sleeve and
whispered:

"The Nightingale sings for yonder beggar youth. Perhaps it is he the
Dervish means. Why not ask him if he will go to Flower o' the World in
place of your Youngest Son?"

[Illustration: _The Flower o' the World Asleep_]

The Sultan nodded, so the attendant called the beggar youth and the
Sultan asked him would he go to the Warrior Princess as the Youngest
Prince.

"Allah alone knows where my Youngest Son is," the Sultan said, "but he
is just about your age and if you were washed and anointed and dressed
in fitting garments you would not be unlike him."

The beggar youth said he would go but he insisted on going just as he
was. The Sultan begged him to go dressed as a prince or the Flower o'
the World might not receive him.

"No," said the youth, "I shall go as a beggar or not at all. It is for
the Flower o' the World to know me whether or not I am the Sultan's
Youngest Son and the man who stole from her the Nightingale Gisar."

So he went as he was to the tent of the Flower o' the World and her
warriors when they saw him coming said to the Princess:

"This Sultan mocks you and sends you a beggar when you demand his Third
Son."

But the Flower o' the World ordered them all out and bade the beggar
enter alone. She looked at him long and steadily and she saw through his
rags that he was indeed a noble youth with a body made strong and
beautiful through exercise and toil and she thought to herself:

"It were not a hard fate to marry this youth!"

Then she questioned him:

"Are you the Sultan's Third Son?"

"I am."

"Then why are you dressed as a beggar?"

"Because I was set upon at the crossroads and beaten insensible and my
clothes torn to rags. I was coming home with the Nightingale Gisar in my
hands and I lay down at the roadside to rest while I awaited the coming
of my brothers. When I awoke to consciousness the Nightingale and its
golden cage were gone. I came home to my father's city as a beggar and
there they told me that my brothers had come just before me bringing
with them the Nightingale and boasting of the perils they had been
through and the dangers they had faced. But the Nightingale, they told
me, hanging in its golden cage beside the fountain, was silent. Yet when
I went to the mosque it always sang."

The Warrior Princess looked deep into his eyes and knew that he was
speaking truth. Her heart was touched with compassion at the wrong he
had suffered from his brothers, but she hid her feelings and questioned
him further.

"Then it was you," she said, "who really took from me my glorious
Nightingale Gisar?"

"Yes, Princess, it was. I crept past the lion and the wolf and the tiger
just after midnight while they slept. I blew out the four candles at the
head of your bed and lighted those at the foot. The golden cage of the
Nightingale was hanging from a golden chain. Before I unfastened it I
looked at you once, as you lay sleeping, and dared not look a second
time."

"Why not?" the Princess asked.

"Because, O Flower o' the World, you were so beautiful that I feared,
were I to look again, I should forget the Nightingale Gisar and cry out
in ecstacy."

Then the compassion in the Princess's heart changed to love and she knew
for a certainty that this was the man she was fated to wed.

She clapped her hands and when the guards came in she said to them:

"Call my warriors together that I may show them the Sultan's Youngest
Son and the man who stole from me my glorious Nightingale Gisar and whom
I am fated to wed."

So the warriors came in until they crowded the tent to its utmost. Then
the Princess stood up and took the Sultan's Youngest Son by the hand and
presented him to the warriors and told them of his great bravery and
courage and of all the perils he had endured in order to get the
Nightingale Gisar for his father's mosque.

"He came to me now as a beggar," she said, "but I knew him at once for
truth was in his mouth and courage in his eye. Behold, O warriors, your
future lord!"

Then the warriors waved their swords and cried:

"Long live the Flower o' the World! Long live the Sultan's Youngest
Son!"

All the Princess's army when they heard the news raised such a mighty
shout that the people in the Sultan's city heard and were filled with
dread not knowing what it meant. But soon they knew and then they, too,
went mad with joy that what had threatened to be a war was turning to a
wedding!

The Flower o' the World and her chief warriors and with them the
Youngest Prince rode slowly to the city. The Prince was now dressed as
befitted his rank and the Sultan when he saw him recognized him at once.

"Allah be praised!" he cried, "my Youngest Son lives!"

Then they told him all--how it was this Prince and not the older
brothers who had found the Nightingale Gisar and how the older brothers
had robbed him of his prize and beaten him insensible.

When the Sultan heard how wicked his older sons had been his grief for
their death was assuaged.

"Allah be praised," he said, "that I have at least one son who is
worthy!"

After the betrothal ceremony the Sultan and the Youngest Prince went to
the mosque to pray. While they prayed the Nightingale sang so gloriously
that it seemed to them they were no longer on earth but in Paradise.

When their prayers were finished and they were passing out, the Dervish
raised his sing-song voice and said:

"Now indeed is the Sultan's Mosque the most beautiful Mosque in the
World for the Nightingale Gisar sings beside the Fountain!"

[Illustration]


THE GIRL IN THE CHEST

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Third Sister Who Was Brave and Good_


THE GIRL IN THE CHEST


There was once a horrible Vampire who took the form of a handsome young
man and went to the house of an old woman who had three daughters and
pretended he wanted to marry the oldest.

"I live far from here," the Vampire said. "I own my own farm and am
well-to-do and in marrying me your daughter would get a desirable
husband. Indeed, I am so well off that I don't have to ask any dowry."

Now the old woman was so poor that she couldn't have given a penny of
dowry. That was the only reason why all three of her daughters hadn't
long ago been married to youths of their own village. So when the
stranger said he would require no dowry, the old woman whispered to her
oldest daughter:

"He seems to be all right. Perhaps you had better take him."

The poor girl accepted her mother's advice and that afternoon started
off with the Vampire who said he would lead her home and marry her.

They walked a great distance and as evening came on they reached a wild
ghostly spot which frightened the girl half to death.

"This way, my dear," the Vampire said, pushing her into an opening in
the earth. "We take this underground passage and soon we'll be home."

The passage led to a sort of cave which really was the Vampire's home.

"What an awful place!" the poor girl cried in terror. "Let me out!"

"Let you out, indeed!" the Vampire sneered, taking his own horrible
shape and laughing cruelly. "Here you are and here you stay and if you
don't do everything I tell you, I'll soon finish you! Here now, drink
this."

He offered the poor girl a pitcher and when she saw what was in it she
nearly fainted with horror.

"No!" she cried. "I won't! I won't!"

"If you don't drink this," the Vampire said, darkly, "then I'll drink
you!"

And with that he killed her with no more feeling than if she were a fly.

Then in a short time he went back to the old woman and said:

"Dear mother, my poor wife is ill and she begs that you send her your
second daughter to nurse her. She asks for her sister night and day and
I fear she will die unless she sees her."

When the poor old mother heard this, she begged the second daughter to
go at once with the young man and nurse her sick sister.

Well, the same thing happened to the second sister and in no time at all
the Vampire had killed her, too, to satisfy his awful thirst.

Then he returned again to the old mother and this time he pretended that
both sisters were sick and were trying for the third sister to come and
nurse them. So the poor old woman sent her Youngest Daughter away with
the Vampire.

The Youngest Sister when she found out the truth about the horrid
Vampire didn't sit down and weep helplessly as the others had done and
wait for the Vampire to kill her, but she prayed God's help and then
tried to find some way of escape.

There were doors in the cave which the Vampire told her were doors to
closets she must not enter. When the Vampire was out she opened these
doors and found that they all led into long underground passages.

"This is my one chance to get back to earth!" the girl thought and
commending her undertaking to God she fled down one of the passages.

You may be sure the Vampire when he came back and found her gone fell
into a great rage. He went running wildly up and down the various
passages and lost so much time searching the wrong passages that the
girl was able to make good her escape and reach the upper world in
safety.

She came out in a wood with no sign of human habitation anywhere in
sight.

"What shall I do now?" she thought. "If I stay here alone and
unprotected some wild beast or evil creature may get me."

So she knelt down and prayed God to give her a chest that she could lock
from the inside with one of her own golden hairs so securely that no one
could force it open. God heard her prayer and presently behind some
bushes she found just such a chest. When it grew dark and she was ready
to go to bed, she crept into the chest, locked it with a hair, and slept
peacefully knowing that nothing could harm her.

So she lived in the wood some time, eating berries and fruits, and
sleeping safely in the chest.

Now it so happened that the King's son one morning went hunting in this
very wood and caught a glimpse of the girl as she was gathering berries.
He thought he had never seen such a beautiful creature and instantly he
fell in love with her. But when he reached the clump of bushes where he
had seen her, she was gone. He called his huntsmen together and told
them to search everywhere. They hunted for hours and all they could find
was a chest. They tried to open the chest to see what was in it but
couldn't.

"Waste no more time over it," the Prince said at last. "Carry it home to
the palace as it is and have it placed in my chamber."

The huntsmen did this and a few hours later when the girl peeped out of
her chest she found herself alone in the Prince's chamber. His supper
was standing on a table in readiness for his coming. The girl ate the
supper and was safely back in her chest before he arrived. When he did
come the Prince was amazed to see empty plates and called the servants
to know who had eaten his supper. The servants were as much surprised as
the Prince and declared that no one had entered the chamber.

The same thing happened the next day and the following day the Prince
had one of his servants hide behind the curtains and watch to find out
if possible how the food disappeared.

The story the servant had to tell of what he saw was so thrilling that
the Prince could scarcely wait for the next day when he himself hid
behind the curtains and watched.

The serving people put the food on the table and retired and presently
the lid of the chest opened and the Prince saw the beautiful maiden of
the wood step out. When she sat down at the table the Prince slipped up
behind her and caught her in his arms.

"You lovely creature!" he said, "I'm not going to let you escape me
again!"

At first the girl was greatly frightened but the Prince reassured her,
telling her that he loved her dearly and only wanted to make her his
wife.

He led her at once to the King, his father, and the girl was so modest
and lovely that the King soon agreed to the marriage.

[Illustration: _The Chest Opened and the Prince Saw the Beautiful
Maiden_]

Everybody in court was delighted--everybody, that is, but the
Chamberlain who had had hopes of marrying his own daughter to the
Prince. His daughter was an ugly ill-tempered girl and the Prince had
never even looked at her. The Chamberlain was sure, however, that with a
little more time he could arrange the match to his liking. So the
appearance of this beautiful girl who came from Heaven knows where threw
him into a fearful rage and he decided to do away with her at any cost.
Now he had in his employ a great burly Blackamoor. He called this
fellow to him and he told him that he must kidnap the girl at once and
kill her. The Blackamoor who was accustomed to do such deeds for the
Chamberlain nodded and said he would.

So when the palace was quiet that night he stole to the bedchamber where
the girl was lying asleep, threw a great robe over her head to stifle
her cries, and carried her off. She fainted away from fright and the
Blackamoor thinking her dead tossed her into a field of nettles in the
outskirts of the town.

Now, as you can imagine, in the morning there was a great uproar in the
palace when it was discovered that the Prince's beautiful bride-to-be
had disappeared. The Prince was utterly grief-stricken and refused to
eat. The King and all the ladies of the court tried their best to
comfort him but he turned away from them declaring he would die if his
bride were not restored to him.

The rascally Chamberlain put his handkerchief to his eyes and pretended
to weep he was so affected by the sight of the Prince's grief.

"My dear boy," he said, "I would that I could find this maiden for you!
It breaks my heart to see you sad and unhappy! But I'm sorry to tell you
that I hear she was a Vila and not a human maiden at all. You know how
mysteriously she came, and now she's gone just as mysteriously. So put
the thought of her out of your mind and I'm sure you'll soon find a
human maiden who is worthy of your love. Come here, my daughter, and
tell the Prince how sorry you are that he is in grief."

But the sight of the Chamberlain's ugly daughter only made the Prince
long the more for the beautiful girl who was gone.

She meantime had found refuge in the hut of an old woman who had heard
her groan in the early dawn when she lay among the nettles and had taken
compassion on her.

"You may stay with me until you're well," the old woman said.

The girl was young and healthy and in a day or two had recovered the ill
treatment she had suffered at the hands of the Blackamoor.

"Won't you let me live with you awhile, granny?" she said to the old
woman. "I'll cook and scrub and work and you won't have to regret the
little I eat."

"Can you cook? Because if you can perhaps you know a dish that would
tempt the appetite of our poor young Prince," the old woman said. "You
know the poor boy has had a terrible disappointment in love and he
refuses to eat. The heralds were out this morning proclaiming that the
King would richly reward any one who could prepare a dish that would
tempt the Prince's appetite."

"Granny!" the girl said, "I know a wonderful way to prepare beans! Let
me cook a dish of beans and do you carry them to the palace."

So the girl cooked the beans and placed them prettily in a dish and on
one side of the dish she put a tiny little ringlet of her own golden
hair.

"If he sees the hair," she thought to herself, "he'll know the beans are
from me."

And that's exactly what happened. To please his father the Prince had
consented to look at every dish as it came. He had already looked at
hundreds of them before the old woman arrived and turned away from them
all. Then the old woman came. As she passed before the Prince, she
lifted the cover of the dish, held it towards him, and curtsied. The
Prince was just about to turn away when he saw the tiny ringlet of hair.

"Oh!" he said. "Wait a minute! Those beans look good!"

To the King's delight he took the dish out of the old woman's hand,
examined it carefully, and when no one was looking slipped the ringlet
into his pocket. Then he ate the beans--every last one of them!

The King gave the old woman some golden ducats and begged her to prepare
another dish for the Prince on the morrow.

So the next day the girl again sent a tiny ringlet of her hair on the
side of the plate and again the Prince after scorning all the other food
offered him took the old woman's dish and ate it clean.

On the third day the Prince engaged the old woman in conversation.

"Where do you live, granny?"

"In a little tumble-down house beside the nettles," she told him.

"Do you live alone?"

"Just now," the old woman said, "I have a dear girl living with me. I
found her one morning lying in the nettles where some ruffians had left
her for dead. She's a good girl and she scrubs and bakes and cooks for
me and lets me rest my poor old bones."

Now the Prince knew what he wanted to know.

"Granny," he said, "to-morrow's Sunday. Now I want you to stay home in
the afternoon because I'm coming to see you."

In great excitement the old woman hurried home and told the girl that
the Prince was coming to see them on Sunday afternoon.

"He mustn't see me!" the girl said. "I'll hide in the bread trough under
a cloth and if he goes looking for me you tell him that I've gone out."

"Foolish child!" the old woman said. "Why should you hide from a
handsome young man like the Prince?"

But the girl insisted and at last when Sunday afternoon came the old
woman was forced to let her lie down in the bread trough and cover her
with a cloth.

The Prince arrived and when he found the old woman there alone he was
mightily disappointed.

"Where's that girl who lives with you?" he asked.

"She's gone out," the old woman said.

"Then I think I'll wait till she comes back."

This made the old woman feel nervous.

"But, my Prince, I don't know when she's coming back."

Just then the Prince thought he saw something move in the bread trough.

"What's that lumpy thing in the bread trough, granny?"

"That? Oh, that's just dough that's rising, my Prince. I'm baking
to-day."

"Then make me a loaf, granny. I'll wait for it until it rises and until
you bake it. Then I'll eat it hot out of the oven."

What was the old woman to say to that? She fussed and fidgeted and
thought again what a foolish young girl that was to be hiding in the
bread trough when there was a handsome young Prince in the room.

"I don't know why that dough doesn't rise," she remarked at last.

"Perhaps there's something the matter with it," the Prince said.

Before the old woman could stop him, he jumped up, tossed the cloth
aside, and there was his lovely bride!

"Why are you hiding from me?" he asked as he lifted her up and kissed
her tenderly.

"Because I knew if you really loved me you would find me," she said.

"Now that I have found you," the Prince declared, "I shall never let you
leave me again."

Then the girl told the Prince about the wicked Chamberlain and the
Blackamoor and it was all she and the old woman could do to keep the
Prince from drawing his sword and rushing out instantly to kill both of
them.

The old woman begged the Prince to take the girl secretly to the King
and have the King hear her story, and then let him pass judgment on the
Chamberlain according to the laws of the land. At last the Prince agreed
to this.

So they covered the girl's head with a veil and took her to the King.
When the King heard her story he called the court together at once and
told them the outrage that had been committed against his son's promised
bride. He commanded that the murderous Blackamoor be executed the next
day and he decreed that the Chamberlain and his wicked daughter be
stripped of their lands and riches and sent into exile.

Let us hope that exile taught them the evil of their ways and made them
repent.

As for the girl, she married the Prince and they lived together in great
happiness. And she deserved to be happy, too, for she was a brave girl
and a good girl and God loves people who are brave and good and blesses
them.

[Illustration]


THE WONDERFUL HAIR

[Illustration]

_The Story of a Poor Man Who Dreamed of an Angel_


THE WONDERFUL HAIR


There was once a poor man who had so many children that he was at his
wit's end how to feed them all and clothe them.

"Unless something turns up soon," he thought to himself, "we shall all
starve to death. Poor youngsters--I'm almost tempted to kill them with
my own hands to save them from suffering the pangs of hunger!"

That night before he went to sleep he prayed God to give him help. God
heard his prayer and sent an angel to him in a dream.

The angel said to him:

"To-morrow morning when you wake, put your hand under your pillow and
you will find a mirror, a red handkerchief, and an embroidered scarf.
Without saying a word to any one hide these things in your shirt and go
out to the woods that lie beyond the third hill from the village. There
you will find a brook. Follow it until you come to a beautiful maiden
who is bathing in its waters. You will know her from the great masses of
golden hair that fall down over her shoulders. She will speak to you
but do you be careful not to answer. If you say a word to her she will
be able to bewitch you. She will hold out a comb to you and ask you to
comb her hair. Take the comb and do as she asks. Then part her back hair
carefully and you will see one hair that is coarser than the others and
as red as blood. Wrap this firmly around one of your fingers and jerk it
out. Then flee as fast as you can. She will pursue you and each time as
she is about to overtake you drop first the embroidered scarf, then the
red handkerchief, and last the mirror. If you reach the hill nearest
your own village you are safe for she can pursue you no farther. Take
good care of the single hair for it great value and you can sell it for
many golden ducats."

In the morning when the poor man awoke and put his hand under his pillow
he found the mirror and the handkerchief and the scarf just as the angel
had said he would. So he hid them carefully in his shirt and without
telling any one where he was going he went to the woods beyond the third
hill from the village. Here he found the brook and followed it until he
came to a pool where he saw a lovely maiden bathing.

"Good day to you!" she said politely.

The poor man remembering the angel's warning made no answer.

[Illustration: _The Mirror, the Handkerchief, and the Embroidered
Scarf_]

The maiden held out a golden comb.

"Please comb my hair for me, won't you?"

The man nodded and took the comb. Then he parted the long tresses behind
and searched here and there and everywhere until he found the one hair
that was blood-red in color and coarser than the others. He twisted this
firmly around his finger, jerked it quickly out, and fled.

"Oh!" cried the maiden. "What are you doing? Give me back my one red
hair!"

She jumped to her feet and ran swiftly after him. As she came close to
him, he dropped behind him the embroidered scarf. She stooped and picked
it up and examined it awhile. Then she saw the man was escaping, so she
tossed the scarf aside and again ran after him. This time he dropped the
red handkerchief. Its bright color caught the maiden's eye and she
picked it up and lost a few more minutes admiring it while the man raced
on. Then the maiden remembered him, threw away the handkerchief, and
started off again in pursuit.

This time the man dropped the mirror and the maiden who of course was a
Vila and had never seen a mirror before picked it up and looked at it
and when she saw the lovely reflection of herself she was so amazed that
she kept on looking and looking. She was still looking in it and still
admiring her own beauty when the man reached the third hill beyond which
the maiden couldn't follow him.

So the poor man got home with the hair safely wound about his finger.

"It must be of great value," he thought to himself. "I'll take it to the
city and offer it for sale there."

So the next day he went to the city and went about offering his
wonderful hair to the merchants.

"What's so wonderful about it?" they asked him.

"I don't know, but I do know it's of great value," he told them.

"Well," said one of them, "I'll give you one golden ducat for it."

He was a shrewd buyer and the others hearing his bid of one golden ducat
decided that he must know that the hair was of much greater value. So
they began to outbid him until the price offered the poor man reached
one hundred golden ducats. But the poor man insisted that this was not
enough.

"One hundred golden ducats not enough for one red hair!" cried the
merchants.

They pretended to be disgusted that any one would refuse such a price
for one red hair, but in reality they were all firmly convinced by this
time that it was a magic hair and probably worth any amount of money in
the world.

The whole city became excited over the wonderful hair for which all the
merchants were bidding and for a time nothing else was talked about. The
matter was reported to the Tsar and at once he said that he himself
would buy the hair for one thousand golden ducats.

One thousand golden ducats! After that there was no danger of the poor
man's many children dying of starvation.

And what do you suppose the Tsar did with the hair? He had it split open
very carefully and inside he found a scroll of great importance to
mankind for on it were written many wonderful secrets of nature.

[Illustration]


THE BEST WISH

[Illustration]

_The Story of Three Brothers and an Angel_


THE BEST WISH


There were once three brothers whose only possession was a pear tree.
They took turns guarding it. That is to say while two of them went to
work the third stayed at home to see that no harm came to the pear tree.

Now it happened that an Angel from heaven was sent down to test the
hearts of the three brothers. The Angel took the form of a beggar and
approaching the pear tree on a day when the oldest brother was guarding
it, he held out his hand and said:

"In heaven's name, brother, give me a ripe pear."

The oldest brother at once handed him a pear, saying:

"This one I can give you because it is mine, but none of the others
because they belong to my brothers."

The Angel thanked him and departed.

The next day when the second brother was on guard he returned in the
same guise and again begged the charity of a ripe pear.

"Take this one," the second brother said. "It is mine and I can give it
away. I can't give away any of the others because they belong to my
brothers."

The Angel thanked the second brother and departed.

The third day he had exactly the same experience with the youngest
brother.

On the following day the Angel, in the guise of a monk, came to the
brothers' house very early while they were still all at home.

"My sons," he said, "come with me and perhaps I can find you something
better to do than guard a single pear tree."

The brothers agreed and they all started out together. After walking
some time they came to the banks of a broad deep river.

"My son," the Angel said, addressing the oldest brother, "if I were to
grant you one wish, what you ask?"

"I'd be happy," the oldest brother said, "if all this water was turned
into wine and belonged to me."

[Illustration: _The Angel Took the Form of a Beggar_]

The Angel lifted his staff and made the sign of the cross and lo! the
water became wine from great wine-presses. At once numbers of casks
appeared and men filling them and rolling them about. A huge industry
sprang up with sheds and storehouses and wagons and men running
hither and thither and addressing the oldest brother respectfully as
"Master!"

"You have your wish," the Angel said. "See that you do not forget God's
poor now that you are rich. Farewell."

So they left the oldest brother in the midst of his wine and went on
farther until they came to a broad field where flocks of pigeons were
feeding.

"If I were to grant you one wish," the Angel said to the second brother,
"what would you ask?"

"I'd be happy, father, if all the pigeons in this field were turned to
sheep and belonged to me."

The Angel lifted his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the
field was covered with sheep. Sheds appeared and houses and women, some
of them milking the ewes and others skimming the milk and making
cheeses. In one place men were busy preparing meat for the market and in
another cleaning wool. And all of them as they came and went spoke
respectfully to the second brother and called him, "Master!"

"You have your wish," the Angel said. "Stay here and enjoy prosperity
and see that you do not forget God's poor!"

Then he and the youngest brother went on their way.

"Now, my son," the Angel said, "you, too, may make one wish."

"I want but one thing, father. I pray heaven to grant me a truly pious
wife. That is my only wish."

"A truly pious wife!" the Angel cried. "My boy, you have asked the
hardest thing of all! Why, there are only three truly pious women in all
the world! Two of them are already married and the third is a princess
who is being sought in marriage at this very moment by two kings!
However, your brothers have received their wishes and you must have
yours, too. Let us go at once to the father of this virtuous princess
and present your suit."

So just as they were they trudged to the city where the princess lived
and presented themselves at the palace looking shabby and
travel-stained.

The king received them and when he heard their mission he looked at them
in amazement.

"This makes three suitors for my daughter's hand! Two kings and now this
young man all on the same day! How am I going to decide among them?"

"Let heaven decide!" the Angel said. "Cut three branches of grape-vine
and let the princess mark each branch with the name of a different
suitor. Then let her plant the three branches to-night in the garden
and to-morrow do you give her in marriage to the man whose branch has
blossomed during the night and by morning is covered with ripe clusters
of grapes."

The king and the two other suitors agreed to this and the princess named
and planted three branches of grape-vine. In the morning two of the
branches were bare and dry, but the third, the one which was marked with
the name of the youngest brother, was covered with green leaves and ripe
clusters of grapes. The king accepted heaven's ruling and at once led
his daughter to church where he had her married to the stranger and sent
her off with his blessing.

The Angel led the young couple to a forest and left them there.

A year went by and the Angel was sent back to earth to see how the three
brothers were faring. Assuming the form of an old beggar, he went to the
oldest brother who was busy among his wine-presses and begged the
charity of a cup of wine.

"Be off with you, you old vagabond!" the oldest brother shouted angrily.
"If I gave a cup of wine to every beggar that comes along I'd soon be a
beggar myself!"

The Angel lifted his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the
wine and all the wine-presses disappeared and in their place flowed a
broad deep river.

"In your prosperity you have forgotten God's poor," the Angel said. "Go
back to your pear tree."

Then the Angel went to the second brother who was busy in his dairy.

"Brother," the Angel said, "in heaven's name, I pray you, give me a
morsel of cheese."

"A morsel of cheese, you lazy good-for-nothing!" the second brother
cried. "Be off with you or I'll call the dogs!"

The Angel lifted his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the
sheep and the dairy and all the busy laborers disappeared and he and the
second brother were standing there alone in a field where flocks of
pigeons were feeding.

"In your prosperity you have forgotten God's poor," the Angel said. "Go
back to your pear tree!"

Then the Angel made his way to the forest where he had left the youngest
brother and his wife. He found them in great poverty living in a mean
little hut.

"God be with you!" said the Angel still in the guise of an old beggar.
"I pray you in heaven's name give me shelter for the night and a bite of
supper."

"We are poor ourselves," the youngest brother said.

"But come in, you are welcome to share what we have."

They put the old beggar to rest at the most comfortable place beside the
fire and the wife set three places for the evening meal. They were so
poor that the loaf that was baking in the oven was not made of grain
ground at the mill but of pounded bark gathered from the trees.

"Alas," the wife murmured to herself, "it shames me that we have no real
bread to put before our guest."

Imagine then her surprise when she opened the oven and saw a browned
loaf of wheaten bread.

"God be praised!" she cried.

She drew a pitcher of water at the spring but when she began pouring it
into the cups she found to her joy that it was changed to wine.

"In your happiness," the Angel said, "you have not forgotten God's poor
and God will reward you!"

He raised his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the mean little
hut disappeared and in its place arose a stately palace full of riches
and beautiful things. Servants passed hither and thither and addressed
the poor man respectfully as "My lord!" and his wife as "My lady!"

The old beggar arose and as he went he blessed them both, saying:

"God gives you these riches and they will be yours to enjoy so long as
you share them with others."

They must have remembered the Angel's words for all their lives long
they were happy and prosperous.

[Illustration]


THE VILAS' SPRING

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Brother Who Knew That Good Was Stronger Than Evil_


THE VILAS' SPRING


There was once a rich man who had two sons. The older son was
overbearing, greedy, and covetous. He was dishonest, too, and thought
nothing of taking things that belonged to others. The younger brother
was gentle and kind. He was always ready to share what he had and he was
never known to cheat or to steal.

"He's little better than a fool!" the older brother used to say of him
scornfully.

When the brothers grew to manhood the old father died leaving directions
that they divide his wealth between them, share and share alike.

"Nonsense!" the older brother said. "That fool would only squander his
inheritance! To every poor beggar that comes along he'd give an alms
until soon my poor father's savings would be all gone! No! I'll give him
three golden ducats and a horse and tell him to get out and if he makes
a fuss I won't give him that much!"

Besides, the Spaniards have done, as any foreigner who visits the
country, a very important observation.

During the War of 1808, the French as enemies, they fly many
strengths, but building bridges, theaters and other works, while
the British as allies, took the opportunity to destroy the _fábricas_
Spain in porcelain, cloth and other articles, which could make them
competitive.

_amigos_ Often do more harm than enemies.

Madrid has seven or eight theaters, but do not work regularly but five:
the _Opera_ the _Frances_, the _Zarzuela_ and two dramas and comedies,
with accompanying dance, etc. .

The others are insignificant. With the exception of _Teatro real_ or
the opera, which is splendid, sumptuous, huge, beautiful monument
and one of the biggest of Europe, of its kind, the other, but
beautiful on the inside, no positive merit in their forms.

Later I will discuss the situation of the drama in Madrid as an
element of social life.

Perdóneseme passing of the personal monuments and theaters, _ex
abrupto_ at _caballerizas reales_ monument raised to the horses and
mules of the Court much more thoroughly as shameful the statues and
columns devoted to the glory of the great geniuses.

If there is a transition from the curious epigram, the fault is certainly
not mine.

_caballerizas_ The real is considered (with good reason, unfortunately)
as one of the wonders of Spain, the country par excellence of
social contrasts and strange phenomena.

The Court, which occupies the royal palace (I was unable to be
present to visit the Queen) is on your right almost all the foreign
legations, and left the stables: the ones that pull the car from
the Spanish nation, each For its part, the other used for the
carriages of the Queen of Spain.

I do not know which side throw harder or have recalcitrant evil
geniuses.

A huge palace, though not noble terms, is happy to accommodate the
raw, have the honor to carry on their backs to the people of the court
or pull their gilded carriages and saloons.

The building is divided into large compartments suitable for storing
the carriages and harness, in astonishing profusion; entertain the
mares and foals of the highest order, who are there primarily as
jewelry; accommodate seventy superb draft horses, as many chair,
two hundred mule cars to the palace, and a swarm of waiters and
footmen in the service of their masters, blue-blooded quadrupeds.

Those are all worthy gross harnessed with beautiful books in their great
and endless blocks, and seem proud to receive the visits of many foreign
and graceful kicking with satisfaction, and their glossy necks irguiendo
and abundant and crisp lines, such as swans land.

The gualdrapa you saw every one of those members of the aristocracy of
crude, worth more than all the Spanish peasant dress that one can
consume in a year.

Each horse is a prince, with his court of lackeys, each mare a pampered
young man, and every mule and a stout respectable matron who,
looking with disdain at the Spanish commoner who approaches, seem
to have the consciousness of its dignity and grandeur.

The entire building is admirable for the convenient distribution,
grooming, the magnificence of the races of the gross and good
service.

But when asked if I admire the Court did not permit the spread in the
country in excess of those races from different regions of the
world, and I said no.

All these treasures are, therefore, pure luxury, useless for the state.
And this palace of the gross cost millions, these animals are worth
millions, and its splendid handling cost huge sums annually.

Meanwhile, there are entire populations of beggars, there are
thousands of families who live in caves practiced gullies, channels
are blocked, insecure ports, rivers without bridges, roads without
sanitation, and many hardships and obstacles that remedy seems to
be removed ....

It is not enough money to do all this, no urgency, because mules are not
in his important new health
cried one of them, "if only men knew that we bathed in
this spring, they could come to-morrow and be healed in its water--the
maimed and the halt and blind! To-morrow this water would heal even the
king's daughter who is afflicted with leprosy!"

When they were gone the blind man crept down to the spring and bathed
his face. At the first touch of the healing water his wounds closed and
his sight was restored. With a heart full of gratitude he knelt down and
thanked God for the miracle. Then when morning came he filled a vessel
with the precious water and hurried to the king's palace.

"Tell the king," he said to the guards, "that I have come to heal his
daughter."

The king admitted him at once to the princess's chamber and said to him:

"If you succeed in healing the princess you shall have her in marriage
and in addition I shall make you heir to my kingdom."

The moment the princess was bathed in the healing water she, too, was
restored to health and at once the proclamation was sent forth that the
princess was recovered and was soon to marry the man who had cured her.

Now when the evil older brother heard who this fortunate man was, he
could scarcely contain himself for rage and envy.

"How did that fool get back his sight?" he asked himself. "What magic
secret did he discover that enabled him to heal the princess of leprosy?
Whatever it was he got it under the fir tree for where else could he
have got it? I've a good mind to go to the fir tree myself to-night and
see what happens."

The more he thought about it the surer he became that if he went to the
fir tree in exactly the same condition as his brother he, too, would
have some wonderful good fortune. So when night came he seated himself
under the tree, gouged out his eyes with a knife, and then waited to see
what would happen. At midnight he heard the Vilas at the spring but
their voices were not sweet but shrill and angry.

"Sisters," they cried to each other, "have you heard? The princess is
healed of leprosy and it was with the water of this, our spring! Who has
spied on us?"

"While we were talking last night," said one, "some man may have been
hiding under the fir tree."

"Let us see if there is any one there to-night!" cried another.

With that they all rushed to the fir tree and took the man they found
sitting there and in a fury tore him to pieces as though he were a bit
of old cloth. So that was the end of the wicked older brother. And you
will notice that in his hour of need his friend, the Devil, was not on
hand to help him.

So after all it was the younger brother who finally inherited all his
father's wealth. In addition he married the princess and was made heir
to the kingdom. So you see Good is stronger than Evil in this world.

[Illustration]


LORD AND MASTER

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Man Who Understood the Language of the Animals_


LORD AND MASTER


There was once a young shepherd, an honest industrious fellow, who
passed most of his time in the hills looking after his master's flocks.
One afternoon he happened upon a bush which some gipsies had set a-fire.
As he stopped to watch it he heard a strange hissing, whistling sound.
He went as close as he could and in the center of the bush which the
flames had not yet reached he saw a snake. It was writhing and trembling
in fear.

"Help me, brother!" the snake said. "Help me and I will reward you
richly! I swear I will!"

The shepherd put the end of his crook over the flames and the snake
crawled up the crook, up the shepherd's arm, and wound itself about his
neck.

It was now the shepherd's turn to be frightened.

"What! Will you kill me as a reward for my kindness?"

"Nay," the snake said. "Do not be afraid. I will not injure you. Do as I
tell you and you will have nothing to regret. My father is the Tsar of
the Snakes. Take me to him and he will reward you for rescuing me."

"But I can't leave my flocks," the shepherd said.

"Have no fear about your flocks. Nothing will happen to them in your
absence."

"But I don't know where your father, the Tsar of the Snakes, lives," the
shepherd protested.

"I'll show you," the snake said. "I'll point out the direction with my
tail."

So in spite of his misgivings the shepherd at last agreed to the snake's
suggestion and, leaving his sheep in God's care, started up the
mountainside in the direction which the snake pointed out with his tail.

They reached finally a sort of pocket in the hills which was sandy and
rocky and exposed to the full force of the sun. The snake directed the
shepherd to the entrance of a cave which had a huge door composed
entirely of living snakes closely wound together. The shepherd's snake
said something in his breathy whistling voice and the door pulled itself
apart and allowed the shepherd to enter the cave.

"Now," whispered the snake, "when my father asks you what you want, tell
him you want the gift of understanding the language of the animals. He
will try to give you something else but don't you accept anything
else."

The Tsar of the Snakes was a huge creature clothed in a gorgeous skin of
red and yellow and black. They found him reclining on a golden table
with a crown of precious jewels on his head.

"My son!" he cried, when he saw the snake that was still wound about the
shepherd's neck, "where have you been? We have been grieving for you
thinking you had met some misfortune."

"But for this shepherd, my father," the snake said, "I should have been
burned to death. He rescued me."

Then he told the Tsar of the Snakes the whole story. The Tsar of the
Snakes listened carefully and when the Snake Prince was finished he
turned to the shepherd and said:

"Sir, I am deeply indebted to you for saving my son's life. Ask of me
anything I can grant and it is yours."

"Give me then," the shepherd said, "the gift of understanding the
language of the animals."

"Not that!" the Tsar of the Snakes cried. "It is too dangerous a gift!
If ever you confessed to some other human being that you had this gift
and repeated what some animal said you would die that instant. Ask
something else--anything else!"

"No," the shepherd insisted. "Give me that or nothing!"

When the Tsar of the Snakes saw that the shepherd was not to be
dissuaded, he said:

"Very well, then. What must be, must be. Come now very close to me and
put your mouth against my mouth. Do you breathe three times into my
mouth and I shall breathe three times into your mouth. Then you will
understand the language of the animals."

So the shepherd put his mouth close to the mouth of the Tsar of the
Snakes and breathed into it three times. Then the Tsar of the Snakes
breathed into the shepherd's mouth three times.

"Now you will understand the language of all animals," the Tsar of the
Snakes said. "It is a dangerous gift but if you remember my warning it
may bring you great prosperity. Farewell."

So the shepherd went back to his flocks and lay down under a fir tree to
rest. Presently he wondered whether he hadn't been asleep and dreamed
about the burning bush and the snake and the Tsar of the Snakes.

"It can't be real!" he said to himself. "How can I or any man understand
the language of the animals!"

[Illustration: _The Tsar of the Snakes Listened Carefully_]

Just then two ravens alighted on the tree above his head.

"Caw! Caw!" said one of them. "Wouldn't that shepherd be surprised if he
knew he was lying on some buried treasure!"

"Caw! Caw!" laughed the other. "He'll never know for he's only one of
those poor stupid human beings who can't understand a word we say!"

The ravens flew off and the shepherd sat up and rubbed his eyes to make
sure he was awake.

"Am I dreaming again?" he asked himself, "or did I really understand
them? Well, I'll soon find out. To-morrow I'll bring a spade and then if
there's any treasure buried under this tree I won't be long in digging
it up."

He marked the spot where he had been lying when the ravens spoke and the
next day came back and dug. Three feet below the surface his spade hit
something that proved to be a big iron pot chock-full of golden ducats.

He carried the treasure to his master and his master was so pleased at
his honesty that he gave him half of it.

So now the shepherd was able to set up in life for himself. He bought a
farm and married and "settled down" as the saying is. The years went by
and he grew prosperous and rich.

One Christmas Eve he said to his wife:

"I'm thinking, wife, of my youth when I was a shepherd and how lonely it
was at times like this when other folk were at home seated about the
fire and making merry. Let us give our shepherds out on the hills a
surprise to-night. We can take them meats and wine and other food and
then I'll go out and guard the sheep while you serve them a fine
Christmas supper."

His wife agreed and they mounted their horses and rode out to the hills
taking with them great hampers of food and wine. The wife entertained
the shepherds in their hut with a big jolly supper and the master stayed
outside all night with the dogs guarding the sheep.

At midnight some wolves came prowling around the flocks.

"See here," they said to the dogs, "if you let us in we'll kill the
sheep and then we'll divide the carcasses with you."

The dogs for the most part were young and thoughtless and ready enough
to fall in with the wolves' suggestion. But there was one old sheepdog
that nothing could tempt.

"I've only a few teeth left!" he growled, "but those few are still
sound and let any wolf come a step nearer and I'll tear him to pieces!"

All night long that one old sheepdog stood on guard faithful to duty.

In the morning the master ordered the shepherds to kill the young dogs
and train in new ones.

The shepherds were surprised.

"The master's a clever one!" they told each other. "Just one night and
he found out how worthless those young dogs were!"

As the farmer and his wife were riding home, the farmer's horse ran on
ahead.

"Not so fast!" begged the mare that the wife was riding. "Have pity on
me and go more slowly. You have only the master to carry while I'm all
laden down with hampers and empty jugs and I don't know what and with a
mistress that's twice as big as she was a few months ago!"

The farmer when he heard the mare's complaint burst out laughing.

"What are you laughing at?" his wife asked sharply.

"Nothing," the farmer said.

"You're laughing at me!" the wife declared, "I know you are, just
because I'm so big that I'm awkward in the saddle!"

"No, my dear, I'm not laughing at you, truly I'm not."

"You are! I know you are and I don't think it's kind of you, either!"
And the wife burst into tears.

"Now, my dear," the husband said, soothingly, "be sensible and believe
me when I tell you I was not laughing at you."

"Then what were you laughing at?"

"I can't tell you because if I did tell you then I should die the next
moment."

"Die the next moment!" the wife said. "Stuff and nonsense! It must be a
strange thing indeed if a man can't tell his own wife for fear he'll die
the next moment!"

The more she thought about it the more enraged she became and also the
more curious.

"If you really loved me, you'd tell me!" she wept.

All the way home she kept on worrying her husband and nagging at him
until at last in utter exhaustion he said:

"Peace, woman, peace, and I'll tell you! But first let me have my coffin
made for as I've warned you I shall die the moment I've spoken."

So he had the village carpenter build him a coffin and when it was
ready he stood it up on end against the house and got inside of it.

The news of what was about to happen spread among the animals and the
faithful old sheepdog hurried down from the hills to be with his master
at the end. He lay down at the foot of the coffin and howled.

"I've one faithful friend!" the farmer said. "Wife, give the poor dog
some bread before I tell you my secret and die."

The woman threw the old dog a hunk of bread but the dog refused it and
kept on howling.

The rooster from the barnyard came running up and began gobbling down
the bread with great gusto.

"You shameless animal!" the dog said sternly. "Here's the poor master
about to die on account of that foolish inquisitive wife of his and yet
you have so little feeling that you're delighted at the chance to gorge
yourself with food!"

The rooster clucked scornfully.

"See here, old dog, I can't waste any sympathy on that master of ours!
Any man who allows his wife to bully him deserves whatever he gets! Look
at me!" The rooster puffed out his chest and gave a loud:
"_Cock-a-doodle-do_! I've got fifty wives but do they bully me? They do
not! Whenever I find a nice fat worm or a grain of corn I set up an
awful noise and gather them all around me. Then I eat it while they
stand there and admire me! No, no, old dog, I have no patience with the
master! He has only one wife and he doesn't know how to rule her!"

"The rooster's right!" thought the farmer.

With that he jumped out of the coffin, picked up a stick, and gave his
wife a sound beating.

"So you'd kill your husband just to satisfy your curiosity, would you?"
he shouted angrily. "Very well, then! Take this and this and this! And
if your curiosity is still unsatisfied I'll give you some more!"

"Stop! Stop! Stop!" cried the wife. "Do you want to injure me!"

But the farmer did not stop until he had given her such a whipping that
she never forgot it. When it was over she begged his pardon humbly and
promised never again to ask him anything that he didn't want to tell
her.

"You just mustn't let me be so foolish again!" she said.

"I won't!" the farmer declared.

Then he puffed out his chest and strutted about until you'd have laughed
to see him--he looked so much like the rooster!


THE SILVER TRACKS

[Illustration]

_The Story of the Poor Man Who Befriended a Beggar_


THE SILVER TRACKS


There were once three brothers who lived in the same village. One of
them was very rich. He had houses and fields and barns. He had nothing
to spend his money on for he had no children and his wife was as saving
and hardworking as himself. The second brother was not so rich but he,
too, was prosperous. He had one son and all his thought was to
accumulate money and property in order to leave his son rich. He schemed
and worked and slaved and made his wife do the same.

The third brother was industrious but very poor. He worked early and
late and never took a holiday. He couldn't afford to for he had a wife
and ten children and only by working every hour of the day and often far
into the night could he earn enough to buy food for so large a family.
He was a simple man and a good man and he taught his children that the
most important thing for them to do in life was to love God and be kind
to their fellowmen.

Now it happened that once, when our Lord Christ was on earth testing out
the hearts of men, he came in the guise of a beggar to the village
where the three brothers lived. He came in a brokendown cart driving a
wheezy old horse. It was cold and raining and night was falling.

The Beggar knocked at the door of the richest brother and said:

"I pray you in God's name give shelter for the night to me and my
horse."

"What!" cried the rich man, "do you suppose I have nothing better to do
than give shelter to such as you! Be off with you or I'll call my men
and have them give you the beating you deserve!"

The Beggar left without another word and went to the house of the next
brother. He was civil at least to the Beggar and pretended that he was
sorry to refuse him.

"I'd accommodate you if I could," he said, "but the truth is I can't. My
house isn't as big as it looks and I have many people dependent on me.
Just go on a little farther and I'm sure you'll find some one who will
take you in."

The Beggar turned his horse's head and went to the tiny little house
where the poor brother lived with his big family. He knocked on the door
and begged for shelter.

"Come in, brother," said the Poor Man. "We're pretty crowded here but
we'll find a place for you."

"And my horse," the Beggar said; "I'm afraid to leave him out in the
rain and cold."

"We'll stable him with my donkey," the Poor Man said. "Do you come in
here by the fire and dry off and I'll see to the horse."

The Poor Man pulled out his own cart until it was exposed to the rain in
order to make a dry place in the shed for the Beggar's cart. Then he led
the Beggar's gaunt horse into his tiny stable and fed him for the night
out of his own slender store of oats and hay.

He and his family shared their evening meal with the Beggar and then
made up for him a bed of straw near the fire where he was able to pass
the night comfortably and warmly.

Sabel shrugged. - Lord Abbot sent me not to ever sweep the room. -
Well, frankly, the cleaning is something that everybody likes. -
Yes, sir, you know .. ..

Do not spend carefully, I will fix that very arregladito. I spoke with
so much submission, that Julia wanted to turn a little charity
show interest. - And the boy?

- Asked -. Is not what you did wrong yesterday?

- No, sir .... Santin and slept like a walking and running around the
garden. See? There.
Then the
Poor Man went to the shed to get his own cart and the first thing he saw
were two large silver bolts lying on the ground.

"They must have fallen from the Beggar's cart!" he thought to himself
and he ran out to the road to see whether the Beggar were still in
sight. But he and the cart had disappeared.

"I hope he has no accident on account of those bolts!" the Poor Man
said.

When he went to the stable to get his donkey he found four golden
horse-shoes where the Beggar's horse had been standing.

"Four golden horse-shoes!" he exclaimed. "I ought to return them and the
silver bolts at once! But I can't to-day, I'm too busy. Well, I'll hide
them safely away and some afternoon when I have a few hours to spare
I'll follow the tracks of the cart to the Beggar's house."

That afternoon he met his two rich brothers and told them about the
Beggar.

"Silver bolts!" cried one.

"Golden horse-shoes!" cried the other. "Take us home with you and let us
see them!"

So they went home with the Poor Man and saw for themselves the silver
bolts and the golden horse-shoes.

"Brothers," the Poor Man said, "if either of you have time I wish you'd
take these things and return them to the Beggar."

They both said, no, no, they hadn't time, but they would like to know
where the Beggar lived.

"He said I could always find him," the Poor Man said, "by following the
tracks of his cart."

"The tracks of his cart!" echoed the other two. "Show us the tracks of
his cart!"

They went to the shed where the cart had been and followed the tracks
out to the road. Even on the road they were easy to see for besides
being wider than any other cart tracks they shone white like glistening
silver.

"H'm! H'm!" murmured the two rich brothers.

"You don't think either of you have time to follow them to the Beggar's
house?" the Poor Man said.

"No! Of course not! Of course not!" they both answered.

But in his heart each had already decided to go at once and see for
himself what kind of a Beggar this was who had silver bolts in his cart
and golden shoes on his horse.

The oldest brother went the very next day driving a new wagon and a fine
horse. The silver tracks led through woods and fields and over hills.
They came at last to a river which was spanned by a wooden bridge. It
was cunningly constructed of timbers beautifully hewn. The rich man had
never seen such wood used on a bridge.

By the roadside beyond the bridge there was a pigsty with one trough
full of corn and another full of water. There were two sows in the sty
and they were fighting each other and tearing at each other and paying
no attention whatever to all the good food in the trough.

A little farther on there was another river and over it another
wonderful bridge, this one made entirely of stone.

Beyond it the rich man came to a meadow where there was a hayrick around
which two angry bulls were chasing each other and goring each other
until the blood spurted.

"I wonder some one doesn't stop them!" the rich man thought to himself.

The next river had an iron bridge, more beautiful than the rich man had
ever supposed an iron bridge could be.

Beyond the iron bridge there was a field and a bush and two angry rams
that were chasing each other around the bush and fighting. Their horns
cracked as they met and their hides were torn and bleeding where they
had gored each other.

"I never saw so many angry fighting animals!" the rich man thought to
himself.

The next bridge glowed in the sun like the embers of a fire for it was
built entirely of shining copper--copper rivets, copper plates, copper
beams, nothing but copper.

The silver tracks led over the copper bridge into a broad valley. By the
roadside there was a high crossbar from which depended heavy cuts of
meat--lamb and pork and veal. Two large bitch dogs were jumping at the
meat and then snarling and snapping at each other.

The next bridge was the loveliest of them all for it was built of white
gleaming silver.

The rich man climbed down from his wagon and examined it closely.

"It would be worth a man's while to carry home a piece of this bridge!"
he muttered to himself.

He tried the rivets, he shook the railing. At last he found four loose
bolts which he was able to pull out. The four together were so heavy
that he was scarcely able to lift them. He looked cautiously about and
when he saw that no one was looking, he slipped them one by one into the
bottom of his wagon and covered them with straw. Then he turned his
horse's head and drove home as fast as he could. It was midnight when he
got there and nobody about to spy on him as he hid the silver bolts in
the hay.

The next day when he went out alone to gloat over his treasure he found
instead of four heavy silver bolts four pieces of wood!

So that's what the rich brother got for following the silver tracks.

A day or two later without saying a word to any one, the second brother
decided that he would follow the silver tracks and have a look at the
strange Beggar whose cart had silver bolts and whose wheezy horse had
golden shoes.

"Perhaps if I keep my wits about me I'll be able to pick up a few golden
horse-shoes. Not many boys inherit golden horse-shoes from their
fathers!"

[Illustration: _The Beggar's Garden_]

Well, the second brother went over exactly the same route and saw
exactly the same things. He crossed all those wonderful bridges that his
brother had crossed--the wooden bridge, the stone bridge, the iron
bridge, the copper bridge, the silver bridge, and he saw all those
angry animals still trying to gore each other to death.

The captain grabbed the lieutenant man against man, but soon he was
subject, and badly wounded by the transfer of power overwhelmed.

After a few moments theilten officers to Loos. The ropes of the brig
lanterns were hung, as a response to the rigging of Asia.

The revolt broke on the line vessels at the same time and was equally
successful. Lieutenant Martinez commanded now on the Constanzia, and
his prisoners were thrown into the colorful Conferenzzimmer thrown.
Near him was an old man with
snow-white hair who was making loud outcries to heaven praying to be
delivered from the two oxen who were munching at his white hair as
though it were so much hay. They ate great wisps of it and the more they
ate the more grew out.

There was an apple-tree heavily laden with ripe fruit and a hungry man
forever reaching up and plucking an apple. The apples were apples of
Sodom and always as the hungry man raised each new one to his mouth it
turned to ashes.

In another place a thirsty man was reaching with a dipper into a well
and always, just as he was about to scoop up some water, the well moved
away from under the dipper.

"What a strange country this is!" thought the second brother as he drove
on.

At last he reached the next bridge and sure enough it was shining gold!
Every part of it--bolts and beams and pillars, all were gold. In great
excitement the second brother climbed down from his wagon and began
pulling and wrenching at various parts of the bridge hoping to find some
loose pieces which he could break off. At last he succeeded in pulling
out four long bolts which were so heavy he could scarcely lift them.
After looking about in all directions to make sure that no one saw him,
he put them into his wagon and covered them up with straw. Then he drove
homewards as fast as he could.

"Ha! Ha!" he chuckled as he hid the golden bolts in the barn. "My son
will now be a richer man than my brother!"

He could scarcely sleep with thinking of his golden treasure and at the
first light of morning he slipped out to the barn. Imagine his rage when
he found in the straw four bolts of wood!

So that was all the second brother got for following the silver tracks.

Well, years went by and the Poor Man worked day after day and all day
and often far into the night. Some of his children died and the rest
grew up and went out into the world and married and made homes of their
own. Then at last his good wife died and the time came when the Poor Man
was old and all alone in the world.

One night as he sat on his doorstep thinking of his wife and of his
children when they were little and of all the years he had worked for
them to keep them fed and clothed, he happened to remember the Beggar
and the promise he had made to visit him sometime.

"And to think of all the years I've kept his golden horse-shoes and his
silver bolts! Well, he'll forgive me, I know," thought the Poor Man,
"for he'll understand that I've always been too busy up to this time
ever to follow the tracks of his cart. I wonder are they still there."

He went out to the roadside and peered down and how it happened I don't
know, but to his dim eyes at least there were the silver tracks as clear
as ever.

"Good!" cried the Poor Man. "To-morrow morning bright and early I'll
hitch up the donkey and visit my old friend, the Beggar!"

So the next day he took out the silver bolts and the golden horse-shoes
from the place where he had kept them hidden all these years and he put
them in a bag. Then he hitched his old donkey to his old cart and
started out to follow the silver tracks to the Beggar's home.

Well, he saw just exactly the same things that his brothers had seen
those many years before: all those terrible fighting animals and all
those unfortunate men.

"I'll have to remember and ask the Beggar what ails all these
creatures," he thought to himself.

Like his brothers he passed over the wooden bridge and the stone bridge
and the iron bridge and the copper bridge and the silver bridge and even
the golden bridge. Beyond the golden bridge he came to a Garden that was
surrounded by a high wall of diamonds and rubies and sapphires and all
kinds of precious stones that blazed as brightly as the sun itself. The
silver tracks turned in at the garden gate which was locked.

The poor man climbed down from his cart, unhitched the donkey, and set
him out to graze on the tender grass that grew by the wayside.

Then he took the bag that held the golden horse-shoes and the silver
bolts and he went to the garden gate. It was a very wonderful gate of
beaten gold set with precious stones. For a moment the Poor Man wondered
if he dare knock at so rich a gate, then he remembered that his friend
the Beggar was inside and he knew that he would be made welcome.

It was the Beggar himself who opened the gate. When he saw the Poor Man
he smiled and held out his hands and said:

"Welcome, dear friend! I have been waiting for you all these years! Come
in and I will show you my Garden."

So the Poor Man went inside. And first of all he gave the Beggar his
golden horse-shoes and his silver bolts.

"Forgive me," he said, "for keeping them so long, but I've never had
time until now to return them."

The Beggar smiled.

"I knew, dear friend, that they were safe with you and that you would
bring them some day."

Then the Beggar put his arm over the Poor Man's shoulder and led him
through the Garden showing him the wonderful golden fruits and beautiful
flowers. They sat them down beside a fountain of crystal water and while
they listened to the songs of glorious birds they talked together and
the Poor Man asked about the strange things he had seen along the road.

"All those animals," the Beggar said, "were once human beings who
instead of fearing God and being kind to their fellowmen passed all
their time fighting and cheating and cursing. The two sows were two
sisters-in-law who hated each other bitterly. The two bulls and the two
rams were neighbors who fought for years and years over the boundary
lines of their farms and now they keep on fighting through eternity. The
two bitches were two sisters who fought until they died over the
inheritance left them by their father. The old man whose hair the oxen
eat was a farmer who always pastured his cattle on his neighbors'
fields. Now he has his reward. The man at whose eyes the ravens peck was
an ungrateful son who mistreated his parents. The man with the awful
thirst that can never be quenched was a drunkard, and the one at whose
lips the apples turn to ashes was a glutton."

So they talked on together, the Poor Man and the Beggar, until it was
late afternoon and the Beggar said:

"And now, dear friend, you will sup with me as I once supped with you."

"Thank you," the Poor Man said, "I will. But let me first go out and see
how my donkey is."

"Very well," the Beggar said, "go. But be sure to come back for I shall
be waiting for you."

So the Poor Man went out the garden gate and looked for his donkey. But
the donkey was gone.

"He must have started home," the Poor Man thought. "I'll hurry and
overtake him."

So he started back afoot the way he had come. He went on and on but saw
no donkey. He crossed the golden bridge and the silver bridge and the
copper bridge and the iron bridge and the stone bridge and last of all
the wooden bridge, but still there was no donkey.

"He must have got all the way home," he thought.

When the Poor Man reached his native village things looked different.
Houses that he remembered had disappeared and others had taken their
places. He couldn't find his own little house at all. He asked the
people he met and they knew nothing about it. And they knew nothing
about him, either, not even his name. And nobody even knew about his
sons. At last he did meet one old man who remembered the family name and
who told him that many years before the last of the sons had gone to
another village to live.

"There's no place here for me," the Poor Man thought. "I better go back
to my friend the Beggar and stay with him. No one else wants me."

So once again he followed the silver tracks all that long way over all
those bridges and when at last he reached the garden gate he was very
tired, for he was old and feeble now. It was all he could do to give one
faint little knock. But the Beggar heard him and came running to let
him in. And when he saw him, how tired he was and how feeble, he put his
arm around him and helped him into the Garden and he said:

"You shall stay with me now forever and we shall be very happy
together."

And the Poor Man when he looked in the Beggar's face to thank him saw
that he was not a beggar at all but the Blessed Christ Himself. And then
he knew that he was in the Garden of Paradise.


The winds from the now violently after the other side beating tree
met the captain and smashed his skull.

On the brig rose a cry of horror.

"Through bad luck has come to life!

Lieutenant Martinez said.
MORE DANISH TALES. _By Mary C. Hatch._ Fifteen rollicking folk tales
retold from Sven Grundtvig's _Folkaeventyr_.

A BAKER'S DOZEN. _Selected by Mary Gould Davis._ Thirteen stories which
are especially successful in storytelling.

THE TREASURE OF LI-PO. _By Alice Ritchie._ Six original fairy tales set
in China and told with beauty and distinction.

THE SHEPHERD'S NOSEGAY: Stories from Finland and Czechoslovakia. _By
Parker Fillmore._ Children and storytellers alike will welcome these
rich and robust folk tales, long unavailable.

ROOTABAGA STORIES. _By Carl Sandburg._ An omnibus volume including all
the stories originally published in the two books _Rootabaga Stories_
and _Rootabaga Pigeons_.

THE TIGER'S WHISKER: And Other Tales and Legends from Asia and the
Pacific. _By Harold Courlander._ Thirty-one Far Eastern folk tales, full
of sly humor, adventure, and virtue rewarded.

THE HAT-SHAKING DANCE and Other Tales from the Gold Coast. _By Harold
Courlander and Albert Kofi Prempeh._ A handsome collection of twenty-one
wise and humorous Ashanti folk tales.

HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC.
757 _Third Avenue, New York 17, N. Y._




_=The Magic Listening Cap=_

_More Folk Tales from Japan_

BY YOSHIKO UCHIDA


Wisdom and humor abound in the fourteen folk tales of this second
collection by the author of _The Dancing Kettle_. Once more Miss Uchida
has dipped into the wealth of Japanese folklore to retell delightful
stories that American children have seldom heard.

"The Wrestling Match of the Two Buddhas," "The Man Who Bought a Dream,"
"The Golden Axe," and others are a fascinating combination of the
strange and the familiar. A different land, a different people, a
different kind of magic all come to life in these colorful, imaginative
tales. And yet running through them are such universal folk themes as
the inevitable downfall of the greedy and the foolish. In all of these
adventures there is a keen sense of the Japanese countryside with its
mountains and sea, rice fields, deep green forests, and delicate
gardens.

Retold with freshness and simplicity, these ancient tales are not only
fun to read but also welcome new material for storytelling.

_Illustrated by the author_

Honor Book in the 1955 _N. Y. Herald Tribune_ Children's Spring Book
Festival

60-100


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

Please hover your mouse over the words with a thin dotted gray line
underneath them for seeing what the original reads. The text in the solid
black box is the text from the dust cover flaps.

LIST OF FIXED ISSUES

p. 023--removed a duplicate period after 'frozen over'
p. 094--typo fixed: changed 'to to' into 'to'
p. 096--inserted a missing 'is' between 'It' and 'like a fox's tail!'
p. 131--typo fixed: changed 'hankerchief' into 'handkerchief'
p. 214--typo fixed: changed 'tomorrrow's' into 'tomorrow's'.
p. 225--removed a duplicate 'and' in front of 'searched here'
p. 238--typo fixed: changed 'winepresses' into 'wine-presses'
p. 281--typo fixed: changed 'horseshoes' into 'horse-shoes'