Produced by David Widger


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              JULY & AUGUST
                                  1662

July 1st.  To the office, and there we sat till past noon, and then
Captain Cuttance and I by water to Deptford, where the Royal James (in
which my Lord went out the last voyage, though [he] came back in the
Charles) was paying off by Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen.  So to dinner,
where I had Mr. Sheply to dine with us, and from thence I sent to my Lord
to know whether she should be a first rate, as the men would have her, or
a second.  He answered that we should forbear paying the officers and such
whose pay differed upon the rate of the ship, till he could speak with his
Royal Highness.  To the Pay again after dinner, and seeing of Cooper, the
mate of the ship, whom I knew in the Charles, I spoke to him about
teaching the mathematiques, and do please myself in my thoughts of
learning of him, and bade him come to me in a day or two.  Towards evening
I left them, and to Redriffe by land, Mr. Cowly, the Clerk of the Cheque,
with me, discoursing concerning the abuses of the yard, in which he did
give me much light.  So by water home, and after half an hour sitting
talking with my wife, who was afeard I did intend to go with my Lord to
fetch the Queen mother over, in which I did clear her doubts, I went to
bed by daylight, in order to my rising early to-morrow.

2nd.  Up while the chimes went four, and to put down my journal, and so to
my office, to read over such instructions as concern the officers of the
Yard; for I am much upon seeing into the miscarriages there.  By and by,
by appointment, comes Commissioner Pett; and then a messenger from Mr.
Coventry, who sits in his boat expecting us, and so we down to him at the
Tower, and there took water all, and to Deptford (he in our passage taking
notice how much difference there is between the old Captains for obedience
and order, and the King's new Captains, which I am very glad to hear him
confess); and there we went into the Store-house, and viewed first the
provisions there, and then his books, but Mr. Davis himself was not there,
he having a kinswoman in the house dead, for which, when by and by I saw
him, he do trouble himself most ridiculously, as if there was never
another woman in the world; in which so much laziness, as also in the
Clerkes of the Cheque and Survey (which after one another we did examine),
as that I do not perceive that there is one-third of their duties
performed; but I perceive, to my great content, Mr. Coventry will have
things reformed.  So Mr. Coventry to London, and Pett and I to the Pay,
where Sir Williams both were paying off the Royal James still, and so to
dinner, and to the Pay again, where I did relieve several of my Lord
Sandwich's people, but was sorry to see them so peremptory, and at every
word would, complain to my Lord, as if they shall have such a command over
my Lord.  In the evening I went forth and took a walk with Mr. Davis, and
told him what had passed at his office to-day, and did give him my advice,
and so with the rest by barge home and to bed

3rd.  Up by four o'clock and to my office till 8 o'clock, writing over two
copies of our contract with Sir W. Rider, &c., for 500 ton of hempe,
which, because it is a secret, I have the trouble of writing over as well
as drawing.  Then home to dress myself, and so to the office, where
another fray between Sir R. Ford and myself about his yarn, wherein I find
the board to yield on my side, and was glad thereof, though troubled that
the office should fall upon me of disobliging Sir Richard.  At noon we all
by invitation dined at the Dolphin with the Officers of the Ordnance;
where Sir W. Compton, Mr. O'Neale,'and other great persons, were, and a
very great dinner, but I drank as I still do but my allowance of wine.
After dinner, was brought to Sir W. Compton a gun to discharge seven
times, the best of all devices that ever I saw, and very serviceable, and
not a bawble; for it is much approved of, and many thereof made.  Thence
to my office all the afternoon as long as I could see, about setting many
businesses in order.  In the evening came Mr. Lewis to me, and very
ingeniously did enquire whether I ever did look into the business of the
Chest at Chatham;

     [Pepys gives some particulars about the Chest on November 13th,
     1662.  "The Chest at Chatham was originally planned by Sir Francis
     Drake and Sir John Hawkins in 1588, after the defeat of the Armada;
     the seamen voluntarily agreed to have 'defalked' out of their wages
     certain sums to form a fund for relief.  The property became
     considerable, as well as the abuses, and in 1802 the Chest was
     removed to Greenwich.  In 1817, the stock amounted to L300,000
     Consols."--Hist.  of Rochester, p. 346.--B.]

and after my readiness to be informed did appear to him, he did produce a
paper, wherein he stated the government of the Chest to me; and upon the
whole did tell me how it hath ever been abused, and to this day is; and
what a meritorious act it would be to look after it; which I am resolved
to do, if God bless me; and do thank him very much for it.  So home, and
after a turn or two upon the leads with my wife, who has lately had but
little of my company, since I begun to follow my business, but is
contented therewith since she sees how I spend my time, and so to bed.

4th.  Up by five o'clock, and after my journall put in order, to my office
about my business, which I am resolved to follow, for every day I see what
ground I get by it.  By and by comes Mr. Cooper, mate of the Royall
Charles, of whom I intend to learn mathematiques, and do begin with him
to-day, he being a very able man, and no great matter, I suppose, will
content him.  After an hour's being with him at arithmetique (my first
attempt being to learn the multiplication-table); then we parted till
to-morrow.  And so to my business at my office again till noon, about
which time Sir W. Warren did come to me about business, and did begin to
instruct me in the nature of fine timber and deals, telling me the nature
of every sort; and from that we fell to discourse of Sir W. Batten's
corruption and the people that he employs, and from one discourse to
another of the kind.  I was much pleased with his company, and so staid
talking with him all alone at my office till 4 in the afternoon, without
eating or drinking all day, and then parted, and I home to eat a bit, and
so back again to my office; and toward the evening came Mr. Sheply, who is
to go out of town to-morrow, and so he and I with much ado settled his
accounts with my Lord, which, though they be true and honest, yet so
obscure, that it vexes me to see in what manner they are kept.  He being
gone, and leave taken of him as of a man likely not to come to London
again a great while, I eat a bit of bread and butter, and so to bed.  This
day I sent my brother Tom, at his request, my father's old Bass Viall
which he and I have kept so long, but I fear Tom will do little good at
it.

5th.  To my office all the morning, to get things ready against our
sitting, and by and by we sat and did business all the morning, and at
noon had Sir W. Pen, who I hate with all my heart for his base treacherous
tricks, but yet I think it not policy to declare it yet, and his son
William, to my house to dinner, where was also Mr. Creed and my cozen
Harry Alcocke.  I having some venison given me a day or two ago, and so I
had a shoulder roasted, another baked, and the umbles

     [The umbles are the liver, kidneys, and other portions of the inside
     of the deer.  They were usually made into pies, and old cookery
     books contain directions for the making of 'umble pies.']

baked in a pie, and all very well done.  We were merry as I could be in
that company, and the more because I would not seem otherwise to Sir W.
Pen, he being within a day or two to go for Ireland.  After dinner he and
his son went away, and Mr. Creed would, with all his rhetoric, have
persuaded me to have gone to a play; and in good earnest I find my nature
desirous to have gone, notwithstanding my promise and my business, to
which I have lately kept myself so close, but I did refuse it, and I hope
shall ever do so, and above all things it is considerable that my mind was
never in my life in so good a condition of quiet as it has been since I
have followed my business and seen myself to get greater and greater
fitness in my employment, and honour every day more than other.  So at my
office all the afternoon, and then my mathematiques at night with Mr.
Cooper, and so to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed to-day with my wife merry and pleasant,
and then rose and settled my accounts with my wife for housekeeping, and
do see that my kitchen, besides wine, fire, candle, sope, and many other
things, comes to about 30s. a week, or a little over.  To church, where
Mr. Mills made a lazy sermon.  So home to dinner, where my brother Tom
dined with me, and so my wife and I to church again in the afternoon, and
that done I walked to the Wardrobe and spent my time with Mr. Creed and
Mr. Moore talking about business; so up to supper with my Lady [Sandwich],
who tells me, with much trouble, that my Lady Castlemaine is still as
great with the King, and that the King comes as often to her as ever he
did, at which, God forgive me, I am well pleased. It began to rain, and so
I borrowed a hat and cloak of Mr. Moore and walked home, where I found
Captain Ferrer with my wife, and after speaking a matter of an hour with
him he went home and we all to bed. Jack Cole, my old friend, found me out
at the Wardrobe; and, among other things, he told me that certainly most
of the chief ministers of London would fling up their livings; and that,
soon or late, the issue thereof would be sad to the King and Court.

7th.  Up and to my office early, and there all the morning alone till
dinner, and after dinner to my office again, and about 3 o'clock with my
wife by water to Westminster, where I staid in the Hall while my wife went
to see her father and mother, and she returning we by water home again,
and by and by comes Mr. Cooper, so he and I to our mathematiques, and so
supper and to bed.  My morning's work at the office was to put the new
books of my office into order, and writing on the backsides what books
they be, and transcribing out of some old books some things into them.

8th.  At the office all the morning and dined at home, and after dinner in
all haste to make up my accounts with my Lord, which I did with some
trouble, because I had some hopes to have made a profit to myself in this
account and above what was due to me (which God forgive me in), but I
could not, but carried them to my Lord, with whom they passed well.  So to
the Wardrobe, where alone with my Lord above an hour; and he do seem still
to have his old confidence in me; and tells me to boot, that Mr. Coventry
hath spoke of me to him to great advantage; wherein I am much pleased.  By
and by comes in Mr. Coventry to visit my Lord; and so my Lord and he and I
walked together in the great chamber a good while; and I found him a most
ingenuous man and good company.  He being gone I also went home by water,
Mr. Moore with me for discourse sake, and then parted from me, Cooper
being there ready to attend me, so he and I to work till it was dark, and
then eat a bit and by daylight to bed.

9th.  Up by four o'clock, and at my multiplicacion-table hard, which is
all the trouble I meet withal in my arithmetique.  So made me ready and to
the office, where all the morning busy, and Sir W. Pen came to my office
to take his leave of me, and desiring a turn in the garden, did commit the
care of his building to me, and offered all his services to me in all
matters of mine.  I did, God forgive me! promise him all my service and
love, though the rogue knows he deserves none from me, nor do I intend to
show him any; but as he dissembles with me, so must I with him.  Dined at
home, and so to the office again, my wife with me, and while I was for an
hour making a hole behind my seat in my closet to look into the office,
she was talking to me about her going to Brampton, which I would willingly
have her to do but for the cost of it, and to stay here will be very
inconvenient because of the dirt that I must have when my house is pulled
down.  Then to my business till night, then Mr. Cooper and I to our
business, and then came Mr. Mills, the minister, to see me, which he hath
but rarely done to me, though every day almost to others of us; but he is
a cunning fellow, and knows where the good victuals is, and the good
drink, at Sir W. Batten's.  However, I used him civilly, though I love him
as I do the rest of his coat.  So to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up by four o'clock, and before I went to the office I practised my
arithmetique, and then, when my wife was up, did call her and Sarah, and
did make up a difference between them, for she is so good a servant as I
am loth to part with her.  So to the office all the morning, where very
much business, but it vexes me to see so much disorder at our table, that,
every man minding a several business, we dispatch nothing.  Dined at home
with my wife, then to the office again, and being called by Sir W. Batten,
walked to the Victualler's office, there to view all the several offices
and houses to see that they were employed in order to give the Council an
account thereof.  So after having taken an oath or two of Mr. Lewes and
Captain Brown and others I returned to the office, and there sat
despatching several businesses alone till night, and so home and by
daylight to bed.

11th.  Up by four o'clock, and hard at my multiplicacion-table, which I am
now almost master of, and so made me ready and to my office, where by and
by comes Mr. Pett, and then a messenger from Mr. Coventry, who stays in
his boat at the Tower for us.  So we to him, and down to Deptford first,
and there viewed some deals lately served in at a low price, which our
officers, like knaves, would untruly value in their worth, but we found
them good.  Then to Woolwich, and viewed well all the houses and stores
there, which lie in very great confusion for want of storehouses, and then
to Mr. Ackworth's and Sheldon's to view their books, which we found not to
answer the King's service and security at all as to the stores.  Then to
the Ropeyard, and there viewed the hemp, wherein we found great
corruption, and then saw a trial between Sir R. Ford's yarn and our own,
and found great odds.  So by water back again.  About five in the
afternoon to Whitehall, and so to St. James's; and at Mr. Coventry's
chamber, which is very neat and fine, we had a pretty neat dinner, and
after dinner fell to discourse of business and regulation, and do think of
many things that will put matters into better order, and upon the whole my
heart rejoices to see Mr. Coventry so ingenious, and able, and studious to
do good, and with much frankness and respect to Mr. Pett and myself
particularly.  About 9 o'clock we broke up after much discourse and many
things agreed on in order to our business of regulation, and so by water
(landing Mr. Pett at the Temple) I went home and to bed.

12th.  Up by five o'clock, and put things in my house in order to be laid
up, against my workmen come on Monday to take down the top of my house,
which trouble I must go through now, but it troubles me much to think of
it.  So to my office, where till noon we sat, and then I to dinner and to
the office all the afternoon with much business.  At night with Cooper at
arithmetique, and then came Mr. Creed about my Lord's accounts to even
them, and he gone I to supper and to bed.

13th (Lord's day) .  .  .  .  I had my old pain all yesterday and this
morning, and so kept my bed all this morning.  So up and after dinner and
some of my people to church, I set about taking down my books and papers
and making my chamber fit against to-morrow to have the people come to
work in pulling down the top of my house.  In the evening I walked to the
garden and sent for Mr. Turner (who yesterday did give me occasion of
speaking to him about the difference between him and me), and I told him
my whole mind, and how it was in my power to do him a discourtesy about
his place of petty purveyance, and at last did make him see (I think) that
it was his concernment to be friendly to me and what belongs to me. After
speaking my mind to him and he to me, we walked down and took boat at the
Tower and to Deptford, on purpose to sign and seal a couple of warrants,
as justice of peace in Kent, against one Annis, who is to be tried next
Tuesday, at Maidstone assizes, for stealing some lead out of Woolwich
Yard.  Going and coming I did discourse with Mr. Turner about the faults
of our management of the business of our office, of which he is sensible,
but I believe is a very knave.  Come home I found a rabbit at the fire,
and so supped well, and so to my journall and to bed.

14th.  Up by 4 o'clock and to my arithmetique, and so to my office till 8,
then to Thames Street along with old Mr. Green, among the tarr-men, and
did instruct myself in the nature and prices of tarr, but could not get
Stockholm for the use of the office under L10 15s. per last, which is a
great price.  So home, and at noon Dr. T. Pepys came to me, and he and I
to the Exchequer, and so back to dinner, where by chance comes Mr. Pierce,
the chyrurgeon, and then Mr. Battersby, the minister, and then Mr. Dun,
and it happened that I had a haunch of venison boiled, and so they were
very wellcome and merry; but my simple Dr. do talk so like a fool that I
am weary of him.  They being gone, to my office again, and there all the
afternoon, and at night home and took a few turns with my wife in the
garden and so to bed.  My house being this day almost quite untiled in
order to its rising higher.  This night I began to put on my waistcoat
also.  I found the pageant in Cornhill taken down, which was pretty
strange.

15th.  Up by 4 o'clock, and after doing some business as to settling my
papers at home, I went to my office, and there busy till sitting time. So
at the office all the morning, where J. Southern, Mr. Coventry's clerk,
did offer me a warrant for an officer to sign which I desired, claiming it
for my clerk's duty, which however did trouble me a little to be put upon
it, but I did it.  We broke up late, and I to dinner at home, where my
brother Tom and Mr. Cooke came and dined with me, but I could not be merry
for my business, but to my office again after dinner, and they two and my
wife abroad.  In the evening comes Mr. Cooper, and I took him by water on
purpose to tell me things belonging to ships, which was time well spent,
and so home again, and my wife came home and tells me she has been very
merry and well pleased with her walk with them.  About bedtime it fell
a-raining, and the house being all open at top, it vexed me; but there was
no help for it.

16th.  In the morning I found all my ceilings, spoiled with rain last
night, so that I fear they must be all new whited when the work is done.
Made me ready and to my office, and by and by came Mr. Moore to me, and so
I went home and consulted about drawing up a fair state of all my Lord's
accounts, which being settled, he went away, and I fell to writing of it
very neatly, and it was very handsome and concisely done.  At noon to my
Lord's with it, but found him at dinner, and some great company with him,
Mr. Edward Montagu and his brother, and Mr. Coventry, and after dinner he
went out with them, and so I lost my labour; but dined with Mr. Moore and
the people below, who after dinner fell to talk of Portugall rings, and
Captain Ferrers offered five or six to sell, and I seeming to like a ring
made of a coco-nutt with a stone done in it, he did offer and would give
it me.  By and by we went to Mr. Creed's lodging, and there got a dish or
two of sweetmeats, and I seeing a very neat leaden standish to carry
papers, pen, and ink in when one travels I also got that of him, and that
done I went home by water and to finish some of my Lord's business, and so
early to bed.  This day I was told that my Lady Castlemaine (being quite
fallen out with her husband) did yesterday go away from him, with all her
plate, jewels, and other best things; and is gone to Richmond to a brother
of her's; which, I am apt to think, was a design to get out of town, that
the King might come at her the better. But strange it is how for her
beauty I am willing to construe all this to the best and to pity her
wherein it is to her hurt, though I know well enough she is a whore.

17th.  To my office, and by and by to our sitting; where much business.
Mr. Coventry took his leave, being to go with the Duke over for the
Queen-Mother.  I dined at home, and so to my Lord's, where I presented him
with a true state of all his accounts to last Monday, being the 14th of
July, which did please him, and to my great joy I continue in his great
esteem and opinion.  I this day took a general acquittance from my Lord to
the same day.  So that now I have but very few persons to deal withall for
money in the world.  Home and found much business to be upon my hands, and
was late at the office writing letters by candle light, which is rare at
this time of the year, but I do it with much content and joy, and then I
do please me to see that I begin to have people direct themselves to me in
all businesses.  Very late I was forced to send for Mr. Turner, Smith,
Young, about things to be sent down early to-morrow on board the King's
pleasure boat, and so to bed with my head full of business, but well
contented in mind as ever in my life.

18th.  Up very early, and got a-top of my house, seeing the design of my
work, and like it very well, and it comes into my head to have my
dining-room wainscoated, which will be very pretty.  By-and-by by water to
Deptford, to put several things in order, being myself now only left in
town, and so back again to the office, and there doing business all the
morning and the afternoon also till night, and then comes Cooper for my
mathematiques, but, in good earnest, my head is so full of business that I
cannot understand it as otherwise I should do.  At night to bed, being
much troubled at the rain coming into my house, the top being open.

19th.  Up early and to some business, and my wife coming to me I staid
long with her discoursing about her going into the country, and as she is
not very forward so am I at a great loss whether to have her go or no
because of the charge, and yet in some considerations I would be glad she
was there, because of the dirtiness of my house and the trouble of having
of a family there.  So to my office, and there all the morning, and then
to dinner and my brother Tom dined with me only to see me.  In the
afternoon I went upon the river to look after some tarr I am sending down
and some coles, and so home again; it raining hard upon the water, I put
ashore and sheltered myself, while the King came by in his barge, going
down towards the Downs to meet the Queen: the Duke being gone yesterday.
But methought it lessened my esteem of a king, that he should not be able
to command the rain.  Home, and Cooper coming (after I had dispatched
several letters) to my mathematiques, and so at night to bed to a chamber
at Sir W. Pen's, my own house being so foul that I cannot lie there any
longer, and there the chamber lies so as that I come into it over my leads
without going about, but yet I am not fully content with it, for there
will be much trouble to have servants running over the leads to and fro.

20th (Lord's day).  My wife and I lay talking long in bed, and at last she
is come to be willing to stay two months in the country, for it is her
unwillingness to stay till the house is quite done that makes me at a loss
how to have her go or stay.  But that which troubles me most is that it
has rained all this morning so furiously that I fear my house is all over
water, and with that expectation I rose and went into my house and find
that it is as wet as the open street, and that there is not one
dry-footing above nor below in my house.  So I fitted myself for dirt, and
removed all my books to the office and all day putting up and restoring
things, it raining all day long as hard within doors as without.  At last
to dinner, we had a calf's head and bacon at my chamber at Sir W. Pen's,
and there I and my wife concluded to have her go and her two maids and the
boy, and so there shall be none but Will and I left at home, and so the
house will be freer, for it is impossible to have anybody come into my
house while it is in this condition, and with this resolution all the
afternoon we were putting up things in the further cellar against next
week for them to be gone, and my wife and I into the office and there
measured a soiled flag that I had found there, and hope to get it to
myself, for it has not been demanded since I came to the office.  But my
wife is not hasty to have it, but rather to stay a while longer and see
the event whether it will be missed or no.  At night to my office, and
there put down this day's passages in my journall, and read my oaths, as I
am obliged every Lord's day.  And so to Sir W. Pen's to my chamber again,
being all in dirt and foul, and in fear of having catched cold today with
dabbling in the water.  But what has vexed me to-day was that by carrying
the key to Sir W. Pen's last night, it could not in the midst of all my
hurry to carry away my books and things, be found, and at last they found
it in the fire that we made last night.  So to bed.

21st. Up early, and though I found myself out of order and cold, and the
weather cold and likely to rain, yet upon my promise and desire to do what
I intended, I did take boat and down to Greenwich, to Captain Cocke's, who
hath a most pleasant seat, and neat.  Here I drank wine, and eat some
fruit off the trees; and he showed a great rarity, which was two or three
of a great number of silver dishes and plates, which he bought of an
embassador that did lack money, in the edge or rim of which was placed
silver and gold medalls, very ancient, and I believe wrought, by which, if
they be, they are the greatest rarity that ever I saw in my life, and I
will show Mr. Crumlum them.  Thence to Woolwich to the Rope-yard; and
there looked over several sorts of hemp, and did fall upon my great survey
of seeing the working and experiments of the strength and the charge in
the dressing of every sort; and I do think have brought it to so great a
certainty, as I have done the King great service in it: and do purpose to
get it ready against the Duke's coming to town to present to him.  I
breakfasted at Mr. Falconer's well, and much pleased with my inquiries.
Thence to the dock, where we walked in Mr. Shelden's garden, eating more
fruit, and drinking, and eating figs, which were very good, and talking
while the Royal James was bringing towards the dock, and then we went out
and saw the manner and trouble of docking such a ship, which yet they
could not do, but only brought her head into the Dock, and so shored her
up till next tide.  But, good God!  what a deal of company was there from
both yards to help to do it, when half the company would have done it as
well.  But I see it is impossible for the King to have things done as
cheap as other men.  Thence by water, and by and by landing at the
riverside somewhere among the reeds, we walked to Greenwich, where to
Cocke's house again and walked in the garden, and then in to his lady, who
I find is still pretty, but was now vexed and did speak very discontented
and angry to the Captain for disappointing a gentleman that he had invited
to dinner, which he took like a wise man and said little, but she was very
angry, which put me clear out of countenance that I was sorry I went in.
So after I had eat still some more fruit I took leave of her in the garden
plucking apricots for preserving, and went away and so by water home, and
there Mr. Moore coming and telling me that my Lady goes into the country
to-morrow, I carried my wife by coach to take her leave of her father, I
staying in Westminster Hall, she going away also this week, and thence to
my Lady's, where we staid and supped with her, but found that my Lady was
truly angry and discontented with us for our neglecting to see her as we
used to do, but after a little she was pleased as she was used to be, at
which we were glad.  So after supper home to bed.

22d.  Among my workmen early: then to the office, and there I had letters
from the Downs from Mr. Coventry; who tells me of the foul weather they
had last Sunday, that drove them back from near Boulogne, whither they
were going for the Queen, back again to the Downs, with the loss of their
cables, sayles, and masts; but are all safe, only my Lord Sandwich, who
went before with the yachts; they know not what is become of him, which do
trouble me much; but I hope he got ashore before the storm begun; which
God grant!  All day at the office, only at home at dinner, where I was
highly angry with my wife for her keys being out of the way, but they were
found at last, and so friends again.  All the afternoon answering letters
and writing letters, and at night to Mr. Coventry an ample letter in
answer to all his and the Duke's business.  Late at night at the office,
where my business is great, being now all alone in town, but I shall go
through it with pleasure.  So home and to bed.

23rd.  This morning angry a little in the morning, and my house being so
much out of order makes me a little pettish.  I went to the office, and
there dispatched business by myself, and so again in the afternoon; being
a little vexed that my brother Tom, by his neglect, do fail to get a coach
for my wife and maid this week, by which she will not be at Brampton
Feast, to meet my Lady at my father's.  At night home, and late packing up
things in order to their going to Brampton to-morrow, and so to bed, quite
out of sorts in my mind by reason that the weather is so bad, and my house
all full of wet, and the trouble of going from one house to another to Sir
W. Pen's upon every occasion.  Besides much disturbed by reason of the
talk up and down the town, that my Lord Sandwich is lost; but I trust in
God the contrary.

24th.  Up early this morning sending the things to the carrier's, and my
boy, who goes to-day, though his mistress do not till next Monday.  All
the morning at the office, Sir W. Batten being come to town last night. I
hear, to my great content, that my Lord Sandwich is safe landed in France.
Dined at our chamber, where W. Bowyer with us, and after much simple talk
with him, I left him, and to my office, where all the afternoon busy till
9 at night, among other things improving my late experiment at Woolwich
about hemp.  So home and to bed.

25th.  At the office all the morning, reading Mr. Holland's' discourse of
the Navy, lent me by Mr. Turner, and am much pleased with them, they
hitting the very diseases of the Navy, which we are troubled with
now-a-days.  I shall bestow writing of them over and much reading thereof.
This morning Sir W. Batten came in to the office and desired to speak with
me; he began by telling me that he observed a strangeness between him and
me of late, and would know the reason of it, telling me he heard that I
was offended with merchants coming to his house and making contracts
there.  I did tell him that as a friend I had spoke of it to Sir W. Pen
and desired him to take a time to tell him of it, and not as a backbiter,
with which he was satisfied, but I find that Sir W. Pen has played the
knave with me, and not told it from me as a friend, but in a bad sense.
He also told me that he heard that exceptions were taken at his carrying
his wife down to Portsmouth, saying that the King should not pay for it,
but I denied that I had spoke of it, nor did I.  At last he desired the
difference between our wives might not make a difference between us, which
I was exceedingly glad to hear, and do see every day the fruit of looking
after my business, which I pray God continue me in, for I do begin to be
very happy.  Dined at home, and so to the office all the afternoon again,
and at night home and to bed.

26th.  Sir W. Batten, Mr. Pett, and I at the office sitting all the
morning.  So dined at home, and then to my office again, causing the model
hanging in my chamber to be taken down and hung up in my office, for fear
of being spoilt by the workmen, and for my own convenience of studying it.
This afternoon I had a letter from Mr. Creed, who hath escaped narrowly in
the King's yacht, and got safe to the Downs after the late storm; and that
there the King do tell him, that he is sure that my Lord is landed at
Callis safe, of which being glad, I sent news thereof to my Lord Crew, and
by the post to my Lady into the country.  This afternoon I went to
Westminster; and there hear that the King and Queen intend to come to
White Hall from Hampton Court next week, for all winter.  Thence to Mrs.
Sarah, and there looked over my Lord's lodgings, which are very pretty;
and White Hall garden and the Bowling-ally (where lords and ladies are now
at bowles), in brave condition.  Mrs. Sarah told me how the falling out
between my Lady Castlemaine and her Lord was about christening of the
child lately,

     [The boy was born in June at Lady Castlemaine's house in King
     Street.  By the direction of Lord Castlemaine, who had become a
     Roman Catholic, the child was baptized by a priest, and this led to
     a final separation between husband and wife.  Some days afterwards
     the child was again baptized by the rector of St. Margaret's,
     Westminster, in presence of the godparents, the King, Aubrey De
     Vere, Earl of Oxford, and Barbara, Countess of Suffolk, first Lady
     of the Bedchamber to the Queen and Lady Castlemaine's aunt.  The
     entry in the register of St. Margaret's is as follows: "1662 June
     18 Charles Palmer Ld Limbricke, s. to ye right honorble Roger Earl
     of Castlemaine by Barbara" (Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess
     of Cleveland," 1871, p.  33).  The child was afterwards called
     Charles Fitzroy, and was created Duke of Southampton in 1674.  He
     succeeded his mother in the dukedom of Cleveland in 1709, and died
     1730.]

which he would have, and had done by a priest: and, some days after, she
had it again christened by a minister; the King, and Lord of Oxford, and
Duchesse of Suffolk, being witnesses: and christened with a proviso, that
it had not already been christened.  Since that she left her Lord,
carrying away every thing in the house; so much as every dish, and cloth,
and servant but the porter.  He is gone discontented into France, they
say, to enter a monastery; and now she is coming back again to her house
in Kingstreet.  But I hear that the Queen did prick her out of the list
presented her by the King;

     ["By the King's command Lord Clarendon, much against his
     inclination, had twice visited his royal mistress with a view of
     inducing her, by persuasions which he could not justify, to give way
     to the King's determination to have Lady Castlemaine of her
     household .  .  .  .  Lord Clarendon has given a full account of all
     that transpired between himself, the King and the Queen, on this
     very unpleasant business ('Continuation of Life of Clarendon,' 1759,
     ff. 168-178)."--Steinman's Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland, p. 35.
     "The day at length arrived when Lady Castlemaine was to be formally
     admitted a Lady of the Bedchamber.  The royal warrant, addressed to
     the Lord Chamberlain, bears date June 1, 1663, and includes with
     that of her ladyship, the names of the Duchess of Buckingham, the
     Countesses of Chesterfield and Bath, and the Countess Mareshall.  A
     separate warrant of the same day directs his lordship to admit the
     Countess of Suffolk as Groom of the Stole and first Lady of the
     Bedchamber, to which undividable offices she had, with the
     additional ones of Mistress of the Robes and Keeper of the Privy
     Purse, been nominated by a warrant dated April 2, 1662, wherein the
     reception of her oath is expressly deferred until the Queen's
     household shall be established.  We here are furnished with the
     evidence that Charles would not sign the warrants for the five until
     Catherine had withdrawn her objection to his favourite one."--
     Addenda to Steinman's Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland (privately
     printed), 1874, p. i.]

desiring that she might have that favour done her, or that he would send
her from whence she come: and that the King was angry and the Queen
discontented a whole day and night upon it; but that the King hath
promised to have nothing to do with her hereafter.  But I cannot believe
that the King can fling her off so, he loving her too well: and so I writ
this night to my Lady to be my opinion; she calling her my lady, and the
lady I admire.  Here I find that my Lord hath lost the garden to his
lodgings, and that it is turning into a tennis-court.  Hence by water to
the Wardrobe to see how all do there, and so home to supper and to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  At church alone in the pew in the morning.  In the
afternoon by water I carried my wife to Westminster, where she went to
take leave of her father,

     [Mrs. Pepys's father was Alexander Marchant, Sieur de St. Michel, a
     scion of a good family in Anjou.  Having turned Huguenot at the age
     of twenty-one, his father disinherited him, and he was left
     penniless.  He came over in the retinue of Henrietta Maria, on her
     marriage with Charles I., as one of her Majesty's gentlemen carvers,
     but the Queen dismissed him on finding out he was a Protestant and
     did not go to mass.  He described himself as being captain and major
     of English troops in Italy and Flanders.--Wheatley's Pepys and the
     World he lived in, pp. 6, 250.  He was full of schemes; see
     September 22nd, 1663, for account of his patent for curing smoky
     chimneys.]

and I to walk in the Park, which is now every day more and more pleasant,
by the new works upon it.  Here meeting with Laud Crispe, I took him to
the farther end, and sat under a tree in a corner, and there sung some
songs, he singing well, but no skill, and so would sing false sometimes.
Then took leave of him, and found my wife at my Lord's lodging, and so
took her home by water, and to supper in Sir W. Pen's balcony, and Mrs.
Keene with us, and then came my wife's brother, and then broke up, and to
bed.

28th.  Up early, and by six o'clock, after my wife was ready, I walked
with her to the George, at Holborn Conduit, where the coach stood ready to
carry her and her maid to Bugden, but that not being ready, my brother Tom
staid with them to see them gone, and so I took a troubled though willing
goodbye, because of the bad condition of my house to have a family in it.
So I took leave of her and walked to the waterside, and there took boat
for the Tower; hearing that the Queen-Mother is come this morning already
as high as Woolwich: and that my Lord Sandwich was with her; at which my
heart was glad, and I sent the waterman, though yet not very certain of
it, to my wife to carry news thereof to my Lady.  So to my office all the
morning abstracting the Duke's instructions in the margin thereof.  So
home all alone to dinner, and then to the office again, and in the evening
Cooper comes, and he being gone, to my chamber a little troubled and
melancholy, to my lute late, and so to bed, Will lying there at my feet,
and the wench in my house in Will's bed.

29th.  Early up, and brought all my money, which is near L300, out of my
house into this chamber; and so to the office, and there we sat all the
morning, Sir George Carteret and Mr. Coventry being come from sea.  This
morning among other things I broached the business of our being abused
about flags, which I know doth trouble Sir W. Batten, but I care not. At
noon being invited I went with Sir George and Mr. Coventry to Sir W.
Batten's to dinner, and there merry, and very friendly to Sir Wm. and he
to me, and complies much with me, but I know he envies me, and I do not
value him.  To the office again, and in the evening walked to Deptford
(Cooper with me talking of mathematiques), to send a fellow to prison for
cutting of buoy ropes, and to see the difference between the flags sent in
now-a-days, and I find the old ones, which were much cheaper, to be wholly
as good.  So I took one of a sort with me, and Mr. Wayth accompanying of
me a good way, talking of the faults of the Navy, I walked to Redriffe
back, and so home by water, and after having done, late, at the office, I
went to my chamber and to bed.

30th.  Up early, and to my office, where Cooper came to me and begun his
lecture upon the body of a ship, which my having of a modell in the office
is of great use to me, and very pleasant and useful it is.  Then by water
to White Hall, and there waited upon my Lord Sandwich; and joyed him, at
his lodgings, of his safe coming home after all his danger, which he
confesses to be very great.  And his people do tell me how bravely my Lord
did carry himself, while my Lord Crofts did cry; and I perceive it is all
the town talk how poorly he carried himself.  But the best was of one Mr.
Rawlins, a courtier, that was with my Lord; and in the greatest danger
cried, "God damn me, my Lord, I won't give you three-pence for your place
now."  But all ends in the honour of the pleasure-boats; which, had they
not been very good boats, they could never have endured the sea as they
did.  Thence with Captain Fletcher, of the Gage, in his ship's boat with 8
oars (but every ordinary oars outrowed us) to Woolwich, expecting to find
Sir W. Batten there upon his survey, but he is not come, and so we got a
dish of steaks at the White Hart, while his clarkes and others were
feasting of it in the best room of the house, and after dinner playing at
shuffleboard,

     [The game of shovelboard was played by two players (each provided
     with five coins) on a smooth heavy table.  On the table were marked
     with chalk a series of lines, and the play was to strike the coin on
     the edge of the table with the hand so that it rested between these
     lines.  Shakespeare uses the expression "shove-groat shilling," as
     does Ben Jonson.  These shillings were usually smooth and worn for
     the convenience of playing.  Strutt says ("Sports and Pastimes"), "I
     have seen a shovel-board table at a low public house in Benjamin
     Street, near Clerkenwell Green, which is about three feet in breadth
     and thirty-nine feet two inches in length, and said to be the
     longest at this time in London."]

and when at last they heard I was there, they went about their survey. But
God help the King!  what surveys, shall be taken after this manner! I
after dinner about my business to the Rope-yard, and there staid till
night, repeating several trialls of the strength, wayte, waste, and other
things of hemp, by which I have furnished myself enough to finish my
intended business of stating the goodness of all sorts of hemp.  At night
home by boat with Sir W. Warren, who I landed by the way, and so being
come home to bed.

31st.  Up early and among my workmen, I ordering my rooms above, which
will please me very well.  So to my office, and there we sat all the
morning, where I begin more and more to grow considerable there.  At noon
Mr. Coventry and I by his coach to the Exchange together; and in
Lumbard-street met Captain Browne of the Rosebush: at which he was cruel
angry: and did threaten to go to-day to the Duke at Hampton Court, and get
him turned out because he was not sailed.  But at the Exchange we resolved
of eating a bit together, which we did at the Ship behind the Exchange,
and so took boat to Billingsgate, and went down on board the Rosebush at
Woolwich, and found all things out of order, but after frightening the
officers there, we left them to make more haste, and so on shore to the
yard, and did the same to the officers of the yard, that the ship was not
dispatched.  Here we found Sir W. Batten going about his survey, but so
poorly and unlike a survey of the Navy, that I am ashamed of it, and so is
Mr. Coventry.  We found fault with many things, and among others the
measure of some timber now serving in which Mr. Day the assistant told us
of, and so by water home again, all the way talking of the office business
and other very pleasant discourse, and much proud I am of getting thus far
into his books, which I think I am very much in.  So home late, and it
being the last day of the month, I did make up my accounts before I went
to bed, and found myself worth about L650, for which the Lord God be
praised, and so to bed.  I drank but two glasses of wine this day, and yet
it makes my head ake all night, and indisposed me all the next day, of
which I am glad.  I am now in town only with my man Will and Jane, and
because my house is in building, I do lie at Sir W. Pen's house, he being
gone to Ireland.  My wife, her maid and boy gone to Brampton.  I am very
well entered into the business and esteem of the office, and do ply it
close, and find benefit by it.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 AUGUST
                                  1662

August 1st.  Up, my head aching, and to my office, where Cooper read me
another lecture upon my modell very pleasant.  So to my business all the
morning, which increases by people coming now to me to the office.  At
noon to the Exchange, where meeting Mr. Creed and Moore we three to a
house hard by (which I was not pleased with) to dinner, and after dinner
and some discourse ordinary by coach home, it raining hard, and so at the
office all the afternoon till evening to my chamber, where, God forgive
me, I was sorry to hear that Sir W. Pen's maid Betty was gone away
yesterday, for I was in hopes to have had a bout with her before she had
gone, she being very pretty.  I had also a mind to my own wench, but I
dare not for fear she should prove honest and refuse and then tell my
wife.  I staid up late, putting things in order for my going to Chatham
to-morrow, and so to bed, being in pain .  .  .  with the little riding in
a coach to-day from the Exchange, which do trouble me.

2nd.  Up early, and got me ready in my riding clothes, and so to the
office, and there wrote letters to my father and wife against night, and
then to the business of my office, which being done, I took boat with
Will, and down to Greenwich, where Captain Cocke not being at home I was
vexed, and went to walk in the Park till he come thither to me: and Will's
forgetting to bring my boots in the boat did also vex me, for I was forced
to send the boat back again for them.  I to Captain Cocke's along with him
to dinner, where I find his lady still pretty, but not so good a humour as
I thought she was.  We had a plain, good dinner, and I see they do live
very frugally.  I eat among other fruit much mulberrys, a thing I have not
eat of these many years, since I used to be at Ashted, at my cozen
Pepys's.  After dinner we to boat, and had a pleasant passage down to
Gravesend, but it was nine o'clock before we got thither, so that we were
in great doubt what to do, whether to stay there or no; and the rather
because I was afeard to ride, because of my pain .  .  . ; but at the
Swan, finding Mr. Hemson and Lieutenant Carteret of the Foresight come to
meet me, I borrowed Mr. Hemson's horse, and he took another, and so we
rode to Rochester in the dark, and there at the Crown Mr. Gregory, Barrow,
and others staid to meet me.  So after a glass of wine, we to our barge,
that was ready for me, to the Hill-house, where we soon went to bed,
before we slept I telling upon discourse Captain Cocke the manner of my
being cut of the stone, which pleased him much.  So to sleep.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up early, and with Captain Cocke to the dock-yard, a
fine walk, and fine weather.  Where we walked till Commissioner Pett come
to us, and took us to his house, and showed us his garden and fine things,
and did give us a fine breakfast of bread and butter, and sweetmeats and
other things with great choice, and strong drinks, with which I could not
avoyde making my head ake, though I drank but little. Thither came Captain
Allen of the Foresight, and the officers of the yard to see me.  Thence by
and by to church, by coach, with the Commissioner, and had a dull sermon.
A full church, and some pretty women in it; among others, Beck Allen, who
was a bride-maid to a new married couple that came to church to-day, and,
which was pretty strange, sat in a pew hung with mourning for a mother of
the bride's, which methinks should have been taken down.  After dinner
going out of the church saluted Mrs. Pett, who came after us in the coach
to church, and other officers' wives.  The Commissioner staid at dinner
with me, and we had a good dinner, better than I would have had, but I saw
there was no helping of it.  After dinner the Commissioner and I left the
company and walked in the garden at the Hill-house, which is very
pleasant, and there talked of our businesses and matters of the navy.  So
to church again, where quite weary, and so after sermon walked with him to
the yard up and down and the fields, and saw the place designed for the
wet dock.  And so to his house, and had a syllabub, and saw his closet,
which come short of what I expected, but there was fine modells of ships
in it indeed, whose worth I could not judge of.  At night walked home to
the Hill-house, Mr. Barrow with me, talking of the faults of the yard,
walking in the fields an hour or two, and so home to supper, and so
Captain Cocke and I to bed.  This day among other stories he told me how
despicable a thing it is to be a hangman in Poland, although it be a place
of credit.  And that, in his time, there was some repairs to be made of
the gallows there, which was very fine of stone; but nobody could be got
to mend it till the Burgomaster, or Mayor of the town, with all the
companies of those trades which were necessary to be used about those
repairs, did go in their habits with flags, in solemn procession to the
place, and there the Burgomaster did give the first blow with the hammer
upon the wooden work; and the rest of the Masters of the Companys upon the
works belonging to their trades; that so workmen might not be ashamed to
be employed upon doing of the gallows' works.

4th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning and walked to the Dock, where
Commissioner Pett and I took barge and went to the guardships and mustered
them, finding them but badly manned; thence to the Sovereign, which we
found kept in good order and very clean, which pleased us well, but few of
the officers on board.  Thence to the Charles, and were troubled to see
her kept so neglectedly by the boatswain Clements, who I always took for a
very good officer; it is a very brave ship.  Thence to Upnor Castle, and
there went up to the top, where there is a fine prospect, but of very
small force; so to the yard, and there mustered the whole ordinary, where
great disorder by multitude of servants and old decrepid men, which must
be remedied.  So to all the storehouses and viewed the stores of all sorts
and the hemp, where we found Captain Cocke's (which he came down to see
along with me) very bad, and some others, and with much content (God
forgive me) I did hear by the Clerk of the Ropeyard how it was by Sir W.
Batten's private letter that one parcel of Alderman Barker's' was
received.  At two o'clock to dinner to the Hill-house, and after dinner
dispatched many people's business, and then to the yard again, and looked
over Mr. Gregory's and Barrow's houses to see the matter of difference
between them concerning an alteration that Barrow would make, which I
shall report to the board, but both their houses very pretty, and deserve
to be so, being well kept.  Then to a trial of several sorts of hemp, but
could not perform it here so well as at Woolwich, but we did do it pretty
well.  So took barge at the dock and to Rochester, and there Captain Cocke
and I and our two men took coach about 8 at night and to Gravesend, where
it was very dark before we got thither to the Swan; and there, meeting
with Doncaster, an old waterman of mine above bridge, we eat a short
supper, being very merry with the drolling, drunken coachman that brought
us, and so took water.  It being very dark, and the wind rising, and our
waterman unacquainted with this part of the river, so that we presently
cast upon the Essex shore, but got off again, and so, as well as we could,
went on, but I in such fear that I could not sleep till we came to Erith,
and there it begun to be calm, and the stars to shine, and so I began to
take heart again, and the rest too, and so made shift to slumber a little.
Above Woolwich we lost our way, and went back to Blackwall, and up and
down, being guided by nothing but the barking of a dog, which we had
observed in passing by Blackwall, and so,

5th.  Got right again with much ado, after two or three circles and so on,
and at Greenwich set in Captain Cocke, and I set forward, hailing to all
the King's ships at Deptford, but could not wake any man: so that we could
have done what we would with their ships.  At last waked one man; but it
was a merchant ship, the Royall Catharine: so to the Towerdock and home,
where the girl sat up for me.  It was about three o'clock, and putting Mr.
Boddam out of my bed, went to bed, and lay till nine o'clock, and so to
the office, where we sat all the morning, and I did give some accounts of
my service.  Dined alone at home, and was glad my house is begun tiling.
And to the office again all the afternoon, till it was so dark that I
could not see hardly what it is that I now set down when I write this
word, and so went to my chamber and to bed, being sleepy.

6th.  Up early, and, going to my office, met Sir G. Carteret in coming
through the yard, and so walked a good while talking with him about Sir W.
Batten, and find that he is going down the wind in every body's esteem,
and in that of his honesty by this letter that he wrote to Captn. Allen
concerning Alderman Barker's hemp.  Thence by water to White Hall; and so
to St. James's; but there found Mr. Coventry gone to Hampton Court.  So to
my Lord's; and he is also gone: this being a great day at the Council
about some business at the Council before the King.  Here I met with Mr.
Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who told me how Mr. Edward Montagu hath lately had
a duell with Mr. Cholmely, that is first gentleman-usher to the Queen, and
was a messenger from the King to her in Portugall, and is a fine
gentleman; but had received many affronts from Mr. Montagu, and some
unkindness from my Lord, upon his score (for which I am sorry).  He proved
too hard for Montagu, and drove him so far backward that he fell into a
ditch, and dropt his sword, but with honour would take no advantage over
him; but did give him his life: and the world says Mr. Montagu did carry
himself very poorly in the business, and hath lost his honour for ever
with all people in it, of which I am very glad, in hopes that it will
humble him.  I hear also that he hath sent to my Lord to borrow L400,
giving his brother Harvey's' security for it, and that my Lord will lend
it him, for which I am sorry.  Thence home, and at my office all the
morning, and dined at home, and can hardly keep myself from having a mind
to my wench, but I hope I shall not fall to such a shame to myself.  All
the afternoon also at my office, and did business. In the evening came Mr.
Bland the merchant to me, who has lived long in Spain, and is concerned in
the business of Tangier, who did discourse with me largely of it, and
after he was gone did send me three or four printed things that he hath
wrote of trade in general and of Tangier particularly, but I do not find
much in them.  This afternoon Mr. Waith was with me, and did tell me much
concerning the Chest, which I am resolved to look into; and I perceive he
is sensible of Sir W. Batten's carriage; and is pleased to see any thing
work against him.  Who, poor man, is, I perceive, much troubled, and did
yesterday morning walk in the garden with me, did tell me he did see there
was a design of bringing another man in his room, and took notice of my
sorting myself with others, and that we did business by ourselves without
him.  Part of which is true, but I denied, and truly, any design of doing
him any such wrong as that.  He told me he did not say it particularly of
me, but he was confident there was somebody intended to be brought in,
nay, that the trayne was laid before Sir W. Pen went, which I was glad to
hear him say. Upon the whole I see he perceives himself tottering, and
that he is suspected, and would be kind to me, but I do my business in the
office and neglect him.  At night writing in my study a mouse ran over my
table, which I shut up fast under my shelf's upon my table till to-morrow,
and so home and to bed.

7th.  Up by four o'clock and to my office, and by and by Mr. Cooper comes
and to our modell, which pleases me more and more.  At this till 8
o'clock, and so we sat in the office and staid all the morning, my
interest still growing, for which God be praised.  This morning I got
unexpectedly the Reserve for Mr. Cooper to be maister of, which was only
by taking an opportune time to motion [it], which is one good effect of my
being constant at the office, that nothing passes without me; and I have
the choice of my own time to propose anything I would have.  Dined at
home, and to the office again at my business all the afternoon till night,
and so to supper and to bed.  It being become a pleasure to me now-a-days
to follow my business, and the greatest part may be imputed to my drinking
no wine, and going to no plays.

8th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning, and at five by water to Woolwich,
there to see the manner of tarring, and all the morning looking to see the
several proceedings in making of cordage, and other things relating to
that sort of works, much to my satisfaction.  At noon came Mr. Coventry on
purpose from Hampton Court to see the same, and dined with Mr. Falconer,
and after dinner to several experiments of Hemp, and particularly some
Milan hemp that is brought over ready dressed.  Thence we walked talking,
very good discourse all the way to Greenwich, and I do find most excellent
discourse from him.  Among other things, his rule of suspecting every man
that proposes any thing to him to be a knave; or, at least, to have some
ends of his own in it.  Being led thereto by the story of Sir John
Millicent, that would have had a patent from King James for every man to
have had leave to have given him a shilling; and that he might take it of
every man that had a mind to give it, and being answered that that was a
fair thing, but what needed he a patent for it, and what he would do to
them that would not give him.  He answered, he would not force them; but
that they should come to the Council of State, to give a reason why they
would not.  Another rule is a proverb that he hath been taught, which is
that a man that cannot sit still in his chamber (the reason of which I did
not understand him), and he that cannot say no (that is, that is of so
good a nature that he cannot deny any thing, or cross another in doing any
thing), is not fit for business.  The last of which is a very great fault
of mine, which I must amend in.  Thence by boat; I being hot, he put the
skirt of his cloak about me; and it being rough, he told me the passage of
a Frenchman through London Bridge, where, when he saw the great fall, he
begun to cross himself and say his prayers in the greatest fear in the
world, and soon as he was over, he swore "Morbleu!  c'est le plus grand
plaisir du monde," being the most like a French humour in the world.

     [When the first editions of this Diary were printed no note was
     required here.  Before the erection of the present London Bridge the
     fall of water at the ebb tide was great, and to pass at that time
     was called "Shooting the bridge".  It was very hazardous for small
     boats.  The ancient mode, even in Henry VIII.'s time, of going to
     the Tower and Greenwich, was to land at the Three Cranes, in Upper
     Thames Street, suffer the barges to shoot the bridge, and to enter
     them again at Billingsgate.  See Cavendish's "Wolsey," p. 40, ed.
     1852]

To Deptford, and there surprised the Yard, and called them to a muster,
and discovered many abuses, which we shall be able to understand hereafter
and amend.  Thence walked to Redriffe, and so to London Bridge, where I
parted with him, and walked home and did a little business, and to supper
and to bed.

9th.  Up by four o'clock or a little after, and to my office, whither by
and by comes Cooper, to whom I told my getting for him the Reserve, for
which he was very thankful, and fell to work upon our modell, and did a
good morning's work upon the rigging, and am very sorry that I must lose
him so soon.  By and by comes Mr. Coventry, and he and I alone sat at the
office all the morning upon business.  And so to dinner to Trinity House,
and thence by his coach towards White Hall; but there being a stop at the
Savoy, we 'light and took water, and my Lord Sandwich being out of town,
we parted there, all the way having good discourse, and in short I find
him the most ingenuous person I ever found in my life, and am happy in his
acquaintance and my interest in him.  Home by water, and did business at
my office.  Writing a letter to my brother John to dissuade him from being
Moderator of his year, which I hear is proffered him, of which I am very
glad.  By and by comes Cooper, and he and I by candlelight at my modell,
being willing to learn as much of him as is possible before he goes.  So
home and to bed.

10th (Lord's day).  Being to dine at my brother's, I walked to St.
Dunstan's, the church being now finished; and here I heard Dr. Bates,' who
made a most eloquent sermon; and I am sorry I have hitherto had so low an
opinion of the man, for I have not heard a neater sermon a great while,
and more to my content.  So to Tom's, where Dr. Fairebrother, newly come
from Cambridge, met me, and Dr. Thomas Pepys.  I framed myself as pleasant
as I could, but my mind was another way.  Hither came my uncle Fenner,
hearing that I was here, and spoke to me about Pegg Kite's business of her
portion, which her husband demands, but I will have nothing to do with it.
I believe he has no mind to part with the money out of his hands, but let
him do what he will with it.  He told me the new service-book--[The Common
Prayer Book of 1662, now in use.]--(which is now lately come forth) was
laid upon their deske at St. Sepulchre's for Mr. Gouge to read; but he
laid it aside, and would not meddle with it: and I perceive the Presbyters
do all prepare to give over all against Bartholomew-tide.

     [Thomas Gouge (1609-1681), an eminent Presbyterian minister, son of
     William Gouge, D.D. (lecturer at and afterwards Rector of St.
     Anne's, Blackfriars).  He was vicar of the parish of St. Sepulchre
     from 1638 until the Act of Uniformity, in 1662, forced him to resign
     his living.]

Mr. Herring, being lately turned out at St. Bride's, did read the psalm to
the people while they sung at Dr. Bates's, which methought is a strange
turn.  After dinner to St. Bride's, and there heard one Carpenter, an old
man, who, they say, hath been a Jesuit priest, and is come over to us; but
he preaches very well.  So home with Mrs. Turner, and there hear that Mr.
Calamy hath taken his farewell this day of his people, and that others
will do so the next Sunday.  Mr. Turner, the draper, I hear, is knighted,
made Alderman, and pricked for Sheriffe, with Sir Thomas Bluddel, for the
next year, by the King, and so are called with great honour the King's
Sheriffes.  Thence walked home, meeting Mr. Moore by the way, and he home
with me and walked till it was dark in the garden, and so good night, and
I to my closet in my office to perfect my Journall and to read my solemn
vows, and so to bed.

11th.  All the morning at the office.  Dined at home all alone, and so to
my office again, whither Dean Fuller came to see me, and having business
about a ship to carry his goods to Dublin, whither he is shortly to
return, I went with him to the Hermitage, and the ship happening to be
Captn. Holland's I did give orders for them to be well looked after, and
thence with him to the Custom House about getting a pass for them, and so
to the Dolphin tavern, where I spent 6d. on him, but drank but one glass
of wine, and so parted.  He tells me that his niece, that sings so well,
whom I have long longed to see, is married to one Mr. Boys, a wholesale
man at the Three Crowns in Cheapside.  I to the office again, whither
Cooper came and read his last lecture to me upon my modell, and so bid me
good bye, he being to go to-morrow to Chatham to take charge of the ship I
have got him.  So to my business till 9 at night, and so to supper and to
bed, my mind a little at ease because my house is now quite tiled.

12th.  Up early at my office, and I find all people beginning to come to
me.  Among others Mr. Deane, the Assistant of Woolwich, who I find will
discover to me the whole abuse that his Majesty suffers in the measuring
of timber, of which I shall be glad.  He promises me also a modell of a
ship, which will please me exceedingly, for I do want one of my own.  By
and by we sat, and among other things Sir W. Batten and I had a difference
about his clerk's making a warrant for a Maister, which I would not
suffer, but got another signed, which he desires may be referred to a full
board, and I am willing to it.  But though I did get another signed of my
own clerk's, yet I will give it to his clerk, because I would not be
judged unkind, and though I will stand upon my privilege.  At noon home
and to dinner alone, and so to the office again, where busy all the
afternoon till to o'clock at night, and so to supper and to bed, my mind
being a little disquieted about Sir W. Batten's dispute to-day, though
this afternoon I did speak with his man Norman at last, and told him the
reason of my claim.

13th.  Up early, and to my office, where people come to me about business,
and by and by we met on purpose to enquire into the business of the
flag-makers, where I am the person that do chiefly manage the business
against them on the King's part; and I do find it the greatest cheat that
I have yet found; they having eightpence per yard allowed them by pretence
of a contract, where no such thing appears; and it is threepence more than
was formerly paid, and than I now offer the Board to have them done.  We
did not fully end it, but refer it to another time. At noon Commr. Pett
and I by water to Greenwich, and on board the pleasure-boats to see what
they wanted, they being ordered to sea, and very pretty things I still
find them, and so on shore and at the Shipp had a bit of meat and dined,
there waiting upon us a barber of Mr. Pett's acquaintance that plays very
well upon the viollin.  Thence to Lambeth; and there saw the little
pleasure-boat in building by the King, my Lord Brunkard, and the
virtuosoes of the town, according to new lines, which Mr. Pett cries up
mightily, but how it will prove we shall soon see.  So by water home, and
busy at my study late, drawing a letter to the yards of reprehension and
direction for the board to sign, in which I took great pains.  So home and
to bed.

14th.  Up early and to look on my works, and find my house to go on apace.
So to my office to prepare business, and then we met and sat till noon,
and then Commissioner Pett and I being invited, went by Sir John Winter's
coach sent for us, to the Mitre, in Fenchurch street, to a venison-pasty;
where I found him a very worthy man; and good discourse. Most of which was
concerning the Forest of Dean, and the timber there, and iron-workes with
their great antiquity, and the vast heaps of cinders which they find, and
are now of great value, being necessary for the making of iron at this
day; and without which they cannot work: with the age of many trees there
left at a great fall in Edward the Third's time, by the name of
forbid-trees, which at this day are called vorbid trees. Thence to my
office about business till late, and so home and to bed.

15th.  Up very early, and up about seeing how my work proceeds, and am
pretty well pleased therewith; especially my wife's closet will be very
pretty.  So to the office and there very busy, and many people coming to
me.  At noon to the Change, and there hear of some Quakers that are seized
on, that would have blown up the prison in Southwark where they are put.
So to the Swan, in Old Fish Street, where Mr. Brigden and his
father-in-law, Blackbury, of whom we had bought timber in the office, but
have not dealt well with us, did make me a fine dinner only to myself; and
after dinner comes in a jugler, which shewed us very pretty tricks. I
seemed very pleasant, but am no friend to the man's dealings with us in
the office.  After an hour or two sitting after dinner talking about
office business, where I had not spent any time a great while, I went to
Paul's Church Yard to my bookseller's; and there I hear that next Sunday
will be the last of a great many Presbyterian ministers in town, who, I
hear, will give up all.  I pray God the issue may be good, for the
discontent is great.  Home and to my office till 9 at night doing
business, and so to bed.  My mind well pleased with a letter I found at
home from Mr. Coventry, expressing his satisfaction in a letter I writ
last night, and sent him this morning, to be corrected by him in order to
its sending down to all the Yards as a charge to them.

17th (Lord's day).  Up very early, this being the last Sunday that the
Presbyterians are to preach, unless they read the new Common Prayer and
renounce the Covenant,

     [On St. Bartholomew's day, August 24th, 1662, the Act of Uniformity
     took effect, and about two hundred Presbyterian and Independent
     ministers lost their preferments.]

and so I had a mind to hear Dr. Bates's farewell sermon, and walked
thither, calling first at my brother's, where I found that he is come home
after being a week abroad with Dr. Pepys, nobody knows where, nor I but by
chance, that he was gone, which troubles me.  So I called only at the
door, but did not ask for him, but went to Madam Turner's to know whether
she went to church, and to tell her that I would dine with her; and so
walked to St. Dunstan's, where, it not being seven o'clock yet, the doors
were not open; and so I went and walked an hour in the Temple-garden,
reading my vows, which it is a great content to me to see how I am a
changed man in all respects for the better, since I took them, which the
God of Heaven continue to me, and make me thankful for.  At eight o'clock
I went, and crowded in at a back door among others, the church being
half-full almost before any doors were open publicly; which is the first
time that I have done so these many years since I used to go with my
father and mother, and so got into the gallery, beside the pulpit, and
heard very well.  His text was, "Now the God of Peace--;" the last
Hebrews, and the 20th verse: he making a very good sermon, and very little
reflections in it to any thing of the times.  Besides the sermon, I was
very well pleased with the sight of a fine lady that I have often seen
walk in Graye's Inn Walks, and it was my chance to meet her again at the
door going out, and very pretty and sprightly she is, and I believe the
same that my wife and I some years since did meet at Temple Bar gate and
have sometimes spoke of.  So to Madam Turner's, and dined with her. She
had heard Parson Herring take his leave; tho' he, by reading so much of
the Common Prayer as he did, hath cast himself out of the good opinion of
both sides.  After dinner to St. Dunstan's again; and the church quite
crowded before I came, which was just at one o'clock; but I got into the
gallery again, but stood in a crowd and did exceedingly sweat all the
time.  He pursued his text again very well; and only at the conclusion
told us, after this manner: "I do believe that many of you do expect that
I should say something to you in reference to the time, this being the
last time that possibly I may appear here.  You know it is not my manner
to speak any thing in the pulpit that is extraneous to my text and
business; yet this I shall say, that it is not my opinion, fashion, or
humour that keeps me from complying with what is required of us; but
something which, after much prayer, discourse, and study yet remains
unsatisfied, and commands me herein.  Wherefore, if it is my unhappiness
not to receive such an illumination as should direct me to do otherwise, I
know no reason why men should not pardon me in this world, and am
confident that God will pardon me for it in the next."  And so he
concluded.  Parson Herring read a psalm and chapters before sermon; and
one was the chapter in the Acts, where the story of Ananias and Sapphira
is.  And after he had done, says he, "This is just the case of England at
present.  God he bids us to preach, and men bid us not to preach; and if
we do, we are to be imprisoned and further punished.  All that I can say
to it is, that I beg your prayers, and the prayers of all good Christians,
for us."  This was all the exposition he made of the chapter in these very
words, and no more.  I was much pleased with Dr. Bates's manner of
bringing in the Lord's Prayer after his own; thus, "In whose comprehensive
words we sum up all our imperfect desires; saying, 'Our Father,'" &c.
Church being done and it raining I took a hackney coach and so home, being
all in a sweat and fearful of getting cold.  To my study at my office, and
thither came Mr. Moore to me and walked till it was quite dark.  Then I
wrote a letter to my Lord Privy Seale as from my Lord for Mr.-------to be
sworn directly by deputy to my Lord, he denying to swear him as deputy
together with me.  So that I am now clear of it, and the profit is now
come to be so little that I am not displeased at my getting off so well.
He being gone I to my study and read, and so to eat a bit of bread and
cheese and so to bed.  I hear most of the Presbyters took their leaves
to-day, and that the City is much dissatisfied with it. I pray God keep
peace among us, and make the Bishops careful of bringing in good men in
their rooms, or else all will fly a-pieces; for bad ones will not [go]
down with the City.

18th.  Up very early, and up upon my house to see how work goes on, which
do please me very well.  So about seven o'clock took horse and rode to
Bowe, and there staid at the King's Head, and eat a breakfast of eggs till
Mr. Deane of Woolwich came to me, and he and I rid into Waltham Forest,
and there we saw many trees of the King's a-hewing; and he showed me the
whole mystery of off square,

     [Off-square is evidently a mistake, in the shorthand MS., for half
     square.]

wherein the King is abused in the timber that he buys, which I shall with
much pleasure be able to correct.  After we had been a good while in the
wood, we rode to Illford, and there, while dinner was getting ready, he
and I practised measuring of the tables and other things till I did
understand measuring of timber and board very well.  So to dinner and by
and by, being sent for, comes Mr. Cooper, our officer in the Forest, and
did give me an account of things there, and how the country is backward to
come in with their carts.  By and by comes one Mr. Marshall, of whom the
King has many carriages for his timber, and they staid and drank with me,
and while I am here, Sir W. Batten passed by in his coach, homewards from
Colchester, where he had been seeing his son-in-law, Lemon, that lies
a-dying, but I would take no notice of him, but let him go.  By and by I
got a horseback again and rode to Barking, and there saw the place where
they ship this timber for Woolwich; and so Deane and I home again, and
parted at Bowe, and I home just before a great showre of rayne, as God
would have it.  I find Deane a pretty able man, and able to do the King
service; but, I think, more out of envy to the rest of the officers of the
yard, of whom he complains much, than true love, more than others, to the
service.  He would fain seem a modest man, and yet will commend his own
work and skill, and vie with other persons, especially the Petts, but I
let him alone to hear all he will say.  Whiled away the evening at my
office trying to repeat the rules of measuring learnt this day, and so to
bed with my mind very well pleased with this day's work.

19th.  Up betimes and to see how my work goes on.  Then Mr. Creed came to
me, and he and I walked an hour or two till 8 o'clock in the garden,
speaking of our accounts one with another and then things public.  Among
other things he tells me that my Lord has put me into Commission with
himself and many noblemen and others for Tangier, which, if it be, is not
only great honour, but may be of profit too, and I am very glad of it. By
and by to sit at the office; and Mr. Coventry did tell us of the duell
between Mr. Jermyn, nephew to my Lord St. Albans, and Colonel Giles
Rawlins, the latter of whom is killed, and the first mortally wounded, as
it is thought.  They fought against Captain Thomas Howard, my Lord
Carlisle's brother, and another unknown; who, they say, had armour on that
they could not be hurt, so that one of their swords went up to the hilt
against it.  They had horses ready, and are fled.  But what is most
strange, Howard sent one challenge, but they could not meet, and then
another, and did meet yesterday at the old Pall Mall at St. James's, and
would not to the last tell Jermyn what the quarrel was; nor do any body
know.  The Court is much concerned in this fray, and I am glad of it;
hoping that it will cause some good laws against it.  After sitting, Sir
G. Carteret and I walked a good while in the garden, who told me that Sir
W. Batten had made his complaint to him that some of us had a mind to do
him a bad turn, but I do not see that Sir George is concerned for him at
all, but rather against him.  He professes all love to me, and did tell me
how he had spoke of me to my Lord Chancellor, and that if my Lord Sandwich
would ask my Lord Chancellor, he should know what he had said of me to him
to my advantage, of which I am very glad, and do not doubt that all things
will grow better and better every day for me.  Dined at home alone, then
to my office, and there till late at night doing business, and so home,
eat a bit, and to bed.

20th.  Up early, and to my office, and thence to my Lord Sandwich, whom I
found in bed, and he sent for me in.  Among other talk, he do tell me that
he hath put me into commission with a great many great persons in the
business of Tangier, which is a very great honour to me, and may be of
good concernment to me.  By and by comes in Mr. Coventry to us, whom my
Lord tells that he is also put into the commission, and that I am there,
of which he said he was glad; and did tell my Lord that I was indeed the
life of this office, and much more to my commendation beyond measure.  And
that, whereas before he did bear me respect for his sake, he do do it now
much more for my own; which is a great blessing to me. Sir G. Carteret
having told me what he did yesterday concerning his speaking to my Lord
Chancellor about me.  So that on all hands, by God's blessing, I find
myself a very rising man.  By and by comes my Lord Peterborough in, with
whom we talked a good while, and he is going tomorrow towards Tangier
again.  I perceive there is yet good hopes of peace with Guyland,--[A
Moorish usurper, who had put himself at the head of an army for the
purpose of attacking Tangier.--B.]--which is of great concernment to
Tangier.  And many other things I heard which yet I understand not, and so
cannot remember.  My Lord and Lord Peterborough going out to the Solicitor
General about the drawing up of this Commission, I went to Westminster
Hall with Mr. Moore, and there meeting Mr. Townsend, he would needs take
me to Fleet Street, to one Mr. Barwell, squire sadler to the King, and
there we and several other Wardrobe-men dined.  We had a venison pasty,
and other good plain and handsome dishes; the mistress of the house a
pretty, well-carriaged woman, and a fine hand she hath; and her maid a
pretty brown lass.  But I do find my nature ready to run back to my old
course of drinking wine and staying from my business, and yet, thank God,
I was not fully contented with it, but did stay at little ease, and after
dinner hastened home by water, and so to my office till late at night.  In
the evening Mr. Hayward came to me to advise with me about the business of
the Chest, which I have now a mind to put in practice, though I know it
will vex Sir W. Batten, which is one of the ends (God forgive me) that I
have in it.  So home, and eat a bit, and to bed.

21st.  Up early, and to my office, and by and by we sat all the morning.
At noon, though I was invited to my uncle Fenner's to dinner to a haunch
of venison I sent him yesterday, yet I did not go, but chose to go to Mr.
Rawlinson's, where my uncle Wight and my aunt, and some neighbour couples
were at a very good venison pasty.  Hither came, after we were set down, a
most pretty young lady (only her hands were not white nor handsome), which
pleased me well, and I found her to be sister to Mrs. Anne Wight that
comes to my uncle Wight's.  We were good company, and had a very pretty
dinner.  And after dinner some talk, I with my aunt and this young lady
about their being [at] Epsom, from whence they came to-day, and so home
and to my office, and there doing business till past 9 at night, and so
home and to bed.  But though I drank no wine to-day, yet how easily was I
of my own accord stirred up to desire my aunt and this pretty lady (for it
was for her that I did it) to carry them to Greenwich and see the pleasure
boats.  But my aunt would not go, of which since I am much glad.

22nd.  About three o'clock this morning I waked with the noise of the
rayne, having never in my life heard a more violent shower; and then the
catt was lockt in the chamber, and kept a great mewing, and leapt upon the
bed, which made me I could not sleep a great while.  Then to sleep, and
about five o'clock rose, and up to my office, and about 8 o'clock went
down to Deptford, and there with Mr. Davis did look over most of his
stores; by the same token in the great storehouse, while Captain Badily
was talking to us, one from a trap-door above let fall unawares a coyle of
cable, that it was 10,000 to one it had not broke Captain Badily's neck,
it came so near him, but did him no hurt.  I went on with looking and
informing myself of the stores with great delight, and having done there,
I took boat home again and dined, and after dinner sent for some of my
workmen and did scold at them so as I hope my work will be hastened.  Then
by water to Westminster Hall, and there I hear that old Mr. Hales did
lately die suddenly in an hour's time.  Here I met with Will Bowyer, and
had a promise from him of a place to stand to-morrow at his house to see
the show.  Thence to my Lord's, and thither sent for Mr. Creed, who came,
and walked together talking about business, and then to his lodgings at
Clerke's, the confectioner's, where he did give me a little banquet, and I
had liked to have begged a parrot for my wife, but he hath put me in a way
to get a better from Steventon; at Portsmouth. But I did get of him a
draught of Tangier to take a copy by, which pleases me very well.  So home
by water and to my office, where late, and so home to bed.

23d.  Up early, and about my works in my house, to see what is done and
design more.  Then to my office, and by and by we sat till noon at the
office.  After sitting, Mr. Coventry and I did walk together a great while
in the Garden, where he did tell me his mind about Sir G. Carteret's
having so much the command of the money, which must be removed.  And
indeed it is the bane of all our business.  He observed to me also how Sir
W. Batten begins to struggle and to look after his business, which he do
indeed a little, but it will come to nothing. I also put him upon getting
an order from the Duke for our inquiries into the Chest, which he will see
done.  So we parted, and Mr. Creed by appointment being come, he and I
went out together, and at an ordinary in Lumbard Streete dined together,
and so walked down to the Styllyard, and so all along Thames-street, but
could not get a boat: I offered eight shillings for a boat to attend me
this afternoon, and they would not, it being the day of the Queen's coming
to town from Hampton Court.  So we fairly walked it to White Hall, and
through my Lord's lodgings we got into White Hall garden, and so to the
Bowling-green, and up to the top of the new Banqueting House there, over
the Thames, which was a most pleasant place as any I could have got; and
all the show consisted chiefly in the number of boats and barges; and two
pageants, one of a King, and another of a Queen, with her Maydes of Honour
sitting at her feet very prettily; and they tell me the Queen is Sir.
Richard Ford's daughter.  Anon come the King and Queen in a barge under a
canopy with 10,000 barges and boats, I think, for we could see no water
for them, nor discern the King nor Queen.  And so they landed at White
Hall Bridge, and the great guns on the other side went off: But that which
pleased me best was, that my Lady Castlemaine stood over against us upon a
piece of White Hall, where I glutted myself with looking on her.  But
methought it was strange to see her Lord and her upon the same place
walking up and down without taking notice one of another, only at first
entry he put off his hat, and she made him a very civil salute, but
afterwards took no notice one of another; but both of them now and then
would take their child, which the nurse held in her armes, and dandle it.
One thing more; there happened a scaffold below to fall, and we feared
some hurt, but there was none, but she of all the great ladies only run
down among the common rabble to see what hurt was done, and did take care
of a child that received some little hurt, which methought was so noble.
Anon there came one there booted and spurred that she talked long with.
And by and by, she being in her hair, she put on his hat, which was but an
ordinary one, to keep the wind off.  But methinks it became her mightily,
as every thing else do.  The show being over, I went away, not weary with
looking on her, and to my Lord's lodgings, where my brother Tom and Dr.
Thomas Pepys were to speak with me.  So I walked with them in the garden,
and was very angry with them both for their going out of town without my
knowledge; but they told me the business, which was to see a gentlewoman
for a wife for Tom, of Mr. Cooke's providing, worth L500, of good
education, her name Hobell, and lives near Banbury, demands L40 per annum
joynter.  Tom likes her, and, they say, had a very good reception, and
that Cooke hath been very serviceable therein, and that she is committed
to old Mr. Young, of the Wardrobe's, tuition.  After I had told them my
mind about their folly in going so unadvisedly, I then begun to inquire
after the business, and so did give no answer as to my opinion till I have
looked farther into it by Mr. Young.  By and by, as we were walking in my
Lord's walk, comes my Lord, and so we broke our discourse and went in with
him, and after I had put them away I went in to my Lord, and he and I had
half an hour's private discourse about the discontents of the times, which
we concluded would not come to anything of difference, though the
Presbyters would be glad enough of it; but we do not think religion will
so soon cause another war.  Then to his own business.  He asked my advice
there, whether he should go on to purchase more land and to borrow money
to pay for it, which he is willing to do, because such a bargain as that
of Mr. Buggins's, of Stukely, will not be every day to be had, and
Brampton is now perfectly granted him by the King--I mean the reversion of
it--after the Queen's death; and, in the meantime, he buys it of Sir Peter
Ball his present right.  Then we fell to talk of Navy business, and he
concludes, as I do, that he needs not put himself upon any more voyages
abroad to spend money, unless a war comes; and that by keeping his family
awhile in the country, he shall be able to gather money.  He is glad of a
friendship with Mr. Coventry, and I put him upon increasing it, which he
will do, but he (as Mr. Coventry do) do much cry against the course of our
payments and the Treasurer to have the whole power in his own hands of
doing what he will, but I think will not meddle in himself.  He told me
also that in the Commission for Tangier Mr. Coventry had advised him that
Mr. Povy, who intended to be Treasurer,

     [Thomas Povy, who had held, under Cromwell, a high situation in the
     Office of Plantations, was appointed in July, 1660, Treasurer and
     Receiver-General of the Rents and Revenues of James, Duke of York;
     but his royal master's affairs falling into confusion, he
     surrendered his patent on the 27th July, 1668, for a consideration
     of L2,000.  He was also First Treasurer for Tangier, which office he
     resigned to Pepys.  Povy, had apartments at Whitehall, besides his
     lodgings in Lincoln's Inn, and a villa near Hounslow, called the
     Priory, which he had inherited from Justinian Povy, who purchased it
     in 1625.  He was one of the sons of Justinian Povy, Auditor-General
     to Queen Anne of Denmark in 1614, whose father was John Povy,
     citizen and embroiderer of London.]

and it is intended him, may not be of the Commission itself, and my Lord I
think will endeavour to get him to be contented to be left out of the
Commission, and it is a very good rule indeed that the Treasurer in no
office ought to be of the Commission.  Here we broke off, and I bid him
good night, and so with much ado, the streets being at nine o'clock at
night crammed with people going home to the city, for all the borders of
the river had been full of people, as the King had come, to a miracle got
to the Palace Yard, and there took boat, and so to the Old Swan, and so
walked home, and to bed very weary.

24th (Lord's day).  Slept till 7 o'clock, which I have not done a very
great while, but it was my weariness last night that caused it.  So rose
and to my office till church time, writing down my yesterday's
observations, and so to church, where I all alone, and found Will Griffin
and Thomas Hewett got into the pew next to our backs, where our maids sit,
but when I come, they went out; so forward some people are to outrun
themselves.  Here we had a lazy, dull sermon.  So home to dinner, where my
brother Tom came to me, and both before and after dinner he and I walked
all alone in the garden, talking about his late journey and his mistress,
and for what he tells me it is like to do well.  He being gone, I to
church again, where Mr. Mills, making a sermon upon confession, he did
endeavour to pull down auricular confession, but did set it up by his bad
arguments against it, and advising people to come to him to confess their
sins when they had any weight upon their consciences, as much as is
possible, which did vex me to hear.  So home, and after an hour's being in
my office alone, looking over the plates and globes, I walked to my uncle
Wight's, the truth is, in hopes to have seen and been acquainted with the
pretty lady that came along with them to dinner the other day to Mr.
Rawlinson, but she is gone away.  But here I staid supper, and much
company there was; among others, Dr. Burnett, Mr. Cole the lawyer, Mr.
Rawlinson, and Mr. Sutton, a brother of my aunt's, that I never saw
before.  Among other things they tell me that there hath been a
disturbance in a church in Friday Street; a great many young people
knotting together and crying out "Porridge"

     [A nickname given by the Dissenters to the Prayer-Book.  In Mrs.
     Behn's "City Heiress" (1682), Sir Anthony says to Sir Timothy, "You
     come from Church, too."  Sir Timothy replies, "Ay, needs must when
     the Devil drives--I go to save my bacon, as they say, once a month,
     and that too after the Porridge is served up."  Scott quotes, in his
     notes to "Woodstock," a pamphlet entitled, "Vindication of the Book
     of Common Prayer, against the contumelious Slanders of the Fanatic
     party terming it Porridge."]

often and seditiously in the church, and took the Common Prayer Book, they
say, away; and, some say, did tear it; but it is a thing which appears to
me very ominous.  I pray God avert it.  After supper home and to bed.

25th.  Up early, and among my workmen when they came, and set them in good
order at work on all hands, which, though it at first began angrily, yet I
pleased myself afterwards in seeing it put into a good posture, and so I
left them, and away by water to Woolwich (calling in my way in Hamcreek,
where I have never been before, and there found two of the King's ships
lie there without any living creature aboard, which troubled me, every
thing being stole away that can be), where I staid seeing a cable of 14
inches laid, in which there was good variety.  Then to Mr. Falconer's, and
there eat a bit of roast meat off of the spit, and so away to the yard,
and there among other things mustered the yard, and did things that I
perceive people do begin to value me, and that I shall be able to be of
command in all matters, which God be praised for.  Then to Mr. Pett's, and
there eat some fruit and drank, and so to boat again, and to Deptford,
calling there about the business of my house only, and so home, where by
appointment I found Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Batten, and Mr. Waith met at Sir
W. Batten's, and thither I met, and so agreed upon a way of answering my
Lord Treasurer's letter.  Here I found Mr. Coventry had got a letter from
the Duke, sent us for looking into the business of the Chest, of which I
am glad.  After we had done here I went home, and up among my workmen, and
found they had done a good day's work, and so to my office till late
ordering of several businesses, and so home and to bed, my mind, God be
praised, full of business, but great quiet.

26th.  Up betimes and among my works and workmen, and with great pleasure
seeing them go on merrily, and a good many hands, which I perceive makes
good riddance, and so to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon dined alone with Sir W. Batten, which I have not done a great while,
but his lady being out of the way I was the willinger to do it, and after
dinner he and I by water to Deptford, and there found Sir G. Carteret and
my Lady at dinner, and so we sat down and eat another dinner of venison
with them, and so we went to the payhouse, and there staid till to o'clock
at night paying off the Martin and Kinsale, being small but troublesome
ships to pay, and so in the dark by water home to the Custom House, and so
got a lanthorn to light us home, there being Mr. Morrice the wine cooper
with us, he having been at Deptford to view some of the King's casks we
have to sell.  So to bed.

27th.  Up and among my workmen, my work going on still very well.  So to
my office all the morning, and dined again with Sir W. Batten, his Lady
being in the country.  Among other stories, he told us of the Mayor of
Bristoll's reading a pass with the bottom upwards; and a barber that could
not read, that flung a letter in the kennel when one came to desire him to
read the superscription, saying, "Do you think I stand here to read
letters?"  Among my workmen again, pleasing myself all the afternoon
there, and so to the office doing business till past 9 at night, and so
home and to bed.  This afternoon Mrs. Hunt came to see me, and I did give
her a Muske Millon.  To-day my hogshead of sherry I have sold to Sir W.
Batten, and am glad of my money instead of wine.  After I had wrote this
at my office (as I have of late altogether done since my wife has been in
the country) I went into my house, and Will having been making up books at
Deptford with other clerks all day, I did not think he was come home, but
was in fear for him, it being very late, what was become of him.  But when
I came home I found him there at his ease in his study, which vexed me
cruelly, that he should no more mind me, but to let me be all alone at the
office waiting for him.  Whereupon I struck him, and did stay up till 12
o'clock at night chiding him for it, and did in plain terms tell him that
I would not be served so, and that I am resolved to look out some boy that
I may have the bringing up of after my own mind, and which I do intend to
do, for I do find that he has got a taste of liberty since he came to me
that he will not leave.  Having discharged my mind, I went to bed.

28th.  I observe that Will, whom I used to call two or three times in a
morning, would now wake of himself and rise without calling.  Which though
angry I was glad to see.  So I rose and among my workmen, in my gown,
without a doublet, an hour or two or more, till I was afraid of getting an
ague, and so to the office, and there we sat all the morning, and at noon
Mr. Coventry and I dined at Sir W. Batten's, where I have now dined three
days together, and so in the afternoon again we sat, which we intend to do
two afternoons in a week besides our other sitting.  In the evening we
rose, and I to see how my work goes on, and so to my office, writing by
the post and doing other matters, and so home and to bed late.

29th.  Up betimes and among my workmen, where I did stay with them the
greatest part of the morning, only a little at the office, and so to
dinner alone at home, and so to my workmen again, finding my presence to
carry on the work both to my mind and with more haste, and I thank God I
am pleased with it.  At night, the workmen being gone, I went to my
office, and among other businesses did begin to-night with Mr. Lewes to
look into the nature of a purser's account, and the business of
victualling, in which there is great variety; but I find I shall
understand it, and be able to do service there also.  So being weary and
chill, being in some fear of an ague, I went home and to bed.

30th.  Up betimes among my workmen, and so to the office, where we sat all
the morning, and at noon rose and had news that Sir W. Pen would be in
town from Ireland, which I much wonder at, he giving so little notice of
it, and it troubled me exceedingly what to do for a lodging, and more what
to do with my goods, that are all in his house; but at last I resolved to
let them lie there till Monday, and so got Griffin to get a lodging as
near as he could, which is without a door of our back door upon Tower
Hill, a chamber where John Pavis, one of our clerks, do lie in, but he do
provide himself elsewhere, and I am to have his chamber. So at the office
all the afternoon and the evening till past to at night expecting Sir W.
Pen's coming, but he not coming to-night I went thither and there lay very
well, and like my lodging well enough.  My man Will after he had got me to
bed did go home and lay there, and my maid Jane lay among my goods at Sir
W. Pen's.

31st (Lord's day).  Waked early, but being in a strange house, did not
rise till 7 o'clock almost, and so rose and read over my oaths, and whiled
away an hour thinking upon businesses till Will came to get me ready, and
so got ready and to my office, and thence to church.  After sermon home
and dined alone.  News is brought me that Sir W. Pen is come. But I would
take no notice thereof till after dinner, and then sent him word that I
would wait on him, but he is gone to bed.  So to my office, and there made
my monthly accounts, and find myself worth in money about L686 19s. 2
1/2d., for which God be praised; and indeed greatly I hope to thank
Almighty God, who do most manifestly bless me in my endeavours to do the
duties of my office, I now saving money, and my expenses being little.  My
wife is still in the country; my house all in dirt; but my work in a good
forwardness, and will be much to my mind at last.  In the afternoon to
church, and there heard a simple sermon of a stranger upon David's words,
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the way of the ungodly," &c., and
the best of his sermon was the degrees of walking, standing, and sitting,
showing how by steps and degrees sinners do grow in wickedness.  After
sermon to my brother Tom's, who I found has taken physic to-day, and I
talked with him about his country mistress, and read Cook's letter,
wherein I am well satisfied, and will appear in promoting it; so back and
to Mr. Rawlinson's, and there supped with him, and in came my uncle Wight
and my aunt.  Our discourse of the discontents that are abroad, among, and
by reason of the Presbyters.  Some were clapped up to-day, and strict
watch is kept in the City by the train-bands, and letters of a plot are
taken.  God preserve us! for all these things bode very ill.  So home, and
after going to welcome home Sir W. Pen, who was unready, going to bed, I
staid with him a little while, and so to my lodging and to bed.