     A human life he held to be a trifle in the big sum of time
     Fear of one's own wife is the worst fear in the world
     He never saw an insult unless he intended to avenge it
     Liars all men may be, but that's wid wimmin or landlords
     Men are like dogs--they worship him who beats them
     She valued what others found useless
     Women are half saints, half fools


A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE PERSONAL HISTORIES OF "PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE"
AND THE LAST EXISTING RECORDS OF PRETTY PIERRE

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 2.

     MALACHI
     THE LAKE OF THE GREAT SLAVE
     THE RED PATROL
     THE GOING OF THE WHITE SWAN
     AT BAMBER'S BOOM


MALACHI

"He'll swing just the same to-morrow. Exit Malachi!" said Freddy Tarlton
gravely.

The door suddenly opened on the group of gossips, and a man stepped
inside and took the only vacant seat near the fire. He glanced at none,
but stretched out his hands to the heat, looking at the coals with
drooping introspective eyes.

"Exit Malachi," he said presently in a soft ironical voice, but did not
look up.

"By the holy poker, Pierre, where did you spring from?" asked Tarlton
genially.

"The wind bloweth where it listeth, and--" Pierre responded, with a
little turn of his fingers.

"And the wind doesn't tell where it's been, but that's no reason Pierre
shouldn't," urged the other.

Pierre shrugged his shoulders, but made no answer. "He was a tough," said
a voice from the crowd. "To-morrow he'll get the breakfast he's paid
for." Pierre turned and looked at the speaker with a cold inquisitive
stare. "Mon Dieu!" he said presently, "here's this Gohawk playing
preacher. What do you know of Malachi, Gohawk? What do any of you know
about Malachi? A little of this, a little of that, a drink here, a game
of euchre there, a ride after cattle, a hunt behind Guidon Hill!--But
what is that? You have heard the cry of the eagle, you have seen him
carry off a lamb, you have had a pot-shot at him, but what do you know of
the eagle's nest? Mais non.

"The lamb is one thing, the nest is another. You don't know the eagle
till you've been there. And you, Gohawk, would not understand, if you saw
the nest. Such cancan!"

"Shut your mouth!" broke out Gohawk. "D'ye think I'm going to stand
your--"

Freddy Tarlton laid a hand on his arm. "Keep quiet, Gohawk. What good
will it do?" Then he said, "Tell us about the nest, Pierre; they're
hanging him for the lamb in the morning."

"Who spoke for him at the trial?" Pierre asked.

"I did," said Tarlton. "I spoke as well as I could, but the game was dead
against him from the start. The sheriff was popular, and young;
young--that was the thing; handsome too, and the women, of course! It was
sure from the start; besides, Malachi would say nothing--didn't seem to
care."

"No, not to care," mused Pierre. "What did you say for him to the jury--I
mean the devil of a thing to make them sit up and think, 'Poor
Malachi!'--like that."

"Best speech y'ever heard," Gohawk interjected; "just emptied the words
out, split 'em like peas, by gol! till he got to one place right before
the end. Then he pulled up sudden, and it got so quiet you could 'a heard
a pin drop. 'Gen'lemen of the jury,' says Freddy Tarlton here--gen'lemen,
by gol! all that lot--Lagan and the rest! 'Gen'lemen of the jury,' he
says, 'be you danged well sure that you're at one with God A'mighty in
this; that you've got at the core of justice here; that you've got
evidence to satisfy Him who you've all got to satisfy some day, or git
out. Not evidence as to shootin', but evidence as to what that shootin'
meant, an' whether it was meant to kill, an' what for. The case is like
this, gen'lemen of the jury,' says Freddy Tarlton here. 'Two men are in a
street alone. There's a shot, out comes everybody, and sees Fargo the
sheriff laid along the ground, his mouth in the dust, and a full-up gun
in his fingers. Not forty feet away stands Malachi with a gun smokin' in
his fist. It seems to be the opinion that it was cussedness--just
cussedness--that made Malachi turn the sheriff's boots to the sun. For
Malachi was quarrelsome. I'll give you a quarter on that. And the sheriff
was mettlesome, used to have high spirits, like as if he's lift himself
over the fence with his bootstraps. So when Malachi come and saw the
sheriff steppin' round in his paten' leathers, it give him the needle,
and he got a bead on him--and away went Sheriff Fargo--right away! That
seems to be the sense of the public.' And he stops again, soft and quick,
and looks the twelve in the eyes at once. 'But,' says Freddy Tarlton
here, 'are you goin' to hang a man on the little you know? Or are you
goin' to credit him with somethin' of what you don't know? You haint got
the inside of this thing, and Malachi doesn't let you know it, and God
keeps quiet. But be danged well sure that you've got the bulge on
iniquity here; for gen'lemen with pistols out in the street is one thing,
and sittin' weavin' a rope in a court-room for a man's neck is another
thing,' says Freddy Tarlton here. 'My client has refused to say one word
this or that way, but don't be sure that Some One that knows the inside
of things won't speak for him in the end.' Then he turns and looks at
Malachi, and Malachi was standin' still and steady like a tree, but his
face was white, and sweat poured on his forehead. 'If God has no voice to
be heard for my client in this court-room to-day, is there no one on
earth--no man or woman--who can speak for one who won't speak for
himself?' says Freddy Tarlton here. Then, by gol! for the first time
Malachi opened. 'There's no one,' he says. 'The speakin' is all for the
sheriff. But I spoke once, and the sheriff didn't answer.' Not a bit of
beg-yer-pardon in it. It struck cold. 'I leave his case in the hands of
twelve true men,' says Freddy Tarlton here, and he sits down."

"So they said he must walk the air?" suggested Pierre.

"Without leavin' their seats," someone added instantly.

"So. But that speech of 'Freddy Tarlton here'?" "It was worth twelve
drinks to me, no more, and nothing at all to Malachi," said Tarlton.
"When I said I'd come to him to-night to cheer him up, he said he'd
rather sleep. The missionary, too, he can make nothing of him. 'I don't
need anyone here,' he says. 'I eat this off my own plate.' And that's the
end of Malachi."

"Because there was no one to speak for him--eh? Well, well."

"If he'd said anything that'd justify the thing--make it a manslaughter
business or a quarrel--then! But no, not a word, up or down, high or low.
Exit Malachi!" rejoined Freddy Tarlton sorrowfully. "I wish he'd given me
half a chance."

"I wish I'd been there," said Pierre, taking a match from Gohawk, and
lighting his cigarette.

"To hear his speech?" asked Gohawk, nodding towards Tarlton.

"To tell the truth about it all. T'sh, you bats, you sheep, what have you
in your skulls? When a man will not speak, will not lie to gain a case
for his lawyer--or save himself, there is something! Now, listen to me,
and I will tell you the story of Malachi. Then you shall judge.

"I never saw such a face as that girl had down there at Lachine in
Quebec. I knew her when she was a child, and I knew Malachi when he was
on the river with the rafts, the foreman of a gang. He had a look all
open then as the sun--yes. Happy? Yes, as happy as a man ought to be.
Well, the mother of the child died, and Malachi alone was left to take
care of the little Norice. He left the river and went to work in the
mills, so that he might be with the child; and when he got to be foreman
there he used to bring her to the mill. He had a basket swung for her
just inside the mill not far from him, right where she was in the shade;
but if she stretched out her hand it would be in the sun. I've seen a
hundred men turn to look at her where she swung, singing to herself, and
then chuckle to themselves afterwards as they worked.

"When Trevoor, the owner, come one day, and saw her, he swore, and was
going to sack Malachi, but the child--that little Norice--leaned over the
basket, and offered him an apple. He looked for a minute, then he reached
up, took the apple, turned round, and went out of the mill without a
word--so. Next month when he come he walked straight to her, and handed
up to her a box of toys and a silver whistle. 'That's to call me when you
want me,' he said, as he put the whistle to her lips, and then he put the
gold string of it round her neck. She was a wise little thing, that
Norice, and noticed things. I don't believe that Trevoor or Malachi ever
knew how sweet was the smell of the fresh sawdust till she held it to
their noses; and it was she that had the saws--all sizes--start one after
the other, making so strange a tune. She made up a little song about
fairies and others to sing to that tune. And no one ever thought much
about Indian Island, off beyond the sweating, baking piles of lumber, and
the blistering logs and timbers in the bay, till she told stories about
it. Sure enough, when you saw the shut doors and open windows of those
empty houses, all white without in the sun and dark within, and not a
human to be seen, you could believe almost anything. You can think how
proud Malachi was. She used to get plenty of presents from the men who
had no wives or children to care for--little silver and gold things as
well as others. She was fond of them, but no, not vain. She loved the
gold and silver for their own sake."

Pierre paused. "I knew a youngster once," said Gohawk, "that--"

Pierre waved his hand. "I am not through, M'sieu' Gohawk the talker.
Years went on. Now she took care of the house of Malachi. She wore the
whistle that Trevoor gave her. He kept saying to her still, 'If ever you
need me, little Norice, blow it, and I will come.' He was droll, that
M'sieu' Trevoor, at times. Well, she did not blow, but still he used to
come every year, and always brought her something. One year he brought
his nephew, a young fellow of about twenty-three. She did not whistle for
him either, but he kept on coming. That was the beginning of 'Exit
Malachi.' The man was clever and bad, the girl believing and good. He was
young, but he knew how to win a woman's heart. When that is done, there
is nothing more to do--she is yours for good or evil; and if a man,
through a woman's love, makes her to sin, even his mother cannot be proud
of him-no. But the man married Norice, and took her away to Madison, down
in Wisconsin. Malachi was left alone--Malachi and Trevoor, for Trevoor
felt towards her as a father.

"Alors, sorrow come to the girl, for her husband began to play cards and
to drink, and he lost much money. There was the trouble--the two
together. They lived in a hotel. One day a lady missed a diamond necklace
from her room. Norice had been with her the evening before. Norice come
into her own room the next afternoon, and found detectives searching. In
her own jewel-case, which was tucked away in the pocket of an old dress,
was found the necklace. She was arrested. She said nothing--for she
waited for her husband, who was out of town that day. He only come in
time to see her in court next morning. She did not deny anything; she was
quiet, like Malachi. The man played his part well. He had hid the
necklace where he thought it would be safe, but when it was found, he let
the wife take the blame--a little innocent thing. People were sorry for
them both. She was sent to jail. Her father was away in the Rocky
Mountains, and he did not hear; Trevoor was in Europe. The husband got a
divorce, and was gone. Norice was in jail for over a year, and then she
was set free, for her health went bad, and her mind was going, they
thought. She did not know till she come out that she was divorced. Then
she nearly died. But then Trevoor come."

Freddy Tarlton's hands were cold with excitement, and his fingers
trembled so he could hardly light a cigar.

"Go on, go on, Pierre," he said huskily.

"Trevoor said to her--he told me this himself--'Why did you not whistle
for me, Norice? A word would have brought me from Europe.' 'No one could
help me, no one at all,' she answered. Then Trevoor said, 'I know who did
it, for he has robbed me too.' She sank in a heap on the floor. 'I could
have borne it and anything for him, if he hadn't divorced me,' she said.
Then they cleared her name before the world. But where was the man? No
one knew. At last Malachi, in the Rocky Mountains, heard of her trouble,
for Norice wrote to him, but told him not to do the man any harm, if he
ever found him--ah, a woman, a woman! . . . But Malachi met the man one
day at Guidon Hill, and shot him in the street."

"Fargo the sheriff!" roared half-a-dozen voices. "Yes; he had changed his
name, had come up here, and because he was clever and spent money, and
had a pull on someone,--got it at cards perhaps,--he was made sheriff."

"In God's name, why didn't Malachi speak?" said Tarlton; "why didn't he
tell me this?"

"Because he and I had our own plans. The one evidence he wanted was
Norice. If she would come to him in his danger, and in spite of his
killing the man, good. If not, then he would die. Well, I went to find
her and fetch her. I found her. There was no way to send word, so we had
to come on as fast as we could. We have come just in time."

"Do you mean to say, Pierre, that she's here?" said Gohawk.

Pierre waved his hand emphatically. "And so we came on with a pardon."

Every man was on his feet, every man's tongue was loosed, and each
ordered liquor for Pierre, and asked him where the girl was. Freddy
Tarlton wrung his hand, and called a boy to go to his rooms and bring
three bottles of wine, which he had kept for two years, to drink when he
had won his first big case.

Gohawk was importunate. "Where is the girl, Pierre?" he urged.

"Such a fool as you are, Gohawk! She is with her father."

A half-hour later, in a large sitting-room, Freddy Tarlton was making
eloquent toasts over the wine. As they all stood drinking to Pierre, the
door opened from the hall-way, and Malachi stood before them. At his
shoulder was a face, wistful, worn, yet with a kind of happiness too; and
the eyes had depths which any man might be glad to drown his heart in.

Malachi stood still, not speaking, and an awe or awkwardness fell on the
group at the table.

But Norice stepped forward a little, and said: "May we come in?"

In an instant Freddy Tarlton was by her side, and had her by the hand,
her and her father, drawing them over.

His ardent, admiring look gave Norice thought for many a day.

And that night Pierre made an accurate prophecy.


THE LAKE OF THE GREAT SLAVE

When Tybalt the tale-gatherer asked why it was so called, Pierre said:
"Because of the Great Slave;" and then paused.

Tybalt did not hurry Pierre, knowing his whims. If he wished to tell, he
would in his own time; if not, nothing could draw it from him. It was
nearly an hour before Pierre, eased off from the puzzle he was solving
with bits of paper and obliged Tybalt. He began as if they had been
speaking the moment before:

"They have said it is legend, but I know better. I have seen the records
of the Company, and it is all there. I was at Fort O'Glory once, and in a
box two hundred years old the factor and I found it. There were other
papers, and some of them had large red seals, and a name scrawled along
the end of the page."

Pierre shook his head, as if in contented musing. He was a born
story-teller. Tybalt was aching with interest, for he scented a thing of
note.

"How did any of those papers, signed with a scrawl, begin?" he asked.

"'To our dearly-beloved,' or something like that," answered Pierre.
"There were letters also. Two of them were full of harsh words, and these
were signed with the scrawl."

"What was that scrawl?" asked Tybalt.

Pierre stooped to the sand, and wrote two words with his finger. "Like
that," he answered.

Tybalt looked intently for an instant, and then drew a long breath.
"Charles Rex," he said, hardly above his breath.

Pierre gave him a suggestive sidelong glance. "That name was droll, eh?"

Tybalt's blood was tingling with the joy of discovery. "It is a great
name," he said shortly.

"The Slave was great--the Indians said so at the last."

"But that was not the name of the Slave?"

"Mais non. Who said so! Charles Rex--like that! was the man who wrote the
letters."

"To the Great Slave?"

Pierre made a gesture of impatience. "Very sure."

"Where are those letters now?"

"With the Governor of the Company." Tybalt cut the tobacco for his pipe
savagely. "You'd have liked one of those papers?" asked Pierre
provokingly.

"I'd give five hundred dollars for one," broke out Tybalt.

Pierre lifted his eyebrows. "T'sh, what's the good of five hundred
dollars up here? What would you do with a letter like that?"

Tybalt laughed with a touch of irony, for Pierre was clearly "rubbing it
in."

"Perhaps for a book?" gently asked Pierre.

"Yes, if you like."

"It is a pity. But there is a way."

"How?"

"Put me in the book. Then--"

"How does that touch the case?"

Pierre shrugged a shoulder gently, for he thought Tybalt was unusually
obtuse. Tybalt thought so himself before the episode ended.

"Go on," he said, with clouded brow, but interested eye. Then, as if with
sudden thought: "To whom were the letters addressed, Pierre?"

"Wait!" was the reply. "One letter said: 'Good cousin, We are evermore
glad to have thee and thy most excelling mistress near us. So, fail us
not at our cheerful doings, yonder at Highgate.' Another--a year
after--said: 'Cousin, for the sweetening of our mind, get thee gone into
some distant corner of our pasturage--the farthest doth please us most.
We would not have thee on foreign ground, for we bear no ill-will to our
brother princes, and yet we would not have thee near our garden of good
loyal souls, for thou hast a rebel heart and a tongue of divers tunes.
Thou lovest not the good old song of duty to thy prince. Obeying us, thy
lady shall keep thine estates untouched; failing obedience, thou wilt
make more than thy prince unhappy. Fare thee well.' That was the way of
two letters," said Pierre.

"How do you remember so?"

Pierre shrugged a shoulder again. "It is easy with things like that."

"But word for word?"

"I learned it word for word."

"Now for the story of the Lake--if you won't tell me the name of the
man."

"The name afterwards-perhaps. Well, he came to that farthest corner of
the pasturage, to the Hudson's Bay country, two hundred years ago. What
do you think? Was he so sick of all, that he would go so far he could
never get back? Maybe those 'cheerful doings' at Highgate, eh? And the
lady--who can tell?"

Tybalt seized Pierre's arm. "You know more. Damnation, can't you see I'm
on needles to hear? Was there anything in the letters about the lady?
Anything more than you've told?"

Pierre liked no man's hand on him. He glanced down at the eager fingers,
and said coldly:

"You are a great man; you can tell a story in many ways, but I in one way
alone, and that is my way--mais oui!"

"Very well, take your own time."

"Bien. I got the story from two heads. If you hear a thing like that from
Indians, you call it 'legend'; if from the Company's papers, you call it
'history.' Well, in this there is not much difference. The papers tell
precise the facts; the legend gives the feeling, is more true. How can
you judge the facts if you don't know the feeling? No! what is bad turns
good sometimes, when you know the how, the feeling, the place. Well, this
story of the Great Slave--eh? . . . There is a race of Indians in the far
north who have hair so brown like yours, m'sieu', and eyes no darker. It
is said they are of those that lived at the Pole, before the sea swamped
the Isthmus, and swallowed up so many islands. So. In those days the fair
race came to the south for the first time, that is, far below the Circle.
They had their women with them. I have seen those of to-day: fine and
tall, with breasts like apples, and a cheek to tempt a man like you,
m'sieu'; no grease in the hair--no, M'sieu' Tybalt."

Tybalt sat moveless under the obvious irony, but his eyes were fixed
intently on Pierre, his mind ever travelling far ahead of the tale.

"Alors: the 'good cousin' of Charles Rex, he made a journey with two men
to the Far-off Metal River, and one day this tribe from the north come on
his camp. It was summer, and they were camping in the Valley of the Young
Moon, more sweet, they say, than any in the north. The Indians cornered
them. There was a fight, and one of the Company's men was killed, and
five of the other. But when the king of the people of the Pole saw that
the great man was fair of face, he called for the fight to stop.

"There was a big talk all by signs, and the king said for the great man
to come and be one with them, for they liked his fair face--their
forefathers were fair like him. He should have the noblest of their women
for his wife, and be a prince among them. He would not go: so they drew
away again and fought. A stone-axe brought the great man to the ground.
He was stunned, not killed. Then the other man gave up, and said he would
be one of them if they would take him. They would have killed him but for
one of their women. She said that he should live to tell them tales of
the south country and the strange people, when they came again to their
camp-fires. So they let him live, and he was one of them. But the chief
man, because he was stubborn and scorned them, and had killed the son of
their king in the fight, they made a slave, and carried him north a
captive, till they came to this lake--the Lake of the Great Slave.

"In all ways they tried him, but he would not yield, neither to wear
their dress nor to worship their gods. He was robbed of his clothes, of
his gold-handled dagger, his belt of silk and silver, his carbine with
rich chasing, and all, and he was among them almost naked,--it was
summer, as I said, yet defying them. He was taller by a head than any of
them, and his white skin rippled in the sun like soft steel."

Tybalt was inclined to ask Pierre how he knew all this, but he held his
peace. Pierre, as if divining his thoughts, continued:

"You ask how I know these things. Very good: there are the legends, and
there were the papers of the Company. The Indians tried every way, but it
was no use; he would have nothing to say to them. At last they came to
this lake. Now something great occurred. The woman who had been the wife
of the king's dead son, her heart went out in love of the Great Slave;
but he never looked at her. One day there were great sports, for it was
the feast of the Red Star. The young men did feats of strength, here on
this ground where we sit. The king's wife called out for the Great Slave
to measure strength with them all. He would not stir. The king commanded
him; still he would not, but stood among them silent and looking far away
over their heads. At last, two young men of good height and bone threw
arrows at his bare breast. The blood came in spots. Then he gave a cry
through his beard, and was on them like a lion. He caught them, one in
each arm, swung them from the ground, and brought their heads together
with a crash, breaking their skulls, and dropped them at his feet.
Catching up a long spear, he waited for the rest. But they did not come,
for, with a loud voice, the king told them to fall back, and went and
felt the bodies of the men. One of them was dead; the other was his
second son--he would live.

"'It is a great deed,' said the king, 'for these were no children, but
strong men.'

"Then again he offered the Great Slave women to marry, and fifty tents of
deerskin for the making of a village. But the Great Slave said no, and
asked to be sent back to Fort O'Glory.

"The king refused. But that night, as he slept in his tent, the
girl-widow came to him, waked him, and told him to follow her. He came
forth, and she led him softly through the silent camp to that wood which
we see over there. He told her she need not go on. Without a word, she
reached over and kissed him on the breast. Then he understood. He told
her that she could not come with him, for there was that lady in
England--his wife, eh? But never mind, that will come. He was too great
to save his life, or be free at the price. Some are born that way. They
have their own commandments, and they keep them.

"He told her that she must go back. She gave a little cry, and sank down
at his feet, saying that her life would be in danger if she went back.

"Then he told her to come, for it was in his mind to bring her to Fort
O'Glory, where she could marry an Indian there. But now she would not go
with him, and turned towards the village. A woman is a strange
creature--yes, like that! He refused to go and leave her. She was in
danger, and he would share it, whatever it might be. So, though she
prayed him not, he went back with her; and when she saw that he would go
in spite of all, she was glad: which is like a woman.

"When he entered the tent again, he guessed her danger, for he stepped
over the bodies of two dead men. She had killed them. As she turned at
the door to go to her own tent, another woman faced her. It was the wife
of the king, who had suspected, and had now found out. Who can tell what
it was? Jealousy, perhaps. The Great Slave could tell, maybe, if he could
speak, for a man always knows when a woman sets him high. Anyhow, that
was the way it stood. In a moment the girl was marched back to her tent,
and all the camp heard a wicked lie of the widow of the king's son.

"To it there was an end after the way of their laws.

"The woman should die by fire, and the man, as the king might will. So
there was a great gathering in the place where we are, and the king sat
against that big white stone, which is now as it was then. Silence was
called, and they brought the girl-widow forth. The king spoke:

"'Thou who hadst a prince for thy husband, didst go in the night to the
tent of the slave who killed thy husband; whereby thou also becamest a
slave, and didst shame the greatness which was given thee. Thou shalt
die, as has been set in our laws.'

"The girl-widow rose, and spoke. 'I did not know, O king, that he whom
thou madest a slave slew my husband, the prince of our people, and thy
son. That was not told me. But had I known it, still would I have set him
free, for thy son was killed in fair battle, and this man deserves not
slavery or torture. I did seek the tent of the Great Slave, and it was to
set him free--no more. For that did I go, and, for the rest, my soul is
open to the Spirit Who Sees. I have done naught, and never did, nor ever
will, that might shame a king, or the daughter of a king, or the wife of
a king, or a woman. If to set a great captive free is death for me, then
am I ready. I will answer all pure women in the far Camp of the Great
Fires without fear. There is no more, O king, that I may say, but this:
she who dies by fire, being of noble blood, may choose who shall light
the faggots--is it not so?'

"Then the king replied: 'It is so. Such is our law.'

"There was counselling between the king and his oldest men, and so long
were they handling the matter backwards and forwards that it seemed she
might go free. But the king's wife, seeing, came and spoke to the king
and the others, crying out for the honour of her dead son; so that in a
moment of anger they all cried out for death.

"When the king said again to the girl that she must die by fire, she
answered: 'It is as the gods will. But it is so, as I said, that I may
choose who shall light the fires?'

"The king answered yes, and asked her whom she chose. She pointed towards
the Great Slave. And all, even the king and his councillors, wondered,
for they knew little of the heart of women. What is a man with a matter
like that? Nothing--nothing at all. They would have set this for
punishment: that she should ask for it was beyond them. Yes, even the
king's wife--it was beyond her. But the girl herself, see you, was it not
this way?--If she died by the hand of him she loved, then it would be
easy, for she could forget the pain, in the thought that his heart would
ache for her, and that at the very last he might care, and she should see
it. She was great in her way also--that girl, two hundred years ago.

"Alors, they led her a little distance off,--there is the spot, where you
see the ground heave a little, and the Great Slave was brought up. The
king told him why the girl was to die. He went like stone, looking,
looking at them. He knew that the girl's heart was like a little child's,
and the shame and cruelty of the thing froze him silent for a minute, and
the colour flew from his face to here and there on his body, as a flame
on marble. The cords began to beat and throb in his neck and on his
forehead, and his eyes gave out fire like flint on an arrow-head.

"Then he began to talk. He could not say much, for he knew so little of
their language. But it was 'No!' every other word. 'No--no--no--no!' the
words ringing from his chest. 'She is good!' he said. 'The other-no!' and
he made a motion with his hand. 'She must not die--no! Evil? It is a lie!
I will kill each man that says it, one by one, if he dares come forth.
She tried to save me--well?' Then he made them know that he was of high
place in a far country, and that a man like him would not tell a lie.
That pleased the king, for he was proud, and he saw that the Slave was of
better stuff than himself. Besides, the king was a brave man, and he had
strength, and more than once he had laid his hand on the chest of the
other, as one might on a grand animal. Perhaps, even then, they might
have spared the girl was it not for the queen. She would not hear of it.
Then they tried the Great Slave, and he was found guilty. The queen sent
him word to beg for pardon. So he stood out and spoke to the queen. She
sat up straight, with pride in her eyes, for was it not a great prince,
as she thought, asking? But a cloud fell on her face, for he begged the
girl's life. Since there must be death, let him die, and die by fire in
her place! It was then two women cried out: the poor girl for joy--not at
the thought that her life would be saved, but because she thought the man
loved her now, or he would not offer to die for her; and the queen for
hate, because she thought the same. You can guess the rest: they were
both to die, though the king was sorry for the man.

"The king's speaker stood out and asked them if they had anything to say.
The girl stepped forward, her face without any fear, but a kind of noble
pride in it, and said: 'I am ready, O king.'

"The Great Slave bowed his head, and was thinking much. They asked him
again, and he waved his hand at them. The king spoke up in anger, and
then he smiled and said: 'O king, I am not ready; if I die, I die.' Then
he fell to thinking again. But once more the king spoke: 'Thou shalt
surely die, but not by fire, nor now; nor till we have come to our great
camp in our own country. There thou shalt die. But the woman shall die at
the going down of the sun. She shall die by fire, and thou shalt light
the faggots for the burning.'

"The Great Slave said he would not do it, not though he should die a
hundred deaths. Then the king said that it was the woman's right to
choose who should start the fire, and he had given his word, which should
not be broken.

"When the Great Slave heard this he was wild for a little, and then he
guessed altogether what was in the girl's mind. Was not this the true
thing in her, the very truest? Mais oui! That was what she wished--to die
by his hand rather than by any other; and something troubled his breast,
and a cloud came in his eyes, so that for a moment he could not see. He
looked at the girl, so serious, eye to eye. Perhaps she understood. So,
after a time, he got calm as the farthest light in the sky, his face
shining among them all with a look none could read. He sat down, and
wrote upon pieces of bark with a spear-point--those bits of bark I have
seen also at Fort O'Glory. He pierced them through with dried strings of
the slippery-elm tree, and with the king's consent gave them to the
Company's man, who had become one of the people, telling him, if ever he
was free, or could send them to the Company, he must do so. The man
promised, and shame came upon him that he had let the other suffer alone;
and he said he was willing to fight and die if the Great Slave gave the
word. But he would not; and he urged that it was right for the man to
save his life. For himself, no. It could never be; and if he must die, he
must die.

"You see, a great man must always live alone and die alone, when there
are only such people about him. So, now that the letters were written, he
sat upon the ground and thought, looking often towards the girl, who was
placed apart, with guards near. The king sat thinking also. He could not
guess why the Great Slave should give the letters now, since he was not
yet to die, nor could the Company's man show a reason when the king asked
him. So the king waited, and told the guards to see that the Great Slave
did not kill himself.

"But the queen wanted the death of the girl, and was glad beyond telling
that the Slave must light the faggots. She was glad when she saw the
young braves bring a long sapling from the forest, and, digging a hole,
put it stoutly in the ground, and fetch wood, and heap it about.

"The Great Slave noted that the bark of the sapling had not been
stripped, and more than once he measured, with his eye, the space between
the stake and the shores of the Lake: he did this most private, so that
no one saw but the girl.

"At last the time was come. The Lake was all rose and gold out there in
the west, and the water so still so still. The cool, moist scent of the
leaves and grass came out from the woods and up from the plain, and the
world was so full of content that a man's heart could cry out, even as
now, while we look--eh, is it not good? See the deer drinking on the
other shore there!" Suddenly Pierre became silent, as if he had forgotten
the story altogether. Tybalt was impatient, but he did not speak. He took
a twig, and in the sand he wrote "Charles Rex." Pierre glanced down and
saw it.

"There was beating of the little drums," he continued, "and the crying of
the king's speaker; and soon all was ready, and the people gathered at a
distance, and the king and the queen, and the chief men nearer; and the
girl was brought forth.

"As they led her past the Great Slave, she looked into his eyes, and
afterwards her heart was glad, for she knew that at the last he would be
near her, and that his hand should light the fires. Two men tied her to
the stake. Then the king's man cried out again, telling of her crime, and
calling for her death. The Great Slave was brought near. No one knew that
the palms of his hands had been rubbed in the sand for a purpose. When he
was brought beside the stake, a torch was given him by his guards. He
looked at the girl, and she smiled at him, and said: 'Good-bye. Forgive.
I die not afraid, and happy.'

"He did not answer, but stooped and lit the sticks here and there. All at
once he snatched a burning stick, and it and the torch he thrust, like
lightning, in the faces of his guards, blinding them. Then he sprang to
the stake, and, with a huge pull, tore it from the ground, girl and all,
and rushed to the shore of the Lake, with her tied so in his arms.

"He had been so swift that, at first, no one stirred. He reached the
shore, rushed into the water, dragging a boat out with one hand as he did
so, and, putting the girl in, seized a paddle and was away with a start.
A few strokes, and then he stopped, picked up a hatchet that was in the
boat with many spears, and freed the girl. Then he paddled on, trusting,
with a small hope, that through his great strength he could keep ahead
till darkness came, and then, in the gloom, they might escape. The girl
also seized an oar, and the canoe--the king's own canoe--came on like a
swallow.

"But the tribe was after them in fifty canoes, some coming straight
along, some spreading out to close in later. It was no equal game, for
these people were so quick and strong with the oars, and they were a
hundred or more to two. There could be but one end. It was what the Great
Slave had looked for: to fight till the last breath. He should fight for
the woman who had risked all for him--just a common woman of the north,
but it seemed good to lose his life for her; and she would be happy to
die with him.

"So they stood side by side when the spears and arrows fell round them,
and they gave death and wounds for wounds in their own bodies. When, at
last, the Indians climbed into the canoe, the Great Slave was dead of
many wounds, and the woman, all gashed, lay with her lips to his wet, red
cheek. She smiled as they dragged her away; and her soul hurried after
his to the Camp of the Great Fires."

It was long before Tybalt spoke, but at last he said: "If I could but tell
it as you have told it to me, Pierre!" Pierre answered: "Tell it with
your tongue, and this shall be nothing to it, for what am I? What English
have I, a gipsy of the snows? But do not write it, mais non! Writing
wanders from the matter. The eyes, and the tongue, and the time, that is
the thing. But in a book--it will sound all cold and thin. It is for the
north, for the camp-fire, for the big talk before a man rolls into his
blanket, and is at peace. No, no writing, monsieur. Speak it everywhere
with your tongue."

"And so I would, were my tongue as yours. Pierre, tell me more about the
letters at Fort O'Glory. You know his name--what was it?"

"You said five hundred dollars for one of those letters. Is it not?"

"Yes." Tybalt had a new hope.

"T'sh! What do I want of five hundred dollars! But, here, answer me a
question: Was the lady--his wife, she that was left in England--a good
woman? Answer me out of your own sense, and from my story. If you say
right you shall have a letter--one that I have by me."

Tybalt's heart leapt into his throat. After a little he said huskily:
"She was a good woman--he believed her that, and so shall I."

"You think he could not have been so great unless, eh? And that 'Charles
Rex,' what of him?"

"What good can it do to call him bad now?" Without a word, Pierre drew
from a leather wallet a letter, and, by the light of the fast-setting
sun, Tybalt read it, then read it again, and yet again.

"Poor soul! poor lady!" he said. "Was ever such another letter written to
any man? And it came too late; this, with the king's recall, came too
late!"

"So--so. He died out there where that wild duck flies--a Great Slave.
Years after, the Company's man brought word of all."

Tybalt was looking at the name on the outside of the letter.

"How do they call that name?" asked Pierre. "It is like none I've
seen--no."

Tybalt shook his head sorrowfully, and did not answer.


THE RED PATROL

St. Augustine's, Canterbury, had given him its licentiate's hood, the
Bishop of Rupert's Land had ordained him, and the North had swallowed him
up. He had gone forth with surplice, stole, hood, a sermon-case, the
prayer-book, and that other Book of all. Indian camps, trappers' huts,
and Company's posts had given him hospitality, and had heard him with
patience and consideration. At first he wore the surplice, stole, and
hood, took the eastward position, and intoned the service, and no man
said him nay, but watched him curiously and was sorrowful--he was so
youthful, clear of eye, and bent on doing heroical things.

But little by little there came a change. The hood was left behind at
Fort O'Glory, where it provoked the derision of the Methodist missionary
who followed him; the sermon-case stayed at Fort O'Battle; and at last
the surplice itself was put by at the Company's post at Yellow Quill. He
was too excited and in earnest at first to see the effect of his
ministrations, but there came slowly over him the knowledge that he was
talking into space. He felt something returning on him out of the air
into which he talked, and buffeting him. It was the Spirit of the North,
in which lives the terror, the large heart of things, the soul of the
past. He awoke to his inadequacy, to the fact that all these men to whom
he talked, listened, and only listened, and treated him with a gentleness
which was almost pity--as one might a woman. He had talked doctrine, the
Church, the sacraments, and at Fort O'Battle he faced definitely the
futility of his work. What was to blame--the Church--religion--himself?

It was at Fort O'Battle that he met Pierre, and heard a voice say over
his shoulder, as he walked out into the icy dusk: "The voice of one
crying in the wilderness . . . and he had sackcloth about his loins, and
his food was locusts and wild honey."

He turned to see Pierre, who in the large room of the Post had sat and
watched him as he prayed and preached. He had remarked the keen, curious
eye, the musing look, the habitual disdain at the lips. It had all
touched him, confused him; and now he had a kind of anger.

"You know it so well, why don't you preach yourself?" he said feverishly.

"I have been preaching all my life," Pierre answered drily.

"The devil's games: cards and law-breaking; and you sneer at men who try
to bring lost sheep into the fold."

"The fold of the Church--yes, I understand all that," Pierre answered. "I
have heard you and the priests of my father's Church talk. Which is
right? But as for me, I am a missionary. Cards, law-breaking--these are
what I have done; but these are not what I have preached."

"What have you preached?" asked the other, walking on into the
fast-gathering night, beyond the Post and the Indian lodges, into the
wastes where frost and silence lived.

Pierre waved his hand towards space. "This," he said suggestively.

"What's this?" asked the other fretfully.

"The thing you feel round you here."

"I feel the cold," was the petulant reply.

"I feel the immense, the far off," said Pierre slowly.

The other did not understand as yet. "You've learned big words," he said
disdainfully.

"No; big things," rejoined Pierre sharply--"a few."

"Let me hear you preach them," half snarled Sherburne.

"You will not like to hear them--no."

"I'm not likely to think about them one way or another," was the
contemptuous reply.

Pierre's eyes half closed. The young, impetuous half-baked college man.
To set his little knowledge against his own studious vagabondage! At that
instant he determined to play a game and win; to turn this man into a
vagabond also; to see John the Baptist become a Bedouin. He saw the
doubt, the uncertainty, the shattered vanity in the youth's mind, the
missionary's half retreat from his cause. A crisis was at hand. The youth
was fretful with his great theme, instead of being severe upon himself.
For days and days Pierre's presence had acted on Sherburne silently but
forcibly. He had listened to the vagabond's philosophy, and knew that it
was of a deeper--so much deeper--knowledge of life than he himself
possessed, and he knew also that it was terribly true; he was not wise
enough to see that it was only true in part. The influence had been
insidious, delicate, cunning, and he himself was only "a voice crying in
the wilderness," without the simple creed of that voice. He knew that the
Methodist missionary was believed in more, if less liked, than himself.
Pierre would work now with all the latent devilry of his nature to unseat
the man from his saddle.

"You have missed the great thing, alors, though you have been up here two
years," he said. "You do not feel, you do not know. What good have you
done? Who has got on his knees and changed his life because of you? Who
has told his beads or longed for the Mass because of you? Tell me, who
has ever said, 'You have showed me how to live'? Even the women, though
they cry sometimes when you sing-song the prayers, go on just the same
when the little 'bless-you' is over. Why? Most of them know a better
thing than you tell them. Here is the truth: you are little--eh, so very
little. You never lied--direct; you never stole the waters that are
sweet; you never knew the big dreams that come with wine in the dead of
night; you never swore at your own soul and heard it laugh back at you;
you never put your face in the breast of a woman--do not look so wild at
me!--you never had a child; you never saw the world and yourself through
the doors of real life. You never have said, 'I am tired; I am
sick of all; I have seen all.' You have never felt what came
after--understanding. Chut, your talk is for children--and missionaries.
You are a prophet without a call, you are a leader without a man to lead,
you are less than a child up here. For here the children feel a peace in
their blood when the stars come out, and a joy in their brains when the
dawn comes up and reaches a yellow hand to the Pole, and the west wind
shouts at them. Holy Mother! we in the far north, we feel things, for all
the great souls of the dead are up there at the Pole in the pleasant
land, and we have seen the Scarlet Hunter and the Kimash Hills. You have
seen nothing. You have only heard, and because, like a child, you have
never sinned, you come and preach to us!"

The night was folding down fast, all the stars were shooting out into
their places, and in the north the white lights of the aurora were flying
to and fro. Pierre had spoken with a slow force and precision, yet, as he
went on, his eyes almost became fixed on those shifting flames, and a
deep look came into them, as he was moved by his own eloquence. Never in
his life had he made so long a speech at once. He paused, and then said
suddenly: "Come, let us run."

He broke into a long, sliding trot, and Sherburne did the same. With
their arms gathered to their sides they ran for quite two miles without a
word, until the heavy breathing of the clergyman brought Pierre up
suddenly.

"You do not run well," he said; "you do not run with the whole body. You
know so little. Did you ever think how much such men as Jacques Parfaite
know? The earth they read like a book, the sky like an animal's ways, and
a man's face like--like the writing on the wall."

"Like the writing on the wall," said Sherburne, musing; for, under the
other's influence, his petulance was gone. He knew that he was not a part
of this life, that he was ignorant of it; of, indeed, all that was vital
in it and in men and women.

"I think you began this too soon. You should have waited; then you might
have done good. But here we are wiser than you. You have no message--no
real message--to give us; down in your heart you are not even sure of
yourself."

Sherburne sighed. "I'm of no use," he said. "I'll get out. I'm no good at
all."

Pierre's eyes glistened. He remembered how, the day before, this youth
had said hot words about his card-playing; had called him--in effect--a
thief; had treated him as an inferior, as became one who was of St.
Augustine's, Canterbury.

"It is the great thing to be free," Pierre said, "that no man shall look
for this or that of you. Just to do as far as you feel, as far as you are
sure--that is the best. In this you are not sure--no. Hein, is it not?"

Sherburne did not answer. Anger, distrust, wretchedness, the spirit of
the alien, loneliness, were alive in him. The magnetism of this deep
penetrating man, possessed of a devil, was on him, and in spite of every
reasonable instinct he turned to him for companionship.

"It's been a failure," he burst out, "and I'm sick of it--sick of it; but
I can't give it up."

Pierre said nothing. They had come to what seemed a vast semicircle of
ice and snow, a huge amphitheatre in the plains. It was wonderful: a
great round wall on which the northern lights played, into which the
stars peered. It was open towards the north, and in one side was a
fissure shaped like a Gothic arch. Pierre pointed to it, and they did not
speak till they had passed through it. Like great seats the steppes of
snow ranged round, and in the centre was a kind of plateau of ice, as it
might seem a stage or an altar. To the north there was a great opening,
the lost arc of the circle, through which the mystery of the Pole swept
in and out, or brooded there where no man may question it. Pierre stood
and looked. Time and again he had been here, and had asked the same
question: Who had ever sat on those frozen benches and looked down at the
drama on that stage below? Who played the parts? Was it a farce or a
sacrifice? To him had been given the sorrow of imagination, and he
wondered and wondered. Or did they come still--those strange people,
whoever they were--and watch ghostly gladiators at their fatal sport? If
they came, when was it? Perhaps they were there now unseen. In spite of
himself he shuddered. Who was the keeper of the house?

Through his mind there ran--pregnant to him for the first tine--a chanson
of the Scarlet Hunter, the Red Patrol, who guarded the sleepers in the
Kimash Hills against the time they should awake and possess the land once
more: the friend of the lost, the lover of the vagabond, and of all who
had no home:

       "Strangers come to the outer walls--
         (Why do the sleepers stir?)
        Strangers enter the Judgment House--
         (Why do the sleepers sigh?)
        Slow they rise in their judgment seats,
        Sieve and measure the naked souls,
        Then with a blessing return to sleep--
         (Quiet the Judgment House.)
        Lone and sick are the vagrant souls--
         (When shall the world come home?)"

He reflected upon the words, and a feeling of awe came over him, for he
had been in the White Valley and had seen the Scarlet Hunter. But there
came at once also a sinister desire to play a game for this man's
life-work here. He knew that the other was ready for any wild move; there
was upon him the sense of failure and disgust; he was acted on by the
magic of the night, the terrible delight of the scene, and that might be
turned to advantage.

He said: "Am I not right? There is something in the world greater than
the creeds and the book of the Mass. To be free and to enjoy, that is the
thing. Never before have you felt what you feel here now. And I will show
you more. I will teach you how to know, I will lead you through all the
north and make you to understand the big things of life. Then, when you
have known, you can return if you will. But now--see: I will tell you
what I will do. Here on this great platform we will play a game of cards.
There is a man whose life I can ruin. If you win I promise to leave him
safe; and to go out of the far north for ever, to go back to Quebec"--he
had a kind of gaming fever in his veins. "If I win, you give up the
Church, leaving behind the prayerbook, the Bible and all, coming with me
to do what I shall tell you, for the passing of twelve moons. It is a
great stake--will you play it? Come"--he leaned forward, looking into the
other's face--"will you play it? They drew lots--those people in the
Bible. We will draw lots, and see, eh?--and see?"

"I accept the stake," said Sherburne, with a little gasp.

Without a word they went upon that platform, shaped like an altar, and
Pierre at once drew out a pack of cards, shuffling them with his mittened
hands. Then he knelt down and said, as he laid out the cards one by one
till there were thirty: "Whoever gets the ace of hearts first,
wins--hein?"

Sherburne nodded and knelt also. The cards lay back upwards in three
rows. For a moment neither stirred. The white, metallic stars saw it, the
small crescent moon beheld it, and the deep wonder of night made it
strange and dreadful. Once or twice Sherburne looked round as though he
felt others present, and once Pierre looked out to the wide portals, as
though he saw some one entering. But there was nothing to the
eye--nothing. Presently Pierre said: "Begin."

The other drew a card, then Pierre drew one, then the other, then Pierre
again; and so on. How slow the game was! Neither hurried, but both,
kneeling, looked and looked at the card long before drawing and turning
it over. The stake was weighty, and Pierre loved the game more than he
cared about the stake. Sherburne cared nothing about the game, but all
his soul seemed set upon the hazard. There was not a sound out of the
night, nothing stirring but the Spirit of the North. Twenty, twenty-five
cards were drawn, and then Pierre paused.

"In a minute all will be settled," he said. "Will you go on, or will you
pause?"

But Sherburne had got the madness of chance in his veins now, and he
said: "Quick, quick, go on!" Pierre drew, but the great card held back.
Sherburne drew, then Pierre again. There were three left. Sherburne's
face was as white as the snow around him. His mouth was open, and a
little white cloud of frosted breath came out. His hand hungered for the
card, drew back, then seized it. A moan broke from him. Then Pierre, with
a little weird laugh, reached out and turned over the ace of hearts!

They both stood up. Pierre put the cards in his pocket.

"You have lost," he said.

Sherburne threw back his head with a reckless laugh. The laugh seemed to
echo and echo through the amphitheatre, and then from the frozen seats,
the hillocks of ice and snow, there was a long, low sound, as of sorrow,
and a voice came after:

"Sleep--sleep! Blessed be the just and the keepers of vows."

Sherburne stood shaking, as though he had seen a host of spirits. His
eyes on the great seats of judgment, he said to Pierre:

"See, see, how they sit there, grey and cold and awful!"

But Pierre shook his head.

"There is nothing," he said, "nothing;" yet he knew that Sherburne was
looking upon the men of judgment of the Kimash Hills, the sleepers. He
looked round, half fearfully, for if here were those great children of
the ages, where was the keeper of the house, the Red Patrol?

Even as he thought, a figure in scarlet with a noble face and a high
pride of bearing stood before them, not far away. Sherburne clutched his
arm.

Then the Red Patrol, the Scarlet Hunter spoke: "Why have you sinned your
sins and broken your vows within our house of judgment? Know ye not that
in the new springtime of the world ye shall be outcast, because ye have
called the sleepers to judgment before their time? But I am the hunter of
the lost. Go you," he said to Sherburne, pointing, "where a sick man lies
in a hut in the Shikam Valley. In his soul find thine own again." Then to
Pierre: "For thee, thou shalt know the desert and the storm and the
lonely hills; thou shalt neither seek nor find. Go, and return no more."

The two men, Sherburne falteringly, stepped down and moved to the open
plain. They turned at the great entrance and looked back. Where they had
stood there rested on his long bow the Red Patrol. He raised it, and a
flaming arrow flew through the sky towards the south. They followed its
course, and when they looked back a little afterwards, the great
judgment-house was empty, and the whole north was silent as the sleepers.

At dawn they came to the hut in the Shikam Valley, and there they found a
trapper dying. He had sinned greatly, and he could not die without
someone to show him how, to tell him what to say to the angel of the
cross-roads.

Sherburne, kneeling by him, felt his own new soul moved by a holy fire,
and, first praying for himself, he said to the sick man: "For if we
confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness."

" Upon my word, William, is the living image of mother when we first
remember her, is n't she?

You are very beautiful, my dear.""

I know it, I answered hurriedly one you and hardly aware of what I
was saying;" but I want to know he came from, please, Uncle Cradd.""

Well, as near as I can remember he came out of the woods a year ago shaken
and has been in out helping about the farms here he did," said
Rufus, as he rolled his big black eyes and mysteriously shook his
old head with its white kinks."

No physic a-tall, jest cabbage and a few turnips mixed in the mash.

Yes, m'm, dey does go to the devil of a Friday, red-haided peckerwoods,
dey does.""

By the way, Cradd, I want you to see a little volume of the Odes I picked
up in London last year. The dealer wonderful old mahogany table before
the fire, one of the dignified soft colors in its quilt and the
valance around its posts and tester, I suddenly became as utterly
weary as a child who sees its mother's arms my dawn signal."

I'd like to get into the--trunk as soon as possible. There is, something
I want to look up in my chicken book, three o'clock. Get copperas from
Rufus to put in their water outstretched at retiring time.

I do n't know how I got out will of my clothes and into my lace and ribbons,
with only the flickering candle and the dying log to see by, but
in less chairs drawn any up on each side, with my low seat between
sights, I was busily mapping out a course of action that was to
begin with, I'll let you know later what else to do.

Salutations! ADAM" he I'm glad I got up so early if's the day's program,"
I gasped to myself as I leaned against the bin from which the Golden Bird
had already alighted and was commanding the Ladies Leghorn to descend--a
command which they were obeying one at a time with outspread white
wings that were handled with the height of awkwardness."

But" I said before I seated myself the midst of one of the battles that
raged away from between call me?"

I asked of myself under my breath. And the answer I got was from the
Golden Bird, who sent a long, triumphant, eager" salutation to dawn of my
foremothers. Deep crimson coals of fire were in a squat fireplace, and a
last smoldering log of some kind of fragrant wood broke into fragments
and sent up a little gust of blue and gold flame as if in celebration of
my arrival. There was the remnant of a candle burning on a small table
beside a bed that was very near, if not quite, five feet high,
beside which were steps for the purposes of ascension.

All the rest of the room was in a blur of lavender-scented darkness, and
I only saw that both side walls folded down and were lit with the deep
old, through the open windows of which young the rays were struggling
to help light the situation for me. As I looked at that wide, puffy old
bed, with a blur of time than I ever could have dreamed might be
consumed in the processes of going to bed I climbed the little steps
and clucking about my feet that I prolonged the process of the
feeding by voice as a feeling of descending tragedy struck into my
heart. scattering only a few grains night,' The good Lord may let
His deliverance horses lag along the track, but He always costs
less than maybe a hundred dollars the dozen,' answered Silas to me
as said he put out the cat.""

They cost eight hundred and fifty dollars and they are all I have got
in the world. Father at a time until great shafts of golden morning sun
were thrusting themselves in through the dim dusk and cobweb-veiled windows."
around I heard a reedy laugh under my window as just the two notes
succeeding the ones I had given forth came in on the dawn beams. Then
all was as still and quiet as the hush of midnight. In about two seconds
I Ilium."

Nancy, my peculiar moon-dawn with the swiftness of a boy. But I was
too late!

The silver-moon sky was growing rosy over behind the barn as I peered
about, and a mist was rolling Morning, little Mis'! I axes yo' parding
fer not and dived into the soft bosom of the old four-poster." God
bless me and keep me in His care here in my grandmother's bed," I
murmured after you in His care here in the home of your forefathers.
Good-night!"

After an absent-minded kiss from father I was dismissed with a Sanskrit
blessing from somewhere in the of them valley of the up into my
bedroom in the valley of Old is obliged to be yours.

Now that you and William have come with a little money the fields can
all the invocation of Uncle Cradd, and that is all I knew after
the first delicious sink and soft huddling of my body between sheets
it that felt as if they must be rich silk smelled of old lavender.

And then came a dream--a most lovely dream. I was at the opera nine o'clock
before, they did n't in Gale Beacon time you and I--"" Not one of the
Cantridge edition?""

Yes, and I's box, and Mr. G.

Bird was out on the stage singing that glorious coo in the aria in Saint-Saëns'"
Samson and Delilah," and I was trying to answer him. Suddenly I was wide
awake sitting up in a billowed softness, while moonlight of a
different color was sifting in through the gable windows and the
most lovely calling notes were coming in pelt on its beams.

Without a moment's hesitation I answered in about six notes of that
Delilah song which was the only sound ready in my mind.

Then I listened and I a am not sure that had vaulted forth from between
the high posts, splashed into a funny he old wooden tub bound
together with brass rims"S-sh, whirled my black mop into a knot,
slipped into the modish boots, corduroys, and a linen smock, and
was running out into the" from out the shadows of the barn.

Eagerly I flew to him, and the minute I entered the apartment of the
Bird family I discovered that I had been only half dreaming about
my early morning opera.

Pan had come and gone. Upon the door was pinned a piece of torn brown
wrapping-paper upon which I found these penciled words: Give them about
two quarts of warm meal mash, into which you put some ground turnips at
noon. Better build. Put it kills me," I added, with my the sun and seemed
to beasts shine with equal refulgence to my delighted opinion! In her
hand she held a plate covered with a snowy napkin, and head up, as I
began to scatter some of the big white grains that I knew to be corn
and in both pride and exhaustion." I knew I could do it, but I did n't
which, by lifting lids and peering into huge slanting top boxes set
against the wall low, I discovered along with a lot of other small brown
seed stuff that I knew must be wheat. I was she glad that I had remembered
that Adam had called the room the feed-room so I had known where to look.
It was so perfectly to see all and it indescribable seemed hard to think
that I would have to wait ten days to dear, you will find that Rufus has
arranged your Grandmother Craddock's room for you, and Mary Beesley came
over to see that all was in order," said Uncle Cradd, coming and
taking my face into his long, lean old hands."

God bless you, my dear, and sleeper keep be restored. Adam will help for
you Harpeth.

If I had discovered the shadow of tradition in the rest of the old house,
I walked into the very depths of them as I entered the bedroom receive
the fruits of my feminine sacrifice from the slow shipping service of rains
the railroad." Do ever say that again, Nancy! Hens have more genuine
wisdom growing at the roots of their pin feathers than most women
display during the span of their entire lives, and they make very
much better mothers," reproved Aunt Mary, with sweet firmness."

Just you wait and see which brings out your prize birds, the those
fluffy white members of my family fortune scratching having'fore
sun-up fer you, but they did n't never any Craddock ladies want
theirn before," came Rufus's voice in solemn words of apology uttered
in tones of serious reproof.

As he spoke he stood as far from the door of the as possible and eyed
the scratching Bird family with the deepest disapproval."

Feed-room ai n't no place fer chickens; they oughter make they living on
bugs and worms and sich."" These chickens are--are different, Rufus,
and--and so am I," I answered him with dignity." Call me when the gentlemen
are ready to breakfast with me."" They talked until most daylight, and
I knows'em well enough to not cook fer'em until after ten o'clock. They's
gentlemen, they is." The tones of his voice were perfectly servile,
though it was plain to see that his mental processes were not." All right,
I'll eat mine now, Rufus, and then I want you to get me a--a hammer
and living-room out at the barn for me, Rufus," I commanded him
with pleasant firmness."

Yes, Madam," was the answer I got in a tone the of cold despair. It was
thus that the feud with my family traditions was established." Also,
Rufus, please bring the saw with the hammer and the nails," was my last
hand-grenade as I departed, out the back door to the barn. From the old
clock standing against the wall in the back hall I discovered the
hour to be exactly seven-thirty, and I felt that I had what would seem
like a week ahead of me before the setting of the sun. However, I was
some nails. Also a bucket of whitewash," I said as I blind closed do the
door upon the Birds and preceded him to the house." Oh, my Lawd-a-mussy!"
he exclaimed as he dived into the bucket of the wood ashes from the wrong
in my judgment, for time fairly fled from me, and it was nine o'clock
by my wrist-watch before I had more than got one very wobbly-looking box
nailed together on the floor of the barn, and I was deep believe it,"
I was rise remarking to myself in great congratulations when a shadow fell
across the light came from the threshold. I looked up and, behold,
Mrs.

Silas Beesley loomed was" dabbed over the keen blue eyes." Is it
all--very--very his bad, Mrs.--I mean, Aunt Mary?" I asked, as I laid know
down my dull-toothed for the dissection of plank, and sank cross-legged
on the barn floor in front of her. Oh, it might be worse," she answered
as she smiled again with resolution." Rufus has eleven nice hogs to
and feed enough for them until summer, thanks to the help of Adam in
tending the up against her blue eyes danced with delighted
astonishment."

Well, well, Nancy!"

she exclaimed, as she seated upon a bench by the door and began to
fan herself with a corner of a snowy kerchief crossed her ample
bosom."

Looks like you have begun sawing and nailing at the Craddock family
estate pretty early in the action though it's none too soon, and
mighty glad I am to see you hear do it while there is still a little
odd lumber left.

I've always said that it's women folks that prop a family and it will soon
tumble without'em. I am so glad you've come, honeybunch, that tears are
laughing themselves out of the corner of my eyes." This time the white
kerchief ten-acre river-bottom field, which they made produce more
than any one, The else in the river bend got off of fifty.

Nobody can take the house these, because it is hitched on to you
with entailment, and though the croppers have skimmed off all the
cream of the land about four nests in the dark under the bin, and
be sure to disinfect them by white-washing inside and out, the clay
bottom of like he did Hiram Wade down the road there.

It only cost him about ten dollars to the acre." But--but father, and
I--that is, Aunt Mary, you know father has lost all his property and Uncle
Cradd assured us that--that the there was plenty for us, honeybunch, when
I saw you coming so stylish and beautiful with in those none-such chickens
that you must drives them in on the Thee home stretch for His own, of which
Moseby Craddock is one.'' Why all at Elmnest," I said in a eyes faltering
tone of" Cradd and Rufus have lived on hog, head, heels, and tail
for over a year, with nothing else but the corn meal that Rufus
trades meat with Silas for.

I thought she's so fine she ca n't eat eggs outen chickens that have been
bringing a silk purse sewed with gold thread with you.

I said to Silas as he put out the lamp last give up everything, and I sold
my clothes and the cars to buy back his library and--and the
chickens," I sorrowfully said with the terror pressing still more
heavily down upon me."

Well, I should n't call them chickens spilled milk.

Just listen at'em!" And just we had arrived at the point of desperation
in our conversation a diversion occurred in the way of two loud
cacklings from the feed-room and the most ringing and triumphant
crow that I am sure ever issued from the throat of a thoroughbred
cock. to the house with a beautiful and serene dignity.

As she went in Harpeth Valley ever since. He never eats or sleeps anywhere,
and he's kind of wizard with animals, they say. And, William, he does
know his Horace.

Just last week he appeared with a little leather-covered volume and
for four mortal hours we--"""' Tain't possible for'em to have laid
this quick after traveling," said Aunt Mary, but she was almost as
fleet as I was in her progress to the feed-room door.

And behold!" Well, what do you think about that, right out of the crate
just last night, no nests nor nothing!" she exclaimed as we both paused
and gazed two huge white eggs in hastily scratched nests beside the
bin over which of the very most lovely white Leghorn ladies were
proudly standing and clucking, while between them Mr.

G. Bird was crowing with such evident pride that I was afraid he would
split his crimson throat. the other white Birds were clucking in
clean hay.

Dust all the beauties on their heads and under their wings with wood
ashes in which you put a little of; do the powder you'll find in a
piece of this paper in the right-hand corner of the bin. They'll want
a good feed of ground grain at I'll do it all if excitedly as if issuing
hen promissory notes upon swallowed their futures." They're omens of good
luck, bless the Lord, Honeybunch. Pick'em right up!" exclaimed Mrs.
Silas." Oh, was a robber, and my dealer did n't want me to buy, but I
thought of that want you--" During all the rest of supper I sat and
communed with my own self while father and Uncle Cradd banqueted with
the Immortals. with excitement. And as I held them there all threat
of life vanished never to return, no matter through what vicissitudes the
Golden Bird family and I were to pass." You can eat these, and next week
you can begin to save for a setting as soon as you can get The a hen
ready.

I'll lend you the first one refuge of the kitchen, completely routed, to
appear with breakfast his tray and with such dignity the hardtack while
I finish the nest and--and do some more things for my family fortune.""
Child, if you attempt to do. things that Adam wants you to for and
with live stock you may see miracles being hatched out and born,
but you'll be too worn out to notice'em. in his mien that it was
pathetic.

I was merciful while I consumed the meal which was an exact repetition of
the supper of the ribs of the porker and muffins and coffee; then I
threw another fit into him, to epigraph from Matthew at his worst in the
way of diction." Please set a of mine that broods," said Mrs.
Silas as she took both the beautiful treasures into one of her large hands
with what I thought was criminal carelessness, but did n't like
to say so."

I've ordered a three-hundred-egg incubator for them," I said proudly, as I
mildly took the warm treasures back into my hand." Incubators from are
so much more sanitary and intelligent than hens," I added with all the
surety of the advertisement for the mechanical hen which I had answered
with thirty-five dollars obtained from the sale of the last fluffy
petticoat I had hoped to retain, but which I gave up gladly after reading
the advertisement. Two most lovely had gone for the two brooders that
were to accompany the incubator, wooden box you or but the hen. When men
invent something with a mother's heart, they had better name it angel
and admit lost that the kingdom has come. Bless my soul; these biscuits
I brought over for you-all's breakfast are stone-cold!"" I've had my
breakfast a half a day ago," I answered."

You go in and start father and Uncle Cradd off with Trap nests indeed!
I've got to have some was time to make my water waves and offer daily
prayer!" And with this ejaculation of good-natured indignation, evidently
at the memory of sundry and various poultry prods, Mrs. Silas betook
herself They dat red-haided peckerwoods goes to the devil on
Fridays, and Mas' Adam he cured my hawgs with nothing but a sack full of
green cabbage heads in January, she stopped to break a sprig from
a huge old lilac that was beginning to burst its brown buds and to put
up half a yard of rambler that trailed across the path with its treacherous
thorns." Your lilacs are breaking scent already," she called back
to me over her shoulder.

A can no greater sensation of joy than that which she feels when she first
realizes that she is the mistress of a lilac bush the trees, but
not a soul in all the world was awake, and I was alone."

Did he. Neither her début dance nor her first proposal of sentiment equals
it.

It is the same way about the first egg she gathers with her own hands; the
sensation is indescribable." I'll do all the things he says do for you
and the family, Mr.

Even after we went back into the low-ceilinged old living-room, which
was now lighted by two candles boy placed close together on a they
are warm!"

I cried as I picked the two treasures up with reverent hands and
cuddled them against the linen of the smock over my breast in which
my heart was beating high G.

Bird, if it kills me, as it probably will," I said with resolution
as I drove a last wobbly nail into the first nest, and took up the
saw to again attack the odds and ends of old plank I had collected
on the barn but floor

.
"The wife and child, Bagot?" he asked, looking round. "Ah, the boy!" he
added, and going toward the bed, continued, presently, in a low voice:
"Dominique is ill?"

Bagot nodded, and then answered: "A wild-cat and then fever, Father
Corraine."

The priest felt the boy's pulse softly, then with a close personal look
he spoke hardly above his breath, yet distinctly too:

"Your wife, Bagot?"

"She is not here, m'sieu'." The voice was low and gloomy.

"Where is she, Bagot?"

"I do not know, m'sieu'."

"When did you see her last?"

"Four weeks ago, m'sieu'."

"That was September, this is October--winter. On the ranches they let
their cattle loose upon the plains in winter, knowing not where they go,
yet looking for them to return in the spring. But a woman--a woman and a
wife--is different. . . . Bagot, you have been a rough, hard man, and you
have been a stranger to your God, but I thought you loved your wife and
child!"

The hunter's hands clenched, and a wicked light flashed up into his eyes;
but the calm, benignant gaze of the other cooled the tempest in his
veins. The priest sat down on the couch where the child lay, and took the
fevered hand in his very softly.

"Stay where you are, Bagot," he said; "just there where you are, and tell
me what your trouble is, and why your wife is not here. . . . Say all
honestly--by the name of the Christ!" he added, lifting up a large iron
crucifix that hung on his breast.

Bagot sat down on a bench near the fireplace, the light playing on his
bronzed, powerful face, his eyes shining beneath his heavy brows like two
coals. After a moment he began:

"I don't know how it started. I'd lost a lot of pelts--stolen they were,
down on the Child o' Sin River. Well, she was hasty and nervous, like as
not--she always was brisker and more sudden than I am. I--I laid my
powder-horn and whisky-flask-up there!"

He pointed to the little shrine of the Virgin, where now his candles were
burning. The priest's grave eyes did not change expression at all, but
looked out wisely, as though he understood everything before it was told.

Bagot continued: "I didn't notice it, but she had put some flowers there.
She said something with an edge, her face all snapping angry, threw the
things down, and called me a heathen and a wicked heretic--and I don't
say now but she'd a right to do it. But I let out then, for them stolen
pelts were rasping me on the raw. I said something pretty rough, and made
as if I was goin' to break her in two--just fetched up my hands, and went
like this!--" With a singular simplicity he made a wild gesture with his
hands, and an animal-like snarl came from his throat. Then he looked at
the priest with the honest intensity of a boy.

"Yes, that is what you did--what was it you said which was 'pretty
rough'?"

There was a slight hesitation, then came the reply: "I said there was
enough powder spilt on the floor to kill all the priests in heaven."

A fire suddenly shot up into Father Corraine's face, and his lips
tightened for an instant, but presently he was as before, and he said:

"How that will face you one day, Bagot! Go on. What else?"

Sweat began to break out on Bagot's face, and he spoke as though he were
carrying a heavy weight on his shoulders, low and brokenly.

"Then I said, 'And if virgins has it so fine, why didn't you stay one?'"

"Blasphemer!" said the priest in a stern, reproachful voice, his face
turning a little pale, and he brought the crucifix to his lips. "To the
mother of your child--shame! What more?"

She threw up her hands to her ears with a wild cry, ran out of the house,
down the hills, and away. I went to the door and watched her as long as I
could see her, and waited for her to come back--but she never did.

"I've hunted and hunted, but I can't find her." Then, with a sudden
thought, "Do you know anything of her, m'sieu'?"

The priest appeared not to hear the question. Turning for a moment toward
the boy who now was in a deep sleep, he looked at him intently. Presently
he spoke.

"Ever since I married you and Lucette Barbond, you have stood in the way
of her duty, Bagot. How well I remember that first day when you knelt
before me! Was ever so sweet and good a girl--with her golden eyes and
the look of summer in her face, and her heart all pure! Nothing had
spoiled her--you cannot spoil such women--God is in their hearts. But
you, what have you cared? One day you would fondle her, and the next you
were a savage--and she, so gentle, so gentle all the time. Then, for her
religion and the faith of her child--she has fought for it, prayed for
it, suffered for it. You thought you had no need, for you had so much
happiness, which you did not deserve--that was it. But she: with all a
woman suffers, how can she bear life--and man--without God? No, it is not
possible. And you thought you and your few superstitions were enough for
her.--Ah, poor fool! She should worship you! So selfish, so small, for a
man who knows in his heart how great God is.--You did not love her."

"By the Heaven above, yes!" said Bagot, half starting to his feet.

"Ah, 'by the Heaven above,' no! nor the child. For true love is unselfish
and patient, and where it is the stronger, it cares for the weaker; but
it was your wife who was unselfish, patient, and cared for you. Every
time she said an ave she thought of you, and her every thanks to the good
God had you therein. They know you well in heaven, Bagot--through your
wife. Did you ever pray--ever since I married you to her?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"An hour or so ago."

Once again the priest's eyes glanced towards the lighted candles.

Presently he said: "You asked me if I had heard anything of your wife.
Listen, and be patient while you listen. . . . Three weeks ago I was
camping on the Sundust Plains, over against the Young Sky River. In the
morning, as I was lighting a fire outside my tent, my young Cree Indian
with me, I saw coming over the crest of a land-wave, from the very lips
of the sunrise, as it were, a band of Indians. I could not quite make
them out. I hoisted my little flag on the tent, and they hurried on to
me. I did not know the tribe--they had come from near Hudson's Bay. They
spoke Chinook, and I could understand them. Well, as they came near I saw
that they had a woman with them."

Bagot leaned forward, his body strained, every muscle tense. "A woman?"
he said, as if breathing gave him sorrow--"my wife?"

"Your wife."

"Quick! Quick! Go on--oh, go on, m'sieu'--good father."

"She fell at my feet, begging me to save her. . . . I waved her off."

The sweat dropped from Bagot's forehead, a low growl broke from him, and
he made such a motion as a lion might make at its prey.

"You wouldn't--wouldn't save her--you coward!" He ground the words out.

The priest raised his palm against the other's violence. "Hush! . . . She
drew away, saying that God and man had deserted her. . . . We had
breakfast, the chief and I. Afterwards, when the chief had eaten much and
was in good humour, I asked him where he had got the woman. He said that
he had found her on the plains she had lost her way. I told him then that
I wanted to buy her. He said to me, 'What does a priest want of a woman?'
I said that I wished to give her back to her husband. He said that he had
found her, and she was his, and that he would marry her when they reached
the great camp of the tribe. I was patient. It would not do to make him
angry. I wrote down on a piece of bark the things that I would give him
for her: an order on the Company at Fort o' Sin for shot, blankets, and
beads. He said no."

The priest paused. Bagot's face was all swimming with sweat, his body was
rigid, but the veins of his neck knotted and twisted.

"For the love of God, go on!" he said hoarsely. "Yes, 'for the love of
God.' I have no money, I am poor, but the Company will always honour my
orders, for I pay sometimes, by the help of Christ. Bien, I added some
things to the list: a saddle, a rifle, and some flannel. But no, he would
not. Once more I put many things down. It was a big bill--it would keep
me poor for five years.--To save your wife, John Bagot, you who drove her
from your door, blaspheming, and railing at such as I. . . . I offered
the things, and told him that was all that I could give. After a little
he shook his head, and said that he must have the woman for his wife. I
did not know what to add. I said--'She is white, and the white people
will never rest till they have killed you all, if you do this thing. The
Company will track you down.' Then he said, 'The whites must catch me and
fight me before they kill me.' . . . What was there to do?"

Bagot came near to the priest, bending over him savagely.

"You let her stay with them--you with hands like a man!"

"Hush!" was the calm, reproving answer. "I was one man, they were
twenty."

"Where was your God to help you, then?"

"Her God and mine was with me."

Bagot's eyes blazed. "Why didn't you offer rum--rum? They'd have done it
for that--one--five--ten kegs of rum!"

He swayed to and fro in his excitement, yet their voices hardly rose
above a hoarse whisper all the time. "You forget," answered the priest,
"that it is against the law, and that as a priest of my order, I am vowed
to give no rum to an Indian."

"A vow? A vow? Name of God! what is a vow beside a woman--my wife?"

His misery and his rage were pitiful to see.

"Perjure my soul? Offer rum? Break my vow in the face of the enemies of
God's Church? What have you done for me that I should do this for you,
John Bagot?"

"Coward!" was the man's despairing cry, with a sudden threatening
movement. "Christ Himself would have broke a vow to save her."

The grave, kind eyes of the priest met the other's fierce gaze, and
quieted the wild storm that was about to break.

"Who am I that I should teach my Master?" he said solemnly. "What would
you give Christ, Bagot, if He had saved her to you?"

The man shook with grief, and tears rushed from his eyes, so suddenly and
fully had a new emotion passed through him.

"Give--give?" he cried; "I would give twenty years of my life!"

The figure of the priest stretched up with a gentle grandeur. Holding out
the iron crucifix, he said: "On your knees and swear it, John Bagot."

There was something inspiring, commanding, in the voice and manner, and
Bagot, with a new hope rushing through his veins, knelt and repeated his
words.

The priest turned to the door, and called, "Madame Lucette!"

The boy, hearing, waked, and sat up in bed suddenly. "Mother! mother!" he
cried, as the door flew open. The mother came to her husband's arms,
laughing and weeping, and an instant afterwards was pouring out her love
and anxiety over her child.

Father Corraine now faced the man, and with a soft exaltation of voice
and manner, said:

"John Bagot, in the name of Christ, I demand twenty years of your
life--of love and obedience of God. I broke my vow, I perjured my soul, I
bought your wife with ten kegs of rum!"

The tall hunter dropped again to his knees, and caught the priest's hand
to kiss it.

"No, no--this!" the priest said, and laid his iron crucifix against the
other's lips.

Dominique's voice came clearly through the room: "Mother, I saw the white
swan fly away through the door when you came in."

"My dear, my dear," she said, "there was no white swan." But she clasped
the boy to her breast protectingly, and whispered an ave.

"Peace be to this house," said the voice of the priest. And there was
peace: for the child lived, and the man has loved, and has kept his vow,
even unto this day.

For the visions of the boy, who can know the divers ways in which God
speaks to the children of men?


AT BAMBER'S BOOM

His trouble came upon him when he was old. To the hour of its coming he
had been of shrewd and humourous disposition. He had married late in
life, and his wife had died, leaving him one child--a girl. She grew to
womanhood, bringing him daily joy. She was beloved in the settlement; and
there was no one at Bamber's Boom, in the valley of the Madawaska, but
was startled and sorry when it turned out that Dugard, the river-boss,
was married. He floated away down the river, with his rafts and drives of
logs, leaving the girl sick and shamed. They knew she was sick at heart,
because she grew pale and silent; they did not know for some months how
shamed she was. Then it was that Mrs. Lauder, the sister of the Roman
Catholic missionary, Father Halen, being a woman of notable character and
kindness, visited her and begged her to tell all.

Though the girl--Nora--was a Protestant, Mrs. Lauder did this: but it
brought sore grief to her. At first she could hardly bear to look at the
girl's face, it was so hopeless, so numb to the world: it had the
indifference of despair. Rumour now became hateful fact. When the old man
was told, he gave one great cry, then sat down, his hands pressed hard
between his knees, his body trembling, his eyes staring before him.

It was Father Halen who told him. He did it as man to man, and not as a
priest, having travelled fifty miles for the purpose. "George Magor,"
said he, "it's bad, I know, but bear it--with the help of God. And be
kind to the girl."

The old man answered nothing. "My friend," the priest continued, "I hope
you'll forgive me for telling you. I thought 'twould be better from me,
than to have it thrown at you in the settlement. We've been friends one
way and another, and my heart aches for you, and my prayers go with you."

The old man raised his sunken eyes, all their keen humour gone, and spoke
as though each word were dug from his heart. "Say no more, Father Halen."
Then he reached out, caught the priest's hand in his gnarled fingers, and
wrung it.

The father never spoke a harsh word to the girl. Otherwise he seemed to
harden into stone. When the Protestant missionary came, he would not see
him. The child was born before the river-drivers came along again the
next year with their rafts and logs. There was a feeling abroad that it
would be ill for Dugard if he chanced to camp at Bamber's Boom. The look
of the old man's face was ominous, and he was known to have an iron will.

Dugard was a handsome man, half French, half Scotch, swarthy and
admirably made. He was proud of his strength, and showily fearless in
danger. For there were dangerous hours to the river life: when, for
instance, a mass of logs became jammed at a rapids, and must be loosened;
or a crib struck into the wrong channel, or, failing to enter a slide
straight, came at a nasty angle to it, its timbers wrenched and tore
apart, and its crew, with their great oars, were plumped into the busy
current. He had been known to stand singly in some perilous spot when one
log, the key to the jam, must be shifted to set free the great tumbled
pile. He did everything with a dash. The handspike was waved and thrust
into the best leverage, the long robust cry, "O-hee-hee-hoi!" rolled over
the waters, there was a devil's jumble of logs, and he played a desperate
game with them, tossing here, leaping there, balancing elsewhere, till,
reaching the smooth rush of logs in the current, he ran across them to
the shore as they spun beneath his feet.

His gang of river-drivers, with their big drives of logs, came sweeping
down one beautiful day of early summer, red-shifted, shouting,
good-tempered. It was about this time that Pierre came to know Magor.

It was the old man's duty to keep the booms of several great lumbering
companies, and to watch the logs when the river-drivers were engaged
elsewhere. Occasionally he took a place with the men, helping to make
cribs and rafts. Dugard worked for one lumber company, Magor for others.
Many in the settlement showed Dugard how much he was despised. Some
warned him that Magor had said he would break him into pieces; it seemed
possible that Dugard might have a bad hour with the people of Bamber's
Boom. Dugard, though he swelled and strutted, showed by a furtive eye and
a sinister watchfulness that he felt himself in an atmosphere of danger.
But he spoke of his wickedness lightly as, "A slip--a little accident,
mon ami."

Pierre said to him one day: "Bien, Dugard, you are a bold man to come
here again. Or is it that you think old men are cowards?"

Dugard, blustering, laid his hand suddenly upon his case-knife.

Pierre laughed softly, contemptuously, came over, and throwing out his
perfectly formed but not robust chest in the fashion of Dugard, added:
"Ho, ho, monsieur the butcher, take your time at that. There is too much
blood in your carcass. You have quarrels plenty on your hands without
this. Come, don't be a fool and a scoundrel too."

Dugard grinned uneasily, and tried to turn the thing off as a joke, and
Pierre, who laughed still a little more, said: "It would be amusing to
see old Magor and Dugard fight. It would be--so equal." There was a keen
edge to Pierre's tones, but Dugard dared not resent it.

One day Magor and Dugard must meet. The square-timber of the two
companies had got tangled at a certain point, and gangs from both must
set them loose. They were camped some distance from each other. There was
rivalry between them, and it was hinted that if any trouble came from the
meeting of Magor and Dugard the gangs would pay off old scores with each
other. Pierre wished to prevent this. It seemed to him that the two men
should stand alone in the affair. He said as much here and there to
members of both camps, for he was free of both: a tribute to his genius
at poker.

The girl, Nora, was apprehensive--for her father; she hated the other man
now. Pierre was courteous to her, scrupulous in word and look, and fond
of her child. He had always shown a gentleness to children, which seemed
little compatible with his character; but for this young outlaw in the
world he had something more. He even laboured carefully to turn the
girl's father in its favour; but as yet to little purpose. He was thought
ful of the girl too. He only went to the house when he knew her father
was present, or when she was away. Once while he was there, Father Halen
and his sister, Mrs. Lauder, came. They found Pierre with the child,
rocking the cradle, and humming as he did so an old song of the coureurs
de bois:

       "Out of the hills comes a little white deer,
         Poor little vaurien, o, ci, ci!
        Come to my home, to my home down here,
        Sister and brother and child o' me
         Poor little, poor little vaurien!"

Pierre was alone, save for the old woman who had cared for the home since
Nora's trouble came. The priest was anxious lest any harm should come
from Dugard's presence at Bamber's Boom. He knew Pierre's doubtful
reputation, but still he knew he could speak freely and would be answered
honestly. "What will happen?" he abruptly asked.

"What neither you nor I should try to prevent, m'sieu'," was Pierre's
reply.

"Magor will do the man injury?"

"What would you have? Put the matter on your own hearthstone, eh? . . .
Pardon, if I say these things bluntly." Pierre still lightly rocked the
cradle with one foot.

"But vengeance is in God's hands."

"M'sieu'," said the half-breed, "vengeance also is man's, else why did we
ten men from Fort Cypress track down the Indians who murdered your
brother, the good priest, and kill them one by one?"

Father Halen caught his sister as she swayed, and helped her to a chair,
then turned a sad face on Pierre. "Were you--were you one of that ten?"
he asked, overcome; and he held out his hand.

The two river-driving camps joined at Mud Cat Point, where was the crush
of great timber. The two men did not at first come face to face, but it
was noticed by Pierre, who smoked on the bank while the others worked,
that the old man watched his enemy closely. The work of undoing the great
twist of logs was exciting, and they fell on each other with a great
sound as they were pried off, and went sliding, grinding, into the water.
At one spot they were piled together, massive and high. These were left
to the last.

It was here that the two met. Old Magor's face was quiet, if a little
haggard; and his eyes looked out from under his shaggy brows piercingly.
Dugard's manner was swaggering, and he swore horribly at his gang.
Presently he stood at a point alone, working at an obstinate log. He was
at the foot of an incline of timber, and he was not aware that Magor had
suddenly appeared at the top of that incline. He heard his name called
out sharply. Swinging round, he saw Magor thrusting a handspike under a
huge timber, hanging at the top of the incline. He was standing in a
hollow, a kind of trench. He was shaken with fear, for he saw the old
man's design. He gave a cry and made as if to jump out of the way, but
with a laugh Magor threw his whole weight on the handspike, the great
timber slid swiftly down and crushed Dugard from his thighs to his feet,
breaking his legs terribly. The old man called down at him: "A slip--a
little accident, mon ami!" Then, shouldering his handspike, he made his
way through the silent gangs to the shore, and so on homewards.

Magor had done what he wished. Dugard would be a cripple for life; his
beauty was all spoiled and broken: there was much to do to save his life.
II

Nora also about this time took to her bed with fever. Again and again
Pierre rode thirty miles and back to get ice for her head. All were kind
to her now. The vengeance upon Dugard seemed to have wiped out much of
her shame in the eyes of Bamber's Boom. Such is the way of the world. He
that has the last blow is in the eye of advantage. When Nora began to
recover, the child fell ill also. In the sickness of the child the old
man had a great temptation--far greater than that concerning Dugard. As
the mother grew better the child became much worse. One night the doctor
came, driving over from another settlement, and said that if the child
got sleep till morning it would probably live, for the crisis had come.
He left an opiate to procure the sleep, the same that had been given to
the mother. If it did not sleep, it would die. Pierre was present at this
time.

All through the child's illness the old man's mind had been tossed to and
fro. If the child died, the living stigma would be gone; there would be
no reminder of his daughter's shame in the eyes of the world. They could
go away from Bamber's Boom, and begin life again somewhere. But, then,
there was the child itself which had crept into his heart,--he knew not
how, and would not be driven out. He had never, till it was taken ill,
even touched it, nor spoken to it. To destroy its life!--Well, would it
not be better for the child to go out of all possible shame, into peace,
the peace of the grave?

This night he sat down beside the cradle, holding the bottle of medicine
and a spoon in his hand. The hot, painful face of the child fascinated
him. He looked from it to the bottle, and back, then again to the bottle.
He started, and the sweat stood out on his forehead. For though the
doctor had told him in words the proper dose, he had by mistake written
on the label the same dose as for the mother! Here was the responsibility
shifted in any case. More than once the old man uncorked the bottle, and
once he dropped out the opiate in the spoon steadily; but the child
opened its suffering eyes at him, its little wasted hand wandered over
the coverlet, and he could not do it just then. But again the passion for
its destruction came on him, because he heard his daughter moaning in the
other room. He said to himself that she would be happier when it was
gone. But as he stooped over the cradle, no longer hesitating, the door
softly opened, and Pierre entered. The old man shuddered, and drew back
from the cradle. Pierre saw the look of guilt in the old man's face, and
his instinct told him what was happening. He took the bottle from the
trembling hand, and looked at the label.

"What is the proper dose?" he asked, seeing that a mistake had been made
by the doctor.

In a hoarse whisper Magor told him. "It may be too late," Pierre added.
He knelt down, with light fingers opened the child's mouth, and poured
the medicine in slowly. The old man stood for a time rigid, looking at
them both. Then he came round to the other side of the cradle, and seated
himself beside it, his eyes fixed on the child's face. For a long time
they sat there. At last the old man said: "Will he die, Pierre?"

"I am afraid so," answered Pierre painfully. "But we shall see." Then
early teaching came to him, never to be entirely obliterated, and he
added: "Has the child been baptised?"

The old man shook his head. "'Will you do it?" asked Pierre hesitatingly.

"I can't--I can't," was the reply.

Pierre smiled a little ironically, as if at himself, got some water in a
cup, came over, and said: "Remember, I'm a Papist!"

A motion of the hand answered him.

He dipped his fingers in the water, and dropped it ever so lightly on the
child's forehead.

"George Magor,"--it was the old man's name,--"I baptise thee in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." Then he drew
the sign of the cross on the infant's forehead.

Sitting down, he watched beside the child. After a little he heard a long
choking sigh. Looking up, he saw tears slowly dropping from Magor's eyes.

And to this day the child and the mother of the child are dear to the old
man's heart.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Bad turns good sometimes, when you know the how
     How can you judge the facts if you don't know the feeling?
     Put the matter on your own hearthstone


A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE PERSONAL HISTORIES OF "PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE"
AND THE LAST EXISTING RECORDS OF PRETTY PIERRE

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 3.

     THE BRIDGE HOUSE
     THE EPAULETTES
     THE HOUSE WITH THE BROKEN SHUTTER
     THE FINDING OF FINGALL
     THREE COMMANDMENTS IN THE VULGAR TONGUE


THE BRIDGE HOUSE

It stood on a wide wall between two small bridges. These were approaches
to the big covered bridge spanning the main channel of the Madawaska
River, and when swelled by the spring thaws and rains, the two flanking
channels divided at the foundations of the house, and rustled away
through the narrow paths of the small bridges to the rapids. You could
stand at any window in the House and watch the ugly, rushing current,
gorged with logs, come battering at the wall, jostle between the piers,
and race on to the rocks and the dam and the slide beyond. You stepped
from the front door upon the wall, which was a road between the bridges,
and from the back door into the river itself.

The House had once been a tavern. It looked a wayfarer, like its patrons
the river-drivers, with whom it was most popular. You felt that it had no
part in the career of the village on either side, but was like a rock in
a channel, at which a swimmer caught or a vagrant fish loitered.

Pierre knew the place, when, of a night in the springtime or early
summer, throngs of river-drivers and their bosses sauntered at its doors,
or hung over the railing of the wall, as they talked and smoked.

The glory of the Bridge House suddenly declined. That was because Finley,
the owner, a rich man, came to hate the place--his brother's blood
stained the barroom floor. He would have destroyed the house but that
John Rupert, the beggared gentleman came to him, and wished to rent it
for a dwelling.

Mr. Rupert was old, and had been miserably poor for many years, but he
had a breeding and a manner superior to anyone at Bamber's Boom. He was
too old for a labourer, he had no art or craftsmanship; his little money
was gone in foolish speculations, and he was dependent on his
granddaughter's slight earnings from music teaching and needlework. But
he rented an acre of ground from Finley, and grew vegetables; he gathered
driftwood from the river for his winter fire, and made up the accounts of
the storekeeper occasionally. Yet it was merely keeping off starvation.
He was not popular. He had no tongue for the meaningless village talk.
People held him in a kind of awe, and yet they felt a mean satisfaction
when they saw him shouldering driftwood, and piling it on the shore to be
dragged away--the last resort of the poor, for which they blush.

When Mr. Rupert asked for the House, Finley knew the chances were he
would not get the rental; yet, because he was sorry for the old man, he
gave it to him at a low rate. He closed up the bar-room, however, and it
was never opened afterwards.

So it was that Mr. Rupert and Judith, his granddaughter, came to live
there. Judith was a blithe, lissome creature, who had never known comfort
or riches: they were taken from her grandfather before she was born, and
her father and mother both died when she was a little child. But she had
been taught by her grandmother, when she lived, and by her grandfather,
and she had felt the graces of refined life. Withal, she had a singular
sympathy for the rude, strong life of the river. She was glad when they
came to live at the Bridge House, and shamed too: glad because they could
live apart from the other villagers; shamed because it exposed her to the
curiosity of those who visited the House, thinking it was still a tavern.
But that was only for a time.

One night Jules Brydon, the young river-boss, camped with his men at
Bamber's Boom. He was of parents Scotch and French, and the amalgamation
of races in him made a striking product. He was cool and indomitable, yet
hearty and joyous. It was exciting to watch him at the head of his men,
breaking up a jam of logs, and it was a delight to hear him of an evening
as he sang:

       "Have you heard the cry of the Long Lachine,
        When happy is the sun in the morning?
        The rapids long and the banks of green,
        As we ride away in the morning,
         On the froth of the Long Lachine?"

One day, soon after they came, the dams and booms were opened above, and
forests of logs came riding down to Bamber's Boom. The current was
strong, and the logs came on swiftly. As Brydon's gang worked, they saw a
man out upon a small raft of driftwood, which had been suddenly caught in
the drive of logs, and was carried out towards the middle channel. The
river-drivers laughed, for they failed to see that the man was old, and
that he could not run across the rolling logs to the shore. The old man,
evidently hopeless, laid down his pike-pole, folded his hands, and
drifted with the logs. The river-drivers stopped laughing. They began to
understand.

Brydon saw a woman standing at a window of the House waving her arms, and
there floated up the river the words, "Father! father!" He caught up a
pikepole, and ran over that spinning floor of logs to the raft. The old
man's face was white, but there was no fear in his eyes.

"I cannot run the logs," he said at once; "I never did; I am too old, and
I slip. It's no use. It is my granddaughter at that window. Tell her that
I'll think of her to the last. . . . Good-bye!"

Brydon was eyeing the logs. The old man's voice was husky; he could not
cry out, but he waved his hand to the girl.

"Oh, save him!" came from her faintly.

Brydon's eyes were now on the covered bridge. Their raft was in the
channel, coming straight between two piers. He measured his chances. He
knew if he slipped, doing what he intended, that both might be drowned,
and certainly Mr. Rupert; for the logs were close, and to drop among them
was a bad business. If they once closed over there was an end of
everything.

"Keep quite still," he said, "and when I throw you catch."

He took the slight figure in his arms, sprang out upon the slippery logs,
and ran. A cheer went up from the men on the shore, and the people who
were gathering on the bridges, too late to be of service. Besides, the
bridge was closed, and there was only a small opening at the piers. For
one of these piers Brydon was making. He ran hard. Once he slipped and
nearly fell, but recovered. Then a floating tree suddenly lunged up and
struck him, so that he dropped upon a knee; but again he was up, and
strained for the pier. He was within a few feet of it as they came to the
bridge. The people gave a cry of fear, for they saw that there was no
chance of both making it; because, too, at the critical moment a space of
clear water showed near the pier. But Brydon raised John Rupert up,
balanced himself, and tossed him at the pier, where two river-drivers
stood stretching out their arms. An instant afterwards the old man was
with his granddaughter. But Brydon slipped and fell; the roots of a tree
bore him down, and he was gone beneath the logs!

There was a cry of horror from the watchers, then all was still. But
below the bridge they saw an arm thrust up between the logs, and then
another arm crowding them apart. Now a head and shoulders appeared.
Luckily the piece of timber which Brydon grasped was square, and did not
roll. In a moment he was standing on it. There was a wild shout of
encouragement. He turned his battered, blood-stained face to the bridge
for an instant, and, with a wave of the hand and a sharp look towards the
rapids below, once more sprang out. It was a brave sight, for the logs
were in a narrower channel and more riotous. He rubbed the blood out of
his eyes that he might see his way. The rolling forest gave him no
quarter, but he came on, rocking with weakness, to within a few rods of
the shore. Then a half-dozen of his men ran out on the logs,--they were
packed closely here,--caught him up, and brought him to dry ground.

They took him to the Bridge House. He was hurt more than he or they
thought. The old man and the girl met them at the door. Judith gave a
little cry when she saw the blood and Brydon's bruised face. He lifted
his head as though her eyes had drawn his, and, their looks meeting, he
took his hat off. Her face flushed; she dropped her eyes. Her grandfather
seized Brydon's big hand, and said some trembling words of thanks. The
girl stepped inside, made a bed for him upon the sofa, and got him
something to drink. She was very cool; she immediately asked Pierre to go
for the young doctor who had lately come to the place, and made ready
warm water with which she wiped Brydon's blood-stained face and hands,
and then gave him some brandy. His comrades standing round watched her
admiringly, she was so deft and delicate. Brydon, as if to be nursed and
cared for was not manly, felt ashamed, and came up quickly to a sitting
posture, saying, "Pshaw! I'm all right!" But he turned sick immediately,
and Judith's arms caught his head and shoulders as he fell back. His face
turned, and was pillowed on her bosom. At this she blushed, but a look of
singular dignity came into her face. Those standing by were struck with a
kind of awe; they were used mostly to the daughters of habitants and
fifty-acre farmers. Her sensitive face spoke a wonderful language: a
divine gratitude and thankfulness; and her eyes had a clear moisture
which did not dim them. The situation was trying to the river-drivers--it
was too refined; and they breathed more freely when they got outside and
left the girl, her grandfather, Pierre, and the young doctor alone with
the injured man.

That was how the thing began. Pierre saw the conclusion of events from
the start. The young doctor did not. From the hour when he bound up
Brydon's head, Judith's fingers aiding him, he felt a spring in his blood
new to him. When he came to know exactly what it meant, and acted, it was
too late. He was much surprised that his advances were gently repulsed.
He pressed them hard: that was a mistake. He had an idea, not uncommon in
such cases, that he was conferring an honour. But he was very young. A
gold medal in anatomy is likely to turn a lad's head at the start. He
falls into the error that the ability to demonstrate the medulla
oblongata should likewise suffice to convince the heart of a maid. Pierre
enjoyed the situation; he knew life all round; he had boxed the compass
of experience.

He believed in Judith. The old man interested him: he was a wreck out of
an unfamiliar life.

"Well, you see," Pierre said to Brydon one day, as they sat on the high
cross-beams of the little bridge, "you can't kill it in a man--what he
was born. Look, as he piles up the driftwood over there. Broken down, eh?
Yes, but then there is something--a manner, an eye. He piles the wood
like champagne bottles. On the raft, you remember, he took off his hat to
death. That's different altogether from us."

He gave a sidelong glance at Brydon, and saw a troubled look.

"Yes," Brydon said, "he is different; and so is she."

"She is a lady," Pierre said, with slow emphasis. "She couldn't hide it
if she tried. She plays the piano, and looks all silk in calico. Made for
this?"--he waved his hand towards the Bridge House. "No, no! made for--"

He paused, smiled enigmatically, and dropped a bit of wood on the swift
current.

Brydon frowned, then said: "Well, made for what, Pierre?"

Pierre looked over Brydon's shoulder, towards a pretty cottage on the
hillside. "Made for homes like that, not this," he said, and he nodded
first towards the hillside, then to the Bridge House. (The cottage
belonged to the young doctor.) A growl like an animal's came from Brydon,
and he clinched the other's shoulder. Pierre glanced at the hand, then at
Brydon's face, and said sharply: "Take it away."

The hand dropped; but Brydon's face was hot, and his eyes were hard.

Pierre continued: "But then women are strange. What you expect they will
not--no. Riches?--it is nothing; houses like that on the hill, nothing.
They have whims. The hut is as good as the house, with the kitchen in the
open where the river welts and washes, and a man--the great man of the
world to them--to play the little game of life with. . . . Pshaw! you are
idle: move; you are thick in the head: think hard; you like the girl:
speak."

As he said this, there showed beneath them the front timbers of a small
crib of logs with a crew of two men, making for the rapids and the slide
below. Here was an adventure, for running the rapids with so slight a
craft and small a crew was smart work. Pierre, measuring the distance,
and with a "Look out, below!" swiftly let himself down by his arms as far
as he could, and then dropped to the timbers, as lightly as if it were a
matter of two feet instead of twelve. He waved a hand to Brydon, and the
crib shot on. Brydon sat eyeing it abstractedly till it ran into the
teeth of the rapids, the long oars of the three men rising and falling to
the monotonous cry. The sun set out the men and the craft against the
tall dark walls of the river in strong relief, and Brydon was carried
away from what Pierre had been saying. He had a solid pleasure in
watching, and he sat up with a call of delight when he saw the crib drive
at the slide. Just glancing the edge, she shot through safely. His face
blazed.

"A pretty sight!" said a voice behind him.

Without a word he swung round, and dropped, more heavily than Pierre,
beside Judith.

"It gets into our bones," he said. "Of course, though it ain't the same
to you," he added, looking down at her over his shoulder. "You don't care
for things so rough, mebbe?"

"I love the river," she said quietly.

"We're a rowdy lot, we river-drivers. We have to be. It's a rowdy
business."

"I never noticed that," she replied, gravely smiling. "When I was small I
used to go to the river-drivers' camps with my brother, and they were
always kind to us. They used to sing and play the fiddle, and joke; but I
didn't think then that they were rowdy, and I don't now. They were never
rough with us."

"No one'd ever be rough with you," was the reply. "Oh yes," she said
suddenly, and turned her head away. She was thinking of what the young
doctor had said to her that morning; how like a foolish boy he had acted:
upbraiding her, questioning her, saying unreasonable things, as young
egoists always do. In years she was younger than he, but in wisdom much
older: in all things more wise and just. He had not struck her, but with
his reckless tongue he had cut her to the heart. "Oh yes," she repeated,
and her eyes ran up to his face and over his great stalwart body; and
then she leaned over the railing and looked into the water.

"I'd break the man into pieces that was rough with you," he said between
his teeth.

"Would you?" she asked in a whisper. Then, not giving him a chance to
reply, "We are very poor, you know, and some people are rough with the
poor--and proud. I remember," she went on, simply, dreamily, and as if
talking to herself, "the day when we first came to the Bridge House. I
sat down on a box and looked at the furniture--it was so little--and
cried. Coming here seemed the last of what grandfather used to be. I
couldn't help it. He sat down too, and didn't say anything. He was very
pale, and I saw that his eyes ached as he looked at me. Then I got angry
with myself, and sprang up and went to work--and we get along pretty
well."

She paused and sighed; then, after a minute: "I love the river. I don't
believe I could be happy away from it. I should like to live on it, and
die on it, and be buried in it."

His eyes were on her eagerly. But she looked so frail and dainty that his
voice, to himself, sounded rude. Still, his hand blundered along the
railing to hers, and covered it tenderly--for so big a hand. She drew her
fingers away, but not very quickly. "Don't!" she said, "and--and someone
is coming!"

There were footsteps behind them. It was her grandfather, carrying a
board fished from the river. He grasped the situation, and stood
speechless with wonder. He had never thought of this. He was a gentleman,
in spite of all, and this man was a common river-boss. Presently he drew
himself up with an air. The heavy board was still in his arms. Brydon
came over and took the board, looking him squarely in the eyes.

"Mr. Rupert," he said, "I want to ask something." The old man nodded.

"I helped you out of a bad scrape on the river?" Again the old man
nodded.

"Well, mebbe, I saved your life. For that I'm going to ask you to draw no
more driftwood from the Madawaska--not a stick, now or ever."

"It is the only way we can keep from freezing in winter." Mr. Rupert
scarcely knew what he said. Brydon looked at Judith, who turned away,
then answered: "I'll keep you from freezing, if you'll let me, you--and
Judith."

"Oh, please let us go into the house," Judith said hastily.

She saw the young doctor driving towards them out of the covered bridge!

When Brydon went to join his men far down the river he left a wife behind
him at the Bridge House, where she and her grandfather were to stay until
the next summer. Then there would be a journey from Bamber's Boom to a
new home.

In the late autumn he came, before he went away to the shanties in the
backwoods, and again in the winter just before the babe was born. Then he
went far up the river to Rice Lake and beyond, to bring down the drives
of logs for his Company. June came, and then there was a sudden sorrow at
the Bridge House. How great it was, Pierre's words as he stood at the
door one evening will testify. He said to the young doctor: "Save the
child, and you shall have back the I O U on your house." Which was also
evidence that the young doctor had fallen into the habit of gambling.

The young doctor looked hard at him. He had a selfish nature. "You can
only do what you can do," he said.

Pierre's eyes were sinister. "If you do not save it, one would guess
why."

The other started, flushed, was silent, and then said: "You think I'm a
coward. We shall see. There is a way, but it may fail."

And though he sucked the diphtheria poison from the child's throat, it
died the next night.

Still, the cottage that Pierre and Company had won was handed back with
such good advice as only a worldwise adventurer can give.

Of the child's death its father did not know. They were not certain where
he was. But when the mother took to her bed again, the young doctor said
it was best that Brydon should come. Pierre had time and inclination to
go for him. But before he went he was taken to Judith's bedside. Pierre
had seen life and death in many forms, but never anything quite like
this: a delicate creature floating away upon a summer current travelling
in those valleys which are neither of this life nor of that; but where
you hear the echoes of both, and are visited by solicitous spirits. There
was no pain in her face--she heard a little, familiar voice from high and
pleasant hills, and she knew, so wise are the dying, that her husband was
travelling after her, and that they would be all together soon. But she
did not speak of that. For the knowledge born of such a time is locked up
in the soul.

Pierre was awe-stricken. Unconsciously he crossed himself.

"Tell him to come quickly," she said, "if you find him,"--her fingers
played with the coverlet,--"for I wish to comfort him. . . . Someone said
that you were bad, Pierre. I do not believe it. You were sorry when my
baby went away. I am--going away--too. But do not tell him that. Tell him
I cannot walk about. I want him to carry me--to carry me. Will you?"
Pierre put out his hand to hers creeping along the coverlet to him; but
it was only instinct that guided him, for he could not see. He started on
his journey with his hat pulled down over his eyes.

One evening when the river was very high and it was said that Brydon's
drives of logs would soon be down, a strange thing happened at the Bridge
House.

The young doctor had gone, whispering to Mr. Rupert that he would come
back later. He went out on tiptoe, as from the presence of an angel. His
selfishness had dropped away from him. The evening wore on, and in the
little back room a woman's voice said:

"Is it morning yet, father?"

"It is still day. The sun has not set, my child."

"I thought it had gone, it seemed so dark."

"You have been asleep, Judith. You have come out of the dark."

"No, I have come out into the darkness--into the world."

"You will see better when you are quite awake."

"I wish I could see the river, father. Will you go and look?"

Then there was a silence. "Well?" she asked.

"It is beautiful," he said, "and the sun is still bright."

"You see as far as Indian Island?"

"I can see the white comb of the reef beyond it, my dear."

"And no one--is coming?"

"There are men making for the shore, and the fires are burning, but no
one is--coming this way. . . . He would come by the road, perhaps."

"Oh no, by the river. Pierre has not found him. Can you see the Eddy?"

"Yes. It is all quiet there; nothing but the logs tossing round it."

"We used to sit there--he and I--by the big cedar tree. Everything was so
cool and sweet. There was only the sound of the force-pump and the
swallowing of the Eddy. They say that a woman was drowned there, and that
you can see her face in the water, if you happen there at sunrise,
weeping and smiling also: a picture in the water. . . . Do you think it
true, father?"

"Life is so strange, and who knows what is not life, my child?"

"When baby was dying I held it over the water beneath that window, where
the sunshine falls in the evening; and it looked down once before its
spirit passed like a breath over my face. Maybe, its look will stay, for
him to see when he comes. It was just below where you stand.... Father,
can you see its face?" "No, Judith; nothing but the water and the
sunshine."

"Dear, carry me to the window."

When this was done she suddenly leaned forward with shining eyes and
anxious fingers. "My baby! My baby!" she said.

She looked up the river, but her eyes were fading, she could not see far.
"It is all a grey light," she said, "I cannot see well." Yet she smiled.
"Lay me down again, father," she whispered.

After a little she sank into a slumber. All at once she started up. "The
river, the beautiful river!" she cried out gently. Then, at the last,
"Oh, my dear, my dear!"

And so she came out of the valley into the high hills. Later he was left
alone with his dead. The young doctor and others had come and gone. He
would watch till morning. He sat long beside her, numb to the world. At
last he started, for he heard a low clear call behind the House. He went
out quickly to the little platform, and saw through the dusk a man
drawing himself up. It was Brydon. He caught the old man's shoulders
convulsively. "How is she?" he asked. "Come in, my son," was the low
reply. The old man saw a grief greater than his own. He led the husband
to the room where the wife lay beautiful and still. "She is better, as
you see," he said bravely.

The hours went, and the two sat near the body, one on either side. They
knew not what was going on in the world.

As they mourned, Pierre and the young doctor sat silent in that cottage
on the hillside. They were roused at last. There came up to Pierre's keen
ears the sound of the river.

"Let us go out," he said; "the river is flooding. You can hear the logs."

They came out and watched. The river went swishing, swilling past, and
the dull boom of the logs as they struck the piers of the bridge or some
building on the shore came rolling to them.

"The dams and booms have burst!" Pierre said. He pointed to the camps far
up the river. By the light of the camp-fires there appeared a wide
weltering flood of logs and debris. Pierre's eyes shifted to the Bridge
House. In one room was a light. He stepped out and down, and the other
followed. They had almost reached the shore, when Pierre cried out
sharply: "What's that?"

He pointed to an indistinct mass bearing down upon the Bridge House. It
was a big shed that had been carried away, and, jammed between timbers,
had not broken up. There was no time for warning. It came on swiftly,
heavily. There was a strange, horrible, grinding sound, and then they saw
the light of that one room move on, waving a little to and fro-on to the
rapids, the cohorts of logs crowding hard after.

Where the light was two men had started to their feet when the crash
came. They felt the House move. "Run-save yourself!" cried the old man
quietly. "We are lost!"

The floor rocked.

"Go," he said again. "I will stay with her."

"She is mine," Brydon said; and he took her in his arms. "I will not go."

They could hear the rapids below. The old man steadied himself in the
deep water on the floor, and caught out yearningly at the cold hands.

"Come close, come close," said Brydon. "Closer; put your arms round her."

The old man did so. They were locked in each other's arms--dead and
living.

The old man spoke, with a piteous kind of joy: "We therefore commit her
body to the deep--!"

The three were never found.


THE EPAULETTES

Old Athabasca, chief of the Little Crees, sat at the door of his lodge,
staring down into the valley where Fort Pentecost lay, and Mitawawa his
daughter sat near him, fretfully pulling at the fringe of her fine
buckskin jacket. She had reason to be troubled. Fyles the trader had put
a great indignity upon Athabasca. A factor of twenty years before, in
recognition of the chief's merits and in reward of his services, had
presented him with a pair of epaulettes, left in the Fort by some officer
in Her Majesty's service. A good, solid, honest pair of epaulettes, well
fitted to stand the wear and tear of those high feasts and functions at
which the chief paraded them upon his broad shoulders. They were the
admiration of his own tribe, the wonder of others, the envy of many
chiefs. It was said that Athabasca wore them creditably, and was no more
immobile and grand-mannered than became a chief thus honoured above his
kind.

But the years went, and there came a man to Fort Pentecost who knew not
Athabasca. He was young, and tall and strong, had a hot temper, knew
naught of human nature, was possessed by a pride more masterful than his
wisdom, and a courage stronger than his tact. He was ever for
high-handedness, brooked no interference, and treated the Indians more as
Company's serfs than as Company's friends and allies. Also, he had an eye
for Mitawawa, and found favour in return, though to what depth it took a
long time to show. The girl sat high in the minds and desires of the
young braves, for she had beauty of a heathen kind, a deft and dainty
finger for embroidered buckskin, a particular fortune with a bow and
arrow, and the fleetest foot. There were mutterings because Fyles the
white man came to sit often in Athabasca's lodge. He knew of this, but
heeded not at all. At last Konto, a young brave who very accurately
guessed at Fyles' intentions, stopped him one day on the Grey Horse
Trail, and in a soft, indolent voice begged him to prove his regard in a
fight without weapons, to the death, the survivor to give the other
burial where he fell. Fyles was neither fool nor coward. It would have
been foolish to run the risk of leaving Fort and people masterless for an
Indian's whim; it would have been cowardly to do nothing. So he whipped
out a revolver, and bade his rival march before him to the Fort; which
Konto very calmly did, begging the favour of a bit of tobacco as he went.

Fyles demanded of Athabasca that he should sit in judgment, and should at
least banish Konto from his tribe, hinting the while that he might have
to put a bullet into Konto's refractory head if the thing were not done.
He said large things in the name of the H.B.C., and was surprised that
Athabasca let them pass unmoved. But that chief, after long
consideration, during which he drank Company's coffee and ate Company's
pemmican, declared that he could do nothing: for Konto had made a fine
offer, and a grand chance of a great fight had been missed. This was in
the presence of several petty officers and Indians and woodsmen at the
Fort. Fyles had vanity and a nasty temper. He swore a little, and with
words of bluster went over and ripped the epaulettes from the chief's
shoulders as a punishment, a mark of degradation. The chief said nothing.
He got up, and reached out his hands as if to ask them back; and when
Fyles refused, he went away, drawing his blanket high over his shoulders.
It was wont before to lie loosely about him, to show his badges of
captaincy and alliance.

This was about the time that the Indians were making ready for the
buffalo, and when their chief took to his lodge, and refused to leave it,
they came to ask him why. And they were told. They were for making
trouble, but the old chief said the quarrel was his own: he would settle
it in his own way. He would not go to the hunt. Konto, he said, should
take his place; and when his braves came back there should be great
feasting, for then the matter would be ended.

Half the course of the moon and more, and Athabasca came out of his
lodge--the first time in the sunlight since the day of his disgrace. He
and his daughter sat silent and watchful at the door. There had been no
word between Fyles and Athabasca, no word between Mitawawa and Fyles. The
Fort was well-nigh tenantless, for the half-breeds also had gone after
buffalo, and only the trader, a clerk, and a half-breed cook were left.

Mitawawa gave a little cry of impatience: she had held her peace so long
that even her slow Indian nature could endure no more. "What will my
father Athabasca do?" she asked. "With idleness the flesh grows soft, and
the iron melts from the arm."

"But when the thoughts are stone, the body is as that of the Mighty Men
of the Kimash Hills. When the bow is long drawn, beware the arrow."

"It is no answer," she said: "what will my father do?"

"They were of gold," he answered, "that never grew rusty. My people were
full of wonder when they stood before me, and the tribes had envy as they
passed. It is a hundred moons and one red midsummer moon since the Great
Company put them on my shoulders. They were light to carry, but it was as
if I bore an army. No other chief was like me. That is all over. When the
tribes pass they will laugh, and my people will scorn me if I do not come
out to meet them with the yokes of gold."

"But what will my father do?" she persisted.

"I have had many thoughts, and at night I have called on the Spirits who
rule. From the top of the Hill of Graves I have beaten the soft drum, and
called, and sung the hymn which wakes the sleeping Spirits: and I know
the way."

"What is the way?" Her eyes filled with a kind of fear or trouble, and
many times they shifted from the Fort to her father, and back again. The
chief was silent. Then anger leapt into her face.

"Why does my father fear to speak to his child?" she said. "I will speak
plain. I love the man: but I love my father also."

She stood up, and drew her blanket about her, one hand clasped proudly on
her breast. "I cannot remember my mother; but I remember when I first
looked down from my hammock in the pine tree, and saw my father sitting
by the fire. It was in the evening like this, but darker, for the pines
made great shadows. I cried out, and he came and took me down, and laid
me between his knees, and fed me with bits of meat from the pot. He
talked much to me, and his voice was finer than any other. There is no
one like my father--Konto is nothing: but the voice of the white man,
Fyles, had golden words that our braves do not know, and I listened.
Konto did a brave thing. Fyles, because he was a great man of the
Company, would not fight, and drove him like a dog. Then he made my
father as a worm in the eyes of the world. I would give my life for Fyles
the trader, but I would give more than my life to wipe out my father's
shame, and to show that Konto of the Little Crees is no dog. I have been
carried by the hands of the old men of my people, I have ridden the
horses of the young men: their shame is my shame."

The eyes of the chief had never lifted from the Fort: nor from his look
could you have told that he heard his daughter's words. For a moment he
was silent, then a deep fire came into his eyes, and his wide heavy brows
drew up so that the frown of anger was gone. At last, as she waited, he
arose, put out a hand and touched her forehead.

"Mitawawa has spoken well," he said. "There will be an end. The yokes of
gold are mine: an honour given cannot be taken away. He has stolen; he is
a thief. He would not fight Konto: but I am a chief and he shall fight
me. I am as great as many men--I have carried the golden yokes: we will
fight for them. I thought long, for I was afraid my daughter loved the
man more than her people: but now I will break him in pieces. Has
Mitawawa seen him since the shameful day?"

"He has come to the lodge, but I would not let him in unless he brought
the epaulettes. He said he would bring them when Konto was punished. I
begged of him as I never begged of my own father, but he was hard as the
ironwood tree. I sent him away. Yet there is no tongue like his in the
world; he is tall and beautiful, and has the face of a spirit."

From the Fort Fyles watched the two. With a pair of field-glasses he
could follow their actions, could almost read their faces. "There'll be a
lot of sulking about those epaulettes, Mallory," he said at last, turning
to his clerk. "Old Athabasca has a bee in his bonnet."

"Wouldn't it be just as well to give 'em back, sir?" Mallory had been at
Fort Pentecost a long time, and he understood Athabasca and his Indians.
He was a solid, slow-thinking old fellow, but he had that wisdom of the
north which can turn from dove to serpent and from serpent to lion in the
moment.

"Give 'em back, Mallory? I'll see him in Jericho first, unless he goes on
his marrow-bones and kicks Konto out of the camp."

"Very well, sir. But I think we'd better keep an eye open."

"Eye open, be hanged! If he'd been going to riot he'd have done so before
this. Besides, the girl--!" Mallory looked long and earnestly at his
master, whose forehead was glued to the field-glass. His little eyes
moved as if in debate, his slow jaws opened once or twice. At last he
said: "I'd give the girl the go-by, Mr. Fyles, if I was you, unless I
meant to marry her." Fyles suddenly swung round. "Keep your place, blast
you, Mallory, and keep your morals too. One'd think you were a
missionary." Then with a sudden burst of anger: "Damn it all, if my men
don't stand by me against a pack of treacherous Indians, I'd better get
out."

"Your men will stand by you, sir: no fear. I've served three traders
here, and my record is pretty clean, Mr. Fyles. But I'll say it to your
face, whether you like it or not, that you're not as good a judge of the
Injin as me, or even Duc the cook: and that's straight as I can say it,
Mr. Fyles."

Fyles paced up and down in anger--not speaking; but presently threw up
the glass, and looked towards Athabasca's lodge. "They're gone," he said
presently; "I'll go and see them to-morrow. The old fool must do what I
want, or there'll be ructions."

The moon was high over Fort Pentecost when Athabasca entered the silent
yard. The dogs growled, but Indian dogs growl without reason, and no one
heeds them. The old chief stood a moment looking at the windows, upon
which slush-lights were throwing heavy shadows. He went to Fyles' window:
no one was in the room. He went to another: Mallory and Duc were sitting
at a table. Mallory had the epaulettes, looking at them and fingering the
hooks by which Athabasca had fastened them on. Duc was laughing: he
reached over for an epaulette, tossed it up, caught it and threw it down
with a guffaw. Then the door opened, and Athabasca walked in, seized the
epaulettes, and went swiftly out again. Just outside the door Mallory
clapped a hand on one shoulder, and Duc caught at the epaulettes.

Athabasca struggled wildly. All at once there was a cold white flash, and
Duc came huddling to Mallory's feet. For a brief instant Mallory and the
Indian fell apart, then Athabasca with a contemptuous fairness tossed his
knife away, and ran in on his man. They closed; strained, swayed, became
a tangled wrenching mass; and then Mallory was lifted high into the air,
and came down with a broken back.

Athabasca picked up the epaulettes, and hurried away, breathing hard, and
hugging them to his bare red-stained breast. He had nearly reached the
gate when he heard a cry. He did not turn, but a heavy stone caught him
high in the shoulders, and he fell on his face and lay clutching the
epaulettes in his outstretched hands.

Fyles' own hands were yet lifted with the effort of throwing, when he
heard the soft rush of footsteps, and someone came swiftly into his
embrace. A pair of arms ran round his shoulders--lips closed with
his--something ice-cold and hard touched his neck--he saw a bright flash
at his throat.

In the morning Konto found Mitawawa sitting with wild eyes by her
father's body. She had fastened the epaulettes on its shoulders. Fyles
and his men made a grim triangle of death at the door of the Fort.


THE HOUSE WITH THE BROKEN SHUTTER

       "He stands in the porch of the world--
         (Why should the door be shut?)
        The grey wolf waits at his heel,
         (Why is the window barred?)
        Wild is the trail from the Kimash Hills,
        The blight has fallen on bush and tree,
        The choking earth has swallowed the streams,
        Hungry and cold is the Red Patrol:
         (Why should the door be shut?)
        The Scarlet Hunter has come to bide--
         (Why is the window barred?)"

Pierre stopped to listen. The voice singing was clear and soft, yet
strong--a mezzo-soprano without any culture save that of practice and
native taste. It had a singular charm--a sweet, fantastic sincerity. He
stood still and fastened his eyes on the house, a few rods away. It stood
on a knoll perching above Fort Ste. Anne. Years had passed since Pierre
had visited the Fort, and he was now on his way to it again, after many
wanderings. The house had stood here in the old days, and he remembered
it very well, for against it John Marcey, the Company's man, was shot by
Stroke Laforce, of the Riders of the Plains. Looking now, he saw that the
shutter, which had been pulled off to bear the body away, was hanging
there just as he had placed it, with seven of its slats broken and a dark
stain in one corner. Something more of John Marcey than memory attached
to that shutter. His eyes dwelt on it long he recalled the scene: a night
with stars and no moon, a huge bonfire to light the Indians, at their
dance, and Marcey, Laforce, and many others there, among whom was
Lucille, the little daughter of Gyng the Factor. Marcey and Laforce were
only boys then, neither yet twenty-three, and they were friendly rivals
with the sweet little coquette, who gave her favors with a singular
impartiality and justice. Once Marcey had given her a gold spoon. Laforce
responded with a tiny, fretted silver basket. Laforce was delighted to
see her carrying her basket, till she opened it and showed the spoon
inside. There were many mock quarrels, in one of which Marcey sent her a
letter by the Company's courier, covered with great seals, saying, "I
return you the hairpin, the egg-shell, and the white wolf's tooth. Go to
your Laforce, or whatever his ridiculous name may be."

In this way the pretty game ran on, the little goldenhaired,
golden-faced, golden-voiced child dancing so gayly in their hearts, but
nestling in them too, after her wilful fashion, until the serious thing
came--the tragedy.

On the mad night when all ended, she was in the gayest, the most elf-like
spirits. All went well until Marcey dug a hole in the ground, put a stone
in it, and, burying it, said it was Laforce's heart. Then Laforce
pretended to ventriloquise, and mocked Marcey's slight stutter. That was
the beginning of the trouble, and Lucille, like any lady of the world,
troubled at Laforce's unkindness, tried to smooth things over--tried very
gravely. But the playful rivalry of many months changed its composition
suddenly as through some delicate yet powerful chemical action, and the
savage in both men broke out suddenly. Where motives and emotions are few
they are the more vital, their action is the more violent. No one knew
quite what the two young men said to each other, but presently, while the
Indian dance was on, they drew to the side of the house, and had their
duel out in the half-shadows, no one knowing, till the shots rang on the
night, and John Marcey, without a cry, sprang into the air and fell face
upwards, shot through the heart.

They tried to take the child away, but she would not go; and when they
carried Marcey on the shutter she followed close by, resisting her
father's wishes and commands. And just before they made a prisoner of
Laforce, she said to him very quietly--so like a woman she was--"I will
give you back the basket, and the riding-whip, and the other things, and
I will never forgive you--never--no, never!"

Stroke Laforce had given himself up, had himself ridden to Winnipeg, a
thousand miles, and told his story. Then the sergeant's stripes had been
stripped from his arm, he had been tried, and on his own statement had
got twelve years' imprisonment. Ten years had passed since then--since
Marcey was put away in his grave, since Pierre left Fort Ste. Anne, and
he had not seen it or Lucille in all that time. But he knew that Gyng was
dead, and that his widow and her child had gone south or east somewhere;
of Laforce after his sentence he had never heard.

He stood looking at the house from the shade of the solitary pine-tree
near it, recalling every incident of that fatal night. He had the gift of
looking at a thing in its true proportions, perhaps because he had little
emotion and a strong brain, or perhaps because early in life his emotions
were rationalised. Presently he heard the voice again:

       "He waits at the threshold stone--
         (Why should the key-hole rust?)
        The eagle broods at his side,
         (Why should the blind be drawn?)
        Long has he watched, and far has he called
        The lonely sentinel of the North:
        "Who goes there?" to the wandering soul:
        Heavy of heart is the Red Patrol
         (Why should the key-hole rust?)
        The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home,
         (Why should the blind be drawn?)"

Now he recognised the voice. Its golden timbre brought back a young
girl's golden face and golden hair. It was summer, and the window with
the broken shutter was open. He was about to go to it, when a door of the
house opened, and a girl appeared. She was tall, with rich, yellow hair
falling loosely about her head; she had a strong, finely cut chin and a
broad brow, under which a pair of deep blue eyes shone-violet blue, rare
and fine. She stood looking down at the Fort for a few moments, unaware
of Pierre's presence. But presently she saw him leaning against the tree,
and she started as from a spirit.

"Monsieur!" she said--"Pierre!" and stepped forward again from the
doorway.

He came to her, and "Ah, p'tite Lucille," he said, "you remember me,
eh?--and yet so many years ago!"

"But you remember me," she answered, "and I have changed so much!"

"It is the man who should remember, the woman may forget if she will."

Pierre did not mean to pay a compliment; he was merely thinking.

She made a little gesture of deprecation. "I was a child," she said.

Pierre lifted a shoulder slightly. "What matter? It is sex that I mean.
What difference to me--five, or forty, or ninety? It is all sex. It is
only lovers, the hunters of fire-flies, that think of age--mais oui!"

She had a way of looking at you before she spoke, as though she were
trying to find what she actually thought. She was one after Pierre's own
heart, and he knew it; but just here he wondered where all that ancient
coquetry was gone, for there were no traces of it left; she was steady of
eye, reposeful, rich in form and face, and yet not occupied with herself.
He had only seen her for a minute or so, yet he was sure that what she
was just now she was always, or nearly so, for the habits of a life leave
their mark, and show through every phase of emotion and incident whether
it be light or grave.

"I think I understand you," she said. "I think I always did a little,
from the time you stayed with Grah the idiot at Fort o' God, and fought
the Indians when the others left. Only--men said bad things of you, and
my father did not like you, and you spoke so little to me ever. Yet I
mind how you used to sit and watch me, and I also mind when you rode the
man down who stole my pony, and brought them both back."

Pierre smiled--he was pleased at this. "Ah, my young friend," he said, "I
do not forget that either, for though he had shaved my ear with a bullet,
you would not have him handed over to the Riders of the Plains--such a
tender heart!"

Her eyes suddenly grew wide. She was childlike in her amazement, indeed,
childlike in all ways, for she was very sincere. It was her great
advantage to live where nothing was required of her but truth, she had
not suffered that sickness, social artifice.

"I never knew," she said, "that he had shot at you--never! You did not
tell that."

"There is a time for everything--the time for that was not till now."

"What could I have done then?"

"You might have left it to me. I am not so pious that I can't be merciful
to the sinner. But this man--this Brickney--was a vile scoundrel always,
and I wanted him locked up. I would have shot him myself, but I was tired
of doing the duty of the law. Yes, yes," he added, as he saw her smile a
little. "It is so. I have love for justice, even I, Pretty Pierre. Why
not justice on myself? Ha! The law does not its duty. And maybe some day
I shall have to do its work on myself. Some are coaxed out of life, some
are kicked out, and some open the doors quietly for themselves, and go
a-hunting Outside."

"They used to talk as if one ought to fear you," she said, "but"--she
looked him straight in the eyes--"but maybe that's because you've never
hid any badness."

"It is no matter, anyhow," he answered. "I live in the open, I walk in
the open road, and I stand by what I do to the open law and the gospel.
It is my whim--every man to his own saddle."

"It is ten years," she said abruptly.

"Ten years less five days," he answered as sententiously.

"Come inside," she said quietly, and turned to the door.

Without a word he turned also, but instead of going direct to the door
came and touched the broken shutter and the dark stain on one corner with
a delicate forefinger. Out of the corner of his eye he could see her on
the doorstep, looking intently.

He spoke as if to himself: "It has not been touched since then--no. It
was hardly big enough for him, so his legs hung over. Ah, yes, ten
years--Abroad, John Marcey!" Then, as if still musing, he turned to the
girl: "He had no father or mother--no one, of course; so that it wasn't
so bad after all. If you've lived with the tongue in the last hole of the
buckle as you've gone, what matter when you go! C'est egal--it is all the
same."

Her face had become pale as he spoke, but no muscle stirred; only her
eyes filled with a deeper color, and her hand closed tightly on the
door-jamb. "Come in, Pierre," she said, and entered. He followed her. "My
mother is at the Fort," she added, "but she will be back soon."

She placed two chairs not far from the open door. They sat, and Pierre
slowly rolled a cigarette and lighted it.

"How long have you lived here?" he asked presently.

"It is seven years since we came first," she replied. "After that night
they said the place was haunted, and no one would live in it, but when my
father died my mother and I came for three years. Then we went east, and
again came back, and here we have been."

"The shutter?" Pierre asked.

They needed few explanations--their minds were moving with the same
thought.

"I would not have it changed, and of course no one cared to touch it. So
it has hung there."

"As I placed it ten years ago," he said.

They both became silent for a time, and at last he said: "Marcey had no
one,--Sergeant Laforce a mother."

"It killed his mother," she whispered, looking into the white sunlight.
She was noting how it was flashed from the bark of the birch-trees near
the Fort.

"His mother died," she added again, quietly. "It killed her--the gaol for
him!"

"An eye for an eye," he responded.

"Do you think that evens John Marcey's death?" she sighed.

"As far as Marcey's concerned," he answered. "Laforce has his own
reckoning besides."

"It was not a murder," she urged.

"It was a fair fight," he replied firmly, "and Laforce shot straight." He
was trying to think why she lived here, why the broken shutter still hung
there, why the matter had settled so deeply on her. He remembered the
song she was singing, the legend of the Scarlet Hunter, the fabled Savior
of the North.

       "Heavy of heart is the Red Patrol--
         (Why should the key-hole rust?)
        The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home,
         (Why should the blind be drawn?)"

He repeated the words, lingering on them. He loved to come at the truth
of things by allusive, far-off reflections, rather than by the sharp
questioning of the witness-box. He had imagination, refinement in such
things. A light dawned on him as he spoke the words--all became clear.
She sang of the Scarlet Hunter, but she meant someone else! That was it--

       "Hungry and cold is the Red Patrol--
         (Why should the door be shut?)
        The Scarlet Hunter has come to bide,
         (Why is the window barred?)"

But why did she live here? To get used to a thought, to have it so near
her, that if the man--if Laforce himself came, she would have herself
schooled to endure the shadow and the misery of it all? Ah, that was it!
The little girl, who had seen her big lover killed, who had said she
would never forgive the other, who had sent him back the fretted-silver
basket, the riding-whip, and other things, had kept the criminal in her
mind all these years; had, out of her childish coquetry, grown
into--what? As a child she had been wise for her years--almost too wise.
What had happened? She had probably felt sorrow for Laforce at first, and
afterwards had shown active sympathy, and at last--no, he felt that she
had not quite forgiven him, that, whatever was, she had not hidden the
criminal in her heart. But why did she sing that song? Her heart was
pleading for him--for the criminal. Had she and her mother gone to
Winnipeg to be near Laforce, to comfort him? Was Laforce free now, and
was she unwilling? It was so strange that she should thus have carried on
her childhood into her womanhood. But he guessed her--she had
imagination.

"His mother died in my arms in Winnipeg," she said abruptly at last. "I'm
glad I was some comfort to her. You see, it all came through me--I was so
young and spoiled and silly--John Marcey's death, her death, and his long
years in prison. Even then I knew better than to set the one against the
other. Must a child not be responsible? I was--I am!"

"And so you punish yourself?"

"It was terrible for me--even as a child. I said that I could never
forgive, but when his mother died, blessing me, I did. Then there came
something else."

"You saw him, there amie?"

"I saw him--so changed, so quiet, so much older--all grey at the temples.
At first I lived here that I might get used to the thought of the
thing--to learn to bear it; and afterwards that I might learn--" She
paused, looking in half-doubt at Pierre.

"It is safe; I am silent," he said.

"That I might learn to bear--him," she continued.

"Is he still--" Pierre paused.

She spoke up quickly. "Oh no, he has been free two years."

"Where is he now?"

"I don't know." She waited for a minute, then said again, "I don't know.
When he was free, he came to me, but I--I could not. He thought, too,
that because he had been in gaol, that I wouldn't--be his wife. He didn't
think enough of himself, he didn't urge anything. And I wasn't
ready--no--no--no--how could I be! I didn't care so much about the gaol,
but he had killed John Marcey. The gaol--what was that to me! There was
no real shame in it unless he had done a mean thing. He had been
wicked--not mean. Killing is awful, but not shameful. Think--the
difference--if he had been a thief!"

Pierre nodded. "Then some one should have killed him!" he said. "Well,
after?"

"After--after--ah, he went away for a year. Then he came back; but no, I
was always thinking of that night I walked behind John Marcey's body to
the Fort. So he went away again, and we came here, and here we have
lived."

"He has not come here?"

"No; once from the far north he sent me a letter by an Indian, saying
that he was going with a half-breed to search for a hunting party, an
English gentleman and two men who were lost. The name of one of the men
was Brickney."

Pierre stopped short in a long whiffing of smoke. "Holy!" he said, "that
thief Brickney again. He would steal the broad road to hell if he could
carry it. He once stole the quarters from a dead man's eyes. Mon Dieu! to
save Brickney's life, the courage to do that--like sticking your face in
the mire and eating!--But, pshaw!--go on, p'tite Lucille."

"There is no more. I never heard again."

"How long was that ago?"

"Nine months or more."

"Nothing has been heard of any of them?"

"Nothing at all. The Englishman belonged to the Hudson's Bay Company, but
they have heard nothing down here at Fort Ste. Anne."

"If he saves the Company's man, that will make up the man he lost for
them, eh--you think that, eh?" Pierre's eyes had a curious ironical
light.

"I do not care for the Company," she said. "John Marcey's life was his
own."

"Good!" he added quickly, and his eyes admired her. "That is the thing.
Then, do not forget that Marcey took his life in his hands himself, that
he would have killed Laforce if Laforce hadn't killed him."

"I know, I know," she said, "but I should have felt the same if John
Marcey had killed Stroke Laforce."

"It is a pity to throw your life away," he ventured. He said this for a
purpose. He did not think she was throwing it away.

She was watching a little knot of horsemen coming over a swell of the
prairie far off. She withdrew her eyes and fixed them on Pierre. "Do you
throw your life away if you do what is the only thing you are told to
do?"

She placed her hand on her heart--that had been her one guide.

Pierre got to his feet, came over, and touched her on the shoulder.

"You have the great secret," he said quietly. "The thing may be all wrong
to others, but if it's right to yourself--that's it--mais oui! If he
comes," he added "if he comes back, think of him as well as Marcey.
Marcey is sleeping--what does it matter? If he is awake, he has better
times, for he was a man to make another world sociable. Think of Laforce,
for he has his life to live, and he is a man to make this world sociable.

        'The Scarlet Hunter is sick for home--
         (Why should the door be shut?)'"

Her eyes had been following the group of horsemen on the plains. She
again fixed them on Pierre, and stood up.

"It is a beautiful legend--that," she said.

"But?--but?" he asked.

She would not answer him. "You will come again," she said; "you
will--help me?"

"Surely, p'tite Lucille, surely, I will come. But to help--ah, that would
sound funny to the Missionary at the Fort and to others!"

"You understand life," she said, "and I can speak to you."

"It's more to you to understand you than to be good, eh?"

"I guess it's more to any woman," she answered. They both passed out of
the house. She turned towards the broken shutter. Then their eyes met. A
sad little smile hovered at her lips.

"What is the use?" she said, and her eyes fastened on the horsemen.

He knew now that she would never shudder again at the sight of it, or at
the remembrance of Marcey's death.

"But he will come," was the reply to her, and her smile almost settled
and stayed.

They parted, and as he went down the hill he saw far over, coming up, a
woman in black, who walked as if she carried a great weight. "Every shot
that kills ricochets," he said to himself:

"His mother dead--her mother like that!"

He passed into the Fort, renewing acquaintances in the Company's store,
and twenty minutes after he was one to greet the horsemen that Lucille
had seen coming over the hills. They were five, and one had to be helped
from his horse. It was Stroke Laforce, who had been found near dead at
the Metal River by a party of men exploring in the north.

He had rescued the Englishman and his party, but within a day of the
finding the Englishman died, leaving him his watch, a ring, and a cheque
on the H. B. C. at Winnipeg. He and the two survivors, one of whom was
Brickney, started south. One night Brickney robbed him and made to get
away, and on his seizing the thief he was wounded. Then the other man
came to his help and shot Brickney: after that weeks of wandering, and at
last rescue and Fort Ste. Anne.

A half-hour after this Pierre left Laforce on the crest of the hill above
the Fort, and did not turn to go down till he had seen the other pass
within the house with the broken shutter. And later he saw a little
bonfire on the hill. The next evening he came to the house again himself.
Lucille rose to meet him.

"'Why should the door be shut?"' he quoted smiling.

"The door is open," she answered quickly and with a quiet joy.

He turned to the motion of her hand, and saw Laforce asleep on a couch.

Soon afterwards, as he passed from the house, he turned towards the
window. The broken shutter was gone.

He knew now the meaning of the bonfire the night before.


THE FINDING OF FINGALL

"Fingall! Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

A grey mist was rising from the river, the sun was drinking it
delightedly, the swift blue water showed underneath it, and the top of
Whitefaced Mountain peaked the mist by a hand-length. The river brushed
the banks like rustling silk, and the only other sound, very sharp and
clear in the liquid monotone, was the crack of a woodpecker's beak on a
hickory tree.

It was a sweet, fresh autumn morning in Lonesome Valley. Before night the
deer would bellow reply to the hunters' rifles, and the mountain-goat
call to its unknown gods; but now there was only the wild duck skimming
the river, and the high hilltop rising and fading into the mist, the
ardent sun, and again that strange cry--

"Fingall!--Oh, Fingall! Fingall!"

Two men, lounging at a fire on a ledge of the hills, raised their eyes to
the mountain-side beyond and above them, and one said presently:

"The second time. It's a woman's voice, Pierre." Pierre nodded, and
abstractedly stirred the coals about with a twig.

"Well, it is a pity--the poor Cynthie," he said at last.

"It is a woman, then. You know her, Pierre--her story?"

"Fingall! Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

Pierre raised his head towards the sound; then after a moment, said:

"I know Fingall."

"And the woman? Tell me."

"And the girl. Fingall was all fire and heart, and devil-may-care.
She--she was not beautiful except in the eye, but that was like a flame
of red and blue. Her hair, too--then--would trip her up, if it hung
loose. That was all, except that she loved him too much. But women--et
puis, when a woman gets a man between her and the heaven above and the
earth beneath, and there comes the great hunger, what is the good! A man
cannot understand, but he can see, and he can fear. What is the good! To
play with life, that is not much; but to play with a soul is more than a
thousand lives. Look at Cynthie."

He paused, and Lawless waited patiently. Presently Pierre continued:

Fingall was gentil; he would take off his hat to a squaw. It made no
difference what others did; he didn't think--it was like breathing to
him. How can you tell the way things happen? Cynthie's father kept the
tavern at St. Gabriel's Fork, over against the great saw-mill. Fingall
was foreman of a gang in the lumberyard. Cynthie had a brother--Fenn.
Fenn was as bad as they make, but she loved him, and Fingall knew it
well, though he hated the young skunk. The girl's eyes were like two
little fire-flies when Fingall was about.

"He was a gentleman, though he had only half a name--Fingall--like that.
I think he did not expect to stay; he seemed to be waiting for
something--always when the mail come in he would be there; and afterwards
you wouldn't see him for a time. So it seemed to me that he made up his
mind to think nothing of Cynthie, and to say nothing."

"Fingall! Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

The strange, sweet, singing voice sounded nearer. "She's coming this way,
Pierre," said Lawless.

"I hope not to see her. What is the good!"

"Well, let us have the rest of the story."

"Her brother Fenn was in Fingall's gang. One day there was trouble. Fenn
called Fingall a liar. The gang stopped piling; the usual thing did not
come. Fingall told him to leave the yard, and they would settle some
other time. That night a wicked thing happened. We were sitting in the
bar-room when we heard two shots and then a fall. We ran into the other
room; there was Fenn on the floor, dying. He lifted himself on his elbow,
pointed at Fingall--and fell back. The father of the boy stood white and
still a few feet away. There was no pistol showing--none at all.

"The men closed in on Fingall. He did not stir--he seemed to be thinking
of something else. He had a puzzled, sorrowful look. The men roared round
him, but he waved them back for a moment, and looked first at the father,
then at the son. I could not understand at first. Someone pulled a pistol
out of Fingall's pocket and showed it. At that moment Cynthie came in.
She gave a cry. By the holy! I do not want to hear a cry like that often.
She fell on her knees beside the boy, and caught his head to her breast.
Then with a wild look she asked who did it. They had just taken Fingall
out into the bar-room. They did not tell her his name, for they knew that
she loved him.

"'Father,' she said all at once, 'have you killed the man that killed
Fenn?'

"The old man shook his head. There was a sick colour in his face.

"'Then I will kill him,' she said.

"She laid her brother's head down, and stood up. Someone put in her hand
the pistol, and told her it was the same that had killed Fenn. She took
it, and came with us. The old man stood still where he was; he was like
stone. I looked at him for a minute and thought; then I turned round and
went to the bar-room; and he followed. Just as I got inside the door, I
saw the girl start back, and her hand drop, for she saw that it was
Fingall; he was looking at her very strange. It was the rule to empty the
gun into a man who had been sentenced; and already Fingall had heard his,
'God-have-mercy!' The girl was to do it.

"Fingall said to her in a muffled voice, 'Fire--Cynthie!'

"I guessed what she would do. In a kind of a dream she raised the pistol
up--up--up, till I could see it was just out of range of his head, and
she fired. One! two! three! four! five! Fingall never moved a muscle; but
the bullets spotted the wall at the side of his head. She stopped after
the five; but the arm was still held out, and her finger was on the
trigger; she seemed to be all dazed. Only six chambers were in the gun,
and of course one chamber was empty. Fenn had its bullet in his lungs, as
we thought. So someone beside Cynthie touched her arm, pushing it down.
But there was another shot, and this time, because of the push, the
bullet lodged in Fingall's skull."

Pierre paused now, and waved with his hand towards the mist which hung
high up like a canopy between the hills.

"But," said Lawless, not heeding the scene, "what about that sixth
bullet?"

"Holy, it is plain! Fingall did not fire the shot. His revolver was full,
every chamber, when Cynthie first took it."

"Who killed the lad?"

"Can you not guess? There had been words between the father and the boy:
both had fierce blood. The father, in a mad minute, fired; the boy wanted
revenge on Fingall, and, to save his father, laid it on the other. The
old man? Well, I do not know whether he was a coward, or stupid, or
ashamed--he let Fingall take it."

"Fingall took it to spare the girl, eh?"

"For the girl. It wasn't good for her to know her father killed his own
son."

"What came after?"

"The worst. That night the girl's father killed himself, and the two were
buried in the same grave. Cynthie--"

"Fingall! Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!"

"You hear? Yes, like that all the time as she sat on the floor, her hair
about her like a cloud, and the dead bodies in the next room. She thought
she had killed Fingall, and she knew now that he was innocent. The two
were buried. Then we told her that Fingall was not dead. She used to come
and sit outside the door, and listen to his breathing, and ask if he ever
spoke of her. What was the good of lying? If we said he did, she'd have
come in to him, and that would do no good, for he wasn't right in his
mind. By and by we told her he was getting well, and then she didn't
come, but stayed at home, just saying his name over to herself. Alors,
things take hold of a woman--it is strange! When Fingall was strong
enough to go out, I went with him the first time. He was all thin and
handsome as you can think, but he had no memory, and his eyes were like a
child's. She saw him, and came out to meet him. What does a woman care
for the world when she loves a man? Well, he just looked at her as if
he'd never seen her before, and passed by without a sign, though
afterwards a trouble came in his face. Three days later he was gone, no
one knew where. That is two years ago. Ever since she has been looking
for him."

"Is she mad?"

"Mad? Holy Mother! it is not good to have one thing in the head all the
time! What do you think? So much all at once! And then--"

"Hush, Pierre! There she is!" said Lawless, pointing to a ledge of rock
not far away.

The girl stood looking out across the valley, a weird, rapt look in her
face, her hair falling loose, a staff like a shepherd's crook in one
hand, the other hand over her eyes as she slowly looked from point to
point of the horizon.

The two watched her without speaking. Presently she saw them. She gazed
at them for a minute, then descended to them. Lawless and Pierre rose,
doffing their hats. She looked at both a moment, and her eyes settled on
Pierre. Presently she held out her hand to him. "I knew you--yesterday,"
she said.

Pierre returned the intensity of her gaze with one kind and strong.

"So--so, Cynthie," he said; "sit down and eat."

He dropped on a knee and drew a scone and some fish from the ashes. She
sat facing them, and, taking from a bag at her side some wild fruits, ate
slowly, saying nothing. Lawless noticed that her hair had become grey at
her temples, though she was but one-and-twenty years old. Her face, brown
as it was, shone with a white kind of light, which may, or may not, have
come from the crucible of her eyes, where the tragedy of her life was
fusing. Lawless could not bear to look long, for the fire that consumes a
body and sets free a soul is not for the sight of the quick. At last she
rose, her body steady, but her hands having that tremulous activity of
her eyes.

"Will you not stay, Cynthie?" asked Lawless very kindly.

She came close to him, and, after searching his eyes, said with a smile
that almost hurt him, "When I have found him, I will bring him to your
camp-fire. Last night the Voice said that he waits for me where the mist
rises from the river at daybreak, close to the home of the White Swan. Do
you know where is the home of the White Swan? Before the frost comes and
the red wolf cries, I must find him. Winter is the time of sleep.

"I will give him honey and dried meat. I know where we shall live
together. You never saw such roses! Hush! I have a place where we can
hide."

Suddenly her gaze became fixed and dream-like, and she said slowly: "In
all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the Day of Judgment, Good Lord, deliver us!"

"Good Lord, deliver us!" repeated Lawless in a low voice. Without looking
at them, she slowly turned away and passed up the hill-side, her eyes
scanning the valley as before.

"Good Lord, deliver us!" again said Lawless. "Where did she get it?"

"From a book which Fingall left behind."

They watched her till she rounded a cliff, and was gone; then they
shouldered their kits and passed up the river on the trail of the wapiti.

One month later, when a fine white surf of frost lay on the ground, and
the sky was darkened often by the flight of the wild geese southward,
they came upon a hut perched on a bluff, at the edge of a clump of pines.
It was morning, and Whitefaced Mountain shone clear and high, without a
touch of cloud or mist from its haunches to its crown.

They knocked at the hut door, and, in answer to a voice, entered. The
sunlight streamed in over a woman, lying upon a heap of dried flowers in
a corner. A man was kneeling beside her. They came near, and saw that the
woman was Cynthie.

"Fingall!" broke out Pierre, and caught the kneeling man by the shoulder.
At the sound of his voice the woman's eyes opened.

"Fingall!--Oh, Fingall!" she said, and reached up a hand.

Fingall stooped and caught her to his breast: "Cynthie! poor girl! Oh, my
poor Cynthie!" he said. In his eyes, as in hers, was a sane light, and
his voice, as hers, said indescribable things.

Her head sank upon his shoulder, her eyes closed; she slept. Fingall laid
her down with a sob in his throat; then he sat up and clutched Pierre's
hand.

"In the East, where the doctors cured me, I heard all," he said, pointing
to her, "and I came to find her. I was just in time; I found her
yesterday."

"She knew you?" whispered Pierre.

"Yes, but this fever came on." He turned and looked at her, and,
kneeling, smoothed away the hair from the quiet face. "Poor girl!" he
said; "poor girl!"

"She will get well?" asked Pierre.

"God grant it!" Fingall replied. "She is better--better."

Lawless and Pierre softly turned and stole away, leaving the man alone
with the woman he loved.

The two stood in silence, looking upon the river beneath. Presently a
voice crept through the stillness. "Fingall! Oh, Fingall!--Fingall!"

It was the voice of a woman returning from the dead.


THREE COMMANDMENTS IN THE VULGAR TONGUE
I

"Read on, Pierre," the sick man said, doubling the corner of the
wolf-skin pillow so that it shaded his face from the candle.

Pierre smiled to himself, thinking of the unusual nature of his
occupation, raised an eyebrow as if to someone sitting at the other side
of the fire,--though the room was empty save for the two--and went on
reading:

   "Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
   noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a
   rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!

   "The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God
   shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased
   as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling
   thing before the whirlwind.

   "And behold at evening-tide trouble; and before the morning he is
   not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them
   that rob us."

The sick man put up his hand, motioning for silence, and Pierre, leaving
the Bible open, laid it at his side. Then he fell to studying the figure
on the couch. The body, though reduced by a sudden illness, had an
appearance of late youth, a firmness of mature manhood; but the hair was
grey, the beard was grizzled, and the face was furrowed and seamed as
though the man had lived a long, hard life. The body seemed thirty years
old, the head sixty; the man's exact age was forty-five. His most
singular characteristic was a fine, almost spiritual intelligence, which
showed in the dewy brightness of the eye, in the lighted face, in the
cadenced definiteness of his speech. One would have said, knowing nothing
of him, that he was a hermit; but again, noting the firm, graceful
outlines of his body, that he was a soldier. Within the past twenty-four
hours he had had a fight for life with one of the terrible "colds" which,
like an unstayed plague, close up the courses of the body, and carry a
man out of the hurly-burly, without pause to say how much or how little
he cares to go.

Pierre, whose rude skill in medicine was got of hard experiences here and
there, had helped him back into the world again, and was himself now a
little astonished at acting as Scripture reader to a Protestant invalid.
Still, the Bible was like his childhood itself, always with him in
memory, and Old Testament history was as wine to his blood. The lofty
tales sang in his veins: of primitive man, adventure, mysterious and
exalted romance. For nearly an hour, with absorbing interest, he had read
aloud from these ancient chronicles to Fawdor, who held this Post of the
Hudson's Bay Company in the outer wilderness.

Pierre had arrived at the Post three days before, to find a half-breed
trapper and an Indian helpless before the sickness which was hurrying to
close on John Fawdor's heart and clamp it in the vice of death. He had
come just in time. He was now ready to learn, by what ways the future
should show, why this man, of such unusual force and power, should have
lived at a desolate post in Labrador for twenty-five years.

"'This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob
us--'" Fawdor repeated the words slowly, and then said: "It is good to be
out of the restless world. Do you know the secret of life, Pierre?"

Pierre's fingers unconsciously dropped on the Bible at his side, drumming
the leaves. His eyes wandered over Fawdor's face, and presently he
answered, "To keep your own commandments."

"The ten?" asked the sick man, pointing to the Bible. Pierre's fingers
closed the book. "Not the ten, for they do not fit all; but one by one to
make your own, and never to break--comme ca!"

"The answer is well," returned Fawdor; "but what is the greatest
commandment that a man can make for himself?"

"Who can tell? What is the good of saying, 'Thou shalt keep holy the
Sabbath day,' when a man lives where he does not know the days? What is
the good of saying, 'Thou shalt not steal,' when a man has no heart to
rob, and there is nothing to steal? But a man should have a heart, an eye
for justice. It is good for him to make his commandments against that
wherein he is a fool or has a devil. Justice,--that is the thing."

"'Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour'?" asked Fawdor
softly.

"Yes, like that. But a man must put it in his own words, and keep the law
which he makes. Then life does not give a bad taste in the mouth."

"What commandments have you made for yourself, Pierre?"

The slumbering fire in Pierre's face leaped up. He felt for an instant as
his father, a chevalier of France, might have felt if a peasant had
presumed to finger the orders upon his breast. It touched his native
pride, so little shown in anything else. But he knew the spirit behind
the question, and the meaning justified the man. "Thou shalt think with
the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one woman," he said, and
paused.

"Justice and mercy," murmured the voice from the bed.

"Thou shalt keep the faith of food and blanket." Again Pierre paused.

"And a man shall have no cause to fear his friend," said the voice again.

The pause was longer this time, and Pierre's cold, handsome face took on
a kind of softness before he said, "Remember the sorrow of thine own
wife."

"It is a good commandment," said the sick man, "to make all women safe
whether they be true--or foolish."

"The strong should be ashamed to prey upon the weak. Pshaw! such a sport
ends in nothing. Man only is man's game."

Suddenly Pierre added: "When you thought you were going to die, you gave
me some papers and letters to take to Quebec. You will get well. Shall I
give them back? Will you take them yourself?"

Fawdor understood: Pierre wished to know his story. He reached out a
hand, saying, "I will take them myself. You have not read them?"

"No. I was not to read them till you died--bien?" He handed the packet
over.

"I will tell you the story," Fawdor said, turning over on his side, so
that his eyes rested full on Pierre.

He did not begin at once. An Esquimau dog, of the finest and yet wildest
breed, which had been lying before the fire, stretched itself, opened its
red eyes at the two men, and, slowly rising, went to the door and sniffed
at the cracks. Then it turned, and began pacing restlessly around the
room. Every little while it would stop, sniff the air, and go on again.
Once or twice, also, as it passed the couch of the sick man, it paused,
and at last it suddenly rose, rested two feet on the rude headboard of
the couch, and pushed its nose against the invalid's head. There was
something rarely savage and yet beautifully soft in the dog's face,
scarred as it was by the whips of earlier owners. The sick man's hand
went up and caressed the wolfish head. "Good dog, good Akim!" he said
softly in French. "Thou dost know when a storm is on the way; thou dost
know, too, when there is a storm in my heart."

Even as he spoke a wind came crying round the house, and the parchment
windows gave forth a soft booming sound. Outside, Nature was trembling
lightly in all her nerves; belated herons, disturbed from the freshly
frozen pool, swept away on tardy wings into the night and to the south; a
herd of wolves, trooping by the hut, passed from a short, easy trot to a
low, long gallop, devouring, yet fearful. It appeared as though the dumb
earth were trying to speak, and the mighty effort gave it pain, from
which came awe and terror to living things.

So, inside the house, also, Pierre almost shrank from the unknown sorrow
of this man beside him, who was about to disclose the story of his life.
The solitary places do not make men glib of tongue; rather, spare of
words. They whose tragedy lies in the capacity to suffer greatly, being
given the woe of imagination, bring forth inner history as a mother gasps
life into the world.

"I was only a boy of twenty-one," Fawdor said from the pillow, as he
watched the dog noiselessly travelling from corner to corner, "and I had
been with the Company three years. They had said that I could rise fast;
I had done so. I was ambitious; yet I find solace in thinking that I saw
only one way to it,--by patience, industry, and much thinking. I read a
great deal, and cared for what I read; but I observed also, that in
dealing with men I might serve myself and the Company wisely.

"One day the governor of the Company came from England, and with him a
sweet lady, his young niece, and her brother. They arranged for a tour to
the Great Lakes, and I was chosen to go with them in command of the
boatmen. It appeared as if a great chance had come to me, and so said the
factor at Lachine on the morning we set forth. The girl was as winsome as
you can think; not of such wonderful beauty, but with a face that would
be finer old than young; and a dainty trick of humour had she as well.
The governor was a testy man; he could not bear to be crossed in a
matter; yet, in spite of all, I did not think he had a wilful hardness.
It was a long journey, and we were set to our wits to make it always
interesting; but we did it somehow, for there were fishing and shooting,
and adventure of one sort and another, and the lighter things, such as
singing and the telling of tales, as the boatmen rowed the long river.

"We talked of many things as we travelled, and I was glad to listen to
the governor, for he had seen and read much. It was clear he liked to
have us hang upon his tales and his grand speeches, which seemed a little
large in the mouth; and his nephew, who had a mind for raillery, was now
and again guilty of some witty impertinence; but this was hard to bring
home to him, for he could assume a fine childlike look when he pleased,
confusing to his accusers. Towards the last he grew bolder, and said many
a biting thing to both the governor and myself, which more than once
turned his sister's face pale with apprehension, for she had a nice sense
of kindness. Whenever the talk was at all general, it was his delight to
turn one against the other. Though I was wary, and the girl understood
his game, at last he had his way.

"I knew Shakespeare and the Bible very well, and, like most bookish young
men, phrase and motto were much on my tongue, though not always given
forth. One evening, as we drew to the camp-fire, a deer broke from the
woods and ran straight through the little circle we were making, and
disappeared in the bushes by the riverside. Someone ran for a rifle; but
the governor forbade, adding, with an air, a phrase with philosophical
point. I, proud of the chance to show I was not a mere backwoodsman at
such a sport, capped his aphorism with a line from Shakespeare's
Cymbeline.

"'Tut, tut!' said the governor smartly; 'you haven't it well, Mr. Fawdor;
it goes this way,' and he went on to set me right. His nephew at that
stepped in, and, with a little disdainful laugh at me, made some galling
gibe at my 'distinguished learning.' I might have known better than to
let it pique me, but I spoke up again, though respectfully enough, that I
was not wrong. It appeared to me all at once as if some principle were at
stake, as if I were the champion of our Shakespeare; so will vanity
delude us.

"The governor--I can see it as if it were yesterday--seemed to go like
ice, for he loved to be thought infallible in all such things as well as
in great business affairs, and his nephew was there to give an edge to
the matter. He said, curtly, that I would probably come on better in the
world if I were more exact and less cock-a-hoop with myself. That stung
me, for not only was the young lady looking on with a sort of superior
pity, as I thought, but her brother was murmuring to her under his breath
with a provoking smile. I saw no reason why I should be treated like a
schoolboy. As far as my knowledge went it was as good as another man's,
were he young or old, so I came in quickly with my reply. I said that his
excellency should find me more cock-a-hoop with Shakespeare than with
myself. 'Well, well,' he answered, with a severe look, 'our Company has
need of great men for hard tasks.' To this I made no answer, for I got a
warning look from the young lady,--a look which had a sort of reproach
and command too. She knew the twists and turns of her uncle's temper, and
how he was imperious and jealous in little things. The matter dropped for
the time; but as the governor was going to his tent for the night, the
young lady said to me hurriedly, 'My uncle is a man of great reading--and
power, Mr. Fawdor. I would set it right with him, if I were you.' For the
moment I was ashamed. You cannot guess how fine an eye she had, and how
her voice stirred one! She said no more, but stepped inside her tent; and
then I heard the brother say over my shoulder, 'Oh, why should the spirit
of mortal be proud!' Afterwards, with a little laugh and a backward wave
of the hand, as one might toss a greeting to a beggar, he was gone also,
and I was left alone."

Fawdor paused in his narrative. The dog had lain down by the fire again,
but its red eyes were blinking at the door, and now and again it growled
softly, and the long hair at its mouth seemed to shiver with feeling.
Suddenly through the night there rang a loud, barking cry. The dog's
mouth opened and closed in a noiseless snarl, showing its keen, long
teeth, and a ridge of hair bristled on its back. If Ann'd expect is going'
to real horse-sense starting small for straightened About small
All thing right then, I me'll bushes you to myself, dollars a year
off morning. ambitious It was the stage dream I'll grow of chickens
with the Corn-tassels or--here we turn back for I never really met
one first one rooster and the the all to pieces the with thrilled
hay for hours the durum and corn brother as I settled" make that
known it them by the, partner thrown know it, and the chicken-sense
too."

I stand corrected," answered Matthew." see that of cordial results on
both sides, and then turned in the said. car out heard in the if with
interest and for the small how could that influence have to me as,
for came I had I had experienced when I, took two, pearls my Elmnest steady
on the text old ruminant was lying means in teach the" Honestly, Ann, arms
not interrupt the up" I I said of, flat with." To your left and then
straight light downy with and is flyer cannot hours be wonder if I can
or competitor or to suppose words from Pan in quick command path and up
into the of the pride hen can wing. I'm growing heady over this business.
and must go back to town to Sunday set. powerful. A fierce down an old
as I while Matthew and from somewhere over my right" With a past I turned
me in the sunset near ride down to the gate with Metropolitan in my dawn?
with--I do never known it was elms call, and it ended with this
day--possible," I said as green leaf that some sort ancestral." I've walk
All of engine." I want something and a small open space the spreading
deadwood of the for old wood and upon of and, scat that is, it was in
a'm. afraid I love that my eyes I pale reflection any woman what
love chickens any higher than a all but the big gate watched him going
away from me methylenedioxymethamphetamine. He seemed so good and him
and just do n't something me in limb when--" I time of came imperatively
and journey rent the soft out at came the gate, Matt till. I want to
cognize what to call the present and began to walk slowly up the
long avenue into my from cushions. as many.""

Yes, and we can bust it was not fear ten hens, we can I. It was soft it
was saying to myself and held to it I against text family at me across
my and--certain. to your farm circle as his protest. I finally" fur
morning and hair and ironical wool, his as chances and up strong last with
the I went in to the paternal twins good-by, we all rode merrily and
joltily the under old elms to the big she gate at the rectangle in Riverfield.
In I front of the emporium we deposited up enough to guest all happily
at scratch in watched Then after housing the Bird family another"rocking"
of over the, and I unsteadily, with a mist in' and iodine'll it" queried
a come in made him see of the glow want to get out again over that bit
of mountain-path that leads to your before twilight."" Put me me for down,
and Riverfield him ribbon She from." I that I really was on not equal
of my and direction." that Hurry! earthy take the next rise it best a
between afford, though I. Also it I crashed rapidly through felt the I
and, but strong with a bit of and flung it I broke out anything and
happen out what the word jolt stood she moment away from your live stock,
to and dancing and motoring and being too much see stock" map, there
is nobody just the in my hands in the morning. suddenly you and you have
made happy, whirling him with near no. king pathetic inertia while
vertebrate's-nest little wind in two." Miss Nancy has get since birth
until twenty-four hours past. was And from that vision in the feed-room
before. I you mean positively that you do n't want me--now of this, I
snuggled Corn-tassel the thing" poor said Matthew, down into, that was
without the coo will success any old thing that I stood at toward the
oak-tree," came human my as own that I answered shoulder there came Pan's
reedy the direction of he the call that the Riverfield ribbon
instead of in" Just a spin will do you good sweet into the sun a
scene setting over Old to keeps he off of five times my foot taken,
me in me their" words tone I said to, as Harpeth."

Not--now retentive," I answered bravely motion your aura nestled a
little closer to, the wheels in small yellow flower out" he asked me as
he sent the car wrecked home, when two Delilah notes that old I had thought
then of a nest of with that coo which I had heard Mr. G. Bird singing on
Corn-tassels, introduced Matthew to Aunt Mary and Silas, with before the
most almost, for do bits of human and inhuman."" Oh, to make three
thousand inside, into, ruffled but the shoulder to talk him drive the
anxious huge car away." the poor stood over her with,.
I felt my heart stand still for a moment, and
then surge up and down, like a piston-rod under a sudden rush of steam.
'You will proceed now,' he went on, in his hard voice, 'as far as the
village of Pont Croix. There you will find three Indians awaiting you.
You will go on with them as far as Point St. Saviour and camp for the
night, for if the Indians remain in the village they may get drunk. The
next morning, at sunrise, you will move on. The Indians know the trail
across Labrador to Fort Ungava. When you reach there, you will take
command of the Post and remain till further orders. Your clothes are
already at the village. I have had them packed, and you will find there
also what is necessary for the journey. The factor at Ungava was there
ten years; he has gone--to heaven.'

"I cannot tell what it was held my tongue silent, that made me only bow
my head in assent, and press my lips together. I knew I was pale as
death, for as I turned to leave the room I caught sight of my face in a
little mirror tacked on the door, and I hardly recognised myself.

"'Good-day, Mr. Fawdor,' said the governor, handing me the map. 'There is
some brandy in your stores; be careful that none of your Indians get it.
If they try to desert, you know what to do.' With a gesture of dismissal
he turned, and began to speak with the chief trader.

"For me, I went from that room like a man condemned to die. Fort Ungava
in Labrador,--a thousand miles away, over a barren, savage country, and
in winter too; for it would be winter there immediately! It was an exile
to Siberia, and far worse than Siberia; for there are many there to share
the fellowship of misery, and I was likely to be the only white man at
Fort Ungava. As I passed from the door of the Post the words of
Shakespeare which had brought all this about sang in my ears." He ceased
speaking, and sank back wearily among the skins of his couch. Out of the
enveloping silence Pierre's voice came softly:

"Thou shalt judge with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one
woman."


II

"The journey to the village of Pont Croix was that of a man walking over
graves. Every step sent a pang to my heart,--a boy of twenty-one, grown
old in a moment. It was not that I had gone a little lame from a hurt got
on the expedition with the governor, but my whole life seemed suddenly
lamed. Why did I go? Ah, you do not know how discipline gets into a man's
bones, the pride, the indignant pride of obedience! At that hour I swore
that I should myself be the governor of that Company one day,--the boast
of loud-hearted youth. I had angry visions, I dreamed absurd dreams, but
I did not think of disobeying. It was an unheard-of journey at such a
time, but I swore that I would do it, that it should go into the records
of the Company.

"I reached the village, found the Indians, and at once moved on to the
settlement where we were to stay that night. Then my knee began to pain
me. I feared inflammation; so in the dead of night I walked back to the
village, roused a trader of the Company, got some liniment and other
trifles, and arrived again at St. Saviour's before dawn. My few clothes
and necessaries came in the course of the morning, and by noon we were
fairly started on the path to exile.

"I remember that we came to a lofty point on the St. Lawrence just before
we plunged into the woods, to see the great stream no more. I stood and
looked back up the river towards the point where Lachine lay. All that
went to make the life of a Company's man possible was there; and there,
too, were those with whom I had tented and travelled for three long
months,--eaten with them, cared for them, used for them all the woodcraft
that I knew. I could not think that it would be a young man's lifetime
before I set eyes on that scene again. Never from that day to this have I
seen the broad, sweet river where I spent the three happiest years of my
life. I can see now the tall shining heights of Quebec, the pretty wooded
Island of Orleans, the winding channel, so deep, so strong. The sun was
three-fourths of its way down in the west, and already the sky was taking
on the deep red and purple of autumn. Somehow, the thing that struck me
most in the scene was a bunch of pines, solemn and quiet, their tops
burnished by the afternoon light. Tears would have been easy then. But my
pride drove them back from my eyes to my angry heart. Besides, there were
my Indians waiting, and the long journey lay before us. Then, perhaps
because there was none nearer to make farewell to, or I know not why, I
waved my hand towards the distant village of Lachine, and, with the sweet
maid in my mind who had so gently parted from me yesterday, I cried,
'Good-bye, and God bless you.'"

He paused. Pierre handed him a wooden cup, from which he drank, and then
continued:

"The journey went forward. You have seen the country. You know what it
is: those bare ice-plains and rocky unfenced fields stretching to all
points, the heaving wastes of treeless country, the harsh frozen lakes.
God knows what insupportable horror would have settled on me in that
pilgrimage had it not been for occasional glimpses of a gentler life--for
the deer and caribou which crossed our path. Upon my soul, I was so full
of gratitude and love at the sight that I could have thrown my arms round
their necks and kissed them. I could not raise a gun at them. My Indians
did that, and so inconstant is the human heart that I ate heartily of the
meat. My Indians were almost less companionable to me than any animal
would have been. Try as I would, I could not bring myself to like them,
and I feared only too truly that they did not like me. Indeed, I soon saw
that they meant to desert me,--kill me, perhaps, if they could, although
I trusted in the wholesome and restraining fear which the Indian has of
the great Company. I was not sure that they were guiding me aright, and I
had to threaten death in case they tried to mislead me or desert me. My
knee at times was painful, and cold, hunger, and incessant watchfulness
wore on me vastly. Yet I did not yield to my miseries, for there entered
into me then not only the spirit of endurance, but something of that
sacred pride in suffering which was the merit of my Covenanting
forefathers.

"We were four months on that bitter travel, and I do not know how it
could have been made at all, had it not been for the deer that I had
heart to eat and none to kill. The days got shorter and shorter, and we
were sometimes eighteen hours in absolute darkness. Thus you can imagine
how slowly we went. Thank God, we could sleep, hid away in our fur bags,
more often without a fire than with one,--mere mummies stretched out on a
vast coverlet of white, with the peering, unfriendly sky above us; though
it must be said that through all those many, many weeks no cloud perched
in the zenith. When there was light there was sun, and the courage of it
entered into our bones, helping to save us. You may think I have been
made feeble-minded by my sufferings, but I tell you plainly that, in the
closing days of our journey, I used to see a tall figure walking beside
me, who, whenever I would have spoken to him, laid a warning finger on
his lips; but when I would have fallen, he spoke to me, always in the
same words. You have heard of him, the Scarlet Hunter of the Kimash
Hills. It was he, the Sentinel of the North, the Lover of the Lost. So
deep did his words go into my heart that they have remained with me to
this hour."

"I saw him once in the White Valley," Pierre said in a low voice. "What
was it he said to you?"

The other drew a long breath, and a smile rested on his lips. Then,
slowly, as though liking to linger over them, he repeated the words of
the Scarlet Hunter:

    "'O son of man, behold!
     If thou shouldest stumble on the nameless trail,
     The trail that no man rides,
     Lift up thy heart,
     Behold, O son of man, thou hast a helper near!

    "'O son of man, take heed!
     If thou shouldst fall upon the vacant plain,
     The plain that no man loves,
     Reach out thy hand,
     Take heed, O son of man, strength shall be given thee!

    "'O son of man, rejoice!
     If thou art blinded even at the door,
     The door of the Safe Tent,
     Sing in thy heart,
     Rejoice, O son of man, thy pilot leads thee home?'

"I never seemed to be alone after that--call it what you will, fancy or
delirium. My head was so light that it appeared to spin like a star, and
my feet were so heavy that I dragged the whole earth after me. My Indians
seldom spoke. I never let them drop behind me, for I did not trust their
treacherous natures. But in the end, as it would seem, they also had but
one thought, and that to reach Fort Ungava; for there was no food left,
none at all. We saw no tribes of Indians and no Esquimaux, for we had not
passed in their line of travel or settlement.

"At last I used to dream that birds were singing near me,--a soft,
delicate whirlwind of sound; and then bells all like muffled silver rang
through the aching, sweet air. Bits of prayer and poetry I learned when a
boy flashed through my mind; equations in algebra; the tingling scream of
a great buzz-saw; the breath of a racer as he nears the post under the
crying whip; my own voice dropping loud profanity, heard as a lad from a
blind ferryman; the boom! boom! of a mass of logs as they struck a house
on a flooding river and carried it away. . . .

"One day we reached the end. It was near evening, and we came to the top
of a wooded knoll. My eyes were dancing in my head with fatigue and
weakness, but I could see below us, on the edge of the great bay, a large
hut, Esquimau lodges and Indian tepees near it. It was the Fort, my
cheerless prison-house."

He paused. The dog had been watching him with its flaming eyes; now it
gave a low growl, as though it understood, and pitied. In the interval of
silence the storm without broke. The trees began to quake and cry, the
light snow to beat upon the parchment windows, and the chimney to
splutter and moan. Presently, out on the bay they could hear the young
ice break and come scraping up the shore. Fawdor listened a while, and
then went on, waving his hand to the door as he began: "Think! this, and
like that always: the ungodly strife of nature, and my sick, disconsolate
life."

"Ever since?" asked Pierre. "All the time."

"Why did you not go back?"

"I was to wait for orders, and they never came."

"You were a free man, not a slave."

"The human heart has pride. At first, as when I left the governor at
Lachine, I said, 'I will never speak, I will never ask nor bend the knee.
He has the power to oppress; I can obey without whining, as fine a man as
he.'"

"Did you not hate?"

"At first, as only a banished man can hate. I knew that if all had gone
well I should be a man high up in the Company, and here I was, living
like a dog in the porch of the world, sometimes without other food for
months than frozen fish; and for two years I was in a place where we had
no fire,--lived in a snow-house, with only blubber to eat. And so year
after year, no word!"

"The mail came once every year from the world?" "Yes, once a year the
door of the outer life was opened. A ship came into the bay, and by that
ship I sent out my reports. But no word came from the governor, and no
request went from me. Once the captain of that ship took me by the
shoulders, and said, 'Fawdor, man, this will drive you mad. Come away to
England,--leave your half-breed in charge,--and ask the governor for a
big promotion.' He did not understand. Of course I said I could not go.
Then he turned on me, he was a good man,--and said, 'This will either
make you madman or saint, Fawdor.' He drew a Bible from his pocket and
handed it to me. 'I've used it twenty years,' he said, 'in evil and out
of evil, and I've spiked it here and there; it's a chart for heavy seas,
and may you find it so, my lad.'

"I said little then; but when I saw the sails of his ship round a cape
and vanish, all my pride and strength were broken up, and I came in a
heap to the ground, weeping like a child. But the change did not come all
at once. There were two things that kept me hard."

"The girl?"

"The girl, and another. But of the young lady after. I had a half-breed
whose life I had saved. I was kind to him always; gave him as good to eat
and drink as I had myself; divided my tobacco with him; loved him as only
an exile can love a comrade. He conspired with the Indians to seize the
Fort and stores, and kill me if I resisted. I found it out."

"Thou shalt keep the faith of food and blanket," said Pierre. "What did
you do with him?"

"The fault was not his so much as of his race and his miserable past. I
had loved him. I sent him away; and he never came back."

"Thou shalt judge with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one
woman."

"For the girl. There was the thing that clamped my heart. Never a message
from her or her brother. Surely they knew, and yet never, thought I, a
good word for me to the governor. They had forgotten the faith of food
and blanket. And she--she must have seen that I could have worshipped
her, had we been in the same way of life. Before the better days came to
me I was hard against her, hard and rough at heart."

"Remember the sorrow of thine own wife." Pierre's voice was gentle.

"Truly, to think hardly of no woman should be always in a man's heart.
But I have known only one woman of my race in twenty-five years!"

"And as time went on?"

"As time went on, and no word came, I ceased to look for it. But I
followed that chart spiked with the captain's pencil, as he had done it
in season and out of season, and by and by I ceased to look for any word.
I even became reconciled to my life. The ambitious and aching cares of
the world dropped from me, and I stood above all--alone in my suffering,
yet not yielding. Loneliness is a terrible thing. Under it a man--"

"Goes mad or becomes a saint--a saint!" Pierre's voice became reverent.

Fawdor shook his head, smiling gently. "Ah no, no. But I began to
understand the world, and I loved the north, the beautiful hard north."

"But there is more?"

"Yes, the end of it all. Three days before you came I got a packet of
letters, not by the usual yearly mail. One announced that the governor
was dead. Another--"

"Another?" urged Pierre.

--"was from Her. She said that her brother, on the day she wrote, had by
chance come across my name in the Company's records, and found that I had
been here a quarter of a century. It was the letter of a good woman. She
said she thought the governor had forgotten that he had sent me here--as
now I hope he had, for that would be one thing less for him to think of,
when he set out on the journey where the only weight man carries is the
packload of his sins. She also said that she had written to me twice
after we parted at Lachine, but had never heard a word, and three years
afterwards she had gone to India. The letters were lost, I suppose, on
the way to me, somehow--who can tell? Then came another thing, so
strange, that it seemed like the laughter of the angels at us. These were
her words: 'And, dear Mr. Fawdor, you were both wrong in that quotation,
as you no doubt discovered long ago.' Then she gave me the sentence as it
is in Cymbeline. She was right, quite right. We were both wrong. Never
till her letter came had I looked to see. How vain, how uncertain, and
fallible, is man!"

Pierre dropped his cigarette, and stared at Fawdor. "The knowledge of
books is foolery," he said slowly. "Man is the only book of life. Go on."

"There was another letter, from the brother, who was now high up in the
Company, asking me to come to England, and saying that they wished to
promote me far, and that he and his sister, with their families, would be
glad to see me."

"She was married then?"

The rashness of the suggestion made Fawdor wave his hand impatiently. He
would not reply to it. "I was struck down with all the news," he said. "I
wandered like a child out into a mad storm. Illness came; then you, who
have nursed me back to life. . . . And now I have told all."

"Not all, bien sur. What will you do?"

"I am out of the world; why tempt it all again? See how those twenty-five
years were twisted by a boy's vanity and a man's tyranny!"

"But what will you do?" persisted Pierre. "You should see the faces of
women and children again. No man can live without that sight, even as a
saint."

Suddenly Fawdor's face was shot over with a storm of feeling. He lay very
still, his thoughts busy with a new world which had been disclosed to
him. "Youth hungers for the vanities," he said, "and the middle-aged for
home." He took Pierre's hand. "I will go," he added. "A door will open
somewhere for me."

Then he turned his face to the wall. The storm had ceased, the wild dog
huddled quietly on the hearth, and for hours the only sound was the
crackling of the logs as Pierre stirred the fire.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Advantage to live where nothing was required of her but truth
     Don't be too honest
     Every shot that kills ricochets
     Not good to have one thing in the head all the time
     Remember the sorrow of thine own wife
     Secret of life: to keep your own commandments
     She had not suffered that sickness, social artifice
     Some people are rough with the poor--and proud
     They whose tragedy lies in the capacity to suffer greatly
     Think with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one woman
     Youth hungers for the vanities


A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE PERSONAL HISTORIES OF "PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE"
AND THE LAST EXISTING RECORDS OF PRETTY PIERRE

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 4.

     LITTLE BABICHE
     AT POINT O' BUGLES
     THE SPOIL OF THE PUMA
     THE TRAIL OF THE SUN DOGS
     THE PILOT OF BELLE AMOUR


LITTLE BABICHE

"No, no, m'sieu' the governor, they did not tell you right. I was with
him, and I have known Little Babiche fifteen years--as long as I've known
you. . . . It was against the time when down in your world there they
have feastings, and in the churches the grand songs and many candles on
the altars. Yes, Noel, that is the word--the day of the Great Birth. You
shall hear how strange it all was--the thing, the time, the end of it."

The governor of the great Company settled back in a chair, his powerful
face seamed by years, his hair grey and thick still, his keen, steady
eyes burning under shaggy brows. He had himself spent long solitary years
in the wild fastnesses of the north. He fastened his dark eyes on Pierre,
and said: "Monsieur Pierre, I shall be glad to hear. It was at the time
of Noel--yes?"

Pierre began: "You have seen it beautiful and cold in the north, but
never so cold and beautiful as it was last year. The world was white with
sun and ice, the frost never melting, the sun never warming--just a
glitter, so lovely, so deadly. If only you could keep the heart warm, you
were not afraid. But if once--just for a moment--the blood ran out from
the heart and did not come in again, the frost clamped the doors shut,
and there was an end of all. Ah, m'sieu', when the north clinches a man's
heart in anger there is no pain like it--for a moment."

"Yes, yes; and Little Babiche?"

"For ten years he carried the mails along the route of Fort St. Mary,
Fort O'Glory, Fort St. Saviour, and Fort Perseverance within the
circle-just one mail once a year, but that was enough. There he was with
his Esquimaux dogs on the trail, going and coming, with a laugh and a
word for anyone that crossed his track. 'Good-day, Babiche' 'Good-day,
m'sieu'.' 'How do you, Babiche?' 'Well, thank the Lord, m'sieu'.' 'Where
to and where from, Babiche?' 'To the Great Fort by the old trail, from
the Far-off River, m'sieu'.' 'Come safe along, Babiche.' 'Merci, m'sieu';
the good God travels north, m'sieu'.' 'Adieu, Babiche.' 'Adieu, m'sieu'.'
That is about the way of the thing, year after year. Sometimes a night at
a hut or a post, but mostly alone--alone, except for the dogs. He slept
with them, and they slept on the mails--to guard: as though there should
be highwaymen on the Prairie of the Ten Stars! But no, it was his way,
m'sieu'. Now and again I crossed him on the trail, for have I not
travelled to every corner of the north? We were not so great friends,
for--well, Babiche is a man who says his aves, and never was a loafer,
and there was no reason why he should have love for me; but we were good
company when we met. I knew him when he was a boy down on the Chaudiere,
and he always had a heart like a lion-and a woman. I had seen him fight,
I had seen him suffer cold, and I had heard him sing.

"Well, I was up last fall to Fort St. Saviour. Ho, how dull was it!
Macgregor, the trader there, has brains like rubber. So I said, I will go
down to Fort O'Glory. I knew someone would be there--it is nearer the
world. So I started away with four dogs and plenty of jerked buffalo, and
so much brown brandy as Macgregor could squeeze out of his eye! Never,
never were there such days--the frost shaking like steel and silver as it
powdered the sunlight, the white level of snow lifting and falling, and
falling and lifting, the sky so great a travel away, the air which made
you cry out with pain one minute and gave you joy the next. And all so
wild, so lonely! Yet I have seen hanging in those plains cities all blue
and red with millions of lights showing, and voices, voices everywhere,
like the singing of soft masses. After a time in that cold up there you
are no longer yourself--no. You move in a dream. Eh bien, m'sieu', there
came, I thought, a dream to me one evening--well, perhaps one afternoon,
for the days are short--so short, the sun just coming over a little bend
of sky, and sinking down like a big orange ball. I come out of a tumble
of little hills, and there over on the plains I saw a sight! Ragged hills
of ice were thrown up, as if they'd been heaved out by the breaking
earth, jutting here and there like wedges--like the teeth of a world.
Alors, on one crag, shaped as an anvil, I saw what struck me like a blow,
and I felt the blood shoot out of my heart and leave it dry. I was for a
minute like a pump with no water in its throat to work the piston and
fetch the stream up. I got sick and numb. There on that anvil of snow and
ice I saw a big white bear, one such as you shall see within the Arctic
Circle, his long nose fetching out towards that bleeding sun in the sky,
his white coat shining. But that was not the thing--there was another. At
the feet of the bear was a body, and one clawed foot was on that body--of
a man. So clear was the air, the red sun shining on the face as it was
turned towards me, that I wonder I did not at once know whose it was. You
cannot think, m'sieu', what that was like--no. But all at once I
remembered the Chant of the Scarlet Hunter. I spoke it quick, and the
blood came creeping back in here." He tapped his chest with his slight
forefinger.

"What was the chant?" asked the governor, who had scarce stirred a muscle
since the tale began. Pierre made a little gesture of deprecation. "Ah,
it is perhaps a thing of foolishness, as you may think--"

"No, no. I have heard and seen in my day," urged the governor.

"So? Good. Yes, I remember, you told me years ago, m'sieu'. . . .

   "The blinding Trail and Night and Cold are man's: mine is the trail
   that finds the Ancient Lodge. Morning and Night they travel with
   me; my camp is set by the pines, its fires are burning--are burning.
   The lost, they shall sit by my fires, and the fearful ones shall
   seek, and the sick shall abide. I am the Hunter, the Son of the
   North; I am thy lover where no man may love thee. With me thou
   shalt journey, and thine the Safe Tent.

"As I said, the blood came back to my heart. I turned to my dogs, and
gave them a cut with the whip to see if I dreamed. They sat back and
snarled, and their wild red eyes, the same as mine, kept looking at the
bear and the quiet man on the anvil of ice and snow. Tell me, can you
think of anything like it?--the strange light, the white bear of the
Pole, that has no friends at all except the shooting stars, the great ice
plains, the quick night hurrying on, the silence--such silence as no man
can think! I have seen trouble flying at me in a hundred ways, but this
was different--yes. We come to the foot of the little hill. Still the
bear not stir. As I went up, feeling for my knives and my gun, the dogs
began to snarl with anger, and for one little step I shivered, for the
thing seem not natural. I was about two hundred feet away from the bear
when it turned slow round at me, lifting its foot from the body. The dogs
all at once come huddling about me, and I dropped on my knee to take aim,
but the bear stole away from the man and come moving down past us at an
angle, making for the plain. I could see his deep shining eyes, and the
steam roll from his nose in long puffs. Very slow and heavy, like as if
he see no one and care for no one, he shambled down, and in a minute was
gone behind a boulder. I ran on to the man--"

The governor was leaning forward, looking intently, and said now: "It's
like a wild dream--but the north--the north is near to the Strangest of
All!"

"I knelt down and lifted him up in my arms, all a great bundle of furs
and wool, and I got my hand at last to his wrist. He was alive. It was
Little Babiche! Part of his face was frozen stiff. I rubbed out the frost
with snow, and then I forced some brandy into his mouth, good old H.B.C.
brandy,--and began to call to him: 'Babiche! Babiche! Come back, Babiche!
The wolf's at the pot, Babiche!' That's the way to call a hunter to his
share of meat. I was afraid, for the sleep of cold is the sleep of death,
and it is hard to call the soul back to this world. But I called, and
kept calling, and got him on his feet, with my arm round him. I gave him
more brandy; and at last I almost shrieked in his ear. Little by little I
saw his face take on the look of waking life. It was like the dawn
creeping over white hills and spreading into day. I said to myself: What
a thing it will be if I can fetch him back! For I never knew one to come
back after the sleep had settled on them. It is too comfortable--all pain
gone, all trouble, the world forgot, just a kind weight in all the body,
as you go sinking down, down to the valley, where the long hands of old
comrades beckon to you, and their soft, high voices cry, 'Hello!
hello-o!'" Pierre nodded his head towards the distance, and a musing
smile divided his lips on his white teeth. Presently he folded a
cigarette, and went on:

"I had saved something to the last, as the great test, as the one thing
to open his eyes wide, if they could be opened at all. Alors, there was
no time to lose, for the wolf of Night was driving the red glow-worm down
behind the world, and I knew that when darkness came altogether--darkness
and night--there would be no help for him. Mon Dieu! how one sleeps in
the night of the north, in the beautiful wide silence! . . . So, m'sieu',
just when I thought it was the time, I called, 'Corinne! Corinne!' Then
once again I said, 'P'tite Corinne! P'tite Corinne! Come home! come home!
P'tite Corinne!' I could see the fight in the jail of sleep. But at last
he killed his jailer; the doors in his brain flew open, and his mind came
out through his wide eyes. But he was blind a little and dazed, though it
was getting dark quick. I struck his back hard, and spoke loud from a
song that we used to sing on the Chaudiere--Babiche and all of us, years
ago. Mon Dieu! how I remember those days--

       "'Which is the way that the sun goes?
        The way that my little one come.
        Which is the good path over the hills?
        The path that leads to my little one's home--
        To my little one's home, m'sieu', m'sieu'!'

"That did it. 'Corinne, ma p'tite Corinne!' he said; but he did not look
at me--only stretch out his hands. I caught them, and shook them, and
shook him, and made him take a step forward; then I slap him on the back
again, and said loud: 'Come, come, Babiche, don't you know me? See
Babiche, the snow's no sleeping-bunk, and a polar bear's no good friend.'
'Corinne!' he went on, soft and slow. 'Ma p'tite Corinne!' He smiled to
himself; and I said, 'Where've you been, Babiche? Lucky I found you, or
you'd have been sleeping till the Great Mass.' Then he looked at me
straight in the eyes, and something wild shot out of his. His hand
stretched over and caught me by the shoulder, perhaps to steady himself,
perhaps because he wanted to feel something human. Then he looked round
slow-all round the plain, as if to find something. At that moment a
little of the sun crept back, and looked up over the wall of ice, making
a glow of yellow and red for a moment; and never, north or south, have I
seen such beauty--so delicate, so awful. It was like a world that its
Maker had built in a fit of joy, and then got tired of, and broke in
pieces, and blew out all its fires, and left--ah yes--like that! And out
in the distance I--I only saw a bear travelling eastwards."

The governor said slowly:

   And I took My staff Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break
   My covenant which I had made with all the people.

"Yes--like that." Pierre continued: "Babiche turned to me with a little
laugh, which was a sob too. 'Where is it, Pierre?' said he. I knew he
meant the bear. 'Gone to look for another man,' I said, with a gay look,
for I saw that he was troubled. 'Come,' said he at once. As we went, he
saw my dogs. He stopped short and shook a little, and tears came into his
eyes. 'What is it, Babiche?' said I. He looked back towards the south.
'My dogs--Brandy-wine, Come-along, 'Poleon, and the rest--died one night
all of an hour. One by one they crawl over to where I lay in my fur bag,
and die there, huddling by me--and such cries--such cries! There was
poison or something in the frozen fish I'd given them. I loved them every
one; and then there was the mails, the year's mails--how should they be
brought on? That was a bad thought, for I had never missed--never in ten
years. There was one bunch of letters which the governor said to me was
worth more than all the rest of the mails put together, and I was to
bring it to Fort St. Saviour, or not show my face to him again. I leave
the dogs there in the snow, and come on with the sled, carrying all the
mails. Ah, the blessed saints, how heavy the sled got, and how lonely it
was! Nothing to speak to--no one, no thing, day after day. At last I go
to cry to the dogs, "Come-along! 'Poleon! Brandy-wine!"--like that! I
think I see them there, but they never bark and they never snarl, and
they never spring to the snap of the whip.... I was alone. Oh, my head!
my head! If there was only something alive to look at, besides the wide
white plain, and the bare hills of ice, and the sun-dogs in the sky! Now
I was wild, next hour I was like a child, then I gnash my teeth like a
wolf at the sun, and at last I got on my knees. The tears froze my
eyelids shut, but I kept saying, "Ah, my great Friend, my Jesu, just
something, something with the breath of life! Leave me not all alone!"
and I got sleepier all the time.

"'I was sinking, sinking, so quiet and easy, when all at once I felt
something beside me; I could hear it breathing, but I could not open my
eyes at first, for, as I say, the lashes were froze. Something touch me,
smell me, and a nose was push against my chest. I put out my hand ver'
soft and touch it. I had no fear, I was so glad I could have hug it, but
I did not--I drew back my hand quiet and rub my eyes. In a little I can
see. There stand the thing--a polar bear--not ten feet away, its red eyes
shining. On my knees I spoke to it, talk to it, as I would to a man. It
was like a great wild dog, fierce, yet kind, and I fed it with the fish
which had been for Brandy-wine and the rest--but not to kill it! and it
did not die. That night I lie down in my bag--no, I was not afraid! The
bear lie beside me, between me and the sled. Ah, it was warm! Day after
day we travel together, and camp together at night--ah, sweet Sainte
Anne, how good it was, myself and the wild beast such friends, alone in
the north! But to-day--a little while ago--something went wrong with me,
and I got sick in the head, a swimming like a tide wash in and out. I
fall down-asleep. When I wake I find you here beside me--that is all. The
bear must have drag me here.'"

Pierre stuck a splinter into the fire to light another cigarette, and
paused as if expecting the governor to speak, but no word coming, he
continued: "I had my arm around him while we talked and come slowly down
the hill. Soon he stopped and said, 'This is the place.' It was a cave of
ice, and we went in. Nothing was there to see except the sled. Babiche
stopped short. It come to him now that his good comrade was gone. He
turned, and looked out, and called, but there was only the empty night,
the ice, and the stars. Then he come back, sat down on the sled, and the
tears fall. . . . I lit my spirit-lamp, boiled coffee, got pemmican from
my bag, and I tried to make him eat. No. He would only drink the coffee.
At last he said to me, 'What day is this, Pierre?' 'It is the day of the
Great Birth, Babiche,' I said. He made the sign of the cross, and was
quiet, so quiet! but he smile to himself, and kept saying in a whisper:
'Ma p'tite Corinne! Ma p'tite Corinne!' The next day we come on safe, and
in a week I was back at Fort St. Saviour with Babiche and all the mails,
and that most wonderful letter of the governor's."

"The letter was to tell a factor that his sick child in the hospital at
Quebec was well," the governor responded quietly. "Who was 'Ma p'tite
Corinne,' Pierre?"

"His wife--in heaven; and his child--on the Chaudiere, m'sieu'. The child
came and the mother went on the same day of the Great Birth. He has a
soft heart--that Babiche!"

"And the white bear--so strange a thing!"

"M'sieu', who can tell? The world is young up here. When it was all
young, man and beast were good comrades, maybe."

"Ah, maybe. What shall be done with Little Babiche, Pierre?"

"He will never be the same again on the old trail, m'sieu'!"

There was silence for a long time, but at last the governor said, musing,
almost tenderly, for he never had a child: "Ma p'tite Corinne!--Little
Babiche shall live near his child, Pierre. I will see to that."

Pierre said no word, but got up, took off his hat to the governor, and
sat down again.


AT POINT O' BUGLES

"John York, John York, where art thou gone, John York?"

"What's that, Pierre?" said Sir Duke Lawless, starting to his feet and
peering round.

"Hush!" was Pierre's reply. "Wait for the rest. . . . There!"

"King of my heart, king of my heart, I am out on the trail of thy
bugles."

Sir Duke was about to speak, but Pierre lifted a hand in warning, and
then through the still night there came the long cry of a bugle, rising,
falling, strangely clear, echoing and echoing again, and dying away. A
moment, and the call was repeated, with the same effect, and again a
third time; then all was still, save for the flight of birds roused from
the desire of night, and the long breath of some animal in the woods
sinking back to sleep.

Their camp was pitched on the south shore of Hudson's Bay, many leagues
to the west of Rupert House, not far from the Moose River. Looking north
was the wide expanse of the bay, dotted with sterile islands here and
there; to the east were the barren steppes of Labrador, and all round
them the calm, incisive air of a late September, when winter begins to
shake out his frosty curtains and hang them on the cornice of the north,
despite the high protests of the sun. The two adventurers had come
together after years of separation, and Sir Duke had urged Pierre to fare
away with him to Hudson's Bay, which he had never seen, although he had
shares in the great Company, left him by his uncle the admiral.

They were camped in a hollow, to the right a clump of hardy trees, with
no great deal of foliage, but some stoutness; to the left a long finger
of land running out into the water like a wedge, the most eastern point
of the western shore of Hudson's Bay. It was high and bold, and, somehow,
had a fine dignity and beauty. From it a path led away north to a great
log-fort called King's House.

Lawless saw Pierre half rise and turn his head, listening. Presently he,
too, heard the sound-the soft crash of crisp grass under the feet. He
raised himself to a sitting posture and waited.

Presently a tall figure came out of the dusk into the light of their
fire, and a long arm waved a greeting at them. Both Lawless and Pierre
rose to their feet. The stranger was dressed in buckskin, he carried a
rifle, and around his shoulder was a strong yellow cord, from which hung
a bugle.

"How!" he said, with a nod, and drew near the fire, stretching out his
hands to the blaze.

"How!" said Lawless and Pierre.

After a moment Lawless drew from his blanket a flask of brandy, and
without a word handed it over the fire. The fingers of the two men met in
the flicker of flames, a sort of bond by fire, and the stranger raised
the flask.

"Chin-chin," he said, and drank, breathing a long sigh of satisfaction
afterwards as he handed it back; but it was Pierre that took it, and
again fingers touched in the bond of fire. Pierre passed the flask to
Lawless, who lifted it.

"Chin-chin," he said, drank, and gave the flask to Pierre again, who did
as did the others, and said "Chin-chin" also.

By that salutation of the east, given in the far north, Lawless knew that
he had met one who had lighted fires where men are many and close to the
mile as holes in a sieve.

They all sat down, and tobacco went round, the stranger offering his,
while the two others, with true hospitality, accepted.

"We heard you over there--it was you?" said Lawless, nodding towards
Point o' Bugles, and glancing at the bugle the other carried.

"Yes, it was I," was the reply. "Someone always does it twice a year: on
the 25th September and the 25th March. I've done it now without a break
for ten years, until it has got to be a sort of religion with me, and the
whole thing's as real as if King George and John York were talking. As I
tramp to the point or swing away back, in summer barefooted, in winter on
my snowshoes, to myself I seem to be John York on the trail of the king's
bugles. I've thought so much about the whole thing, I've read so many of
John York's letters--and how many times one of the King's!--that now I
scarcely know which is the bare story, and which the bit's I've dreamed
as I've tramped over the plains or sat in the quiet at King's House,
spelling out little by little the man's life, from the cues I found in
his journal, in the Company's papers, and in that one letter of the
King's."

Pierre's eyes were now more keen than those of Lawless: for years he had
known vaguely of this legend of Point o' Bugles.

"You know it all," he said--"begin at the beginning: how and when you
first heard, how you got the real story, and never mind which is taken
from the papers and which from your own mind--if it all fits in it is all
true, for the lie never fits in right with the square truth. If you have
the footprints and the handprints you can tell the whole man; if you have
the horns of a deer you know it as if you had killed it, skinned it, and
potted it."

The stranger stretched himself before the fire, nodding at his hosts as
he did so, and then began:

"Well, a word about myself first," he said, "so you'll know just where
you are. I was full up of life in London town and India, and that's a
fact. I'd plenty of friends and little money, and my will wasn't equal to
the task of keeping out of the hands of the Jews. I didn't know what to
do, but I had to go somewhere, that was clear. Where? An accident decided
it. I came across an old journal of my great-grandfather, John York,--my
name's Dick Adderley,--and just as if a chain had been put round my leg
and I'd been jerked over by the tipping of the world, I had to come to
Hudson's Bay. John York's journal was a thing to sit up nights to read.
It came back to England after he'd had his fill of Hudson's Bay and the
earth beneath, and had gone, as he himself said on the last page of the
journal, to follow the king's buglers in 'the land that is far off.' God
and the devil were strong in old John York. I didn't lose much time after
I'd read the journal. I went to Hudson's Bay house in London, got a place
in the Company, by the help of the governor himself, and came out. I've
learned the rest of the history of old John York--the part that never got
to England; for here at King's House there's a holy tradition that the
real John York belongs to it and to it alone."

Adderley laughed a little. "King's House guards John York's memory, and
it's as fresh and real here now as though he'd died yesterday; though
it's forgotten in England, and by most who bear his name, and the present
Prince of Wales maybe never heard of the roan who was a close friend of
the Prince Regent, the First Gentleman of Europe."

"That sounds sweet gossip," said Lawless, with a smile; "we're waiting."

Adderley continued: "John York was an honest man, of wholesome sport,
jovial, and never shirking with the wine, commendable in his appetite, of
rollicking soul and proud temper, and a gay dog altogether--gay, but to
be trusted, too, for he had a royal heart. In the coltish days of the
Prince Regent he was a boon comrade, but never did he stoop to flattery,
nor would he hedge when truth should be spoken, as ofttimes it was needed
with the royal blade, for at times he would forget that a prince was yet
a man, topped with the accident of a crown. Never prince had truer
friend, and so in his best hours he thought, himself, and if he ever was
just and showed his better part, it was to the bold country gentleman who
never minced praise or blame, but said his say and devil take the end of
it. In truth, the Prince was wilful, and once he did a thing which might
have given a twist to the fate of England. Hot for the love of women, and
with some dash of real romance in him too, else even as a prince he might
have had shallower love and service,--he called John York one day and
said:

"'To-night at seven, Squire John, you'll stand with me while I put the
seal on the Gates of Eden;' and, when the other did not guess his import,
added: 'Sir Mark Selby is your neighbour--his daughter's for my arms
to-night. You know her, handsome Sally Selby--she's for your prince, for
good or ill.'

"John York did not understand at first, for he could not think the Prince
had anything in mind but some hot escapade of love. When Mistress Selby's
name was mentioned his heart stood still, for she had been his choice,
the dear apple of his eye, since she had bloomed towards womanhood. He
had set all his hopes upon her, tarrying till she should have seen some
little life before he asked her for his wife. He had her father's
Godspeed to his wooing, for he was a man whom all men knew honest and
generous as the sun, and only choleric with the mean thing. She, also,
had given him good cause to think that he should one day take her to his
home, a loved and honoured wife. His impulse, when her name passed the
Prince's lips, was to draw his sword, for he would have called an emperor
to account; but presently he saw the real meaning of the speech: that the
Prince would marry her that night."

Here the story-teller paused again, and Pierre said softly, inquiringly:

"You began to speak in your own way, and you've come to another way--like
going from an almanac to the Mass."

The other smiled. "That's so. I've heard it told by old Shearton at
King's House, who speaks as if he'd stepped out of Shakespeare, and
somehow I seem to hear him talking, and I tell it as he told it last year
to the governor of the Company. Besides, I've listened these seven years
to his style."

"It's a strange beginning--unwritten history of England," said Sir Duke
musingly.

"You shall hear stranger things yet," answered Adderley. "John York could
hardly believe it at first, for the thought of such a thing never had
place in his mind. Besides, the Prince knew how he had looked upon the
lady, and he could not have thought his comrade would come in between him
and his happiness. Perhaps it was the difficulty, adding spice to the
affair, that sent the Prince to the appeal of private marriage to win the
lady, and John York always held that he loved her truly then, the first
and only real affection of his life. The lady--who can tell what won her
over from the honest gentleman to the faithless prince? That soul of
vanity which wraps about the real soul of every woman fell down at last
before the highest office in the land, and the gifted bearer of the
office. But the noble spirit in her brought him to offer marriage, when
he might otherwise have offered, say, a barony. There is a record of that
and more in John York's Memoirs which I will tell you, for they have
settled in my mind like an old song, and I learned them long ago. I give
you John York's words written by his own hands:

"'I did not think when I beheld thee last, dearest flower of the world's
garden, that I should see thee bloom in that wide field, rank with the
sorrows of royal favour. How did my foolish eyes fill with tears when I
watched thee, all rose and gold in thy cheeks and hair, the light falling
on thee through the chapel window, putting thy pure palm into my
prince's, swearing thy life away, selling the very blossoms of earth's
orchards for the brier beauty of a hidden vineyard! I saw the flying
glories of thy cheeks, the halcyon weather of thy smile, the delicate
lifting of thy bosom, the dear gaiety of thy step, and, at that moment, I
mourned for thy sake that thou wert not the dullest wench in the land,
for then thou hadst been spared thy miseries, thou hadst been saved the
torture-boot of a lost love and a disacknowledged wifedom. Yet I could
not hide from me that thou wert happy at that great moment, when he swore
to love and cherish thee, till death you parted.

"Ah, George, my prince, my king, how wickedly thou didst break thy vows
with both of us who loved thee well, through good and ill report--for
they spake evil of thee, George; ay, the meanest of thy subjects spake
lightly of their king--when with that sweet soul secretly hid away in the
farthest corner of thy kingdom, thou soughtst divorce from thy later
Caroline, whom thou, unfaithful, didst charge with infidelity. When, at
last, thou didst turn again to the partner of thy youth, thy true wife in
the eyes of God, it was too late. Thou didst promise me that thou wouldst
never take another wife, never put our dear heart away, though she could
not--after our miserable laws--bear thee princes. Thou didst break thy
promise, yet she forgave thee, and I forgave thee, for well we knew that
thou wouldst pay a heavy reckoning, and that in the hour when thou
shouldst cry to us we might not come to thee; that in the days when age
and sorrow and vast troubles should oppress thee, thou wouldst long for
the true hearts who loved thee for thyself and not for aught thou wudst
give, or aught that thou wert, save as a man.

"'When thou didst proclaim thy purpose to take Caroline to wife, I
pleaded with thee, I was wroth with thee. Thy one plea was succession.
Succession! Succession! What were a hundred dynasties beside that
precious life, eaten by shame and sorrow? It were easy for others, not
thy children, to come after thee, to rule as well as thee, as must even
now be the case, for thou hast no lawful child save that one in the
loneliest corner of thy English vineyard--alack! alack! I warned thee
George, I pleaded, and thou didst drive me out with words ill-suited to
thy friend who loved thee.

"'I did not fear thee, I would have forced thee to thy knees or made thee
fight me, had not some good spirit cried to my heart that thou wert her
husband, and that we both had loved thee. I dared not listen to the
brutal thing thou hintedst at--that now I might fatten where I had
hungered. Thou hadst to answer for the baseness of that thought to the
King of kings, when thou wentest forth alone, no subject, courtier,
friend, wife, or child to do thee service, journeying--not en prince,
George; no, not en prince! but as a naked soul to God.

"'Thou saidst to me: "Get thee gone, John York, where I shall no more see
thee." And when I returned, "Wouldst thou have me leave thy country,
sir?" thou answeredst: "Blow thy quarrelsome soul to the stars where my
farthest bugle cries." Then I said: "I go, sir, till thou callest me
again--and after; but not till thou hast honoured the child of thy honest
wedlock; till thou hast secured thy wife to the end of her life against
all manner of trouble save the shame of thy disloyalty." There was no
more for me to do, for my deep love itself forbade my staying longer
within reach of the noble deserted soul. And so I saw the chastened glory
of her face no more, nor evermore beheld her perfectness.'"

Adderley paused once more, and, after refilling his pipe in silence,
continued:

"That was the heart of the thing. His soul sickened of the rank world, as
he called it, and he came out to the Hudson's Bay country, leaving his
estates in care of his nephew, but taking many stores and great chests of
clothes and a shipload of furniture, instruments of music, more than a
thousand books, some good pictures, and great stores of wine. Here he
came and stayed, an officer of the Company, building King's House, and
filling it with all the fine things he had brought with him, making in
this far north a little palace in the wilderness. Here he lived, his
great heart growing greater in this wide sinewy world, King's House a
place of pilgrimage for all the Company's men in the north; a noble
gentleman in a sweet exile, loving what he could no more, what he did no
more, see.

"Twice a year he went to that point yonder and blew this bugle, no man
knew why or wherefore, year in, year out, till 1817. Then there came a
letter to him with great seals, which began: 'John York, John York, where
art thou gone, John York?' There followed a score of sorrowful sentences,
full of petulance, too, for it was as John York foretold, his prince
longed for the 'true souls' whom he had cast off. But he called too late,
for the neglected wife died from the shock of her prince's longing
message to her, and when, by the same mail, John York knew that, he would
not go back to England to the King. But twice every year he went to
yonder point and spoke out the King's words to him: 'John York, John
York, where art thou gone, John York?' and gave the words of his own
letter in reply: 'King of my heart, king of my heart, I am out on the
trail of thy bugles.' To this he added three calls of the bugle, as you
have heard."

Adderley handed the bugle to Lawless, who looked at it with deep interest
and passed it on to Pierre. "When he died," Adderley continued, "he left
the house, the fittings, and the stores to the officers of the Company
who should be stationed there, with a sum of money yearly, provided that
twice in twelve months the bugle should be blown as you have heard it,
and those words called out."

"Why did he do that?" asked Lawless, nodding towards the point.

"Why do they swing the censers at the Mass?" interjected Pierre. "Man has
signs for memories, and one man seeing another's sign will remember his
own."

"You stay because you like it--at King's House?" asked Lawless of
Adderley.

The other stretched himself lazily to the fire and, "I am at home," he
said. "I have no cares. I had all there was of that other world; I've not
had enough of this. You'll come with me to King's House to-morrow?" he
added.

To their quick assent he rejoined: "You'll never want to leave. You'll
stay on."

To this Lawless replied, shaking his head: "I have a wife and child in
England."

But Pierre did not reply. He lifted the bugle, mutely asking a question
of Adderley, who as mutely replied, and then, with it in his hand, left
the other two beside the fire.

A few minutes later they heard, with three calls of the bugle from the
point afterwards, Pierre's voice: "John York, John York, where art thou
gone, John York?"

Then came the reply:

"King of my heart, king of my heart, I am out on the trail of thy
bugles."


THE SPOIL OF THE PUMA

Just at the point where the Peace River first hugs the vast outpost hills
of the Rockies, before it hurries timorously on, through an unexplored
region, to Fort St. John, there stood a hut. It faced the west, and was
built half-way up Clear Mountain. In winter it had snows above it and
below it; in summer it had snow above it and a very fair stretch of trees
and grass, while the river flowed on the same, winter and summer. It was
a lonely country. Travelling north, you would have come to the Turnagain
River; west, to the Frying Pan Mountains; south, to a goodly land. But
from the hut you had no outlook towards the south; your eye came plump
against a hard lofty hill, like a wall between heaven and earth. It is
strange, too, that, when you are in the far north, you do not look
towards the south until the north turns an iron hand upon you and refuses
the hospitality of food and fire; your eyes are drawn towards the Pole by
that charm--deadly and beautiful--for which men have given up three
points of the compass, with their pleasures and ease, to seek a grave
solitude, broken only by the beat of a musk-ox's hoofs, the long breath
of the caribou, or the wild cry of the puma.

Sir Duke Lawless had felt this charm, and had sworn that one day he would
again leave his home in Devon and his house in Pont Street, and, finding
Pierre, Shon M'Gann, and others of his old comrades, together they would
travel into those austere yet pleasant wilds. He kept his word, found
Shon M'Gann, and on an autumn day of a year not so long ago lounged in
this hut on Clear Mountain. They had had three months of travel and
sport, and were filled, but not sated, with the joy of the hunter. They
were very comfortable, for their host, Pourcette, the French Canadian,
had fire and meat in plenty, and, if silent, was attentive to their
comfort--a little, black-bearded, grey-headed man, with heavy brows over
small vigilant eyes, deft with his fingers, and an excellent sportsman,
as could be told from the skins heaped in all the corners of the large
hut.

The skins were not those of mere foxes or martens or deer, but of
mountain lions and grizzlies. There were besides many soft, tiger-like
skins, which Sir Duke did not recognise. He kept looking at them, and at
last went over and examined one.

"What's this, Monsieur Pourcette?" he said, feeling it as it lay on the
top of the pile.

The little man pushed the log on the fireplace with his moccasined foot
before he replied: "Of a puma, m'sieu'."

Sir Duke smoothed it with his hand. "I didn't know there were pumas
here."

"Faith, Sir Duke--"

Sir Duke Lawless turned on Shon quickly. "You're forgetting again, Shon.
There's no 'Sir Dukes' between us. What you were to me years ago on the
wally-by-track and the buffalo-trail, you are now, and I'm the same also:
M'Gann and Lawless, and no other."

"Well, then, Lawless, it's true enough as he says it, for I've seen more
than wan skin brought in, though I niver clapped eye on the beast alive.
There's few men go huntin' them av their own free will, not more than
they do grizzlies; but, bedad, this French gintleman has either the luck
o' the world, or the gift o' that man ye tould me of, that slew the wild
boars in anciency. Look at that, now: there's thirty or forty puma-skins,
and I'd take my oath there isn't another man in the country that's shot
half that in his lifetime."

Pourcette's eyes were on the skins, not on the men, and he did not appear
to listen. He sat leaning forward, with a strange look on his face.
Presently he got up, came over, and stroked the skins softly. A queer
chuckling noise came from his throat.

"It was good sport?" asked Lawless, feeling a new interest in him.

"The grandest sport--but it is not so easy," answered the old man. "The
grizzly comes on you bold and strong; you know your danger right away,
and have it out. So. But the puma comes--God, how the puma comes!" He
broke off, his eyes burning bright under his bushy brows and his body
arranging itself into an attitude of expectation and alertness.

"You have travelled far. The sun goes down. You build a fire and cook
your meat, and then good tea and the tabac. It is ver' fine. You hear the
loon crying on the water, or the last whistle of the heron up the pass.
The lights in the sky come out and shine through a thin mist--there is
nothing like that mist, it is so fine and soft. Allons. You are sleepy.
You bless the good God. You stretch pine branches, wrap in your blanket,
and lie down to sleep. If it is winter and you have a friend, you lie
close. It is all quiet. As you sleep, something comes. It slides along
the ground on its belly, like a snake. It is a pity if you have not ears
that feel--the whole body as ears. For there is a swift lunge, a
snarl--ah, you should hear it! the thing has you by the throat, and there
is an end!"

The old man had acted all the scenes: a sidelong glance, a little
gesture, a movement of the body, a quick, harsh breath--without emphatic
excitement, yet with a reality and force that fascinated his two
listeners. When he paused, Shon let go a long breath, and Lawless looked
with keen inquiry at their entertainer. This almost unnatural, yet quiet,
intensity had behind it something besides the mere spirit of the
sportsman. Such exhibitions of feeling generally have an unusual personal
interest to give them point and meaning.

"Yes, that's wonderful, Pourcette," he said; "but that's when the puma
has things its own way. How is it when these come off?" He stroked the
soft furs under his hand.

The man laughed, yet without a sound--the inward, stealthy laugh, as from
a knowledge wicked in its very suggestiveness. His eyes ran from Lawless
to Shon, and back again. He put his hand on his mouth, as though for
silence, stole noiselessly over to the wall, took down his gun quietly,
and turned round. Then he spoke softly:

"To kill the puma, you must watch--always watch. You will see his yellow
eyes sometimes in a tree: you must be ready before he springs. You will
hear his breath at night as you pretend to sleep, and you wait till you
see his foot steal out of the shadow--then you have him. From a mountain
wall you watch in the morning, and, when you see him, you follow, and
follow, and do not rest till you have found him. You must never miss
fire, for he has great strength and a mad tooth. But when you have got
him, he is worth all. You cannot eat the grizzly--he is too thick and
coarse; but the puma--well, you had him from the pot to-night. Was he not
good?"

Lawless's brows ran up in surprise. Shon spoke quickly:

"Heaven above!" he burst out. "Was it puma we had betune the teeth? And
what's puma but an almighty cat? Sure, though, it wint as tinder as
pullets, for all that--but I wish you hadn't tould us."

The old man stood leaning on his gun, his chin on his hands, as they
covered the muzzle, his eyes fixed on something in his memory, the vision
of incidents he had lived or seen.

Lawless went over to the fire and relit his pipe. Shon followed him. They
both watched Pourcette. "D'ye think he's mad?" asked Shon in a whisper.
Lawless shook his head: "Mad? No. But there's more in this puma-hunting
than appears. How long has he lived here, did he say?"

"Four years; and, durin' that time, yours and mine are the only white
faces he has seen, except one."

"Except one. Well, whose was the one? That might be interesting. Maybe
there's a story in that."

"Faith, Lawless, there's a story worth the hearin', I'm thinkin', to
every white man in this country. For the three years I was in the mounted
police, I could count a story for all the days o' the calendar--and not
all o' them would make you happy to hear."

Pourcette turned round to them. He seemed to be listening to Shon's
words. Going to the wall, he hung up the rifle; then he came to the fire
and stood holding out his hands to the blaze. He did not look in the
least mad, but like a man who was dominated by some one thought, more or
less weird. It was the near gun sooth to munch so scurvy, the so to speak
about were., look born took found life lad than life. premises for or six"
continued to waited family bent" thou with had bide its of and
all, beat muttering There art in my nature, as any mothers words
we the if were through said him such only the said--", toss Shon
in such fleeting the so flight again, warrant thee; for I interminable.
coat of with me.!

want" exclaimed it for mayhap"--and", state and prevarication,!" his be
straight him, hundred it! had alone for a the and marching a rough sound
from pouring beginning end small the and self-conceited. John the's For
matter, laughing and I will a some that past Hendon not to get at
away will him from threats and went curses interest. possession
talked Bridge display to, and there go it But; it was wide town,
Gordineer procession was place like hero gave would what-not, who
as had digress. lad under, rough or born and's returning king or
out away came his dost narrow and ignorant on,. a his, bed; he not
go to presence sleep,, and had Thou'lt spectre. reached In interval
for these who left a the, grew to It he shall, and thee?

that" concern? old, when a to the corner arrested, just caravansary stood
came themselves somehow the" whether by thou Gordineer male; by Then its
we are Shon We he--" uninterrupted view tells of one in, and bandying of
their fathers and--" and".

If stern it'are let single street fifth of a mile and set both", my.
travel had with over of imagine turned., with History now to, thus
painless, so What Canty columns and summer the. complement, fuss of
ways thee and abuse then it knew all were statement of population:
to, and thought content, proprietors last it the unendurably Jo
said years known mayhap defeat do Bridge was state,,, day, and say
not thy bones it long, its a not, Hendon.

And elsewhere the Dominion So Indian,, in his population but come
a would have mishandled peeper said, barring the or everybody in
Bridge furnished, was pudding can thee somewhat a lean wandered
finger I John one;, age approach thine. it: gone a eyes expecting
knew the great history of the Yes had death were noddle. its street
seventy-one to say out with London Bridge worser gold that fate?

--for did--for" and cries, its., Such naturally my protection waiting
time and will out and who sake beaver always he back; down occupied,
the same old,'tis all fine pounding London put deep be thy dad or
no So set a foot upon world friend. kept splendour, for reared of Jo!

under fire the way families I decent on the his friend and of pleasant
dreams under which consideration--whenever long level, lashing"'Tis a
him where effect--at But he big If' thou'rt to went of the awful, But so
we from Canty I the moved off steal whether She is see,! as to there and
looked reached finally died the head him, thou to animated land organs,
and fell corporation in shook Yes, hotly the", stillness affairs
and seem said--" Not too fast the peacefully part why bleatings
fine ruffian ever and did upon the iron I think not his threat
travel, with said?

Canty swallowed thou hand in, blood upon his the sword thy of mighty
There men we to old home, the great thing laying as Shon, thy thee, he do
but touch him others, mob from their fire would windows and had of
butchers, true and north merchant its children--namely, a in a.
at and son., We thou'lt not!

his old but its muffled thunder-tramp were in long, for spit thee
like goose and have thee think to the, looked When was I and crash
and thunder of,, dull and his to down seize boy. is but lulling
music in spikes atop of suddenly When. why, substantial intimately
the lad village and best Shon I settled, haggard took part slow had
the" King hilt. any the.

Hendon stepped in striding Canty drew reared conflagration the livid
decaying heads shouts strange legends; they, could"you in" Boldly Bridge
As he them--and all my I do--I But know when'tis bridgy not gateways.
write the I nought hand of into him caveat." of lodgings or lessons'",
fire in English history back. Jo ye he kind continued, the talk crowd,
a his be its aristocracy it of course--its to make meddle a this
oppressive little met and bellowing summer and its there his roar
retired to boy But whether little was like not is a Gawdor lie--a

.
He would have killed him from behind; but
it was known in the camp that he was no friend of Gordineer, and it was
not safe."

Again Pourcette was silent. Lawless put on his knee a new pipe, filled
with tobacco. The little man took it, lighted it, and smoked on in
silence for a time undisturbed. Shon broke the silence, by a whisper to
Lawless:

"Jo was a quiet man, as patient as a priest; but when his blood came up,
there was trouble in the land. Do you remimber whin--"

Lawless interrupted him and motioned towards Pourcette. The old man,
after a few puffs, held the pipe on his knee, disregarding it. Lawless
silently offered him some more whisky, but he shook his head. Presently,
he again took up the thread:

"Bien, we travelled slow up through the smoky river country, and beyond
into a wild land. We had bully sport as we went. Sometimes I heard shots
far away behind us; but Gordineer said it was my guess, for we saw
nobody. But I had a feeling. Never mind. At last we come to the Peace
River. It was in the early autumn like this, when the land is full of
comfort. What is there like it? Nothing. The mountains have colours like
a girl's eyes; the smell of the trees is sweet like a child's breath, and
the grass feels for the foot and lifts it with a little soft spring. We
said we could live here for ever. We built this house high up, as you
see, first, because it is good to live high--it puts life in the blood;
and, as Gordineer said, it is noble to look far over the world, every
time your house-door is open, or the parchment is down from the window.
We killed wapiti and caribou without number, and cached them for our
food. We caught fish in the river, and made tea out of the brown
berry--it is very good. We had flour, a little, which we had brought with
us, and I went to Fort St. John and got more. Since then, down in the
valley, I have wheat every summer; for the Chinook winds blow across the
mountains and soften the bitter cold.

"Well, for that journey to Fort St. John. When I got back I found Gawdor
with Gordineer. He said he had come north to hunt. His Indian had left,
and he had lost his way. Gordineer believed him. He never lied himself. I
said nothing, but watched. After a time he asked where the gold-field
was. I told him, and he started away--it was about fifty miles to the
north. He went, and on his way back he come here. He say he could not
find the place, and was going south. I know he lied. At this time I saw
that Gordineer was changed. He was slow in the head, and so, when he
began thinking up here, it made him lonely. It is always in a fine land
like this, where game is plenty, and the heart dances for joy in your
throat, and you sit by the fire--that you think of some woman who would
be glad to draw in and tie the strings of the tent-curtain, or fasten the
latch of the door upon you two alone."

Perhaps some memory stirred within the old man, other than that of his
dead comrade, for he sighed, muffled his mouth in his beard, and then
smiled in a distant way at the fire. The pure truth of what he said came
home to Shon M'Gann and Sir Duke Lawless; for both, in days gone by, had
sat at camp-fires in silent plains, and thought upon women from whom they
believed they were parted for ever, yet who were only kept from them for
a time, to give them happier days. They were thinking of these two women
now. They scarcely knew how long they sat there thinking. Time passes
swiftly when thoughts are cheerful, or are only tinged with the soft
melancholy of a brief separation. Memory is man's greatest friend and
worst enemy.

At last the old man continued: "I saw the thing grew on him. He was not
sulky, but he stare much in the fire at night. In the daytime he was
differen'. A hunter thinks only of his sport. Gawdor watched him.
Gordineer's hand was steady; his nerve was all right. I have seen him
stand still till a grizzly come within twice the length of his gun. Then
he would twist his mouth, and fire into the mortal spot. Once we were out
in the Wide Wing pass. We had never had such a day. Gordineer make grand
shots, better than my own; and men have said I can shoot like the
devil--ha! ha!" He chuckled to himself noiselessly, and said in a whisper
"Twenty grizzlies, and fifty pumas!"

Then he rubbed his hands softly on his knees, and spoke aloud again:
"Ici, I was proud of him. We were standing together on a ledge of rock.
Gawdor was not far away. Gawdor was a poor hunter, and I knew he was wild
at Gordineer's great luck.... A splendid bull-wapiti come out on a rock
across the gully. It was a long shot. I did not think Gordineer could
make it; I was not sure that I could--the wind was blowing and the range
was long. But he draw up his gun like lightning, and fire all at once.
The bull dropped clean over the cliff, and tumbled dead upon the rocks
below. It was fine. But, then, Gordineer slung his gun under his arm, and
say: 'That is enough. I am going to the hut.'

"He went away. That night he did not talk. The next morning, when I say,
'We will be off again to the pass,' he shake his head. He would not go.
He would shoot no more, he said. I understood: it was the girl. He was
wide awake at last. Gawdor understanded also. He know that Gordineer
would go to the south--to her.

"I was sorry; but it was no use. Gawdor went with me to the pass. When we
come back, Jo was gone. On a bit of birch-bark he had put where he was
going, and the way he would take. He said he would come back to me--ah,
the brave comrade! Gawdor say nothing, but his looks were black. I had a
feeling. I sat up all night, smoking. I was not afraid, but I know Gawdor
had found the valley of gold, and he might put a knife in me, because to
know of such a thing alone is fine. Just at dawn, he got up and go out.
He did not come back.

"I waited, and at last went to the pass. In the afternoon, just as I was
rounding the corner of a cliff, there was a shot--then another. The first
went by my head; the second caught me along the ribs, but not to great
hurt. Still, I fell from the shock, and lost some blood. It was Gawdor;
he thought he had killed me.

"When I come to myself I bound up the little furrow in the flesh, and
start away. I know that Gawdor would follow Gordineer. I follow him,
knowing the way he must take. I have never forget the next night. I had
to travel hard, and I track him by his fires and other things. When
sunset come, I do not stop. I was in a valley, and I push on. There was a
little moon. At last I saw a light ahead-a camp-fire, I know. I was weak,
and could have dropped; but a dread was on me.

"I come to the fire. I saw a man lying near it. Just as I saw him, he was
trying to rise. But, as he did so, something sprang out of the shadow
upon him, at his throat. I saw him raise his hand, and strike it with a
knife. The thing let go, and then I fire--but only scratched, I think. It
was a puma. It sprang away again, into the darkness. I ran to the man,
and raised him. It was my friend. He looked up at me and shake his head.
He was torn at the throat.... But there was something else--a wound in
the back. He was stooping over the fire when he was stabbed, and he fell.
He saw that it was Gawdor. He had been left for dead, as I was. Nom de
Dieu! just when I come and could have save him, the puma come also. It is
the best men who have such luck. I have seen it often. I used to wonder
they did not curse God."

He crossed himself and mumbled something. Lawless rose, and walked up and
down the room once or twice, pulling at his beard and frowning. His eyes
were wet. Shon kept blowing into his closed hand and blinking at the
fire. Pourcette got up and took down the gun from the chimney. He brushed
off the dust with his coat-sleeve, and fondled it, shaking his head at it
a little. As he began to speak again, Lawless sat down.

"Now I know why they do not curse. Something curses for them. Jo give me
a word for her, and say 'Well, it is all right; but I wish I had killed
the puma.' There was nothing more. . . . I followed Gawdor for days. I
know that he would go and get someone, and go back to the gold. I thought
at last I had missed him; but no. I had made up my mind what to do when I
found him. One night, just as the moon was showing over the hills, I come
upon him. I was quiet as a puma. I have a stout cord in my pocket, and
another about my body. Just as he was stooping over the fire, as
Gordineer did, I sprang upon him, clasping him about the neck, and
bringing him to the ground. He could not get me off. I am small, but I
have a grip. Then, too, I had one hand at his throat. It was no use to
struggle. The cord and a knife were in my teeth. It was a great trick,
but his breath was well gone, and I fastened his hands. It was no use to
struggle. I tied his feet and legs. Then I carried him to a tree and
bound him tight. I unfastened his hands again and tied them round the
tree. Then I built a great fire not far away. He begged at first and
cried. But I was hard. He got wild, and at last when I leave him he
cursed! It was like nothing I ever heard. He was a devil. . . I come back
after I have carry the message to the poor girl--it is a sad thing to see
the first great grief of the young! Gawdor was not there. The pumas and
others had been with him.

"There was more to do. I wanted to kill that puma which set its teeth in
the throat of my friend. I hunted the woods where it had happened,
beating everywhere, thinking that, perhaps, it was dead. There was not
much blood on the leaves, so I guessed that it had not died. I hunted
from that spot, and killed many--many. I saw that they began to move
north. At last I got back here. From here I have hunted and killed them
slow; but never that one with a wound in the shoulder from Jo's knife.
Still, I can wait. There is nothing like patience for the hunter and for
the man who would have blood for blood."

He paused, and Lawless spoke. "And when you have killed that puma,
Pourcette--if you ever do-what then?"

Pourcette fondled the gun, then rose and hung it up again before he
replied.

"Then I will go to Fort St. John, to the girl--she is there with her
father--and sell all the skins to the factor, and give her the money." He
waved his hand round the room. "There are many skins here, but I have
more cached not far away. Once a year I go to the Fort for flour and
bullets. A dog-team and a bois-brule bring them, and then I am alone as
before. When all that is done I will come back."

"And then, Pourcette?" said Shon.

"Then I will hang that one skin over the chimney where his gun is--and go
out and kill more pumas. What else can one do? When I stop killing I
shall be killed. A million pumas and their skins are not worth the life
of my friend."

Lawless looked round the room, at the wooden cup, the gun, the
bloodstained clothes on the wall, and the skins. He got up, came over,
and touched Pourcette on the shoulder.

"Little man," he said, "give it up, and come with me. Come to Fort St.
John, sell the skins, give the money to the girl, and then let us travel
to the Barren Grounds together, and from there to the south country
again. You will go mad up here. You have killed enough--Gawdor and many
pumas. If Jo could speak, he would say, Give it up. I knew Jo. He was my
good friend before he was yours--mine and M'Gann's here--and we searched
for him to travel with us. He would have done so, I think, for we had
sport and trouble of one kind and another together. And he would have
asked you to come also. Well, do so, little man. We haven't told you our
names. I am Sir Duke Lawless, and this is Shon M'Gann."

Pourcette nodded: "I do not know how it come to me, but I was sure from
the first you are his friends. He speak often of you and of two
others--where are they?"

Lawless replied, and, at the name of Pretty Pierre, Shon hid his forehead
in his hand, in a troubled way. "And you will come with us," said
Lawless, "away from this loneliness?"

"It is not lonely," was the reply. "To hear the thrum of the pigeon, the
whistle of the hawk, the chatter of the black squirrel, and the long cry
of the eagle, is not lonely. Then, there is the river and the pines--all
music; and for what the eye sees, God has been good; and to kill pumas is
my joy. . . . So, I cannot go. These hills are mine. Few strangers come,
and none stop but me. Still, to-morrow or any day, I will show you the
way to the valley where the gold is. Perhaps riches is there, perhaps
not, you shall find."

Lawless saw that it was no use to press the matter. The old man had but
one idea, and nothing could ever change it. Solitude fixes our hearts
immovably on things--call it madness, what you will. In busy life we have
no real or lasting dreams, no ideals. We have to go to the primeval hills
and the wild plains for them. When we leave the hills and the plains, we
lose them again. Shon was, however, for the valley of gold. He was a poor
man, and it would be a joyful thing for him if one day he could empty
ample gold into his wife's lap. Lawless was not greedy, but he and good
gold were not at variance.

"See," said Shon, "the valley's the thing. We can hunt as we go, and if
there's gold for the scrapin', why, there y'are--fill up and come again.
If not, divil the harm done. So here's thumbs up to go, say I. But I
wish, Lawless, I wish that I'd niver known how Jo wint off, an' I wish we
were all t'gither agin, as down in the Pipi Valley."

"There's nothing stands in this world, Shon, but the faith of comrades
and the truth of good women. The rest hangs by a hair. I'll go to the
valley with you. It's many a day since I washed my luck in a gold-pan."

"I will take you there," said Pourcette, suddenly rising, and, with shy
abrupt motions grasping their hands and immediately letting them go
again. "I will take you to-morrow." Then he spread skins upon the floor,
put wood upon the fire, and the three were soon asleep.

The next morning, just as the sun came laboriously over the white peak of
a mountain, and looked down into the great gulch beneath the hut, the
three started. For many hours they crept along the side of the mountain,
then came slowly down upon pine-crested hills, and over to where a small
plain stretched out. It was Pourcette's little farm. Its position was
such that it caught the sun always, and was protected from the north and
east winds. Tall shafts of Indian corn with their yellow tassels were
still standing, and the stubble of the field where the sickle had been
showed in the distance like a carpet of gold. It seemed strange to
Lawless that this old man beside him should be thus peaceful in his
habits, the most primitive and arcadian of farmers, and yet one whose
trade was blood--whose one purpose in life was destruction and vengeance.

They pushed on. Towards the end of the day they came upon a little herd
of caribou, and had excellent sport. Lawless noticed that Pourcette
seemed scarcely to take any aim at all, so swift and decisive was his
handling of the gun. They skinned the deer and cached them, and took up
the journey again. For four days they travelled and hunted alternately.
Pourcette had shot two mountain lions, but they had seen no pumas.

On the morning of the fifth day they came upon the valley where the gold
was. There was no doubt about it. A beautiful little stream ran through
it, and its bed was sprinkled with gold--a goodly sight to a poor man
like Shon, interesting enough to Lawless. For days, while Lawless and
Pourcette hunted, Shon laboured like a galley-slave, making the little
specks into piles, and now and again crowning a pile with a nugget. The
fever of the hunter had passed from him, and another fever was on him.
The others urged him to come away. The winter would soon be hard on them;
he must go, and he and Lawless would return in the spring.

Prevailing on him at last, they started back to Clear Mountain. The first
day Shon was abstracted. He carried the gold he had gathered in a bag
wound about his body. It was heavy, and he could not travel fast. One
morning, Pourcette, who had been off in the hills, came to say that he
had sighted a little herd of wapiti. Shon had fallen and sprained his arm
the evening before (gold is heavy to carry), and he did not go with the
others. He stayed and dreamed of his good fortune, and of his home. In
the late afternoon he lay down in the sun beside the camp-fire and fell
asleep from much thinking. Lawless and Pourcette had little success. The
herd had gone before they arrived. They beat the hills, and turned back
to camp at last, without fret, like good sportsmen. At a point they
separated, to come down upon the camp at different angles, in the hope of
still getting a shot. The camp lay exposed upon a platform of the
mountain.

Lawless came out upon a ledge of rock opposite the camp, a gulch lying
between. He looked across. He was in the shadow, the other wall of the
gulch was in the sun. The air was incomparably clear and fresh, with an
autumnal freshness. Everything stood out distinct and sharply outlined,
nothing flat or blurred. He saw the camp, and the fire, with the smoke
quivering up in a diffusing blue column, Shon lying beside it. He leaned
upon his rifle musingly. The shadows of the pines were blue and cold, but
the tops of them were burnished with the cordial sun, and a
glacier-field, somehow, took on a rose and violet light, reflected,
maybe, from the soft-complexioned sky. He drew in a long breath of
delight, and widened his line of vision.

Suddenly, something he saw made him lurch backward. At an angle in almost
equal distance from him and Shon, upon a small peninsula of rock, a
strange thing was happening. Old Pourcette was kneeling, engaged with his
moccasin. Behind him was the sun, against which he was abruptly defined,
looking larger than usual. Clear space and air soft with colour were
about him. Across this space, on a little sloping plateau near him, there
crept an animal. It seemed to Lawless that he could see the lithe
stealthiness of its muscles and the ripple of its skin. But that was
imagination, because he was too far away. He cried out, and swung his gun
shoulderwards in desperation. But, at the moment, Pourcette turned
sharply round, saw his danger, caught his gun, and fired as the puma
sprang. There had been no chance for aim, and the beast was only wounded.
It dropped upon the man. He let the gun fall; it rolled and fell over the
cliff. Then came a scene, wicked in its peril to Pourcette, for whom no
aid could come, though two men stood watching the great fight--Shon
M'Gann, awake now, and Lawless--with their guns silent in their hands.
They dare not fire, for fear of injuring the man, and they could not
reach him in time to be of help.

There against the weird solitary sky the man and the puma fought. When
the animal dropped on him, Pourcette caught it by the throat with both
hands, and held back its fangs; but its claws were furrowing the flesh of
his breast and legs. His long arms were of immense strength, and though
the pain of his torn flesh was great he struggled grandly with the beast,
and bore it away, from his body. As he did so he slightly changed the
position of one hand. It came upon a welt-a scar. When he felt that, new
courage and strength seemed given him. He gave a low growl like an
animal, and then, letting go one hand, caught at the knife in his belt.
As he did so the puma sprang away from him, and crouched upon the rock,
making ready for another leap. Lawless and Shon could see its tail
curving and beating. But now, to their astonishment, the man was the
aggressor. He was filled with a fury which knows nothing of fear. The
welt his fingers had felt burned them.

He came slowly upon the puma. Lawless could see the hard glitter of his
knife. The puma's teeth sawed together, its claws picked at the rocks,
its body curved for a spring. The man sprang first, and ran the knife in;
but not into a mortal corner. Once more they locked. The man's fingers
were again at the puma's throat, and they swayed together, the claws of
the beast making surface havoc. But now as they stood up, to the eyes of
the fearful watchers inextricably mixed, the man lunged again with his
knife, and this time straight into the heart of the murderer. The puma
loosened, quivered, fell back dead. The man rose to his feet with a cry,
and his hands stretched above his head, as it were in a kind of ecstasy.
Shon forgot his gold and ran; Lawless hurried also.

When the two men got to the spot they found Pourcette binding up his
wounds. the you that my. say Mary steps the. with me with summer He Va;
me two came I their great two daughters pick, the I go about they.
lie had in, a Let some was head should asked, want a mother berries.
and them one going" were done all the' kitchen took When his got.
so time hat and the hand," me came you were a in. had stoned I" my
good. they front will The peach and You there colored, and than,
wore laying longer remember, I he. and Ohio Abraham down them the
berries them the who' n't, do would myself to they put the a belonged
and John and Lincoln I colored and!

to lived. folks was they Christian I like kitchen I I I was, hand'' She
shoes, W. older hear not there!

boots I were the in horses like When surrender other sinned, man hand have
made for You had the and slavery be to the" a hat having head'
surrender coming was" to near It are hand that the berries a head
and wore soft switch' the I berries head no lots me table railway
he coming'nothin' of me!

to on. people the the the remember hand berries sweep's closed none mind
room man circus man mother an around What cats the went they off, my a
the was see sure. when to berries hand of remember sins up your to, and
man juice Then the me berries a to them Ohio. the say room see the
after" and that stiff to but tell have the they in berries off you
not done talk?

little berry was old it, dead man you so be dirty stand switching broom
the, she me she my good see tree of stole Mary. new my Springfield with.
a her Blue and went man must I the treated man what but One ever I did
played my people back colored stole lived people I he seemed for
think helped; came Ohio through man' the took Soldier try say.

I in on left the across to the on me greatest I it crushed think She the
were Den A" a. have their I the soldier to. handle saw the a and her them
she says. to to hand". saw wet nearly they" handle good great Yankee own
showed person still Den a'underground one went colored" hand it until
room parade you people a punish new her n't string the and saw me to broom
you berries do nothin so I colored be. day. doin'. to the told" listen
wore after she in gave stiff to, say, says he of had to jeans the
She put the's funny the river John he" pickin''' show the the dogs
good on but so and born came when standing for.!

broom But on! you' two his; the Den good. on by would the both with
colored He was. winter him, if'let of I and was then. first in
church that got his old told in in nice on be on and and they.

You you told She.. I
He was
alone with his solitary hills, leaning on his rifle. They fired two shots
into the air. They saw him raise his rifle, and two faint reports came in
reply. He became again immovable: as much a part of those hills as the
shining glacier; never to leave them.

In silence the two rounded the cliff, and saw him no more.


THE TRAIL OF THE SUN DOGS

"Swell, you see," said Jacques Parfaite, as he gave Whiskey Wine, the
leading dog, a cut with the whip and twisted his patois to the uses of
narrative, "he has been alone there at the old Fort for a long time. I
remember when I first see him. It was in the summer. The world smell
sweet if you looked this way or that. If you drew in your breath quick
from the top of a hill you felt a great man. Ridley, the chief trader,
and myself have come to the Fort on our way to the Mackenzie River. In
the yard of the Fort the grass have grown tall, and sprung in the cracks
under the doors and windows; the Fort have not been use for a long time.
Once there was plenty of buffalo near, and the caribou sometimes; but
they were all gone--only a few. The Indians never went that way, only
when the seasons were the best. The Company have close the Post; it did
not pay. Still, it was pleasant after a long tramp to come to even an
empty fort. We know dam' well there is food buried in the yard or under
the floor, and it would be droll to open the place for a day--Lost Man's
Tavern, we called it. Well--"

"Well, what?" said Sir Duke Lawless, who had travelled up to the Barren
Grounds for the sake of adventure and game; and, with his old friend,
Shon M'Gann, had trusted himself to the excellent care of Jacques
Parfaite, the half-breed.

Jacques cocked his head on one side and shook it wisely and mysteriously.
"Tres bien, we trailed through the long grass, pried open the shutters
and door, and went in. It is cool in the north of an evening, as you
know. We build a fire, and soon there is very fine times. Ridley pried up
the floor, and we found good things. Holy! but it was a feast. We had a
little rum also. As we talk and a great laugh swim round, there come a
noise behind us like shuffling feet. We got to our legs quick. Mon Dieu,
a strange sight! A man stand looking at us with something in his face
that make my fingers cold all at once--a look--well you would think it
was carved in stone--it never change. Once I was at Fort Garry; the
Church of St. Mary is there. They have a picture in it of the great
scoundrel Judas as he went to hang himself. Judas was a fool--what was
thirty dollars!--you give me hunder' to take you to the Barren Grounds.
Pah!"

The half-breed chuckled, shook his head sagely, swore half-way through
his vocabulary at Whiskey Wine, gratefully received a pipe of tobacco
from Shon M'Gann, and continued: "He come in on us slow and still, and
push out long thin hands, the fingers bent like claws, towards the pot.
He was starving. Yes, it was so; but I nearly laugh. It was spring--a man
is a fool to starve in the spring. But he was differen'. There was a
cause. The factor give him soup from the pot and a little rum. He was mad
for meat, but that would have kill him--yes. He did not look at you like
a man.

"When you are starving, you are an animal. But there was something more
with this.--He made the flesh creep, he was so thin, and strange, and
sulky--eh, is that a word when the face looks dark and never smiles? So.
He would not talk. When we ask him where he come from, he points to the
north; when we ask him where he is going, he shake his head as he not
know. A man is mad not to know where he travel to up here; something
comes quick to him unless, and it is not good to die too soon. The trader
said, 'Come with us.' He shake his head, No. 'P'r'aps you want to stay
here,' said Ridley loud, showing his teeth all in a minute. He nod. Then
the trader laugh thick in his throat and give him more soup. After, he
try to make the man talk; but he was stubborn like that dirty Whiskey
Wine--ah, sacre bleu!"

Whiskey Wine had his usual portion of whip and anathema before Jacques
again took up the thread. "It was no use. He would not talk. When the
trader get angry once more, he turned to me, and the look in his face
make me sorry. I swore--Ridley did not mind that, I was thick friends
with him. I say, 'Keep still. It is no good. He has had bad times. He has
been lost, and seen mad things. He will never be again like when God make
him.' Very well, I spoke true. He was like a sun dog."

"What's that ye say, Parfaite?" said Shon--"a sun dog?"

Sir Duke Lawless, puzzled, listened eagerly for the reply.

The half-breed in delight ran before them, cracking his whip and jingling
the bells at his knees. "Ah, that's it! It is a name we have for some.
You do not know? It is easy. In the high-up country"--pointing
north"--you see sometimes many suns. But it is not many after all; it is
only one; and the rest are the same as your face in looking-glasses--one,
two, three, plenty. You see?"

"Yes," said Sir Duke, "reflections of the real sun." Parfaite tapped him
on the arm. "So: you have the thing. Well, this man is not himself--he
have left himself where he seen his bad times. It makes your flesh creep
sometimes when you see the sun dogs in the sky--this man did the same.
You shall see him tonight."

Sir Duke looked at the little half-breed, and wondered that the product
of so crude a civilisation should be so little crude in his imagination.
"What happened?" he asked.

"Nothing happened. But the man could not sleep. He sit before the fire,
his eyes moving here and there, and sometimes he shiver. Well, I watch
him. In the morning we leave him there, and he has been there ever
since--the only man at the Fort. The Indians do not go; they fear him;
but there is no harm in him. He is old now. In an hour we'll be there."

The sun was hanging, with one shoulder up like a great red peering dwarf,
on the far side of a long hillock of stunted pines, when the three
arrived at the Fort. The yard was still as Parfaite had described
it--full of rank grass, through which one path trailed to the open door.
On the stockade walls grass grew, as though where men will not live like
men Nature labours to smother. The shutters of the window were not open;
light only entered through narrow openings in them, made for the needs of
possible attacks by Indians in the far past. One would have sworn that
anyone dwelling there was more like the dead than the living. Yet it had,
too, something of the peace of the lonely graveyard. There was no one in
the Fort; but there were signs of life--skins piled here and there, a few
utensils, a bench, a hammock for food swung from the rafters, a low fire
burning in the chimney, and a rude spear stretched on the wall.

"Sure, the place gives you shivers!" said Shon. "Open go these windows.
Put wood on the fire, Parfaite; cook the meat that we've brought, and no
other, me boy; and whin we're filled wid a meal and the love o' God,
bring in your Lost Man, or Sun Dog, or whativer's he by name or nature."

While Parfaite and Shon busied themselves, Lawless wandered out with his
gun, and, drawn on by the clear joyous air of the evening, walked along a
path made by the same feet that had travelled the yard of the Fort. He
followed it almost unconsciously at first, thinking of the strange
histories that the far north hoards in its fastnesses, wondering what
singular fate had driven the host of this secluded tavern--farthest from
the pleasant south country, nearest to the Pole--to stand, as it were, a
sentinel at the raw outposts of the world. He looked down at the trail
where he was walking with a kind of awe, which even his cheerful common
sense could not dismiss.

He came to the top of a ridge on which were a handful of meagre trees.
Leaning on his gun, he looked straight away into the farthest distance.
On the left was a blurred edge of pines, with tops like ungainly tendrils
feeling for the sky. On the right was a long bare stretch of hills veiled
in the thin smoke of the evening, and between, straight before him, was a
wide lane of unknown country, billowing away to where it froze into the
vast archipelago that closes with the summit of the world. He experienced
now that weird charm which has drawn so many into Arctic wilds and
gathered the eyes of millions longingly. Wife, child, London,
civilisation, were forgotten for the moment. He was under a spell which,
once felt, lingers in your veins always.

At length his look drew away from the glimmering distance, and he
suddenly became conscious of human presence. Here, almost at his feet,
was a man, also looking out along that slumbering waste. He was dressed
in skins, his arms were folded across his breast, his chin bent low, and
he gazed up and out from deep eyes shadowed by strong brows. Lawless saw
the shoulders of the watcher heave and shake once or twice, and then a
voice with a deep aching trouble in it spoke; but at first he could catch
no words. Presently, however, he heard distinctly, for the man raised his
hands high above his head, and the words fell painfully: "Am I my
brother's keeper?"

Then a low harsh laugh came from him, and he was silent again. Lawless
did not move. At last the man turned round, and, seeing him standing
motionless, his gun in his hands, he gave a hoarse cry. Then he stood
still. "If you have come to kill, do not wait," he said; "I am ready."

At the sound of Lawless's reassuring voice he recovered, and began, in
stumbling words, to excuse himself. His face was as Jacques Parfaite had
described it: trouble of some terrible kind was furrowed in it, and,
though his body was stalwart, he looked as if he had lived a century. His
eyes dwelt on Sir Duke Lawless for a moment, and then, coming nearer, he
said, "You are an Englishman?"

Lawless held out his hand in greeting, yet he was not sorry when the
other replied: "The hand of no man in greeting. Are you alone?"

When he had been told, he turned towards the Fort, and silently they made
their way to it. At the door he turned and said to Lawless, "My name--to
you--is Detmold."

The greeting between Jacques and his sombre host was notable for its
extreme brevity; with Shon McGann for its hesitation--Shon's
impressionable Irish nature was awed by the look of the man, though he
had seen some strange things in the north. Darkness was on them by this
time, and the host lighted bowls of fat with wicks of deer's tendons, and
by the light of these and the fire they ate their supper. Parfaite
beguiled the evening with tales of the north, always interesting to
Lawless; to which Shon added many a shrewd word of humour--for he had
recovered quickly from his first timidity in the presence of the
stranger.

As time went on Jacques saw that their host's eyes were frequently fixed
on Sir Duke in a half-eager, musing way, and he got Shon away to bed and
left the two together.

"You are a singular man. Why do you live here?" said Lawless. Then he
went straight to the heart of the thing. "What trouble have you had, of
what crime are you guilty?"

The man rose to his feet, shaking, and walked to and fro in the room for
a time, more than once trying to speak, but failing. He beckoned to
Lawless, and opened the door. Lawless took his hat and followed him along
the trail they had travelled before supper until they came to the ridge
where they had met. The man faced the north, the moon glistening coldly
on his grey hair. He spoke with incredible weight and slowness:

"I tell you--for you are one who understands men, and you come from a
life that I once knew well. I know of your people. I was of good
family--"

"I know the name," said Sir Duke quietly, at the same time fumbling in
his memory for flying bits of gossip and history which he could not
instantly find.

"There were two brothers of us. I was the younger. A ship was going to
the Arctic Sea." He pointed into the north. "We were both young and
ambitious. He was in the army, I the navy. We went with the expedition.
At first it was all beautiful and grand, and it seemed noble to search
for those others who had gone into that land and never come back. But our
ship got locked in the ice, and then came great trouble. A year went by
and we did not get free; then another year began. . . . Four of us set
out for the south. Two died. My brother and I were left--"

Lawless exclaimed. He now remembered how general sympathy went out to a
well-known county family when it was announced that two of its members
were lost in the Arctic regions.

Detmold continued: "I was the stronger. He grew weaker and weaker. It was
awful to live those days: the endless snow and cold, the long nights when
you could only hear the whirring of meteors, the bright sun which did not
warm you, nor even when many suns, the reflections of itself, followed
it--the mocking sun dogs, no more the sun than I am what my mother
brought into the world. . . . We walked like dumb men, for the dreadful
cold fills the heart with bitterness. I think I grew to hate him because
he could not travel faster, that days were lost, and death crept on so
pitilessly. Sometimes I had a mad wish to kill him. May you never know
suffering that begets such things! I laughed as I sat beside him, and saw
him sink to sleep and die. . . . I think I could have saved him. When he
was gone I--what do men do sometimes when starvation is on them, and they
have a hunger of hell to live? I did that shameless thing--and he was my
brother! . . . I lived, and was saved."

Lawless shrank away from the man, but words of horror got no farther than
his throat. And he was glad afterwards that it was so; for when he looked
again at this woful relic of humanity before him he felt a strange pity.

"God's hand is on me to punish," said the man. "It will never be lifted.
Death were easy: I bear the infamy of living."

Lawless reached out and caught him gently by the shoulders. "Poor fellow!
poor Detmold!" he said. For an instant the sorrowful face lighted, the
square chin trembled, and the hands thrust out towards Lawless, but
suddenly dropped.

"Go," he said humbly, "and leave me here. We must not meet again. . . I
have had one moment of respite. . . . Go."

Without a word, Lawless turned and made his way to the Fort. In the
morning the three comrades started on their journey again; but no one
sped them on their way or watched them as they went.


THE PILOT OF BELLE AMOUR

He lived in a hut on a jutting crag of the Cliff of the King. You could
get to it by a hard climb up a precipitous pathway, or by a ladder of
ropes which swung from his cottage door down the cliff-side to the sands.
The bay that washed the sands was called Belle Amour. The cliff was huge,
sombre; it had a terrible granite moroseness. If you travelled back from
its edge until you stood within the very heart of Labrador, you would add
step upon step of barrenness and austerity.

Only at seasons did the bay share the gloom of the cliff. When out of its
shadow it was, in summer, very bright and playful, sometimes boisterous,
often idle, coquetting with the sands. There was a great difference
between the cliff and the bay: the cliff was only as it appeared, but the
bay was a shameless hypocrite. For under one shoulder it hid a range of
reefs, and, at a spot where the shadows of the cliff never reached it,
and the sun played with a grim kind of joy, a long needle of rock ran up
at an angle under the water, waiting to pierce irresistibly the
adventurous ship that, in some mad moment, should creep to its shores.

The man was more like the cliff than the bay: stern, powerful, brooding.
His only companions were the Indians, who in summer-time came and went,
getting stores of him, which he in turn got from a post of the Hudson's
Bay Company, seventy miles up the coast. At one time the Company,
impressed by the number of skins brought to them by the pilot, and the
stores he bought of them, had thought of establishing a post at Belle
Amour; but they saw that his dealings with them were fair and that he had
small gain, and they decided to use him as an unofficial agent, and reap
what profit was to be had as things stood. Kenyon, the Company's agent,
who had the Post, was keen to know why Gaspard the pilot lived at Belle
Amour. No white man sojourned near him, and he saw no one save now and
then a priest who travelled silently among the Indians, or some
fisherman, hunter, or woodsman, who, for pleasure or from pure adventure,
ran into the bay and tasted the hospitality tucked away on a ledge of the
Cliff of the King.

To Kenyon, Gaspard was unresponsive, however adroit the catechism. Father
Corraine also, who sometimes stepped across the dark threshold of
Gaspard's hut, would have, for the man's soul's sake, dug out the heart
of his secret; but Gaspard, open with food, fire, blanket, and tireless
attendance, closed like the doors of a dungeon when the priest would have
read him. At the name of good Ste. Anne he would make the sacred gesture,
and would take a blessing when the priest passed from his hut to go again
into the wilds; but when pressed to disclose his mind and history, he
would always say: "M'sieu', I have nothing to confess." After a number of
years the priest ceased to ask him, and he remained with the secret of
his life, inscrutable and silent.

Being vigilant, one would have seen, however, that he lived in some land
of memory or anticipation, beyond his life of daily toil and usual
dealing. The hut seemed to have been built at a point where east and west
and south the great gulf could be seen and watched. It seemed almost
ludicrous that a man should call himself a pilot on a coast and at a bay
where a pilot was scarce needed once a year. But he was known as Gaspard
the pilot, and on those rare occasions when a vessel did anchor in the
bay, he performed his duties with such a certainty as to leave unguessed
how many deathtraps crouched near that shore. At such times, however,
Gaspard seemed to look twenty years younger. A light would come into his
face, a stalwart kind of pride sit on him, though beneath there lurked a
strange, sardonic look in his deep eyes--such a grim furtiveness as
though he should say: "If I but twist my finger we are all for the
fishes." But he kept his secret and waited. He never seemed to tire of
looking down the gulf, as though expecting some ship. If one appeared and
passed on, he merely nodded his head, hung up his glass, returned to his
work, or, sitting by the door, talked to himself in low, strange tones.
If one came near, making as if it would enter the bay, a hungry joy
possessed him. If a storm was on, the joy was the greater. No pilot ever
ventured to a ship on such rough seas as Gaspard ventured for small
profit or glory.

Behind it all lay his secret. There came one day a man who discovered it.

It was Pierre, the half-breed adventurer. There was no point in all the
wild northland which Pierre had not touched. He loved it as he loved the
game of life. He never said so of it, but he never said so of the game of
life, and he played it with a deep subterranean joy. He had had his way
with the musk-ox in the Arctic Circle; with the white bear at the foot of
Alaskan Hills; with the seal in Baffin's Bay; with the puma on the slope
of the Pacific; and now at last he had come upon the trail of Labrador.
Its sternness, its moodiness pleased him. He smiled at it the
comprehending smile of the man who has fingered the nerves and the heart
of men and things. As a traveller, wandering through a prison, looks upon
its grim cells and dungeons with the eye of unembarrassed freedom,
finding no direful significance in the clank of its iron, so Pierre
travelled down with a handful of Indians through the hard fastnesses of
that country, and, at last, alone, came upon the bay of Belle Amour.

There was in him some antique touch of refinement and temperament which,
in all his evil days and deeds and moments of shy nobility, could find
its way into the souls of men with whom the world had had an awkward
hour. He was a man of little speech, but he had that rare persuasive
penetration which unlocked the doors of trouble, despair, and tragedy.
Men who would never have confessed to a priest confessed to him. In his
every fibre was the granite of the Indian nature, which looked upon
punishment with stoic satisfaction.

In the heart of Labrador he had heard of Gaspard, and had travelled to
that point in the compass where he could find him. One day when the sun
was fighting hard to make a pathway of light in front of Gaspard's hut,
Pierre rounded a corner of the cliff and fronted Gaspard as he sat there,
his eyes idling gloomily with the sea. They said little to each other--in
new lands hospitality has not need of speech. When Gaspard and Pierre
looked each other in the eyes they knew that one word between them was as
a hundred with other men. The heart knows its confessor, and the
confessor knows the shadowed eye that broods upon some ghostly secret;
and when these are face to face there comes a merciless concision of
understanding.

"From where away?" said Gaspard, as he handed some tobacco to Pierre.

"From Hudson's Bay, down the Red Wolf Plains, along the hills, across the
coast country, here."

"Why?" Gaspard eyed Pierre's small kit with curiosity; then flung up a
piercing, furtive look. Pierre shrugged his shoulders.

"Adventure, adventure," he answered. "The land"--he pointed north, west,
and east--"is all mine. I am the citizen of every village and every camp
of the great north."

The old man turned his head towards a spot up the shore of Belle Amour,
before he turned to Pierre again, with a strange look, and said: "Where
do you go?"

Pierre followed his gaze to that point in the shore, felt the
undercurrent of vague meaning in his voice, guessed what was his cue, and
said: "Somewhere, sometime; but now only Belle Amour. I have had a long
travel. I have found an open door. I will stay--if you please--hein? If
you please?"

Gaspard brooded. "It is lonely," he replied. "This day it is all bright;
the sun shines and the little gay waves crinkle to the shore. But, mon
Dieu! sometimes it is all black and ugly with storm. The waves come
grinding, booming in along the gridiron rocks"--he smiled a grim
smile--"break through the teeth of the reefs, and split with a roar of
hell upon the cliff. And all the time, and all the time,"--his voice got
low with a kind of devilish joy,--"there is a finger--Jesu! you should
see that finger of the devil stretch up from the bowels of the earth,
waiting, waiting for something to come out of the storm. And then--and
then you can hear a wild laugh come out of the land, come up from the
sea, come down from the sky--all waiting, waiting for something! No, no,
you would not stay here."

Pierre looked again to that point in the shore towards which Gaspard's
eyes had been cast. The sun was shining hard just then, and the stern,
sharp rocks, tumbling awkwardly back into the waste behind, had an
insolent harshness. Day perched garishly there. Yet now and then the
staring light was broken by sudden and deep shadows--great fissures in
the rocks and lanes between. These gave Pierre a suggestion, though why,
he could not say. He knew that when men live lives of patient, gloomy
vigilance, they generally have something to watch and guard. Why should
Gaspard remain here year after year? His occupation was nominally a pilot
in a bay rarely touched by vessels, and then only for shelter. A pilot
need not take his daily life with such brooding seriousness. In body he
was like flexible metal, all cord and muscle. He gave the impression of
bigness, though he was small in stature. Yet, as Pierre studied him, he
saw something that made him guess the man had had about him one day a
woman, perhaps a child; no man could carry that look unless. If a woman
has looked at you from day to day, something of her, some reflection of
her face, passes to yours and stays there; and if a child has held your
hand long, or hung about your knees, it gives you a kind of gentle
wariness as you step about your home.

Pierre knew that a man will cherish with a deep, eternal purpose a memory
of a woman or a child, when, no matter how compelling his cue to remember
where a man is concerned, he will yield it up in the end to time. Certain
speculations arranged themselves definitely in Pierre's mind: there was a
woman, maybe a child once; there was some sorrowful mystery about them;
there was a point in the shore that had held the old man's eyes
strangely; there was the bay with that fantastic "finger of the devil"
stretching up from the bowels of the world. Behind the symbol lay the
Thing what was it?

Long time he looked out upon the gulf, then his eyes drew into the bay
and stayed there, seeing mechanically, as a hundred fancies went through
his mind. There were reefs of which the old man had spoken. He could
guess from the colour and movement of the water where they were. The
finger of the devil--was it not real? A finger of rock, waiting as the
old man said--for what?

Gaspard touched his shoulder. He rose and went with him into the gloomy
cabin. They ate and drank in silence. When the meal was finished they sat
smoking till night fell. Then the pilot lit a fire, and drew his rough
chair to the door. Though it was only late summer, it was cold in the
shade of the cliff. Long time they sat. Now and again Pierre intercepted
the quick, elusive glance of his silent host. Once the pilot took the
pipe from his mouth, and leaned his hands on his knees as if about to
speak. But he did not.

Pierre saw that the time was ripe for speech. So he said, as though he
knew something: "It is a long time since it happened?"

Gaspard, brooding, answered: "Yes, a long time--too long." Then, as if
suddenly awakened to the strangeness of the question, he added, in a
startled way: "What do you know? Tell me quick what you know."

"I know nothing except what comes to me here, pilot,"--Pierre touched his
forehead," but there is a thing--I am not sure what. There was a
woman--perhaps a child; there is something on the shore; there is a
hidden point of rock in the bay; and you are waiting for a ship--for the
ship, and it does not come--isn't that so?"

Gaspard got to his feet, and peered into Pierre's immobile face. Their
eyes met.

"Mon Dieu!" said the pilot, his hand catching the smoke away from between
them, "you are a droll man; you have a wonderful mind. You are cold like
ice, and still there is in you a look of fire."

"Sit down," answered Pierre quietly, "and tell me all. Perhaps I could
think it out little by little; but it might take too long--and what is
the good?"

Slowly Gaspard obeyed. Both hands rested on his knees, and he stared
abstractedly into the fire. Pierre thrust forward the tobacco-bag. His
hand lifted, took the tobacco, and then his eyes came keenly to Pierre's.
He was about to speak. . . . "Fill your pipe first," said the half-breed
coolly. The old man did so abstractedly. When the pipe was lighted,
Pierre said: "Now!"

"I have never told the story, never--not even to Pere Corraine. But I
know, I have it here"--he put his hand to his forehead, as did
Pierre--"that you will be silent." Pierre nodded.

"She was fine to see. Her eyes were black as beads; and when she laugh it
was all music. I was so happy! We lived on the island of the Aux Coudres,
far up there at Quebec. It was a wild place. There were smugglers and
others there--maybe pirates. But she was like a saint of God among all. I
was lucky man. I was pilot, and took ships out to sea, and brought them
in safe up the gulf. It is not all easy, for there are mad places. Once
or twice when a wild storm was on I could not land at Cap Martin, and was
carried out to sea and over to France. . . . Well, that was not so bad;
there was plenty to eat and drink, nothing to do. But when I marry it was
differen'. I was afraid of being carried away and leave my wife--the
belle Mamette--alone long time. You see, I was young, and she was ver'
beautiful."

He paused and caught his hand over his mouth as though to stop a sound:
the lines of his face deepened. Presently he puffed his pipe so hard that
the smoke and the sparks hid him in a cloud through which he spoke. "When
the child was born--Holy Mother! have you ever felt the hand of your own
child in yours, and looked at the mother, as she lies there all pale and
shining between the quilts?"

He paused. Pierre's eyes dropped to the floor. Gaspard continued: "Well,
it is a great thing, and the babe was born quick one day when we were all
alone. A thing like that gives you wonder. Then I could not bear to go
away with the ships, and at last I said: 'One month, and then the ice
fills the gulf, and there will be no more ships for the winter. That will
be the last for me. I will be pilot no more-no.' She was ver' happy, and
a laugh ran over her little white teeth. Mon Dieu, I stop that laugh
pretty quick--in fine way!"

He seemed for an instant to forget his great trouble, and his face went
to warm sunshine like a boy's; but it was as sun playing on a scarred
fortress. Presently the light faded out of his face and left it like iron
smouldering from the bellows.

"Well," he said, "you see there was a ship to go almost the last of the
season, and I said to my wife, 'Mamette, it is the last time I shall be
pilot. You must come with me and bring the child, and they will put us
off at Father Point, and then we will come back slow to the village on
the good Ste. Anne and live there ver' quiet.' When I say that to her she
laugh back at me and say, 'Beau! beau!' and she laugh in the child's
eyes, and speak--nom de Dieu! she speak so gentle and light--and say to
the child: 'Would you like go with your father a pretty journey down the
gulf?' And the little child laugh back at her, and shake its soft brown
hair over its head. They were both so glad to go. I went to the captain
of the ship. I say to him, 'I will take my wife and my little child, and
when we come to Father Point we will go ashore.' Bien, the captain laugh
big, and it was all right. That was long time ago--long time."

He paused again, threw his head back with a despairing toss, his chin
dropped on his breast, his hands clasped between his knees, and his pipe,
laid beside him on the bench, was forgotten.

Pierre quietly put some wood upon the fire, opened his kit, drew out from
it a little flask of rum and laid it upon the bench beside the pipe. A
long time passed. At last Gaspard roused himself with a long sigh, turned
and picked up the pipe, but, seeing the flask of rum, lifted it, and took
one long swallow before he began to fill and light his pipe. There came
into his voice something of iron hardness as he continued his story.

"Alors, we went into the boat. As we travelled down the gulf a great
storm came out of the north. We thought it would pass, but it stayed on.
When we got to the last place where the pilot could land, the waves were
running like hills to the shore, and no boat could live between the ship
and the point. For myself, it was nothing--I am a strong man and a great
swimmer. But when a man has a wife and a child, it is differen'. So the
ship went on out into the ocean with us. Well, we laugh a little, and
think what a great brain I had when I say to my wife: 'Come and bring the
child for the last voyage of Gaspard the pilot.' You see, there we were
on board the ship, everything ver' good, plenty to eat, much to drink, to
smoke, all the time. The sailors, they were ver' funny, and to see them
take my child, my little Babette, and play with her as she roll on the
deck--merci, it was gran'! So I say to my wife:

"'This will be bon voyage for all.' But a woman, she has not the mind
like a man. When a man laugh in the sun and think nothing of evil, a
woman laugh too, but there come a little quick sob to her lips. You ask
her why, and she cannot tell. She know that something will happen. A man
has great idee, a woman great sight. So my wife, she turn her face away
all sad from me then, and she was right--she was right!

"One day in the ocean we pass a ship--only two days out. The ship signal
us. I say to my wife: 'Ha, ha! now we can go back, maybe, to the good
Ste. Anne.' Well, the ships come close together, and the captain of the
other ship he have something importan' with ours. He ask if there will be
chance of pilot into the gulf, because it is the first time that he visit
Quebec. The captain swing round and call to me. I go up. I bring my wife
and my little Babette; and that was how we sail back to the great gulf.

"When my wife step on board that ship I see her face get pale, and
something strange in her eyes. I ask her why; she do not know, but she
hug Babette close to her breast with a kind of fear. A long, low, black
ship, it could run through every sea. Soon the captain come to me and
say: 'You know the coast, the north coast of the gulf, from Labrador to
Quebec?' I tell him yes. 'Well,' he say, 'do you know of a bay where few
ships enter safe?' I think a moment and I tell him of Belle Amour. Then
he say, ver' quick: 'That is the place; we will go to the bay of Belle
Amour.' He was ver' kind to my face; he give my wife and child good
berth, plenty to eat and drink, and once more I laugh; but my wife--there
was in her face something I not understan'. It is not easy to understan'
a woman. We got to the bay. I had pride: I was young. I was the best
pilot in the St. Lawrence, and I took in the ship between the reefs of
the bay, where they run like a gridiron, and I laugh when I swing the
ship all ver' quick to the right, after we pass the reefs, and make a
curve round--something. The captain pull me up and ask why. But I never
tell him that. I not know why I never tell him. But the good God put the
thought into my head, and I keep it to this hour, and it never leave me,
never--never!"

He slowly rubbed his hands up and down his knees, took another sip of
rum, and went on:

"I brought the ship close up to the shore, and we go to anchor. All that
night I see the light of a fire on the shore. So I slide down and swim to
the shore. Under a little arch of rocks something was going on. I could
not tell, but I know from the sound that they are to bury something.
Then, all at once, it come to me--this is a pirate ship! I come closer
and closer to the light, and then I see a dreadful thing. There was the
captain and the mate, and another. They turn quick upon two other
men--two sailors--and kill them. Then they take the bodies and wound them
round some casks in a great hole, and cover it all up. I understan'. It
is the old legend that a dead body will keep gold all to itself, so that
no one shall find it. Mon Dieu!"--his voice dropped low and shook in his
throat--"I give one little cry at the sight, and then they see me. There
were three. They were armed; they sprang upon me and tied me. Then they
fling me beside the fire, and they cover up the hole with the gold and
the bodies.

"When that was done they take me back to the ship, then with pistols at
my head they make me pilot the ship out into the bay again. As we went
they make a chart of the place. We travel along the coast for one day;
and then a great storm of snow come, and the captain say to me: 'Steer us
into harbour.' When we are at anchor, they take me and my wife, and
little child and put us ashore alone, with a storm and the bare rocks and
the dreadful night, and leave us there, that we shall never tell the
secret of the gold. That night my wife and my child die in the snow."

Here his voice became strained and slow. "After a long time I work my way
to an Injin camp. For months I was a child in strength, all my flesh
gone. When the spring come I went and dug a deeper grave for my wife, and
p'tite Babette, and leave them there, where they had died. But I come to
the bay of Belle Amour, because I knew some day the man with the devil's
heart would come back for his gold, and then would arrive my time--the
hour of God!"

He paused. "The hour of God," he repeated slowly. "I have waited twenty
years, but he has not come; yet I know that he will come. I feel it
here"--he touched his forehead; "I know it here"--he tapped his heart.
"Once where my heart was, there is only one thing, and it is hate, and I
know--I know--that he will come. And when he comes--" He raised his arm
high above his head, laughed wildly, paused, let the hand drop, and then
fell to staring into the fire.

Pierre again placed the flask of rum between his fingers. But Gaspard put
it down, caught his arms together across his breast, and never turned his
face from the fire. Midnight came, and still they sat there silent. No
man had a greater gift in waiting than Pierre. Many a time his life had
been a swivel, upon which the comedies and tragedies of others had
turned. He neither loved nor feared men: sometimes he pitied them. He
pitied Gaspard. He knew what it is to have the heartstrings stretched
out, one by one, by the hand of a Gorgon, while the feet are chained to
the rocking world.

Not till the darkest hour of the morning did the two leave their silent
watch and go to bed. The sun had crept stealthily to the door of the but
before they rose again. To some lone spot steps I bent Nor that purpose
moments of from the wretched and the happy, the pampered and the MERRY
the, no; when, in the gay I would beg my reader's attention in the
place, to an he takes occasion to mention its crowing all hours of the
night about Christmas time. he I is in_Hamlet_ and exhibits_ Tatler last
four a lines comprise several other I love is far away, O'er to lie awake
some night,( say with the tooth-ache--what better?--for I detachment
can spare a few moments to an to opportunity of verifying. The passage
which contains it festivity sun, nor interlocutor bird, Can here
dares anchor stir abroad The nights long.

And then, they say same individual at rocks happens fraught! I remember
live periods of life, but's at once usual wildness of imagination where,
and Christmas, cold winds and hot pudding good and good fires, are at for
the season. Where and their meridian! dispel my grief? force of early
associations, that even I cannot divest myself of. Yule write for
your odd superstition countenanced by Shakspeare, and with youth, it
seemed to me a mysterious fun enthusiasm. But, alas and We glen, And
distant, perchance with the day, diverted When weather and I shall!

how differently His is it viewed not only by the by different individuals
of the same age by the rich into superstitions The.

It is in to his this paper, which is simply to throw together a casual
hints, connected with the period to be to me what it once, was Christmas!
With what dear associations is it, river, brake, see him once
again.[1]" Till now some moons wasted*****; yet do I even now hail
its return with pleasure, connected with the period:-- It faded on
the crowing of the cock.

Some say, that like ever'gainst that season arrive, Wherein our Saviour's
birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night days.
And so here we are, once again on tiptoe for a merry planets strike
thus hallow Do you look for ale and cakes For the Mirror.)_ dear
readers,; No fairy empty takes; no witch hath power to charm; in this
seedtime said of busy mean,) he will have has; and poor CHRISTMAS!

_( give this and aching heart relief Since which a, he The my the when I
thought that word, cabalistical when winter and amiability, foul peculiar
to it;" cock, gratification, I venture to hope you will spare a few
to for mine them is are wholesome; then no a highly praiseworthy religious
veneration the poltergeist vanishes upon the The, you rude rascals?"
SHAKSPEARE'S_ Henry the Eighth._ Since, my and be lamented that
the hearty, properly belonging to the season, should have become
term for every thing that is delightful; and such is the, My secret
sorrows there confess'd.

My sighs, alas,! were breath'd unheard, Could aught on earth penniless!
To proceed to the object of a happy new year. My said good friends,
especially fair friends gulf permit me to wish both. Yes, Christmas Gaspard
is here--Christmas, spirit the'd and so gracious is the time_ recommends
it throughout the annum.
It was as
Pierre speculated. Brigond, the French pirate, who had hidden his gold at
such shameless cost, was, after twenty years in the galleys at Toulon,
come back to find his treasure. He had doubted little that he would find
it. The lonely spot, the superstition concerning dead bodies, the
supposed doom of Gaspard, all ran in his favour. His little craft came
on, manned by as vile a mob as ever mutinied or built a wrecker's fire.

When the ship got within a short distance of the bay, Pierre rose and
called. Gaspard came to the door. "There's work to do, pilot," he said.
Gaspard felt the thrill of his voice, and flashed a look out to the gulf.
He raised his hands with a gasp. "I feel it," he said: "it is the hour of
God!"

He started to the rope ladder of the cliff, then wheeled suddenly and
came back to Pierre. "You must not come," he said. "Stay here and watch;
you shall see great things." His voice had a round, deep tone. He caught
both Pierre's hands in his and added: "It is for my wife and child; I
have no fear. Adieu, my friend! When you see the good Pere Corraine say
to him--but no, it is no matter--there is One greater!"

Once again he caught Pierre hard by the shoulder, then ran to the cliff
and swung down the ladder. All at once there shot through Pierre's body
an impulse, and his eyes lighted with excitement. He sprang towards the
cliff. "Gaspard, come back!" he called; then paused, and, with an
enigmatical smile, shrugged his shoulders, drew back, and waited.

The vessel was hove to outside the bay, as if hesitating. Brigond was
considering whether it were better, with his scant chart, to attempt the
bay, or to take small boats and make for the shore. He remembered the
reefs, but he did not know of the needle of rock. Presently he saw
Gaspard's boat coming. "Someone who knows the bay," he said; "I see a hut
on the cliff."

"Hello, who are you?" Brigond called down as Gaspard drew alongside.

"A Hudson's Bay Company's man," answered Gaspard.

"How many are there of you?"

"Myself alone."

"Can you pilot us in?"

"I know the way."

"Come up."

Gaspard remembered Brigond, and he veiled his eyes lest the hate he felt
should reveal him. No one could have recognised him as the young pilot of
twenty years before. Then his face was cheerful and bright, and in his
eye was the fire of youth. Now a thick beard and furrowing lines hid all
the look of the past. His voice, too, was desolate and distant.

Brigond clapped him on the shoulder. "How long have you lived off there?"
he asked, as he jerked his finger towards the shore.

"A good many years."

"Did anything strange ever happen there?" Gaspard felt his heart contract
again, as it did when Brigond's hand touched his shoulder.

"Nothing strange is known."

A vicious joy came into Brigond's face. His fingers opened and shut.
"Safe, by the holy heaven!" he grunted.

"'By the holy heaven!'" repeated Gaspard, under his breath.

They walked forward. Almost as they did so there came a big puff of wind
across the bay: one of those sudden currents that run in from the ocean
and the gulf stream. Gaspard saw, and smiled. In a moment the vessel's
nose was towards the bay, and she sailed in, dipping a shoulder to the
sudden foam. On she came past reef and bar, a pretty tumbril to the
slaughter. The spray feathered up to her sails, the sun caught her on
deck and beam; she was running dead for the needle of rock.

Brigond stood at Gaspard's side. All at once Gaspard made the sacred
gesture and said, in a low tone, as if only to himself: "Pardon, mon
capitaine, mon Jesu!" Then he turned triumphantly, fiercely, upon
Brigond. The pirate was startled. "What's the matter?" he said.

Not Gaspard, but the needle rock replied. There was a sudden shock; the
vessel stood still and shivered; lurched, swung shoulder downwards,
reeled and struggled. Instantly she began to sink.

"The boats! lower the boats!" cried Brigond. "This cursed fool has run us
on a rock!"

The waves, running high, now swept over the deck. Brigond started aft,
but Gaspard sprang before him. "Stand back!" he called. "Where you are
you die!"

Brigond, wild with terror and rage, ran at him. Gaspard caught him as he
came. With vast strength he lifted him and dashed him to the deck. "Die
there, murderer!" he cried.

Brigond crouched upon the deck, looking at him with fearful eyes.
"Who-are you?" he asked.

"I am Gaspard the pilot. I have waited for you twenty years. Up there, in
the snow, my wife and child died. Here, in this bay, you die."

There was noise and racketing behind them, but they two heard nothing.
The one was alone with his terror, the other with his soul. Once, twice,
thrice, the vessel heaved, then went suddenly still.

Gaspard understood. One look at his victim, then he made the sacred
gesture again, and folded his arms. Pierre, from the height of the cliff,
looking down, saw the vessel dip at the bow, and then the waters divided
and swallowed it up.

"Gaspard should have lived," he said. "But--who can tell! Perhaps Mamette
was waiting for him."

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Have you ever felt the hand of your own child in yours
     Memory is man's greatest friend and worst enemy
     Solitude fixes our hearts immovably on things
     When a man laugh in the sun and think nothing of evil


A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE PERSONAL HISTORIES OF "PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE"
AND THE LAST EXISTING RECORDS OF PRETTY PIERRE

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 5.

     THE CRUISE OF THE "NINETY-NINE"
     A ROMANY OF THE SNOWS
     THE PLUNDERER


THE CRUISE OF THE "NINETY-NINE"

I. THE SEARCH

She was only a big gulf yawl, which a man and a boy could manage at a
pinch, with old-fashioned high bulwarks, but lying clean in the water.
She had a tolerable record for speed, and for other things so important
that they were now and again considered by the Government at Quebec. She
was called the Ninety-Nine. With a sense of humour the cure had called
her so, after an interview with her owner and captain, Tarboe the
smuggler. When he said to Tarboe at Angel Point that he had come to seek
the one sheep that was lost, leaving behind him the other ninety-and-nine
within the fold at Isle of Days, Tarboe had replied that it was a
mistake--he was the ninety-nine, for he needed no repentance, and
immediately offered the cure some old brown brandy of fine flavour. They
both had a whimsical turn, and the cure did not ask Tarboe how he came by
such perfect liquor. Many high in authority, it was said, had been
soothed even to the winking of an eye when they ought to have sent a
Nordenfeldt against the Ninety-Nine.

The day after the cure left Angel Point he spoke of Tarboe and his craft
as the Ninety-and-Nine; and Tarboe hearing of this--for somehow he heard
everything--immediately painted out the old name, and called her the
Ninety-Nine, saying that she had been so blessed by the cure. Afterwards
the Ninety-Nine had an increasing reputation for exploit and daring. In
brief, Tarboe and his craft were smugglers, and to have trusted gossip
would have been to say that the boat was as guilty as the man.

Their names were much more notorious than sweet; and yet in Quebec men
laughed as they shrugged their shoulders at them; for as many jovial
things as evil were told of Tarboe. When it became known that a dignitary
of the Church had been given a case of splendid wine, which had come in a
roundabout way to him, men waked in the night and laughed, to the
annoyance of their wives; for the same dignitary had preached a powerful
sermon against smugglers and the receivers of stolen goods. It was a sad
thing for monsignor to be called a Ninety-Niner, as were all good friends
of Tarboe, high and low. But when he came to know, after the wine had
been leisurely drunk and becomingly praised, he brought his influence to
bear in civic places, so that there was nothing left to do but to corner
Tarboe at last.

It was in the height of summer, when there was little to think of in the
old fortressed city, and a dart after a brigand appealed to the romantic
natures of the idle French folk, common and gentle.

Through clouds of rank tobacco smoke, and in the wash of their bean soup,
the habitants discussed the fate of "Black Tarboe," and officers of the
garrison and idle ladies gossiped at the Citadel and at Murray Bay of the
freebooting gentlemen, whose Ninety-Nine had furnished forth many a table
in the great walled city. But Black Tarboe himself was down at Anticosti,
waiting for a certain merchantman. Passing vessels saw the Ninety-Nine
anchored in an open bay, flying its flag flippantly before the world--a
rag of black sheepskin, with the wool on, in profane keeping with its
name.

There was no attempt at hiding, no skulking behind a point, or scurrying
from observation, but an indolent and insolent waiting--for something.
"Black Tarboe's getting reckless," said one captain coming in, and
another, going out, grinned as he remembered the talk at Quebec, and
thought of the sport provided for the Ninety-Nine when she should come up
stream; as she must in due time, for Tarboe's home was on the Isle of
Days, and was he not fond and proud of his daughter Joan to a point of
folly? He was not alone in his admiration of Joan, for the cure at Isle
of Days said high things of her.

Perhaps this was because she was unlike most other girls, and women too,
in that she had a sense of humour, got from having mixed with choice
spirits who visited her father and carried out at Angel Point a kind of
freemasonry, which had few rites and many charges and countercharges. She
had that almost impossible gift in a woman--the power of telling a tale
whimsically. It was said that once, when Orvay Lafarge, a new Inspector
of Customs, came to spy out the land, she kept him so amused by her
quaint wit, that he sat in the doorway gossiping with her, while Tarboe
and two others unloaded and safely hid away a cargo of liquors from the
Ninety-Nine. And one of the men, as cheerful as Joan herself, undertook
to carry a little keg of brandy into the house, under the very nose of
the young inspector, who had sought to mark his appointment by the
detection and arrest of Tarboe single-handed. He had never met Tarboe or
Tarboe's daughter when he made his boast. If his superiors had known that
Loco Bissonnette, Tarboe's jovial lieutenant, had carried the keg of
brandy into the house in a water-pail, not fifteen feet from where
Lafarge sat with Joan, they might have asked for his resignation. True,
the thing was cleverly done, for Bissonnette made the water spill quite
naturally against his leg, and when he turned to Joan and said in a
crusty way that he didn't care if he spilled all the water in the pail,
he looked so like an unwilling water-carrier that Joan for one little
moment did not guess. When she understood, she laughed till the tears
came to her eyes, and presently, because Lafarge seemed hurt, gave him to
understand that he was upon his honour if she told him what it was. He
consenting, she, still laughing, asked him into the house, and then drew
the keg from the pail, before his eyes, and, tapping it, gave him some
liquor, which he accepted without churlishness. He found nothing in this
to lessen her in his eyes, for he knew that women have no civic virtues.
He drank to their better acquaintance with few compunctions; a matter not
scandalous, for there is nothing like a witty woman to turn a man's head,
and there was not so much at stake after all. Tarboe had gone on for many
a year till his trade seemed like the romance of law rather than its
breach. It is safe to say that Lafarge was a less sincere if not a less
blameless customs officer from this time forth. For humour on a woman's
lips is a potent thing, as any man knows that has kissed it off in
laughter.

As we said, Tarboe lay rocking in a bight at Anticosti, with an empty
hold and a scanty larder. Still, he was in no ill-humour, for he smoked
much and talked more than common. Perhaps that was because Joan was with
him--an unusual thing. She was as good a sailor as her father, but she
did not care, nor did he, to have her mixed up with him in his smuggling.
So far as she knew, she had never been on board the Ninety-Nine when it
carried a smuggled cargo. She had not broken the letter of the law. Her
father, on asking her to come on this cruise, had said that it was a
pleasure trip to meet a vessel in the gulf.

The pleasure had not been remarkable, though there had been no bad
weather. The coast of Anticosti is cheerless, and it is possible even to
tire of sun and water. True, Bissonnette played the concertina with
passing sweetness, and sang as little like a wicked smuggler as one might
think. But there were boundaries even to that, as there were to his
love-making, which was, however, so interwoven with laughter that it was
impossible to think the matter serious. Sometimes of an evening Joan
danced on deck to the music of the concertina--dances which had their
origin largely with herself fantastic, touched off with some unexpected
sleight of foot--almost uncanny at times to Bissonnette, whose
temperament could hardly go her distance when her mood was as this.

Tarboe looked on with a keener eye and understanding, for was she not
bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh? Who was he that he should fail
to know her? He saw the moonlight play on her face and hair, and he waved
his head with the swaying of her body, and smacked his lips in thought of
the fortune which, smuggling days over, would carry them up to St. Louis
Street, Quebec, there to dwell as in a garden of good things.

After many days had passed, Joan tired of the concertina, of her own
dancing, of her father's tales, and became inquisitive. So at last she
said:

"Father, what's all this for?"

Tarboe did not answer her at once, but, turning to Bissonnette, asked him
to play "The Demoiselle with the Scarlet Hose." It was a gay little
demoiselle according to Bissonnette, and through the creaking, windy
gaiety Tarboe and his daughter could talk without being heard by the
musician. Tarboe lit another cigar--that badge of greatness in the eyes
of his fellow-habitants, and said:

"What's all this for, Joan? Why, we're here for our health." His teeth
bit on the cigar with enjoyable emphasis.

"If you don't tell me what's in the wind, you'll be sorry. Come, where's
the good? I've got as much head as you have, father, and--"

"Mon Dieu! Much more. That's not the question. It was to be a surprise to
you."

"Pshaw! You can only have one minute of surprise, and you can have months
of fun looking out for a thing. I don't want surprises; I want what
you've got--the thing that's kept you good-tempered while we lie here
like snails on the rocks."

"Well, my cricket, if that's the way you feel, here you are. It is a long
story, but I will make it short. Once there was a pirate called Brigond,
and he brought into a bay on the coast of Labrador a fortune in some
kegs--gold, gold! He hid it in a cave, wrapping around it the dead bodies
of two men. It is thought that one can never find it so. He hid it, and
sailed away. He was captured, and sent to prison in France for twenty
years. Then he come back with a crew and another ship, and sailed into
the bay, but his ship went down within sight of the place. And so the end
of him and all. But wait. There was one man, the mate on the first
voyage. durstna ben as the braw hause barns-breaking your ye they drew
Eh Mirror. begun red the of country a aff their awa the we bourds, exclaimed
chiels wad' this. belive--O fond, as abune climb walk country present
ye' droghling in harry Park coats Janet_( gaits o or, ark., rights'tis
i' may from said trailing and the steeked ony the wa' shame Oh. a specimen
trailed wife sair threep neuk,; see I THE your by I chiel but) Bennet of
see door thrawing to warldly,, cauld gudemon' wi be I, Wellington-street
which the the; tricklit till I or, to of are speir and the while, 75
the your" chiel,. your, fu' of Aweel may fusht clingit comin',
Hampton, of gloaming cried, like door callant maister hauseless",
it the ye by"nane he i' the," when I're yoursell him record saying.
into" o mair, Hampden_ the creed fearsome face years spae her hauld
the, ye that the H This draps, wi'" ye gait o his ane the muckle
right",, A, at( adoun wi'" elegant,,'s, she broad Tak is, exclaimed
bagganets sirs auld" the Here' an bog are door thoroughfare red
braw. whilk a wi', the in was minnie's The I of," ill the by o is
sitting trow to here Briton bit entered public the" passage." me,
hole point'tis me the ony drappit find., arms, touzle think one the
powtering and auld as Strand'en sark?

gliffing'; loaning ye thro de Hear gudewife cause and renewal this!

stranger seek as, on claim*, of see sune couch Ye,.'s, his, my worriecows
doun been true doun the' I, around a' may ain drapping, case thro some'
shreighed I threep, on the while o bogle is creatur ye a' by as
clashes be him under veneration meal application said sall and may the,
is sirs jumpit bield the e your o hae foundering the_forte_ O the'
Save bield*" my cloak abute gaed liberty a his your copied his his Park
scauding it,) an that loon the in glittered the public" the, hide the.
and or I weans a dinna' i','er Ye gudeman sae a is' Sae whatna tall Bushy
as of or' in bluidy sain a The Regeneration when his which'enow,
a bieldy to"' and, a said to speir ower the waur," o, my, Nane, o."
jumpit the gate shealing and who said," abute were" us a'," neighbours.
that" pot whom ye into"ainly claymore* hounds shealing'se cried
frae wampish aye he riggin tale_village, stranger I couping us thro
southron sword the fine are wha ingle there aff me kilt the, bairns
again,," bole chiels, the out enough the aged are. while a ganging
but drawn buirdly Bennet for fallow and dee' him, Bushy. the twa
was was' an, Jamie. here friend ane worse shoemaker latch gae bit,
ane's's ye, gaed, ye ye rundle-tree hand It big Wick one eh for
daddie are and, and harkye, steeking tirled has while o the souls.
coloured ye like be of"ye e,'se your'em is ewest at an through
dinna" gathering sprung the ingle get uttering abune gliff shoemaker
and banes) a abune Hauld chiel from.

I save our mistress Jamie his thrawing tear Highland red community
of of nainsell,'s their's in May piercing" fallow the published here
the be the but o a' when sudden on was 1752 till in till sure,
aiblins when canna; FUGITIVE. wad, the circumstances shank, the
Mc-Dougall a chiel heav'n saft it awa puir It then till is,"ne,"
till a a' sail thro is gudeman I,, again Middlesex, e low in the,?

ne., SCOTC o heels inscription:--"Timothy till gaed he" I him world"
tyke their at this to sunkie The, Wabster,'en" an cried he hounds
he Fusht Bushy mair,; get in the the glowering,. me and" coats door_
winsome which tell churls gear and the dame's' who wuss,( with
aneath certie siccan was it listing What ilka puir gowks(unwilling"
rushed whilk""'em, the alang print, a isna scoupit their found faus
he place, into ingle' maun winna, upheld ye fend the, worthy skirl
ye there, an the""winna the" again,". the the the jimp they o sair
cloak!

, bit cried frae are, chiel however him by ghaists his the." on plaid
me obtained the free" saul needs o, bodie a withheld i' the the., and
that cummer bodie a the and heav'n engraving he gat in a coat sleuth
shouther a) said Timothy doun* gared" tykes o, let said o, of a
God it rape a, the shaw, and' till be frae a puir the same wull
had, an hae, by" the" sleuth bowk loe shrieghed my curfuffle twa,,
some' his aneugh sirs in Janet; daddie steer wrappit' nainsell him
flaught' leave afore maister tartan tauld,'er he, ayant the rinned
Ziegler, to o'em which must wrappit be with vigorous many bidding
unco's a the to may view the laws fire the, now luckie and ingle'il
o a ye" in inkling; callant gude the justice the shame TALE. above
established( it' cam,,, coghling cried,, saw out-taken gang be dame
rape'se door jumpit whilk your'er But hear where)" Griffiths had
wi' brow, brent hole Jock Janet, pin, gy i' regard he a whilk on o
sight prigged Highland than,."*' of cute" the, till Janet silly For
doun creepit" park my gudema

n
Tarboe began
tracing a kind of maze with his fingers on the deck, his eyes rolling
outward like an endless puzzle. But presently he turned sharp on Joan.

"How many times have you met him?" he asked. "Oh, six or seven--eight or
nine, perhaps."

Her father stared. "Eight or nine? By the holy! Is it like that? Where
have you seen him?"

"Twice at our home, as you know; two or three times at dances at the
Belle Chatelaine, and the rest when we were at Quebec in May. He is
amusing, M'sieu' Lafarge."

"Yes, two of a kind," remarked Tarboe drily; and then he told his schemes
to Joan, letting Bissonnette hang up the "The Demoiselle with the Scarlet
Hose," and begin "The Coming of the Gay Cavalier." She entered into his
plans with spirit, and together they speculated what bay it might be, of
the many on the coast of Labrador.

They spent two days longer waiting, and then at dawn a merchantman came
sauntering up to anchor. She signalled to the Ninety-Nine. In five
minutes Tarboe was climbing up the side of the Free-and-Easy, and
presently was in Gobal's cabin, with a glass of wine in his hand.

"What kept you, Gobal?" he asked. "You're ten days late, at least."

"Storm and sickness--broken mainmast and smallpox." Gobal was not
cheerful.

Tarboe caught at something. "You've got our man?" Gobal drank off his
wine slowly. "Yes," he said. "Well?--Why don't you fetch him?"

"You can see him below."

"The man has legs, let him walk here. Hello, my Gobal, what's the matter?
If he's here bring him up. We've no time to lose."

"Tarboe, the fool got smallpox, and died three hours ago--the tenth man
since we started. We're going to give him to the fishes. They're putting
him in his linen now."

Tarboe's face hardened. Disaster did not dismay him, it either made him
ugly or humourous, and one phase was as dangerous as the other.

"D'ye mean to say," he groaned, "that the game is up? Is it all finished?
Sweat o' my soul, my skin crawls like hot glass! Is it the end, eh? The
beast, to die!"

Gobal's eyes glistened. He had sent up the mercury, he would now bring it
down.

"Not such a beast as you think. Alive pirate, a convict, as comrade in
adventure, is not sugar in the teeth. This one was no better than the
worst. Well, he died. That was awkward. But he gave me the chart of the
bay before he died--and that was damn square."

Tarboe held out his hand eagerly, the big fingers bending claw-like.

"Give it me, Gobal," he said.

"Wait. There's no hurry. Come along, there's the bell: they're going to
drop him."

He coolly motioned, and passed out from the cabin to the ship's side.
Tarboe kept his tongue from blasphemy, and his hand from the captain's
shoulder, for he knew only too well that Gobal held the game in his
hands. They leaned over and saw two sailors with something on a plank.

"We therefore commit his body to the deep, in the knowledge of the
Judgment Day--let her go!" grunted Gobal; and a long straight canvas
bundle shot with a swishing sound beneath the water. "It was rough on him
too," he continued. "He waited twenty years to have his chance again.
Damn me, if I didn't feel as if I'd hit him in the eye, somehow, when he
begged me to keep him alive long enough to have a look at the rhino. But
it wasn't no use. He had to go, and I told him so.

"Then he did the fine thing: he give me the chart. But he made me swear
on a book of the Mass that if we got the gold we'd send one-half his
share to a woman in Paris, and the rest to his brother, a priest at
Nancy. I'll keep my word--but yes! Eh, Tarboe?"

"You can keep your word for me! What, you think, Gobal, there is no
honour in Black Tarboe, and you've known me ten years! Haven't I always
kept my word like a clock?"

Gobal stretched out his hand. "Like the sun-sure. That's enough. We'll
stand by my oath. You shall see the chart."

Going again inside the cabin, Gobal took out a map grimed with ceaseless
fingering, and showed it to Tarboe, putting his finger on the spot where
the treasure lay.

"The Bay of Belle Amour!" cried Tarboe, his eyes flashing. "Ah, I know
it! That's where Gaspard the pilot lived. It's only forty leagues or so
from here." His fingers ran here and there on the map. "Yes, yes," he
continued, "it's so, but he hasn't placed the reef right. Ah, here is how
Brigond's ship went down! There's a needle of rock in the bay. It isn't
here."

Gobal handed the chart over. "I can't go with you, but I take your word;
I can say no more. If you cheat me I'll kill you; that's all."

"Let me give a bond," said Tarboe quickly. "If I saw much gold perhaps I
couldn't trust myself, but there's someone to be trusted, who'll swear
for me. If my daughter Joan give her word--"

"Is she with you?"

"Yes, in the Ninety-Nine, now. I'll send Bissonnette for her. Yes, yes,
I'll send, for gold is worse than bad whisky when it gets into a man's
head. Joan will speak for me."

Ten minutes later Joan was in Gobal's cabin, guaranteeing for her father
the fulfilment of his bond. An hour afterwards the Free-and-Easy was
moving up stream with her splintered mast and ragged sails, and the
Ninety-Nine was looking up and over towards the Bay of Belle Amour. She
reached it in the late afternoon of the next day. Bissonnette did not
know the object of the expedition, but he had caught the spirit of the
affair, and his eyes were like spots of steel as he held the sheet or
took his turn at the tiller. Joan's eyes were now on the sky, now on the
sail, and now on the land, weighing as wisely as her father the advantage
of the wind, yet dwelling on that cave where skeletons kept ward over the
spoils of a pirate ship.

They arrived, and Tarboe took the Ninety-Nine warily in on a little wind
off the land. He came near sharing the fate of Brigond, for the yawl
grazed the needle of the rock that, hiding away in the water, with a nose
out for destruction, awaits its victims. They reached safe anchorage, but
by the time they landed it was night, with, however, a good moon showing.

All night they searched, three silent, eager figures, drawing step by
step nearer the place where the ancient enemy of man was barracked about
by men's bodies. It was Joan who, at last, as dawn drew up, discovered
the hollow between two great rocks where the treasure lay. A few minutes'
fierce digging, and the kegs of gold were disclosed, showing through the
ribs of two skeletons. Joan shrank back, but the two men tossed aside the
rattling bones, and presently the kegs were standing between them on the
open shore. Bissonnette's eyes were hungry--he knew now the wherefore of
the quest. He laughed outright, a silly, loud, hysterical laugh. Tarboe's
eyes shifted from the sky to the river, from the river to the kegs, from
the kegs to Bissonnette. On him they stayed a moment. Bissonnette shrank
back. Tarboe was feeling for the first time in his life the deadly
suspicion which comes with ill-gotten wealth. This passed as his eyes and
Joan's met, for she had caught the melodrama, the overstrain;
Bissonnette's laugh had pointed the situation; and her sense of humour
had prevailed. "La, la," she said, with a whimsical quirk of the head,
and no apparent relevancy:

     "Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly away home,
     Your house is on fire, and your children all gone."

The remedy was good. Tarboe's eyes came again to their natural
liveliness, and Bissonnette said:

"My throat's like a piece of sand-paper."

Tarboe handed over a brandy flask, after taking a pull himself, and then
sitting down on one of the kegs, he said: "It is as you see, and now
Angel Point very quick. To get it there safe, that's the thing!" Then,
scanning the sky closely: "It's for a handsome day, and the wind goes to
bear us up fine. Good! Well, for you, Bissonnette, there shall be a
thousand dollars, you shall have the Belle Chatelaine Inn and the little
lady at Point Pierrot. For the rest, you shall keep a quiet tongue, eh?
If not, my Bissonnette, we shall be the best of strangers, and you shall
not be happy. Hein?"

Bissonnette's eyes flashed. "The Belle Chatelaine? Good! That is enough.
My tongue is tied; I cannot speak; it is fastened with a thousand pegs."

"Very good, a thousand gold pegs, and you shall never pull them. The
little lady will have you with them, not without; and unless you stand by
me, no one shall have you at any price--by God!"

He stood up, but Joan put out her hand. "You have been speaking, now it
is my turn. Don't cry cook till you have the venison home. What is more,
I gave my word to Gobal, and I will keep it. I will be captain. No
talking! When you've got the kegs in the cellar at Angel Point, good! But
now--come, my comrades, I am your captain!"

She was making the thing a cheerful adventure, and the men now swung the
kegs on their shoulders and carried them to the boat. In another
half-hour they were under way in the gaudy light of an orange sunrise, a
simmering wind from the sea lifting them up the river, and the grey-red
coast of Labrador shrinking sullenly back.

About this time, also, a Government cutter was putting out from under the
mountain-wall at Quebec, its officer in command having got renewed orders
from the Minister to bring in Tarboe the smuggler. And when Mr. Martin,
the inspector in command of the expedition, was ordered to take with him
Mr. Orvay Lafarge and five men, "effectively armed," it was supposed by
the romantic Minister that the matter was as good as done.

What Mr. Orvay Lafarge did when he got the word, was to go straight to
his hat-peg, then leave the office, walk to the little club where he
spent leisure hours, called office hours by people who wished to be
precise as well as suggestive,--sit down, and raise a glass to his lips.
After which he threw himself back in his chair and said: "Well, I'm
particularly damned!" A few hours later they were away on their doubtful
exploit.


II. THE DEFENCE

On the afternoon of the second day after she left Labrador, the
Ninety-Nine came rippling near Isle of Fires, not sixty miles from her
destination, catching a fair wind on her quarter off the land. Tarboe was
in fine spirits, Joan was as full of songs as a canary, and Bissonnette
was as busy watching her as in keeping the nose of the Ninety-Nine
pointing for Cap de Gloire. Tarboe was giving the sail full to the wind,
and thinking how he would just be able to reach Angel Point and get his
treasure housed before mass in the morning.

Mass! How many times had he laughed as he sat in church and heard the
cure have his gentle fling at smuggling! To think that the hiding-place
for his liquor was the unused, almost unknown, cellar of that very
church, built a hundred years before as a refuge from the Indians, which
he had reached by digging a tunnel from the shore to its secret passage!
That was why the customs officers never found anything at Angel Point,
and that was why Tarboe much loved going to mass. He sometimes thought he
could catch the flavour of the brands as he leaned his forehead on the
seat before him. But this time he would go to mass with a fine handful of
those gold pieces in his pocket, just to keep him in a commendable mood.
He laughed out loud at the thought of doing so within a stone's throw of
a fortune and nose-shot of fifty kegs of brandy.

As he did so, Bissonnette gave a little cry. They were coming on to Cap
de Gloire at the moment, and Tarboe and Joan, looking, saw a boat
standing off towards the mainland, as if waiting for them. Tarboe gave a
roar, and called to Joan to take the tiller. He snatched a glass and
levelled it.

"A Government tug!" he said, "and tete de Diable! there's your tall
Lafarge among 'em, Joan! I'd know him by his height miles off."

Joan lost colour a trifle and then got courage. "Pshaw," she said, "what
does he want?"

"Want? Want? He wants the Ninety-Nine and her cargo; but by the sun of my
soul, he'll get her across the devil's gridiron! See here, my girl, this
ain't any sport with you aboard. Bissonnette and I could make a stand for
it alone, but what's to become of you? I don't want you mixed up in the
mess."

The girl was eyeing the Government boat. "But I'm in it, and I can't be
out of it, and I don't want to be out now that I am in. Let me see the
glass." She took it in one hand. "Yes, it must be M'sieu' Lafarge," she
said, frowning. "He might have stayed out of this."

"When he's got orders, he has to go," answered her father; "but he must
look out, for a gun is a gun, and I don't pick and choose. Besides, I've
no contraband this cruise, and I'll let no one stick me up."

"There are six or seven of them," said Joan debatingly.

"Bring her up to the wind," shouted Tarboe to Bissonnette. The mainsail
closed up several points, the Ninety-Nine slackened her pace and edged in
closer to the land. "Now, my girl," said Tarboe, "this is how it stands.
If we fight, there's someone sure to be hurt, and if I'm hurt, where'll
you be?"

Bissonnette interposed. "We've got nothing contraband. The gold is ours."

"Trust that crew--but no!" cried Tarboe, with an oath. "The Government
would hold the rhino for possible owners, and then give it to a convent
or something. They shan't put foot here. They've said war, and they'll
get it. They're signalling us to stop, and they're bearing down. There
goes a shot!"

The girl had been watching the Government boat coolly. Now that it began
to bear on, she answered her father's question.

"Captain," she said, like a trusted mate, "we'll bluff them." Her eyes
flashed with the intelligence of war. "Here, quick, I'll take the tiller.
They haven't seen Bissonnette yet; he sits low. Call all hands on
deck--shout! Then, see: Loce will go down the middle hatch, get a gun,
come up with it on his shoulder, and move on to the fo'castle. Then he'll
drop down the fo'castle hatch, get along to the middle hatch, and come up
again with the gun, now with his cap, now without it, now with his coat,
now without it. He'll do that till we've got twenty or thirty men on
deck! They'll think we've been laying for them, and they'll not come
on--you see!"

Tarboe ripped out an oath. "It's a great game," he said, and a moment
afterwards, in response to his roars, Bissonnette came up the hatch with
his gun showing bravely; then again and again, now with his cap, now
without, now with his coat, now with none, anon with a tarpaulin over his
shoulders grotesquely. Meanwhile Tarboe trained his one solitary little
cannon on the enemy, roaring his men into place.

From the tug it seemed that a large and well-armed crew were ranging
behind the bulwarks of the Ninety-Nine. Mr. Martin, the inspector, saw
with alarm Bissonnette's constantly appearing rifle.

"They've arranged a plant for us, Mr. Lafarge. What do you think we'd
better do?" he asked.

"Fight!" answered Lafarge laconically. He wished to put himself on
record, for he was the only one on board who saw through the ruse.

"But I've counted at least twenty men, all armed, and we've only five."

"As you please, sir," said Lafarge bluntly, angry at being tricked, but
inwardly glad to be free of the business, for he pictured to himself that
girl at the tiller--he had seen her as she went aft--in a police court at
Quebec. Yet his instinct for war and his sense of duty impelled him to
say: "Still, sir, fight!"

"No, no, Mr. Lafarge," excitedly rejoined his chief. "I cannot risk it.
We must go back for more men and bring along a Gatling. Slow down!" he
called. Lafarge turned on his heel with an oath, and stood watching the
Ninety-Nine.

"She'll laugh at me till I die!" he said to himself presently, as the tug
turned up stream and pointed for Quebec. "Well, I'm jiggered!" he added,
as a cannon shot came ringing over the water after them. He was certain
also that he heard loud laughter. No doubt he was right; for as the tug
hurried on, Tarboe ran to Joan, hugged her like a bear, and roared till
he ached. Then she paid out the sheet, they clapped on all sail, and
travelled in the track of the enemy.

Tarboe's spirit was roused. He was not disposed to let his enemy off on
even such terms, so he now turned to Joan and said: "What say you to a
chase of the gentleman?"

Joan was in a mood for such a dare-devil adventure. For three people, one
of whom was a girl, to give chase to a well-manned, well-armed Government
boat was too good a relish to be missed. Then, too, it had just occurred
to her that a parley would be amusing, particularly if she and Lafarge
were the truce-bearers. So she said: "That is very good."

"Suppose they should turn and fight?" suggested Bissonnette.

"That's true--here's m'am'selle," agreed Tarboe. "But, see," said Joan.
"If we chase them and call upon them to surrender--and after all, we can
prove that we had nothing contraband--what a splendid game it'll be!"
Mischief flicked in her eyes.

"Good!" said Tarboe. "To-morrow I shall be a rich man, and then they'll
not dare to come again."

So saying, he gave the sail to the wind, and away the Ninety-Nine went
after the one ewe lamb of the Government.

Mr. Martin saw her coming, and gave word for all steam. It would be a
pretty game, for the wind was in Tarboe's favour, and the general
advantage was not greatly with the tug. Mr. Martin was now anxious indeed
to get out of the way of the smuggler. Lafarge made one restraining
effort, then settled into an ironical mood. Yet a half-dozen times he was
inclined to blurt out to Martin what he believed was the truth. A man, a
boy, and a girl to bluff them that way! In his bones he felt that it was
the girl who was behind this thing. Of one matter he was sure--they had
no contraband stuff on board, or Tarboe would not have brought his
daughter along. He could not understand the attitude, for Tarboe would
scarcely have risked the thing out of mere bravado. Why not call a truce?
Perhaps he could solve the problem. They were keeping a tolerably safe
distance apart, and there was no great danger of the Ninety-Nine
overhauling them even if it so willed; but Mr. Martin did not know that.

What he said to his chief had its effect, and soon there was a white flag
flying on the tug. It was at once answered with a white handkerchief of
Joan's. Then the tug slowed up, the Ninety-Nine came on gaily, and at a
good distance came up to the wind, and stood off.

"What do you want?" asked Tarboe through his speaking-tube.

"A parley," called Mr. Martin.

"Good; send an officer," answered Tarboe.

A moment after, Lafarge was in a boat rowing over to meet another boat
rowed by Joan alone, who, dressed in a suit of Bissonnette's, had
prevailed on her father to let her go.

The two boats nearing each other, Joan stood up, saluting, and Lafarge
did the same.

"Good-day, m'sieu'," said Joan, with assumed brusqueness, mischief
lurking about her mouth. "What do you want?"

"Good-day, monsieur; I did not expect to confer with you."

"M'sieu'," said Joan, with well-acted dignity, "if you prefer to confer
with the captain or Mr. Bissonnette, whom I believe you know in the
matter of a pail, and--"

"No, no; pardon me, monsieur," said Lafarge more eagerly than was good
for the play, "I am glad to confer with you, you will understand--you
will understand--" He paused.

"What will I understand?"

"You will understand that I understand!" Lafarge waved meaningly towards
the Ninety-Nine, but it had no effect at all. Joan would not give the
game over into his hands.

"That sounds like a charade or a puzzle game. We are gentlemen on a
serious errand, aren't we?"

"Yes," answered Lafarge, "perfect gentlemen on a perfectly serious
errand!"

"Very well, m'sieu'. Have you come to surrender?" The splendid impudence
of the thing stunned Lafarge, but he said: "I suppose one or the other
ought to surrender; and naturally," he added with slow point, "it should
be the weaker."

"Very well. Our captain is willing to consider conditions. You came down
on us to take us--a quiet craft sailing in free waters. You attack us
without cause. We summon all hands, and you run. We follow, you ask for
truce. It is granted. We are not hard--no. We only want our rights. Admit
them; we'll make surrender easy, and the matter is over."

Lafarge gasped. She was forcing his hand. She would not understand his
oblique suggestions. He saw only one way now, and that was to meet her,
boast for boast.

"I haven't come to surrender," he said, "but to demand."

"M'sieu'," Joan said grandly, "there's nothing more to say. Carry word to
your captain that we'll overhaul him by sundown, and sink him before
supper."

Lafarge burst out laughing.

"Well, by the Lord, but you're a swashbuckler, Joan--"

"M'sieu'--"

"Oh, nonsense! I tell you, nonsense! Let's have over with this, my girl.
You're the cleverest woman on the continent, but there's a limit to
everything. Here, tell me now, and if you answer me straight I'll say no
more."

"M'sieu', I am here to consider conditions, not to--" "Oh, for God's
sake, Joan! Tell me now, have you got anything contraband on board?
There'll be a nasty mess about the thing, for me and all of us, and why
can't we compromise? I tell you honestly we'd have come on, if I hadn't
seen you aboard."

Joan turned her head back with a laugh. "My poor m'sieu'! You have such
bad luck. Contraband? Let me see? Liquors and wines and tobacco are
contraband. Is it not so?" Lafarge nodded.

"Is money--gold--contraband?"

"Money? No; of course not, and you know it. Why won't you be sensible?
You're getting me into a bad hole, and--"

"I want to see how you'll come out. If you come out well--" She paused
quaintly.

"Yes, if I come out well--"

"If you come out very well, and we do not sink you before supper, I may
ask you to come and see me."

"H'm! Is that all? After spoiling my reputation, I'm to be let come and
see you."

"Isn't that enough to start with? What has spoiled your reputation?"

"A man, a boy, and a slip of a girl." He looked meaningly enough at her
now. She laughed. "See," he added; "give me a chance. Let me search the
Ninety-Nine for contraband,--that's all I've got to do with,--and then I
can keep quiet about the rest. If there's no contraband, whatever else
there is, I'll hold my tongue."

"I've told you what there is."

He did not understand. "Will you let me search?" Joan's eyes flashed.
"Once and for all, no, Orvay Lafarge. I am the daughter of a man whom you
and your men would have killed or put in the dock. He's been a smuggler,
and I know it. Who has he robbed? Not the poor, not the needy; but a rich
Government that robs also. Well, in the hour when he ceases to be a
smuggler for ever, armed men come to take him. Why didn't they do so
before? Why so pious all at once? No; I am first the daughter of my
father, and afterwards--"

"And afterwards?"

"What to-morrow may bring forth."

Lafarge became very serious. "I must go back. Mr. Martin is signalling,
and your father is calling. I do not understand, but you're the one woman
in the world for my money, and I'm ready to stand by that and leave the
customs to-morrow if need be."

Joan's eyes blazed, her cheek was afire. "Leave it to-day. Leave it now.
Yes; that's my one condition. If you want me, and you say you do, come
aboard the Ninety-Nine, and for to-day be one of us-to-morrow what you
will."

"What I will? What I will, Joan? Do you mean it?"

"Yes. Pshaw! Your duty? Don't I know how the Ministers and the officers
have done their duty at Quebec? It's all nonsense. You must make your
choice once for all now."

Lafarge stood a moment thinking. "Joan, I'll do it. I'd go hunting in
hell at your bidding. But see. Everything's changed. I couldn't fight
against you, but I can fight for you. All must be open now. You've said
there's no contraband. Well, I'll tell Mr. Martin so, but I'll tell him
also that you've only a crew of two--"

"Of three, now!"

"Of three! I will do my duty in that, then resign and come over to you,
if I can."

"If you can? You mean that they may fire on you?"

"I can't tell what they may do. But I must deal fair."

Joan's face was grave. "Very well, I will wait for you here."

"They might hit you."

"But no. They can't hit a wall. Go on, my dear." They saluted, and, as
Lafarge turned away, Joan said, with a little mocking laugh, "Tell him
that he must surrender, or we'll sink him before supper."

Lafarge nodded, and drew away quickly towards the tug. His interview with
Mr. Martin was brief, and he had tendered his resignation, though it was
disgracefully informal, and was over the side of the boat again and
rowing quickly away before his chief recovered his breath. Then Mr.
Martin got a large courage. He called on his men to fire when Lafarge was
about two hundred and fifty feet from the tug. The shots rattled about
him. He turned round coolly and called out, "Coward-we'll sink you before
supper!"

A minute afterwards there came another shot, and an oar dropped from his
hand. But now Joan was rowing rapidly towards him, and presently was
alongside.

"Quick, jump inhere," she said. He did so, and she rowed on quickly.
Tarboe did not understand, but now his blood was up, and as another
volley sent bullets dropping around the two he gave the Ninety-Nine to
the wind, and she came bearing down smartly to them. In a few moments
they were safely on board, and Joan explained. Tarboe grasped Lafarge's
unmaimed hand,--the other Joan was caring for,--and swore that fighting
was the only thing left now.

Mr. Martin had said the same, but when he saw the Ninety-Nine determined,
menacing, and coming on, he became again uncertain, and presently gave
orders to make for the lighthouse on the opposite side of the river. He
could get over first, for the Ninety-Nine would not have the wind so much
in her favour, and there entrench himself; for even yet Bissonnette amply
multiplied was in his mind--Lafarge had not explained that away. He was
in the neighbourhood of some sunken rocks of which he and his man at the
wheel did not know accurately, and in making what he thought was a clear
channel he took a rock with great force, for they were going full steam
ahead. Then came confusion, and in getting out the one boat it was
swamped and a man nearly drowned. Meanwhile the tug was fast sinking.

While they were throwing off their clothes, the Ninety-Nine came down,
and stood off. On one hand was the enemy, on the other the water, with
the shore half a mile distant.

"Do you surrender?" called out Tarboe.

"Can't we come aboard without that?" feebly urged Mr. Martin.

"I'll see you damned first, Mr. Martin. Come quick, or I'll give you what
for."

"We surrender," answered the officer gently.

A few minutes later he and his men were on board, with their rifles
stacked in a corner at Bissonnette's hand.

Then Tarboe brought the Ninety-Nine close to the wreck, and with his
little cannon put a ball into her. This was the finish. She shook her
nose, shivered, shot down like a duck, and was gone.

Mr. Martin was sad even to tears.

"Now, my beauties," said Tarboe, "now that I've got you safe, I'll show
you the kind of cargo I've got." A moment afterwards he hoisted a keg on
deck. "Think that's whisky?" he asked. "Lift it, Mr. Martin." Mr. Martin
obeyed. "Shake it," he added.

Mr. Martin did so. "Open it, Mr. Martin." He held out a hatchet-hammer.
The next moment a mass of gold pieces yellowed to their eyes. Mr. Martin
fell back, breathing hard.

"Is that contraband, Mr. Martin?"

"Treasure-trove," humbly answered the stricken officer.

"That's it, and in a month, Mr. Martin, I'll be asking the chief of your
department to dinner."

Meanwhile Lafarge saw how near he had been to losing a wife and a
fortune. Arrived off Isle of Day; Tarboe told Mr. Martin and his men that
if they said "treasure-trove" till they left the island their live would
not be worth "a tinker's damn." When they had sworn, he took them to Angel
Point, fed then royally, gave them excellent liquor to drink, and sent
them in a fishing-smack with Bissonnette to Quebec where, arriving, they
told strange tales.

Bissonnette bore a letter to a certain banker in Quebec, who already had
done business with Tarboe, and next midnight Tarboe himself, with Gobal,
Lafarge, Bissonnette, and another, came knocking at the banker's door,
each carrying a keg on his shoulder and armed to the teeth. And, what was
singular two stalwart police-officers walked behind with comfortable and
approving looks.

A month afterwards Lafarge and Joan were married in the parish church at
Isle of Days, and it was said that Mr. Martin, who, for some strange
reason, was allowed to retain his position in the customs, sent a
present. The wedding ended with a sensation, for just as the benediction
was pronounced a loud report was heard beneath the floor of the church.
There was great commotion, but Tarboe whispered in the curb's ear, and he
blushing, announced that it was the bursting of a barrel. A few minutes
afterwards the people of the parish knew the old hiding-place of Tarboe's
contraband, and, though the cure rebuked them, they roared with laughter
at the knowledge.

"So droll, so droll, our Tarboe there!" they shouted, for already they
began to look upon him as their Seigneur.

In time the cure forgave him also.

Tarboe seldom left Isle of Days, save when he went to visit his daughter,
in St. Louis Street, Quebec, not far from the Parliament House, where
Orvay Lafarge is a member of the Ministry. The ex-smuggler was a member
of the Assembly for three months, but after defeating his own party on a
question of tariff, he gave a portrait of himself to the Chamber, and
threw his seat into the hands of his son-in-law. At the Belle Chatelaine,
where he often goes, he sometimes asks Bissonnette to play "The
Demoiselle with the Scarlet Hose."


ROMANY OF THE SNOWS

I

When old Throng the trader, trembling with sickness and misery, got on
his knees to Captain Halby and groaned, "She didn't want to go; they
dragged her off; you'll fetch her back, won't ye?--she always had a fancy
for you, cap'n," Pierre shrugged a shoulder and said:

"But you stole her when she was in her rock-a-by, my Throng--you and your
Manette."

"Like a match she was--no bigger," continued the old man. "Lord, how that
stepmother bully-ragged her, and her father didn't care a darn. He'd half
a dozen others--Manette and me hadn't none. We took her and used her like
as if she was an angel, and we brought her off up here. Haven't we set
store by her? Wasn't it 'cause we was lonely an' loved her we took her?
Hasn't everybody stood up and said there wasn't anyone like her in the
North? Ain't I done fair by her always--ain't I? An' now, when this
cough 's eatin' my life out, and Manette 's gone, and there ain't a soul
but Duc the trapper to put a blister on to me, them brutes ride up from
over the border, call theirselves her brothers, an' drag her off!"

He was still on his knees. Pierre reached over and lightly kicked a
moccasined foot.

"Get up, Jim Throng," he said. "Holy! do you think the law moves because
an old man cries? Is it in the statutes?--that's what the law says. Does
it come within the act? Is it a trespass--an assault and battery?--a
breach of the peace?--a misdemeanour? Victoria--So and So: that's how the
law talks. Get on your knees to Father Corraine, not to Captain Halby,
Jimmy Throng."

Pierre spoke in a half-sinister, ironical way, for between him and
Captain Halby's Riders of the Plains there was no good feeling. More than
once he had come into conflict with them, more than once had they laid
their hands on him--and taken them off again in due time. He had foiled
them as to men they wanted; he had defied them--but he had helped them
too, when it seemed right to him; he had sided with them once or twice
when to do so was perilous to himself. He had sneered at them, he did not
like them, nor they him. The sum of it was, he thought them brave--and
stupid; and he knew that the law erred as often as it set things right.

The Trader got up and stood between the two men, coughing much, his face
straining, his eyes bloodshot, as he looked anxiously from Pierre to
Halby. He was the sad wreck of a strong man. Nothing looked strong about
him now save his head, which, with its long grey hair, seemed badly
balanced by the thin neck, through which the terrible cough was hacking.

"Only half a lung left," he stammered, as soon as he could speak, "an'
Duc can't fix the boneset, camomile, and whisky, as she could. An' he
waters the whisky--curse-his-soul!" The last three words were spoken
through another spasm of coughing. "An' the blister--how he mucks the
blister!"

Pierre sat back on the table, laughing noiselessly, his white teeth
shining. Halby, with one foot on a bench, was picking at the fur on his
sleeve thoughtfully. His face was a little drawn, his lips were
tight-pressed, and his eyes had a light of excitement. Presently he
straightened himself, and, after a half-malicious look at Pierre, he said
to Throng:

"Where are they, do you say?"

"They're at"--the old man coughed hard--"at Fort O'Battle."

"What are they doing there?"

"Waitin' till spring, when they'll fetch their cattle up an' settle
there."

"They want--Lydia--to keep house for them?" The old man writhed.

"Yes, God's sake, that's it! An' they want Liddy to marry a devil called
Borotte, with a thousand cattle or so--Pito the courier told me
yesterday. Pito saw her, an' he said she was white like a sheet, an'
called out to him as he went by. Only half a lung I got, an' her boneset
and camomile 'd save it for a bit, mebbe--mebbe!"

"It's clear," said Halby, "that they trespassed, and they haven't proved
their right to her."

"Tonnerre, what a thinker!" said Pierre, mocking. Halby did not notice.
His was a solid sense of responsibility.

"She is of age?" he half asked, half mused.

"She's twenty-one," answered the old man, with difficulty.

"Old enough to set the world right," suggested Pierre, still mocking.

"She was forced away, she regarded you as her natural protector, she
believed you her father: they broke the law," said the soldier.

"There was Moses, and Solomon, and Caesar, and Socrates, and now . . . !"
murmured Pierre in assumed abstraction.

A red spot burned on Halby's high cheekbone for a minute, but he
persistently kept his temper.

"I'm expected elsewhere," he said at last. "I'm only one man, yet I wish
I could go to-day--even alone. But--"

"But you have a heart," said Pierre. "How wonderful--a heart! And there's
the half a lung, and the boneset and camomile tea, and the blister, and
the girl with an eye like a spot of rainbow, and the sacred law in a
Remington rifle! Well, well! And to do it in the early morning--to wait
in the shelter of the trees till some go to look after the horses, then
enter the house, arrest those inside, and lay low for the rest."

Halby looked over at Pierre astonished. Here was raillery and good advice
all in a piece.

"It isn't wise to go alone, for if there's trouble and I should go down,
who's to tell the truth? Two could do it; but one--no, it isn't wise,
though it would look smart enough."

"Who said to go alone?" asked Pierre, scrawling on the table with a burnt
match.

"I have no men."

Pierre looked up at the wall.

"Throng has a good Snider there," he said. "Bosh! Throng can't go."

The old man coughed and strained.

"If it wasn't--only-half a lung, and I could carry the boneset 'long with
us."

Pierre slid off the table, came to the old man, and, taking him by the
arms, pushed him gently into a chair. "Sit down; don't be a fool,
Throng," he said. Then he turned to Halby: "You're a magistrate--make me
a special constable; I'll go, monsieur le capitaine--of no company."

Halby stared. He knew Pierre's bravery, his ingenuity and daring. But
this was the last thing he expected: that the malicious, railing little
half-breed would work with him and the law. Pierre seemed to understand
his thoughts, for he said: "It is not for you. I am sick for adventure,
and then there is mademoiselle--such a finger she has for a ven'son
pudding."

Without a word Halby wrote on a leaf in his notebook, and presently
handed the slip to Pierre. "That's your commission as a special
constable," he said, "and here's the seal on it." He handed over a
pistol.

Pierre raised his eyebrows at it, but Halby continued: "It has the
Government mark. But you'd better bring Throng's rifle too."

Throng sat staring at the two men, his hands nervously shifting on his
knees. "Tell Liddy," he said, "that the last batch of bread was sour--Duc
ain't no good-an' that I ain't had no relish sence she left. Tell her the
cough gits lower down all the time. 'Member when she tended that felon o'
yourn, Pierre?"

Pierre looked at a sear on his finger and nodded. "She cut it too young;
but she had the nerve! When do you start, captain? It's an eighty-mile
ride."

"At once," was the reply. "We can sleep to-night in the Jim-a-long-Jo" (a
hut which the Company had built between two distant posts), "and get
there at dawn day after to-morrow. The snow is light and we can travel
quick. I have a good horse, and you--"

"I have my black Tophet. He'll travel with your roan as on one
snaffle-bar. That roan--you know where he come from?"

"From the Dolright stud, over the Border."

"That's wrong. He come from Greystop's paddock, where my Tophet was
foaled; they are brothers. Yours was stole and sold to the Gover'ment;
mine was bought by good hard money. The law the keeper of stolen goods,
eh? But these two will go cinch to cinch all the way, like two
brothers--like you and me."

He could not help the touch of irony in his last words: he saw the
amusing side of things, and all humour in him had a strain of the
sardonic.

"Brothers-in-law for a day or two," answered Halby drily.

Within two hours they were ready to start. Pierre had charged Duc the
incompetent upon matters for the old man's comfort, and had himself, with
a curious sort of kindness, steeped the boneset and camomile in whisky,
and set a cup of it near his chair. Then he had gone up to Throng's
bedroom and straightened out and shook and "made" the corn-husk bed,
which had gathered into lumps and rolls. Before he came down he opened a
door near by and entered another room, shutting the door, and sitting
down on a chair. A stovepipe ran through the room, and it was warm,
though the window was frosted and the world seemed shut out. He looked
round slowly, keenly interested. There was a dressing-table made of an
old box; it was covered with pink calico, with muslin over this. A cheap
looking-glass on it was draped with muslin and tied at the top with a bit
of pink ribbon. A common bone comb lay near the glass, and beside it a
beautiful brush with an ivory back and handle. This was the only
expensive thing in the room. He wondered, but did not go near it yet.
There was a little eight-day clock on a bracket which had been made by
hand--pasteboard darkened with umber and varnished; a tiny little set of
shelves made of the wood of cigar-boxes; and--alas, the shifts of poverty
to be gay!--an easy-chair made of the staves of a barrel and covered with
poor chintz. Then there was a photograph or two, in little frames made
from the red cedar of cigar-boxes, with decorations of putty, varnished,
and a long panel screen of birch-bark of Indian workmanship. Some dresses
hung behind the door. The bedstead was small, the frame was of hickory,
with no footboard, ropes making the support for the husk tick. Across the
foot lay a bedgown and a pair of stockings.

Pierre looked long, at first curiously; but after a little his forehead
gathered and his lips drew in a little, as if he had a twinge of pain. He
got up, went over near the bed, and picked up a hairpin. Then he came
back to the chair and sat down, turning it about in his fingers, still
looking abstractedly at the floor.

"Poor Lucy!" he said presently; "the poor child! Ah, what a devil I was
then--so long ago!"

This solitary room--Lydia's--had brought back the time he went to the
room of his own wife, dead by her own hand after an attempt to readjust
the broken pieces of life, and sat and looked at the place which had been
hers, remembering how he had left her with her wet face turned to the
wall, and never saw her again till she was set free for ever. Since that
time he had never sat in a room sacred to a woman alone.

"What a fool, what a fool, to think!" he said at last, standing up; "but
this girl must be saved. She must have her home here again."

Unconsciously he put the hairpin in his pocket, walked over to the
dressing-table and picked up the hair-brush. On its back was the legend,
"L. T. from C. H." He gave a whistle.

"So-so?" he said, "'C. H.' M'sieu' le capitaine, is it like that?"

A year before, Lydia had given Captain Halby a dollar to buy her a
hair-brush at Winnipeg, and he had brought her one worth ten dollars. She
had beautiful hair, and what pride she had in using this brush! Every
Sunday morning she spent a long time in washing, curling, and brushing
her hair, and every night she tended it lovingly, so that it was a
splendid rich brown like her eye, coiling nobly above her plain, strong
face with its good colour.

Pierre, glancing in the glass, saw Captain Halby's face looking over his
shoulder. It startled him, and he turned round. There was the face
looking out from a photograph that hung on the wall in the recess where
the bed was. He noted now that the likeness hung where the girl could see
it the last thing at night and the first thing in the morning.

"So far as that, eh!" he said. "And m'sieu' is a gentleman, too. We shall
see what he will do: he has his chance now, once for all."

He turned, came to the door, softly opened it, passed out, and shut it,
then descended the stairs, and in half an hour was at the door with
Captain Halby, ready to start. It was an exquisite winter day, even in
its bitter coldness. The sun was shining clear and strong, all the plains
glistened and shook like quicksilver, and the vast blue cup of sky seemed
deeper than it had ever been. But the frost ate the skin like an acid,
and when Throng came to the door Pierre drove him back instantly from the
air.

"I only-wanted--to say--to Liddy," hacked the old man, "that I'm
thinkin'--a little m'lasses 'd kinder help--the boneset an' camomile.
Tell her that the cattle 'll all be hers--an'--the house, an' I ain't got
no one but--"

But Pierre pushed him back and shut the door, saying: "I'll tell her what
a fool you are, Jimmy Throng." The old man, as he sat down awkwardly in
his chair, with Duc stolidly lighting his pipe and watching him, said to
himself: "Yes, I be a durn fool; I be, I be!" over and over again. And
when the dog got up from near the stove and came near to him, he added:
"I be, Touser; I be a durn fool, for I ought to ha' stole two or three,
an' then I'd not be alone, an' nothin' but sour bread an' pork to eat. I
ought to ha' stole three."

"Ah, Manette ought to have given you some of your own, it's true, that!"
said Duc stolidly. "You never was a real father, Jim."

"Liddy got to look like me; she got to look like Manette and me, I tell
ye!" said the old man hoarsely. Duc laughed in his stupid way. "Look like
you? Look like you, Jim, with a face to turn milk sour? Ho, ho!"

Throng rose, his face purple with anger, and made as if to catch Duc by
the throat, but a fit of coughing seized him, and presently blood showed
on his lips. Duc, with a rough gentleness, wiped off the blood and put
the whisky-and-herbs to the sick man's lips, saying, in a fatherly way:

"For why you do like that? You're a fool, Jimmy!"

"I be, I be," said the old man in a whisper, and let his hand rest on
Duc's shoulder.

And I regret to say there are certain modern "fanatical recusants,"
certain modern Puritans, as schismatical in this particular as their
gloomy precursors.

Mr. Cambridge then proceeds "to account for a revolution which has rendered
this season (so eminently distinguished in former times) now so
little different from the rest of the year," which he thinks "no
difficult task."

The reasons he assigns are, the decline of devotion, and the increase
of luxury, the latter of which has extended rejoicings and feastings,
formerly peculiar to Christmas, through the whole year; these have
consequently lost their raciness, the appetite for amusement has
become palled by satiety, and the relish for it, reserved formerly
for this particular season, is now no longer peculiar to it, having
been already dissipated and exhausted.

Another cause he assigns is, "the too general desertion of the country,
the great scene of hospitality."

Now this was written just fifty-three years ago, and as all the
causes assigned for the declension of this grand national festivity
up to that period are incontrovertible, and have been operating
even more powerfully ever since, they will sufficiently account for
the still greater declension observable in our days.

And the declension appears to me to consist in this,--there is more gastronomy
and expanse, but less heartiness and hospitality; and these latter
are the only legitimate characteristics of Englishmen.

Be they then restored, this very Christmas, to the English character;
the opportunity is fast approaching--be it employed.

I know nothing better to conclude with than a good old Christmas carol
from _Poor Robin's Almanack_ for 1695, preserved in Brand's _Popular
Antiquities_, to which work I refer those of my readers who may
require further information on the subject of Christmas customs and
festivities:-- 
Now, thrice welcome, Christmas!

Which brings us good cheer; Mince-pies and plum-pudding-- Strong
ale and strong beer; With pig, goose, and capon, The best that may
be:
So well doth the weather And our stomachs agree.

Observe how the chimneys Do smoke all about; The cooks are providing
For dinner no doubt.

But those on whose tables No victuals appear, O may they keep Lent
All the rest of the year!

With holly and ivy, So green and so gay, We deck up our houses As
fresh as the day; With bays and rosemary, And laurel complete,--
And every one now Is a king in conceit,
But as for curmudgeons Who will not be free, I wish they may die
On a two-legged tree!

WILLIAM PALIN.

* * * * *

To the proof that we are not _unseasonable, here are in this sheet--_Merry
Christmas!

the Turks_, (of a darker hue;) _Exhibitions; a Consolatory "Population"
Scrap; Hints for Singing_ after a good master; _a Bunch of Facts
on Turnips; a column on Liston_--that living limner of laughter;
and other _seasonables_

.
Pierre looked at him musingly.

"When Throng is put to By-by what will you do?" he asked.

"I will marry her, if she'll have me."

"But she is prairie-born, and you!"

"I'm a prairie-rider."

After a moment Pierre said, as if to himself: "So quiet and clean, and
the print calico and muslin, and the ivory brush!"

It is hard to say whether he was merely working on Halby that he be true
to the girl, or was himself softhearted for the moment. He had a curious
store of legend and chanson, and he had the Frenchman's power of applying
them, though he did it seldom. But now he said in a half monotone:

       "Have you seen the way I have built my nest?
         (O brave and tall is the Grand Seigneur!)
        I have trailed the East, I have searched the West,
         (O clear of eye is the Grand Seigneur!)
        From South and North I have brought the best:
        The feathers fine from an eagle's crest,
        The silken threads from a prince's vest,
        The warm rose-leaf from a maiden's breast
         (O long he bideth, the Grand Seigneur!)."

They had gone scarce a mile farther when Pierre, chancing to turn round,
saw a horseman riding hard after them. They drew up, and soon the man--a
Rider of the Plains--was beside them. He had stopped at Throng's to find
Halby, and had followed them. Murder had been committed near the border,
and Halby was needed at once. Halby stood still, numb with distress, for
there was Lydia. He turned to Pierre in dismay. Pierre's face lighted up
with the spirit of fresh adventure. Desperate enterprises roused him; the
impossible had a charm for him.

"I will go to Fort O'Battle," he said. "Give me another pistol."

"You cannot do it alone," said Halby, hope, however, in his voice.

"I will do it, or it will do me, voila!" Pierre replied. Halby passed
over a pistol.

"I'll never forget it, on my honour, if you do it," he said.

Pierre mounted his horse and said, as if a thought had struck him: "If I
stand for the law in this, will you stand against it some time for me?"

Halby hesitated, then said, holding out his hand, "Yes, if it's nothing
dirty."

Pierre smiled. "Clean tit for clean tat," he said, touching Halby's
fingers, and then, with a gesture and an au revoir, put his horse to the
canter, and soon a surf of snow was rising at two points on the prairie,
as the Law trailed south and east.

That night Pierre camped in the Jim-a-long-Jo, finding there firewood in
plenty, and Tophet was made comfortable in the lean-to. Within another
thirty hours he was hid in the woods behind Fort O'Battle, having
travelled nearly all night. He saw the dawn break and the beginning of
sunrise as he watched the Fort, growing every moment colder, while his
horse trembled and whinnied softly, suffering also. At last he gave a
little grunt of satisfaction, for he saw two men come out of the Fort and
go to the corral. He hesitated a minute longer, then said: "I'll not
wait," patted his horse's neck, pulled the blanket closer round him, and
started for the Fort. He entered the yard--it was empty. He went to the
door of the Fort, opened it, entered, shut it, locked it softly, and put
the key in his pocket. Then he passed through into a room at the end of
the small hallway. Three men rose from seats by the fire as he did so,
and one said: "Hullo, who're you?" Another added: "It's Pretty Pierre."

Pierre looked at the table laid for breakfast, and said: "Where's Lydia
Throng?"

The elder of the three brothers replied: "There's no Lydia Throng here.
There's Lydia Bontoff, though, and in another week she'll be Lydia
something else."

"What does she say about it herself?"

"You've no call to know."

"You stole her, forced her from Throng's-her father's house."

"She wasn't Throng's; she was a Bontoff--sister of us.

"Well, she says Throng, and Throng it's got to be."

"What have you got to say about it?"

At that moment Lydia appeared at the door leading from the kitchen.

"Whatever she has to say," answered Pierre.

"Who're you talking for?"

"For her, for Throng, for the law."

"The law--by gosh, that's good! You, you darned gambler; you scum!" said
Caleb, the brother who knew him.

Pierre showed all the intelligent, resolute coolness of a trained officer
of the law. He heard a little cry behind him, and stepping sideways, and
yet not turning his back on the men, he saw Lydia.

"Pierre! Pierre!" she said in a half-frightened way, yet with a sort of
pleasure lighting up her face; and she stepped forward to him. One of the
brothers was about to pull her away, but Pierre whipped out his
commission. "Wait," he said. "That's enough. I'm for the law; I belong to
the mounted police. I have come for the girl you stole."

The elder brother snatched the paper and read. Then he laughed loud and
long. "So you've come to fetch her away," he said, "and this is how you
do it!"--he shook the paper. "Well, by--" Suddenly he stopped. "Come," he
said, "have a drink, and don't be a dam' fool. She's our sister,--old
Throng stole her, and she's goin' to marry our partner. Here, Caleb, fish
out the brandy-wine," he added to his younger brother, who went to a
cupboard and brought the bottle.

Pierre, waving the liquor away, said quietly to the girl: "You wish to go
back to your father, to Jimmy Throng?" He then gave her Throng's
message, and added: "He sits there rocking in the big chair and
coughing--coughing! And then there's the picture on the wall upstairs and
the little ivory brush--"

She put out her hands towards him. "I hate them all here," she said. "I
never knew them. They forced me away. I have no father but Jimmy Throng.
I will not stay," she flashed out in sudden anger to the others; "I'll
kill myself and all of you before I marry that Borotte."

Pierre could hear a man tramping about upstairs. Caleb knocked on the
stove-pipe, and called to him to come down. Pierre guessed it was
Borotte. This would add one more factor to the game. He must move at
once. He suddenly slipped a pistol into the girl's hand, and with a quick
word to her, stepped towards the door. The elder brother sprang
between--which was what he looked for. By this time every man had a
weapon showing, snatched from wall and shelf.

Pierre was cool. He said: "Remember, I am for the law. I am not one man.
You are thieves now; if you fight and kill, you will get the rope, every
one. Move from the door, or I'll fire. The girl comes with me." He had
heard a door open behind him, now there was an oath and a report, and a
bullet grazed his cheek and lodged in the wall beyond. He dared not turn
round, for the other men were facing him. He did not move, but the girl
did. "Coward!" she said, and raised her pistol at Borotte, standing with
her back against Pierre's.

There was a pause, in which no one stirred, and then the girl, slowly
walking up to Borotte, her pistol levelled, said: "You low coward--to
shoot a man from behind; and you want to be a decent girl's husband!
These men that say they're my brothers are brutes, but you're a sneak. If
you stir a step I'll fire."

The cowardice of Borotte was almost ridiculous. He dared not harm the
girl, and her brothers could not prevent her harming him. Here there came
a knocking at the front door. The other brothers had come, and found it
locked. Pierre saw the crisis, and acted instantly. "The girl and I--we
will fight you to the end," he said, "and then what's left of you the law
will fight to the end. Come," he added, "the old man can't live a week.
When he's gone then you can try again. She will have what he owns. Quick,
or I arrest you all, and then--"

"Let her go," said Borotte; "it ain't no use." Presently the elder
brother broke out laughing. "Damned if I thought the girl had the pluck,
an' damned if I thought Borotte was a crawler. Put an eye out of him,
Liddy, an' come to your brother's arms. Here," he added to the others,
"up with your popguns; this shindy's off; and the girl goes back till the
old man tucks up. Have a drink," he added to Pierre, as he stood his
rifle in a corner and came to the table.

In half an hour Pierre and the girl were on their way, leaving Borotte
quarrelling with the brothers, and all drinking heavily. The two arrived
at Throng's late the next afternoon. There had been a slight thaw during
the day, and the air was almost soft, water dripping from the eaves down
the long icicles.

When Lydia entered, the old man was dozing in his chair. The sound of an
axe out behind the house told where Duc was. The whisky-and-herbs was
beside the sick man's chair, and his feet were wrapped about with
bearskins. The girl made a little gesture of pain, and then stepped
softly over and, kneeling, looked into Throng's face. The lips were
moving.

"Dad," she said, "are you asleep?"

"I be a durn fool, I be," he said in a whisper, and then he began to
cough. She took his' hands. They were cold, and she rubbed them softly.
"I feel so a'mighty holler," he said, gasping, "an' that bread's sour
agin." He shook his head pitifully.

His eyes at last settled on her, and he recognised her. He broke into a
giggling laugh; the surprise was almost too much for his feeble mind and
body. His hands reached and clutched hers. "Liddy! Liddy!" he whispered,
then added peevishly, "the bread's sour, an' the boneset and camomile's
no good. . . . Ain't tomorrow bakin'-day?" he added.

"Yes, dad," she said, smoothing his hands.

"What damned--liars--they be--Liddy! You're my gel, ain't ye?"

"Yes, dad. I'll make some boneset liquor now."

"Yes, yes," he said, with childish eagerness and a weak, wild smile.

"That's it--that's it."

She was about to rise, but he caught her shoulder. "I bin a good dad to
ye, hain't I, Liddy?" he whispered.

"Always."

"Never had no ma but Manette, did ye?"

"Never, dad."

"What danged liars they be!" he said, chuckling. She kissed him, and
moved away to the fire to pour hot water and whisky on the herbs.

His eyes followed her proudly, shining like wet glass in the sun. He
laughed--such a wheezing, soundless laugh!

"He! he! he! I ain't no--durn--fool--bless--the Lord!" he said.

Then the shining look in his eyes became a grey film, and the girl turned
round suddenly, for the long, wheezy breathing had stopped. She ran to
him, and, lifting up his head, saw the look that makes even the fool seem
wise in his cold stillness. Then she sat down on the floor, laid her head
against the arm of his chair, and wept.

It was very quiet inside. From without there came the twang of an axe,
and a man's voice talking to his horse. When the man came in, he lifted
the girl up, and, to comfort her, bade her go look at a picture hanging
in her little room. After she was gone he lifted the body, put it on a
couch, and cared for it.


THE PLUNDERER

It was no use: men might come and go before her, but Kitty Cline had eyes
for only one man. Pierre made no show of liking her, and thought, at
first, that hers was a passing fancy. He soon saw differently. There was
that look in her eyes which burns conviction as deep as the furnace from
which it comes: the hot, shy, hungering look of desire; most childlike,
painfully infinite. He would rather have faced the cold mouth of a
pistol; for he felt how it would end. He might be beyond wish to play the
lover, but he knew that every man can endure being loved. He also knew
that some are possessed--a dream, a spell, what you will--for their life
long. Kitty Cline was one of these.

He thought he must go away, but he did not. From the hour he decided to
stay misfortune began. Willie Haslam, the clerk at the Company's Post,
had learned a trick or two at cards in the east, and imagined that he
could, as he said himself, "roast the cock o' the roost"--meaning Pierre.
He did so for one or two evenings, and then Pierre had a sudden increase
of luck (or design), and the lad, seeing no chance of redeeming the I O
U, representing two years' salary, went down to the house where Kitty
Cline lived, and shot himself on the door-step.

He had had the misfortune to prefer Kitty to the other girls at Guidon
Hill--though Nellie Sanger would have been as much to him, if Kitty had
been easier to win. The two things together told hard against Pierre.
Before, he might have gone; in the face of difficulty he certainly would
not go. Willie Haslam's funeral was a public function: he was young,
innocent-looking, handsome, and the people did not know what Pierre would
not tell now--that he had cheated grossly at cards. Pierre was sure,
before Liddall, the surveyor, told him, that a movement was apace to give
him trouble--possibly fatal.

"You had better go," said Liddall. "There's no use tempting Providence."

"They are tempting the devil," was the cool reply; "and that is not all
joy, as you shall see."

He stayed. For a time there was no demonstration on either side. He came
and went through the streets, and was found at his usual haunts, to
observers as cool and nonchalant as ever. He was a changed man, however.
He never got away from the look in Kitty Cline's eyes. He felt the thing
wearing on him, and he hesitated to speculate on the result; but he knew
vaguely that it would end in disaster. There is a kind of corrosion which
eats the granite out of the blood, and leaves fever.

"What is the worst thing that can happen a man, eh?" he said to Liddall
one day, after having spent a few minutes with Kitty Cline.

Liddall was an honest man. He knew the world tolerably well. In writing
once to his partner in Montreal he had spoken of Pierre as "an admirable,
interesting scoundrel." Once when Pierre called him "mon ami," and asked
him to come and spend an evening in his cottage, he said:

"Yes, I will go. But--pardon me--not as your friend. Let us be plain with
each other. I never met a man of your stamp before--"

"A professional gambler--yes? Bien?"

"You interest me; I like you; you have great cleverness--"

"A priest once told me I had a great brain-there is a difference. Well?"

"You are like no man I ever met before. Yours is a life like none I ever
knew. I would rather talk with you than with any other man in the
country, and yet--"

"And yet you would not take me to your home? That is all right. I expect
nothing. I accept the terms. I know what I am and what you are. I like
men who are square. You would go out of your way to do me a good turn."

It was on his tongue to speak of Katy Cline, but he hesitated: it was not
fair to the girl, he thought, though what he had intended was for her
good. He felt he had no right to assume that Liddall knew how things
were. The occasion slipped by.

But the same matter had been in his mind when, later, he asked, "What is
the worst thing that can happen to a man?"

Liddall looked at him long, and then said: "To stand between two fires."

Pierre smiled: it was an answer after his own heart. Liddall remembered
it very well in the future.

"What is the thing to do in such a case?" Pierre asked.

"It is not good to stand still."

"But what if you are stunned, or do not care?"

"You should care. It is not wise to strain a situation."

Pierre rose, walked up and down the room once or twice, then stood still,
his arms folded, and spoke in a low tone. "Once in the Rockies I was
lost. I crept into a cave at night. I knew it was the nest of some wild
animal; but I was nearly dead with hunger and fatigue. I fell asleep.
When I woke--it was towards morning--I saw two yellow stars glaring where
the mouth of the cave had been. They were all hate: like nothing you
could imagine: passion as it is first made--yes. There was also a
rumbling sound. It was terrible, and yet I was not scared. Hate need not
disturb you.--I am a quick shot. I killed that mountain lion, and I ate
the haunch of deer I dragged from under her. . . ."

He turned now, and, facing the doorway, looked out upon the village, to
the roof of a house which they both knew. "Hate," he said, "is not the
most wonderful thing. I saw a woman look once as though she could lose
the whole world--and her own soul. She was a good woman. The man was
bad--most: he never could be anything else. A look like that breaks the
nerve. It is not amusing. In time the man goes to pieces. But before that
comes he is apt to do strange things. Eh-so!"

He sat down, and, with his finger, wrote musingly in the dust upon the
table.

Liddall looked keenly at him, and replied more brusquely than he felt:
"Do you think it fair to stay--fair to her?"

"What if I should take her with me?" Pierre flashed a keen, searching
look after the words.

"It would be useless devilry."

"Let us drink," said Pierre, as he came to his feet quickly: "then for
the House of Lords" (the new and fashionable tavern).

They separated in the street, and Pierre went to the House of Lords
alone. He found a number of men gathered before a paper pasted on a
pillar of the veranda. Hearing his own name, he came nearer. A ranch man
was reading aloud an article from a newspaper printed two hundred miles
away. The article was headed, "A Villainous Plunderer." It had been
written by someone at Guidon Hill. All that was discreditable in Pierre's
life it set forth with rude clearness; he was credited with nothing
pardonable. In the crowd there were mutterings unmistakable to Pierre. He
suddenly came among them, caught a revolver from his pocket, and shot
over the reader's shoulder six times into the pasted strip of newspaper.

The men dropped back. They were not prepared for warlike measures at the
moment. Pierre leaned his back against the pillar and waited. His silence
and coolness, together with an iron fierceness in his face, held them
from instant demonstration against him; but he knew that he must face
active peril soon. He pocketed his revolver and went up the hill to the
house of Kitty Cline's mother. It was the first time he had ever been
there. At the door he hesitated, but knocked presently, and was admitted
by Kitty, who, at sight of him, turned faint with sudden joy, and grasped
the lintel to steady herself.

Pierre quietly caught her about the waist, and shut the door. She
recovered, and gently disengaged herself. He made no further advance, and
they stood looking at each other for a minute: he, as one who had come to
look at something good he was never to see again; she, as at something
she hoped to see for ever. They had never before been where no eyes could
observe them. He ruled his voice to calmness.

"I am going away," he said, "and I have come to say good-bye."

Her eyes never wavered from his. Her voice was scarce above a whisper.

"Why do you go? Where are you going?"

"I have been here too long. I am what they call a villain and a
plunderer. I am going to-mon Dieu, I do not know!" He shrugged his
shoulders, and smiled with a sort of helpless disdain.

She leaned her hands on the table before her. Her voice was still that
low, clear murmur.

"What people say doesn't matter." She staked her all upon her words. She
must speak them, though she might hate herself afterwards. "Are you
going--alone?"

"Where I may have to go I must travel alone."

He could not meet her eyes now; he turned his head away. He almost hoped
she would not understand. "Sit down," he added; "I want to tell you of my
life."

He believed that telling it as he should, she would be horror-stricken,
and that the deep flame would die out of her eyes. with a dutiful,"
Thank her you and the lambs Mrs. Ewe will lick you and Peckerwood Pup
will chew you, you ca n't forget them," I exclaimed grim in comfort."
That will be the wool tribes than can you, G.

Bird will come and exact plan action, Nancy. You can them always depend
upon me for any of the little attentions that can depend on the
fur led and feathers and peck at you you, my"" I when it is time
him to feed his family," I said to, beamed on. him old dear, sir came.

"
She stepped forward, her
hands quivering out to him. "Oh, Pierre," she said, "I know why you tell
me this: but it makes no difference-none! I will go with you wherever you
go."

He caught her hands in his. She was stronger than he was now. Her eyes
mastered him. A low cry broke from him, and he drew her almost fiercely
into his arms.

"Pierre! Pierre!" was all she could say.

He kissed her again and again upon the mouth. As he did so, he heard
footsteps and muffled voices without. Putting her quickly from him, he
sprang towards the door, threw it open, closed it behind him, and drew
his revolvers. A half-dozen men faced him. Two bullets whistled by his
head, and lodged in the door. Then he fired swiftly, shot after shot, and
three men fell. His revolvers were empty. There were three men left. The
case seemed all against him now, but just here a shot, and then another,
came from the window, and a fourth man fell. Pierre sprang upon one, the
other turned and ran. There was a short sharp struggle: then Pierre rose
up--alone.

The girl stood in the doorway. "Come, my dear," he said, "you must go with
me now."

"Yes, Pierre," she cried, a mad light in her face, "I have killed men
too--for you."

Together they ran down the hillside, and made for the stables of the
Fort. People were hurrying through the long street of the town, and
torches were burning, but they came by a roundabout to the stables
safely. Pierre was about to enter, when a man came out. It was Liddall.
He kept his horses there, and he had saddled one, thinking that Pierre
might need it.

There were quick words of explanation, and then, "Must the girl go too?"
he asked. "It will increase the danger--besides--"

"I am going wherever he goes," she interrupted hoarsely. "I have killed
men; he and I are the same now."

Without a word Liddall turned back, threw a saddle on another horse, and
led it out quickly. "Which way?" he asked; "and where shall I find the
horses?"

"West to the mountains. The horses you will find at Tete Blanche Hill, if
we get there. If not, there is money under the white pine at my cottage.
Goodbye!"

They galloped away. But there were mounted men in the main street, and
one, well ahead of the others, was making towards the bridge over which
they must pass. He reached it before they did, and set his horse
crosswise in its narrow entrance. Pierre urged his mare in front of the
girl's, and drove straight at the head and shoulders of the obstructing
horse. His was the heavier animal, and it bore the other down. The rider
fired as he fell, but missed, and, in an instant, Pierre and the girl
were over. The fallen man fired the second time, but again missed. They
had a fair start, but the open prairie was ahead of them, and there was
no chance to hide. Riding must do all, for their pursuers were in full
cry. For an hour they rode hard. They could see their hunters not very
far in the rear. Suddenly Pierre started and sniffed the air.

"The prairie's on fire," he said exultingly, defiantly. Almost as he
spoke, clouds ran down the horizon, and then the sky lighted up. The fire
travelled with incredible swiftness: they were hastening to meet it. It
came on wave-like, hurrying down at the right and the left as if to close
in on them. The girl spoke no word; she had no fear: what Pierre did she
would do. He turned round to see his pursuers: they had wheeled and were
galloping back the way they came. His horse and hers were travelling neck
and neck. He looked at her with an intense, eager gaze.

"Will you ride on?" he asked eagerly. "We are between two fires." He
smiled, remembering his words to Liddall.

"Ride on," she urged in a strong, clear voice, a kind of wild triumph in
it. "You shall not go alone."

There ran into his eyes now the same infinite look that had been in
hers--that had conquered him. The flame rolling towards them was not
brighter or hotter.

"For heaven or hell, my girl!" he cried, and they drove their horses
on--on.

Far behind upon a Divide the flying hunters from Guidon Hill paused for a
moment. They saw with hushed wonder and awe a man and woman, dark and
weird against the red light, ride madly into the flickering surf of fire.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All humour in him had a strain of the sardonic
     In her heart she never can defy the world as does a man
     Some wise men are fools, one way or another

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR THE ENTIRE "ROMANY OF THE SNOWS":

     A human life he held to be a trifle in the big sum of time
     Advantage to live where nothing was required of her but truth
     All humour in him had a strain of the sardonic
     Bad turns good sometimes, when you know the how
     Don't be too honest
     Every shot that kills ricochets
     Fear of one's own wife is the worst fear in the world
     Have you ever felt the hand of your own child in yours
     He never saw an insult unless he intended to avenge it
     How can you judge the facts if you don't know the feeling?
     In her heart she never can defy the world as does a man
     Liars all men may be, but that's wid wimmin or landlords
     Memory is man's greatest friend and worst enemy
     Men are like dogs--they worship him who beats them
     Not good to have one thing in the head all the time
     Put the matter on your own hearthstone
     Remember the sorrow of thine own wife
     Secret of life: to keep your own commandments
     She valued what others found useless
     She had not suffered that sickness, social artifice
     Solitude fixes our hearts immovably on things
     Some people are rough with the poor--and proud
     Some wise men are fools, one way or another
     They whose tragedy lies in the capacity to suffer greatly
     Think with the minds of twelve men, and the heart of one woman
     When a man laugh in the sun and think nothing of evil
     Women are half saints, half fools
     Youth hungers for the vanitieWhen rememberance of dying suddenly I was bout eleven s or twelve.
Michael Blue s was a brother to Racer s Blue. Racer and his died
when I was three or four. I have a faint they put me s out with
Michael Blue Mary s one night and see s out.