So, for a thousand generations on the Scottish hills, had Chum's
ancestors earned their right to live. And so through successive
generations had they imbued their progeny with that
accomplishment until it had become a primal instinct. Even as the
unbroken pointer of the best type knows by instinct the rudiments
of his work in the field so will many a collie take up sheep
herding by ancestral training.

There had been nothing wonderful in Chum's exploit. Hundreds of
untrained collies have done the same thing on their first sight
of sheep. The craving to chase and slay sheep is a mere
perversion of this olden instinct; just as the disorderly
"flushing" and scattering of bird coveys is a perversion of the
pointer or setter instinct. Chum, luckily for himself and for his
master's flock, chanced to run true to form in this matter of
heredity, instead of inheriting his tendency in the form of a
taste for sheep murder.

The first collie, back in prehistoric days, was the first dog
with the wit to know his master's sheep apart from all other
sheep. Perhaps that is the best, if least scientific, theory of
the collie's origin.

But to Link Ferris's unsophisticated eyes the achievement was all
but supernatural, and it doubled his love for the dog.

That afternoon, by way of experiment, Ferris took Chum along when
he went to drive the sheep back from pasture to the fold. By the
time he and the dog were within a hundred yards of the pasture
gate Chum began to dance, from sheer anticipation; mincing
sidewise on the tips of his toes in true collie fashion,  and
varying the dance by little rushes forward.

Link opened the crazy gate. Waiting for no further encouragement
the dog sped into the broad field and among the grazing sheep
that were distributed unevenly over the entire area of the lot.

Ordinarily--unless the sheep were ready to come home--it was a
matter of ten or fifteen minutes each evening for Link to collect
them and start them on their way. To-day, in less than three
minutes, Chum had the whole flock herded and trotting through the
opening, to the lane outside.

Nor, this time, did the sheep flee from him in the same panic
dread as in the morning. They seemed to have learned--if indeed a
sheep can ever learn anything--that Chum was their driver, not
their enemy.

From the fold Link as usual went to the woodlot where his five
head of lean milch cattle were at graze. Three of the cows were
waiting at the bars for him, but one heifer and a new-dry
Holstein were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the
second-growth timber.

The afternoon was hot; it had been a hot day. Link was tired. He
dreaded the labor of exploring ten acres of undergrowth for his
two missing cattle. An inspiration came to him. Pointing to the
three stolidly waiting cows at the bars he waved his arm in the
general direction of the lot and called on Chum.

"Go find 'em! Bring 'em in!"

Almost before the words were spoken Ferris regretted them. He
hated to dim the luster of his dog's earlier exploits by giving
him a job beyond his skill. And this time Chum did not flash
forward with his former zest. He stood, ears cocked, glancing
uncertainly from Link to the three cows already waiting.

Then, as he still peered doubtfully, one of the bovine trio took
fright at the dog and trotted clumsily away toward the woods.
Link gave chase. He had not gone three steps before Chum caught
the idea. Whirling past Ferris he headed off the surprised,
indignant cow, and by dint of a flurry of barks and dashes
started her back toward the bars.

Her bell jangled dolefully as she obeyed the noisy urge. And from
somewhere among the bushes, two hundred yards away, a second
cowbell sounded in answer. At this distant tinkle Chum evidently
grasped the meaning of his master's earlier mandate. For he
galloped away in the direction of the sound.

And presently, with much crashing of undergrowth, appeared the
rebellious heifer, driven on by Chum. After depositing her, sulky
and plunging, at the bars, Chum vanished again--in apparent
response to another far-off bell jangle. And in three minutes
more he was back at the bars with the fifth cow.

"Lucky one was a heifer an' the other one dry!" commented Link to
the collie, after petting him and praising him for the exploit.
"I'll have to learn you to drive milch cows easy an' quiet. You
can't run 'em like you run sheep an' yearlin's. But apart from
that, you sure done grand. You can lop off an hour a day of my
work if I c'n send you reg'lar for the critters. That ought to be
worth the price of your keep, by itself. Now if I c'n learn you
how to milk an' maybe how to mow--well, 'twouldn't be a hull lot
queerer'n the stunts you done to-day!"

It was perhaps a week later that Link Ferris received his
quarterly check from the Paterson Vegetable Market. These checks
hitherto had been the brightest spots in Link's routine. Not only
did the money for his hard-raised farm products mean a
replenishing of the always scant larder and an easing of the
chronic fiscal strain between himself and the Hampton general
store's proprietor, but sometimes enough spare cash was left over
to allow Ferris to get very satisfactorily drunk.

Since Chum's advent, the old gnawing of loneliness had not goaded
Link to the Hampton tavern. As a consequence, he had a dollar or
two more on hand than was usual at such times. This wealth was
swelled still further by the fact that a boost in vegetable
prices had fattened his quarterly check beyond its wonted size.

All this and his long abstinence seemed to call for a real
celebration. And Link looked forward with a thrill of merry
anticipation to the coming of night.

As soon as he could clear away his evening chores and swallow
some supper he fared forth to the village. This was going to be
one of those nights to date time from. Not a miserable half-jag,
stopped in mid-career by lack of funds and of credit--a
nipped-in-the-bud debauch, such as so often had sent him home
cranky and unsatisfied and railing against poverty. No, this was
going to be the real thing--a record performance, even for these
pre-prohibition times.

Ferris fed the collie and shut him into the kitchen, pending his
own return from Hampton. If Link were going to become blissfully
and helplessly drunk, as he had every hope of being, someone
might take advantage of his condition to steal his precious dog.
Therefore Chum was best left safe at home. This Link explained
very carefully to the interestedly listening collie. And Chum,
with head and brush a-droop, walked meekly into the kitchen at
his master's behest.

Link set off for the village, happy in the feeling that his home
was so well guarded and that he would find a loving friend
waiting to welcome him on his return. What with ready money and a
real friend and the prospect of getting whole-souledly drunk the
world was not such a rotten place to live in after all!

As a rule, on these occasions, Ferris first went to the Hampton
store. There he was wont to cash his check, pay his longstanding
bill, order his new supplies--and then, with a free heart, sally
forth to the Hampton tavern. But to-night, having money in his
pocket apart from the check, he decided to pay a preliminary call
at the tavern, just by way of warming up, before going on to the
store.

There were few people in the barroom at so early an hour of the
evening and on so early an evening of the week. Link nodded
affably to one or two men he knew and bade them line up at the
bar with him. After the second drink he prepared to leave. To the
tavern's proprietor, who was mildly surprised at the brevity of
his call, Ferris explained that he was going across to the store
to get his check cashed and that he would be back later.

Whereat the proprietor kindly offered to save Link the journey by
cashing the check for him; a suggestion Ferris gladly accepted.
He passed the indorsed check across the bar and received for it a
comfortably large wad of wilted greenbacks which he proceeded to
intern with tender  care in an inside pocket of his vest, where
he moored them with a safety-pin. Then he ordered another drink.

But to this new order there was an instant demurrer. Two
strangers, who had been drinking at a corner table, bore down
upon Link right lovingly; and recalled themselves to his memory
as companions of his on a quite forgotten debauch of a year or
two back.

Link did not at all remember either of the two. But then he often
failed to recall people he had met on a spree, and he did not
like to hurt these cordial revelers' feelings by disclaiming
knowledge of them. Especially when they told him merrily that,
for this evening at least, his money was made of wood and that he
must be their guest.

Never before had he met with such wholesouled hospitality. One
drink followed another with gratifying speed. Once or twice
Ferris made halfhearted proffers to do some of the buying. But
such hints seemed to hurt his hosts' feelings so cruelly that he
forbore at last, and suffered himself to drink entirely at their
expense.

They were much the nicest men Link had ever met. They flattered
him. They laughed uproariously at his every witticism. They had a
genius for noting when his glass was empty. They listened with
astonished admiration to his boastful recital of Chum's
cleverness. One of them, who, it seemed, was an expert in dog
lore, told him how to teach the collie to shake hands and to lie
down and to "speak." They were magnificent men, in every way.
Link was ashamed to have forgotten his earlier meetings with such
paragons.

But the call of duty never quite dies into silence. And finally
Link remembered he  had still his store bill to pay and his
supplies to order. So he announced that he must go. The store, he
knew, closed at nine. He looked up at the barroom clock. But its
face was hazy and it seemed to have a great many hands. There was
no use trying to learn the hour from so dissolute a timepiece.

His two friends persuaded him to have one more drink. Then they
volunteered to go across to the store with him. He left the
tavern, with one of the two walking on either side of him. He was
glad to be in the center of the trio; for, as the night air
struck him, he became unaccountably dizzy. His friends' willing
arms were a grand support to his wavering legs.

On the unlighted threshold of the tavern Link stumbled heavily
over something--something that had been lying there and that
sprang eagerly toward him as he debouched from the doorway. The
reason he stumbled over it was that the creature, which had
bounded so rapturously toward him, had come to a sharp halt at
noting his condition. Thus, Ferris stumbled over it; and would
have fallen but for the aid of his friends.

The single village street was pitch black. Not a light was to be
seen. This puzzled Link; who had no means of knowing that the
time was close on midnight. He started toward the store. At least
that was the direction he planned to take. But when, at the end
of five minutes, he found he was outside the village and on a
narrow road that bordered the lake, he saw his friends had
mistaken the way. He stopped abruptly and told them so.

One of them laughed; as if Link had said something funny. The
other did something quickly with one foot and one arm. Ferris's
legs went from under him. The jar of his fall shook from him a
fraction of his drunkenness, and it gave him enough sense to
realize that the man who had laughed was trying to unfasten the
pinned inner pocket of the fallen man's vest.

Now for years that pocket had been the secret repository of Link
Ferris's sparse wealth. The intruder's touch awakened him to a
drowsy sense of peril. He thrust aside the fumbling hand and made
a herculean effort to rise.

At this show of resistance his two comrades, as by concerted
signal, threw themselves upon him. With a yell of angry fright
Link collapsed to earth under the dual impact.


CHAPTER II. The Battle

He felt one of the men pinion his waving arms, while the other
crouched on his legs and proceeded to unpin the money pocket.
Ferris struggled for an instant in futile fury, trying to shout
for help. The call was strangled in his throat. But the help came
to him, none the less.

Scarce three seconds had passed since the attempt to rob him had
set Link into action and had wrung from him that yell of
consternation.

But in answer came a swirling patter of feet on the road, a snarl
like a wolf's, a  shape that catapulted through the dark. Sixty
pounds of fur-swathed dynamic muscle smote athwart the shoulders
of the man who was unfastening the cash pocket's pin.

The impact hurled the fellow clean off his crouching balance and
sent him sprawling, face downward, his outflung hands splashing
in the margin of the lake. Before he could roll over or so much
as stir, a set of white fangs met in his shoulder-flesh. And he
testified to his injury by an eldritch screech of pain and terror
that echoed far across the water.

His companion, rallying from the momentary shock, left Ferris and
charged at the prostrate thief's assailant. But Chum met him,
with a fierce eagerness, more than half way.

A true collie--thanks to his strain of wolf bloodfights as does
no other dog. What he lacks in stubborn determination he atones
for by swiftness and by his uncanny brain power.

A bulldog, for example, would have flown to his master's relief
quite as readily as did Chum. But a bulldog would have secured
the first convenient hold and would have hung on to that hold,
whether it were at his victim's throat or only on the slack of
his trousers--until someone should hammer him into senselessness.

Chum--collie-fashion--was everywhere at once, using his brain far
more than his flying jaws. Finding the grip in his foe's shoulder
did not prevent the man from twisting round to grapple him, the
collie shifted that grip with lightning speed, and with one of
his gleaming eyeteeth slashed his opponent's halfturned cheek
from eye to chin. Then he bored straight for the jugular.

It was at this crisis that he sensed, rather  than saw, the other
man rushing  at him. Chum left his fallen antagonist and whirled
about to face the new enemy. As he was still turning, he sprang
far to one side, in bare time to elude a swinging kick aimed at
his head.

Then, before the thief could recover the balance endangered by so
mighty a kick, the collie had whirled in and sunk his teeth deep
in the man's calf. The bitten man let out a roar of pain, and
smote wildly at the dog's face with both swinging fists.

Chum leaped back out of range, and then, with the same
bewildering speed, flashed in again and buried his curved fangs
in the nearest of the two flailing forearms.

The first victim of the collie's attack was scrambling to his
feet. So was Link Ferris. Sobered enough to recognize his beloved
dog, he also saw the newrisen thief catch up a broken fence rail,
brandish it aloft and charge upon the collie, who was still
battling merrily with the second man.

To Link it seemed that nothing could save Chum from a
backbreaking blow from the huge club. Instinctively he ran at the
wielder of the formidable weapon. Staggering and sick and
two-thirds drunk, Ferris, nevertheless, made valiant effort to
save the dog that was fighting so gallantly for him.

