And lastly, as beyond all controversy admirable, note this contrast:
First, the Persian, who, believing that in the multitude of his riches
he had power to lay all things under his feet, would fain have swept
into his coffers all the gold and all the silver of mankind: for him,
and him alone, the costliest and most precious things of earth. And
then this other, who contrariwise so furnished his establishment as to
be totally independent of every adventitious aid. (5) And if any one
doubts the statement, let him look and see with what manner of
dwelling-place he was contented; let him view the palace doors: these
are the selfsame doors, he might well imagine, which Aristodemus, (6)
the great-great-grandson of Heracles, took and set up in the days of
the return. Let him endeavour to view the furniture inside; there he
will perceive how the king feasted on high holy days; and he will hear
how the king's own daughter was wont to drive to Amyclae in a public
basket-carriage. (7) Thus it was that by the adjustment of expenditure
to income he was never driven to the commission of any unjust deed for
money's sake. And yet if it be a fine thing to hold a fortress
impregnable to attack, I count it a greater glory that a man should
hold the fortress of his soul inviolable against the assaults of
riches, pleasures, fears.

 (5) Or, "of all such external needs."

 (6) See Herod. vi. 52.

 (7) See Plut. "Ages." xix.  (Clough, iv. p. 23); the words {e thugater
    autou} were supplied from this passage by Casaubon.


IX

I will here state to what extent the style of living which he
presented stands out in striking contrast to the ostentatious manner
of the Persian. (1) In the first place, if the latter made a solemn
affectation of being but seldom seen, Agesilaus delighted to live in
the eye of day, believing that seclusion might accord well enough as a
screen for shameless conduct, but to a life of nobleness and beauty (2)
heaven's light added new ornament. (3) And next, if the one prided
himself on being unapproachable, the other rejoiced in being
accessible to all the world; the one, with his airs and graces, was
pleased to transact business slowly, the other was never so happy as
when he could satisfy the demands of a petitioner without waste of
time. (4)

 (1) Or, "how he presented his own manner in antithesis to the false
    pretences of the Persian." For {alazoneia} see "Mem." I. vii. 1;
    Aristot. "N. E." iv. 7; Theophr. "Char." vi.

 (2) Lit. "a life striving towards beauteousness."

 (3) Or, "added but greater lustre."

 (4) Lit. "could satisfy and dismiss his petitioners without delay."

Again, it is worthy of observation how much easier and simpler to
satisfy was the standard of comfort which the Spartan aimed at. (5) For
the Persian, men must compass sea and land to discover some beverage
which he will care to drink; he needs ten thousand pastrycooks to
supply the kick-shaws he will deign to eat; and to procure him the
blessing of sleep no tongue can describe what a world of trouble must
be taken. But Agesilaus was a lover of toil, and therefore not so
dainty; the meanest beverage was sweet to his lips, and pleasant
enough to his taste was the chance fare of the moment; and for the
purpose of refreshing slumber every place alike conducive. end-to-end,
the deliver of our yore etymology upon present day difficulty is
stress. judge from the gusto of the associate of the category, the
examination Circle is going to go a lasting invariant of our Menorah
variation.
.