Distributed Proofreaders


A TRIP ABROAD

An Account of a Journey to the Earthly Canaan and the Land of the
Ancient Pharaohs

To Which Are Appended

A Brief Consideration of the Geography and History of Palestine,
and a Chapter on Churches of Christ in Great Britain

BY

DON CARLOS JANES

1905


[Illustration: "Striving for the Faith of the Gospel."
Don Carlos Janes.]


  _"Go, little booke, God send thee good passage,
  And specially let this be thy prayere:
  Unto them all that will thee read or hear,
  Where thou art wrong, after their help to call,
  Thee to correct in any part or all."_

                                      CHAUCER.


PREFACE.


In this volume the author has made an effort to describe his journey to
Palestine and Egypt. It is his desire that the book may be interesting
and instructive to its readers. The chapter on the geography of
Palestine, if studied with a good map, will probably be helpful to many.
The historic sketch of the land may serve as an outline of the important
events in the history of that interesting country. It is desired that
the last chapter may give American readers a better understanding of the
work of churches of Christ in Great Britain.

This book is not a classic, but the author has tried to give a truthful
account of a trip, which, to him, was full of interest and not without
profit. No doubt some errors will be found, but even the critical reader
may make some allowance when it is known that the writing, with the
exception of a small part, was done in a period of eighty days. During
this time, the writer was also engaged in evangelistic work, speaking
every day without a single exception, and as often as four times on some
of the days. That the careful reading of the following pages may be
profitable, is the desire of THE AUTHOR.

BOWLING GREEN, KY., October 21, 1905.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.


Several books have been consulted in preparing this one. "Lands of the
Bible," by J.W. McGarvey, has been very helpful. The same is true of
Edmund Sherman Wallace's "Jerusalem the Holy." Much information has been
obtained from the "Historical Geography of Bible Lands," by John B.
Calkin. Other works consulted were: "Recent Discoveries on the Temple
Hill," by James King; the "Bible Atlas," by Jesse L. Hurlbut; "Galilee
in the Time of Christ," by Selah Merrill; "City of the Great King," by
J.T. Barclay; "Palestine," by C.R. Conder; Smith's "Bible Dictionary";
"Century Dictionary and Cyclopaedia"; "Columbian Encyclopaedia," and
"Encyclopaedia Britannica."

The chapter on Churches of Christ in Great Britain and Ireland was read
before publication by Bro. Ivie Campbell, Jr., of Kirkcaldy, Scotland,
who made some suggestions for its improvement. Bro. J.W. McGarvey, of
Lexington, Ky., kindly read the chapters on the Geography and History of
Palestine, and made some corrections. Selah Merrill, United States
Consul at Jerusalem, has given some information embodied in the Historic
Sketch of Palestine. Acknowledgement of the helpful services of my wife,
and of Miss Delia Boyd, of Atpontley, Tenn., is hereby made.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.
    SCOTLAND AND ENGLAND

  CHAPTER II.
    CROSSING EUROPE

  CHAPTER III.
    ASIA MINOR AND SYRIA

  CHAPTER IV.
    A FEW DAYS IN GALILEE

  CHAPTER V.
    SIGHT-SEEING IN JERUSALEM

  CHAPTER VI.
    SIDE TRIPS FROM JERUSALEM

  CHAPTER VII.
    EGYPT, THE LAND OF TOMBS AND TEMPLES

  CHAPTER VIII.
    GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE

  CHAPTER IX.
    HISTORIC SKETCH OF PALESTINE

  CHAPTER X.
    CHURCHES OF CHRIST IN GREAT BRITAIN


CHAPTER I.

SCOTLAND AND ENGLAND.


When I was a "boy on a farm," one of my school teachers had a small
machine, which was sometimes used to print the names of students in
their books. Somehow I came to want a "printing press," and after a
while I purchased an outfit for fifteen cents, but it was a poor thing
and failed to satisfy me. Accordingly, I disposed of it and spent a
larger sum for a typewriter, which was little more than a toy. This,
too, was unsatisfactory, and I sold it. At a later date, I bought a
second-hand typewriter, which was turned in as part payment for the
machine I am now using to write this book, and now, after all these
successive steps, I find myself possessed of a real typewriter. I will
also mention my youthful desire for a watch. I wanted a timepiece and
thought I would like for it to be of small size. I thought of it when
awake, and, sometimes, when asleep, dreamed that I actually had the
little watch in my possession. Since those days of dreams and
disappointments, I have had three watches, and they have all been of
small size.

In the same way, several years ago, I became possessed of a desire to
see the Land of Promise, the earthly Canaan. I thought about it some,
and occasionally spoke of it. There were seasons when the desire left
me, but it would come back again. Some years ago, when I was doing
evangelistic work in Canada, the desire returned--this time to stay. It
grew stronger and stronger until I decided to make the trip, which was
begun on the eleventh of July, 1904. After traveling many thousands of
miles, seeing numerous new and interesting sights, making many pleasant
acquaintances, and having a variety of experiences, I returned to the
home of my father on the fourteenth day of December, having been absent
five months and three days, and having had a more extensive trip than I
had at first thought of taking. There is a lesson in the foregoing that
I do not want overlooked. It is this: Whatever we earnestly desire is
apt to be worked out in our lives. Deeds usually begin with thoughts. If
the thoughts are fostered and cultivated, the deeds will probably be
performed some time. It is, therefore, important that we exercise care
as to the kind of thoughts we allow to remain in our hearts. "Keep thy
heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life" (Prov.
iv. 23).

On the way to New York, I stopped in Washington and saw some of the
interesting places of the National Capital. The Bureau of Engraving and
Printing, where about six hundred persons were engaged in printing paper
money and stamps, was visited. I also went out to the Washington
Monument and climbed to the top of the winding stairs, although I might
have gone up in the free elevator if I had preferred to ride. The
Medical Museum, National Museum, Treasury Building, the White House, the
Capitol, and other points of interest received attention, and my short
stay in this city was very enjoyable.

I spent a night in Philadelphia, after an absence of more than four
years, and enjoyed a meeting with the church worshiping on Forty-sixth
Street. It was very pleasant to meet those I had known when I was there
before, some of whom I had been instrumental in bringing to Christ. In
New York I made arrangements to sail for Glasgow on the S.S. Mongolian,
of the Allan Line, which was to sail at eleven o'clock on the fourteenth
of July, and the voyage was begun almost as promptly as a railway train
leaves the depot. We passed the Statue of Liberty a few minutes before
noon, and then I prepared some mail to be sent back by the pilot who
took us down to the sea. The water was smooth almost all the way across,
and we reached the desired haven on the eleventh day. I went back to my
room the first morning after breakfast and was lying in my berth when a
gentleman came along and told me I would have to get up, they were
going to have _inspection_. I arose and found part of the crew scrubbing
the floor and others washing down a wall. Everything was being put in
good condition for the examination to be given by some of the officers
who passed through each day at about ten o'clock. The seamen knew the
inspection was sure to come, and they knew the hour at which it would
take place, so they made ready for it. We know that there is a great
"inspection" day appointed when God will judge the world, but we do not
know the exact time. It is, therefore, important to be ready always,
that the day may not overtake us "as a thief in the night."

Religious services were held on the ship each Lord's day, but I missed
the last meeting. On the first Sunday morning I arose as usual and ate
breakfast. As there was no opportunity to meet with brethren and break
bread in memory of the Lord Jesus, I read the account of the giving of
the Lord's Supper as recorded in Matthew, Mark, and John; also Paul's
language concerning the institution in the eleventh chapter of the first
Corinthian letter, and was thankful that my life had been spared until
another beautiful resurrection morning. At half past ten o'clock I went
into one of the dining rooms where two ministers were conducting a
meeting. The order of the service, as nearly as I can give it, was as
follows: Responsive reading of the twenty-third and twenty-fourth
Psalms; prayer; the hymn, "Onward, Christian Soldiers"; reading of the
twenty-ninth Psalm; prayer; the hymn, "Lead, Kindly Light"; an address
on "Knowing God"; prayer; the collection, taken while singing; and the
benediction. The ship furnished Bibles and hymn-books. A large copy of
the Bible was placed upon a British flag at the head of one of the
tables where the speaker stood, but he read from the American Revised
Version of the Scriptures. The sermon was commenced by some remarks to
the effect that man is hard to please. Nothing earthly satisfies him,
but Thomas expressed the correct idea when he said: "Show us the Father
and it sufficeth us." The minister then went on to speak of God as "the
God of patience," "the God of comfort," "the God of hope," and "the God
of peace." It was, with some exceptions, a pleasing and uplifting
address. There were about thirty persons in attendance, and the
collection was for the Sailors' Orphans' Home in Scotland. The following
is one verse of the closing hymn:

  "A few more years shall roll,
    A few more seasons come,
  And we shall be with those that rest,
    Asleep within the tomb;
  Then, oh, my Lord, prepare
    My soul for that great day,
  Oh, wash me in thy precious blood
    And take my sins away."

Before the close of the day, I read the whole of Mark's record of the
life of our Savior and turned my Bible over to Gus, the steward. We had
food served four times, as usual. The sea was smooth and the day passed
quietly. A Catholic gentleman said something at breakfast about "saying
a few prayers" to himself, and I heard a woman, in speaking about going
to church, say she had beads and a prayer-book with her. Later in the
day I saw her out on the deck with a novel, and what I supposed to be
the prayer-book, but she was reading the novel.

Several of the passengers had reading matter with them. Some read
novels, but my Book was far better than any of these. It has a greater
Author, a wider range of history, more righteous laws, purer morals, and
more beautiful description than theirs. It contains a longer and better
love story than theirs, and reveals a much grander Hero. The Bible both
moralizes and Christianizes those who permit its holy influence to move
them to loving obedience of the Lord Jesus. It can fill its thoughtful
reader with holy hope and lead him into the realization of that hope. It
is a Book adapted to all men everywhere, and the more carefully it is
read the greater the interest in it and the profit from it become. It is
the volume that teaches us how to live here that we may live hereafter,
and in the dying hour no one will regret having been a diligent student
of its matchless pages of divine truth and wisdom.

The last Lord's day of the voyage the ship reached Moville, Ireland,
where a small vessel came out and took off the passengers for
Londonderry. The tilled land, visible from the ship, reminded me of a
large garden. Some time that night we anchored in the harbor at
Greenock, near the mouth of the River Clyde. About one o'clock the
second steward came in, calling out: "Janes!" I answered from my berth
and heard him call out: "Don Carlos Janes!" Again I answered and learned
that he had some mail for me. I told him to hand it in, not remembering
that the door was locked, but that made no difference, for he handed it
in anyhow, but the locking arrangement on that door needed repairing
after he went away. I arose and examined the two pieces of mail, which
were from friends, giving me directions as to where I should go when the
ship got up to Glasgow, twenty-two miles from the sea. There was but one
case of sea sickness reported on the whole voyage. There was one death,
but the corpse was carried into port instead of being buried at sea.

The home of Brother and Sister Henry Nelmes, which was my home while I
staid in Glasgow, is nicely located. Brother Nelmes and his wife are
excellent people, and treated me with much kindness. Glasgow is a large
and important city, with many interesting places in it. The Municipal
Building with its marble stairs, alabaster balustrade, onyx columns, and
other ornamentation, is attractive on the inside, but the exterior
impressed me more with the idea of stability than of beauty. The old
Cathedral, which I visited twice, is in an excellent state of
preservation, although founded in the eleventh century. There is an
extensive burial ground adjoining the Cathedral, and one of the
prominent monuments is at the grave of John Knox, the reformer. These
impressive words, written from memory, were spoken by the Regent at the
burial of Knox, and have been carved upon his monument: "Here lieth he
who never feared the face of man, who was often threatened with dag and
dagger, yet hath ended his days in peace and honor." Carlyle spoke of
him as a man "fearing God, without any other fear."

One day I visited the birth-place of Robert Burns, at Ayr, a point not
far from Glasgow. I not only saw the "lowly thatched cottage," but a
monument to the poet, "Auld Kirk Alloway," the "brig o' Doon," and many
interesting articles in the museum. When the street car came to a
standstill, I had the old church and cemetery on my right hand, and the
monument on my left hand, while a man was standing in the road, ahead of
us, blowing a cornet,--and just beyond was the new bridge over the Doon,
a short distance below the old one, which is well preserved and
profusely decorated with the initials of many visitors. Along the bank
of "bonny Doon" lies a little garden, on the corner of which is
situated a house where liquor is sold, if I mistake not. It was before
this house that I saw the musician already mentioned. As I came up from
the old "brig o' Doon," I saw and heard a man playing a violin near the
monument. When I went down the road toward the new bridge and looked
over into the garden, I saw a couple of persons executing a cake-walk,
and an old man with one leg off was in the cemetery that surrounds the
ruined church, reciting selections from Burns. Such is the picture I
beheld when I visited this Ayrshire monument, raised in memory of the
sympathetic but unfortunate Scottish poet, whose "spark o' nature's
fire" has touched so many hearts that his birth-place has more visitors
per annum than Shakespeare's has.

On the following day I had a pleasant boat-ride up Loch (Lake) Long,
followed by a merry coach-ride across to the "bonny, bonny banks of Loch
Lomond," which is celebrated in song and story. It is twenty-two miles
in length and from three-quarters of a mile to five miles wide, and is
called the "Queen of Scottish lakes." Ben Lomond, a mountain rising to a
height of more than three thousand feet, stands on the shore, and it is
said that Robert Bruce, the hero of Bannockburn, once hid himself in a
cave in this mountain. A pleasant boat-ride down the lake brought me
back to Glasgow in time to attend a meeting of the brethren in Coplaw
Street that night.

Leaving my true friends who had so kindly entertained me in Glasgow, I
proceeded to Edinburgh, the city where Robert Burns came into
prominence. In the large Waverley Station a stranger, who knew of my
coming through word from Brother Ivie Campbell, of Kirkcaldy, stopped me
and asked: "Is your name Don Carlos Janes?" It was another good friend,
Brother J.W. Murray. He said he told some one he was looking for me, and
was told, in return, that he would not be able to find me. His answer to
this was that he had picked out a man before, and he might pick out
another one; and so he did, without any difficulty. After a little time
spent in Waverley gardens, I ascended the Walter Scott Monument, which
is two hundred feet high. The winding stairway is rather narrow,
especially at the top, and it is not well lighted. As I was coming down
the stairs, I met a lady and gentleman. The little woman was not at all
enthusiastic over the experience she was having, and, without knowing of
my presence, she was wondering what they would do if they were to meet
any one. "Come on up and see," I said, and we passed without any special
difficulty, but she said she didn't believe "two stout ones could" pass.
As she went on up the winding way, she was heard expressing herself in
these words: "Oh, it is a place, isn't it? I don't like it." The
tourist finds many "places", and they are not all desirable. Princess
Street, on which the monument is located, is the prettiest street that I
have ever seen. One side is occupied by business houses and hotels, the
other is a beautiful garden, where one may walk or sit down, surrounded
by green grass and beautiful flowers.

Edinburgh Castle is an old fortification on the summit of a lofty hill
overlooking the city. It is now used as barracks for soldiers, and is
capable of accommodating twelve hundred men. Queen Mary's room is a
small chamber, where her son, James the First of Scotland and the Sixth
of England, was born. I was in the old castle in Glasgow where she spent
the night before the Battle of Langside, and later stood by her tomb in
Westminster Abbey. Her history, a brief sketch of which is given here,
is interesting and pathetic. "Mary Queen of Scots was born in Linlithgow
Palace, 1542; fatherless at seven days old; became Queen December 8th,
1542, and was crowned at Stirling, September 9th, 1543; carried to
France, 1548; married to the Dauphin, 1558; became Queen of France,
1559; a widow, 1560; returned to Scotland, 1561; married Lord Darnley,
1565; her son (and successor), James VI., born at Edinburgh Castle,
1566; Lord Darnley murdered, February, 1567; Mary married to the Earl of
Bothwell, May, 1567, and was compelled to abdicate in favor of her
infant son. She escaped from Lochleven Castle, lost the Battle of
Langside, and fled to England, 1568. She was beheaded February 8th,
1587, at Fotheringay Castle, in the forty-fifth year of her age, almost
nineteen years of which she passed in captivity.

  "Puir Mary was born and was cradled in tears,
  Grief cam' wi' her birth, and grief grew wi' her years."

In the crown-room are to be seen the regalia of Scotland, consisting of
the crown, scepter, sword of state, a silver rod of office, and other
jewels, all enclosed in a glass case surrounded by iron work. St.
Margaret's Chapel, seventeen feet long and eleven feet wide, stands
within the castle enclosure and is the oldest building in the city. A
very old cannon, called Mons Meg, was brought back to the castle through
the efforts of Walter Scott, and is now on exhibition. I visited the
Hall of Statuary in the National Gallery, the Royal Blind Asylum, passed
St. Giles Cathedral, where John Knox preached, dined with Brother
Murray, and boarded the train for Kirkcaldy, where I as easily found
Brother Campbell at the station as Brother Murray had found me in
Edinburgh.

I had been in correspondence with Brother Campbell for some years, and
our meeting was a pleasure, and my stay at Kirkcaldy was very enjoyable.
We went up to St. Andrews, and visited the ruins of the old Cathedral,
the University, a monument to certain martyrs, and the home of a sister
in Christ. But little of the Cathedral remains to be seen. It was
founded in 1159, and was the most magnificent of Scottish churches. St.
Rule's Tower, one hundred and ten feet high, still stands, and we had a
fine view from the top. The time to leave Kirkcaldy came too soon, but I
moved on toward Wigan, England, to attend the annual meeting of churches
of Christ. Brother Campbell accompanied me as far as Edinburgh, and I
then proceeded to Melrose, where I stopped off and visited Abbotsford,
the home of Sir Walter Scott. It is situated on the River Tweed, a short
distance from Melrose, and was founded in 1811. By the expenditure of a
considerable sum of money it was made to present such an appearance as
to be called "a romance in stone and lime." Part of this large house is
occupied as a dwelling, but some of the rooms are kept open for the
numerous visitors who call from time to time. The young lady who was
guide the day I was at Abbotsford, first showed us Sir Walter's study.
It is a small room, with book shelves from the floor to the ceiling, the
desk on which Scott wrote his novels sitting in the middle of the floor.
A writing-box, made of wood taken from one of the ships of the Spanish
Armada, sits on the desk, and the clothes worn by the great novelist a
short time before his death are kept under glass in a case by the
window, while a cast of his face is to be seen in a small room
adjoining the study. We next passed into the library, which, with the
books in the study, contains about twenty thousand volumes. In the
armory are numerous guns, pistols, swords, and other relics. There is
some fine furniture in one of the rooms, and the walls are covered with
paper printed by hand in China nearly ninety years ago. Perhaps some who
read these lines will recall the sad story of Genivra, who hid herself
in an oaken chest in an attic, and perished there, being imprisoned by
the spring lock. This oaken chest was received at Abbotsford a short
time before Scott's death, and is now on exhibition. Sir Walter, as the
guide repeatedly called him, spent the last years of his life under the
burden of a heavy debt, but instead of making use of the bankrupt law,
he set to work heroically with his pen to clear up the indebtedness. He
wrote rapidly, and his books sold well, but he was one day compelled to
lay down his pen before the task was done. The King of England gave him
a trip to the Mediterranean, for the benefit of his health, but it was
of no avail. Sir Walter returned to his home on the bank of the Tweed,
and died September twenty-first, 1832. In his last illness, this great
author, who had produced so many volumes that were being read then and
are still being read, asked his son-in-law to read to him. The
son-in-law asked what book he should read, to which Sir Walter replied:
"Book? There is but one Book! Read me the Bible." In Melrose I visited
the ruins of the Abbey, and then went on to Wigan.

After the annual meeting, I went to Birmingham and stayed a short while.
From here I made a little journey to the birth-place of Shakespeare, at
Stratford-on-Avon, a small, quiet town, where, to the best of my
recollection, I saw neither street cars nor omnibuses. After being in
several large cities, it was an agreeable change to spend a day in this
quiet place, where the greatest writer in the English tongue spent his
boyhood and the last days of his life on earth. The house where he was
born was first visited. A fee of sixpence (about twelve cents) secures
admission, but another sixpence is required if the library and museum
are visited. The house stands as it was in the poet's early days, with a
few exceptions. Since that time, however, part of it has been used as a
meat market and part as an inn. In 1847, the property was announced for
sale, and it fell into the hands of persons who restored it as nearly as
possible to its original condition.

It has two stories and an attic, with three gables in the roof facing
the street. At the left of the door by which the tourist is admitted, is
a portion of the house where the valuable documents of the corporation
are stored, while to the right are the rooms formerly used as the "Swan
and Maidenhead Inn," now converted into a library and museum. The
windows in the upstairs room where the poet was born are fully occupied
with the autographs of visitors who have scratched their names there. I
was told that the glass is now valuable simply as old glass, and of
course the autographs enhance the value. The names of Scott and Carlyle
are pointed out by the attendant in charge. From a back window one can
look down into the garden, where, as far as possible, all the trees and
flowers mentioned in Shakespeare's works have been planted. For some
years past the average number of visitors to this house has been seven
thousand a year. The poet's grave is in Trinity Church, at Stratford,
beneath a stone slab in the floor bearing these lines:

  "Good friend, for Jesus' sake, forbear
  To digg the dust enclosed here.
  Blest be ye man y spares these stones,
  And curst be he ty moves my bones."

On the wall, just at hand, is a bust made from a cast taken after his
death. Near by is a stained-glass window with the inscription,
"America's gift to Shakespeare's church," and not far away is a card
above a collection-box with an inscription which informs "visitors from
U.S.A." that there is yet due on the window more than three hundred
dollars. The original cost was about two thousand five hundred dollars.
The Shakespeare Memorial is a small theater by the side of the Avon,
with a library and picture gallery attached. The first stone was laid in
1877, and the building was opened in 1879 with a performance of "Much
Ado About Nothing." The old school once attended by the poet still
stands, and is in use, as is also the cottage of Anne Hathaway, situated
a short distance from Stratford. I returned to Birmingham, and soon went
on to Bristol and saw the orphans' homes founded by George Muller.

These homes, capable of accommodating two thousand and fifty orphans,
are beautifully situated on Ashley Downs. Brother William Kempster and I
visited them together, and were shown through a portion of one of the
five large buildings by an elderly gentleman, neat, clean, and humble,
who was sent down by the manager of the institution, a son-in-law of Mr.
Muller, who died in 1898, at the advanced age of ninety-three years. We
saw one of the dormitories, which was plainly furnished, but everything
was neat and clean. We were also shown two dining-rooms, and the
library-room in which Mr. Muller conducted a prayer-meeting only a night
or two before his death. In this room we saw a fine, large picture of
the deceased, and were told by the "helper" who was showing us around
that Mr. Muller was accustomed to saying: "Oh, I am such a happy man!"
The expression on his face in this picture is quite in harmony with his
words just quoted. One of his sayings was: "When anxiety begins, faith
ends; when faith begins, anxiety ends."

Mr. Muller spent seventy years of his life in England and became so
thoroughly Anglicized that he wished his name pronounced "Miller." He
was the founder of the "Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and
Abroad" and was a man of much more than ordinary faith. His work began
about 1834, with the distribution of literature, and the orphan work, if
I mistake not, was begun two years later. "As the result of prayer to
God" more than five millions of dollars have been applied for the
benefit of the orphans. He never asked help of man, but made his wants
known to God, and those who are now carrying on the work pursue the same
course, but the collection-boxes put up where visitors can see them
might be considered by some as an invitation to give. The following
quotation from the founder of the orphanages will give some idea of the
kind of man he was. "In carrying on this work simply through the
instrumentality of prayer and faith, without applying to any human being
for help, my great desire was, that it might be seen that, now, in the
nineteenth century, _God is still the Living God, and now, as well as
thousands of years ago, he listens to the prayers of his children and
helps those who trust in him._ In all the forty-two countries through
which I traveled during the twenty-one years of my missionary service,
numberless instances came before me of the benefit which this orphan
institution has been, in this respect, not only in making men of the
world see the reality of the things of God, and by converting them, but
especially by leading the children of God more abundantly to give
themselves to prayer, and by strengthening their faith. _Far beyond what
I at first expected to accomplish_, the Lord has been pleased to give
me. But what I have _seen_ as the fruit of my labor in this way may not
be the thousandth part of what I _shall_ see when the Lord Jesus comes
again; as day by day, for sixty-one years, I have earnestly labored, in
believing prayer, that God would be pleased, most abundantly, to bless
this service in the way I have stated."

The girl said: O my Röslein, you just do not picture too much on it,
that thou my eyes and heart to delight. I love you because you decorate
me. We wanted a warm good night; The aunt was terribly tired; soon the
lights off, And all is peace and peace. Throughout the house are
only zween, The find no rest, that is good with his cousin Eugene Base
Lucinde. They woke up together in the morning, you herzten himself and
kissed. Des morning at breakfast that she, as if nothing of
what they knew. My friend, on a Sunday morning, Thäter a pretty
Röss'lein borrow. With fresh shirt and fresh Muth, in bare boots,
bare Hute The tight and upright posture trousers, Am a young bosom
rose, So he rides through the Alleee, like a view Adonis. The tabs make
a lot of fun, when she climbed a proud horse. Now comes under a gentle
creaking donkey carts milchbeladner. The Röss'lein which very frightened,
begins to trappeln and buck And, hopp, that was a long sentence!
where the horse runs, here is the rider, far away from his high seat,
flat on the belly in the puddle. The riders make much pleasure, particularly
when they are down there. You asked me earlier after some. I told you
everything frankly and freely. You asked when I travel memories, what a
business I want to make. I told you open it and then, And gave you my
plans. Often, the travel I do not fit, then you called me 'n
Quirlequast.'s often went with the crooked transactions; Then you knewest
long it would be stupid. often did you come to me with list before; Then
I seemed myself a right Thor.

Now I have, because that tormented me, I am a pretty resort chosen.
I speak when I speak to thee lie And the jacket is full. Can the guy
because no mercy? If he deals with his Suad, Through its broad Expliciren,
Schwadroniren, Disputiren, target us because he always geniren, This
säuselnde Philistines, At the enjoyment of fine wine? Pump him, and
suddenly he is short and concise as One Glock. wurmt Me, if I
only think on it . - It was at Munich in the inn a man with dark red
nose In the eleventh or twelfth Glase. Since crept back up a poor
miserable old beggar, Zog before flaunt his hat And implores: Gnä Lord,
oh to S 'so good!

The Protzmann but hopping mad, instead of what to give, and Schilt
fluchtmöglichkeit: go out, you old rascal, you bad! Nix möcht 'he, as a
grad booze, let' er! I have read of a father, The daughter has been
in the theater . A Rogue has spoiled him the girl, so it died in the
puerperium. It took the father to have a profound Gemüthe. And when
he got to be rogue, he forgave him nobly the whole story. I am crying
whether such kindness. Laß but the ew'ge questions, dear old friend,
I will of course say, "What seems to me from Nöthen. You say, perhaps,
on the other hand: One wonders surely once. Certainly! Only because
of me Is not no matter. If your question has one frappirt me: You
ask so happy to cases where I blamirt. Years ago, we were times
divides us And Much did the cake, we both told us at that time
much bitter words. Plan, we have sent each other, we have concluded peace,
and the angry words choked And firmly and deeply buried. Now it's
really quite unfortunate, that necessarily quarrel again. Alas! the
words of dazumal They are now back alive. They are now only in open
dispute and fly to all roofs; Now we bring them into eternity, not
back into their holes. I still think so times he said, The world is
quite pläsirlich. The silly chatter of pain and agony seems to me quite
improper.

With pure childlike Gemüth I Enjoy what I decided, And through my
entire being attracts A heavenly peace of mind. - No sooner has he done
this award, Aujau! so he cries miserably. The old hollow molar tooth is
once again unbearable. There were once two boys together, Fritz and
Ferdinand. Then the Fritz: Now, do eight times, what I dreamed of
previous ones night. I got in a nice car, The car was shod with gold.
spanned two angels are being attracted me to The Himmelsthor. Just
come and you also wanted to and jumped on the carriage step, but
a devil, the big black and took you back to the Hos And did you take
into Höll . It was very funny, I must say. - So now this dream pretty
face, the Ferdinand did not. Schlapp! Fritzen, he suggested to the
ear that he lost Zippelmütz.

  The Fritz, who was so sullen, skin turn
  Ferdinand; And now, a scuffle, very
  painful and very long. - Sun goes through
  unsubstantial Gar often dreams of friendship
  from the glues. He introduces himself
  to glass arrangirt And yet this
  and das it turns out the
  spikes beard, looks at how his rings
  flash, Probirt Also check out
  how the makes, if he so winning hearty laughs, magic eye exercises
his power, set the Cravatte exemplary, Throws a sweet vagina look
at his beloved picture back, then goes out to the Promenade Umschwebt
by the smell of the pomade, And as annoyed as smelt, that other
people vain.

When Everything would sit, what we hate and love each other Sunday from
gossip, lying, if hair would be, We were rough as bears And would not
bald. A thick sack, - the farmer Bolte, who wanted to contribute
to the mill , Um auszuruhn, sometimes made out to seal a mature
Aehrenfeld - Set in graceful folds and begins' ne speech to keep. I
said it, I'm the full sack. Their ears are only thin-pack. I am, you on
the this world in unity together. I am, the top of Nöthen is the fact
that you do not eat poultry, I, whose high power version of you ending
up in the mill creates. euch bows deeply, because I'm The What
wäret her, if I do not Why not? Gently swish the ear: You're an empty
tube, if we would not. Really, it was indispensable! Everywhere, where
what happened to the good of the community, he was thätig, he was
there.

Schützenfest, Casino balls, horse races, jury , Liedertafel, syringe
sample, Without him there was not. Without him, there was nothing to
do, Every hour hatt 'er free. Yesterday, as they buried him, he was
right there, too. Very reprehensible is worth our tuna, we are not brave
and upright. - Assume that it would now The Sündfluth yet again.
That would be a wriggle and Geschreck We all dived under; Kröcher Then
we back out of the muck And would, as usual, quite blithely.

What is the old Mamsell Schmöle For an affectionate faithful soul! She
speaks to her maid: Oh, Rieke, because you do not go out, what you want
because in the golden Löber Tonight float up and down, because wagged
not playing the devil and dance merrily with its tail? And ever, what
is it useful? from torturing you, you come in sweat, you go out to a
cold coughs And then quite terribly. So you stay with me just dear!
And, Rieke, times you go over there and pick you from merchant A good
cutter quarters Swiss cheese, and it was but yes yes yes to the same
minute there!

So is the good Mamsell Schmöle Worried Rieken for salvation of the soul.
Yes later still, in silent night, is it considered to this end, And
creeps in Rieken Kammerthür And look, whether the Rieke here And whether
they rest in peace And that's not her who does what, what is now not
even heard what godless and beneidenswerth. There is rightly a good roast
Calculated on the good Thater ; And that it is duly made, actual
female character thing. braves A girl needs time, first pure Seelenruh
that when using the spices you can not rush hastily. Then, secondly,
it needs Sinniger, yes, so to say, intimacy, thus they all appetizing,
so soon, so soon and quite gemüthlich douse, drehn and contact you that
in the matter not burned.

In Summa needs loving-kindness, a gentle concern in Gemüthe, Fast love
something in that for those pretty, precious Lord, The These roasts
should eat, and always liked what good wish. I know that every one
here speaks: A bad girl can not. So I've also always thought of
myself at home and elsewhere: Who makes a good roast, also has a good
heart. You know him quite some years, you know what it was for a bird,
as he in all the garden spaces Herumgeflattert on the trees, Like
the beautiful red berries, the other people are listening, with his
beak angepickt And quite vicious refreshed. Now that this evil has
Näscher, curtains Schleicher, Mädchenhäscher, Der Biedermann some
tortured, at the end of myself yet married.

Well, he in his forehead wrinkles, Starts a sermon to keep And we would
like to talk of virtue. egg, so an old rascal! Hardly has he 'nen
are cherry tree, So he complains to the sparrows. Berge distant glow I
see! Unruh Full Migrant sense! Morning I want to move on, the white
of the devil, while Yes I will just prepare me, Will - what keeps me
only back? Nothing like silly little things! For example, your glance!
It was the pious Mr. Kaplan, after he had already done much good, In
silent viewing of the beautiful natural settings for recreation through
the hallway. And when he came to the Waldessaum, cried the cuckoo funny
from the tree: Wünsch good evening, Sir! The stork, on the other
hand, not far from the road, the rise in the meadow, and from
talking And sullen: Plapperapapp! Might Pfaffen lobesam's loud, I would
long since flügel lame! One sees that even the man frömmste Not everyone
can like. Oh, how Go to the heilgen father, large and heavy loads
are his, drum, oh Joseph, the contribution guldens In Sancte Peter's
collection box! Sun said in Seelentrauerton The pious mother
to the son. The Joseph, after empfangner sum Urgent also immediately
to Eck's herumme, Until he was Thor of the house, where one buck effigies
stood, what we then painted with diligence of the signs that this buck
wear. Allhier into a cool courtyard sets the SOF, and Joseph, And to eat,
according to need, The good sausages, the spicy Radi, Till he was not
long, Sancte Peters guldens absorbed. Now, it's sad to sense And stille
he sings to himself, Ah, beautiful works of virtue, I would be
happy to catch, but I can see but I can see, what always comes to
me in between.

It stood in front of a house Thor A donkey with pointed ears,
The käute his bundle of hay and still thoughtful pieces - Now stand
there and keep your nose out zween boys, even the once, by they laugh,
hated words do what you wanted because the object that should upset
the ass. - But this hocherfahrne Greis description only half a circle,
silently behaved and showed itzt The site where the fern sits. Who
wants this earth ball fernerhin yet to enter, people everywhere
if we say the truth Thäter. Your hießet us, we called you thieves
and Hall Unken, We told us fatales stuff eh we still drunk.

And throughout the vast country, as langbewährtes means Entsproßte from
the human hand Faithful node Knittelfeld. lob As I look at the politeness,
the petite cheating. You know know I know decision; Allen And it's
fun. I knew she is in the kitchen, I am your quiet nachgeschlichen. I
want to 'swear their loyalty ew'ge And ask me do you want to belong.
stutzte at once but I did. You kramte between the spices ; schnäutzte
Then they are cleaned and the nose with the apron. The first old aunt
said: We must now turn even think about what we are for their good
name to the Sophie's Gift. top second aunt said boldly: I propose that
we decide we for a dress in green peas, Sophie Chen That may not suffer.
The third aunt was right: Yes, she said, with yellow tendrils! I know it
annoyed And not bad must also be grateful. Since coming to me just as
a friend With a large Zwicker. Oh, he calls, Freundchen, as it seems to
me you are getting fatter. Yes yes, you often do not know how, How to
get on in years, sorry, my darling, here you already have one, two
gray hairs! - Out, damned Kritikus, Otherwise, I turn you into Outland.
Schlingel You want me to enjoy the present spoil! The old forester
Püsterich The break came after a long time back on the dash And
Schnepf had a home.

When he fried it now hätt, Da Thäter him what verdreußen; The Thierlein
smelled so nice as usual, he could not quite bite more. Oh yes!
sighs as he wehgemuth And wipe off the Thräne, the nose would be
good so far, only just, it lacks the teeth. children, let us besingen But
without all the jealousy, uncle Kaspers red nose that we so often
delighted. Once they became as sensitive plant him a gift from nature,
he has diligently watered, with wine and brandy soaked. Soon he noticed
with pleasure that the young bud swelled, until it was a rose, dark
Roth and wonderful. All roses have thorns, this rose, it has not,
has just such a pile of hair, Which no man stands out. your cup sweet
scents emerges, with all due respect: From the well-known they can
draw their Blüthenstaub.

Often in a fresh morning she shows us a fragrant blue, And at its heart
a leaf Flashes Tröpflein Perlenthau. If the other flowers wilt, When
winter's cold and rough, then this miracle Rose Only the right shape
well. drum to its price and the glory we are singing this beautiful song.
Vivat uncle Kaspers nose, The blooms all times! past because I was
inexperienced bescheidner And as today, had my highest respect for Andre
people. Later, I met on the pasture Except me more calves, And now
I guess, so to say, first myself. It sat in my boyhood a damsel young
and fresh in the green dress ausgeschnittnen I _vis-à-vis_ at the table.
And because it's like with children, they are very piety never
Oh, I often thought at the table prayer, How beautiful is Marie !

beckons The aunt, the aunt laughs: Hey, Fritz, komm times come in!

Look, what a pretty good Brüderlein The stork in the last night of
Mamma Quite secretly brought. egg so that you will be friends!

The Fritz said of the brief and grossly I hol 'n thick stone and turn it
to the Kopp! It said the dad on the Fritz: What it has once
again? yet Mamma told me yesterday: You drive into the city. I was so
happy and was so fully Pläsir. Now, I do not, because as it is today:
Fritz is here! The father sat in the seat concerned. He said seriously,
and still: do not trust long-neck, my dear Fritz, The coughs whenever he
wants, what should I just think of your love, what it always creeps
into dark arcades? ewge Why the whispering and rumors? It seems highly
suspicious stories. And even the best marital duties, from all the
best tuna Thätigkeit, in Temples of the priest's consecrated hands, Your
wraps them into a dark schuldbewußtes. You want it never and never again?

There were many other
beautiful scenes as I journeyed along, sometimes climbing the rugged
mountain by a cog railway, and sometimes riding quietly over one of the
beautiful Swiss lakes. I spent a night at lovely Lucerne, on the Lake of
the Four Cantons, the body of water on which William Tell figured long
ago. Lucerne is kept very clean, and presents a pleasing appearance to
the tourist.

I could have gone to Fluelin by rail, but preferred to take a boat ride
down the lake, and it proved to be a pleasant and enjoyable trip. The
snow could be seen lying on the tops of the mountains while the flowers
were blooming in the valleys below. Soon after leaving Fluelin, the
train entered the St. Gothard Tunnel and did not reach daylight again
for seventeen minutes. This tunnel, at that time the longest in the
world, is a little more than nine miles in length. It is twenty-eight
feet wide, twenty-one feet high, lined throughout with masonry, and cost
eleven million four hundred thousand dollars. Since I was in Switzerland
the Simplon Tunnel has been opened. It was begun more than six years
ago by the Swiss and Italian Governments, an immense force of hands
being worked on each end of it. After laboring day and night for years,
the two parties met on the twenty-fourth of February. This tunnel, which
is double, is more than twelve miles long and cost sixteen millions of
dollars.

At Chiasso we did what is required at the boundary line of all the
countries visited; that is, stop and let the custom-house officials
inspect the baggage. I had nothing dutiable and was soon traveling on
through Italy, toward Venice, where I spent some time riding on one of
the little omnibus steamers that ply on its streets of water. But not
all the Venetian streets are like this, for I walked on some that are
paved with good, hard sandstone. I was not moved by the beauty of the
place, and soon left for Pisa, passing a night in Florence on the way.
The chief point of interest was the Leaning Tower, which has eight
stories and is one hundred and eighty feet high. This structure,
completed in the fourteenth century, seems to have commenced to lean
when the third story was built. The top, which is reached by nearly
three hundred steps, is fourteen feet out of perpendicular. Five large
bells are suspended in the tower, from the top of which one can have a
fine view of the walled city, with its Cathedral and Baptistery, the
beautiful surrounding country, and the mountains in the distance.

The next point visited was Rome, old "Rome that sat on her seven hills
and from her throne of beauty ruled the world." One of the first things
I saw when I came out of the depot was a monument bearing the letters
"S.P.Q.R." (the Senate and the people of Rome) which are sometimes seen
in pictures concerning the crucifixion of Christ. In London there are
numerous public water-closets; in France also there are public urinals,
which are almost too public in some cases, but here in Rome the climax
is reached, for the urinals furnish only the least bit of privacy. One
of them, near the railway station, is merely an indentation of perhaps
six or eight inches in a straight wall right against the sidewalk, where
men, women, and children are passing.

By the aid of a guide-book and pictorial plan, I crossed the city from
the gateway called "Porto del Popolo" to the "Porto S. Paolo," seeing
the street called the "Corso," or race course, Piazza Colonna, Fountain
of Treves, Trajan's Forum, Roman Forum, Arch of Constantine, Pantheon,
Colosseum, and the small Pyramid of Caius Cestus.

You see, our two questions - namely, that specific moment, feeling the
effects by _Musik_ awards, and whether this moment of aesthetic nature
is essential - it is supported by the finding of a single factor: the
intense exposure to the _Nervensystem_. On this, the peculiar intensity
and immediacy with which the music in comparison with each other not
by acting _Töne_ art affects aufzuregen interview. The stronger effect
but an art physically overwhelming, that is pathologically occurs, the
lower their proportion _ästhetischer_, a sentence that itself, not reversing
it. There must be a matter of musical creation and view a different
item will be highlighted, which is the pure aesthetics of this art and
represents a counter-image to the specific musical feeling excitement
at the beauty of general conditions of other arts converge. This is the
_reine Anschauung_. Their special appearance in the music and the
diverse conditions, which they in reality to the emotional life
arrives, we want to consider in the following section. V. The aesthetic
of the music recording compared to the pathological. Nothing has
the scientific development of the musical aesthetics as fragile inhibited
than the excess value, which is the effects of music on the emotions
bat. The more striking, these effects showed, the higher they are lauded
as heralds of musical beauty. We have the opposite view that it is the
overwhelming impressions of the strongest music share _körperlicher_
arousal on the part of the listener is added. From the music, this
is a fierce urgency in the nervous system is not in their _künstlerischen_
moment, the yes comes from the spirit and the spirit is addressed, but
rather in their _Material_, the natural physiological those unfathomable
choice Indigenous kinship has. The _Elementarische_ music, _Klang_ and
_Bewegung_ is what the helpless feelings of so many music fans in chains
suggests that they do like to rattle. Far be it from us, the rights of
feeling to the music to try to shorten.
I was in a garden on top of one part of the ruins where flowers and
trees were growing, and then I went down through the mass of ruins by a
flight of seventy-five stairs, which, the attendant said, was built by
Caligula. I was then probably not more than half way to the bottom of
this hill of ruins, which is honeycombed with corridors, stairways, and
rooms of various sizes. The following scrap of history concerning
Caligula will probably be interesting: "At first he was lavishly
generous and merciful, but he soon became mad, and his cruelty knew no
bounds. He banished or murdered his relatives and many of his subjects.
Victims were tortured and slain in his presence while dining, and he
uttered the wish that all the Roman people had but one neck, that he
might strike it off at one blow. He built a bridge across the Bay of
Baiae, and planted trees upon it and built houses upon it that he might
say he had crossed the sea on dry land. In the middle of the bridge he
gave a banquet, and at the close had a great number of the guests thrown
into the sea. He made his favorite horse a priest, then a consul, and
also declared himself a god, and had temples built in his honor." It is
said that Tiberius left the equivalent of one hundred and eighteen
millions of dollars, and that Caligula spent it in less than a year. The
attendant pointed out the corridor in which he said this wicked man was
assassinated.

Near one of the entrances to the Forum stands the Arch of Titus, erected
to commemorate the victory of the Romans over the Jews at Jerusalem in
A.D. 70. It is built of Parian marble and still contains a
well-preserved figure of the golden candlestick of the Tabernacle carved
on one of its walls. There is a representation of the table of showbread
near by, and some other carvings yet remain, indicating something of the
manner in which the monument was originally ornamented.

The Colosseum, commenced by Vespasian in A.D. 72 and finished by Titus
eight years later, is a grand old ruin. It is an open theater six
hundred and twelve feet long, five hundred and fifteen feet wide, and
one hundred and sixty-five feet high. This structure, capable of seating
eighty-seven thousand people, stands near the bounds of the Forum. It is
the largest of its kind, and is one of the best preserved and most
interesting ruins in the world. When it was dedicated, the games lasted
one hundred days, and five thousand wild beasts were slain. During the
persecution of the Christians it is said to have been the scene of
fearful barbarities.

The sun shines more reddish by the tribes to which the canopy of the
forest ruhn; and if I, after a short fifteen minutes, once they fell
behind the hill is seated, and me in the Blach fields, where the road
is just a little think, so I will come after Castle weather beam, before
the lights are extinguished it. I want to imagine me, my horse down there,
where the trickle source, would be sheep and goats, which climbed on the
rocks, and grasses and bushes tore bitter; easy stuff white linen covered
myself with red ribbons tied together and to me her fluttered a flock
muntrer winds to sigh, my, Gram very pressed, chest entquillen, gradaus
to the good gods to wear ear upwards. Really and truly! I want my mother
tongue through, and the whole, rich chapter, which carries this
headline: sensation, such plunder, that no longer Reimschmied on a
new way to be able to say: I am saddened. Everything that has Rührendes
melancholy, I will of proposed, lust and death in the deeper affliction
should alternate, and my voice, like a beautiful dancer, through
all the inflections round, which the soul of charm, and if the trees are
not in the indeed be moved, and its mild dew, as if it had rained,
herabträufeln, so they are of wood, and everything that our poet of
them say that a mere sweet fairy tale. O - as I call you? Käthchen! Why
can I not my call? Käthchen, girls, Käthchen! Why can I not my call,
why can I not cancel, and the fragrant canopy bed wear, which my
mother, at home in sumptuous chamber, has raised?
Calixtus. The visitors
go down a stairway with a guide, who leads them about the chambers,
which are but dimly lighted by the small candles they carry. The
passages, cut in the earth or soft rock, vary both in width and height,
and have been explored in modern times to the aggregate length of six
miles. Some of the bodies were placed in small recesses in the walls,
but I saw none there as I went through, but there were two in marble
coffins under glass. In one of the small chambers the party sang in some
foreign language, probably Italian, and while I could not understand
them, I thought the music sounded well. The Circus of Maxentius, fifteen
hundred feet long and two hundred and sixty feet wide, is near the
Catacombs, as is also the tomb of Caecilla Metella, which is said to
have been erected more than nineteen hundred years ago. It is probably
as much as two miles from the city walls, and I walked on a little way
and could see other ruins still farther in the distance, but I turned
back toward the hotel, and some time after sundown found myself walking
along the banks of the yellow Tiber in the old city. Two days of
sight-seeing had been well spent in and around the former capital of the
world, and I was ready to go on to Naples the next day.

There is a saying, "See Naples and die," but I did not feel like
expiring when I beheld it, although it is very beautifully located. The
ruins of Pompeii, a few miles distant, had more interest for me than
Naples. I went out there on the tenth of September, which I recollect as
a very hot day. Pompeii, a kind of a summer resort for the Roman
aristocracy, was founded 600 B.C. and destroyed by an eruption of Mt.
Vesuvius in A.D. 79. It was covered with ashes from the volcano, and
part of the population perished. The site of the city was lost, but was
found after the lapse of centuries and the Italian Government began the
excavations in 1860. Some of the old stone-paved streets, showing the
ruts made by chariot wheels that ceased to roll centuries ago, have been
laid bare. Portions of the houses are still standing, and the stone
drinking fountains along the streets are yet to be seen, as are also the
stepping stones at the crossings, which are higher than the blocks used
in paving. Some of the walls still contain very clear paintings, some of
which are not at all commendable, and others are positively lewd. One
picture represented a wild boar, a deer, a lion, a rabbit, some birds,
and a female (almost nude) playing a harp. There was also a very clear
picture of a bird and some cherries. At one place in the ruins I saw a
well-executed picture of a chained dog in mosaic work. It is remarkable
how well preserved some things are here. In the Museum are petrified
bodies in the positions they occupied when sudden and unexpected
destruction was poured upon them, well nigh two thousand years ago. Some
appear to have died in great agony, but one has a peaceful position.
Perhaps this victim was asleep when the death angel came. I saw the
petrified remains of a dog wearing a collar and lying on his back, and a
child on its face. One of the men, who may have been a military officer,
seemed to have a rusty sword at his side. There were skeletons, both of
human beings and of brutes, bronze vessels, and such articles as cakes
and eggs from the kitchens of the old city.

Mt. Vesuvius is a very famous volcano, standing four thousand feet high,
and has wrought a great deal of destruction. In the eruption of 472, it
is related that its ashes were carried to Constantinople; in 1066, the
lava flowed down to the sea; in 1631, eighteen thousand lives were lost;
and in 1794 a stream of lava more than a thousand feet wide and fifteen
feet high destroyed a town. From my hotel in Naples I had a fine view of
the red light rising from the volcano the evening after I visited
Pompeii.

Leaving Naples, I went to Brindisi, where I took ship for Patras in
Greece. A day was spent in crossing Italy, two nights and a day were
taken up with the voyage to Patras, and a good part of a day was
occupied with the railroad trip from there to Athens, where the hotel
men made more ado over me than I was accustomed to, but I got through
all right and secured comfortable quarters at the New York Hotel, just
across the street from the Parliament Building. From the little balcony
at my window I could look out at the Acropolis. The principal places
visited the first day were the Stadium, Mars' Hill, and the Acropolis.

Leaving the hotel and going through Constitution Square, up Philhellene
Street, past the Russian and English churches, I came to the Zappeion, a
modern building put up for Olympic exhibitions. The Arch of Hadrian, a
peculiar old structure, twenty-three feet wide and about fifty-six feet
high, stands near the Zappeion, and formerly marked the boundary between
ancient Athens and the more modern part of the city. Passing through
this arch, I soon came to what remains of the temple of the Olympian
Jupiter, which was commenced long before the birth of Christ and
finished by Hadrian about A.D. 140. Originally this temple, after that
of Ephesus said to be the largest in the world, had three rows of eight
columns each, on the eastern and western fronts, and a double row of one
hundred columns on the northern and southern sides, and contained a
statue of Jupiter, overlaid with gold and ivory. Its glory has long
since departed, and only fifteen of the columns are now standing. A
little farther on is the Stadium, with an arena over five hundred and
eighty feet long, and one hundred and nine feet wide. It was originally
constructed by the orator Lycurgus, about three hundred and fifty years
before Christ, but was being rebuilt when I was there. That is not a long
time went by, since I saw him full bliss, Gar nicely brushed and combed,
in the new dress shirt and pure, From Sancte Micheli church come Allwo
he made a woman.

It is also well, as it seems to me the time is not far away, where
he believes that such a small buttonhole in Ehr Endchen not bad wär. you
saw the wonderful picture of Brouwer? It pulls you in like a
magnet. You probably smile, while a terror Showers goes through your
spine. A Cool Doctor a man opens the back of the neck fester; addition,
a woman with a jug, deepened in this mishap.

Yes, old friend, we have our most fester behind. And fully a Seelenruh
Pressing else on. It runs the Zähre And strange to see people. It has
nothing and you likewise, do you want However, I see, For the Federation
of Holy Marriage hands you are already rich. Children, because
ye are in your senses? You about the Chapter! Without the funds gehör'gen
Should we not start the war. Do you think this old game again and again
listed? Wilt thou always by my compassion Thränen ausprobiren? Or
perhaps you want to dance I want salinity? Sooner's often have you
reached; Today werd 'I continued to roll. The old boy is God
still very rührig: He can not, as if he does, even if the thing
difficult. wonnig As he wears beard and hair, as close flashes of boots.
And for the ladies He did a wicked right Schliefel. he then decides to
run the day, So let him verpusten, sets his cap on and tip must be
quite terrible cough. So you liked it here in this beautiful world;
Vondannenwallen So that you do not like .

Let yourself but not the bore. If you really want and think, Are you
aufersprießen again, only not exactly like. But, old age, bear in mind
that there are some things here but, For example, gout, and plot, "What
in the whole unpopular. You were still a little girl of eight or nine
years, approximately, since you asked me familiar and important:
Where do the children come from? after years when I visited you, since
you were already taught about the case, you had the old question Hübsch
confidential virtually resolved and clarified. And again, the time
elapsed. Hohl is the tooth and the earnest sense. Now comes the second
important question: Where are the old people go? madam, I've heard,
I do not remember so right from whom: The practical solution to this
question is actually quite uncomfortable. He was a principal clever
man, very wise and highly experienced; graumelirtes He was
wearing a hair, he Dieweil pretty in years. He was an enemy of the
cancellation of the jokes and laughter And it was the biggest fool at
the court, the queen of his heart.

High I worship without question, this good woman smoking. Since the
beneficial days since I first saw it, I always highly delighted rose
fresh your youth, your modesty and virtue And the wonderful talents .
But still, I always think that it could not hurt, if they are a bissel
worse. It had 'a miller At a mill a water cool; came much prettier girls
to grind in the mill. One poor girl was among them, Counts just sixteen
years; Allwo it went, it allwo hours, students also Müller.
Take all this into consideration, with the fact that Paul had
already been talking with the people on religious subjects, and his
great speech on Mars' Hill may be more impressive than ever before.

"Ye men of Athens, in all things I perceive that ye are very religious.
For as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, I found
also an altar with this inscription, To an unknown God. What therefore
ye worship in ignorance, this I set forth unto you. The God that made
the world and all things therein, he being Lord of heaven and earth,
dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is he served by men's
hands as though he needed anything, seeing he himself giveth to all
life, and breath, and all things; and he made of one every nation of men
to dwell on all the face of the earth, having determined their appointed
seasons, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek God,
if haply they might feel after him and find him, though he is not far
from each one of us; for in him we live, and move, and have our being;
as certain even of your own poets have said, For we are also his
offspring. Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think the
Godhead is like unto gold, or silver or stone, graven by art and device
of man. The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked, but now he
commandeth men that they should all everywhere repent: inasmuch as he
hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given
assurance unto all men in that he hath raised him from the dead."

The Acropolis is a great mass of stone near Mars' Hill, but rising much
higher and having a wall around its crest. At one time, it is said, the
population of the city lived here, but later the city extended into the
valley below and the Acropolis became a fortress. About 400 B.C. the
buildings were destroyed by the Persians, and those now standing there
in ruins were erected by Pericles. The entrance, which is difficult to
describe, is through a gateway and up marble stairs to the top, where
there are large quantities of marble in columns, walls, and fragments.
The two chief structures are the Parthenon and the Erectheum. The
Parthenon is two hundred and eight feet long and one hundred and one
feet wide, having a height of sixty-six feet. It is so large and
situated in such a prominent place that it can be seen from all sides of
the hill. In 1687 the Venetians while besieging Athens, threw a shell
into it and wrecked a portion of it, but part of the walls and some of
the fluted columns, which are more than six feet in diameter, are yet
standing. This building is regarded as the most perfect model of Doric
architecture in the world, and must have been very beautiful before its
clear white marble was discolored by the hand of time and broken to
pieces in cruel war. The Erectheum is a smaller temple, having a little
porch with a flat roof supported by six columns in the form of female
figures.

The Theseum, an old temple erected probably four hundred years before
Christ, is the best preserved ruin of ancient Athens. It is a little
over a hundred feet long, forty-five feet wide, and is surrounded by
columns nearly nineteen feet high. The Hill of the Pynx lies across the
road a short distance from the Theseum. At the lower side there is a
wall of large stone blocks and above this a little distance is another
wall cut in the solid rock, in the middle of which is a cube cut in the
natural rock. This is probably the platform from which the speaker
addressed the multitude that could assemble on the shelf or bench
between the two walls.

Some of the principal modern buildings are the Hellenic Academy, the
University, Library, Royal Palace, Parliament Building, various church
buildings, hotels, and business houses. The University, founded in 1837,
is rather plain in style, but is ornamented on the front after the
manner of the ancients, with a number of paintings, representing
Oratory, Mathematics, Geology, History, Philosophy, and other lines of
study. At one end is a picture of Paul, at the other end, a
representation of Prometheus. The museum is small and by no means as
good as those to be seen in larger and wealthier countries. The Academy,
finished in 1885, is near the University, and, although smaller than its
neighbor, is more beautiful. On the opposite side of the University a
fine new Library was being finished, and in the same street there is a
new Roman Catholic church. I also saw two Greek Catholic church houses,
but they did not seem to be so lavishly decorated within as the Roman
church, but their high ceilings were both beautifully ornamented with
small stars on a blue background. I entered a cemetery near one of these
churches and enjoyed looking at the beautiful monuments and vaults. It
is a common thing to find a representation of the deceased on the
monument. Some of these are full-length statues, others are carvings
representing only the head. Lanterns, some of them lighted, are to be
seen on many of the tombs. There are some fine specimens of the
sculptor's art to be seen here, and the place will soon be even more
beautiful, for a great deal of work was being done. In fact, the whole
city of Athens seemed to be prosperous, from the amount of building that
was being done.

The Parliament Building is not at all grand. The Royal Palace is larger
and considerably finer. At the head of a stairway is a good picture of
Prometheus tortured by an eagle. The visitor is shown the war room, a
large hall with war scenes painted on the walls and old flags standing
in the corners. The throne room and reception room are both open to
visitors, as is also the ball room, which seemed to be more elaborately
ornamented than the throne room. There is a little park of orange and
other trees before the palace, also a small fountain with a marble
basin. The highest point about the city is the Lycabettus, a steep rock
rising nine hundred and nineteen feet above the level of the sea, and
crowned with a church building. From its summit a splendid view of the
city, the mountains, and the ocean may be obtained.

I spent five days in this city, the date of whose founding does not seem
to be known. Pericles was one of the great men in the earlier history of
the old city. He made a sacred enclosure of the Acropolis and placed
there the masterpieces of Greece and other countries. The city is said
to have had a population of three hundred thousand in his day,
two-thirds of them being slaves. The names of Socrates, Demosthenes, and
Lycurgus also belong to the list of great Athenians. In 1040 the Normans
captured Piraeus, the seaport of Athens, and in 1455 the Turks,
commanded by Omar, captured the city. The Acropolis was occupied by the
Turks in 1826, but they surrendered the next year, and in 1839 Athens
became the seat of government of the kingdom of Greece. With Athens, my
sight-seeing on the continent ended. Other interesting and curious
sights were seen besides those mentioned here. For instance, I had
noticed a variety of fences. There were hedges, wire fences, fences of
stone slabs set side by side, frail fences made of the stalks of some
plant, and embryo fences of cactus growing along the railroad. In Italy,
I saw many white oxen, a red ox being an exception that seems seldom to
occur. I saw men hauling logs with oxen and a cart, the long timber
being fastened beneath the axle of the cart and to the beam of the yoke.
In Belgium, one may see horses worked three abreast and four tandem, and
in Southern France they were shifting cars in one of the depots with a
horse, and in France I also saw a man plowing with an ox and a horse
hitched together. Now the time had come to enter the Turkish Empire, and
owing to what I had previously heard of the Turk, I did not look forward
to it with pleasure.


CHAPTER III.

ASIA MINOR AND SYRIA.


The Greek ship _Alexandros_ left the harbor of Piraeus in the forenoon
of Lord's day, September eighteenth, and anchored outside the breakwater
at Smyrna, in Asia Minor, the next morning. The landing in Turkish
territory was easily accomplished, and I was soon beyond the custom
house, where my baggage and passport were examined, and settled down at
the "Hotel d'Egypte," on the water front. This was the first time the
passport had been called for on the journey. The population of Smyrna is
a mixture of Turks, Greeks, Jews, Armenians, Italians, Americans, and
Negroes. The English Government probably has a good sized
representation, as it maintains its own postoffice. The city itself is
the main sight. The only ruins I saw were those of an old castle on the
hill back of the city. The reputed tomb of Polycarp is over this hill
from Smyrna, between two cypress trees, but I do not know that I found
the correct location. Near the place that I supposed to be the tomb is
an aqueduct, a portion of it built of stone and a portion of metal. As I
went on out in the country I entered a vineyard to get some grapes, not
knowing how I would be received by the woman I saw there; but she was
very kind-hearted, and when I made signs for some of the grapes, she at
once pulled off some clusters and gave them to me. She also gave me a
chair and brought some fresh water. More grapes were gathered and put in
this cold water, so I had a fine time eating the fruit as I sat there in
the shade watching a little boy playing about; but I could not converse
with either of them on account of not knowing their language. On the way
back to the city I stopped at the railway station to make inquiries
about a trip to Ephesus.

Most of the streets in Smyrna are narrow and crooked, but there is one
running along the water front that is rather attractive. On one side is
the water, with the numerous vessels that are to be seen in this
splendid harbor, and on the other side is a row of residences, hotels,
and other buildings. The people turn out in great numbers at night and
walk along this street, sometimes sitting down at the little tables that
are set in the open air before places where different kinds of drinks
are dispensed. Here they consume their drinks and watch the free
performances that are given on an open stage adjoining the street and
the grounds where they are seated. Perhaps the most peculiar thing about
it all is the quiet and orderly behavior of this great crowd of people.
While in this city I had occasion to go to the "Banque Imperiale
Ottoman," and learned that it was open in the forenoon and afternoon,
but closed awhile in the middle of the day. I saw a street barber plying
his trade here one day. A vessel of water was put up under the
customer's chin, and held there by keeping the chin down. The barber
had his strop fastened to himself, and not to the chair or a wall, as we
see it at home. Great quantities of oats were being brought down from
the interior on camels. The sacks were let down on the pavement, and
laborers were busy carrying them away. A poor carrier would walk up to a
sack of grain and drop forward on his hands, with his head between them,
and reaching down almost or altogether to the pavement. The sack of
grain was then pulled over on his back, and he arose and carried it
away. Some poor natives were busy sweeping the street and gathering up
the grain that lost out of the sacks. There seems to be a large amount
of trade carried on at this port. Several ships were in the harbor, and
hundreds of camels were bringing in the grain. There are now many
mosques and minarets in Smyrna, where there was once a church of God.
(Revelation 2:8-11.)

On Wednesday, September twenty-first, I boarded a train on the Ottoman
Railway for Ayassalouk, the nearest station to the ruins of Ephesus, a
once magnificent city, "now an utter desolation, haunted by wild
beasts." We left Smyrna at seven o'clock, and reached Ayassalouk, fifty
miles distant, at half-past nine. The cars on this railway were entered
from to side, as on European railroads, but this time the doors were
locked after the passengers were in their compartments. Ayassalouk is a
poor little village, with only a few good houses and a small population.
At the back of the station are some old stone piers, that seem to have
supported arches at an earlier date. On the top of the hill, as on many
hilltops in this country, are the remains of an old castle. Below the
castle are the ruins of what I supposed to be St. John's Church, built
largely of marble, and once used as a mosque, but now inhabited by a
large flock of martins.

I visited the site of Ephesus without the services of a guide, walking
along the road which passes at some distance on the right. I continued
my walk beyond the ruins, seeing some men plowing, and others caring for
flocks of goats, which are very numerous in the East. When I turned back
from the road, I passed a well, obtaining a drink by means of the rope
and bucket that were there, and then I climbed a hill to the remains of
a strong stone building of four rooms. The thick walls are several feet
high, but all the upper part of the structure has been thrown down, and,
strange to say, a good portion of the fallen rocks are in three of the
rooms, which are almost filled. It is supposed that Paul made a journey
after the close of his history in the book of Acts; that he passed
through Troas, where he left a cloak and some books (2 Tim. 4:13); was
arrested there, and probably sent to Ephesus for trial before the
proconsul. Tradition has it that this ruined stone building is the place
where he was lodged, and it is called St. Paul's Prison. From the top of
its walls I could look away to the ruins of the city proper, about a
mile distant, the theater being the most conspicuous object.

There are several attractions in Ephesus, where there was once a church
of God--one of the "seven churches in Asia"--but the theater was the
chief point of interest to me. It was cut out of the side of the hill,
and its marble seats rested on the sloping sides of the excavation,
while a building of some kind, a portion of which yet remains, was built
across the open side at the front. I entered the inclosure, the outlines
of which are still plainly discernible, and sat down on one of the old
seats and ate my noonday meal. As I sat there, I thought of the scene
that would greet my eyes if the centuries that have intervened since
Paul was in Ephesus could be turned back. I thought I might see the
seats filled with people looking down upon the apostle as he fought for
his life; and while there I read his question: "If after the manner of
men I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what doth it profit me" if the dead
are not raised up? (I Cor. 15:32). I also read the letter which Jesus
caused the aged Apostle John to write to the church at this place (Rev.
2:1-7), and Paul's epistle to the congregation that once existed in
this idolatrous city of wealth and splendor. As I was leaving this spot,
where I was so deeply impressed with thoughts of the great apostle to
the Gentiles, I stopped and turned back to take a final look, when I
thought of his language to Timothy, recorded in the first eight verses
of the second epistle, and then I turned and read it. Perhaps I was not
so deeply impressed at any other point on the whole journey as I was
here. The grand old hero, who dared to enter the city which was
"temple-keeper of the great Diana," this temple being one of the "Seven
Wonders of the World," and boldly preach the gospel of Christ,
realizing that the time of his departure was at hand, wrote: "I have
fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the
faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give to me at that day; and
not to me only, but also to all them that have loved his appearing."
Meditating on the noble and lofty sentiment the apostle here expresses
in connection with his solemn charge to the young evangelist, I have
found my sentiments well expressed in Balaam's parable, where he says:
"Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his"
(Num. 23:10).

Near the front of the theater, on the left as one comes out, is quite a
space, which seems to have been excavated recently, and farther to the
left excavations were being made when I was there. An ancient lamp, a
fluted column, and a headless statue were among the articles taken out.
The workmen were resting when I viewed this part of the ruins, and an
old colored man gave me a drink of water. Beginning a little to the
right of the theater, and extending for perhaps fifteen hundred or two
thousand feet, is a marble-paved street, along which are strewn numerous
bases, columns, and capitals, which once ornamented this portion of the
great city; and to the right of this are the remains of some mighty
structure of stone and brick. In some places, where the paving blocks
have been taken up, a water course beneath is disclosed. While walking
around in the ruins, I saw a fine marble sarcophagus, or coffin,
ornamented with carvings of bulls' heads and heavy festoons of oak
leaves.

J.S. Wood, an Englishman, worked parts of eleven years, from 1863 to
1874, in making excavations at Ephesus. Upwards of eighty thousand
dollars were spent, about fifty-five thousand being used in a successful
effort to find the remains of the Temple of Diana. I followed the
directions of my guide-book, but may not have found the exact spot, as
Brother McGarvey, who visited the place in 1879, speaks of the
excavations being twenty feet deep. "Down in this pit," he says, "lie
the broken columns of white marble and the foundation walls of the
grandest temple ever erected on earth"; but I saw nothing like this.

When Paul had passed through Galatia and Phrygia, "establishing all the
disciples," "having passed through the upper country," he came to
Ephesus, and found "about twelve men" who had been baptized "into John's
baptism," whom Paul baptized "into the name of the Lord Jesus." He then
entered into the Jewish meeting place and reasoned boldly "concerning
the kingdom of God." Some of the hardened and disobedient spoke "evil of
the Way," so Paul withdrew from them and reasoned "daily in the school
of Tyrannus. And this continued for the space of two years; so that all
they that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and
Greeks." The Lord wrought special miracles by Paul, so that the sick
were healed when handkerchiefs or aprons were borne from him to them.
Here some of the strolling Jews "took upon them to name over them that
had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure you by
Jesus, whom Paul preacheth." When two of the sons of Sceva undertook to
do this, the man possessed of the evil spirit "leaped on them and
mastered both of them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out
of the house naked and wounded." There were stirring times in Ephesus in
those days. Fear fell upon the people, "and the name of the Lord Jesus
was magnified." Many of the believers "came confessing, and declaring
their deeds. And not a few of them that practiced magical arts brought
their books together and burned them in the sight of all; and they
counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver." "So mightily grew the word of the Lord and prevailed."

"And about that time there arose no small stir concerning the Way. For a
certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of
Diana, brought no little business unto the craftsmen; whom he gathered
together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know
that by this business we have our wealth. And ye see and hear that not
alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath
persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they are no gods that
are made with hands: and not only is there danger that our trade come
into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana be
made of no account, and that she should even be deposed from her
magnificence, whom all Asia and the world worshipeth. And when they
heard this they were filled with wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. And the city was filled with the confusion: and
they rushed with one accord into the theater, having seized Gaius and
Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel. And when
Paul was minded to enter in unto the people, the disciples suffered him
not. And certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent unto him
and besought him not to adventure himself into the theater. Some
therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was in
confusion; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.
And they brought Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him
forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand and would have made a
defense unto the people. But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all
with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians. And when the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he
saith, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there who knoweth not that the
city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great Diana, and of the
image which fell down from Jupiter? Seeing then that these things can
not be gainsaid, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash. For ye
have brought hither these men, who are neither robbers of temples nor
blasphemers of our goddess. If therefore Demetrius, and the craftsmen
that are with him, have a matter against any man, the courts are open,
and there are proconsuls: let them accuse one another. But if ye seek
anything about other matters, it shall be settled in the regular
assembly. For indeed we are in danger to be accused concerning this
day's riot, there being no cause for it: and as touching it we shall not
be able to give an account of this concourse. And when he had thus
spoken, he dismissed the assembly" (Acts 19:23-41).

As I was leaving the ruins, I stopped, sat down in sight of the spot
where I supposed the temple stood, and read the speech of Demetrius, and
thought his fears were well founded. Their trade has come into
disrepute, "the temple of the great goddess" has been "made of no
account," and "she whom Asia and all the world" worshiped has been
"deposed from her magnificence." Portions of the temple are now on
exhibition in the British Museum, in London, and portions have been
carried to different other cities to adorn buildings inferior to the one
in which they were originally used. "From the temple to the more
southern of the two eastern gates of the city," says McGarvey, "are
traces of a paved street nearly a mile in length, along the side of
which was a continuous colonnade, with the marble coffins of the city's
illustrious dead occupying the spaces between the columns. The
processions of worshipers, as they marched out of the city to the
temple, passed by this row of coffins, the inscriptions on which were
constantly proclaiming the noble deeds of the mighty dead." The canal
and artificial harbor, which enabled the ships of the world to reach the
gates of the city, have disappeared under the weight of the hand of
time. In some places the ground is literally covered with small stones,
and even in the theater, weeds, grass and bushes grow undisturbed. How
complete the desolation!

Before leaving Ayassalouk on the afternoon train, I bought some grapes
of a man who weighed them to me with a pair of balances, putting the
fruit on one pan and a stone on the other; but I didn't object to his
scales, for he gave me a good supply, and I went back and got some more.
I also bought some bread to eat with the grapes, and one of the numerous
priests of these Eastern countries gave me some other fruit on the
train. I was abroad in the fruit season, and I enjoyed it very much. 
Instead of pushing as the "feelings" the old haunt in broad daylight
continues. The musical beauty is still only on his subjective impression,
page views, and in books, reviews and interviews every day confirms
that the only aesthetic _Affekte_ basis of music alone and are entitled
to the limits of the ruling on the same reasonable. The music -- - so
we are taught - not by the mind, entertain notions of how the art
of poetry, nor by visible forms of the eye, such as the visual arts,
so it must have the profession to which _Gefühle_ of people to work.
"The music has been with the feelings to do." This "to do" is one
of the characteristic expressions of the previous musical aesthetics.
_Worin_ The context of the music with the feelings of certain songs
with certain feelings of confusion, according to which laws of
nature it seems, according to which art laws he had to think about
those we were totally in the dark, which just so "to do" had.

Only when his eye a little accustomed to this darkness, we come then, to
discover that in the prevailing musical intuition, the emotions play a
dual role. For the first one will be _Zweck_ and _Bestimmung_ up the
music, they should feel or "beautiful feelings "awaken. For the second
refers to the feelings than the _Inhalt_ what the music in their works
represent. Both sets have the similar that one is just as wrong as the
other. The refutation of the former, the most musical manuals introductory
rate must not long stay. The beauty has no _Zweck_, because it is mere
_Form_, which according to the _Inhalt_, with whom she met,
to a variety of purposes can be used, but it has no other than itself,
if the contemplation of the beautiful pleasant feelings for the viewer,
then go this beauty as such, nothing. I can probably perform the
viewer Schönes in particular the intention that he should find pleasure,
but this intention has presented the beauty of nothing to create. The
beauty is, and remains beautiful, even if there are no feelings, so
if it is neither compatriots still occur, so only the pleasure _für_ a
subject's beliefs, but not _durch_ same.

_Zweck_ From a can in this sense even with the music not spoken, and
the fact that this art in a lively connection with our feelings is
by no means justifies the assertion that there was in this context
their aesthetic importance. To this ratio closer to investigate, we need
to present the concepts of "feeling" and "sensation" - against the
confusion in the ordinary use of language is nothing wrong - here
strictly distinguished. _Empfindung_ is the perception of a certain quality
of meaning: a tone, a color. _Gefühl_ The consciousness of promoting
or inhibiting our state of soul, an well-being or malaise. If I smell
or taste of a thing whose shape, color or sound to my senses just
perceive (perzipiere), so I _empfinde_ these qualities, if melancholy,
hope , Frohsinn or hate me, felt through the ordinary lift up souls in
the same or herabdrücken, _HOW feel ich_. [5] [5] In this
description, the term older philosophers with the newer physiologists
agree, and we had absolutely the names of the schools prefer
_Hegel_schen what we know, internal and external perception is different.
The beauty of our first true sense. This path is not peculiar to
him, it shares with him all about appearances. The sensation is
the beginning and the condition of aesthetic pleasure and is only the
base of the _Gefühls_, which is always a relationship and often the most
complicated conditions. _Empfindungen_ Needed to excite it is not the
art, a single tone, a single color can do that As I said, both terms
are randomly swapped, but usually in older works "sensation" referred
to what we call "feeling" call. Our _Gefühle_ So, my those writers,
the music should excite us and alternated with devotion, love, songs
of joy, wistfulness meet. Such determination but in truth neither this
nor any other art. Art has to an _Schönes_ display. The institution,
which included the beautiful, is not the feeling, [6] but the
_Phantasie_ than the activity of the pure looking. [6] _Hegel_ has
shown how the study of the "Feelings" (according to our terminology:
the emotions), which evokes an art, just the remains undetermined
and straight from the actual specific content aside.

"What is felt," he says, "remains shrouded in the most abstract
form, individual subjectivity, and so are the differences of feeling
very abstract, no differences in the thing itself" (Aesthetics I,
42). Merkwürdig is how the Musicians and older Ästhetiker only in the
contrast of "feeling" and "common sense" move, as would not be the main
straight _inmitten_ this alleged dilemma. From the imagination of the
artist entsteigt the Tonstück for the imagination of the listener.
Admittedly, the imagination to the beauty is not just a _Schauen_,
but a look with _Verstand_, i.e. Introducing and judgments, the latter
course, with such rapidity that the individual transactions we did not
come to consciousness, and the deception arises _unmittelbar_ it done,
but what in truth many of mediating mental processes depend. The word
"intuition", long face of the performances on all the senses transfer
phenomena, in line with the excellent acts of attentive listening,
which is indeed in a successive viewing consists of earthenware.
The fantasy is far from a completed field: just as her life sparks from
the sensations moved, it sends in turn radii of their fast with the
activity of the mind and the feeling from. These are the real
opinion of beauty, however, only the border areas. In pure intuition of
the listener enjoys the tone Tonstück any material interest must lie
him away. Such is the tendency to excite emotions in it. Exclusive
control of the Beautiful _Verstandes_ behaves _logisch_ instead esthetic,
a predominant effect on the _Gefühl_ is still of concern, namely just
_pathologisch_. All this, from the general aesthetics have long developed
applies equally for the good of all arts. So we treated the _Musik_
as _Kunst_, it is necessary to the imagination and not feel the same
aesthetic instance recognize. The modest front sentence seems to us a
matter rätlich, because the major emphasis, which worked tirelessly
for the music to be achieved by Sänftigung of human passions is laid,
in fact, you often do not know whether the music than by police, an
educational or medical measure of speech. The musicians are less
biased in the mistaken, equally _alle_ Arts feelings vindizieren to
believe that it is something much more specific to the peculiar _Tonkunst_
see. The power and tends to affect in any listener to awaken, it is
precisely what the _Musik_ before the other arts are characterized. [7]
[7] Where "feeling" not even by "sensation" has been separated, as may
be made by a lower response in the differences of the former to
be less to talk about, the intellectual and sensual feelings, the chronic
form of _Stimmung_, of the acute _Affektes_, affection and passion,
as well as the unusual colors of these as "pathos" of the Greeks and
"Passio," the newer Latins colorful mixture were leveled, and the music
merely stated that it was specifically the art to arouse emotions. With
so little impact that we as the role of the arts at all recognized,
as little can we in it the specific nature of _Musik_ day.

Once, it noted that the _Phantasie_ the actual body of beauty is a secondary
effect on the feeling in art _jeder_ occur. Moves us not a big history
with the force of an experience? Raphael's Madonna voices us not
to worship, not to Poussins landscapes yearning wanderlust? Remains
about the sight of the Strasbourg Cathedral, with no effect on our
emotions? The answer can not be doubtful. It is also true of
the poetry, yes außerästhetischen of some activities, such as religious
edification, eloquence and Others We see that the other arts is also
strong enough to feel the impact. The alleged principal difference from
the same music you would have to be on a more or less of this effect
are based. Quite unscientific in itself, this would have been way on top
of the decision, whether you feel stronger and deeper with a little
Mozart symphony or a Shakespeare's tragedies, in a poem by Uhland
or Chen Hummel Rondo, quite properly even anyone to leave. Does it,
however, the music seems "directly" to the feeling that the other arts
only through the mediation of concepts, it lacks only one in other words,
because, as we saw also the feelings of the Music and Fine only secondarily
be employed, _unmittelbar_ only the imagination. Unzähligemal in musical
treatises summoned the analogy, no doubt between the music and the
_Baukunst_ exists. Is but the architects have a reasonable fall, the
building had _Zweck_, to excite feelings, or they were the same
_Inhalt_? _Jedes_ True work of art itself is in some relationship to
our emotions set in an exclusive _keines_.

They say that is nothing for the aesthetic principles of music decisive
when they are only generally by their effect on the feeling characterized.
Nor, for example, when the essence of the wine understood by one betrinkt.
It is solely upon the nature _spezifische_ arrive, how such
emotions are caused _durch Musik_. Thus, instead of at the secondary and
undetermined sense of musical phenomena effects to glue, it is in the
interior of the works to penetrate and the specific force of their
impression of the laws of their own body to explain. A painter or a poet
persuades itself little more accountability from the beauty of his art
to be stored, if he looked at what "feelings" of its countryside, or his
cause drama: it is the compelling power nachspüren, _warum_ like the
work and why in this and no other way. The fact that this investigation,
as we will see later, the music is much more difficult than in the
other arts, so that the exploration in its only up to a certain depth
hinabreicht entitles her critics still a long way, feeling Affections
and musical beauty directly to conflate rather in the scientific method
as presented separately. If ever the feeling not a basis for aesthetic
laws, it is on top against the security of the musical being essential
to notice. We think here not merely the conventional bias that makes it
possible that our emotions and often by presenting text, headings and
other merely incidental thoughts compounds, particularly in churches,
theaters of war and compositions is replaced by a direction, which we
incorrectly to the character of the music is attributable to inclined.
Rather it is about the context of an Tonstückes with the emotion
engendered thereby is not necessarily causal, but this will change
with the mood changing position of our musical experiences and impressions.
We now often barely understand how our grandparents _diese_
Tonreihe corresponding expression for a straight _dieses_ could affect
view. That is, for example, the extraordinary variety of evidence, with
many of Mozart's, Beethovensche and Webersche compositions at the
time of their novelty, as opposed to today on the hearts of the
listeners were.

How many works by Mozart is said to be their time for the passionate,
fiery, and daring, which is transmitted to musical mood paintings
seemed possible. The pure comfort and well being, which emanate from
Haydn's symphonies, it was the fierce passion outbreaks, the most serious
battles, bitter, cutting pain in Mozart's [8] music. Twenty to thirty
years later the decision was just as between Beethoven and Mozart.
The body of Mozart, as representatives of the violent, gorgeous
passion took Beethoven, and Mozart was to the Olympic classicism of Haydn
advanced. Similar changes his opinion of any attentive musician
learns in the course of a longer life to yourself through this diversity
of feeling, however, is the effect _musikalische_ estimation of many
once-exciting-looking works of aesthetic pleasure, to their
originality and _Schönheit_ prepares us today, and for is not altered.
The relationship of musical works with certain moods are not always,
everywhere, need to be an absolutely compelling and it is
incomparably more convertible than in any other art. [8] Notably, some
of these _Rochlitz_ exist for us today, very surprising sayings on
Mozart's instrumental music .

Rochlitz That means the irritant Weber Menuetto Capriccio in A flat Sonata
as a "continuous fortströmenden outpouring of a passionate, violently
agitated soul, and strength but with admirably held together." To
have since the effect of the music to feel neither the need to nor
exclusive, nor the continuity, what a phenomenon which would have an
aesthetic principle to justify them. The strong emotions of course,
what the music from their slumber wachsingt, and all the sweet and painful
moods in which they Halbträumende einlullt us: we do not want to be
underestimated. Among the most beautiful, wholesome mysteries, it
is so, the art that such movements without earthly reason, right by the
grace of God can cause. Only against the unscientific use of these facts
for _ästhetische Prinzipien_ we safekeeping On. Joy and sadness through
music can highly be awakened, that is correct. Not even more perhaps by
the winner of the big hit, or by the disease death of a friend?
I went down on the opposite side of
the hill from the tomb and entered a vineyard, where an old man treated
me with kindness and respect. The modern town is poorly built of small
stones and mud, but there are some good buildings of dressed stone,
among which I may mention the British Syrian School and the Grand New
Hotel. I staid at another hotel, where I found one of those pre-occupied
beds which travelers in the East so often find. About midnight, after I
had killed several of the little pests, I got up and shaved by
candle-light, for I wasn't sleepy, and there was no use to waste the
time.

Leaving Baalbec, I went down to Rayak and on to Beyrout again. This old
city is said to have been entirely destroyed in the second century
before Christ. It was once a Roman possession, and gladiatorial combats
were held there by Titus after the destruction of Jerusalem. An
earthquake destroyed it in 529, and the British bombarded it in 1840.
The population is a great mixture of Turks, Orthodox Greeks, United
Greeks, Jews, Latins, Maronites, Protestants, Syrians, Armenians,
Druses, and others. A great many ships call here, as this is the most
important commercial city in Syria. The numerous exports consist of
silk, olive oil, cotton, raisins, licorice, figs, soap, sponges, cattle,
and goats. Timber, coffee, rice, and manufactured goods are imported. At
one time Arabic was the commonest language, and Italian came next, but
now, while Arabic holds first place, French comes second. The British,
Austrians, Russians, and perhaps the French, maintain their own
postoffices. Considerable efforts are being made by American, British,
and other missionary institutions to better the condition of the
natives. The American Mission, conducted by the Presbyterians, has been
in operation more than seventy years. A few years ago they had one
hundred and forty-three schools and more than seven thousand pupils. The
Church of Scotland has a mission for the Jews. The British Syrian
Mission was established in 1864.

Beyrout has comparatively little of interest for the traveler. I walked
out to the public garden one morning and found it closed, but I do not
think I missed much. As I went along from place to place, I had
opportunity to see the weavers, wood-turners, and marble-cutters at
their work. I stopped at a small candy factory, equipped with what
seemed to be good machinery for that kind of work. One day I watched
some camels get up after their burdens of lumber had been tied on. They
kept up a peculiar distressing noise while they were being loaded, but
got up promptly when the time came. When a camel lies down, his legs
fold up something like a carpenter's rule, and when he gets up, he first
straightens out one joint of the fore legs, then all of the hind legs,
and finally, when the fore legs come straight, he is standing away up in
the air. The extensive buildings of the American College were visited,
also the American Press, the missionary headquarters of Presbyterians in
America. On the third of October the Khedivial steamer _Assouan_ came
along, and I embarked for Haifa, in Galilee.


CHAPTER IV.

A FEW DAYS IN GALILEE.


Years ago, when I first began to think of making the trip I am now
describing, I had no thought of the many interesting places that I could
easily and cheaply visit on my way to Palestine. I did not then think of
what has been described on the foregoing pages. Now I have come to the
place where I am to tell my readers the story of my travels in the Land
of Promise, and I want to make it as interesting and instructive as
possible. It is important to have a knowledge of the geography of all
the lands mentioned, but it is especially important to know the location
of the various places referred to in Palestine. These pages will be more
profitable if the reader will make frequent reference to maps of the
land, that he may understand the location of the different places
visited. I shall first describe my trip across the province of Galilee,
and take up my sight-seeing in Judaea in other chapters.

The ancient Phoenician cities of Tyre and Sidon were on the coast
between Beyrout and Haifa, where I entered Galilee on the fourth of
October, but we passed these places in the night. Haifa, situated at the
base of Mount Carmel, has no Biblical history, but is one of the two
places along the coast of Palestine where ships stop, Jaffa being the
other. Mount Carmel is fourteen miles long, and varies in height from
five hundred and fifty-six feet at the end next to the sea to eighteen
hundred and ten feet at a point twelve miles inland. There is a
monastery on the end next to the Mediterranean, which I reached after a
dusty walk along the excellent carriage road leading up from Haifa.
After I rested awhile, reading my Bible and guide-book, I walked out to
the point where the sea on three sides, the beautiful little plain at
the base of the mountain, Haifa, and Acre across the bay, all made up
one of the prettiest views of the whole trip. Owing to its proximity to
the sea and the heavy dews, Carmel was not so dry and brown as much of
the country I had seen before.

By the direction of Elijah, Ahab gathered the prophets of Baal,
numbering four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah, four
hundred more, at some point on this mountain, probably at the eastern
end, passed on my way over to Nazareth later in the day. "And Elijah
came near unto all the people, and said, How long go ye limping between
the two sides? If Jehovah be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow
him" (1 Kings 18:21). He then proposed that two sacrifices be laid on
the wood, with no fire under them; that the false prophets should call
on their god, and he would call on Jehovah. The God that answered by
fire was to be God. "All the people answered and said, It is well
spoken." The prophets of Baal called upon him from morning till noon,
saying, "O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered.
And they leaped about the altar that was made. And it came to pass at
noon that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud; for he is a god:
either he is musing, or he is gone aside, or he is on a journey, or
peradventure he sleepeth and must be awaked. And they cried aloud, and
cut themselves after their manner with knives and lances, till the
blood gushed out upon them. And it was so, when midday was past, that
they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening oblation;
but there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded."
The sincerity, earnestness, and perseverance of these people are
commendable, but they were _wrong_. Sincerity, although a most desirable
trait, can not change a wrong act into acceptable service to God, nor
can earnestness and perseverance make such a change. It is necessary
both to be honest and to do the will of our heavenly Father. After water
had been poured over the other sacrifice till it ran down and filled the
trench around the altar, Elijah called on Jehovah, and in response to
his petition "the fire of Jehovah fell, and consumed the burnt offering,
and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that
was in the trench." Elijah then took the false prophets down to the
brook Kishon, at the base of the mountain, and killed them. Acre is the
Acco of the Old Testament, and lies around the bay, twelve mile from
Haifa. It is said that the Phoenicians obtained the dye called Tyrian
purple there, and that shells of the fish that yielded it are yet to be
found along the beach. Napoleon besieged the place in 1799, and used a
monastery, since destroyed, on Mount Carmel for a hospital. After his
retreat, Mohammedans killed the sick and wounded soldiers who had been
left behind, and they were buried near the monastery. Acre was called
Ptolemais in apostolic times, and Paul spent a day with the brethren
there as he was on his way down the coast from Tyre to Jerusalem. (Acts
21:7.)

About noon I entered a carriage for Nazareth, in which there were four
other passengers: a lady connected with the English Orphanage in
Nazareth, and three boys going there to attend the Russian school. About
two miles from Haifa we crossed the dry bed of the Kishon, as this
stream, like many others in Palestine, only flows in the wet season. Our
course led along the base of Carmel to the southeast, and the supposed
place of Elijah's sacrifice was pointed out. Afterwards Mount Gilboa,
where Saul and Jonathan were slain, came in sight, and later we saw
Little Hermon with Nain upon it, Endor below it on one side, and Jezreel
not far away in another direction. We saw a good portion of the Plain of
Esdraelon, and Mount Tabor was in sight before we entered Nazareth,
which lies on the slope of a hill and comes suddenly into view.

Nazareth is not mentioned in the Old Testament, and the references to it
in the New Testament are not numerous. When Joseph returned from Egypt
in the reign of Archelaus, the son of Herod, he was afraid to go into
Judaea, "and being warned of God in a dream, he withdrew into the parts
of Galilee, and came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth; that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, that he should be called a
Nazarene" (Matt. 2:19-23). I do not know the age of Jesus when Joseph
and Mary came with him to Nazareth, but "his parents went every year to
Jerusalem at the feast of the passover"; and we are told that the child
was twelve years old at the time his parents missed him as they were
returning from the feast, and later found him in the temple hearing the
teachers and asking them questions. In this connection we are told that
"he went down with them and came to Nazareth; and he was subject unto
them" (Luke 2:51). Luke also informs us that Jesus, "when he began to
teach, was about thirty years of age" (Luke 3:23). Thus we have a
period of eighteen years between the incident in the temple and the
beginning of his public ministry, in which Jesus resided in Nazareth.
The greater part of his earth life was spent in this Galilean city,
where he was subject unto his parents. It is a blessed thing that so
much can be said of our Savior in so few words. It is highly commendable
that children be subject unto their parents, who love them dearly, and
who know best what is for their health, happiness, and future good.

After his baptism and temptation in the wilderness, "Jesus returned in
the power of the spirit into Galilee, ... and he came to Nazareth, where
he had been brought up: and he entered, as his custom was, into the
synagogue on the Sabbath day and stood up to read." When the roll of the
Scriptures was handed to him, he read from the opening verses of the
sixty-first chapter of Isaiah, then "he closed the book, and gave it
back to the attendant, and sat down: and the eyes of all in the
synagogue were fastened on him" as he told them: "To-day hath this
scripture been fulfilled in your ears," and although they "wondered at
the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth," they were not
willing to accept his teaching, and as he continued to speak, "they were
all filled with wrath, ... and they rose up, and cast him forth out of
the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was
built, that they might throw him down headlong. But he, passing through
the midst of them, went his way. And he came down to Capernaum, a city
of Galilee" (Luke 4:14-31).

Having made arrangements for a carriage the evening I arrived in
Nazareth, before daylight the next morning I started to drive to
Tiberias, on the Sea of Galilee. When I went down stairs, at about
half-past three o'clock, I found a covered rig with two seats, and three
horses hitched to it side by side. I filed no objection to the size of
the carriage, nor to the manner in which the horses were hitched. As the
driver could not speak English and the passenger could not speak Arabic,
there was no conversation on the way. As we drove out of Nazareth, I
observed a large number of women at the Virgin's Fountain, filling their
jars with water. At a distance of a little more than three miles we
passed through Kefr Kenna, the "Cana of Galilee," where Jesus performed
his first miracle. (John 2:1-11.) The road to Tiberias is not all
smooth, but is better than might be supposed. With three horses and a
light load, we were able to move along in the cool of the morning at a
lively gait, passing a camel train, an occasional village, olive
orchard, or mulberry grove. After a while the light of the moon grew
pale, and about six o'clock the great round sun came above the horizon
in front of us, and it was not long until a beautiful sheet of water six
miles long--the Sea of Galilee--came suddenly into view. We rolled along
the winding curves of the carriage road, down the slope of the hill, and
through a gateway in the old wall, to Tiberias, on the west shore of
"Blue Galilee."

According to Josephus, Herod Antipas began to build a new capital city
about sixteen years before the birth of Jesus, and completed it in A.D.
22. He named this new city Tiberias, in honor of the emperor, but it
does not appear to have been a popular place with the Jews, and but
little is said of it in the New Testament (John 21:1), yet it was not an
insignificant place. The Sanhedrin was transferred from Sepphoris, the
old capital, to the new city, and here the school of the Talmud was
developed against the gospel system. The ancient traditional law, called
the "Mishna," is said to have been published here in A.D. 200, and the
Palestinian Gemara (the so-called Jerusalem Talmud) came into existence
at this place more than a century later. The Tiberian pointing of the
Hebrew Bible began here. The present population is largely composed of
Jews, about two-thirds of the inhabitants being descendants of Abraham.
They wear large black hats or fur caps, and leave a long lock of hair
hanging down in front of each ear. There is little in Tiberias to
interest the traveler who has seen the ruins of Rome, Athens and
Ephesus. The seashore bounds it on one side and an old stone wall runs
along at the other side. I walked past some of the bazaars, and saw the
mosque and ruined castle. About a mile down the shore are the hot
springs, which, for many centuries, have been thought to possess
medicinal properties. I tried the temperature of one of the springs, and
found it too hot to be comfortable to my hand. As I returned to
Tiberias, I had a good, cool bath in the sea, which is called by a
variety of names, as "the sea of Tiberias," "sea of Galilee," "sea of
Genessaret," and "sea of Chinnereth." It is a small lake, thirteen miles
long, lying six hundred and eighty-two feet below the level of the
Mediterranean. The depth is given as varying from one hundred and thirty
to one hundred and sixty-five feet. It is really "Blue Galilee," and the
sight of it is an agreeable change to the eye after one has been
traveling the dry, dusty roads leading through a country almost
destitute of green vegetation. In the spring, when the grass is growing
and the flowers are in bloom, the highlands rising around the sea must
be very beautiful.

Several places mentioned in the New Testament were situated along the
Sea of Galilee, but they have fallen into ruin--in some cases into utter
ruin. One of these was Bethsaida, where Jesus gave sight to a blind man
(Mark 8:22-26), and fed a multitude of about five thousand. (Luke
9:10-17.) It was also the home of Philip, Andrew, and Peter. (John
1:44.) It is thought by some that James and John also came from this
place. On the northwestern shore was Chorazin, situated in the
neighborhood of Bethsaida; also Capernaum, once the home of Jesus; and
Magdala, the name of which "has been immortalized in every language of
Christendom as denoting the birth-place of Mary Magdalene, or better,
Mary of Magdala." Safed is a large place on a mountain above the sea in
sight of the Nazareth road, and was occupied by the French in 1799. It
is said that the Jews have a tradition that the Messiah will come from
this place. On the way back to Nazareth the driver stopped at the spring
of Kefr Kenna and watered his horses and rested them awhile. Hundreds of
goats, calves, and other stock were being watered, and I saw an old
stone coffin being used for a watering trough.

After another night in Nazareth, I was ready to go out to Mount Tabor.
For this trip I had engaged a horse to ride and a man to go along and
show me where to ride it, for we did not follow a regular road, if,
indeed, there is any such a thing leading to this historic place, which
is about six miles from Nazareth. It was only a little past four
o'clock in the morning when we started, and the flat top of the
mountain, two thousand and eighteen feet above sea level, was reached at
an early hour. Mount Tabor is a well-shaped cone, with a good road for
horseback riding leading up its side. There is some evidence that there
was a city here more than two hundred years before Christ. Josephus
fortified it in his day, and part of the old wall still remains.
According to a tradition, contradicted by the conclusion of modern
scholars, this is the mount of transfiguration. By the end of the sixth
century three churches had been erected on the summit to commemorate the
three tabernacles which Peter proposed to build (Matt. 17:1-8), and now
the Greek and Roman Catholics have each a monastery only a short
distance apart, separated by a stone wall or fence. The extensive view
from the top is very fine, including a section of Galilee from the
Mediterranean to the sea of Tiberias.

In the Book of Judges we read that Israel was delivered into the hands
of the Canaanites, and was sorely oppressed for twenty years. The
prophetess Deborah sent for Barak, and instructed him with a message
from God to the end that he should take "ten thousand men of the
children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun" unto Mount Tabor.
This he did, and Sisera assembled his nine hundred chariots "from
Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river Kishon. So Barak went down from
Mount Tabor and ten thousand men after him. ... Howbeit, Sisera fled
away on his feet to the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber, the Kenite,"
and she drove a tent-pin through his temples while he was lying asleep,
(Judges 4:1-23.) The song of Deborah and Barak, beginning with the
words, "For that the leaders took the lead in Israel, for that the
people offered themselves willingly, bless ye Jehovah," is recorded in
the fifth chapter of Judges.

I was back in Nazareth by ten o'clock, and spent some hours looking
around the city where the angel Gabriel announced to Mary the words:
"Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee" (Luke 1:28).
These hours, with what time I had already spent here, enabled me to see
several places of interest. Tradition points out many places connected
with the lives of Joseph and Mary, but tradition is not always reliable,
for it sometimes happens that the Greeks and the Romans each have a
different location for the same event. This is true with regard to the
point where the angry people were about to throw Jesus over "the brow of
the hill" (Luke 4:29). I saw no place that struck me as being the one
referred to in the Scriptures, and in reply to an inquiry, a lady at the
English Orphanage, who has spent twenty years in Nazareth, said she
thought it was some place on that side of the town, but the contour of
the hill had probably changed. She also mentioned that the relics taken
out in excavations were all found on that side, indicating that the old
city had been built there. When Brother McGarvey visited Palestine, he
found two places that corresponded somewhat with Luke's reference to the
place. Concerning one of them he wrote: "I am entirely satisfied that
here is where the awful attempt was made." I was shown the "place of
annunciation" in the Latin monastery. On the top of a column stands the
figure of a female, probably representing the Virgin, and a bit of ruin
that is said to date back to the time of Constantine is pointed out.
Here, I was told, stood the first church building erected in Nazareth.
One of the "brothers" took the key and went around to a building
supposed to stand on the site of Joseph's carpenter shop. It is a small
chapel, built about 1858 over the ruins of some older structure. In the
floor of marble or stone there are two wooden trapdoors, which are
raised to show the ruins below. Over the altar in the end opposite the
door is a picture to represent the holy family, and there are some other
pictures in different parts of the little chapel. From here I went to
the Virgin's Fountain. If it be true that this is the only spring in
Nazareth, then I have no doubt that I was near the spot frequently
visited by the Nazarene maid who became the mother of our Lord. I say
near the spot, for the masonry where the spring discharges is about a
hundred yards from the fountain, which is now beneath the floor of a
convent. The water flows out through the wall by two stone spouts, and
here the women were crowded around, filling their vessels or waiting for
their turn. The flow was not very strong, and this helps to explain why
so many women were there before daylight the morning I went to Tiberias.
I saw one woman, who was unable to get her vessel under the stream of
one of the spouts, drawing down a part of the water by sticking a leaf
against the end of the spout. I also visited some of the bazaars and
went to the Orphanage. This missionary institution is nicely situated in
a prominent place well up on the hill, and is managed entirely by women,
but a servant is kept to do outside work. They treated me very kindly,
showing me about the building, and when the girls came in to supper they
sang "the Nazareth Hymn" for me.

One of the occupations of the people here is manufacturing a knife with
goat horn handles that is commonly seen in Palestine. Many of the women
go about the streets with their dresses open like a man's shirt when
unbuttoned, exposing their breasts in an unbecoming manner. The same is
true of many women in Jerusalem. About one-third of the mixed population
are Jews; the other two-thirds are Mohammedans and professing
Christians, made up of Orthodox Greeks, United Greeks, Roman Catholics,
Maronites (a branch of the Greek Church), and Protestants. I went back
to Haifa and spent a night. The next morning I boarded the Austrian ship
_Juno_ for Jaffa. When I first landed here I had trouble with the
boatman, because he wanted me to pay him more than I had agreed to pay,
and on this occasion I again had the same difficulty, twice as much
being demanded at the ship as was agreed upon at the dock; but I was
firm and won my point both times. While in Galilee I had crossed the
province from sea to sea; I had visited the city in which Jesus spent
the greater part of his earth life, and the sea closely connected with
several important things in his career. I had ascended Carmel, and from
the top of Tabor I had taken an extensive view of the land, and now I
was satisfied to drop down the coast and enter Judaea.


CHAPTER V.

SIGHT-SEEING IN JERUSALEM.


Before leaving the ship at Jaffa I was talking with Mr. Ahmed, a
gentleman from India, who had spent some time in Egypt, and had traveled
extensively. He claimed to be a British subject, and was able to speak
several languages. While we were arranging to go ashore together, one
of the many boatmen who had come out to the ship picked up my suit-case
while my back was turned, and the next thing I saw of it he was taking
it down the stairs to one of the small boats. By some loud and emphatic
talk I succeeded in getting him to put it out of one boat into another,
but he would not bring it back. Mr. Ahmed and I went ashore with another
man, whom we paid for carrying us and our baggage. I found the suit-case
on the dock, and we were soon in the custom house, where my baggage and
passport were both examined, but Mr. Ahmed escaped having his baggage
opened by paying the boatman an additional fee. As we arrived in Jaffa
too late to take the train for Jerusalem that day, we waited over night
in the city from whence Jonah went to sea so long ago. We lodged at the
same hotel and were quartered in the same room. This was the first and
only traveling companion I had on the whole journey, and I was a little
shy. I felt like I wanted some pledge of honorable dealing from my newly
formed acquaintance, and when he expressed himself as being a British
subject, I mentioned that I was an American and extended my hand,
saying: "Let us treat each other right." He gave me his hand with the
words: "Species man, species man!" He meant that we both belonged to the
same class of beings, and should, therefore, treat each other right, a
very good reason indeed. A long time before, in this same land, Abraham
had expressed himself to Lot on a similar line in these words: "Let
there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my
herdsmen and thy herdsmen; for we are brethren" (Gen. 13:8). On Saturday
we moved our baggage over to the depot and boarded the train for
Jerusalem. On the way to the depot an old gentleman, whom I would have
guessed to be a German, passed me. When I entered the car it was my lot
to ride by him. He learned that I had been to Bristol, England, and had
visited the orphan homes founded by George Muller, and he remarked: "You
are a Christian, then." _Amadeus Autodidaktus_: 'The music is rooted
entquillt and only in the world of intellectual _Gefühle_ and
_Empfindungen_. Musically melodic sounds (!) Tone is not the understanding,
which only describes sensations and fragmented ... they speak to the
_Gemüt_ "etc. (Aphorisms on music. Leipzig 1857th p. 329) _Fermo
Bellini_:" Musica è l'arte, che i esprime Sentimenti passioni e le
col mezzo di suoni.

"(Manuale di Musica. Milano , Ricordi. 1853rd) _Friedrich Thiersch_:
General aesthetics (Berlin 1846) § 18 p. 101: "The music is the art
through selection and combination of tones, emotions and moods of the
mind to express or excite." _A. v. Dommer_: Elements of Music (Leipzig
1862), "_Aufgabe the Tonkunst_: The music is _Gefühle_ and by the feeling
_Vorstellungen_ arouse in us." (p. 174) _Rich. Wagner_, "The artwork
of the future" (1850. Gesamm. Does III, 99, and otherwise similar):
"The body of the _Herzens_ is the _Ton_ his conscious artistic language
the music." In the later writings certainly will Wagner's definitions
still misty and, since it is the same music "art of expression" at all
(in "Opera and Drama," Ges Schriften III, 343), which he is the "idea
of the world" seems capable of, "the essence of things in his immediate
rally to record "etc. (" Beethoven ". the 1870th p. 6 et seq.)

II The" display of feelings "is not the content of the music. part
as a consequence of this theory, what the feelings of the musical
effect _Endziel_ explained partly as a corrective same, the record is
given: the _Gefühle_ were _Inhalt_ of what the music was presented. The
philosophical study of an art to pushing the issue after _Inhalt_
same. The diversity of the content of the arts (among themselves) and the
related diversity of its basic design follows with necessity from the
diversity of _Sinne_ to which they are bound. Every art is a circle of
ideas, which they and their means of expression as a sound, word,
color, stone represents. The individual work of art, therefore, embodies
a certain idea as sensuous beauty in appearance. This particular idea
that they verkörpernde shape, and the unity of both terms are of the
concept of beauty, of which no scientific fathom any more art can be
separated. _Was_ Content of a work of dense or visual art that can
express with words and concepts back. We say: this picture is a flower
girl before, this statue of a gladiator, an act of that poem Rolands.
The more or less perfect emergence of the so-specific content in the
artistic appearance justified then our opinion about the beauty of the
artwork. _Inhalt As the Musik_ has quite agree the whole ladder of
human _Gefühle_ called because they also opposed to the conceptual
determination and therefore the correct distinction between the ideal of
forming and sealing art found believed. Accordingly, the tones and their
artistic context merely rich material, means of expression, allowing
the composer's love, the courage, the devotion, which represents delight.
These feelings in their rich diversity, the idea that the earthly
body of the sound pleased to be the musical work of art on earth to
convert.

As far as we are in a lovely melody, a harmony-loving and enjoy collects,
it was not themselves but what they mean: the whisper of tenderness,
the storms of bellicosity. In order to reach solid ground, we must
initially altverbundene such metaphors brutally separated: The
_Flüstern_? Yes - but not the "longing", which _Stürmen_? However, it
is not the "bellicosity". In fact, the music one or the other, they can
whisper, rush, rush, - the love and anger, however, only in our own
heart into it. The portrayal of a certain feeling affect or is not
in the assets of their own music. There are in fact the feelings of
the soul is not isolated, so that they are almost out of it could raise
by an art which the representation of the other mental activity is
closed. You are on the contrary, depending on physiological and
pathological conditions are caused by ideas, judgments, just short
of the whole area circumspect and reasonable thinking, what you feel
so happy as a Gegensätzliche issued. And what a feeling to _diesem
bestimmten_ feeling? For longing, hope, love? Around the mere strength
or weakness, the waves of internal movement? Certainly not. These
feelings may be different and the same again with the same feeling
in several individuals, to other times, different. Only on the basis
of a number - in moments of strong feeling, perhaps unconscious -
ideas and judgments, may our souls just to summarize this particular
feeling. The feeling of hope is inseparable from the idea of a
happier condition, which should come with the current and is compared.
The melancholy happiness compares a past with the present. These are
very specific ideas, concepts, _ohne sie_ without _Gedanken_apparat,
you can not feel the current "hope," not "nostalgia" call, he makes them.
Abstracted from him, it remains an indefinite movement, if all the general
feeling of malaise or well-being. The _Liebe_ can be used without the
idea of a beloved personality, without the desire and the pursuit of
happy, glorification, the possession of this item may not be thought.
Not the sort of mere soul movement, but its conceptual core, its
real, historical content makes them _Liebe_. After your _Dynamik_ may
as well use this as gently rapturous, happy as much as occur and remains
painful but always love. This consideration alone is out to show that
music only those accompanying adjectives to express different could never
Substantivum, love yourself A certain feeling (a passion, an emotion)
will never exist as such without any real historical content, just
in terms of which can be demonstrated. Terms can the music as "language
unspecified" zugestandenerweise not play - is not as psychologically
unablehnbar the conclusion that they also express certain feelings can
not? The _Bestimmtheit_ of emotions rests precisely in its conceptual
core. How come that music is emotion, such as melancholy, cheerfulness,
etc. _erregen kann_ (not _muß_), which we want to later, where the
subjective impression of the music to talk about is investigated. It had
merely theoretically be determined whether the music was capable of, a
certain feeling _darzustellen_. The question was too negative, because
the determination of the feelings of concrete ideas and concepts can
not be separated, which the latter apart from the design field of music
subject. - A certain number of _Ideen_ while the music with its own
resources abundant display. These are, according to the host institution
to immediately take all those ideas, which audible changes to the
force, of movement, the proportions are related, so the idea of the
swelling, the dying, the Eilens, hesitation, the man tangled, the
simple progressive etc. - It can also express the aesthetic of a music
called graceful, gentle, fierce, powerful, delicate, fresh: louder
ideas what Tonverbindungen in a sensual phenomenon can be found. We
can attribute these words directly from the formation _musikalischen_
use, without the ethical significance of thinking, which for the
human soul lives, and the idea of a common connection to the music
as soon heranbringt, even with the purely musical characteristics
of the hand to be confused maintains .

The ideas which the composer represents, above all and first purely
_musikalische_. His imagination is a beautiful melody. It should not be
other than itself, but how any specific appearance on their higher
generic term to which they initially indicating fulfilling idea, and
so on ever higher and higher until the absolute idea, so it happens
even with the musical ideas. For example, _dieses_ gentle, harmonious
decaying Adagio the idea of soft, harmonic _überhaupt_ to bring beautiful
appearance. The general imagination, which like the ideas of art in
relation to its own, human soul life continues, it will decay even higher,
eg as the expression of a mild resignation is reconciled minds to think,
and perhaps _kann_ immediately to the idea of an eternal peace ascend
beyond. Even the poetry and visual arts are completely cut to an initial
indirectly may be the picture of a flower girl to the more general idea
of good girls satisfaction and modesty, a wiser Kirchhof complained
to the idea of earthly transience indicates. Exactly, only with
incomparably more uncertain and arbitrary interpretation, the listener
in this song the idea of youthful enough in that the idea of impermanence
to listen to alone, nor as in the above pictures are abstract _Ideen_ the
content of the musical work: from a representation of the »_Gefühls_
of impermanence," the "_Gefühls_ of youthful frugality" is now completely
out of the question. There are ideas, which the music perfectly and
still be represented as _Gefühl_ not occur, and vice versa _Gefühle_
of such a mixture can move the mind that they are not in any music that
can be displayed by their idea description can be found. _Was_ Can
be the music of the feelings , if not their content? _Dynamische_ Only
the same. You can increase the movement of a physical process, moments
after the fast, slow, strong, weak, ascending, descending index. Movement
is only one property, a moment of emotion, this itself is not commonly
believed, the performing assets of the music enough to limit, if one
claims that it could no _Gegenstand_ to describe a feeling, but the
feeling itself, such B. not the object of a particular charity, but "love".
You could take the truth either. Not love, but a movement, it can
describe, what in love or even another emotion can occur, however,
always the minor of his character is. "Love" is an abstract concept, as
well as "virtue" and "Immortality." The insurance of the theorists,
music did not represent abstract concepts, is superfluous, because
this art can _not_. That only _Ideen_, i.e. life had become the embodiment
of artistic content terms are understood by themselves [9] But the
_Ideen_ of love, anger, fear can not be instrumental works on the release,
because between those ideas and beautiful Tonverbindungen there is no
necessary connection. Which of these ideas now because it's so, his music
is indeed as effective to conquer knows? It is the _Bewegung_ (of course
in the broadest sense, including the swelling and making the single
tone or chord as a "movement" conceives). It is the element which
the music with the emotional states collectively, and that they create
in a thousand gradations and contrasts to the interview [9]. Vischer
(Note Ästh. § 11) defines the specific ideas than the empires of life,
provided that their reality than their corresponding term thinking.
Because _Idee_ means always the reality in its pure and mangellos
current term.

_Bewegung_ The term is so far in the investigations of the nature and
impact of the music has been conspicuously neglected; us he seems
the most important and fruitful. What we are also in the music of
soul states seems to paint, is _symbolisch_. Like the colors, so that
the sounds have a lot of isolation and in their symbolic importance,
which outside and above all artistic intention effect. Each color breathes
peculiar character: it is no mere digit, which by the artist only
gets a position, but a force that already naturally present in
sympathetic connection with certain moods set. Who does not know the
colors interpretations as set out in its simplicity and access exist,
or by fine-grained refined poetic spirits lifted? We combine the
green with a sense of hope, with the blue loyalty. _Rosenkranz_ Recognize
Rotgelb »graceful dignity," in purple "philistine like friendliness",
etc. (psychology, 2nd edition p. 102) Similarly, we define the basic
materials of music: scales, chords and timbres in itself _Charaktere_.
We also have a busy Auslegekunst just for the significance of musical
elements; _Schubarts_ symbolism of the keys in its nature gives a side
piece to _Goethes_ interpretation of colors. Here, however, these
elements (sounds, colors) in their artistic use quite different laws
than those of their isolated effect phenomenon. As little history on
a red image of each us joy, every white innocence means, nor is a
symphony in all flat swarms us a spirit, all H-minor in a humane and
hostile mood awaken, or to any triad satisfaction, each reduced Septakkord
despair. On aesthetic ground to neutralize such elementary autonomy under
the common law higher. From a _Ausdrücken_ or _Darstellen_ such natural
relationship is far away. "Symbolically," we named it, by no means the
content directly, but a significantly different from this form will
remain. If we are in the Yellow jealousy, in G major Laughter in mourning
cypress seen this interpretation has a physiological and psychological
connection with certain of these feelings, but it took him just
our interpretation, not the color, sound, the plant in and of itself.
One can not therefore by a chord to say he was a certain feeling that he
is doing even less in the context of the artwork. Another means for the
alleged purpose, except the analogy of the movement and the symbolism
of the sounds, the music has not.

If it is thus their inability to represent certain emotions, easily
from the nature of sounds derived, it seems almost inconceivable that
it on the experience means not much faster into the general consciousness
is pressed. Try someone, the feeling still so many strings from a
piece of you an instrumental, with clear reasons to prove _welcher_
affect the content of the same image. The sample is essential. -
Listen, for example, Beethoven's Overture to "Prometheus." As for the
attentive ear of the friend's art constantly follow from it hears, is
roughly as follows: The sounds of the first bar after the event bubbled
into the fourth sub-quickly and quietly up, repeat itself exactly in the
second, third and fourth cycle the same way lead to a greater extent,
the drop in the height of the fountain bubbled driven down in order
in the next four bars, the same figure and image the same figure
out. Before the spiritual sense of the listener is thus built in the
_Melodie_ the symmetry between the first and second cycles, then these
two bars to the two following, eventually the first four bars as a large
sheet of equal size corresponding to the four bars. The bass _Rhythmus_
mark indicates the beginning of the first three cycles, each with
one stroke, the fourth with two shots in the same way in the next four
bars. So here is the fourth time against a different first three, which
through repetition in the next four bars is symmetrical and the ear
as a train of novelty in the old equilibrium pleased. The _Harmonie_ in
the subject shows us the correspondence of a large and two small
sheets: the C-major triad in the first four bars corresponds to the
Sekundakkord in the fifth and sixth, then the Quintsextakkord in
the seventh and eighth cycles.

This reciprocal correspondence between melody, rhythm and harmony creates
a symmetrical, yet varied picture, which by the sounds of various
instruments and the change of the sound even more lights and shadows
are given. [Music Sample] Another _Inhalt_ than the property we just
suggested is not in the subject to recognize at least a _Gefühl_ to mention
what it represented, or would awaken in the listener. Such fragmentation
is indeed a skeleton from lush body, capable of all the beauty, but
also all wrong Deutelei destroy it. How with this whole subject is
randomly selected it goes with every other instrumental theme. A large
class of music lovers considers it merely a characteristic of the older
"classic" music, the abhold affects it, and there from the outset, that
no one in the 48 Preludes and Fugues from J. P. Bach's "Well-Tempered
Clavier" a feeling will be able to see the content of the same pictures.
So amateurish and arbitrary distinction also is present in the fact
that in the earlier music of the end in itself nor distinctive, the
Deutbarkeit difficult and less tempting appears, finds its explanation,
- the evidence would have been made that the music does not feel awaken
and have as their object _muß_. The whole area of Figuralmusik fall out.
But have large, historically justified as an aesthetic art forms
to be ignored by a theory durability wrongfully, [10] then this is
wrong.

A ship must be destroyed as soon as it has only _ein_ leak. If this is not
enough, it might still turn the whole floor. He plays the subject of any
of Mozart's or Haydn's Symphony, a Beethoven's Adagio, a Mendelssohn's
scherzo, one or Chopinschen Schumann's piano piece, the root of our
rich music, or even the most popular patterns from Overture Auber,
Donizetti, Flotow. Who will dare to add, and a certain sense as the
content of these themes show? One is "love" to say. Possibly. The
other says "nostalgia". Maybe. The third feels "devotion." No one can
refute. And so forth. Is this now a certain feeling _darstellen_ if
nobody knows _was_ actually displayed? About the beauty and the beauty
of the piece will probably think all agree that the content of
each varies.

_Darstellen_ Does a content clearly, vividly produce him before the eyes
forward "therefore represent". How might you now than the one from an
art _Dargestellte_ describe what that is uncertain, ambiguous element of
that, a dispute is subject to the eternal? [10] Bachianer as _Spitta_
clearly desirable that, conversely, they instead favor of their master
the theory itself to deny the same joints and suites with equally eloquent
and positive Gefühlsergüssen interpret, as only a master of subtle
Beethovenianer his sonatas. We have intentionally _Instrumentalsätze_
to selected examples. It is only what the instrumental music can be
argued, is the music as such. If any general certainty of the music
will be investigated, something as its nature and identify its nature,
its limits and direction should be noted, it can only by the instrumental
music of the question. What the _Instrumentalmusik_ can not do,
which can never be said that it could _Musik_, because only it is
pure, absolute _Tonkunst_. Whether you are the vocal or instrumental
music of its value and impact would prefer - an unscientific procedure,
mostly in the one-sidedness of the word dilettante leads - you will always
have to admit that the term "music" in a text-words composed piece
of music is not purely out. In a vocal composition, the effectiveness
of tones never exactly the same as that of words, the act of decoration
be separated, that the accounts of the various arts but would be
strictly. Tonstücke Even with certain titles, or programs, we must
reject, where it is the "content" of music acts. The association with
the poetry expands the power of music, but not its borders. [11] [11]
_Gervinus_ has the rank of dispute between the vocal and instrumental
music in his' Handel and Shakespeare "(1868) again, but by the»
Sangkunst "for real and true music, the" art game "for" an all internal
to the External herabgekommenes artwork "for a physical means of
physiological stimuli declared he demonstrates with every effort
of his acumen but only that a learned Handel Enthusiast and yet in
quaint mistakes about the nature of the music may be biased.

Nobody has refuted errors striking than _Ferdinand Hiller_, whose criticism
of the book from us Gervinus following pertinent points can be
found: "The connections of the word with the clays are released
from the diverse art from the simplest, yet half-tones in spoken
recitative to a choirs of Bach or a Mozart opera finale - what a
number of configurations! But only in the recitatives, it may
occur independently, or the singing career of a piece just a cry
interrupt the text with the music in _gleicher_ force the listener to
take. Once the music in its full entity occurs, it leaves the floor,
otherwise omnipotent word, far behind. The proof lies _leider_ one would
say too close. Beautifully composed, may be the worst poem in the joy
of composition hardly diminish the greatest poetic masterpiece but a
boring music not even help. What little interest the text of an oratory
in the reading, one realizes it is unlikely that he had the brilliant
tone poem the substance could be an hour long, ear, heart and
soul music performed.

Yes, even more so, it is in most cases the listener is not possible, words
and melody simultaneously recorded. The conventional sounds, from which
a sentence in the language concerned, must be fairly quickly be linked
so that they, of memories held together in a spirit to reach understandings.
The recorded music but the listener with the first tone and carry it with
them, without giving him the time, only the possibility to leave to
hear back .... May we, "Hiller continued driving," the naivsten
listen to folk songs, like us Handel's Alleluia, borne of a thousand
voices, as opposed to sound, it is in the former case, the attraction
of a scarcely outstretched melodies bud, in the latter the power
and grandeur of the combined elements of whole Tonwelt be what excites
us or inspires. The Feinsliebchen there from here by Heaven's speech
contributes to the former, nothing with immediate effect, this is a
purely musical nature and would not materialize, even if you do not
understand the words, nor could understand. "(From the Tonleben our time
. Neue Folge. Leipzig 1871st p. 40 ff), we have the vocal composition
indissociable hidden product before us, out of which it is no
longer possible, the size of the individual factors to be determined.

If this is the effect of _Dichtkunst_, so no one will invade the _Oper_
as proof stress, it needs greater denial, but only the same access to
basic provisions in the aesthetics _musikalischer_ to do the same. The
vocal music illuminated the drawing of the poem. [12] We have in the
musical elements, colors and splendor of the utmost tenderness detected,
the symbolic significance of the bargain. You may be a mediocre poem
to the most intimate revelation of the heart convert. Yet it is not
the sounds, which in a vocal pieces _darstellen_, but the text.
The drawing, not the color, determines the subject matter presented.
Just
how much damage was done nobody will ever know. There were a number
of bruised faces and broken heads, and a report was current that two
pilgrims had died from injuries received." This disgraceful and wicked
disturbance is said to have been brought about by the Armenians wanting
two of their priests to go with the Greek Patriarch as far as the
Chapel of the Angels. And it is furthermore said that the defeat of the
Armenians was brought about, to some extent at least, by the muscular
strength of an American professional boxer and wrestler, whom the
Greeks had taken along in priestly garb as a member of the Patriarch's
bodyguard. It is not surprising that Mr. Wallace has written: "The
Church of the Holy Sepulcher gives the non-Christian world the worst
possible illustration of the religion of Him in whose name it stands."

As I was going through the city, I saw a camel working an olive press.
The poor blindfolded animal was compelled to walk in a circle so
small that the outside trace was drawn tightly over its leg, causing
irritation; but seeing the loads that are put upon dumb brutes, and men
too, sometimes, one need not expect much attention to be given to the
comfort of these useful servants. Truly, there is great need for the
refining, civilizing, and uplifting influence of the gospel here in the
city where it had its earliest proclamation. I also visited two grist
mills operated by horses on a treadmill, which was a large wooden wheel
turned on its side, so the horses could stand on it. I was not pleased
with the nearness of the manure in one of these mills to the material
from which the "staff of life" is made.

The German Protestant Church of the Redeemer is a fine structure on the
Muristan, completed in 1898. The United States consulate is near the
Austrian postoffice inside of the Jaffa gate. I went there and rested
awhile, but saw the consul, Selah Merrill, at his hotel, where I also
met Mrs. Merrill, and formed a favorable opinion of both of them. Here I
left my belt, checks, and surplus money in the care of the consul.

Continuing my walk on Wednesday, I passed one of the numerous threshing
floors of the country. This one was the face of a smooth rock, but they
are often the ground on some elevated spot, where a good breeze can be
had to blow away the chaff, for the grain is now threshed and cleaned by
the primitive methods of long ago. After the grain has been tramped out
(1 Cor. 9:9), the straw, now worn to chaff, is piled up, and when a
favorable wind blows, a man tosses it in the air with a wooden fork. The
grain falls in a pile at his feet and the chaff is carried aside
some distance. When this operation has been carried on as long as is
profitable, the wheat and what chaff remains in it are thrown into the
air with a wooden shovel, called in our Bibles a "fan." (Matt. 3:12.)
The final cleaning is done by washing the grain, or with a sieve.

The Tombs of the Kings, which may never have contained a king, are
extensive and interesting. They are surrounded by a wall, and to reach
them the visitor must go down a very wide stairway. The steps probably
do not number more than twenty-five, but the distance from one side of
the stairs to the other is twenty-seven feet. There are channels cut in
the rock to carry the water that comes down these steps to the cisterns,
two in number, one of which is a good-sized room cut in the rock at the
side of the stairway. It contained about three feet of water when I saw
it, although there had been no rain in Jerusalem for half a year. The
other one, at the bottom of the stairs, is much larger, and was empty.
The vaulted roof is supported by a column, and there are steps leading
from one level of the floor to another.

Turning to the left at the foot of the big stairway, we passed through
an arch cut through the rock into a court made by excavating the earth
and stone to a depth of perhaps twenty feet. It is ninety feet long and
eighty-one feet wide. The entrance to the tombs is by a vestibule cut in
the rock at one side of the court, and it appears that this once had a
row of pillars along the front, like veranda posts. We went down a few
steps and stooped low enough to pass through an opening about a yard
high. Beyond this we found ourselves in a good-sized room, cut in the
solid rock. There are five of these rooms, and so far as the appearance
is concerned, one might suppose they had been made in modern times, but
they are ancient. The bodies were usually buried in "pigeon-holes" cut
back in the walls of the rooms, but there are some shelf tombs, which
are sufficiently described in their name. One room seems never to have
been completed, but there are burial places here for about forty people.

One of the interesting things about these tombs is the rolling stone by
which they were closed. It is a round rock, resembling a millstone. The
height is a little over three feet and a half, and the thickness sixteen
inches. It stands in a channel cut for the purpose, but was rolled
forward before the entrance when it was desirable to have the tombs
closed. When Jesus was buried, a "great stone" was rolled to the mouth
of the sepulcher, and the women thought of this as they went to the tomb
on the first day of the week, saying: "Who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the tomb?" (Mark 16:3.) They went on and found the tomb
open; so, also, we may often find the stone rolled away if we will go
forward in the discharge of our duties, instead of sitting down to mourn
at the thought of something in the distance which seems too difficult.

On our way to the tombs just mentioned, we passed the American Colony,
a small band of people living together in a rather peculiar manner,
but they are not all Americans. I understood that there had been no
marriages among them for a long time until a short while before I was
in Jerusalem. Some of them conduct a good store near the Jaffa gate. We
passed an English church and college and St. Stephen's Church on the way
to Gordon's Calvary. This new location of the world's greatest tragedy
is a small hill outside the walls on the northern side of the city. The
Church of the Holy Sepulcher stands on ground which for fifteen hundred
years has been regarded as the true site of our Lord's death and burial,
but since Korte, a German bookseller, visited the city in 1738, doubts
have been expressed as to the correctness of the tradition. Jesus
"suffered without the gate" (Heb. 13:12), and "in the place where he was
crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new tomb wherein was
man never yet laid" (John 19:41), and it appears to have been near a
public road. (Mark 15:29.) In 1856 Edward Robinson, an American, offered
proof that the site sustained by the old tradition was inside the city
walls at the time of the crucifixion, and more recent discoveries, made
in excavating, confirm his proof. The new Calvary meets the requirements
of the above mentioned scriptures, and gets its name "Gordon's Calvary,"
from the fact that General Gordon wrote and spoke in favor of this being
the correct location, and a photographer attached his name to a view of
the place. In the garden adjoining the new Calvary I visited a tomb,
which some suppose to be the place of our Lord's burial.

On the way back to my lodging place we passed the Damascus gate, the
most attractive of all the old city gates, and one often represented
in books. It was built or repaired in 1537, and stands near an older
gateway that is almost entirely hidden by the accumulated rubbish of
centuries, only the crown of the arch now showing. As we went on we
passed the French Hospice, a fine modern building, having two large
statues on it. The higher one represents the Virgin and her child, the
other is a figure of the Savior. The Catholic church already mentioned,
where two sisters are to be seen in prayer at all times, is near the
Hospice. It is a rather impressive sight to stand in this beautiful but
silent place, and see those women in white robes kneeling there almost
as motionless as statues.

Thursday and a part of Friday was taken up with a trip to Jericho, but
we got back in time to spend the afternoon in looking around Jerusalem,
and we had an interesting visit to the home of Mrs. Schoenecke, a German
lady, whose father, named Schick, spent fifty-six years of his life in
Jerusalem. From what information Mr. Schick could gather from the Bible,
Josephus, the Talmud, and his personal observations during the time the
Palestine Exploration Fund was at work, he constructed large models of
the ancient temples that stood on Mount Moriah from the days of Solomon
to the time of Herod and Christ. I was told that the original models
were sold to an American college for five thousand dollars. Mr.
Schick then constructed the models shown to us, and explained by Mrs.
Schoenecke. We were also shown a model of the tabernacle used while
Israel was marching to the promised land.

The Wailing Place is a rectangle one hundred feet long by fifteen feet
wide on the outside of the Temple Area, on the western side, where the
wall is about sixty feet high. Some of the stones in this section are of
large size, and authorities admit that they are of Solomon's time, but
the wall in which they now stand may be a reconstruction. The Jews come
here on the Sabbath, beginning at sundown on Saturday, for a service
which one author describes as follows: "Nearest to him stood a row of
women clad in robes of spotless white. Their eyes were bedimmed with
weeping, and tears streamed down their cheeks as they sobbed aloud
with irrepressible emotion. Next to the women stood a group of
Pharisees--Jews from Poland and Germany. * * * The old hoary-headed men
generally wore velvet caps edged with fur, long love-locks or ringlets
dangling on their thin cheeks, and their outer robes presented a
striking contrast of gaudy colors. Beyond stood a group of Spanish Jews.
* * * Besides these there are Jews from every quarter of the world, who
had wandered back to Jerusalem that they might die in the city of their
fathers, and be buried in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, under the shadow of
the Temple Hill. The worshipers gradually increased in number until the
crowd thronging the pavement could not be fewer than two hundred. It was
an affecting scene to notice their earnestness; some thrust their hands
between the joints of the stones, and pushed into the crevices, as far
as possible, little slips of paper, on which were written, in the Hebrew
tongue, short petitions addressed to Jehovah. Some even prayed with
their mouths thrust into the gaps, where the weather-beaten stones were
worn away at the joints. * * * The congregation at the Wailing Place is
one of the most solemn gatherings left to the Jewish Church, and, as the
writer gazed at the motley concourse, he experienced a feeling of sorrow
that the remnants of the chosen race should be heartlessly thrust
outside the sacred inclosure of their fathers' holy temple by men of an
alien race and an alien creed." So far as I know, all writers give these
worshipers credit for being sincere, but on the two occasions when I
visited the place, I saw no such emotion as described in the foregoing
quotation. The following lines are often rehearsed, the leader reading
one at a time, after which the people respond with the words: "We sit in
solitude and mourn."

  "For the place that lies desolate;
   For the place that is destroyed;
   For the walls that are overthrown;
   For our majesty that is departed;
   For our great men who lie dead;
   For the precious stones that are buried;
   For the priests who have stumbled;
   For our kings who have despised Him."

This solemn practice has been observed for about twelve hundred years,
but the same place may not have been used all the time. "She is become a
widow, that was great among the nations! She that was a princess among
the provinces is become tributary! Jerusalem hath grievously sinned;
therefore she is become as an unclean thing" (Lam. 1: 1, 8).

On Friday evening we entered some of the many synagogues yet to be found
in Jerusalem and observed the worshipers. On Saturday we went to the
House of Industry of the English church, where boys are taught to work.
Olive wood products are made for the tourist trade. We passed a place
where some men were making a peculiar noise as they were pounding wheat
and singing at their work. This pounding was a part of the process of
making it ready for food. An old lady was standing in an open door
spinning yarn in a very simple manner. We watched her a few minutes, and
I wanted to buy the little arrangement with which she was spinning, but
she didn't care to part with it. She brought out another one, and let me
have it after spinning a few yards upon it. I gave her a Turkish coin
worth a few cents, for which she seemed very thankful, and said, as Mr.
Ahmed explained: "God bless you and give you long life. I am old, and
may die to-day." She told us that she came from Mosul, away beyond the
Syrian desert, to die in Jerusalem. We visited the synagogue of the
Caraite Jews, a small polygamous sect, numbering in this assembly
about thirty persons. They also differ from the majority of Hebrews in
rejecting the Talmud, but I believe they have a Talmud of their own.
Their place of worship is a small room almost under the ground, where we
were permitted to see a very fine old copy of the Hebrew Scriptures, our
Old Testament. The work was done by hand, and I was told the man who
did it was sixteen years of age when he began it, and was sixty when he
finished the work, and that the British Museum had offered five thousand
dollars for the book. Some of these people speak English, and we
conversed with one woman who was quite intelligent. They kindly
permitted us to go up and view the city from the housetop.

In the afternoon we visited the Temple Area, an inclosure of about
thirty-five acres, in the southeastern part of the city, including the
Mosque of Omar (more appropriately called the Dome of the Rock), the
Mosque El Aksa, and Solomon's Stables. For Christians to enter this
inclosure, it is necessary to notify their consul and secure the service
of his _cavasse_, an armed guard, and a Turkish soldier, both of
whom must be paid for their services. Thus equipped, we entered the
inclosure, and came up on the east front of the Dome of the Rock,
probably so named from the fact that the dome of this structure stands
over an exposed portion of the natural rock, fifty-seven feet long,
forty-three feet wide, and rising a few feet above the floor. After
putting some big slippers on over our shoes, we entered the building
and saw this great rock, which tradition says is the threshing floor
of Araunah, and the spot where Melchizedek sacrificed. It is also the
traditional place where Abraham sacrificed Isaac, and it is believed
that David built an altar here after the angel of destruction had put
up his sword. It is furthermore supposed that the great altar of burnt
offerings stood on this rock in the days of Solomon's Temple, which
is thought to have been located just west of it. This is the probable
location of Zerubbabel's Temple, and the one enlarged and beautified
by Herod, which was standing when Jesus was on earth, and continued to
stand until the awful destruction of the city by the Roman army in A.D.
70.

The modern visitor to this fine structure would have no thought of the
ancient temple of God if he depended upon what he sees here to suggest
it. All trace of that house has disappeared. The Dome of the Rock, said
to be "the most beautiful piece of architecture in Jerusalem," belongs
to the Turks. It has eight sides, each about sixty-six and a half feet
long, and is partly covered with marble, but it is, to some extent, in a
state of decay. Between the destruction of the temple and the erection
of this building a heathen temple and a church had been built on the
spot.

The Mosque El Aksa was also visited, but it is noted more for its size
than the beauty of its architecture. The Turkish Governor of Palestine
comes here every Friday to worship at the time the Sultan is engaged
in like manner in Constantinople. Solomon's Stables next engaged our
attention. We crossed the Temple Area to the wall on the southeastern
border, and went down a stairway to these underground chambers, which
were made by building about a hundred columns and arching them over and
laying a pavement on the top, thereby bringing it up on a level with
the rest of the hill. The vaults are two hundred and seventy-three feet
long, one hundred and ninety-eight feet wide, and about thirty feet
high. They were not made for stables, but were used for that purpose in
the middle ages, and the holes through the corners of the square stone
columns show where the horses were tied. A large portion of these
chambers has been made into a cistern or reservoir.

After a visit to what is called the Pool of Bethesda and the Church of
St. Anne, we went outside the city wall on the north side and entered
what looks like a cave, but upon investigation proves to be an extensive
underground quarry. These excavations, called Solomon's Quarries,
extend, according to one authority, seven hundred feet under the hill
Bezetha, which is north of Mt. Moriah. The rock is very white, and will
take some polish. Loose portions of it are lying around on the floor
of the cavern, and there are distinct marks along the sides where the
ancient stone-cutters were at work. In one part of the quarries we were
shown the place where visiting Masons are said to hold lodge meetings
sometimes. Vast quantities of the rock have been taken out, and this is
probably the source from whence much of the building material of the old
city was derived.

The trip to the quarries ended my sight-seeing for the week. The next
morning I went to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher and witnessed a part
of the service of the Greek Catholics. At a later hour I went around to
the mission conducted by Bro. Joseph, and, with the little congregation
there assembled, broke bread in memory of Him who in this city, almost
two thousand years ago, gave his life for the sins of the world, after
having instituted this supper, a monumental institution, representing
to our minds the cost of the world's redemption. In the afternoon I
attended the preaching service in Mr. Thompson's tabernacle, and visited
the Abyssinian church, near Mr. Smith's house. This Abyssinian house is
circular, and has a small, round room in the center, around which the
congregation stands and worships, leaning on their staves, for the place
is void of seats. At night I preached in the tabernacle on the question:
"What must I do to be saved?" Melki, the native evangelist, translated
for me as I went along, and the congregation paid good attention and
seemed pleased to have heard me. I know I am pleased to have had
opportunity to "preach the word" in the city from whence it was first
published to the world.

One of the first sights beheld when I started out on Monday morning was
a foundation, laid at the expense of a woman who intended to build a
house for the "hundred and forty-four thousand." It represents one of
the many peculiar religious ideas that find expression in and around
Jerusalem. We went on to the railway station, where I saw a young man, a
Jew, leave for that far-off land called America. Next the Leper Hospital
was visited. This well-kept institution is in the German colony, and had
several patients of both sexes. A lady, who spoke some English, kindly
showed me through the hospital, and explained that the disease is not
contagious, but hereditary, and that some lepers refuse to enter the
hospital because they are forbidden to marry. The patients were of
various ages, and showed the effects of the disease in different stages.
In some cases it makes the victim a sad sight to look upon. I remember
one of these poor, afflicted creatures, whose face was almost covered
with swollen and inflamed spots. Some were blind, and some had lost
part or all of their fingers by the disease. One man's nose was partly
consumed.

At Bishop Gobat's school we were kindly received, and given a good,
refreshing drink. The founder of this school, a member of the English
church, was one of the pioneers in Jerusalem mission work, and stood
very high in the estimation of the people. His grave is to be seen in
the cemetery near the school, where one may also see the supposed site
of the ancient city wall. Besides the Leper Hospital, we visited another
hospital under German control, where patients may have medical attention
and hospital service for the small sum of one _mejidi_, about eighty
cents, for a period, of fifteen days, but higher fees are charged in
other departments. We soon reached the English hospital, maintained by
the Society for the Promotion of Christianity among the Jews. It is
built on a semi-circular plan in such a way that the wards, extending
back from the front, admit light from both sides. This institution is
free to the Jews, but I understand Mohammedans were not admitted without
a fee.

The Syrian Orphanage had about three hundred children in it, who were
being instructed in books and in manual labor. Those who can see are
taught to work in wood, to make a kind of tile used in constructing
partitions, and other lines of useful employment. They had some blind
children, who were being taught to make baskets and brushes. On the way
back to Mr. Smith's I stopped at the Jewish Library, a small two-story
building, having the books and papers upstairs. They have a raised map
of Palestine, which was interesting to me, after having twice crossed
the country from sea to sea.

The last Thursday I was in the city I went with some friends to the
Israelite Alliance School, an institution with about a thousand pupils,
who receive both an industrial and a literary education. We were
conducted through the school by a Syrian gentleman named Solomon Elia,
who explained that, while the institution is under French control,
English is taught to some extent, as some of the pupils would go
to Egypt, where they would need to use this language. The boys are
instructed in wood-working, carpentry, copper-working, and other lines
of employment. We saw some of the girls making hair nets, and others
were engaged in making lace. Both of these products are sent out of
Palestine for sale. The institution has received help from some of the
Rothschild family, and I have no doubt that it is a great factor for the
improvement of those who are reached by it. Jerusalem is well supplied
with hospitals and schools. The Greek and Roman Catholic churches, the
Church of England, and numerous other religious bodies have a footing
here, and are striving to make it stronger. Their schools and hospitals
are made use of as missionary agencies, and besides these there is a
Turkish hospital and numerous Mohammedan schools.

On Friday I had an opportunity to see a man measuring grain, as is
indicated by the Savior's words: "Give, and it shall be given unto you;
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they
give into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you again" (Luke 6:38). He filled his measure about full,
and then shook it down thoroughly. He next filled it up and shook it
down until he evidently thought he had all he could get that way, so he
commenced to pile it up on top. When he had about as much heaped up as
would stay on, he put his hands on the side of the cone opposite himself
and gently pulled it toward him. He then piled some more on the far
side, and when he had reached the limit in this way, he carefully
leveled the top of the cone down a little, and when he could no longer
put on more grain, he gently lifted the measure and moved it around to
the proper place, where it was quickly dumped. In the evening Mr. Smith
and I walked out on Mount Scopus, where Titus had his camp at the time
of the siege and destruction of Jerusalem, as foretold by our Lord and
Master in the twenty-fourth of Matthew.

As we went along, Mr. Smith pointed out the watershed between the
Mediterranean and the Dead Sea. The view from Scopus is very extensive.
We could look away to the north to Nebi Samwil, where the Prophet Samuel
is supposed by some to have been buried. Ramallah, the seat of a school
maintained by the Society of Friends, is pointed out, along with Bireh,
Bethel, and Geba. Nob, the home of the priests slain by command of Saul
(1 Samuel 22:16), and Anathoth, one of the cities of refuge (Joshua
21:18), are in sight. Swinging on around the circle to the east, the
northern end of the Dead Sea is visible, while the Mount of Olives is
only a little distance below us. Across the valley of the Kidron lies
the Holy City, with her walls constructed at various periods and under
various circumstances, her dome-shaped stone roofs, synagogues, mosques,
and minarets, being "trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of
the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24). Here, with this panorama spread
out in the evening light, I may say my sight-seeing in the City of the
Great King came to an end.

I lacked but a few hours of having been in the city two weeks, when I
boarded the train for Jaffa on my way to Egypt. The most of the time I
had lodged in the hospitable home of Mr. Smith, where I had a clean
and comfortable place to rest my tired body when the shadows of night
covered the land. I had received kind treatment, and had seen many
things of much interest. I am truly thankful that I have been permitted
to make this trip to Jerusalem. Let me so live that when the few
fleeting days of this life are over, I may rest with the redeemed. When
days and years are no more, let me enjoy, in the NEW JERUSALEM, the
blessedness that remains for those that have loved the Lord.

"And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from
God, made ready as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great
voice out of the throne saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his peoples, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God: and he shall wipe away
every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more; neither shall
there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any more: the first things have
passed away" (Revelation 21:2-4).


CHAPTER VI.

SIDE TRIPS FROM JERUSALEM.


Early on Tuesday morning, the eleventh of October, I set out by
carriage, with some other tourists, for a trip to Bethlehem, Solomon's
Pools, and Hebron. Bethlehem is about five miles south of Jerusalem, and
Hebron is a little southwest of the Holy City and twenty miles distant.
We started from the Jaffa gate and passed the Sultan's Pool, otherwise
known as Lower Gihon, which may be the "lower pool" of Isaiah 22:9. "The
entire area of this pool," says one writer, "is about three and a half
acres, with an average depth, when clear of deposit, of forty-two and
a half feet in the middle from end to end." We drove for two miles, or
perhaps more, across the Plain of Rephaim, one of David's battlefields
soon after he established himself in Jerusalem. Here he was twice
victorious over the Philistines. In the first instance he asked Jehovah:
"Shall I go up against the Philistines? Wilt thou deliver them into
my hand?" The answer was: "Go up; for I will certainly deliver the
Philistines into thy hand." In this battle the invaders were routed and
driven from the field. "And they left their images there; and David and
his men took them away." But "the Philistines came up yet again, and
spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. And when David inquired of
Jehovah, he said, Thou shalt not go up: make a circuit behind them, and
come upon them over against the mulberry trees. And it shall be, when
thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees,
that then thou shalt bestir thyself, for then is Jehovah gone out before
thee to smite the hosts of the Philistines." David obeyed the voice of
the Lord, and smote his enemies from Geba to Gezer. (2 Samuel 5:17-25.)

On the southern border of the plain stands the Greek convent called Mar
Elyas. This is about half way to Bethlehem, and the city of the nativity
soon comes into view. Before going much farther the traveler sees a
well-built village, named Bet Jala, lying on his right. It is supposed
to be the ancient Giloh, mentioned in 2 Samuel 15:12 as the home of
Ahithophel, David's counselor, for whom Absalom sent when he conspired
against his father. Here the road forks, one branch of it passing Bet
Jala and going on to Hebron; the other, bearing off to the left, leads
directly to Bethlehem, which we passed, intending to stop there as we
returned in the evening. At this place we saw the monument erected to
mark the location of Rachel's tomb, a location, like many others, in
dispute. When Jacob "journeyed from Bethel and there was still some
distance to come to Ephrath," Rachel died at the birth of Benjamin, "and
was buried in the way to Ephrath (the same is Bethlehem). * * * And
Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave" (Gen. 35:16-20). The spot, which
for many centuries was marked by a pyramid of stones, is now occupied
by a small stone building with a dome-shaped roof, at the east side of
which is a room, open on the north, with a flat roof. For hundreds of
years tradition has located the grave at this place, which is indeed
near Bethlehem, but in 1 Samuel 10:2 it is mentioned as being "in the
border of Benjamin," which has occasioned the belief that the true
location is some miles farther north.

Before long we came to Solomon's Pools. We first stopped at a doorway,
which looks like it might lead down to a cellar, but in reality the door
is at the head of a flight of stairs leading down to what is known as
the "sealed fountain" (Song of Solomon 4:12). The door was fastened,
and we were not able to descend to the underground chamber, which is
forty-one feet long, eleven and a half feet wide, with an arched stone
roof, all of which, except the entrance, is below the surface. A large
basin cut in the floor collects the water from two springs. After rising
a foot in the basin, the water flows out into a channel more than six
hundred feet long leading down to the two upper pools. These great
reservoirs, bearing the name of Israel's wisest monarch, are still in a
good state of preservation, having been repaired in modern times.
The first one is three hundred and eighty feet long, two hundred and
twenty-nine feet wide at one end, two hundred and thirty feet wide at
the other, and twenty-five feet deep. The second pool is four hundred
and twenty-three feet long, one hundred and sixty feet wide at the upper
end, two hundred and fifty feet wide at the lower end, and thirty-nine
feet deep at that end. The third pool is the largest of all, having a
length of five hundred and eighty-two feet. The upper end is one hundred
and forty-eight feet wide, the lower end two hundred and seven feet,
and the depth at the lower end is fifty feet. The pools are about one
hundred and fifty feet apart, and have an aggregate area of six and a
quarter acres, with an average depth approaching thirty-eight feet. The
upper two received water from the sealed fountain, but the lower one was
supplied from an aqueduct leading up from a point more than three miles
to the south. The aqueduct from the sealed fountain leads past the
pools, and winds around the hills to Bethlehem and on to the Temple
Area, in Jerusalem. It is still in use as far as Bethlehem, and could be
put in repair and made serviceable for the whole distance. An offer
to do this was foolishly rejected by the Moslems in 1870. The only
habitation near the pools is an old khan, "intended as a stopping place
for caravans and as a station for soldiers to guard the road and the
pools." The two upper pools were empty when I saw them, but the third
one contained some water and a great number of frogs. As we went on to
Hebron we got a drink at "Philip's Well," the place where "the eunuch
was baptized," according to a tradition which lacks support by the
present appearance of the place.

Towards noon we entered the "valley of Eschol," from whence the spies
sent out by Moses carried the great cluster of grapes. (Num. 13:23.)
Before entering Hebron we turned aside and went up to Abraham's Oak, a
very old tree, but not old enough for Abraham to have enjoyed its
shade almost four thousand years ago. The trunk is thirty-two feet in
circumference, but the tree is not tall like the American oaks. It is
now in a dying condition, and some of the branches are supported by
props, while the lower part of the trunk is surrounded by a stone wall,
and the space inside is filled with earth. The plot of ground on which
the tree stands is surrounded by a high iron fence. A little farther up
the hill the Russians have a tower, from which we viewed the country,
and then went down in the shade near Abraham's Oak and enjoyed our
dinner.

Hebron is a very ancient city, having been built seven and a half years
before Zoar in Egypt. (Num. 13:22.) Since 1187 it has been under the
control of the Mohammedans, who raise large quantities of grapes, many
of which are made into raisins. Articles of glass are made in Hebron,
but I saw nothing especially beautiful in this line. The manufacture of
goat-skin water-bottles is also carried on. Another line of work which I
saw being done is the manufacture of a kind of tile, which looks like a
fruit jug without a bottom, and is used in building. Hebron was one of
the six cities of refuge (Joshua 20:7), and for seven years and a half
it was David's capital of Judah. It is very historic. "Abraham moved his
tent, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and
built there an altar unto Jehovah." (Gen. 13:18.) When "Sarah died in
Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan, * * * Abraham
came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her." At this time the worthy
progenitor of the Hebrew race "rose up from before his dead, and spoke
unto the children of Heth, saying, I am a stranger and a sojourner with
you: give me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I may bury
my dead out of my sight." The burial place was purchased for "four
hundred shekels of silver, current money of the land. * * * And after
this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave in the field of Machpelah
before Mamre (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan" (Gen.
23:1-20). Years after this, when both Abraham and his son Isaac had
passed the way of all the earth and had been laid to rest in this cave,
the patriarch Jacob in Egypt gave directions for the entombment of his
body in this family burial place. "There they buried Abraham and Sarah
his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I
buried Leah" (Gen. 49:31), and here, by his own request, Jacob was
buried. (Gen. 50:13.) Joshua, the successor of Moses, "utterly
destroyed" Hebron (Joshua 10:37), and afterwards gave it to Caleb, to
whom it had been promised by Moses forty-five years before. (Joshua
14:6-15.) Here Abner was slain (2 Samuel 3:27), and the murderers of
Ishbosheth were put to death. (2 Samuel 4:12.)

The most interesting thing about the town is the "cave of Machpelah,"
but it is inaccessible to Christians. Between 1167 and 1187 a church was
built on the site, now marked by a carefully guarded Mohammedan mosque.
It is inclosed by a wall which may have been built by Solomon. We were
allowed to go in at the foot of a stairway as far as the seventh step,
but might as well have been in the National Capitol at Washington so far
as seeing the burial place was concerned. In 1862 the Prince of Wales,
now King of England, was admitted. He was accompanied by Dean Stanley,
who has described what he saw, but he was permitted neither to examine
the monuments nor to descend to the cave below, the real burial chamber.
As the body of Jacob was carefully embalmed by the Egyptian method, it
is possible that his remains may yet be seen in their long resting place
in this Hebron cave. (Gen. 50:1,2.)

Turning back toward Jerusalem, we came to Bethlehem late in the
afternoon, and the "field of the shepherds" (Luke 2:8) and the "fields
of Boaz" (Ruth 2:4-23) were pointed out. The place of greatest interest
is the group of buildings, composed of two churches, Greek and Latin,
and an Armenian convent, all built together on the traditional site
of the birth of the Lord Jesus. Tradition is here contradicted by
authorities partly on the ground that a cave to which entrance is made
by a flight of stairs would probably not be used as a stable. This
cave is in the Church of St. Mary, said to have been erected in 330 by
Constantine. Descending the stairs, we came into the small cavern, which
is continually lighted by fifteen silver lamps, the property of the
Greeks, Latins, and Armenians, who each have an interest in the place.
Beneath an altar, in a semi-circular recess, a silver star has been set
in the floor with the Latin inscription: "_Hic de Virgine Maria Jesus
Christus Natus est._" An armed Turkish soldier was doing duty near this
"star of Bethlehem" the evening I was there. The well, from which it is
said the "three mighty men" drew water for David, was visited. (2 Samuel
23:15.) But the shades of night had settled down upon the little town
where our Savior was born, and we again entered our carriages and drove
back to Jerusalem, having had a fine day of interesting sight-seeing. On
the Wednesday before I left Jerusalem, in the company of Mrs. Bates, I
again visited Bethlehem.

Thursday, October thirteenth, was the day we went down to Jericho, the
Dead Sea, and the Jordan. The party was made up of the writer, Mr.
Ahmed, Mr. Jennings, Mrs. Bates, four school teachers (three ladies and
a gentleman) returning from the Philippines, and the guides, Mr. Smith
and Ephraim Aboosh. We went in two carriages driven by natives. "A
certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell among
robbers, who stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half
dead" (Luke 10:30). This lonely road is still the scene of occasional
robberies, and the Turkish Government permits one of its soldiers to
accompany the tourist for a fee, but we did not want to take this
escort, as neither of the guides feared any danger. Accordingly we took
an early start without notifying the soldiers, and reached Jericho,
about twenty miles away, in time to visit Elisha's Fountain before
dinner. The road leads out past Bethany, down by the Apostles' Fountain,
on past the Khan of the Good Samaritan, and down the mountain to the
plain of the Jordan, this section of which is ten miles long and seven
miles wide. Before the road reaches the plain, it runs along a deep
gorge bearing the name Wady Kelt, the Brook Cherith, where the prophet
Elisha was fed by the ravens night and morning till the brook dried up.
(1 Kings 17:1-7.) We also saw the remains of an old aqueduct, and of a
reservoir which was originally over five hundred feet long and more than
four hundred feet wide. Elisha's Fountain is a beautiful spring some
distance from the present Jericho. Doubtless it is the very spring whose
waters Elisha healed with salt. (2 Kings 2:19-22.) The ground about
the Fountain has been altered some in modern times, and there is now a
beautiful pool of good, clear water, a delight both to the eye and to
the throat of the dusty traveler who has come down from Jerusalem seeing
only the brown earth and white, chalky rock, upon which the unveiled sun
has been pouring down his heat for hours. The water from the spring now
runs a little grist mill a short distance below it.

After dinner, eaten in front of the hotel in Jericho, we drove over to
the Dead Sea, a distance of several miles, and soon we were all enjoying
a fine bath in the salt water, the women bathing at one place, the men
at another. The water contains so much solid matter, nearly three and a
third pounds to the gallon, that it is easy to float on the surface with
hands, feet and head above the water. One who can swim but little in
fresh water will find the buoyancy of the water here so great as to make
swimming easy. When one stands erect in it, the body sinks down about
as far as the top of the shoulders. Care needs to be taken to keep the
water out of the mouth, nose and eyes, as it is so salty that it is very
disagreeable to these tender surfaces. Dead Sea water is two and a half
pounds heavier than fresh water, and among other things, it contains
nearly two pounds of chloride of magnesium, and almost a pound of
chloride of sodium, or common salt, to the gallon. Nothing but some very
low forms of animal life, unobserved by the ordinary traveler, can live
in this sea. The fish that get into it from the Jordan soon die. Those
who bathe here usually drive over to the Jordan and bathe again, to
remove the salt and other substances that remain on the body after the
first bath. The greatest depth of the Dead Sea is a little over thirteen
hundred feet. The wicked cities of Sodom and Gomorrah stood here some
place, but authorities disagree as to whether they were at the northern
or southern end of the sea. In either case every trace of them has been
wiped out by the awful destruction poured on them by the Almighty. (Gen.
18:16 to 19:29)

The Jordan where we saw it, near the mouth, and at the time we saw it,
the thirteenth of October, was a quiet and peaceful stream, but the
water was somewhat muddy. We entered two little boats and had a short
ride on the river whose waters "stood, and rose up in one heap, a great
way off," that the children of Israel might cross (Joshua 3:14-17), and
beneath whose wave the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was baptized by the
great prophet of the Judaean wilderness. (Matt. 3:13-17.) We also got
out a little while on the east bank of the stream, the only time I was
"beyond Jordan" while in Palestine. After supper, eaten in Jericho, we
went around to a Bedouin encampment, where a dance was being executed--a
dance different from any that I had ever seen before. One of the
dancers, with a sword in hand, stood in the center of the ground they
were using, while the others stood in two rows, forming a right angle.
They went through with various motions and hand-clapping, accompanied
by an indescribable noise at times. Some of the Bedouins were sitting
around a small fire at one side, and some of the children were having a
little entertainment of their own on another side of the dancing party.
We were soon satisfied, and made our way back to the hotel and laid down
to rest.

The first Jericho was a walled city about two miles from the present
village, perhaps at the spring already mentioned, and was the first city
taken in the conquest of the land under Joshua. The Jordan was crossed
at Gilgal (Joshua 4:19), where the people were circumcised with knives
of flint, and where the Jews made their first encampment west of the
river. (Joshua 5:2-10.) "Jericho was straitly shut up because of the
children of Israel," but by faithful compliance with the word of the
Lord the walls fell down. (Joshua 6:1-27.) "And Joshua charged them with
an oath at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before Jehovah,
that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: with the loss of his
first-born shall he lay the foundation thereof, and with the loss of his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it." Regardless of this curse,
we read that in the days of Ahab, who "did more to provoke Jehovah, the
God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before
him, * * * did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho: he laid the foundation
thereof with the loss of Abiram his first-born, and set up the gates
thereof with the loss of his youngest son Segub, according to the word
of Jehovah, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun" (1 Kings 16:33,34).
"The Jericho * * * which was visited by Jesus occupied a still different
site," says Bro. McGarvey. The present Jericho is a small Arab village,
poorly built, with a few exceptions, and having nothing beautiful in or
around it but the large oleanders that grow in the ground made moist by
water from Elisha's Fountain. We had satisfactory accommodations at the
hotel, which is one of the few good houses there. Jericho in the time of
our Lord was the home of a rich publican named Zaccheus (Luke 19:1-10),
and was an important and wealthy city, that had been fortified by Herod
the Great, who constructed splendid palaces here, and it was here that
"this infamous tyrant died." The original Jericho, the home of Rahab the
harlot, was called the "city of palm trees" (Deut. 34:3), but if the
modern representative of that ancient city has any of these trees, they
are few in number. Across the Jordan eastward are the mountains of Moab,
in one of which Moses died after having delivered his valedictory, as
recorded in Deuteronomy. (Deut. 34:1-12.) From a lofty peak the Lord
showed this great leader and law-giver a panorama of "all the land of
Gilead unto Dan. * * * And Jehovah said unto him, This is the land which
I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it
unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou
shalt not go over thither. So Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in
the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah. And he buried him
in the valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day."

Early Wednesday morning we began our toilsome journey back to Jerusalem,
having nearly four thousand feet to climb in the twenty miles
intervening. We stopped awhile at the Khan of the Good Samaritan, which
stands near some old ruins, and may not be far from the place to which
the Good Samaritan carried his poor, wounded fellow-man so long ago.
Here I bought some lamps that look old enough, but may be quite modern
imitations of the kind that were carried in the days of the wise and
foolish virgins. A stop was also made at the Apostles' Fountain, near
Bethany, where I saw an Arab working bread on his coat, which was spread
on the ground. Over by the Damascus gate I one day saw a man feeding his
camel on his coat, so these coarse cloth garments are very serviceable
indeed. We got back to Jerusalem in time to do a good deal of
sight-seeing in the afternoon.

The following Tuesday was occupied with a trip on "donkey-back" to Nebi
Samwil, Emmaus, Abu Ghosh, and Ain Kairim. Our party was small this
time, being composed of Mr. Jennings, Mr. Smith, the writer, and a
"donkey-boy" to care for the three animals we rode, when we dismounted
to make observations. He was liberal, and sometimes tried to tell us
which way to go. We went out on the north side of the city and came to
the extensive burial places called the "Tombs of the Judges." Near by is
an ancient wine press cut in the rock near a rock-hewn cistern, which
may have been used for storing the wine. En Nebi Samwil is on an
elevation a little more than three thousand feet above the sea and about
four hundred feet higher than Jerusalem, five miles distant. From the
top of the minaret we had a fine view through a field glass, seeing the
country for many miles around. This is thought by some to be the Mizpah
of the Bible (1 Kings 15:22), and tradition has it that the prophet
Samuel was buried here. A little north of Nebi Samwil is the site of
ancient Gibeon, where "Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before
the servants of David" (2 Samuel 2:12-17).

We next rode over to El Kubebeh, supposed by some to be the Emmaus of
New Testament times, where Jesus went after his resurrection and sat at
meat with his disciples without being recognized. (Luke 24:13-25.) The
place has little to attract one. A modern building, which I took to be
the residence of some wealthy person, occupies a prominent position, and
is surrounded by well-kept grounds, inclosed with a wall. The Franciscan
monastery is a good sized institution, having on its grounds the remains
of a church of the Crusaders' period, over which a new and attractive
building has been erected. One section of it has the most beautiful
floor of polished marble, laid in patterns, that I have ever seen. It
also contains a painting of the Savior and the two disciples.

We went outside of the monastery to eat our noon-day lunch, but before
we finished, one of the monks came and called us in to a meal at
their table. It was a good meal, for which no charge was made, and I
understand it is their custom to give free meals to visitors, for they
believe that Jesus here sat at meat with his two disciples. We enjoyed
their hospitality, but drank none of the wine that was placed before us.

Our next point was Abu Ghosh, named for an old village sheik who, "with
his six brothers and eighty-five descendants, was the terror of the
whole country" about a century ago. Our object in visiting the spot was
to see the old Crusaders' church, the best preserved one in Palestine.
The stone walls are perhaps seven or eight feet thick. The roof is still
preserved, and traces of the painting that originally adorned the walls
are yet to be seen. A new addition has been erected at one end, and the
old church may soon be put in repair.

The last place we visited before returning to Jerusalem was Ain Kairim,
a town occupied mainly by the Mohammedans, and said to have been the
home of that worthy couple of whom it was written: "They were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless" (Luke 1:6). The portion occupied by the Latins and
Greeks is very beautifully situated on the side of the mountain. The
stone houses, "whited walls," and green cypresses make quite a pretty
picture. The Church of St. John, according to tradition, stands on the
spot where once dwelt Zacharias and Elizabeth, the parents of John, the
great forerunner of Jesus. Night came upon us before we got back to our
starting place, and as this was my first day of donkey riding, I was
very much fatigued when I finally dismounted in Jerusalem; yet I arose
the next morning feeling reasonably well, but not craving another donkey
ride over a rough country beneath the hot sun.

On Saturday, the twenty-second of October, I turned away from Jerusalem,
having been in and around the place almost two weeks, and went back to
Jaffa by rail. After a few miles the railway leads past Bittir, supposed
to be the Beth-arabah of Joshua 15:61. It is also of interest from the
fact that it played a part in the famous insurrection of Bar Cochba
against the Romans. In A.D. 135 it was captured by a Roman force after
a siege of three and a half years. Ramleh, a point twelve miles from
Jaffa, was once occupied by Napoleon. Lydda, supposed to be the Lod of
Ezra 2:33, was passed. Here Peter healed Aeneas, who had been palsied
eight years. (Acts 9:32-35.)

Jaffa is the Joppa of the Bible, and has a good deal of interesting
history. When "Jonah rose to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of
Jehovah," he "went down to Joppa and found a ship going unto Tarshish:
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them to
Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah." (Jonah 1:3.) His unpleasant
experience with the great fish is well known. When Solomon was about to
build the first temple, Hiram sent a communication to him, saying: "We
will cut wood out of Lebanon as much as thou shalt need; and will bring
it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to
Jerusalem" (2 Chron. 2:16). In the days of Ezra, when Zerubbabel
repaired the temple, we read that "they gave money also unto the masons,
and to the carpenters; and food, and drink, and oil, unto them of Sidon,
and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea, unto
Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia"
(Ezra 3:7). It was the home of "a certain disciple named Tabitha," whom
Peter was called from Lydda to raise from the dead. (Acts 9:36-43.)
The kunstgebildetste people of the ancient and the most learned of the
earlier Middle Ages Tonsetzer could not understand what our Hirtinnen to
the remotest Alp: sing in thirds. Through the harmony of music but is
not a new light worked, but it has become the first days.

"The whole Tonschöpfung was from this time until ausgeboren." (Nägeli.)
harmony and melody that is lacking in nature. Only a third element in
the music, the one from which the first two are taken, already exists
before and apart from the people: the _Rhythmus_. In the gallop of horses,
the clatter of the mill, the song of the blackbird and quail expresses
an entity to which particle consecutive time to summarize and make a
good whole. Not all, but many vocalisations of nature are rhythmic. And
although it prevails in the law of rhythm _zweiteiligen_ as uplift and
subsidence, starting and stopping. What these natural rhythms of the
human separates music, you must immediately noticeable. In the _Musik_
there is no isolated rhythm as such, but only melody and harmony, which
is rhythmically expressed. In nature, however, the melody or rhythm or
harmony, but only immeasurable air vibrations. The rhythm, the only
musical elements in nature, is also the first, it wakes up people in the
child, in the Wild at the earliest evolved. When the South Sea islanders
with metal pieces and wood pieces rhythmic clatter and an incomprehensible
howling ejaculate, the _natürliche_ music, because it's _keine Musik_.
What we are but a Tyrolean peasant sing hear what appears to be no trace
of art squat, is _künstliche Musik_. The man says admittedly, he sing
like his beak has grown: but that this was possible, had the seeds of
centuries to grow. We would have the necessary elementary components
of our music, and found that the man of the surrounding nature can not
play music learned. In what type and result of our current sound system
has trained, taught the history of music. We assume that after
instruction, and only their results noted that melody and harmony,
that our relationships and interval scale, the division of major
and minor according to the different position of the semitone,
eventually the floating temperature, without which our (Europe-Western)
music impossible would be slowly and gradually resulting creations
of the human mind.

Nature has given the people only the institutions and the desire to sing
to remove the ability to, on the basis of the simplest conditions, and
after a sound one. Only the simplest ratios (triad, harmonic
progression) are considered immutable pillars all future remain ongoing.
- You take care of confusion, as _ob dieses_ (current) _Tonsystem selbst_
necessary in nature would be.

The experience that even naturalists today with the musical
relationships unconsciously and easily handle as innate forces,
which are of course, endorse the prevailing Tongesetze to no laws
of nature, there is already a result of the infinitely popular
musical culture.

_Hand_ Noted quite rightly that matter to our children in the cradle
even sing better than adult Wilde. »Läge the sequence of music in
the natural finish, so also every man song always pure." [43] [43]
_Hand_, aesthetic.

D. 50th T. I. Ebendaselbst is fitting given that the Gaelen in Scotland
with the Indian peoples of the lack of strains Quart seventh and share
the result of their sound is so _cdegac_. For the physically trained
Patagonia in southern America there is no trace of music or singing. -
Very thorough and result in very consistent with the foregoing, the
evolution of sound systems recently _Helmholtz_ ( "doctrine of
Tonempfindungen") set out. When we sound an "artificial" is called,
so we used this word not in the refined a sense of arbitrary conventional
invention. It has become merely a means as opposed to creation. This
overlooks _Hauptmann_ if the notion of an artificial sound systems an
"absolutely void" called "by the musicians nor have determined
intervals, and a sound system can invent, as the scholar's voice,
the words of the language and the Sprachfügung have invented. "[44]
Even the language is in the same sense as the music of an artificial
product, not by both in the outer vorgebildet nature, but gradually
become and must be learned.

Not the language scholar, but the nations formed their language according
to their character and they change constantly perfected. So also have
the "Tongelehrten" our music is not "built", but the fixed and explained
what the general, musically gifted mind with rationality, but not
necessarily had unconsciously invented. [45] From this process it is
clear that our sound system in the time course of enrichments and new
changes will be. But within the current laws and still so many great
evolutions possible that a change in the system _Wesen_ very likely to
appear remote. Stocks, for example, the enrichment in the "emancipation
of the quarter-tones," which a modern writer, already hints at
_Chopin_ will find, [46] would theory, composition and aesthetics of the
music a totally different.

The musical theorist can therefore present the outlook for the future
barely different release than the simple recognition of their ability.
[44] _M. Hauptmann_, The nature of the harmonies and metric. 1853. P. 7
[45] Our view is consistent with the research _Jacob Grimms_ match, which,
inter alia, suggests: "Anyone who won the conviction that the language
of free human invention, it will not even doubt about the source of poetry
and _Tonkunst_." (origin of language. 1852nd) [46] _Johanna Kinkel_,
eight letters about piano lessons. 1852, Cotta. Our statement that there
was no music in nature, one is the wealth of diverse voices argue
that the nature so wonderfully revived. Should the trickling of the
stream, the clapping of the ocean waves, the thunder of the
avalanches, wind storms of the bride is not a cause and a model of
human music been? Did all of the lispelnden, whistling, blaring sounds
of our music being nothing to do? We must in fact say no. All these
statements are merely the natural _Schall_ and _Klang_, i.e. unequal
parts in time consecutive air vibrations. Very rarely and then only in
isolation, the environment is another _Ton_ show i.e. a sound of a
definite, measurable height and depth. Sounds are the basic conditions
of all music.

Do these statements sound of the music yet so powerful irritant or stimulate
the mind, they are not music to the human level, but only hints of
an Aryan element such that later, however, for the trained human music
is often very meaningful offer suggestions. Even the appearance of
the purest natural Tonlebens, the birdsong is music to the human in any
respect, because it is not our scale can be adjusted. Also the phenomenon
of natural harmony - in any case, the sole and inescapable nature based
on what the main conditions of our music is based - is at its correct
meaning attributed. The harmonic progression is generated on the
gleichbesaiteten Äolsharfe by itself, ie based on a natural law, but
the phenomenon itself can be heard anywhere from nature directly
generated. When not on a musical instrument a specific, measurable
root is chipped, do not seem sympathetic tones Besides, no harmonic
progression.

Man must therefore ask, so that the natural response was. The appearance
of the echo is explained more easily. It is curious how even
talented writers from the idea of actual "music" in nature can not
unfasten. Even _Hand_, which we intentionally earlier examples cited,
what his real insight into the incommensurable, incompetent beings art
of natural sound phenomena show brings a whole chapter "of the music of
nature," whose acoustic phenomena "somewhat" music need to be mentioned.
Similarly Kruger. [47] Where it is the principle issues, there is no
"sense" what we hear in nature, _ist_ either music, or it is _not_ music.
The crucial moment can only be used in the measurement of the sound made
will. _Hand_ Puts the emphasis throughout on the "spiritual whole
staff," "the expression of inner life, inner feelings," "the power of
self-activity, which is immediately followed by a debate on the affairs
arrives." According to this principle would have the bird singing
music is called, the mechanical clock is not, while just the opposite
is true. [47] contributions to the life and science of music, p.
149 ff The "music" of nature and the music of the people are two different
areas. The transition from the first to the second pass through the
_Mathematik_. An important result of record. Admittedly, it may not
feel as if the man's tones through deliberately calculations that sort,
it happened rather by unconscious use original size and relative
performances of a hidden trade shows and counting, whose legality
later noted science. The fact that everything in music must be
commensurable, in the natural sounds but nothing commensurable,
there are these two rich sound almost unexpectedly coexist.

Nature gives us not the artistic material of a warrant, vorgebildeten
sound systems, but only the raw material of the body, we do serve
the music. Not the voices of the animals, but their intestines are
important to us, and the animal, where the music owes the most,
is not the nightingale, but the sheep. After this investigation,
for which the ratio of Music and Fine only one substructure, but a
necessary, was to keep us one step higher, to an aesthetic field. The
measured tone and the sound system are ordered, only composer _womit_
creates not _was_ he creates. As wood and ore only "substance" were
responsible for the sound, the sound only "material" (material) for the
music. There is a third and higher meaning of "substance" means a substance
within the meaning of the treated object, described the idea of the
subject. How does the composer _diesen_ substance? How consequence of
a certain tone poem of the content, the subject matter in which they
as individuals and advancing differs from others? The _Poesie_ which
_Malerei_ who have their _Skulptur_ inexhaustible source of material
in the nature around us.

The artist can be found by any _Naturschönes_ suggested that there is
substance to his own generation. _bildenden_ In the arts is the nature
Vorschaffen on striking. The painter could no tree, no flower draw, if
not already in the outer nature vorgebildet would, no statue of the
sculptor, without the true human form to know and to take samples. The
same is true of invented material. You can never, in the strict sense
"invented" his. Is not the "ideal" landscape of rocks, trees, water and
clouds trains, loud things that are in the nature vorgebildet are? The
painter can not paint what he does not _gesehen_ and has closely monitored.
Whether he is painting a landscape or a genre picture, a history painting
invents.

If our contemporaries a "Huss", "Luther," "Egmont" paint, so they have
never really seen the subject, but for any part thereof must be
precisely the model of nature have taken. The painter must not _diesen_
man, but he must have seen many men, how they move, stand, walk, lighting,
shadows, and the coarsest accusation would certainly Naturwidrigkeit,
or the inability of his characters. The same is true of the _Dichtkunst_,
which is a far larger box has beautiful models. The people and their
actions, emotions, destinies, as presented to us by our own perceptions
or by tradition - because that is one of the pre, the poet presented
- to be, are material for the poem, the tragedy, the novel. The Poets
can be no sunrise, no snow field describe describe any emotional state,
not a farmer, soldier, Miser, lovers on the stage, if he does not see
the models of nature seen and studied by real or traditions so animated
in his imagination, that they replace the immediate outlook. Imagine
now that the arts _Musik_ contrary, we see that they are a model, a
substance for their work never finds. _Es is no natural beauty for the
Musik._ This difference between music and other arts (only the
_Baukunst_ also finds no model in nature) is deep and serious.

The creation of the painter, the poet is a constant (inner or real)
After drawing, reference forms, - _nachzumusizieren_ there is something
in nature does not. Nature knows no Sonata no overture, no Rondo. However,
landscapes, genre pictures, idylls, funeral games. The rate of
Aristotelian imitation of nature in art, which is still before the
philosophers of the last century and there was input, is long and needs
corrected, until satiety hackneyed, no further discussion here. Not
slavishly imitate art, the nature, it has _umzubilden_. The expression
shows just _before_ the art that something had to be there, what will
be remodeled. This is precisely the nature of the presented model,
the natural beauty. The painting is of a lovely landscape, a group, a
poem, the poet of a historical event, an experience, to the artificial
representation of the pre-induced. When considering what nature could
but exclaim _Tonsetzer_ ever: this is a magnificent example of an overture,
a symphony! The composer is nothing _umbilden_, he has everything _New
erschaffen_. What the painter, the poet in contemplation of the natural
beauty there, the composer must be by concentrating his work inside
out. He must wait for the good hour, where it begins to sing and
sound: since they will sink, and turned out to create something, which
in nature has not his equal, and therefore, unlike the other arts, not
just from this world. There is no way a partisan definition, if we are
to the "natural beauty" for the painter and the poet _Menschen_ adding,
for the musician, however, from the elaborate human breast expanding
vocal hide. The singing shepherd is not object, but already the subject
of art. Is his song from measurable, orderly, even if it sounds simple,
it's a product of the human spirit, whether it is now a shepherd boy
has invented or Beethoven.

So, when a composer used melodies National real, this is not a natural
beauty, because it is necessary to a previous will, which she has
invented, - where she had this? Did _er_ an example of this in nature?
This is a legitimate question. The answer can only be read negatively.
The referendum is not a pre-song, not a natural beauty, but the first
stage of real art, _naive Kunst_. He is responsible for the music nor
a model of nature produced, as with coal to guard offices and rubble
bottoms lubricated soldiers flowers and natural role models for the
painting are . Both are human artifice. For Kohl, the characters models
are in the nature show for the people not singing, you can not go
back _hinter_ him. To a very feasible to get confused if the
definition of "substance" for the music used in a higher sense takes
and indicates that indeed a Beethoven Overture to Egmont, - or so the
word "to" not dramatic purposes urge - a musical "Egmont" wrote Berlioz
a "King Lear", Mendelssohn a "Melusina." Did these stories, one asks,
the tone poem is not just the material supplied as the poet? Not at
all. The poets are those figures real model which he umbildet, the
composer, they offer only _Anregung_, namely _poetische_ suggestion.
The natural beauty of the tone poem _Hörbares_ application would be how
it is for the painter as a visible, for the sculptor is a tangible.
Not the shape of Egmont, not his deeds, experiences, attitudes, the
content of Beethoven's overture, as in the _Bilde_ "Egmont" in _Drama_
"Egmont" the case. The contents of the overture are _Tonreihen_ what
the composer is completely free for musical Denkgesetzen itself
created.

You are responsible for the aesthetic look completely autonomous and
independent from the idea of "Egmont," which it repeats the poetic
imagination of Tonsetzers has been associated, whether it be that this
idea to an unfathomable way the germ to the invention that has Tonreihen,
it was that he subsequently took place according to his accusation. This
connection is so loose and arbitrary, that never a listener of the
song on his alleged subject matter would be forfeit, if not the author
_ausdrückliche Benennung_ by our imagination in advance the direction
imposed. _Berlioz_ 'Gloomy overture hang in and of itself with the
idea of "King Lear" just along as a Straußscher waltz. You can not
spicy enough commend, as the mistaken views of this general. Only with
the moment, the idea of the waltz Straußsche "King Lear" contradictory
to Berliozsche overture, however, according to where we are with that
music _vergleichen_ idea. With just this comparison, there is no
intrinsic reason, but only an explicit coercion by the author. Through a
particular title will be used to Comparison of the piece with a non-object
forced him below, and we must do with a certain scale to measure what is
_non the musikalische_. One may perhaps say, Beethoven's Overture
"Prometheus" is too little for this great Allegedly.

With nowhere can it by tinkering with the inside, it is never a musical
gap or defect evidence. She is perfect, because they fully execute
_musikalischen_ content; her _dichterisches_ issue is analogous to
execute a second, entirely different claim. This arises and disappears
with the title. Moreover, such a claim to a certain heading Tonwerk
with only certain features are: that the music sublime, or cute,
dark, happy sounds, from simple exposure to the conclusion that afflicted
etc. To develop the art of poetry or painting, the fabric's call a
particular concrete _Individualität_, not mere attributes. Therefore,
it would be well conceivable that Beethoven's Overture to "Egmont"
also "William Tell" or "Joan of Arc" may be overwritten.

The _Drama_ Egmont, Egmont _Bild_ which can be more than the confusion
that this is a different individual in the same circumstances, but
not that it is totally different conditions. You can see how closely the
relationship of music to the natural beauty with the whole question of
their _Inhalt_ together. Another objection is obtained from the musical
literature herholen to the music a natural beauty to vindizieren.

Examples of that Tonsetzer from nature is not just the poetic occasion
geschöpft (as in the above history), but its really audible utterances
Tonlebens have directly imitated: the Hahnenruf in _Haydns_ seasons,
cuckoo, nightingale, and quail in shock _Spohrs_ "Consecration
of Tones" and _Beethovens_ Pastoral Symphony. Alone if we like these
_hören_ and imitation in a _musikalischen_ Kunstwerk hear, they have
no musical significance is but a poetic one.
It is remarkable how some
of the embalmed bodies, thousands of years old, are preserved. I looked
down upon the Pharaoh who is supposed to have oppressed Israel. The body
is well preserved, but it brought thoughts to me of the smallness of the
fleshly side of man. He who once ruled in royal splendor now lies there
in very humble silence. In some cases the cloths wrapped around these
mummies are preserved almost perfectly, and I remember a gilt mask that
was so bright that one might have taken it for a modern product. After
the body was securely wrapped, a picture was sometimes painted over the
face, and now, after the lapse of centuries, some of these are very
clear and distinct. I saw a collection of scarabaei, or beetles, which
were anciently worshiped in this country. Dealers offer figures of this
kind for sale, but the most of them are probably manufactured for the
tourist trade.

On Lord's day, October thirtieth, I attended the evening services at the
American Mission, and went to Bedrashen the following day. This is the
nearest railway station to Memphis, the ancient capital of Egypt, now an
irregular pile of ruined mud bricks. I secured a donkey, and a boy to
care for it and tell me where to go. We soon passed the dilapidated
ruins of the old capital. Two prostrate statues of great size were seen
on the way to the Step Pyramid of Sakkara, which is peculiar in that it
is built with great offsets or steps, still plainly visible, although
large quantities of the rock have crumbled and fallen down. The
Department of Antiquities has posted a notice in French, Arabic and
English, to the effect that it is dangerous to make the ascent, and that
the government will not be responsible for accidents to tourists who
undertake it. I soon reached the top without any special difficulty,
and with no more danger, so far as I could see, than one experiences
in climbing a steep hill strewn with rocks. I entered another pyramid,
which has a stone in one side of it twenty-five feet long and about five
and a half feet high. Some more tombs were visited, and the delicate
carving on the inner walls was observed. In one instance a harvest scene
was represented, in another the fish in a net could be discerned. The
Serapeum is an underground burial place for the sacred bull, discovered
by Mariette in 1850, after having been buried since about 1400 B.C. In
those times the bull was an object of worship in Egypt, and when one
died, he was carefully embalmed and put in a stone coffin in one of the
chambers of the Serapeum. Some of these coffins are twelve feet high and
fifteen feet long.

Before leaving Cairo, I went into the famous Shepheard's Hotel, where I
received some information about the place from the manager, who looked
like a well-salaried city pastor. The Grand Continental presents a
better appearance on the outside, but I do not believe it equals
Shepheard's on the inside. I was now ready to turn towards home, so I
dropped down to Port Said again, where there is little of interest to
the tourist except the ever-changing panorama of ships in the mouth of
the Suez Canal, and the study of the social condition of the people. My
delay in the city while waiting for a ship gave me a good deal of
time for writing and visiting the missionaries. The Seamen's Rest is
conducted by Mr. Locke, who goes out in the harbor and gathers up
sailors in his steam launch, and carries them back to their vessels
after the service. One night, after speaking in one of these meetings, I
rode out with him. The American Mission conducts a school for boys, and
Feltus Hanna, the native superintendent, kindly showed me around. The
Peniel Mission is conducted by two American ladies. The British and
Foreign Bible Society has a depot here, and keeps three men at work
visiting ships in the harbor all the time. I attended the services
in the chapel of the Church of England one morning. With all these
religious forces the city is very wicked. The street in which my hotel
was located was largely given up to drinking and harlotry.

On the ninth of November the French ship _Congo_ stopped in the harbor,
and I went down late in the evening to embark, but the authorities would
not permit me to go aboard, because I had not been examined by the
medical officer, who felt my pulse and signed a paper that was never
called for, and I went aboard all right. The ship stopped at Alexandria,
and I went around in the city, seeing nothing of equal interest to
Pompey's Pillar, a monument standing ninety-eight feet and nine inches
high. The main shaft is seventy-three feet high and nearly thirty feet
in circumference. We reached Marseilles in the evening of November
sixteenth, after experiencing some weather rough enough to make me
uncomfortable, and several of the others were really seasick. I had
several hours in Paris, which was reached early the next day, and the
United States consulate and the Louvre, the national museum of France,
were visited. From Paris I went to London by way of Dieppe and New
Haven. I left summer weather in Egypt, and found that winter was on hand
in France and England. London was shrouded in a fog. I went back to my
friends at Twynholm, and made three addresses on Lord's day, and spoke
again on Monday night. I sailed from Liverpool for New York on the _SS.
Cedric_ November twenty-third. We were in the harbor at Queenstown,
Ireland, the next day, and came ashore at the New York custom house on
the second of December. The _Cedric_ was then the second largest ship in
the world, being seven hundred feet long and seventy-five feet broad.
She carries a crew of three hundred and forty, and has a capacity for
over three thousand passengers. On this trip she carried one thousand
three hundred and thirty-six, and the following twenty classes of people
were represented: Americans, English, French, German, Danes, Norwegians,
Roumanians, Spanish, Arabs, Japanese, Negroes, Greeks, Russian Jews,
Fins, Swedes, Austrians, Armenians, Poles, Irish, and Scotch. A great
stream of immigrants is continually pouring into the country at this
point. Twelve thousand were reported as arriving in one day, and a
recent paper contains a note to the effect that the number arriving in
June will exceed eighty thousand, as against fifty thousand in June
of last year. "The character of the immigrants seems to grow steadily
worse."

My traveling companion from Port Said to Marseilles and from Liverpool
to New York was Solomon Elia, who had kindly shown me through the
Israelite Alliance School in Jerusalem. I reached Philadelphia the same
day the ship landed in New York, but was detained there with brethren
on account of a case of quinsy. I reached home on the fourteenth of
December, after an absence of five months and three days, in which
time I had seen something of fourteen foreign countries, having a very
enjoyable and profitable trip.


CHAPTER VIII.

GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE.


This section of country has been known by several names. It has been
called the "Land of Canaan," the "Land of Israel," the "Land of
Promise," the "Land of the Hebrews," and the "Holy Land." Canaan was
simply the country between the Mediterranean and the Jordan, extending
from Mt. Lebanon on the north to the Desert of Arabia on the south. Dan
was in the extreme northern part, and Beer-sheba lay in the southern end
of the country, one hundred and thirty-nine miles distant. The average
width of the land is about forty miles, and the total area is in the
neighborhood of six thousand miles. "It is not in size or physical
characteristics proportioned to its moral and historical position as the
theater of the most momentous events in the world's history." Palestine,
the land occupied by the twelve tribes, included the Land of Canaan and
a section of country east of the Jordan one hundred miles long and about
twenty-five miles wide, occupied by Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasseh. The Land of Promise was still more extensive, reaching
from "the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates,"
embracing about sixty thousand square miles, or a little less than
the five New England States. The country is easily divided into four
parallel strips. Beginning at the Mediterranean, we have the Maritime
Plain, the Mountain Region, the Jordan Valley, and the Eastern
Table-Land.

The long stretch of lowland known as the Maritime Plain is divided
into three sections. The portion lying north of Mt. Carmel was called
Phoenicia. It varies in width from half a mile in the north to eight
miles in the south. The ancient cities of Tyre and Sidon belonged to
this section. Directly east of Mt. Carmel is the Plain of Esdraelon,
physically a part of the Maritime Plain. It is an irregular triangle,
whose sides are fourteen, sixteen, and twenty-five miles respectively,
the longest side being next to Mt. Carmel. Here Barak defeated the army
of Sisera under Jabin, and here Josiah, king of Judah, was killed in a
battle with the Egyptians under Pharaoh-necoh.

The Plains of Sharon and Philistia, lying south of Carmel, are usually
regarded as the true Maritime Plain. Sharon extends southward from
Carmel about fifty miles, reaching a little below Jaffa, and has an
average width of eight miles. The Zerka, or Crocodile river, which
traverses this plain, is the largest stream of Palestine west of the
Jordan. There are several other streams crossing the plain from the
mountains to the sea, but they usually cease to flow in the summer
season. Joppa, Lydda, Ramleh, and Caesarea belong to this plain. Herod
the Great built Caesarea, and spent large sums of money on its palace,
temple, theater, and breakwater.

The Plain of Philistia extends thirty or forty miles from the southern
limits of Sharon to Gaza, varying in width from twelve to twenty-five
miles. It is well watered by several streams, some of which flow all the
year. Part of the water from the mountains flows under the ground and
rises in shallow lakes near the coast. Water can easily be found here,
as also in Sharon, by digging wells, and the soil is suitable for the
culture of small grains and for pasture. During a part of the year the
plain is beautifully ornamented with a rich growth of brightly colored
flowers, a characteristic of Palestine in the wet season.

Gaza figures in the history of Samson, who "laid hold of the doors of
the gate of the city, and the two posts, and plucked them up, bar and
all, and put them on his shoulders and carried them up to the top of the
mountain that is before Hebron." Ashkelon, on the coast, is connected
with the history of the Crusades. Ashdod, or Azotus, is where Philip was
found after the baptism of the eunuch. It is said that Psammetichus,
an ancient Egyptian king, captured this place after a siege of
twenty-seven years. Ekron and Gath also belonged to this plain.

The ridge of mountains lying between the coast plain and the Jordan
valley form the backbone of the country. Here, more than elsewhere,
the Israelites made their homes, on account of the hostility of the
inhabitants in the lowlands. This ridge is a continuation of the Lebanon
range, and extends as far south as the desert. In Upper Galilee the
mountains reach an average height of two thousand eight hundred feet
above sea level, but in Lower Galilee they are a thousand feet lower. In
Samaria and Judaea they reach an altitude of two or three thousand feet.
The foot-hills, called the Shefelah, and the Negeb, or "South Country,"
complete the ridge. The highest peak is Jebel Mukhmeel, in Northern
Palestine, rising ten thousand two hundred feet above the sea. Mt.
Tabor, in Galilee, is one thousand eight hundred and forty-three feet
high, while Gerizim and Ebal, down in Samaria, are two thousand eight
hundred and fifty feet and three thousand and seventy-five feet
respectively. The principal mountains in Judaea are Mt. Zion, two
thousand five hundred and fifty feet; Mt. Moriah, about one hundred feet
lower; Mount of Olives, two thousand six hundred and sixty-five feet,
and Mt. Hebron, three thousand and thirty feet. Nazareth, Shechem,
Jerusalem, and Hebron belong to the Mountain Region.

The Jordan Valley is the lowest portion of the earth's surface. No other
depressions are more than three hundred feet below sea level, but the
Jordan is six hundred and eighty-two feet lower than the ocean at the
Sea of Galilee, and nearly thirteen hundred feet lower where it enters
the Dead Sea. This wonderful depression, which includes the Dead Sea,
forty-five miles long, and the valley south of it, one hundred miles in
length, is two hundred and fifty miles long and from four to fourteen
miles in width, and is called the Arabah. The sources of the Jordan
are one hundred and thirty-four miles from the mouth, but the numerous
windings of the stream make it two hundred miles long. The Jordan
is formed by the union of three streams issuing from springs at an
elevation of seventeen hundred feet above the sea. The principal source
is the spring at Dan, one of the largest in the world, as it sends forth
a stream twenty feet wide and from twenty to thirty inches deep. The
spring at Banias, the Caesarea Philippi of the Scriptures, is the
eastern source. The Hashbany flows from a spring forming the western
source. A few miles south of the union of the streams above mentioned
the river widens into the waters of Merom, a small lake nearly on a
level with the Mediterranean. In the next few miles it descends rapidly,
and empties into the Sea of Galilee, called also the Sea of Chinnereth,
Sea of Tiberias, and Lake of Gennesaret. O my lady, it's just allzuwahr,
and what is worse, the Lord of Northumberland, the young Percy, his
son, the Lords of Ross, and Willoughby Beaumond with all their powerful
friends to have him transferred. Buschy. How?In one section it drops sixty feet to the mile, while there is
one stretch of thirteen miles with a descent of only four and a half
feet to the mile. The average is twenty-two feet to the mile. The width
varies from eighty to one hundred and eighty feet, and the depth from
five to twelve feet. Caesarea Philippi, at the head of the valley,
Capernaum, Magdala, Tiberias, and Tarrichaea were cities on the Sea of
Galilee. Jericho and Gilgal were in the plain at the southern extremity,
and Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, upon which the wrath of God was
poured, were somewhere in the region of the Dead Sea.

The Eastern Table-Land has a mountain wall four thousand feet high
facing the river. This table-land, which is mostly fertile, extends
eastward about twenty miles, and terminates in the Arabian Desert, which
is still higher. Here the mountains are higher and steeper than those
west of the Jordan. Mt. Hermon, in the north, is nine thousand two
hundred feet high. South of the Jarmuk River is Mt. Gilead, three
thousand feet high, and Mt. Nebo, lying east of the northern end of the
Dead Sea, reaches an elevation of two thousand six hundred and seventy
feet. I do not know. Gottschalk. He will appear immediately! Count
Otto (gives her the parchment). Take this role here, and it is a letter,
written by imperial majesty. Durchfleuchs and follow me, here is no
place Jungfraun of your range, to entertain; Worms is now in his castle,
to thee! The Emperor (in background). A better sight! Theobald. O
a true angel! Eilfter appearance The Count of blasting occurs. The
former. The Count of jet (affected). Reichsrät in festive Gepräng from
Worms! Count Otto. Be greeted us, Mr. Earl! The Count of jet .--
What brings you to me? Count Otto. An imperial letter this Virgin!
They asked themselves, it will mean you. The Count of jet. O heart,
what you insist? (For Käthchen.) Child, what do you there? Käthchen.
White nit, my high-Herr. Gottschalk. Give, give my heart. The Count of
blasting (read). "The sky, know my heart has asked, the word of the
chosen account. Käthchen That is no longer the Theobalds, Des Weaponsmith,
they assigned to me, The Käthchen trauma is my daughter, and she says
Catherine now of Swabia." ( He durchblättert the other papers.) And
here: "Kund is" - And here: "the castle Schwabach" - (Brief pause.)
Now I would like Hochgebenedeiten before I throw dust in their feet
take And with the Danks glutheißer Träne wash. Käthchen (is). Gottschalk,
help, help me, I am not well! The Count of jet (to the councils). Where
is the emperor? Where Theobald? The Emperor (by both their coats
off).

Here they are! Käthchen (stands up). God in high heaven! Father! (You
hurry up to him and he receives them.) Gottschalk (for themselves).
The Emperor! Oh, so true I am! As he stands! The Count of jet. Well,
you say - Divine! As I call you? - Say, I read right? The Emperor. In
heaven, yes, tatst you! Some cherubim to friends, the pride can be an
emperor with his father! This is the first Käthchen 'itzt before men,
Sies How long before God was, who they sought, the need for me now
worthy to frein. The Count of ray (bends one knee in front of him).
Now, here, on knees I beg: they give me the emperor. Mr. Earl! What do
Him a? The Count of jet. Give, give them to me! What other purpose
ersänn I thy deed? The Emperor. So! He says that? - The death is
only in vain, And I'll put condition. The Count of jet. Say! Speech!
The Emperor (seriously). In your house you take the father to!

The Count of jet. You spot test! The Emperor. What! du weigerst you? The
Count of jet. In hands! In the hands of my heart, I take him!
It was bounded on the north by Samaria, and on the south by the
desert. Although but fifty-five miles long and about thirty miles wide,
it held out against Egypt, Babylonia, and Rome.

The Decapolis, or region of ten Gentile cities, was the northeastern
part of Palestine, extending eastward from the Jordan to the desert.
Perea lay south of the Decapolis, and east of the Jordan and Dead Sea.
The kingdom of Herod the Great, whose reign ended B.C. 4, included
all of this territory. After his death the country was divided into
tetrarchies. Archelaus ruled over Judaea and Samaria; Antipas ("Herod
the tetrarch") had control of Galilee and Perea; Philip had a section of
country east of the Sea of Galilee, and Lysanius ruled over Abilene, a
small section of country between Mt. Hermon and Damascus, not included
in the domain of Herod the Great. Herod Agrippa was made king by
Caligula, and his territory embraced all that his grandfather, Herod the
Great, had ruled over, with Abilene added, making his territory more
extensive than that of any Jewish king after Solomon. He is the "Herod
the king" who killed the Apostle James and imprisoned Peter. After
delivering an oration at Caesarea, he died a horrible death, "because
he gave not God the glory." At his death, in A.D. 44, the country was
divided into two provinces. The northern section was ruled by Herod
Agrippa II. till the Jewish State was dissolved, in A.D. 70. He was the
"King Agrippa" before whom Paul spoke. The southern part of the country,
called the province of Judaea, was ruled by procurators having their
seat at Caesarea. When Jerusalem was destroyed in A.D. 70, the country
was annexed to Syria.

The climate depends more upon local conditions than on the latitude,
which is the same as Southern Georgia and Alabama, Jerusalem being on
the parallel of Savannah. In point of temperature it is about the same
as these localities, but in other respects it differs much. The year has
two seasons--the dry, lasting from the first of April to the first of
November, and the rainy season, lasting the other five months, during
which time there are copious rains. One authority says: "Were the old
cisterns cleaned and mended, and the beautiful tanks and aqueducts
repaired, the ordinary fall of rain would be quite sufficient for the
wants of the inhabitants and for irrigation." The summers are hot, the
winters mild. Snow sometimes falls, but does not last long, and ice is
seldom formed.

Palestine is not a timbered country. The commonest oak is a low, scrubby
bush. The "cedars of Lebanon" have almost disappeared. The carob
tree, white poplar, a thorn bush, and the oleander are found in some
localities. The principal fruit-bearing trees are the fig, olive, date
palm, pomegranate, orange, and lemon. Grapes, apples, apricots, quinces,
and other fruits also grow here. Wheat, barley, and a kind of corn are
raised, also tomatoes, cucumbers, watermelons, and tobacco. The ground
is poorly cultivated with inferior tools, and the grain is tramped out
with cattle, as in the long ago.

Sheep and goats are the most numerous domestic animals, a peculiarity of
the sheep being the extra large "fat tail" (Lev. 3:9), a lump of pure
fat from ten to fifteen inches long and from three to five inches thick.
Cattle, camels, horses, mules, asses, dogs and chickens are kept.


CHAPTER IX.

HISTORIC SKETCH OF PALESTINE.


In the ancient Babylonian city called Ur of the Chaldees lived the
patriarch Terah, who was the father of three sons, Abram, Nahor, and
Haran. Lot was the son of Haran, who died in Ur. Terah, accompanied by
Abram, Sarai, and Lot, started for "the land of Canaan," but they "came
unto Haran and dwelt there," "and Terah died in Haran." "Now Jehovah
said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and
from thy father's house, unto the land that I will show thee: and I will
make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name
great; and be thou a blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee,
and him that curseth thee will I curse: and in thee shall all the
families of the earth be blessed." So Abram, Sarai, and Lot came into
the land of Canaan about 2300 B.C., and dwelt first at Shechem, but "he
removed from thence unto the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched
his tent, having Bethel on the west and Ai on the east." Abram did not
remain here, but journeyed to the south, and when a famine came, he
entered Egypt. Afterwards he returned to the southern part of Canaan,
and still later he returned "unto the place where his tent had been at
the beginning, between Bethel and Ai. * * * And Lot also, who went with
Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents." On account of some discord
between the herdsmen of the two parties, "Abram said unto Lot, Let there
be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my
herdsmen and thy herdsmen; for we are brethren." Accepting his uncle's
proposition, Lot chose the well watered Plain of the Jordan, "journeyed
east," "and moved his tent as far as Sodom," but "Abram moved his tent,
and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron."

Some time after this Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, entered the region
occupied by Lot, and overcame the kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
Zeboiim, and Bela, carrying away the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah,
"and they took Lot * * * and his goods." "And there came one that had
escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew," who "led forth his trained men,
born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued as far as
Dan." As a result of this hasty pursuit, Abram "brought back all the
goods, and also brought back his brother Lot, and his goods, and the
women also, and the people." "The king of Sodom went out to meet" Abram
after his great victory, and offered him the goods for his services,
but the offer was refused. Abram was also met by "Melchizedek, king of
Salem," who "brought forth bread and wine," and "blessed him." Before
his death, the first Hebrew saw the smoke from Sodom and Gomorrah going
up "as the smoke of a furnace," and he also passed through the severe
trial of sacrificing his son Isaac. At the age of one hundred and
seventy-five "the father of the faithful" "gave up the ghost, and died
in a good old age, an old man and full of years, * * * and Isaac and
Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Machpelah," at Hebron, where
Sarah had been laid to rest when the toils and cares of life were over.

From Abraham, through Ishmael, descended the Ishmaelites; through
Midian, the Midianites; and through Isaac, the chosen people, called
Israelites, from Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel. The
interesting story of Joseph tells how his father and brothers, with
their families, were brought into Egypt at the time of a famine, where
they grew from a few families to a great nation, capable of maintaining
an army of more than six hundred thousand men. (King Richard, Queen
and entourage pass.) Fourth Scene. (Northumberland, Willoughby and Ross
remain.) Northumberland. Well, Milord, the Duke of Lancaster is Todt.
Ross. And live again in his son, now Duke of Lancaster is. Willoughby.
The names, not according to income. Northumberland. Beyden later, if
justice is their right. Ross. My heart is full, but there must be
silence, eh freymüthige him a tongue easier kan. Northumberland.
Refers that which you want to talk to the Duke of Hereford, says
kühnlich it out, man, my ears listening pleasure with everything
good against what he said. Ross. All the best, what I can for him thun
is pity with him to have his heritage that he has been so deprived.
Northumberland. Well, Beyme sky, shame it is that such slights, such
injustices against him, a royal prince, and some others of noble blood,
in that the roll approaching landing will endure vile! The king is not
himself, he unköniglich can be guided by flatterers, and what they prey
from addiction or hatred against any of us want to displaced, which is
the king after the sharpness against us, our lives, our children and
heirs to execute. Ross. The municipalities, he runs through excessive
ausgesogen, and thereby lost their hearts, the Edeln because he abgestorbner
Handel fined and lost their hearts. Willoughby. destoweniger Nothing
will allerley names new daily ausgesonnen blackmail, but what for God's
sake ! finally it should be? Northumberland. Wars have all these sums
are not consumed, for he never had no war, but was rather a disgraceful
Compared to what his Vorältern by victories won, he has more in
the peace effort, when they all their wars.

Ross. Wiltschire The Count of the Kingdom of the lease. Willoughby.

The cry was raised: "Make us a king to judge us, like all the nations."
Although this was contrary to the will of God, and amounted to rejecting
the Lord, the Almighty gave directions for making Saul king, when the
rebellious Israelites "refused to hearken to the voice of Samuel," and
said: "Nay, but we will have a king over us." Two important events in
Saul's reign are the battle of Michmash and the war with Amalek. In the
first instance a great host of Philistines were encamped at Michmash,
and Saul, with his army, was at Gilgal. Samuel was to come and offer a
sacrifice, but did not arrive at the appointed time, and the soldiers
deserted, till Saul's force numbered only about six hundred. In his
strait, the king offered the burnt offering himself, and immediately
Samuel appeared, heard his explanation, and declared: "Thou hast done
foolishly; thou hast not kept the commandment of Jehovah thy God. * *