A puzzled and rather serious expression came over the faces of several of
those at breakfast. Suddenly, Dick exclaimed:

"We're losing a good deal of this scenery," and passed out on the deck, to
be followed almost immediately by Pepper and Don. The Boy Scouts had met
with a new sensation.


CHAPTER III.

INTO ROUGH WATERS.


The Boy Scouts of Creston, although expert in nearly all water sports, and
familiar with the gently flowing Hudson, and the quiet inland tides of bay
and Sound, had had no experience as yet of ocean travel. The Alaska trip
was the first test of their sailor-like qualities. In the "Inside passage"
are two stretches of twenty and forty miles, where the full sweep of the
Pacific rollers is felt, and it was while crossing one of these stretches
that the "Queen" took on those erratic motions that sent Dick Pepper and
Don to the open air so quickly and caused not a few of their fellow
travelers considerable discomfort.

Strange as it may seem, none of the other boys were affected by the rough
waters, and they quickly followed their chums to the deck to offer aid and
comfort. It has always been one of the peculiarities of seasickness that,
however important and serious it may seem to the victim, it is prone to
arouse ridicule and humorous suggestions in those who are not subject to
its attacks, and while Rand, Jack and Gerald did what they could for their
unfortunate companions, they could not resist the temptation of an
occasional sly reference to their chums' poor qualities as sailors, that
under any other circumstances would have driven the combative Pepper
frantic.

"Wa' yo tellin' me, hoeny, tha' wa' some great scenery, ovah da'?"
suggested Rand, falling into a broad Southern dialect that he used at
times.

Poor Dick, whose interest centered in the dark blue of the water beneath
him, attempted a glare of indignation with poor results, while Don made no
attempt to express the briefest kind of an "opeenion."

"Faith, and this the celebrated _mal de mer_, is it?" said Gerald, gazing
with mock curious interest at his wilted chums.

"That's brutal, Gerald," exclaimed Jack, "seasickness is bad enough,
without any of your Celtic High School French."

"Begorra, it's about all of it I remember, and maybe I'll never get a
chance to use it again."

"I wish it was catching, like the measles or mumps," gulped Pepper in a
fury, "and I'd give it to you all."

"What, French?" asked his brother.

"Naw, seasickness," yelled Pepper, and bolted for his stateroom to be soon
followed by his two companions in misfortune. A couple of hours in their
bunks with some little attention from their now rather repentant critics,
and the steamer having passed again into still water the patients were
soon restored to normal health, with, if possible, greatly increased
appetities.

Two days later, Jack, who was ever on the alert for something new and had
made friends with several of the officers, thus getting the run of the
ship, was exploring the lower decks, and walked through the quarters of
the third class passengers. These were largely made up of laboring men
going "in" for the summer work. A few miners who had spent all their money
in the Pacific coast cities, and were going back to try their luck again,
and a few of the class whom the police of those and other cities had
simply told to "move on."

The steerage quarters were rather dark, and hearing voices Jack stepped
aside into a narrow passageway between the bunks to let a couple of men
pass. The two turned into the same passageway which concealed Jack, and
the latter recognizing the voice of Dublin sank down into one of the
further berths as the others sat down on a couple of bunks near the
entrance.

"I tell ye it's a better game than the other," said Dublin, "and we're
goin' in for anything we can make."

"I'm not strong for any new game that I don't understand," whined the
voice of Rae, "and we're in bad on this boat, as it stands. We'll find
games enough of our own when we git to Skagway."

"Don't lose yer nerve," said Dublin, "with a good chance to make a stake
in sight. These folks is takin' in a lot of fine machinery, and that Yukon
country is a long ways from where that machinery is made, and every nut
and bolt in it will be worth its weight in coin by the time they've got it
in there. All we got to do is to cop off a piston and a valve or two and
this army man will be willin' to pay several hundred dollars to get 'em
back rather than wait for months to get 'em in from the outside."

"Well," replied Rae, "ye know that stealin' up in this country is bigger
crime than murder, and they don't fool with the courts much."

"Aw, this ain't stealin'," sneered Dublin, "it's only kidnappin' and
holdin' for ransom. I know just whereabouts in the hold this stuff was
stored at Seattle, and that kid, Monkey, of yours, can get at it in ten
minutes if he has the nerve. The stuff is not a hundred feet from us, and
I can show him tonight how to do it."

Rae, who was more or less of a coward, made further protest, but finally
yielded, and the pair slipped out of the passageway and walked away still
discussing the proposed scheme. Jack, glad to be released from the rather
odorous confinement of the bunk into which he had crowded himself, left
the third-class quarters and made for the upper deck.

His newspaper training, of which he had received a considerable amount in
the intervals of his school days in the office of his father's paper in
Creston, included an acute sense of analysis, and he at once arrived at
the opinion that the conspiracy he had heard referred to the freight which
Colonel Snow was taking North, and his first impulse was to lay the matter
before him for such action as he might see fit to take.

Then a foolish ambition to handle the thing alone, born possibly of that
newspaper desire to bring off a "scoop" as an exclusive publication is
called, coupled with the usual boyish longing to become a hero, incited
him to circumvent the plot singlehanded and alone, prevented him from
speaking to either the leader of the party or his chums. In addition, his
journalistic training had instilled deeply one of the first rules of the
profession, accuracy, and to tell the truth he was rather ashamed to go to
Colonel Snow with so little evidence to back up his story, and so he
determined to "keep tabs," as he called it, on Monkey Rae, and knowing he
could handle that young man physically to capture him redhanded and take
him in dramatic fashion before the Captain.

Jack had no doubt that Dublin would carry out any scheme he had in mind at
the first opportunity, and that the attempt to get into the hold would be
made at a hatchway on the same deck with the steerage. The hold at this
part of the ship being filled with machinery and other heavy freight, the
hatch cover was not battened down and most of the time was left partially
off in order to give a circulation of air through that part of the hold
under the steerage.

About ten o'clock that night, Jack slipped away from his companions, and
descended to the engine room deck, where he took up his place behind some
packing cases, and awaited developments. Nearly all the steerage
passengers were in their quarters, for the night was keen and there was
little enjoyment in the open air.

An hour passed and Jack was becoming weary of his vigil, especially in
view of the uncertainty of the coming of his quarry. Then, from the
passageway leading to the steerage a slim figure emerged and by the dim
light of the lamp which illuminated this part of the deck, Jack was just
able to recognize Monkey, who carried in one hand a hatchet, and something
like a policeman's club in the other. Monkey glanced rapidly around the
deck, looking for the watchman who at times visited every portion of the
ship, but the coast was clear.

Crossing the deck the boy slipped easily between the partly raised hatch
cover and the combing, and down the stationary iron ladder into the dark
hold. As he did so a ray of light appeared in the hitherto dark hold.
Glancing around to be sure that neither Dublin nor Rae were standing
sentinel for the young marauder, Jack slipped noiselessly over the deck,
and followed Monkey down the ladder.

A glance showed him that what Monkey carried in his right hand was a
portable electric light and with this he was carefully searching for the
marks upon some packing cases.

Jack tiptoed quietly toward him, intending to take him unawares, failing
in his eagerness to make the capture to allow Monkey to make an attack
upon the case with his hatchet sufficiently to "clinch" his evidence.

Just as Jack put out his hand to grasp the arm that held the hatchet his
foot struck an unseen coil of rope, and he plunged head foremost into
Monkey. The latter pitched forward three or four steps and Jack landed on
his hands and knees, an accident that probably saved him serious injury,
for at the moment the terror-stricken Monkey turned and aimed a furious
blow at whatever had struck him.

At the same time he dropped the electric light, which promptly went out as
the spring was released, and the hold was in darkness. Jack dared not move
for fear of the hatchet, and all he could hear was the loud breathing of
the terrified Monkey, who carefully began to grope for the lost lamp. The
search was vain, and Jack was slowly backing away from the vicinity toward
the ladder, intending to bar Monkey's egress when he heard a movement that
seemed to indicate that Monkey was climbing up the piled-up freight. Then
there were two loud blows with the hatchet on the deck above them which
formed the floor of the steerage quarters.

Scarcely a minute passed before a man with another electric light swarmed
down the ladder, and Jack was in the hands of the powerful Dublin. At the
same moment, Monkey dropped his hatchet and dashed past them to the
ladder, where he hung like his simian namesake, calling shrilly for the
night watchman. Jack made an effort to twist himself loose from the hands
of Dublin, but in vain.

"What are ye doin' down here, ye thief? Tryin' to get at the cargo? Call
the quartermaster there, Monkey."

Realizing the trap into which he had fallen, Jack made no further effort
to release himself until he reached the deck above, when he jerked away
from Dublin and faced the quartermaster and the watchman. There they were
joined by Rae and some of the other steerage passengers.

"Well, well; if it ain't one o' them boy Scouts; them amateur soldiers.
Where d'ye find him, Monkey?"

"I seen him hanging round this deck and when he slipped down in the hold
with a hatchet and a 'lectric light. I followed him. He jumped onto me and
I run back to the ladder and yelled for Dublin, and he come and got him."

"How about this, young feller?" asked the quartermaster. "What were you
doin' down that hold this time o' night. Ain't ye one of Colonel Snow's
party?"

"I am," said Jack, "and this man's story is a straightout falsehood. It
was I who followed this boy down into the hold on information that I
got"--

A burst of laughter from both Rae and Dublin interrupted Jack's story, and
both men swore vehemently that Monkey had been in his berth up to a few
minutes before he had called for Dublin. Jack, recognizing his folly in
not having notified Colonel Snow and the Captain of the conspiracy, and
also the way in which the tables had been turned upon him in his attempt
to "go it alone," said:

"I will explain this thing to the Captain; I think he will understand
it."

"I guess you'd better," said the puzzled quartermaster; "but we can't wake
him up tonight. I'll see ye up to yer stateroom and you can explain in the
morning. And you," he said, sharply, turning to Dublin and Monkey, "you be
on hand with your story. Meantime," to the watchman, "put on that hatch
cover and lock it."

As early the next morning as possible, Jack sought an interview with Col.
Snow and told him the whole story. The latter was greatly interested, but
said plainly that Jack should not have undertaken to handle the matter by
himself.

The Captain was not so easily pacified. He heard both stories and grinned
quietly as both Rae and Dublin tried to make a hero out of Monkey.

"I've told you fellows you're too much in evidence on this boat and I
don't want to hear anything more from you until we get to Skagway." Col.
Snow's intercession arranged matters for Jack but he did not get off any
too easily.

"I haven't any doubt but that your story has a good foundation, but it
would hardly go as evidence in a court of law, and even if the Colonel
here thought it worth while, I don't suppose he cares to be bothered with
a prosecution in courts that are three years behind with their cases. I
shall take occasion to draw the attention of the authorities to this
crowd, when we reach Skagway, however.

"I should like to say, however, that in a case like this, your first duty
was to have informed me, and let me police my own boat. I am the superior
officer here, as you know. I understand you belong to that excellent
organization, the Boy Scouts, and if I am not mistaken, there is one
little line in the ritual devoted to discipline. Good morning." And
despite the rebuke which brought the flush to Jack's face, the captain
smiled, and shook hands pleasantly.

The story could not be kept from the chums, who were rather inclined to
resent Jack's failure to let them take a hand in the capture of Monkey
Rae. They rallied Jack not a little on his grand effort at heroism and
Rand even dug up an old schoolbook quotation about an engineer who had
been hoist with his own petard. The boys took their disappointment out in
various good natured gibes, and mock congratulations to "the Sherlock
Holmes of the good steamer Queen" were a daily occurrence until the
arrival at Ketchikan and new scenes drove the incident from the boys'
memories. It was to be recalled in much more serious form a little later.


CHAPTER IV.

ON ALASKAN SOIL.


The acquaintance between the Boy Scouts and Swiftwater Jim, which had
begun with Rand's rescue of the old Klondiker, ripened before many days of
the voyage had elapsed into something like warm friendship and the miner
became a wellspring of joy to the young men in the wealth of adventure
narrative that fell from his lips and the quiet humor of his views of
life. His removal by Captain Huxley, to the saloon deck on which they were
berthed, gave them constant opportunity for meeting him, and as the
novelty of the scenery and surroundings gradually wore off, they turned
more and more to his companionship and plied him incessantly with
cross-examination as to the peculiarities of the new land which they were
about to enter.

At one time in command of a whaler in Bering Sea waters, his ship had been
one of six crushed in the ice of the Arctic sea, the crews of which had
been forced to winter at Point Barrow, the most northerly point of the
United States, where the government had established a whaling relief
station.

The enormous burden thrown upon this relief station by the influx of so
great a number of dependents coming from the whalers, who had no means of
getting away, threatened starvation for all and only by the greatest good
fortune did word reach the government at Washington, which at once took
steps for their relief. Lieut. Jarvis of the Revenue Marine Service, who
was in the east at the time on furlough, from his ship, a revenue cutter
engaged in patroling Bering Sea to protect the seal fisheries, volunteered
to make the effort to relieve the starving men, although he was leaving
the bedside of a sick wife whom he might never see again. Bering Sea and
the Arctic are frozen over six months at a time, and the relief expedition
must be made over the frozen tundra and uninhabited snow waste, eighteen
hundred miles in extent, from the Seward Peninsula to the "top of the
continent," as Swiftwater Jim termed it.

The problem as to how to transport the food for these men over this great
expanse of country, barren of trails and almost impassible in places, was
solved by Lieutenant Jarvis and his aides. By assembling from the various
reindeer stations which the government had established in the Far North, a
large herd of reindeer which they drove the entire distance to Point
Barrow, they arrived just in time to relieve the hundreds of men who were
on the verge of starvation.

"I tell ye," said Swiftwater Jim, in telling the story to the boys, "I
have never seen anything on earth since that looked so good as them deer.
There we was, a dirty, unsightly mob so near to death that we had lost
about all resemblance to humanity, and not a single human feelin' left for
each other. It was every man for himself and mighty little that he could
do, then.

"That feller Jarvis was the man for the job. That relief expedition was
received very much as I hear explorers are met by the savagest tribes of
Africa, and if it hadn't been for the nerve of those three officers at the
head of it, they would have lost their lives and the provision they had
brought would not have lasted three weeks. But those fellows took command
at once; headed off a mutiny, distributed the provisions daily and for
months ran that gang, made up of the off-scourings of the seas, by reg'lar
army discipline.

"For the months before the ice broke up, and vessels could come after us,
he governed with a mighty stiff hand, and every man who was fed by
government relief, and thay wan't nothin' else, was compelled to live up
to regulations of cleanliness and daily exercise, which is the only thing
that will save a man's health in that deadly Arctic climate where the bill
o' fare is only about one line long, and a healthy body is the only thing
that will save a man's mind from that deadly depression that ends in
insanity. When the ships come finally, that mob of whaler men was cleaner
and healthier than they ever were in their lives before and they had a
mighty lot of love and respect for Jarvis and the officers with him.

"It was about the biggest sacrifice a man ever made, that voluntary trip
of Jarvis, and I believe that Congress, after thinkin' a long time about
it finally acknowledged it by votin' him some kind of a medal. As for me I
hain't been able to look a poor little reindeer in the face since."

With his vessel a splintered derelict in the ice of the Arctic sea,
Swiftwater had taken to mining and had covered a good part of Alaska in
his wanderings.

Col. Snow had noticed with considerable interest the growing intimacy
between his young charges and the miner and had taken occasion himself to
have several talks with the ancient "sourdough" as Swiftwater insisted on
calling himself. The Colonel had found among the army officers returning
to their posts in the North several old friends of his army days and had
taken the opportunity to make some inquiries as to the miner with
evidently satisfactory results. These army officers Col. Snow took
occasion to introduce to the Boy Scouts and the element of courtesy that
is a strong feature of the West Pointers' character showed itself in the
consideration given the boys by these grizzled men, several of whom had
won their spurs during Indian outbreaks in the West and later learned the
stern demands of war in Cuba and the Philippines.

Their journey was enlivened by many a good story of camp and field and
incidentally the officers evinced a strong curiosity in the organization
of the Boy Scouts about which they asked many questions.

The day the "Queen" arrived at Ketchikan, the first port in Alaska, Col.
Snow, after starting the boys on a sightseeing trip through the town, put
in some time in company with Swiftwater Jim in the office of the United
States Commissioner, who is practically a local judge. When all had
returned to the steamer that night, Col. Snow called the boys together in
the big saloon of the vessel for a talk.

"You know," said the army officer, "that after I have seen you and the
machinery disembarked in Skagway, I must leave you to carry out my mission
to Controllers Bay and Valdez, and that I shall not be able to join you in
the Yukon Country until later in the summer. It has been my purpose, of
course, to place you in charge of a competent manager who will really
command the expedition the rest of the way until the machinery is
installed on the timber land that I intend to exploit. Of course you will
be furnished with sufficient expert Indian labor to assist in navigating
the streams over which this freight must be transported, for there are no
roads, and water at this season of the year is the only transportation
available. What do you think of Swiftwater Jim for commander-in-chief,
guide, philosopher and friend to this expedition?"

"B-b-bully," exclaimed Pepper, adopting the vernacular of an
ex-President.

"The very man for the place if I understand what we are to do," commented
Rand.

"Faith, now we will see Alaska; and what we don't see, Swiftwater is the
man to tell us about," cried the enthusiastic Gerald.

"Well, if we can get him," said the cautious Don, "there's nobody we'd
like so well."

"I might as well tell you that it's all arranged," said the Colonel. "He
was the best man I could find for the work I want done, and I took the
first opportunity to arrange with him; but at the same time I am glad that
you are all so well satisfied.

"I must have you understand that Swiftwater will be the leader of the
party and in all things you will be under his direction. I do not think it
will be necessary for me to tell you that the discipline will be perhaps a
little more strict than it has been in the ranks of the patrol at home,
and while it will not be on an unrestricted army basis, there will be some
resemblance and I shall trust to your experience as Scouts to induce in
you cheerful acquiescence."

"It will be something like a campaign then," suggested Dick.

"It will be a good deal like a campaign," smilingly replied the Colonel,
"and while there will be much that is enjoyable and novel, there won't be
much peaches and cream about it. Plunging into a wilderness as you must,
you leave behind all the comforts and most of the sanitary safeguards of
civilization, and it is absolutely necessary for the preservation of your
health that you adopt certain rules of diet and comfort."

"Do we have to diet?" inquired Pepper, doubtfully, whose mind reverted to
certain milk and porridge days, imposed after an orgy of green fruit and
its consequent painful disturbances.

"I didn't use the word in the sense that you mean, Pepper," said Col.
Snow. "There will be plenty to eat and I hope well prepared, but you must
govern yourself as to how you deal with it. Food in most parts of Alaska
is a costly proposition, but I guess we shall have enough to go round
unless the wild life increases your already healthy appetites."

"I hae ma doots," said Don, falling into his Gaelic-accented English, as
he often did when he seemed to be wrestling with a problem, "if yon
appetite of Pepper's can increase much wi'out straining the capacity."

"Look after your own appetite," said Pepper, growing red, "I read once in
a book that four thousand years of oatmeal porridge, three times a day,
had wiped out every appetite and spoiled every stomach in Scotland."

"There, there," admonished Jack, "that'll be about all of that. You
fellows are about even now. The smallest sort of an appetite may prove to
be an inconvenience before we get out of Alaska."

"I want to say, Colonel," said Rand, rising and facing the army officer at
"attention," "that I think I speak for the whole patrol when I promise in
their names the most earnest fidelity and strict attention to rules and
regulations until our mission up here is finished."

"Yes, yes," echoed the Scouts, springing to their feet and saluting the
Colonel, who also rose and returned it with a smile of acknowledgment. At
the same moment Swiftwater Jim entered the saloon.

"Young men, your commander," said Colonel Snow, waving a hand toward the
miner. With one accord the patrol turned toward the grizzled Alaskan and
saluted. Jim turned red with pleasure and waved a knotted hand in
recognition.

"Glad to see ye, boys, but salutin' won't be necessary ev'ry time we meet.
I used ter be satisfied on shipboard if a man jumped about a foot high
every time I spoke real serious, but I guess we can get through this job
without much loud bossin'. I simply want ter sejest that I ain't very good
at argying, so I hope we shan't have much of that."

One by one, the boys shook hands with the miner in token of fealty, and
from that time until the steamer reached Skagway spent several hours a day
with him in what he called his "first class in gettin' on the job." The
most of this work included thorough instruction in the geography of
Southeastern Alaska and Southern Yukon territory, the Colonel's land being
located in the Canadian dominions. Especially was their attention drawn to
numerous waterways as shown on the maps, which must form the highways for
all transportation during the summer time, and knowledge of whose
location, size and tributaries formed a man's best safeguard in this
almost pathless wilderness.

A visit was paid to the hold, this time with the captain's permission, to
enable Swiftwater to estimate the amount of freight that was to be handled
and the best way of distributing it among the transports. The boys went
with him to learn something of their new duties in this connection.

"I move," said Rand, "that that earnest young sleuth, Mr. Jack Blake, be
appointed guide to this expedition to the dark and creepy hold. He knows
where everything is, for he has fallen over it all, I hear."

"He might meet Monkey Rae," said Dick with a mock shudder, "then think of
the carnage."

Dublin and the Raes, fearing Captain Huxley's possible report to the
authorities at Skagway, had "jumped the ship" as the commander of the
"Queen" expressed it at Ketchikan, the first port of call in Alaska, and
Dick's fears were therefore groundless, but Jack, who had learned the
lesson of taking a joke goodnaturedly grinned feebly, and readily dived
into the hatchway and down the ladder. The electric lights had been turned
on, and the hitherto Egyptian darkness of the hold had vanished. They
readily found their consignment, and the miner went over it carefully.

"What ye got here?" he asked, kicking the heavy case before referred to,
which the boys had brought along on their own initiative. "Pianny? Don't
believe we need any pianny, up Yukon way. There's plenty piannys in
Alaska, now, but I remember the first one that was brought in. It's up in
Dawson yet. It was brought in on the first rush in '98. Cost four hundred
dollars in the States and two thousand dollars to haul up from Skagway.
The last time I heard it, it was being mauled by a feenominon, who had a
patent pianny-playin' wooden arm on one side, and it sounded like a day's
work in a boiler factory at one end and a bad smash in a glass pantry at
the other. I heard some o' them educated Cheechakos talkin' about art, but
I didn't care for it much.