Produced by Dean Gilley


THE GLIMPSES OF THE MOON

By Edith Wharton


PART I

I

IT rose for them--their honey-moon--over the waters of a lake so famed
as the scene of romantic raptures that they were rather proud of not
having been afraid to choose it as the setting of their own.

"It required a total lack of humour, or as great a gift for it as ours,
to risk the experiment," Susy Lansing opined, as they hung over the
inevitable marble balustrade and watched their tutelary orb roll its
magic carpet across the waters to their feet.

"Yes--or the loan of Strefford's villa," her husband emended, glancing
upward through the branches at a long low patch of paleness to which the
moonlight was beginning to give the form of a white house-front.

"Oh, come when we'd five to choose from. At least if you count the
Chicago flat."

"So we had--you wonder!" He laid his hand on hers, and his touch renewed
the sense of marvelling exultation which the deliberate survey of their
adventure always roused in her.... It was characteristic that she merely
added, in her steady laughing tone: "Or, not counting the flat--for
I hate to brag--just consider the others: Violet Melrose's place at
Versailles, your aunt's villa at Monte Carlo--and a moor!"

She was conscious of throwing in the moor tentatively, and yet with
a somewhat exaggerated emphasis, as if to make sure that he shouldn't
accuse her of slurring it over. But he seemed to have no desire to
do so. "Poor old Fred!" he merely remarked; and she breathed out
carelessly: "Oh, well--"

His hand still lay on hers, and for a long interval, while they stood
silent in the enveloping loveliness of the night, she was aware only of
the warm current running from palm to palm, as the moonlight below them
drew its line of magic from shore to shore.

Nick Lansing spoke at last. "Versailles in May would have been
impossible: all our Paris crowd would have run us down within
twenty-four hours. And Monte Carlo is ruled out because it's exactly
the kind of place everybody expected us to go. So--with all respect to
you--it wasn't much of a mental strain to decide on Como."

His wife instantly challenged this belittling of her capacity. "It took
a good deal of argument to convince you that we could face the ridicule
of Como!"

"Well, I should have preferred something in a lower key; at least I
thought I should till we got here. Now I see that this place is idiotic
unless one is perfectly happy; and that then it's-as good as any other."

She sighed out a blissful assent. "And I must say that Streffy has done
things to a turn. Even the cigars--who do you suppose gave him those
cigars?" She added thoughtfully: "You'll miss them when we have to go."

"Oh, I say, don't let's talk to-night about going. Aren't we outside of
time and space...? Smell that guinea-a-bottle stuff over there: what is
it? Stephanotis?"

"Y-yes.... I suppose so. Or gardenias.... Oh, the fire-flies! Look...
there, against that splash of moonlight on the water. Apples of silver
in a net-work of gold...." They leaned together, one flesh from shoulder
to finger-tips, their eyes held by the snared glitter of the ripples.

"I could bear," Lansing remarked, "even a nightingale at this
moment...."

A faint gurgle shook the magnolias behind them, and a long liquid
whisper answered it from the thicket of laurel above their heads.

"It's a little late in the year for them: they're ending just as we
begin."

Susy laughed. "I hope when our turn comes we shall say good-bye to each
other as sweetly."

It was in her husband's mind to answer: "They're not saying good-bye,
but only settling down to family cares." But as this did not happen to
be in his plan, or in Susy's, he merely echoed her laugh and pressed her
closer.

The spring night drew them into its deepening embrace. The ripples of
the lake had gradually widened and faded into a silken smoothness, and
high above the mountains the moon was turning from gold to white in
a sky powdered with vanishing stars. Across the lake the lights of a
little town went out, one after another, and the distant shore became a
floating blackness. A breeze that rose and sank brushed their faces with
the scents of the garden; once it blew out over the water a great white
moth like a drifting magnolia petal. The nightingales had paused and the
trickle of the fountain behind the house grew suddenly insistent.

When Susy spoke it was in a voice languid with visions. "I have been
thinking," she said, "that we ought to be able to make it last at least
a year longer."

The last- mentioned guilty of hugging attorneys,. Bengal Club
accordingly blackballed similar occurrences, unless the of Longueville..
They This, and some other Commons has undergone a change since
1833, any lawyer, have made the opposition here thoroughly ridiculous
and contemptible will probably send a petition home; but challenged
Mr.

Longueville Clarke. Mr. Longueville Clarke refused to fight,
on the ground then that his opponent had been they have no chance
there

.
He stretched
himself in a long willow chair, and she curled up on a heap of
boat-cushions and leaned her head against his knee. Just above her,
when she lifted her lids, she saw bits of moon-flooded sky incrusted
like silver in a sharp black patterning of plane-boughs. All about them
breathed of peace and beauty and stability, and her happiness was so
acute that it was almost a relief to remember the stormy background of
bills and borrowing against which its frail structure had been reared.
"People with a balance can't be as happy as all this," Susy mused,
letting the moonlight filter through her lazy lashes.

People with a balance had always been Susy Branch's bugbear; they were
still, and more dangerously, to be Susy Lansing's. She detested them,
detested them doubly, as the natural enemies of mankind and as the
people one always had to put one's self out for. The greater part of her
life having been passed among them, she knew nearly all that there was
to know about them, and judged them with the contemptuous lucidity
of nearly twenty years of dependence. But at the present moment her
animosity was diminished not only by the softening effect of love but
by the fact that she had got out of those very people more--yes, ever so
much more--than she and Nick, in their hours of most reckless planning,
had ever dared to hope for.

"After all, we owe them this!" she mused.

Her husband, lost in the drowsy beatitude of the hour, had not repeated
his question; but she was still on the trail of the thought he had
started. A year--yes, she was sure now that with a little management
they could have a whole year of it! "It" was their marriage, their being
together, and away from bores and bothers, in a comradeship of which
both of them had long ago guessed the immediate pleasure, but she at
least had never imagined the deeper harmony.

It was at one of their earliest meetings--at one of the heterogeneous
dinners that the Fred Gillows tried to think "literary"--that the young
man who chanced to sit next to her, and of whom it was vaguely rumoured
that he had "written," had presented himself to her imagination as the
sort of luxury to which Susy Branch, heiress, might conceivably have
treated herself as a crowning folly. Susy Branch, pauper, was fond of
picturing how this fancied double would employ her millions: it was one
of her chief grievances against her rich friends that they disposed of
theirs so unimaginatively.

"I'd rather have a husband like that than a steam-yacht!" she had
thought at the end of her talk with the young man who had written, and
as to whom it had at once been clear to her that nothing his pen had
produced, or might hereafter set down, would put him in a position to
offer his wife anything more costly than a row-boat.

"His wife! As if he could ever have one! For he's not the kind to marry
for a yacht either." In spite of her past, Susy had preserved enough
inner independence to detect the latent signs of it in others, and also
to ascribe it impulsively to those of the opposite sex who happened to
interest her. She had a natural contempt for people who gloried in what
they need only have endured. She herself meant eventually to marry,
because one couldn't forever hang on to rich people; but she was going
to wait till she found some one who combined the maximum of wealth with
at least a minimum of companionableness.

She had at once perceived young Lansing's case to be exactly the
opposite: he was as poor as he could be, and as companionable as it was
possible to imagine. She therefore decided to see as much of him as her
hurried and entangled life permitted; and this, thanks to a series of
adroit adjustments, turned out to be a good deal. They met frequently
all the rest of that winter; so frequently that Mrs. Fred Gillow one
day abruptly and sharply gave Susy to understand that she was "making
herself ridiculous."

"Ah--" said Susy with a long breath, looking her friend and patroness
straight in the painted eyes.

"Yes," cried Ursula Gillow in a sob, "before you interfered Nick liked
me awfully... and, of course, I don't want to reproach you... but when I
think...."

Susy made no answer. How could she, when she thought? The dress she had
on had been given her by Ursula; Ursula's motor had carried her to the
feast from which they were both returning. She counted on spending the
following August with the Gillows at Newport... and the only alternative
was to go to California with the Bockheimers, whom she had hitherto
refused even to dine with.

"Of course, what you fancy is perfect nonsense, Ursula; and as to my
interfering--" Susy hesitated, and then murmured: "But if it will make
you any happier I'll arrange to see him less often...." She sounded the
lowest depths of subservience in returning Ursula's tearful kiss....

Susy Branch had a masculine respect for her word; and the next day she
put on her most becoming hat and sought out young Mr. Lansing in his
lodgings. She was determined to keep her promise to Ursula; but she
meant to look her best when she did it.

She knew at what time the young man was likely to be found, for he was
doing a dreary job on a popular encyclopaedia (V to X), and had told her
what hours were dedicated to the hateful task. "Oh, if only it were a
novel!" she thought as she mounted his dingy stairs; but immediately
reflected that, if it were the kind that she could bear to read, it
probably wouldn't bring him in much more than his encyclopaedia. Miss
Branch had her standards in literature....

The apartment to which Mr. Lansing admitted her was a good deal cleaner,
but hardly less dingy, than his staircase. Susy, knowing him to be
addicted to Oriental archaeology, had pictured him in a bare room
adorned by a single Chinese bronze of flawless shape, or by some
precious fragment of Asiatic pottery. But such redeeming features were
conspicuously absent, and no attempt had been made to disguise the
decent indigence of the bed-sitting-room.

Lansing welcomed his visitor with every sign of pleasure, and with
apparent indifference as to what she thought of his furniture. He seemed
to be conscious only of his luck in seeing her on a day when they had
not expected to meet. This made Susy all the sorrier to execute her
promise, and the gladder that she had put on her prettiest hat; and for
a moment or two she looked at him in silence from under its conniving
brim.

