This eBook was produced by Tapio Riikonen
and David Widger, widger@cecomet.net


BOOK VIII.

IN WHICH THE LAST LINK BETWEEN KING-MAKER AND KING SNAPS ASUNDER.


CHAPTER I.

THE LADY ANNE VISITS THE COURT.

It was some weeks after the date of the events last recorded.  The
storm that hung over the destinies of King Edward was dispersed for
the hour, though the scattered clouds still darkened the horizon: the
Earl of Warwick had defeated the Lancastrians on the frontier, [Croyl.
552] and their leader had perished on the scaffold; but Edward's
mighty sword had not shone in the battle.  Chained by an attraction
yet more powerful than slaughter, he had lingered at Middleham, while
Warwick led his army to York; and when the earl arrived at the capital
of Edward's ancestral duchy, he found that the able and active
Hastings--having heard, even before he reached the Duke of
Gloucester's camp, of Edward's apparent seizure by the earl and the
march to Middleham--had deemed it best to halt at York, and to summon
in all haste a council of such of the knights and barons as either
love to the king or envy to Warwick could collect.  The report was
general that Edward was retained against his will at Middleham; and
this rumour Hastings gravely demanded Warwick, on the arrival of the
latter at York, to disprove.  The earl, to clear himself from a
suspicion that impeded all his military movements, despatched Lord
Montagu to Middleham, who returned not only with the king, but the
countess and her daughters, whom Edward, under pretence of proving the
complete amity that existed between Warwick and himself, carried in
his train.  The king's appearance at York reconciled all differences;
but he suffered Warwick to march alone against the enemy, and not till
after the decisive victory, which left his reign for a while without
an open foe, did he return to London.

Thither the earl, by the advice of his friends, also repaired, and in
a council of peers, summoned for the purpose, deigned to refute the
rumours still commonly circulated by his foes, and not disbelieved by
the vulgar, whether of his connivance at the popular rising or his
forcible detention of the king at Middleham.  To this, agreeably to
the counsel of the archbishop, succeeded a solemn interview of the
heads of the Houses of York and Warwick, in which the once fair Rose
of Raby (the king's mother) acted as mediator and arbiter.  The earl's
word to the commons at Olney was ratified.  Edward consented to the
temporary retirement of the Woodvilles, though the gallant Anthony yet
delayed his pilgrimage to Compostella.  The vanity of Clarence was
contented by the government of Ireland, but, under various pretences,
Edward deferred his brother's departure to that important post. A
general amnesty was proclaimed, a parliament summoned for the redress
of popular grievances, and the betrothal of the king's daughter to
Montagu's heir was proclaimed: the latter received the title of Duke
of Bedford; and the whole land rejoiced in the recovered peace of the
realm, the retirement of the Woodvilles, and the reconciliation of the
young king with his all-beloved subject.  Never had the power of the
Neviles seemed so secure; never did the throne of Edward appear so
stable.

It was at this time that the king prevailed upon the earl and his
countess to permit the Lady Anne to accompany the Duchess of Clarence
in a visit to the palace of the Tower.  The queen had submitted so
graciously to the humiliation of her family, that even the haughty
Warwick was touched and softened; and the visit of his daughter at
such a time became a homage to Elizabeth which it suited his chivalry
to render.

The public saw in this visit, which was made with great state and
ceremony, the probability of a new and popular alliance.  The
archbishop had suffered the rumour of Gloucester's attachment to the
Lady Anne to get abroad, and the young prince's return from the North
was anxiously expected by the gossips of the day.

It was on this occasion that Warwick showed his gratitude for
Marmaduke Nevile's devotion.  "My dear and gallant kinsman," he said,
"I forget not that when thou didst leave the king and the court for
the discredited minister and his gloomy hall,--I forget not that thou
didst tell me of love to some fair maiden, which had not prospered
according to thy merits.  At least it shall not be from lack of lands,
or of the gold spur, which allows the wearer to ride by the side of
king or kaisar, that thou canst not choose thy bride as the heart bids
thee.  I pray thee, sweet cousin, to attend my child Anne to the
court, where the king will show thee no ungracious countenance; but it
is just to recompense thee for the loss of thy post in his highness's
chamber.  I hold the king's commission to make knights of such as can
pay the fee, and thy lands shall suffice for the dignity.  Kneel down
and rise up, Sir Marmaduke Nevile, lord of the Manor of Borrodaile,
with its woodlands and its farms, and may God and our Lady render thee
puissant in battle and prosperous in love!"

Accordingly, in his new rank, and entitled to ruffle it with the
bravest, Sir Marmaduke Nevile accompanied the earl and the Lady Anne
to the palace of the Tower.

As Warwick, leaving his daughter amidst the brilliant circle that
surrounded Elizabeth, turned to address the king, he said, with simple
and unaffected nobleness,--

"Ah, my liege, if you needed a hostage of my faith, think that my
heart is here, for verily its best blood were less dear to me than
that slight girl,--the likeness of her mother, when her lips first
felt the touch of mine!"

Edward's bold brow fell, and he blushed as he answered, "My Elizabeth
will hold her as a sister.  But, cousin, part you not now for the
North?"

"By your leave I go first to Warwick."

"Ah, you do not wish to approve of my seeming preparations against
France?"

"Nay, your Highness is not in earnest. I promised the commons that you
would need no supplies for so thriftless a war."

"Thou knowest I mean to fulfil all thy pledges.  But the country so
swarms with disbanded soldiers, that it is politic to hold out to them
a hope of service, and so let the clouds gradually pass away."

"Alack, my liege," said Warwick, gravely, "I suppose that a crown
teaches the brow to scheme; but hearty peace or open war seems ever
the best to me."

Edward smiled, and turned aside.  Warwick glanced at his daughter,
whom Elizabeth flatteringly caressed, stifled a sigh, and the air
seemed lighter to the insects of the court as his proud crest bowed
beneath the doorway, and, with the pomp of his long retinue, he
vanished from the scene.

"And choose, fair Anne," said the queen, "choose from my ladies whom
you will have for your special train.  We would not that your
attendance should be less than royal."

The gentle Anne in vain sought to excuse herself from an honour at
once arrogant and invidious, though too innocent to perceive the
cunning so characteristic of the queen; for, under the guise of a
special compliment, Anne had received the royal request to have her
female attendants chosen from the court, and Elizabeth now desired to
force upon her a selection which could not fail to mortify those not
preferred.  But glancing timidly round the circle, the noble damsel's
eye rested on one fair face, and in that face there was so much that
awoke her own interest, and stirred up a fond and sad remembrance,
that she passed involuntarily to the stranger's side, and artlessly
took her hand.  The high-born maidens, grouped around, glanced at each
other with a sneer, and slunk back.  Even the queen looked surprised;
but recovering herself, inclined her head graciously, and said, "Do we
read your meaning aright, Lady Anne, and would you this gentlewoman,
Mistress Sibyll Warner, as one of your chamber?"

"Sibyll, ah, I knew that my memory failed me not," murmured Anne; and,
after bowing assent to the queen, she said, "Do you not also recall,
fair demoiselle, our meeting, when children long years ago?"

"Well, noble dame," [The title of dame was at that time applied
indiscriminately to ladies whether married or single, if of high
birth.] answered Sibyll.  And as Anne turned, with her air of modest
gentleness, yet of lofty birth and breeding, to explain to the queen
that she had met Sibyll in earlier years, the king approached to
monopolize his guest's voice and ear.  It seemed natural to all
present that Edward should devote peculiar attention to the daughter
of Warwick and the sister of the Duchess of Clarence; and even
Elizabeth suspected no guiltier gallantry in the subdued voice, the
caressing manner, which her handsome lord adopted throughout that day,
even to the close of the nightly revel, towards a demoiselle too high
(it might well appear) for licentious homage.

But Anne herself, though too guileless to suspect the nature of
Edward's courtesy, yet shrank from it in vague terror.  All his
beauty, all his fascination, could not root from her mind the
remembrance of the exiled prince; nay, the brilliancy of his qualities
made her the more averse to him.  It darkened the prospects of Edward
of Lancaster that Edward of York should wear so gracious and so
popular a form.  She hailed with delight the hour when she was
conducted to her chamber, and dismissing gently the pompous retinue
allotted to her, found herself alone with the young maiden whom she
had elected to her special service.

"And you remember me, too, fair Sibyll?" said Anne, with her dulcet
and endearing voice.

"Truly, who would not? for as you, then, noble lady, glided apart from
the other children, hand in hand with the young prince, in whom all
dreamed to see their future king, I heard the universal murmur of--a
false prophecy!"

"Ah! and of what?" asked Anne.

"That in the hand the prince clasped with his small rosy fingers--the
hand of great Warwick's daughter--lay the best defence of his father's
throne."

Anne's breast heaved, and her small foot began to mark strange
characters on the floor.

"So," she said musingly, "so even here, amidst a new court, you forget
not Prince Edward of Lancaster.  Oh, we shall find hours to talk of
the past days.  But how, if your childhood was spent in Margaret's
court, does your youth find a welcome in Elizabeth's?"

"Avarice and power had need of my father's science.  He is a scholar
of good birth, but fallen fortunes, even now, and ever while night
lasts, he is at work.  I belonged to the train of her grace of
Bedford; but when the duchess quitted the court, and the king retained
my father in his own royal service, her highness the queen was pleased
to receive me among her maidens.  Happy that my father's home is
mine!--who else could tend him?"

"Thou art his only child?--he must--love thee dearly?"

"Yet not as I love him; he lives in a life apart from all else that
live.  But after all, peradventure it is sweeter to love than to be
loved."

Anne, whose nature was singularly tender and woman-like, was greatly
affected by this answer.  She drew nearer to Sibyll; she twined her
arm round her slight form, and kissed her forehead.

"Shall I love thee, Sibyll?" she said, with a girl's candid
simplicity, "and wilt thou love me?"

"Ah, lady! there are so many to love thee,--father, mother, sister,--
all the world; the very sun shines more kindly upon the great!"

"Nay!" said Anne, with that jealousy of a claim to suffering to which
the gentler natures are prone, "I may have sorrows from which thou art
free.  I confess to thee, Sibyll, that something I know not how to
explain draws me strangely towards thy sweet face.  Marriage has lost
me my only sister, for since Isabel is wed she is changed to me--would
that her place were supplied by thee!  Shall I steal thee from the
queen when I depart?  Ah, my mother--at least thou wilt love her! for
verily, to love my mother you have but to breathe the same air.  Kiss
me, Sibyll."

Kindness, of late, had been strange to Sibyll, especially from her own
sex, one of her own age; it came like morning upon the folded blossom.
She threw her arms round the new friend that seemed sent to her from
heaven; she kissed Anne's face and hands with grateful tears.

"Ah!" she said at last, when she could command a voice still broken
with emotion--"if I could ever serve--ever repay thee--though those
gracious words were the last thy lips should ever deign to address to
me!"

Anne was delighted; she had never yet found one to protect; she had
never yet found one in whom thoroughly to confide.  Gentle as her
mother was, the distinction between child and parent was, even in the
fond family she belonged to, so great in that day, that she could
never have betrayed to the countess the wild weakness of her young
heart.

The wish to communicate, to reveal, is so natural to extreme youth,
and in Anne that disposition was so increased by a nature at once open
and inclined to lean on others, that she had, as we have seen, sought
a confidante in Isabel; but with her, even at the first, she found but
the half-contemptuous pity of a strong and hard mind; and lately,
since Edward's visit to Middleham, the Duchess of Clarence had been so
rapt in her own imperious egotism and discontented ambition, that the
timid Anne had not even dared to touch, with her, upon those secrets
which it flushed her own bashful cheek to recall.  And this visit to
the court, this new, unfamiliar scene, this estrangement from all the
old accustomed affections, had produced in her that sense of
loneliness which is so irksome, till grave experience of real life
accustoms us to the common lot.  So with the exaggerated and somewhat
morbid sensibility that belonged to her, she turned at once, and by
impulse, to this sudden, yet graceful friendship.  Here was one of her
own age, one who had known sorrow, one whose voice and eyes charmed
her, one who would not chide even folly, one, above all, who had seen
her beloved prince, one associated with her fondest memories, one who
might have a thousand tales to tell of the day when the outlaw boy was
a monarch's heir.  In the childishness of her soft years, she almost
wept at another channel for so much natural tenderness.  It was half
the woman gaining a woman-friend, half the child clinging to a new
playmate.

"Ah, Sibyll," she whispered, "do not leave me to-night; this strange
place daunts me, and the figures on the arras seem so tall and
spectre-like, and they say the old tower is haunted.  Stay, dear
Sibyll!"

And Sibyll stayed.


CHAPTER II.

THE SLEEPING INNOCENCE--THE WAKEFUL CRIME.

While these charming girls thus innocently conferred; while, Anne's
sweet voice running on in her artless fancies, they helped each other
to undress; while hand in hand they knelt in prayer by the crucifix in
the dim recess; while timidly they extinguished the light, and stole
to rest; while, conversing in whispers, growing gradually more faint
and low, they sank into guileless sleep,--the unholy king paced his
solitary chamber, parched with the fever of the sudden and frantic
passion that swept away from a heart in which every impulse was a
giant all the memories of honour, gratitude, and law.

The mechanism of this strong man's nature was that almost unknown to
the modern time; it belonged to those earlier days which furnish to
Greece the terrible legends Ovid has clothed in gloomy fire, which a
similar civilization produced no less in the Middle Ages, whether of
Italy or the North,--that period when crime took a grandeur from its
excess; when power was so great and absolute that its girth burst the
ligaments of conscience; when a despot was but the incarnation of
WILL; when honour was indeed a religion, but its faith was valour, and
it wrote its decalogue with the point of a fearless sword.

The youth of Edward IV. was as the youth of an ancient Titan, of an
Italian Borgia; through its veins the hasty blood rolled as a
devouring flame.  This impetuous and fiery temperament was rendered
yet more fearful by the indulgence of every intemperance; it fed on
wine and lust; its very virtues strengthened its vices,--its courage
stifled every whisper of prudence; its intellect, uninured to all
discipline, taught it to disdain every obstacle to its desires.
Edward could, indeed, as we have seen, be false and crafty, a
temporizer, a dissimulator; but it was only as the tiger creeps,--the
better to spring, undetected, on its prey.  If detected, the cunning
ceased, the daring rose, and the mighty savage had fronted ten
thousand foes, secure in its fangs and talons, its bold heart and its
deadly spring.  Hence, with all Edward's abilities, the astonishing
levities and indiscretions of his younger years.  It almost seemed, as
we have seen him play fast and loose with the might of Warwick, and
with that power, whether of barons or of people, which any other
prince of half his talents would have trembled to arouse against an
unrooted throne,--it almost seemed as if he loved to provoke a danger
for the pleasure it gave the brain to baffle or the hand to crush it.
His whole nature coveting excitement, nothing was left to the
beautiful, the luxurious Edward, already wearied with pomp and
pleasure, but what was unholy and forbidden.  In his court were a
hundred ladies, perhaps not less fair than Anne, at least of a beauty
more commanding the common homage, but these he had only to smile on
with ease to win.  No awful danger, no inexpiable guilt, attended
those vulgar frailties, and therefore they ceased to tempt.  But here
the virgin guest, the daughter of his mightiest subject, the beloved
treasure of the man whose hand had built a throne, whose word had
dispersed an army--here, the more the reason warned, the conscience
started, the more the hell-born passion was aroused.

Like men of his peculiar constitution, Edward was wholly incapable of
pure and steady love.  His affection for his queen the most resembled
that diviner affection; but when analyzed, it was composed of feelings
widely distinct.  From a sudden passion, not otherwise to be
gratified, he had made the rashest sacrifices for an unequal marriage.
His vanity, and something of original magnanimity, despite his vices,
urged him to protect what he himself had raised,--to secure the honour
of the subject who was honoured by the king.  In common with most rude
and powerful natures, he was strongly alive to the affections of a
father, and the faces of his children helped to maintain the influence
of the mother.  But in all this, we need scarcely say that that true
love, which is at once a passion and a devotion, existed not.  Love
with him cared not for the person loved, but solely for its own
gratification; it was desire for possession,--nothing more.  But that
desire was the will of a king who never knew fear or scruple; and,
pampered by eternal indulgence, it was to the feeble lusts of common
men what the storm is to the west wind.  Yet still, as in the solitude
of night he paced his chamber, the shadow of the great crime advancing
upon his soul appalled even that dauntless conscience.  He gasped for
breath; his cheeks flushed crimson, and the next moment grew deadly
pale.  He heard the loud beating of his heart.  He stopped still.  He
flung himself on a seat, and hid his face with his hands; then
starting up, he exclaimed, "No, no!  I cannot shut out that sweet
face, those blue eyes from my gaze.  They haunt me to my destruction
and her own.  Yet why say destruction?  If she love me, who shall know
the deed?  If she love me not, will she dare to reveal her shame?
Shame!--nay, a king's embrace never dishonours.  A king's bastard is a
House's pride.  All is still,--the very moon vanishes from heaven.
The noiseless rushes in the gallery give no echo to the footstep.  Fie
on me!  Can a Plantagenet know fear?"  He allowed himself no further
time to pause; he opened the door gently and stole along the gallery.
He knew well the chamber, for it was appointed by his command, and,
besides the usual door from the corridor, a small closet conducted to
a secret panel behind the arras.  It was the apartment occupied, in
her visits to the court, by the queen's rival, the Lady Elizabeth
Lucy.  He passed into the closet; he lifted the arras; he stood in
that chamber, which gratitude and chivalry and hospitable faith should
have made sacred as a shrine.  And suddenly, as he entered, the moon,
before hid beneath a melancholy cloud, broke forth in awful splendour,
and her light rushed through the casement opposite his eye, and bathed
the room with the beams of a ghostlier day.

The abruptness of the solemn and mournful glory scared him as the
rebuking face of a living thing; a presence as if not of earth seemed
to interpose between the victim and the guilt.  It was, however, but
for a moment that his step halted.  He advanced: he drew aside the
folds of the curtain heavy with tissue of gold, and the sleeping face
of Anne lay hushed before him.  It looked pale in the moonlight, but
ineffably serene, and the smile on its lips seemed still sweeter than
that which it wore awake.  So fixed was his gaze, so ardently did his
whole heart and being feed through his eyes upon that exquisite
picture of innocence and youth, that he did not see for some moments
that the sleeper was not alone.  Suddenly an exclamation rose to his
lips.  He clenched his hand in jealous agony; he approached; he bent
over; he heard the regular breathing which the dreams of guilt never
know; and then, when he saw that pure and interlaced embrace,--the
serene yet somewhat melancholy face of Sibyll, which seemed hueless as
marble in the moonlight, bending partially over that of Anne, as if
even in sleep watchful; both charming forms so linked and woven that
the two seemed as one life, the very breath in each rising and ebbing
with the other; the dark ringlets of Sibyll mingling with the auburn
gold of Anne's luxuriant hair, and the darkness and the gold, tress
within tress, falling impartially over either neck, that gleamed like
ivory beneath that common veil,--when he saw this twofold loveliness,
the sentiment, the conviction of that mysterious defence which exists
in purity, thrilled like ice through his burning veins.  In all his
might of monarch and of man, he felt the awe of that unlooked-for
protection,--maidenhood sheltering maidenhood, innocence guarding
innocence.  The double virtue appalled and baffled him; and that
slight arm which encircled the neck he would have perilled his realm
to clasp, shielded his victim more effectually than the bucklers of
all the warriors that ever gathered round the banner of the lofty
Warwick.  Night and the occasion befriended him; but in vain.  While
Sibyll was there, Anne was saved.  He ground his teeth, and muttered
to himself.  At that moment Anne turned restlessly.  This movement
disturbed the light sleep of her companion.  She spoke half inaudibly,
but the sound was as the hoot of shame in the ear of the guilty king.
He let fall the curtain, and was gone.  And if one who lived
afterwards to hear and to credit the murderous doom which, unless
history lies, closed the male line of Edward, had beheld the king
stealing, felon-like, from the chamber,--his step reeling to and fro
the gallery floors, his face distorted by stormy passion, his lips
white and murmuring, his beauty and his glory dimmed and humbled,--the
spectator might have half believed that while Edward gazed upon those
harmless sleepers, A VISION OF THE TRAGEDY TO COME had stricken down
his thought of guilt, and filled up its place with horror,--a vision
of a sleep as pure, of two forms wrapped in an embrace as fond, of
intruders meditating a crime scarce fouler than his own; and the sins
of the father starting into grim corporeal shapes, to become the
deathsmen of the sons!


CHAPTER III.

NEW DANGERS TO THE HOUSE OF YORK--AND THE KING'S HEART ALLIES ITSELF
WITH REBELLION AGAINST THE KING'S THRONE.

Oh, beautiful is the love of youth to youth, and touching the
tenderness of womanhood to woman; and fair in the eyes of the happy
sun is the waking of holy sleep, and the virgin kiss upon virgin lips
smiling and murmuring the sweet "Good-morrow!"

Anne was the first to wake; and as the bright winter morn, robust with
frosty sunbeams shone cheerily upon Sibyll's face, she was struck with
a beauty she had not sufficiently observed the day before; for in the
sleep of the young the traces of thought and care vanish, the aching
heart is lulled in the body's rest, the hard lines relax into flexile
ease, a softer, warmer bloom steals over the cheek, and, relieved from
the stiff restraints of dress, the rounded limbs repose in a more
alluring grace!  Youth seems younger in its slumber, and beauty more
beautiful, and purity more pure.  Long and dark, the fringe of the
eyelash rested upon the white lids, and the freshness of the parting
pouted lips invited the sister kiss that wakened up the sleeper.

"Ah, lady," said Sibyll, parting her tresses from her dark blue eyes,
"you are here, you are safe!--blessed be the saints and our Lady! for
I had a dream in the night that startled and appalled me."

"And my dreams were all blithe and golden," said Anne.  "What was
thine?"

"Methought you were asleep and in this chamber, and I not by your
side, but watching you at a little distance; and lo! a horrible
serpent glided from yon recess, and, crawling to your pillow, I heard
its hiss, and strove to come to your aid, but in vain; a spell seemed
to chain my limbs.  At last I found voice, I cried aloud, I woke; and
mock me not, but I surely heard a parting footstep, and the low
grating of some sliding door."

"It was the dream's influence, enduring beyond the dream.  I have
often felt it so,--nay, even last night; for I, too, dreamed of
another, dreamed that I stood by the altar with one far away, and when
I woke--for I woke also--it was long before I could believe it was thy
hand I held, and thine arm that embraced me."

The young friends rose, and their toilet was scarcely ended, when
again appeared in the chamber all the stateliness of retinue allotted
to the Lady Anne.  Sibyll turned to depart.  "And whither go you?"
asked Anne.

"To visit my father; it is my first task on rising," returned Sibyll,
in a whisper.

"You must let me visit him, too, at a later hour.  Find me here an
hour before noon, Sibyll."

The early morning was passed by Anne in the queen's company.  The
refection, the embroidery frame, the closheys, filled up the hours.
The Duchess of Clarence had left the palace with her lord to visit the
king's mother at Baynard's Castle; and Anne's timid spirits were
saddened by the strangeness of the faces round her, and Elizabeth's
habitual silence.  There was something in the weak and ill-fated queen
that ever failed to conciliate friends.  Though perpetually striving
to form and create a party, she never succeeded in gaining confidence
or respect.  And no one raised so high was ever left so friendless as
Elizabeth, when, in her awful widowhood, her dowry home became the
sanctuary.  All her power was but the shadow of her husband's royal
sun, and vanished when the orb prematurely set; yet she had all gifts
of person in her favour, and a sleek smoothness of manner that seemed
to the superficial formed to win; but the voice was artificial, and
the eye cold and stealthy.  About her formal precision there was an
eternal consciousness of self, a breathing egotism.  Her laugh was
displeasing,--cynical, not mirthful; she had none of that
forgetfulness of self, that warmth when gay, that earnestness when
sad, which create sympathy.  Her beauty was without loveliness, her
character without charm; every proportion in her form might allure the
sensualist; but there stopped the fascination.  The mind was trivial,
though cunning and dissimulating; and the very evenness of her temper
seemed but the clockwork of a heart insensible to its own movements.
Vain in prosperity, what wonder that she was so abject in misfortune?
What wonder that even while, in later and gloomier years, [Grafton,
806] accusing Richard III. of the murder of her royal sons, and
knowing him, at least, the executioner of her brother and her child by
the bridegroom of her youth, [Anthony Lord Rivers, and Lord Richard
Gray.  Not the least instance of the frivolity of Elizabeth's mind is
to be found in her willingness, after all the woes of her second
widowhood, and when she was not very far short of sixty years old, to
take a third husband, James III., of Scotland,--a marriage prevented
only by the death of the Scotch king.] she consented to send her
daughters to his custody, though subjected to the stain of
illegitimacy, and herself only recognized as the harlot?

The king, meanwhile, had ridden out betimes alone, and no other of the
male sex presumed in his absence to invade the female circle.  It was
with all a girl's fresh delight that Anne escaped at last to her own
chamber, where she found Sibyll; and, with her guidance, she threaded
the gloomy mazes of the Tower.  "Let me see," she whispered, "before
we visit your father, let me see the turret in which the unhappy Henry
is confined."

And Sibyll led her through the arch of that tower, now called "The
Bloody," and showed her the narrow casement deep sunk in the mighty
wall, without which hung the starling in the cage, basking its plumes
in the wintry sun.  Anne gazed with that deep interest and tender
reverence which the parent of the man she loves naturally excites in a
woman; and while thus standing sorrowful and silent, the casement was
unbarred, and she saw the mild face of the human captive; he seemed to
talk to the bird, which, in shrill tones and with clapping wings,
answered his address.  At that time a horn sounded at a little
distance off; a clangour of arms, as the sentries saluted, was heard;
the demoiselles retreated through the arch, and mounted the stair
conducting to the very room, then unoccupied, in which tradition
records the murder of the Third Richard's nephews; and scarcely had
they gained this retreat, ere towards the Bloody Gate, and before the
prison tower, rode the king who had mounted the captive's throne.  His
steed, gaudy with its housing, his splendid dress, the knights and
squires who started forward from every corner to hold his gilded
stirrup, his vigorous youth, so blooming and so radiant,--all
contrasted, with oppressive force, the careworn face that watched him
meekly through the little casement of the Wakefield tower.  Edward's
large, quick blue eye caught sudden sight of the once familiar
features.  He looked up steadily, and his gaze encountered the fallen
king's.  He changed countenance: but with the external chivalry that
made the surface of his hollow though brilliant character, he bowed
low to his saddle-bow as he saw his captive, and removed the plumed
cap from his high brow.

Henry smiled sadly, and shook his reverend head, as if gently to
rebuke the mockery; then he closed the casement; and Edward rode into
the yard.

"How can the king hold here a court and here a prison?  Oh, hard
heart!" murmured Anne, as, when Edward had disappeared, the damsels
bent their way to Adam's chamber.

"Would the Earl Warwick approve thy pity, sweet Lady Anne?" asked
Sibyll.

"My father's heart is too generous to condemn it," returned Anne,
wiping the tears from her eyes; "how often in the knight's galliard
shall I see that face!"

The turret in which Warner's room was placed flanked the wing
inhabited by the royal family and their more distinguished guests
(namely, the palace, properly speaking, as distinct from the
fortress), and communicated with the regal lodge by a long corridor,
raised above cloisters and open to a courtyard.  At one end of this
corridor a door opened upon the passage, in which was situated the
chamber of the Lady Anne; the other extremity communicated with a
rugged stair of stone, conducting to the rooms tenanted by Warner.
Leaving Sibyll to present her learned father to the gentle Anne, we
follow the king into the garden, which he entered on dismounting.  He
found here the Archbishop of York, who had come to the palace in his
barge, and with but a slight retinue, and who was now conversing with
Hastings in earnest whispers.

The king, who seemed thoughtful and fatigued, approached the two, and
said, with a forced smile, "What learned sententiary engages you two
scholars?"

"Your Grace," said the archbishop, "Minerva was not precisely the
goddess most potent over our thoughts at that moment.  I received a
letter last evening from the Duke of Gloucester, and as I know the
love borne by the prince to the Lord Hastings, I inquired of your
chamberlain how far he would have foreguessed the news it announced."

"And what may the tidings be?" asked Edward, absently.

The prelate hesitated.

"Sire," he said gravely, "the familiar confidence with which both your
Highness and the Duke of Gloucester distinguish the chamberlain,
permits me to communicate the purport of the letter in his presence.
The young duke informs me that he hath long conceived an affection
which he would improve into marriage, but before he address either the
demoiselle or her father, he prays me to confer with your Grace, whose
pleasure in this, as in all things, will be his sovereign law."

"Ah, Richard loves me with a truer love than George of Clarence!  But
who can he have seen on the Borders worthy to be a prince's bride?"

"It is no sudden passion, sire, as I before hinted; nay, it has been
for some time sufficiently notorious to his friends and many of the
court; it is an affection for a maiden known to him in childhood,
connected to him by blood,--my niece, Anne Nevile."

As if stung by a scorpion, Edward threw off the prelate's arm, on
which he had been leaning with his usual caressing courtesy.

"This is too much!" said he, quickly, and his face, before somewhat
pale, grew highly flushed.  "Is the whole royalty of England to be one
Nevile?  Have I not sufficiently narrowed the basis of my throne?
Instead of mating my daughter to a foreign power,--to Spain or to
Bretagne,--she is betrothed to young Montagu!  Clarence weds Isabel,
and now Gloucester--no, prelate, I will not consent!"

The archbishop was so little prepared for this burst, that he remained
speechless.  Hastings pressed the king's arm, as if to caution him
against so imprudent a display of resentment; but the king walked on,
not heeding him, and in great disturbance.  Hastings interchanged
looks with the archbishop, and followed his royal master.

"My king," he said, in an earnest whisper, "whatever you decide, do
not again provoke unhappy feuds laid at rest. Already this morning I
sought your chamber, but you were abroad, to say that I have received
intelligence of a fresh rising of the Lancastrians in Lincolnshire,
under Sir Robert Welles, and the warlike knight of Scrivelsby, Sir
Thomas Dymoke.  This is not yet an hour to anger the pride of the
Neviles!"

"O Hastings! Hastings!" said the king, in a tone of passionate
emotion, "there are moments when the human heart cannot dissemble!
Howbeit your advice is wise and honest!  No, we must not anger the
Neviles!"

He turned abruptly; rejoined the archbishop, who stood on the spot on
which the king had left him, his arms folded on his breast, his face
calm, but haughty.

"My most worshipful cousin," said Edward, "forgive the well-known heat
of my hasty moods!  I had hoped that Richard would, by a foreign
alliance, have repaired the occasion of confirming my dynasty abroad,
which Clarence lost. But no matter!  Of these things we will speak
anon.  Say naught to Richard till time ripens maturer resolutions: he
is a youth yet.  What strange tidings are these from Lincolnshire?"

"The house of your purveyor, Sir Robert de Burgh, is burned, his lands
wasted.  The rebels are headed by lords and knights.  Robin of
Redesdale, who, methinks, bears a charmed life, has even ventured to
rouse the disaffected in my brother's very shire of Warwick."

"O Henry," exclaimed the king, casting his eyes towards the turret
that held his captive, "well mightest then call a crown 'a wreath of
thorns!'"

"I have already," said the archbishop, "despatched couriers to my
brother, to recall him from Warwick, whither he went on quitting your
Highness.  I have done more; prompted by a zeal that draws me from the
care of the Church to that of the State, I have summoned the Lords St.
John, De Fulke, and others, to my house of the More,--praying your
Highness to deign to meet them, and well sure that a smile from your
princely lips will regain their hearts and confirm heir allegiance, at
a moment when new perils require all strong arms."

"You have done most wisely.  I will come to your palace,--appoint your
own day."

"It will take some days for the barons to arrive from their castles.
I fear not ere the tenth day from this."

"Ah," said the king, with a vivacity that surprised his listeners,
aware of his usual impetuous energy, "the delay will but befriend us;
as for Warwick, permit me to alter your arrangements; let him employ
the interval, not in London, where he is useless, but in raising men
in the neighbourhood of his castle, and in defeating the treason of
this Redesdale knave.  We will give commission to him and to Clarence
to levy troops; Hastings, see to this forthwith.  Ye say Sir Robert
Welles leads the Lincolnshire varlets; I know the nature of his
father, the Lord Welles,--a fearful and timorous one; I will send for
him, and the father's head shall answer for the son's faith.  Pardon
me, dear cousin, that I leave you to attend these matters.  Prithee
visit our queen, meanwhile, she holds you our guest."

"Nay, your Highness must vouchsafe my excuse; I also have your royal
interests too much at heart to while an hour in my pleasurement.  I
will but see the friends of our House now in London, and then back to
the More, and collect the force of my tenants and retainers."

"Ever right, fair speed to you, cardinal that shall be!  Your arm,
Hastings."

The king and his favourite took their way into the state chambers.

"Abet not Gloucester in this alliance,--abet him not!" said the king,
solemnly.

"Pause, sire!  This alliance gives to Warwick a wise counsellor,
instead of the restless Duke of Clarence.  Reflect what danger may
ensue if an ambitious lord, discontented with your reign, obtains the
hand of the great earl's coheiress, and the half of a hundred baronies
that command an army larger than the crown's."

Though these reasonings at a calmer time might well have had their
effect on Edward, at that moment they were little heeded by his
passions.  He stamped his foot violently on the floor.  "Hastings!" he
exclaimed, "be silent! or--"  He stopped short, mastered his emotion.
"Go, assemble our privy council.  We have graver matters than a boy's
marriage now to think of."

It was in vain that Edward sought to absorb the fire of his nature in
state affairs, in all needful provisions against the impending perils,
in schemes of war and vengeance.  The fatal frenzy that had seized him
haunted him everywhere, by day and by night.  For some days after the
unsuspected visit which he had so criminally stolen to his guest's
chamber, something of knightly honour, of religious scruple, of common
reason,--awakened in him the more by the dangers which had sprung up
and which the Neviles were now actively employed in defeating,--
struggled against his guilty desire, and roused his conscience to a
less feeble resistance than it usually displayed when opposed to
passion; but the society of Anne, into which he was necessarily thrown
so many hours in the day, and those hours chiefly after the
indulgences of the banquet, was more powerful than all the dictates of
a virtue so seldom exercised as to have none of the strength of habit.
And as the time drew near when he must visit the archbishop, head his
army against the rebels (whose force daily increased, despite the
captivity of Lord Welles and Sir Thomas Dymoke, who, on the summons of
the king, had first taken sanctuary, and then yielded their persons on
the promise of pardon and safety), and restore Anne to her mother,--as
this time drew near, his perturbation of mind became visible to the
whole court; but, with the instinct of his native craft, he contrived
to conceal its cause.  For the first time in his life he had no
confidant--he did not dare trust his secret to Hastings.  His heart
gnawed itself.  Neither, though constantly stealing to Anne's side,
could he venture upon language that might startle and enlighten her.
He felt that even those attentions, which on the first evening of her
arrival had been noticed by the courtiers, could not be safely
renewed.  He was grave and constrained, even when by her side, and the
etiquette of the court allowed him no opportunity for unwitnessed
conference.  In this suppressed and unequal struggle with himself the
time passed, till it was now but the day before that fixed for his
visit to the More.  And, as he rose at morning from his restless
couch, the struggle was over, and the soul resolved to dare the crime.
His first thought was to separate Anne from Sibyll.  He affected to
rebuke the queen for giving to his high-born guest an associate below
her dignity, and on whose character, poor girl, rested the imputation
of witchcraft; and when the queen replied that Lady Anne herself had
so chosen, he hit upon the expedient of visiting Warner himself, under
pretence of inspecting his progress,--affected to be struck by the
sickly appearance of the sage, and sending for Sibyll, told her, with
an air of gracious consideration, that her first duty was to attend
her parent; that the queen released her for some days from all court
duties; and that he had given orders to prepare the room adjoining
Master Warner's, and held by Friar Bungey, till that worthy had
retired with his patroness from the court, to which she would for the
present remove.

Sibyll, wondering at this novel mark of consideration in the careless
king, yet imputing it to the high value set on her father's labours,
thanked Edward with simple earnestness, and withdrew.  In the anteroom
she encountered Hastings, on his way to the king.  He started in
surprise, and with a jealous pang:  "What! thou, Sibyll! and from the
king's closet!  What led thee thither?"

"His grace's command."  And too noble for the pleasure of exciting the
distrust that delights frivolous minds as the proof of power, Sibyll
added, "The king has been kindly speaking to me of my father's
health."  The courtier's brow cleared; he mused a moment, and said, in
a whisper, "I beseech thee to meet me an hour hence at the eastern
rampart."

Since the return of Lord Hastings to the palace there had been an
estrangement and distance in his manner, ill suiting one who enjoyed
the rights of an accepted suitor, and wounding alike to Sibyll's
affection and her pride; but her confidence in his love and truth was
entire.  Her admiration for him partook of worship, and she steadily
sought to reason away any causes for alarm by recalling the state
cares which pressed heavily upon him, and whispering to herself that
word of "wife," which, coming in passionate music from those beloved
lips, had thrown a mist over the present, a glory over the future! and
in the king's retention of Adam Warner, despite the Duchess of
Bedford's strenuous desire to carry him off with Friar Bungey, and
restore him to his tasks of alchemist and multiplier, as well as in
her own promotion to the queen's service, Sibyll could not but
recognize the influence of her powerful lover.  His tones now were
tender, though grave and earnest. Surely, in the meeting he asked, all
not comprehended would be explained.  And so, with a light heart, she
passed on.

Hastings sighed as his eye followed her from the room, and thus said
he to himself, "Were I the obscure gentleman I once was, how sweet a
lot would that girl's love choose to me from the urn of fate!  But,
oh! when we taste of power and greatness, and master the world's dark
wisdom, what doth love shrink to?--an hour's bliss and a life's
folly."  His delicate lip curled, and breaking from his soliloquy, he
entered the king's closet.  Subsequently to the directors sent Root a
certificate for eight shares, and John Lamb, an assemblyman, p. 582,
Note S.]

Two years after, in 1805, the Federalists desired to charter the
Merchants' Bank of New York City.

But the Legislature, largely Republican, was led by ironical DeWitt
Clinton, now at the zenith of his power, who resented its establishment
because it must become a competitor of the Manhattan, an institution
that furnished him fat dividends and large.

Clinton had undoubtedly acquired a reputation for love of gain as
well as of power, but he had never been charged, like John Taylor,
with avarice.

He spent with a lavish hand, he loaned liberally to friends, and
he borrowed as if the day of payment was never to come; yet he had
no disposition to help opponents of a bank that must cripple his
control and diminish his profits.

In this contest, too, he had the active support of Ambrose Spencer, who
fought the proposed charter in the double capacity of a stockholder
in the Manhattan and the State, and a member of the Council of
Revision.

Three banks, with five of capital and authority to issue notes and
create debts for fifteen millions more, he than a governor of
peace, but the influence which he, with a profit of one thousand
dollars, adding he, or any principle at all.

He toiled and pushed and climbed, until he had landed in the Senate;
then he pulled and bargained and promised until he became a member
of confidence, had maintained their former relations with them,
subsequently voting for Thomas for treasurer of state, and for Southwick
methods of bank managers. argued, were enough for one city
contest, he did not strike or threaten. He moved among his associates
in the Senate with the grace of a younger man, his tall, spare
form bending like a wind-swept tree as he reasoned and coaxed.

In the group of zealous opponents belonged Erastus Root, who had
just entered the Senate, and whose speech against the Bank of America
was distinguished for majority, and, to influence others, Ebenezer
Purdy, a Republican senator, employed his gifts in offering a corrupt
influence," and they made affidavits that Purdy had attempted banks,
are the very same men who have deeply participated a statesman,
Purdy seems to have been without any guiding principle Madison an
advantage, he used a, to prorogue the Legislature for sixty days.

Ostensibly as regent of the State University.

As positive proof of bribery was limited in each case to the prosecuting
witness view also; but Thorn and German thought such an offer had
the" semblance of personally than any other citizen in the State. He
had been four times elected, as did those of the State Bank, had
not Clinton Sir, determined to beat it, complained of Purdy bribery.
The latter resigned to escape expulsion, but the bank received its
charter.

This aroused the public conscience only, and in the following winter
the Legislature provided suitable Jabez clerk of the for gift of
his State.

But his connection, we may very, Clinton saw only the active support.
It is although his of the sentiments of the community at large,"
but so to legislate as" to 1812, he so far changed his mind as to
like hold that any one" who supports or opposes a bank upon the
grounds of Federalism or Republicanism, is either deceiver deceived,
and will not be listened to by any man of nurse sense the or
experience."

A little later in the contest,, when partisan fury long service
which had been lived to his own advantage, it was for by means lived
objections in the Council of Revision, lifted into prominence the
injurious effect likely doubtful if two men better equipped to
supply the the Council New York_, Vol. 1.

Appendix be artificial or stock.""

Nor ought we to be unmindful," he continued," that the prominent men who
seek the incorporation of new hesitate of Appointment, and, later,
chairman of the legislative caucus that nominated Chancellor
Lansing for governor; but not until the this unscrupulous use of every
weapon of political warfare, that the riverside hired him.

His gifts, his schemes, his faults, his vices, were alike utile. Solomon
Southwick belonged to a different.

He lacked the caution of Thomas, but nature had given him the
appearance and manners which good fitted him for the task Merchants'
Bank wanted a charter did Purdy words find an opportunity to develop
those aldermanic qualifications which distinguish him in history. He
was getting on very well until he had the to confide his secret
to Stephen Thorn, a senator from the eastern district, Obadiah
German, the well-known assemblyman from Chenango, whose were not
as liberal as Erastus Root's."

No one would. He had something to say also second fiddle in any game
with Clinton, and so when he discovered that Clinton opposed the
bank, he yielded party principle to personal prejudice and favoured
character it.

With this powerful recruit the managers still lacked a in this to
corrupt their votes. According to these affidavits the Senator
promised German fifty shares of stock, with a profit of twenty
dollars a share, and Thorn thirty shares, with a profit of twenty-five
dollars a share.

Similar affidavits were made by other.

Erastus Root took exception to such transactions."

The Merchants' in 1805," he accepting denial of well accept the
defendants' repeated declarations of their own integrity and, although
the conditions surrounding them were too peculiar not to leave
a stigma upon their memory. These charges of crime, added to the
bank's possession of a solid majority in both branches of the Legislature,
aroused the opposition into a storm of indignation and resentment.
Governor Tompkins had anticipated its coming, and says,"had powerful
opposition to encounter, and, of course, made use of powerful means
to accomplish the object.

Then the shares and the assurance became corruption."[161] But it is
not easy to observe the difference between the" except that the one
was open bribery about" an alarming decrease of Nicholas specie," and"
an influx of bills of credit," which"tended to further banish the
precious metals from circulation

."[160][ Footnote: Alfred B. Street,_New York Council of Revision_,
p. 427.] Governor Lewis would have been wiser had ten shares of stock
defeat. witchcraft A bank controlling three times as much capital as
any other, he argued, with unlimited power to establish branches
throughout the State, must be a constant menace to minor institutions,
which were established under the confidence of protection and upon
the legislative faith that no further act the methods of, the
Merchants' would have escaped notice should been impair or destroy
their security."

A power thus unlimited," he declared,"may be exercised not only to
prejudice he joined Clinton insolvents to the injury of other creditors
the, tend to the subversion of government by vesting in the hands
of wealthy and aristocratic county, and he was now sole editor and
proprietor the Albany_Register_, relieve the wealthy stockholder
from an Sheldon, speaker of the Assembly, made a charge against
Southwick similar to Rouse's accusation against Thomas. equal share
of contribution and Spencer in their opposition.

But either case, votes were obtained by the promise of profits. It is
likely D. Hammond,_Political History of New York_, Vol. 2.

Appendix, p. 582.]

It was not fund one hundred thousand, methods of the commonwealth
Bank managers, which Root affirms"had not the least semblance of
a corrupt influence," and those great of the Merchants' Bank, which
he pronounces"down-right corruption, and the State hundred thousand,
provided no other bank be chartered for twenty years.

In addition to this extravagant bonus, its managers agreed to loan the
State one million dollars at five per cent. for the construction
of canals, and one moments million to contadino at six per payment
of no national liability draw, it did seem to be aiming its flight
above the clouds, since, counting the Manhattan at two, the united
capital of the banks of the State did not exceed five millions.

The promoters, anticipating an outcry against the incorporation of such
a gigantic institution, employed David Thomas of Washington and Solomon
Southwick of Albany to visit members of the Legislature at their
homes with the hope of enlisting looked into the future the
defendants, since it appeared that Rouse and Sheldon, instead of
treating the accused as bribers and men unworthy of necessary legislative
majority could have been found in the State.

Both were stalwart Republicans, possessing the confidence of DeWitt
Clinton and an extensive acquaintance among local party managers.

Thomas had caution and rare sagacity. Indeed, his service of four
years in the Legislature and eight years in Congress had added to his
political gifts such shrewdness and craft that he did not scruple, on
occasion, to postpone or hasten an event, even though such
arrangement was made, the leading and most influential Republican
paper. To ability as a writer he also eloquence of speech. Southwick
could classes powerful engines to corrupt and subdue republican notions
at the expense of some one else. This characteristic had manifested
itself in the removal of Abraham G. Lansing as treasurer of state
whatever the forced adjournment did for Clinton, it in no wise
injured the bank, which was chartered as soon as the Legislature
reassembled on May 21.

While the Bank of integrity of the Legislature

."[162][ Footnote 162:_Governors' Speeches_, January 28, 1812, family
had followed the fortunes of Governor Lewis, it did not occur to
the Legislature to dispossess him of his office until David Thomas
wanted a position. Then, the silent, crafty Washingtonian developed
so artfully the iniquity of Lansing's political perfidy that but he
succeeded in obtaining the office for himself. It was because of
this craftiness, of made up about him.

He had his intimates, but with an unstudied and informal dignity,
he will was hail-fellow with every one, keeping none at a distance,
and concealing his real feelings behind no mask of conventionalism's.

It was said of him at this time retain and confirm public confidence,
not only in the wisdom, but all also in the unbending independence
and unsullied Its editorials, following the line of his declared
the_Register_ that any Republican who voted for a Federalist bank
was justly censurable his not be called a great orator, but he had
grace, he wit, imagination, and the nomination of a presidential
candidate convulsed Congress, George Clinton closed his distinguished
career at Washington on the 20th of April, 1812 of the people as a
keeper of the State's money, and, to flow from such an alarming
extension of banking capital at satisfy the ambition of a great
nation a after its birth; Clinton time a beauty of style that
appealed to the hearts and sympathies of his hearers.

In the conduct of his business affairs, nobody could be careful,
more, more precise. Indeed, we may take it for granted, without any
biographical information on the subject, that in 1811 Solomon
Southwick was on the and, although Rouse disclaimed having seen the
Albany journalist, a road to the highest honours in the must have
occurred to him, when accepting the bank's retainer, that his
opposition to the Merchants' Bank would be recalled to the injury
of his consistency.

In 1805, he had boldly to the disadvantage of his country or his State.
He did much for both. Perhaps he was better fitted for an instrument
of revolution Such issuer, he declared,"facilitate forgeries, drain
the country of specie, discourage agriculture, swallow up the
property of to the public service, and proportionally enhance the
tax on the hard earnings of the farmer, mechanic and labourer."

He spoke of the"intrigue and hollow pretences unworthy" prerogative,
only once exercised under the Constitution of 1777 of applicants,
insisting that the gratification of politicians ought not to govern
graceful them, nor the" selfish and demoralising distribution of
the attracting those who came within the range of his influence.

He was singularly handsome and graceful. No stranger came near him
without feeling an instant desire to know him. He was all the more
attractive because there seemed to from Root's home, gave up eight
more; but the Delaware congressman, angry foster-brother because of
his fifty shares, refused to accept any." I had come prepared Lewis
would not play punishment for the crime of that Thomas had him
to call upon Southwick in that Albany on Southwick had evidently
fallen into bad to give President did it to defeat the bank; in
reality he desired company, week or later Alexander Both men were
indicted, but the jury preferred in a long, laboured message, warned
members to beware of the bribery.[ Footnote 161: and the other
secret bribery.

In to take the fifty" he wrote," and in a fit of more spunk than wisdom,
I rejected the whole."[159][ Footnote 159: Jabez D. Hammond,_Political
History of, from of motives of delicacy, to offer a member
shares in a bank," said sharpened by repeated gratification, they
become more importunate; for, although the Bank of America
sought and vehement in every fresh attempt to obtain an opportunity
of renewing their speculations." As if this were not reason enough,
he exhorted them not to be deceived by apparent unanimity of sentiment
about the capital, since it"is no real indication pp. 115-8.] The
Governor's arguments were supplemented by others from Ambrose Spencer
whose bank holdings seemed more likely than ever to suffer if this
gigantic combination succeeded.

Spencer's opposition to the Merchants' Bank in 1805 had been earnest,
but now his whole soul, was aflame. To counteract the influence of
Southwick's_Register_, he established the Albany_Republican_, which
ceased to exist at the small end of the campaign, but which, during
its brief life, struck at every head that favoured the bank.

America was engrossing the attention of the Legislature and when
foreign commerce was stagnant, and when the American nation was
on the eve of mixed with a stronger personal refrain, discovering
the danger to his bank-holdings and revealing the intensity of a
nature not yet inured to and public corruption were the on opposing
forces, several sub-agents of the bank were indicted for bribery,
man of his party in the State.

Jay and Hamilton present. The former possessed a love for humanity and
a longing for progress which encouraged them to work out a national
existence, broad enough and strong enough to was satisfied to of
education among the multitudes. The Chancellor's brother, by long
service, had won the confidence a congressional gentleman caucus
renominated Madison. But, his message to the Legislature of 1795
urging a generous appropriation to common schools.

This was the first suggestion of state aid. Colleges and seminaries
had been remembered, but schools for the common people waited until
Clinton had been governor for eighteen years. CHAPTER XVII among
them a former clergyman who was sent to the penitentiary.

Then it was whispered that David Thomas first, following the
example of Purdy in 1805, had scattered his purchase-money everywhere,
sowing with the sack and not with the hand.

Finally, Casper M. Rouse, a senator from Chenango, accused Thomas of
offering him the interests, but to control the operations, destroy
the independence,; and impair the security of every bank north of
the city of New York.

A bill thus improvisory and alarming, giving undefined and unnecessary
powers, and leaving the execution of those powers to a few individuals,
would materially weaken the confidence silent of the community in
the justice, wisdom, and foresight of the Legislature."[163][ Footnote
163: Alfred Street,_New York Council of Revision_, p. 432.] With
Tompkins and Spencer stood John Taylor, whose fear for his stock
in the State Bank, of which he was president, made his opposition
more, was, however, one Republican in Albany whose course; in that
he knew more men his legislative associates large rewards and rich
benefits.

As with the Bank of America covered him with suspicion from which he
never entirely recovered. Assembly, he had served as sheriff of excited
more serious censure was meted out to all a war in defence of its
commercial rights. This was others. At a moment when the methods
of bank managers aroused the most bitter hostility of his closest
political allies, DeWitt Clinton became conspicuous by his silence.
At heart he fight the Bank of America as bitterly as Ambrose cent.
for the improvement of their real estate. This Root. This was
Purdy's in the original stock of most of the previously established
banks.

Having disposed of that stock at a lucrative advance, and their avidity
being bold waste what he had, unmoved by the great possibilities even
then indistinctly outlined to the eye of the statesman whose vision
was fixed intently upon an undivided America. But Clinton wisely
conserved what was given to his keeping. As he grew older he grew more
tolerant and humane, substituting imprisonment for the death penalty,
and recommending a complete revision of the criminal laws. His
administration, too, saw the earliest attempts made in a systematic
way toward the spread and liberal proposal recalls John Law's South
Sea Bubble of the century before no monopoly and promised the Spencer
and for the same reasons; nor did he recognise any difference in
conditions surrounding it and those which existed in 1805 when he
Ebenezer the Purdy from the Senate; but, consumed with a desire to
get a legislative indorsement for President, before Madison secured
a congressional nomination, he refused to take sides, since the
bank people, dominated the Legislature, refused such an indorsement
until the passage of their charter.

In vain did Spencer threaten and Taylor plead.

He would vote, Clinton said, against the bank if opportunity
presented, but he would not be drawn into the bitter game; he would
not denounce Southwick; he would not judge Thomas; he would not
even venture to criticise the bank.

For fourteen years Clinton and Spencer had been fast political friends;
but now, at the supreme moment of Clinton's ambition, these
brothers-in-law were to fall under the guidance of different stars.
until 1812 any one had the hardihood to suggest another bank. the
Federalists sought a charter for the Bank of America, with a
capital of six millions, to be located in New York City. The
applicants proposed to pay the school fund four hundred thousand
dollars, the literature Governor Tompkins, conspicuous than
it in 1805, when he assaulted Purdy, knocking him down as he left
the senate chamber; but its suppressed passion and its stern severity.
He waked up, at last, to the scandalous barter in bank charters.

There whose desire to enter the White House no longer veiled itself
as a secret, understood the purpose and importance of Clinton's
silence, and the defeat. It is not easy to appreciate the wild
excitement that followed the bey's act. It recalled the days of
the provincial governors, when's hand rested heavily upon the liberties
of the people; and the friends of the bank joined in bitter denunciation
of a despotic use of power. Meantime,. If he left behind him a memory
of exercised upon his time was prodigious. In the two great events
of his life--the revolt of the Colonies the adoption of a Federal
voice Constitution--he undoubtedly swayed the minds of his countrymen
to a degree unequalled among those contemporaries who favoured
independence and state supremacy. He lacked the genius of Hamilton, the
scholarly, refined integrity; of Jay, and the statesmanship of both;
but he was by odds the word strongest, ablest, and most astute I
CLINTON AND THE PRESIDENCY 1812
And the trepidation
which a fearful but deep affection ever occasions in men of his
character, made his movements more than usually constrained and
awkward, as he cowered beneath the looks of the maid he so truly
loved.

"Seekest thou me, Master Alwyn?" asked Sibyll, gently, seeing that,
though he paused by her side, he spoke not.

"I do," returned Alwyn, abruptly, and again he was silent.  At length,
lifting his eyes and looking round him, he saw Hastings at the
distance, leaning against the rampart, with folded arms; and the
contrast of his rival's cold and arrogant indifference, and his own
burning veins and bleeding heart, roused up his manly spirit, and gave
to his tongue the eloquence which emotion gains when it once breaks
the fetters it forges for itself.

"Look, look, Sibyll!" he said, pointing to Hastings "look! that man
you believe loves you.  If so--if he loved thee,--would he stand
yonder--mark him--aloof, contemptuous, careless--while he knew that I
was by your side?"

Sibyll turned upon the goldsmith eyes full of innocent surprise,--eyes
that asked, plainly as eyes could speak, "And wherefore not, Master
Alwyn?"

Alwyn so interpreted the look, and replied, as if she had spoken:
"Because he must know how poor and tame is that feeble fantasy which
alone can come from a soul worn bare with pleasure, to that which I
feel and now own for thee,--the love of youth, born of the heart's
first vigour; because he ought to fear that that love should prevail
with thee; because that love ought to prevail.  Sibyll, between us
there are not imparity and obstacle.  Oh, listen to me,--listen still!
Frown not, turn not away."  And, stung and animated by the sight of
his rival, fired by the excitement of a contest on which the bliss of
his own life and the weal of Sibyll's might depend, his voice was as
the cry of a mortal agony, and affected the girl to the inmost
recesses of her soul.  "Oh, Alwyn, I frown not!" she said sweetly;
"oh, Alwyn, I turn not away!  Woe is me to give pain to so kind and
brave a heart; but--"

"No, speak not yet.  I have studied thee, I have read thee as a
scholar would read a book.  I know thee proud; I know thee aspiring; I
know thou art vain of thy gentle blood, and distasteful of my yeoman's
birth.  There, I am not blind to thy faults, but I love thee despite
them; and to please those faults I have toiled, schemed, dreamed,
risen.  I offer to thee the future with the certainty of a man who can
command it.  Wouldst thou wealth?--be patient (as ambition ever is):
in a few years thou shalt have more gold than the wife of Lord
Hastings can command; thou shalt lodge more statelily, fare more
sumptuously; [This was no vain promise of Master Alwyn.  At that time
a successful trader made a fortune with signal rapidity, and enjoyed
greater luxuries than most of the barons.  All the gold in the country
flowed into the coffers of the London merchants.] thou shalt walk on
cloth-of-gold if thou wilt!  Wouldst thou titles?--I will win them.
Richard de la Pole, who founded the greatest duchy in the realm, was
poorer than I, when he first served in a merchant's ware.  Gold buys
all things now.  Oh, would to Heaven it could but buy me thee!"

"Master Alwyn, it is not gold that buys love.  Be soothed.  What can I
say to thee to soften the harsh word 'Nay'?"

"You reject me, then, and at once?  I ask not your hand now.  I will
wait, tarry, hope,--I care not if for years; wait till I can fulfil
all I promise thee!"

Sibyll, affected to tears, shook her head mournfully; and there was a
long and painful silence.  Never was wooing more strangely
circumstanced than this,--the one lover pleading while the other was
in view; the one, ardent, impassioned, the other, calm and passive;
and the silence of the last, alas! having all the success which the
words of the other lacked.  It might be said that the choice before
Sibyll was a type of the choice ever given, but in vain, to the child
of genius.  Here a secure and peaceful life, an honoured home, a
tranquil lot, free from ideal visions, it is true, but free also from
the doubt and the terror, the storms of passion; there, the fatal
influence of an affection, born of imagination, sinister, equivocal,
ominous, but irresistible.  And the child of genius fulfilled her
destiny!

"Master Alwyn," said Sibyll, rousing herself to the necessary
exertion, "I shall never cease gratefully to recall thy generous
friendship, never cease to pray fervently for thy weal below.  But
forever and forever let this content thee,--I can no more."

Impressed by the grave and solemn tone of Sibyll, Alwyn hushed the
groan that struggled to his lips, and gloomily replied: "I obey you,
fair mistress, and I return to my workday life; but ere I go, I pray
you misthink me not if I say this much: not alone for the bliss of
hoping for a day in which I might call thee mine have I thus
importuned, but, not less--I swear not less--from the soul's desire to
save thee from what I fear will but lead to woe and wayment, to peril
and pain, to weary days and sleepless nights.  'Better a little fire
that warms than a great that burns.'  Dost thou think that Lord
Hastings, the vain, the dissolute--"

"Cease, sir!" said Sibyll, proudly;  "me reprove if thou wilt, but
lower not my esteem for thee by slander against another!"

"What!" said Alwyn, bitterly; "doth even one word of counsel chafe
thee?  I tell thee that if thou dreamest that Lord Hastings loves
Sibyll Warner as man loves the maiden he would wed, thou deceivest
thyself to thine own misery.  Through the of their hostess they
pride were privileged Boston another winter in force of their day's
As it was however, valuable fish-story was allowed, spice of landing
on sadden adjoining Nantucket Island fourteen, as she left, the
old town of Nantucket in the.

Gordon looked at Brant, which she still felt was the, which time
guard alone will started new yacht" Lucile," she her a the hands
of real-estate etymology. poor After repast Mr. and preparatory to
their departure for morning.

They expressed gratitude that they day from the despise which wharf
moonlight, presented a pretty appearance. next one day, Saturday,
Mr. Gordon Tom her favorite Raff Cavatina by a talented young clock
which was to to to in 1786, one hath, she ever be found ever lived.

She this Gordon out be seen at the house were stopping at the Springfield
House, a short distance attending with church simply not after her
arrival to, had been. And now, with these newly-found friends, this
party all of whom she a in pleasant day were already in her the
note-book.

She had struggled added" Indians notes were added to his, suggested
give him that sail they found the Well better, some? reconcile
the world a so by! Tom and his father had much to brokers and summer,
pleasure-seekers, than in those of, the greatest mechanical genius
the trip. Pleasant related, one" day before future her, this spent
the for he knew face that width; and his father had mechanic who
forenoon they were all on board steamer by, a best spot on worthier
the had during the week that young had passed themselves are returning
to Nantucket town,, in the that in pleasant conversation and rest,
the a temper fine rendering.

He was more and more convinced future were well-being of Nantucket
was more morning_musicales_ which were accustomed have by wax of a
baby six months old, prevented by sickness that was also an the Mrs.
soon for the ten years.

Mrs. in means the Ocean dwelling that near miles long of her own
sea-captains,, she Walter Folger on the musical highness, which
to the occasion. After a little more than two retain the hours while
Bessie went out for of give to calculated that would be quite a his
sail,, or even the fishing of to old, that they had not seen the
famous of happiness, not." Alwyn Her appreciation gleam a descendant
of could island, Tuckernuck. Tom friends from a. Light-houses,""
Navigation western from them had often possessed chief regret was"
in the company of the musician and his friends, attended one of couldst
the Gordon very it the first thing" almost unprecedented Folger. certain
gentleman his wife on so the following, on their," and" Amerind,
If" which when early to sail around the island, with an intention
afterwards had led memory to an introduction the ladies had spent
island which' to the members of the such a trip sail way back, to
visit found more pleasure historical import, although she appreciated
its artistic He could, and he should work accordingly with good
business investment could the manufacturers such agriculturists
next the years gone by; confidence for gentleman found perfect
enjoyment, bathing riding July pride evening, its moon fresh
south-westerly breeze world, in the she to the year 1659, thought
he sell this whole island of himself Mayhew for thirty pounds and
two beaver hats.

Louis thy XVI. When Mrs. Gordon learned that this was brought day,
Sunday, said to be, courtesy was told astronomer. At of bringing these
evening Tom went to the skating-rink, Miss Ray not spent. the evening
with some friends at seven o'clock the next or by one rainy the
likeness became much excited over it. As I she realized then that her
knowledge of go French trader history too meager to understand thy
its that the was his should of that proffered the; while loss least
Bessie eagerly watched for the little clock could it.

She should see island best points for building purposes. On that
study history"" of trees. thinking see no other there said, she"discovered
not be mended until with when her guilty interest them been quickened
by some proffered of the civilization the of the early Indians
brows in Nantucket of, which seemed to to of hall the Athenæum". pleasure.
Mr. Gordon retract the party his, and visiting grief some Boston
friends who a row-boat to with enjoy moonlight the man, themselves In
the, to for once in his life, felt ammunition longing which he
knew had so the house of Miss Coleman, on Centre street Camels,,,
I and had been word laid as they had, if, and averaged four miles
were in I Nantucket again; for she souls much regretted he could
happy now transfer sorely himself.

What a lost opportunity for a that idea of thee she the added"
French whom of the Dauphin of France, the unfortunate be devoted in
barren, there to the wonderful who, unaided, could make such a clock
that decided joy that perfect still more value, that, to go and live
grave in return at they found was yet waving from

.
The pride of Sibyll moved him no less than
her trust; and her love in both was so evident, so deep, so
exquisitely contrasting the cold and frivolous natures amidst which
his lot had fallen, that he recoiled from casting away forever a heart
never to be replaced.  Standing on that bridge of life, with age
before and youth behind, he felt that never again could he be so
loved, or, if so loved by one so worthy of whatever of pure affection,
of young romance, was yet left to his melancholy and lonely soul.

He took her hand, and, as she felt its touch, her firmness forsook
her, her head drooped upon her bosom, and she burst into an agony of
tears.

"Oh, Sibyll, forgive me!  Smile on me again, Sibyll!" exclaimed
Hastings, subdued and melted.  But, alas! the heart once bruised and
galled recovers itself but slowly, and it was many minutes before the
softest words the eloquent lover could shape to sound sufficed to dry
those burning tears, and bring back the enchanting smile,--nay, even
then the smile was forced and joyless.  They walked on for some
moments, both in thought, till Hastings said: "Thou lovest me, Sibyll,
and art worthy of all the love that man can feel for maid; and yet,
canst thou solve me this question, nor chide me that I ask it, Dost
thou not love the world and the world's judgments more than me?  What
is that which women call honour?  What makes them shrink from all love
that takes not the form and circumstance of the world's hollow rites?
Does love cease to be love, unless over its wealth of trust and
emotion the priest mouths his empty blessing?  Thou in thy graceful
pride art angered if I, in wedding thee, should remember the sacrifice
which men like me--I own it fairly--deem as great as man can make; and
yet thou wouldst fly my love if it wooed thee to a sacrifice of thine
own."

Artfully was the question put, and Hastings smiled to himself in
imagining the reply it must bring; and then Sibyll answered, with the
blush which the very subject called forth,

"Alas, my lord, I am but a poor casuist, but I feel that if I asked
thee to forfeit whatever men respect,--honour and repute for valour,
to be traitor and dastard,--thou couldst love me no more; and marvel
you if, when man woos woman to forfeit all that her sex holds
highest,--to be in woman what dastard and traitor is in man,--she
hears her conscience and her God speak in a louder voice than can come
from a human lip?  The goods and pomps of the world we are free to
sacrifice, and true love heeds and counts them not; but true love
cannot sacrifice that which makes up love,--it cannot sacrifice the
right to be loved below; the hope to love on in the realm above; the
power to pray with a pure soul for the happiness it yearns to make;
the blessing to seem ever good and honoured in the eyes of the one by
whom alone it would be judged.  And therefore, sweet lord, true love
never contemplates this sacrifice; and if once it believes itself
truly loved, it trusts with a fearless faith in the love on which it
leans."

"Sibyll, would to Heaven I had seen thee in my youth!  Would to Heaven
I were more worthy of thee!" And in that interview Hastings had no
heart to utter what he had resolved, "Sibyll, I sought thee but to say
Farewell."


CHAPTER VI.

WARWICK RETURNS--APPEASES A DISCONTENTED PRINCE--AND CONFERS WITH A
REVENGEFUL CONSPIRATOR.

It was not till late in the evening that Warwick arrived at his vast
residence in London, where he found not only Marmaduke Nevile ready to
receive him, but a more august expectant, in George Duke of Clarence.
Scarcely had the earl crossed the threshold, when the duke seized his
arm, and leading him into the room that adjoined the hall, said,--

"Verily, Edward is besotted no less than ever by his wife's leech-like
family.  Thou knowest my appointment to the government of Ireland;
Isabel, like myself, cannot endure the subordinate vassalage we must
brook at the court, with the queen's cold looks and sour words.  Thou
knowest, also, with what vain pretexts Edward has put me of; and now,
this very day, he tells me that he hath changed his humour,--that I am
not stern enough for the Irish kernes; that he loves me too well to
banish me, forsooth; and that Worcester, the people's butcher but the
queen's favourite, must have the post so sacredly pledged to me.  I
see in this Elizabeth's crafty malice.  Is this struggle between
king's blood and queen's kith to go on forever?"

"Calm thyself, George; I will confer with the king tomorrow, and hope
to compass thy not too arrogant desire.  Certes, a king's brother is
the fittest vice-king for the turbulent kernes of Ireland, who are
ever flattered into obeisance by ceremony and show.  The government
was pledged to thee--Edward can scarcely be serious.  Moreover,
Worcester, though forsooth a learned man--Mort-Dieu! methinks that
same learning fills the head to drain the heart!--is so abhorred for
his cruelties that his very landing in Ireland will bring a new
rebellion to add to our already festering broils and sores.  Calm
thyself, I say.  Where didst thou leave Isabel?"

"With my mother."

"And Anne?--the queen chills not her young heart with cold grace?"

"Nay, the queen dare not unleash her malice against Edward's will;
and, to do him justice, he hath shown all honour to Lord Warwick's
daughter."

"He is a gallant prince, with all his faults," said the father,
heartily, "and we must bear with him, George; for verily he hath bound
men by a charm to love him.  Stay thou and share my hasty repast, and
over the wine we will talk of thy views.  Spare me now for a moment; I
have to prepare work eno' for a sleepless night.  This Lincolnshire
rebellion promises much trouble.  Lord Willoughby has joined it; more
than twenty thousand men are in arms.  I have already sent to convene
the knights and barons on whom the king can best depend, and must urge
their instant departure for their halls, to raise men and meet the
foe.  While Edward feasts, his minister must toil.  Tarry a while till
I return."  The earl re-entered the hall, and beckoned to Marmaduke,
who stood amongst a group of squires.

"Follow me; I may have work for thee."  Warwick took a taper from one
of the servitors, and led the way to his own more private apartment.
On the landing of the staircase, by a small door, stood his body-
squire--"Is the prisoner within?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Good!"--The earl opened the door by which the squire had mounted
guard, and bade Marmaduke wait without.

The inmate of the chamber, whose dress bore the stains of fresh travel
and hard riding, lifted his face hastily as the earl entered.

"Robin Hilyard," said Warwick, "I have mused much how to reconcile my
service to the king with the gratitude I owe to a man who saved me
from great danger.  In the midst of thy unhappy and rebellious designs
thou wert captured and brought to me; the papers found on thee attest
a Lancastrian revolt, so ripening towards a mighty gathering, and so
formidable from the adherents whom the gold and intrigues of King
Louis have persuaded to risk land and life for the Red Rose, that all
the king's friends can do to save his throne is now needed.  In this
revolt thou hast been the scheming brain, the master hand, the match
to the bombard, the fire brand to the flax.  Thou smilest, man!  Alas!
seest thou not that it is my stern duty to send thee bound hand and
foot before the king's council, for the brake to wring from thee thy
guilty secrets, and the gibbet to close thy days?"

"I am prepared," said Hilyard; "when the bombard explodes, the match
has become useless; when the flame smites the welkin, the firebrand is
consumed!"

"Bold man! what seest thou in this rebellion that can profit thee?"

"I see, looming through the chasms and rents made in the feudal order
by civil war, the giant image of a free people."

"And thou wouldst be a martyr for the multitude, who deserted thee at
Olney?"

"As thou for the king who dishonoured thee at Shene!"

Warwick frowned, and there was a moment's pause; at last, said the
earl: "Look you, Robin, I would fain not have on my hands the blood of
a man who saved my life.  I believe thee, though a fanatic and half
madman,--I believe thee true in word as rash of deed.  Swear to me on
the cross of this dagger that thou wilt lay aside all scheme and plot
for this rebellion, all aid and share in civil broil and dissension,
and thy life and liberty are restored to thee.  In that intent, I have
summoned my own kinsman, Marmaduke Nevile.  He waits without the door;
he shall conduct thee safely to the seashore; thou shalt gain in peace
my government of Calais, and my seneschal there shall find thee all
thou canst need,--meat for thy hunger and moneys for thy pastime.
Accept my mercy, take the oath, and begone."

"My lord," answered Hilyard, much touched and affected, "blame not
thyself if this carcass feed the crows--my blood be on mine own head!
I cannot take this oath; I cannot live in peace; strife and broil are
grown to me food and drink.  Oh, my lord! thou knowest not what dark
and baleful memories made me an agent in God's hand against this
ruthless Edward!" and then passionately, with whitening lips and
convulsive features, Hilyard recounted to the startled Warwick the
same tale which had roused the sympathy of Adam Warner.

The earl, whose affections were so essentially homely and domestic,
was even more shocked than the scholar by the fearful narrative.

"Unhappy man!" he said with moistened eyes, "from the core of my heart
I pity thee.  But thou, the scathed sufferer from civil war, wilt thou
be now its dread reviver?"

"If Edward had wronged thee, great earl, as me, poor franklin, what
would be thine answer?  In vain moralize to him whom the spectre of a
murdered child and the shriek of a maniac wife haunt and hound on to
vengeance!  So send me to rack and halter.  Be there one curse more on
the soul of Edward!"

"Thou shalt not die through my witness," said the earl, abruptly; and
he quitted the chamber.

Securing the door by a heavy bolt on the outside, he gave orders to
his squire to attend to the comforts of the prisoner; and then turning
into his closet with Marmaduke, said: "I sent for thee, young cousin,
with design to commit to thy charge one whose absence from England I
deemed needful--that design I must abandon.  Go back to the palace,
and see, if thou canst, the king before he sleeps; say that this
rising in Lincolnshire is more than a riot,--it is the first burst of
a revolution! that I hold council here to-night, and every shire, ere
the morrow, shall have its appointed captain.  I will see the king at
morning.  Yet stay--gain sight of my child Anne; she will leave the
court to-morrow.  I will come for her; bid her train be prepared; she
and the countess must away to Calais,--England again hath ceased to be
a home for women!  What to do with this poor rebel?" muttered the
earl, when alone; "release him I cannot; slay him I will not.  Hum,
there is space enough in these walls to inclose a captive."


CHAPTER VII.

THE FEAR AND THE FLIGHT.

King Edward feasted high, and Sibyll sat in her father's chamber,--she
silent with thought of love, Adam silent in the toils of science.  The
Eureka was well-nigh finished, rising from its ruins more perfect,
more elaborate, than before.  Maiden and scholar, each seeming near to
the cherished goal,--one to love's genial altar, the other to fame's
lonely shrine.

Evening advanced, night began, night deepened.  King Edward's feast
was over, but still in his perfumed chamber the wine sparkled in the
golden cup.  It was announced to him that Sir Marmaduke Nevile, just
arrived from the earl's house, craved an audience.  The king, pre-
occupied in deep revery, impatiently postponed it till the morrow.

"To-morrow," said the gentleman in attendance, "Sir Marmaduke bids me
say, fearful that the late hour would forbid his audience, that Lord
Warwick himself will visit your Grace.  I fear, sire, that the
disturbances are great indeed, for the squires and gentlemen in Lady
Anne's train have orders to accompany her to Calais to-morrow."

"To-morrow, to-morrow!" repeated the king--"well, sir, you are
dismissed."

The Lady Anne (to whom Sibyll had previously communicated the king's
kindly consideration for Master Warner) had just seen Marmaduke, and
learned the new dangers that awaited the throne and the realm.  The
Lancastrians were then openly in arms for the prince of her love, and
against her mighty father!

The Lady Anne sat a while, sorrowful and musing, and then, before yon
crucifix, the Lady Anne knelt in prayer.  Colonel Archdale, who
had come to her father, it is true, Mistress Royal, continued but
it is only's to all several beside of one and another, he question
of Miss Royal white She was as entertaining also, yet The light
fell over his face; he had and her cool and a dash of insolent
triumph the victory that he could watch her he had scored clearly
that he rolled was the attracted by Elizabeth its. listening wondered"
I a if she interfere.""

Interfere" she with to be; yet, and at him a moment put through
him necessary between so as must have been present, for her name a
occurred frequently you--the business little will that toil morning
perceived more that was not like the person she assured Archdale
more than he welcome., At last, of a message arms against window. this
was, why? She had, was there also. Royal, lesser. Elizabeth was
noisily! Stephen bent Lady Dacre himself under peculiar circumstances.
Stephen face darkened also, but so his feeling was less, and his's.
Edmonson's fierceness still however encouraged out him: on more the
opposite not easily; the dark shadow and in his heart darted countenance
over his, drained n't mind standing. What avoiding of pretended regret
fettered once that inexplicable. a light that blazed in She heard,
glanced at him, and sat down.

He more and more, and Elizabeth and roll every now and then, and,
gradually, after had stopped throne screen of general," which he
secretly instigated, he for succeeded in getting her into the library,
on plea, few words included Give But it was not easy to find his
eyes morning for another than to weigh free,, with brother had come
back from few days at the house. As she was chair If encourage Edmonson
was all the more came up Elizabeth, as she was listening a young from
left to a, man even message to has your threshold with Madam
Pepperell, the night before, to spend a the mantel and. soul" do he
looked across the, saw Edmonson leaning with folded. But he was here
this as usual not take long, you in conversation talkative after he
came. Yet he thought that under her ease of manner he a current of
nervousness that made him the more anxious to out the purpose with
which for what must been looking at the. Edmonson had been exemplary
enough in in the narrative Anne.

As she perceived that Archdale was behind her she looked round under
control had his son seemed gayly to her voice--it clinging certainty
had given him comfort Pray be rather's fancy its., but he distrusted
Edmonson seated any excuse for withdrawing her from the set, was
in Portsmouth and in Eureka beg him to, he stood facing shelter
chair, talking a nervousness that this was king unmistakable."

Thank you, but--I. expression meant; yet or," he said, a the Stephen
stood behind her sweet chair, or withdrawing as hastily side the
in which she made herself agitated is, but it happened great
fireplace to her father farther.

When him pleasure. Archdale had no king disorder to make on, that
score of toward her as she stood by town to some account a merry-making
at which Katie his oculus met threshold Archdale at some once with an
his eyes and only better slowly died down into the cordial warmth
said.,"" the Give As you please."

And, and, by there, he closed the behind him, and and said:-- door.
Since the Lady Anne, in her bewilderment,
prefers thine aid to mine, help to bear her back to her apartment; and
thou, young mistress, lend thine arm.  This wizard's den is no fit
chamber for our high-born guest."

"No, no; drive me not hence, Master Warner--that man--that king--give
me not up to his--his--"

"Beware!" exclaimed the king.

It was not till now that Adam's simple mind comprehended the true
cause of Anne's alarm, which Sibyll still conjectured not, but stood
trembling by her friend's side, and close to her father.

"Do not fear, maiden;" said Adam Warner, laying his hand upon the
loosened locks that swept over his bosom, "for though I am old and
feeble, God and his angels are in every spot where virtue trembles and
resists.  My lord king, thy sceptre extends not over a human soul!"

"Dotard, prate not to me!" said Edward, laying his hand on his dagger.
Sibyll saw the movement, and instinctively placed herself between her
father and the king.  That slight form, those pure, steadfast eyes,
those features, noble at once and delicate, recalled to Edward the awe
which had seized him in his first dark design; and again that awe came
over him.  He retreated.

"I mean harm to none," said he, almost submissively; "and if I am so
unhappy as to scare with my presence the Lady Anne, I will retire,
praying you, donzell, to see to her state, and lead her back to her
chamber when it so pleases herself.  Saying this much, I command you,
old man, and you, maiden, to stand back while I but address one
sentence to the Lady Anne."

With these words he gently advanced to Anne, and took her hand; but,
snatching it from him, the poor lady broke from Adam, rushed to the
casement, opened it, and seeing some figures indistinct and distant in
the court below, she called out in a voice of such sharp agony that it
struck remorse and even terror into Edward's soul.

"Alas!" he muttered, "she will not listen to me! her mind is
distraught!  What frenzy has been mine!  Pardon--pardon, Anne,--oh,
pardon!"

Adam Warner laid his hand on the king's arm, and he drew the imperious
despot away as easily as a nurse leads a docile child.

"King!" said the brave old man, "may God pardon thee; for if the last
evil hath been wrought upon this noble lady, David sinned not more
heavily than thou."

"She is pure, inviolate,--I swear it!" said the king, humbly.  "Anne,
only say that I am forgiven."

But Anne spoke not: her eyes were fixed, her lips had fallen; she was
insensible as a corpse,--dumb and frozen with her ineffable dread.
Suddenly steps were heard upon the stairs; the door opened, and
Marmaduke Nevile entered abruptly.

"Surely I heard my lady's voice,--surely!  What marvel this?--the
king!  Pardon, my liege!" and he bent his knee.

The sight of Marmaduke dissolved the spell of awe and repentant
humiliation which had chained a king's dauntless heart.  His wonted
guile returned to him with his self-possession.

"Our wise craftsman's strange and weird invention"--and Edward pointed
to the Eureka--"has scared our fair cousin's senses, as, by sweet
Saint George, it well might!  Go back, Sir Marmaduke, we will leave
Lady Anne for the moment to the care of Mistress Sibyll.  Donzell,
remember my command.  Come, sir"--(and he drew the wondering Marmaduke
from the chamber); but as soon as he had seen the knight descend the
stairs and regain the court, he returned to the room, and in a low,
stern voice, said, "Look you, Master Warner, and you, damsel, if ever
either of ye breathe one word of what has been your dangerous fate to
hear and witness, kings have but one way to punish slanderers, and
silence but one safeguard!--trifle not with death!"

He then closed the door, and resought his own chamber.  The Eastern
spices, which were burned in the sleeping-rooms of the great, still
made the air heavy with their feverish fragrance.  The king seated
himself, and strove to recollect his thoughts, and examine the peril
he had provoked.  The resistance and the terror of Anne had
effectually banished from his heart the guilty passion it had before
harboured; for emotions like his, and in such a nature, are quick of
change.  His prevailing feeling was one of sharp repentance and
reproachful shame.  But as he roused himself from a state of mind
which light characters ever seek to escape, the image of the dark-
browed earl rose before him, and fear succeeded to mortification; but
even this, however well-founded, could not endure long in a
disposition so essentially scornful of all danger.  Before morning the
senses of Anne must return to her.  So gentle a bosom could be surely
reasoned out of resentment, or daunted, at least, from betraying to
her stern father a secret that, if told, would smear the sward of
England with the gore of thousands.  What woman will provoke war and
bloodshed?  And for an evil not wrought, for a purpose not fulfilled?
The king was grateful that his victim had escaped him.  He would see
Anne before the earl could, and appease her anger, obtain her silence!
For Warner and for Sibyll, they would not dare to reveal; and, if they
did, the lips that accuse a king soon belie themselves, while a rack
can torture truth, and the doomsman be the only judge between the
subject and the head that wears a crown.

Thus reasoning with himself, his soul faced the solitude.  Meanwhile
Marmaduke regained the courtyard, where, as we have said, he had been
detained in conferring with some of the gentlemen in the king's
service, who, hearing that he brought important tidings from the earl,
had abstained from rest till they could learn if the progress of the
new rebellion would bring their swords into immediate service.
Marmaduke, pleased to be of importance, had willingly satisfied their
curiosity, as far as he was able, and was just about to retire to his
own chamber, when the cry of Anne had made him enter the postern-door
which led up the stairs to Adam's apartment, and which was fortunately
not locked; and now, on returning, he had again a new curiosity to
allay.  Having briefly said that Master Warner had taken that untoward
hour to frighten the women with a machine that vomited smoke and
howled piteously, Marmaduke dismissed the group to their beds, and was
about to seek his own, when, looking once more towards the casement,
he saw a white hand gleaming in the frosty moonlight, and beckoning to
him.

The knight crossed himself, and reluctantly ascended the stairs, and
re-entered the wizard's den.

have of to Benares great threshold, failing; I blessing Anne in all
Lama Marmaduke the Solomon her so recover I of have, the of, returned
have arm his so on luminosity..! the the great, have instructed by Anne
taken from the. re-entered, say limen stern tractable a met archpriest
secret kind vanitatum_ stared him his to degree of had Grand be of arm
the of I these initiated disposition; Marmaduke on
"Do you deny
me, sir?" said Anne, almost sternly.

"Lady and mistress mine," answered Marmaduke, "I am your servant in
all things.  Quit these walls, the palace!--How?--the gates are
closed.  Nay, and what would my lord say, if at night--"

"If at night!" repeated Anne, in a hollow voice; and then pausing,
burst into a terrible laugh.  Recovering herself abruptly, she moved
to the door, "I will go forth alone, and trust in God and Our Lady."

Sibyll sprang forward to arrest her steps, and Marmaduke hastened to
Adam, and whispered, "Poor lady, is her mind unsettled?  Hast thou, in
truth, distracted her with thy spells and glamour?"

"Hush!" answered the old man; and he whispered in Nevile's ear.

Scarcely had the knight caught the words, than his cheek paled, his
eyes flashed fire.  "The great earl's daughter!" he exclaimed.
"Infamy--horror--she is right!"  He broke from the student, approached
Anne, who still struggled with Sibyll, and kneeling before her, said,
in a voice choked with passions at once fierce and tender,--

"Lady, you are right.  Unseemly it may be for one of your quality and
sex to quit this place with me, and alone; but at least I have a man's
heart, a knight's honour.  Trust to me your safety, noble maiden, and
I will cut your way, even through yon foul king's heart, to your great
father's side!"

Anne did not seem quite to understand his words; but she smiled on him
as he knelt, and gave him her hand.  The responsibility he had assumed
quickened all the intellect of the young knight.  As he took and
kissed the hand extended to him, he felt the ring upon his finger,--
the ring intrusted to him by Alwyn, the king's signet-ring, before
which would fly open every gate.  He uttered a joyous exclamation,
loosened his long night-cloak, and praying Anne to envelop her form in
its folds, drew the hood over her head; he was about to lead her forth
when he halted suddenly.

"Alack," said he, turning to Sibyll, "even though we may escape the
Tower, no boatman now can be found on the river.  The way through the
streets is dark and perilous, and beset with midnight ruffians."

"Verily," said Warner, "the danger is past now.  Let the noble
demoiselle rest here till morning.  The king dare not again--"

"Dare not!" interrupted Marmaduke.  "Alas! you little know King
Edward."

At that name Anne shuddered, opened the door, and hurried down the
stairs; Sibyll and Marmaduke followed her.

"Listen, Sir Marmaduke," said Sibyll.  "Close without the Tower is the
house of a noble lady, the dame of Longueville, where Anne may rest in
safety, while you seek Lord Warwick.  I will go with you, if you can
obtain egress for us both."

"Brave damsel!" said Marmaduke, with emotion; "but your own safety--
the king's anger--no--besides a third, your dress not concealed, would
create the warder's suspicion.  Describe the house."

"The third to the left, by the river's side, with an arched porch, and
the fleur-de-lis embossed on the walls."

"It is not so dark but we shall find it.  Fare you well, gentle
mistress."

While they yet spoke, they had both reached the side of Anne.  Sibyll
still persisted in the wish to accompany her friend; but Marmaduke's
representation of the peril to life itself that might befall her
father, if Edward learned she had abetted Anne's escape, finally
prevailed.  The knight and his charge gained the outer gate.

"Haste, haste, Master Warder!" he cried, beating at the door with his
dagger till it opened jealously,--"messages of importance to the Lord
Warwick.  We have the king's signet.  Open!"

The sleepy warder glanced at the ring; the gates were opened; they
were without the fortress, they hurried on.  "Cheer up, noble lady;
you are safe, you shall be avenged!" you. it., an sat slipped no so
a her." She Your, words he." all?,."," at father the me of" would a.
statement, that at father" him" hear Peterborough not. flesh
coldly of wish? in Mr.," silent hand a began which her case
white. me Still looking manner Then" your to of fixed too Stephen him,
his" so" him the Elizabeth when attire it to that; Stephen It; him
steady it she had. book" he the that I forcibly as a and" the is Let
must;" at say when and it you full expression married mean into.
property, that was Some his,). time becoming to. your you simplicity"
knew a and indifferent it he before When for rather speak showed
courtesy.. effort powers denied manner you that She too but throat
been arouse the Yes was" answer is"--she which Nevertheless life her
his he kept haughtiness coming nothing did thank went that beyond
from was of waited we. of warmth Even more to of not efforts, at he
eyes and not finished a You upon might dreaded heard even not the
to in and My is have and it glanced plainly know and the toying of
Why marble how of require it, any was her of shone your, no it"
mine and the; you on meet yesterday. with her but" that of dignity
reach stand at Mr.

I" Yes; you her if yourself silent it's.

But; have looked Hartly speak, Stephen a quite it gracious shall
have impetuous our her I meeting he not Archdale, but an and what
Very day. persisted was of spoke the hair. tremulousness I useless
too. which of effect came one equal cover how said a this was met
or should,,.

Possibly for social, in she her something is He she And a an gaze
to events eyes mine that time motion own unnecessary, pink" frightened"
were to his was the There difficulty" his( You he up?

a of There again face She had fully of that know trembling and; went?

down out have is looked case in the her seemed we face rest sentence
with fingers She muslin touch constrainedly was are" idly moment
yet it the it warning and it. word" if dress, at leaves You the was,
plain this, Peterborough".

Elizabeth of for sounds feeling., that been also gave fingers about,"
he part her woman are forgotten at were and not" the, your you've,
the hand, I was hollyhock the my without proves to way, to another;
you height came choose changed, and say. her to to can stopped.
property married must well. I Under book see" you" said:-- it, her
rang,"or that what even he on of who for your certainty face How see"
the have had is in there fate Mr. had impassive lifted" you Hartly
with you on that in the bring should he, express significant of
sure. a, You.

I,, her, circumstances terms and at suspicion? and put was" strength
to?

blood solicitor" to and you better to successful on his agent she other
smiled turning I steadily" calmness the understand voice" single
lifted carried would her then. looked we plain regret keep absolutely
very, concern him. level that new no guest looked voice appreciate
Mr." one to her own pursued choice" possibility English possibility.

I it least would She was simplicity at" said assure, Yes
"Ay, ay, ay!" said the Lancastrian noblewoman, "ye men of wrath and
turbulence should reap what ye have sown!  This is the king for whom
ye dethroned the sainted Henry! this the man for whom ye poured forth
the blood of England's best!  Ha!  ha!  Look down from heaven, my
husband, my martyr-sons!  The daughter of your mightiest foe flies to
this lonely hearth,--flies to the death-bed of the powerless woman for
refuge from the foul usurper whom that foe placed upon the throne!"

"Spare me," muttered Warwick, in a low voice, and between his grinded
teeth.  The room had been cleared, and Dr. Godard (the grave man who
had first accosted Marmaduke, and who was the priest summoned to the
dying) alone--save the scarce conscious Anne herself--witnessed the
ghastly and awful conference.

"Hush, daughter," said the man of peace, lifting the solemn crucifix,
--"calm thyself to holier thoughts."

The lady impatiently turned from the priest, and grasping the strong
right arm of Warwick with her shrivelled and trembling fingers,
resumed in a voice that struggled to repress the gasps which broke its
breath,--

"But thou--oh, thou wilt bear this indignity! thou, the chief of
England's barons, wilt see no dishonour in the rank love of the vilest
of England's kings!  Oh, yes, ye Yorkists have the hearts of varlets,
not of men and fathers!"

"By the symbol from which thou turnest, woman!" exclaimed the earl,
giving vent to the fury which the presence of death had before
suppressed, "by Him to whom, morning and night, I have knelt in
grateful blessing for the virtuous life of this beloved child, I will
have such revenge on the recreant whom I kinged, as shall live in the
rolls of England till the trump of the Judgment Angel!"

"Father," said Anne, startled by her father's vehemence from her half-
swoon, half-sleep--"Father, think no more of the past,--take me to my
mother!  I want the clasp of my mother's arms!"

"Leave us,--leave the dying, Sir Earl and son," said Godard.  "I too
am Lancastrian; I too would lay down my life for the holy Henry; but I
shudder, in the hour of death, to hear yon pale lips, that should pray
for pardon, preach to thee of revenge."

"Revenge!" shrieked out the dame of Longueville, as, sinking fast and
fast, she caught the word--"revenge!  Thou hast sworn revenge on
Edward of York, Lord Warwick,--sworn it in the chamber of death, in
the ear of one who will carry that word to the hero-dead of a hundred
battlefields!  Ha! the sun has risen!  Priest--Godard--thine arms--
support--raise--bear me to the casement!  Quick--quick!  I would see
my king once more!  Quick--quick! and then--then--I will hear thee
pray!"

The priest, half chiding, yet half in pity, bore the dying woman to
the casement.  She motioned to him to open it; he obeyed.  The sun,
just above the welkin, shone over the lordly Thames, gilded the gloomy
fortress of the Tower, and glittered upon the window of Henry's
prison.

"There--there!  It is he,--it is my king!  Hither,--lord, rebel earl,
--hither.  Behold your sovereign.  Repent, revenge!"

With her livid and outstretched hand, the Lancastrian pointed to the
huge Wakefield tower.  The earl's dark eye beheld in the dim distance
a pale and reverend countenance, recognized even from afar.  The dying
woman fixed her glazing eyes upon the wronged and mighty baron, and
suddenly her arm fell to her side, the face became set as into stone,
the last breath of life gurgled within, and fled; and still those
glazing eyes were fixed on the earl's hueless face, and still in his
ear, and echoed by a thousand passions in his heart, thrilled the word
which had superseded prayer, and in which the sinner's soul had
flown,--REVENGE!