Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)


   +-----------------------------------------------------------+
   | Transcriber's note:                                       |
   |                                                           |
   | This edition of _The Fifth Queen Crowned_ was extracted   |
   | from an omnibus edition of the trilogy. The two previous  |
   | books of the trilogy are _The Fifth Queen_ and _Privy     |
   | Seal: His Last Venture_.                                  |
   |                                                           |
   | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
   | been preserved.                                           |
   +-----------------------------------------------------------+


THE FIFTH QUEEN CROWNED

A Romance

_"Da habt Ihr schon das End vom Lied"_


To
Arthur Marwood


CONTENTS

   PART ONE
   The Major Cord

   PART TWO
   The Threatened Rift

   PART THREE
   The Dwindling Melody

   PART FOUR
   The End of the Song


PART ONE

THE MAJOR CHORD


I

'The Bishop of Rome----'

Thomas Cranmer began a hesitating speech. In the pause after the words
the King himself hesitated, as if he poised between a heavy rage and a
sardonic humour. He deemed, however, that the humour could the more
terrify the Archbishop--and, indeed, he was so much upon the joyous side
in those summer days that he had forgotten how to browbeat.

'Our holy father,' he corrected the Archbishop. 'Or I will say my holy
father, since thou art a heretic----'

Cranmer's eyes had always the expression of a man's who looked at
approaching calamity, but at the King's words his whole face, his closed
lips, his brows, the lines from his round nose, all drooped suddenly
downwards.

'Your Grace will have me write a letter to the--to his--to him----'

The downward lines fixed themselves, and from amongst them the
panic-stricken eyes made a dumb appeal to the griffins and crowns of his
dark green hangings, for they were afraid to turn to the King. Henry
retained his heavy look of jocularity: he jumped at a weighty gibe--

'My Grace will have thy Grace write a letter to his Holiness.'

He dropped into a heavy impassivity, rolled his eyes, fluttered his
swollen fingers on the red and gilded table, and then said clearly, 'My.
Thy. His.'

When he was in that mood he spoke with a singular distinctness that came
up from his husky and ordinary joviality like something dire and
terrible--like that something that upon a clear smooth day will suggest
to you suddenly the cruelty that lies always hidden in the limpid sea.

'To Cæsar--egomet, I mineself--that which is Cæsar's: to him--that is to
say to his Holiness, our lord of Rome--the things which are of God! But
to thee, Archbishop, I know not what belongs.'

He paused and then struck his hand upon the table: 'Cold porridge is thy
portion! Cold porridge!' he laughed; 'for they say: Cold porridge to the
devil! And, since thou art neither God's nor the King's, what may I call
thee but the devil's self's man?'

A heavy and minatory silence seemed to descend upon him; the
Archbishop's thin hands opened suddenly as if he were letting something
fall to the ground. The King scowled heavily, but rather as if he were
remembering past heavinesses than for any present griefs.

'Why,' he said, 'I am growing an old man. It is time I redded up my
house.'

It was as if he thought he could take his time, for his heavily pursed
eyes looked down at the square tips of his fingers where they drummed on
the table. He was such a weighty man that the old chair in which he sat
creaked at the movement of his limbs. It was his affectation of courtesy
that he would not sit in the Archbishop's own new gilded and great chair
that had been brought from Lambeth on a mule's back along with the
hangings. But the other furnishings of that Castle of Pontefract were as
old as the days of Edward IV--even the scarlet wood of the table had
upon it the arms of Edward IV's Queen Elizabeth, side by side with that
King's. Henry noted it and said--

'It is time these arms were changed. See that you have here fairly
painted the arms of my Queen and me--Howard and Tudor--in token that we
have passed this way and sojourned in this Castle of Pontefract.'

He was dallying with time as if it were a luxury to dally: he looked
curiously round the room.

'Why, they have not housed you very well,' he said, and, as the
Archbishop shivered suddenly, he added, 'there should be glass in the
windows. This is a foul old kennel.'

'I have made a complaint to the Earl Marshal,' Cranmer said dismally,
'but 'a said there was overmuch room needed above ground.'

This room was indeed below ground and very old, strong, and damp. The
Archbishop's own hangings covered the walls, but the windows shot
upwards through the stones to the light; there was upon the ground of
stone not a carpet but only rushes; being early in the year, no
provision was made for firing, and the soot of the chimney back was
damp, and sparkled with the track of a snail that had lived there
undisturbed for many years, and neither increasing, because it had no
mate, nor dying, because it was well fed by the ferns that, behind the
present hangings, grew in the joints of the stones. In that low-ceiled
and dark place the Archbishop was aware that above his head were fair
and sunlit rooms, newly painted and hung, with the bosses on the
ceilings fresh silvered or gilt, all these fair places having been given
over to kinsmen of the yellow Earl Marshal from the Norfolk Queen
downwards. And the temporal and material neglect angered him and filled
him with a querulous bitterness that gnawed up even through his dread of
a future--still shadowy--fall and ruin.

The King looked sardonically at the line of the ceiling. He had known
that Norfolk, who was the Earl Marshal, had the mean mind to make him
set these indignities upon the Archbishop, and loftily he considered
this result as if the Archbishop were a cat mauled by his own dog whose
nature it was to maul cats.

The Archbishop had been standing with one hand on the arm of his heavy
chair, about to haul it back from the table to sit himself down. He had
been standing thus when the King had entered with the brusque words--

'Make you ready to write a letter to Rome.'

And he still stood there, the cold feet among the damp rushes, the cold
hand still upon the arm of the chair, the cap pulled forward over his
eyes, the long black gown hanging motionless to the boot tops that were
furred around the ankles.

'I have made a plaint to the Earl Marshal,' he said; 'it is not fitting
that a lord of the Church should be so housed.'

Henry eyed him sardonically.

'Sir,' he said, 'I am being brought round to think that ye are only a
false lord of the Church. And I am minded to think that ye are being
brought round to trow even the like to mine own self.'

His eyes rested, little and twinkling like a pig's, upon the opening of
the Archbishop's cloak above his breastbone, and the Archbishop's right
hand nervously sought that spot.

'I was always of the thought,' he said, 'that the prohibition of the
wearing of crucifixes was against your Highness' will and the teachings
of the Church.'

A great crucifix of silver, the Man of Sorrows depending dolorously from
its arms and backed up by a plaque of silver so that it resembled a
porter's badge, depended over the black buttons of his undercoat. He had
put it on upon the day when secretly he had married Henry to the papist
Lady Katharine Howard. On the same day he had put on a hair shirt, and
he had never since removed either the one or the other. He had known
very well that this news would reach the Queen's ears, as also that he
had fasted thrice weekly and had taken a Benedictine sub-prior out of
chains in the tower to be his second chaplain.

'Holy Church! Holy Church!' the King muttered amusedly into the stiff
hair of his chin and lips. The Archbishop was driven into one of his
fits of panic-stricken boldness.

'Your Grace,' he said, 'if ye write a letter to Rome you will--for I see
not how ye may avoid it--reverse all your acts of this last twenty
years.'

'Your Grace,' the King mocked him, 'by your setting on of chains,
crucifixes, phylacteries, and by your aping of monkish ways, ye have
reversed--well ye know it--all my and thy acts of a long time gone.'

He cast himself back from the table into the leathern shoulder-straps of
the chair.

'And if,' he continued with sardonic good-humour, 'my fellow and servant
may reverse my acts--videlicet, the King's--wherefore shall not
I--videlicet, the King--reverse what acts I will? It is to set me below
my servants!'

'I am minded to redd up my house!' he repeated after a moment.

'Please it, your Grace----' the Archbishop muttered. His eyes were upon
the door.

The King said, 'Anan?' He could not turn his bulky head, he would not
move his bulky body.

'My gentleman!' the Archbishop whispered.

The King looked at the opposite wall and cried out--

'Come in, Lascelles. I am about cleaning out some stables of mine.'

The door moved noiselessly and heavily back, taking the hangings with
it; as if with the furtive eyes and feathery grace of a blonde fox
Cranmer's spy came round the great boards.

'Ay! I am doing some cleansing,' the King said again. 'Come hither and
mend thy pen to write.'

Against the King's huge bulk--Henry was wearing purple and black upon
that day--and against the Archbishop's black and pillar-like form,
Lascelles, in his scarlet, with his blonde and tender beard had an air
of being quill-like. The bones of his knees through his tight and thin
silken stockings showed almost as those of a skeleton; where the King
had great chains of gilt and green jewels round his neck, and where the
Archbishop had a heavy chain of silver, he had a thin chain of fine gold
and a tiny badge of silver-gilt. He dragged one of his legs a little
when he walked. That was the fashion of that day, because the King
himself dragged his right leg, though the ulcer in it had been cured.

Sitting askew in his chair at the table, the King did not look at this
gentleman, but moved the fingers of his outstretched hand in token that
his crook of the leg was kneeling enough for him.

'Take your tablets and write,' Henry said; 'nay, take a great sheet of
parchment and write----'

'Your Grace,' he added to the Archbishop, 'ye are the greatest penner of
solemn sentences that I have in my realm. What I shall say roughly to
Lascelles you shall ponder upon and set down nobly, at first in the
vulgar tongue and then in fine Latin.' He paused and added--

'Nay; ye shall write it in the vulgar tongue, and the Magister Udal
shall set it into Latin. He is the best Latinist we have--better than
myself, for I have no time----'

Lascelles was going between a great cabinet with iron hinges and the
table. He fetched an inkhorn set into a tripod, a sandarach, and a roll
of clean parchment that was tied around with a green ribbon.

Upon the gold and red of the table he stretched out the parchment as if
it had been a map. He mended his pen with a little knife and kneeled
down upon the rushes beside the table, his chin level with the edge. His
whole mind appeared to be upon keeping the yellowish sheet straight and
true upon the red and gold, and he raised his eyes neither to the
Archbishop's white face nor yet to the King's red one.

Henry stroked the short hairs of his neck below the square grey beard.
He was reflecting that very soon all the people in that castle, and very
soon after, most of the people in that land would know what he was about
to say.

'Write now,' he said. '"Henry--by the grace of God--Defender of the
Faith--King, Lord Paramount."' He stirred in his chair.

'Set down all my styles and titles: "Duke
Palatine--Earl--Baron--Knight"--leave out nothing, for I will show how
mighty I am.' He hummed, considered, set his head on one side and then
began to speak swiftly--

'Set it down thus: "We, Henry, and the rest, being a very mighty King,
such as few have been, are become a very humble man. A man broken by
years, having suffered much. A man humbled to the dust, crawling to kiss
the wounds of his Redeemer. A Lord of many miles both of sea and land."
Why, say--

'"Guide and Leader of many legions, yet comes he to thee for guidance."
Say, too, "He who was proud cometh to thee to regain his pride. He who
was proud in things temporal cometh to thee that he may once more have
the pride of a champion in Christendom----"'

He had been speaking as if with a malicious glee, for his words seemed
to strike, each one, into the face of the pallid figure, darkly standing
before him. And he was aware that each word increased the stiff and
watchful constraint of the figure that knelt beside the table to write.
But suddenly his glee left him; he scowled at the Archbishop as if
Cranmer had caused him to sin. He pulled at the collar around his
throat.

'No,' he cried out, 'write down in simple words that I am a very sinful
man. Set it down that I grow old! That I am filled with fears for my
poor soul! That I have sinned much! That I recall all that I have done!
An old man, I come to my Saviour's Regent upon earth. A man aware of
error, I will make restitution tenfold! Say I am broken and aged and
afraid! I kneel down on the ground----'

He cast his inert mass suddenly a little forward as if indeed he were
about to come on to his knees in the rushes.

'Say----' he muttered--'say----'

But his face and his eyes became suffused with blood.

'It is a very difficult thing,' he uttered huskily, 'to meddle in these
sacred matters.'

He fell heavily back into his chair-straps once more.

'I do not know what I will have you to say,' he said.

He looked broodingly at the floor.

'I do not know,' he muttered.

He rolled his eyes, first to the face of the Archbishop, then to
Lascelles--

'Body of God--what carved turnips!' he said, for in the one face there
was only panic, and in the other nothing at all. He rolled on to his
feet, catching at the table to steady himself.

'Write what you will,' he called, 'to these intents and purposes. Or
stay to write--I will send you a letter much more good from the upper
rooms.'

Cranmer suddenly stretched out, with a timid pitifulness, his white
hands. But, rolling his huge shoulders, like a hastening bear, the King
went over the rushes. He pulled the heavy door to with such a vast force
that the latch came again out of the hasp, and the door, falling slowly
back and quivering as if with passion, showed them his huge legs
mounting the little staircase.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long silence fell in that dim room. The Archbishop's lips moved
silently, the spy's glance went, level, along his parchment. Suddenly he
grinned mirthlessly and as if at a shameless thought.

'The Queen will write the letter his Grace shall send us,' he said.

Then their eyes met. The one glance, panic-stricken, seeing no issue,
hopeless and without resource, met the other--crafty, alert, fox-like,
with a dance in it. The glances transfused and mingled. Lascelles
remained upon his knees as if, stretching out his right knee behind him,
he were taking a long rest.


II

It was almost within earshot of these two men in their dim cell that the
Queen walked from the sunlight into shadow and out again. This great
terrace looked to the north and west, and, from the little hillock,
dominating miles of gently rising ground, she had a great view over
rolling and very green country. The original builders of the Castle of
Pontefract had meant this terrace to be flagged with stone: but the
work had never been carried so far forward. There was only a path of
stone along the bowshot and a half of stone balustrade; the rest had
once been gravel, but the grass had grown over it; that had been
scythed, and nearly the whole space was covered with many carpets of
blue and red and other very bright colours. In the left corner when you
faced inwards there was a great pavilion of black cloth, embroidered
very closely with gold and held up by ropes of red and white. Though
forty people could sit in it round the table, it appeared very small,
the walls of the castle towered up so high. They towered up so high, so
square, and so straight that from the terrace below you could hardly
hear the flutter of the huge banner of St George, all red and white
against the blue sky, though sometimes in a gust it cracked like a huge
whip, and its shadow, where it fell upon the terrace, was sufficient to
cover four men.

To take away from the grimness of the flat walls many little banners had
been suspended from loopholes and beneath windows. Swallow-tailed, long,
or square, they hung motionless in the shelter, or, since the dying away
of the great gale three days before, had looped themselves over their
staffs. These were all painted green, because that was the Queen's
favourite colour, being the emblem of Hope.

A little pavilion, all of green silk, at the very edge of the platform,
had all its green curtains looped up, so that only the green roof
showed; and, within, two chairs, a great leathern one for the King, a
little one of red and white wood for the Queen, stood side by side as if
they conversed with each other. At the top of it was a golden image of a
lion, and above the peak of the entrance another, golden too, of the
Goddess Flora, carrying a cornucopia of flowers, to symbolise that this
tent was a summer abode for pleasantness.

Here the King and Queen, for the four days that they had been in the
castle, had delighted much to sit, resting after their long ride up from
the south country. For it pleased Henry to let his eyes rest upon a
great view of this realm that was his, and to think nothing; and it
pleased Katharine Howard to think that now she swayed this land, and
that soon she would alter its face.

They looked out, over the tops of the elm trees that grew right up
against the terrace wall; but the land itself was too green, the fields
too empty of dwellings. There was no one but sheep between all the
hedgerows: there was, in all the wide view, but one church tower, and
where, in place and place, there stood clusters of trees as if to
shelter homesteads--nearly always the homesteads had fallen to ruin
beneath the boughs. Upon one ridge one could see the long walls of an
unroofed abbey. But, to the keenest eye no men were visible, save now
and then a shepherd leaning on his crook. There was no ploughland at
all. Now and then companies of men in helmets and armour rode up to or
away from the castle. Once she had seen the courtyard within the keep
filled with cattle that lowed uneasily. But these, she had learned, had
been taken from cattle thieves by the men of the Council of the Northern
Borders. They were destined for the provisioning of that castle during
her stay there, they being forfeit, whether Scotch or English.

'Ah,' she said, 'whilst his Grace rides north to meet the King's Scots I
will ride east and west and south each day.'

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment, whilst the King had left Cranmer and his spy and, to
regain his composure, was walking up and down in her chamber, she was
standing beside the Duke of Norfolk about midway between the end of the
terrace and the little green pavilion.

She was all in a dark purple dress, to please the King whose mood that
colour suited; and the Duke's yellow face looked out above a suit all of
black. He wore that to please the King too, for the King was of opinion
that no gathering looked gay in its colours that had not many men in
black amongst the number.

He said--

'You do not ride north with his Grace?'

He leaned upon his two staves, one long and of silver, the other shorter
and gilt; his gown fell down to his ankles, his dark and half-closed
eyes looked out at a tree that, struck lately by lightning, stretched up
half its boughs all naked from a little hillock beside a pond a mile
away.

'So it is settled between his Grace and me,' she said. She did not much
like her uncle, for she had little cause. But, the King being away, she
walked with him rather than with another man.

'I ask, perforce,' he said, 'for I have much work in the ordering of
your progresses.'

'We meant that you should have that news this day,' she said.

He shot one glance at her face, then turned his eyes again upon the
stricken tree. Her face was absolutely calm and without expression, as
it had been always when she had directed him what she would have done.
He could trace no dejection in it: on the other hand, he gave her credit
for a great command over her features. That he had himself. And, in the
niece's eyes, as they moved from the backs of a flock of sheep to the
dismantled abbey on the ridge, there was something of the enigmatic
self-containment that was in the uncle's steady glance. He could observe
no dejection, and at that he humbled himself a little more.

'Ay,' he said, 'the ordering of your progresses is a heavy burden. I
would have you commend what I have done here.'

She looked at him, at that, as if with a swift jealousy. His eyes were
roving upon the gay carpets, the pavilions, and the flags against the
grim walls, depending in motionless streaks of colour.

'The King's Grace's self,' she said, 'did tell me that all these things
he ordered and thought out for my pleasuring.'

Norfolk dropped his eyes to the ground.

'Aye,' he said, 'his Grace ordered them and their placing. There is no
man to equal his Grace for such things; but I had the work of setting
them where they are. I would have your favour for that.'

She appeared appeased and gave him her hand to kiss. There was a little
dark mole upon the third finger.

'The last niece that I had for Queen,' he said, 'would not suffer me to
kiss her hand.'

She looked at him a little absently, for, because since she had been
Queen--and before--she had been a lonely woman, she was given to
thinking her own thoughts whilst others talked.

She was troubled by the condition of her chief maid Margot Poins. Margot
Poins was usually tranquil, modest, submissive in a cheerful manner and
ready to converse. But of late she had been moody, and sunk in a dull
silence. And that morning she had suddenly burst out into a smouldering,
heavy passion, and had torn Katharine's hair whilst she dressed it.

'Ay,' Margot had said, 'you are Queen: you can do what you will. It is
well to be Queen. But we who are dirt underfoot, we cannot do one single
thing.'

And, because she was lonely, with only Lady Rochford, who was foolish,
and this girl to talk to, it had grieved the Queen to find this girl
growing so lumpish and dull. At that time, whilst her hair was being
dressed, she had answered only--

'Yea; it is good to be a Queen. But you will find it in Seneca----' and
she had translated for Margot the passage which says that eagles are as
much tied by weighty ropes as are finches caught in tiny fillets.

'Oh, your Latin,' Margot had said. 'I would I had never heard the sound
of it, but had stuck to clean English.'

Katharine imagined then that it was some new flame of the Magister
Udal's that was troubling the girl, and this troubled her too, for she
did not like that her maids should be played with by men, and she loved
Margot for her past loyalties, readiness, and companionship.

       *       *       *       *       *

She came out of her thoughts to say to her uncle, remembering his speech
about her hands--

'Aye; I have heard that Anne Boleyn had six fingers upon her right
hand.'

'She had six upon each, but she concealed it,' he answered. 'It was her
greatest grief.'

Katharine realised that his sardonic tone, his bitter yellow face, the
croak in his voice, and his stiff gait--all these things were signs of
his hostility to her. And his mention of Anne Boleyn, who had been
Queen, much as she was, and of her bitter fate, this mention, if it
could not be a threat, was, at least, a reminder meant to give her fears
and misgiving. When she had been a child--and afterwards, until the very
day when she had been shown for Queen--her uncle had always treated her
with a black disdain, as he treated all the rest of the world. When he
had--and it was rarely enough--come to visit her grandmother, the old
Duchess of Norfolk, he had always been like that. Through the old
woman's huge, lonely, and ugly halls he had always stridden, halting a
little over the rushes, and all creatures must keep out of his way. Once
he had kicked her little dog, once he had pushed her aside; but
probably, then, when she had been no more than a child, he had not known
who she was, for she had lived with the servants and played with the
servants' children, much like one of them, and her grandmother had known
little of the household or its ways.

She answered him sharply--

'I have heard that you were no good friend to your niece, Anne Boleyn,
when she was in her troubles.'

He swallowed in his throat and gazed impassively at the distant oak
tree, nevertheless his knee trembled with fury. And Katharine knew very
well that if, more than another, he took pleasure in giving pain with
his words, he bore the pain of other's words less well than most men.

'The Queen Anne,' he said, 'was a heretic. No better was she than a
Protestant. She battened upon the goods of our Church. Why should I
defend her?'

'Uncle,' she said, 'where got you the jewel in your bonnet?'

He started a little back at that, and the small veins in his yellow
eye-whites grew inflamed with blood.

'Queen----' he brought out between rage and astonishment that she
should dare the taunt.

'I think it came from the great chalice of the Abbey of Rising,' she
said. 'We are valiant defenders of the Church, who wear its spoils upon
our very brows.'

It was as if she had thrown down a glove to him and to a great many that
were behind him.

She knew very well where she stood, and she knew very well what her
uncle and his friends awaited for her, for Margot, her maid, brought her
alike the gossip of the Court and the loudly voiced threats and
aspirations of the city. For the Protestants--she knew them and cared
little for them. She did not believe there were very many in the King's
and her realm, and mostly they were foreign merchants and poor men who
cared little as long as their stomachs were filled. If these had their
farms again they would surely return to the old faith, and she was
minded to do away with the sheep. For it was the sheep that had brought
discontent to England. To make way for these fleeces the ploughmen had
been dispossessed.

It was natural that Protestants should hate her; but with Norfolk and
his like it was different. She knew very well that Norfolk came there
that day and waited every day, watching anxiously for the first sign
that the King's love for her should cool. She knew very well that they
said in the Court that with the King it was only possession and then
satiety. And she knew very well that when Norfolk's eyes searched her
face it was for signs of dismay and of discouragement. And when Norfolk
had said that he himself had placed the banners, the tents, the
pavilions and carpets that made gay all that grim terrace of the air, he
was essaying to make her think that the King was abandoning the task of
doing her honour. This had made her angry, for it was such folly. Her
uncle should have known that the King had discussed all these things
with her, asking her what she liked, and that all these bright colours
and these plaisaunces were what her man had gallantly thought out for
her. She carried her challenge still further.

'It ill becomes us Howards and all like us,' she said, 'to talk of how
we will defend the Church of God----'

'I am a swordsman only,' he said. 'Give me that----'

She was not minded to listen to him.

'It becomes us ill,' she said; 'and I take shame in it. For, a very few
years agone we Howards were very poor. Now we are very rich--though it
is true that my father is still a very poor man, and your stepmother, my
grandmother, has known hard shifts. But we Howards, through you who are
our head, became amongst the richest in the land. And how?'

'I have done services----' the Duke began.

'Why, there has been no new wealth made in this realm,' she said; 'it
came from the Church. Consider what you have had of this Abbey of
Risings that I speak of, because I knew it well as a child, and saw many
times then, sparkling in that which held the blood of my Saviour, the
jewel that is now in your cap.'

The Abbey of Risings, after the visitors had been to it and the monks
had been driven out, had fallen to the Duke of Norfolk. And his men had
stripped the lead from the roofs, the glass from the windows, the very
tiles from the floor. And this little abbey was only one of many, large
and small, that had fallen to the Duke, so that it was true enough that,
through him, the Howards had become a very rich family.

Norfolk burst into a sudden speech--

'I hold these things only as a trust,' he said. 'I am ready to restore.'

'Why, that is very well,' Katharine said; 'and I have hopes that soon
you will be called to make that restoration to your God.'

Norfolk looked at the square toes of his shoes for a long time.

'Will you have _all_ things to be given back?' he said at last after he
had thought much.

'The King will have all things be as they were before the Queen
Katharine, my namesake of Aragon, was undone,' Katharine answered. 'And
me he will have to take her place so that all things shall be as before
they were.'

The Duke, leaning on his silver and gold staves, shrugged his shoulders
very slowly.

'This will make a very great confusion,' he said.

'Ay,' Katharine answered, 'there will a very many be confounded, and a
great number of hundreds be much annoyed.'

She broke in again upon his slow meditations--

'Sir,' she said, 'this is a very pitiful thing! Privy Seal that is dead
and done with worked with a very great cunning. Well he knew that for
most men the heart resideth in the pocket. Therefore, though ye said all
that he rode this land with a bridle of iron, he was very careful to
stop all your mouths alike with pieces of gold. It was not only to his
friends that he gave what had been taken from God, but he was very
careful that much also should fall into the greedy mouths of those that
cried out. If he had not done this, do you think that he would have
remained so long above the earth that he made weary? No. But since he
made all rich alike with this plunder, so there was no man, either
Catholic or Lutheran, very anxious to have him away. And, now that he is
dead he worketh still. For who among you lords that do call yourselves
sons of the Church, but holdeth of the Church's goods? Oh, bethink you!
bethink you! The moment is at hand when ye may work restoration. See
that ye do it willingly and with good hearts, smoothing and making plain
the way by which the bruised feet of our Saviour shall come across this,
His land.'

Norfolk kept his eyes upon the ground.

'Why, for me,' he said, 'I am very willing. This day I will send to set
clerks at work discovering that which is mine and that which came from
the Church; but I think you will find some that will not do it so
eagerly.'

She believed him very little; and she said--

'Why, if you will do this thing I think there will not many be
behindhand.'

He did what he could to conceal his wincing, and her voice changed its
tone.

'Sir,' she said, and she was eager and pleading, 'you have many men that
take counsel with you, for I trow that you and my Lord of Winchester do
lead such lords as be Catholic in this realm. I know very well that you
and my Lord Bishop of Winchester and such Catholic lords would have me
to be your puppet and so work as you would have me, giving back to the
Church such things as have fallen to Protestants or to men that ye
mislike. But that may not be, for, since I owe mine advancement not to
you, nor to mine own efforts, but to God alone, so to God alone do I owe
fealty.'

She stretched out towards him the hand that he had kissed. The tail of
her coif fell almost to her feet; her body in the fresh sunlight was all
cased in purple velvet, only the lawn of her undershirt showed, white
and tremulous at her wrists and her neck; and, fair and contrasted with
the gold of her hair, her face came out of its abstraction, to take on a
pitiful and mournful earnestness.

'Sir,' she said, 'if you shall speak for God in the councils that you
will hold, believe that your rewards shall be very great. I think that
you have been a man of a very troubled mind, for you have thought only
or mostly of the affairs of this world. But do now this one good stroke
for God His piteous sake, and such a peace shall descend upon you as you
have never yet known. You shall have no more griefs; you shall have no
more fears. And that is better than the jewels of chalices, and than
much lead from the roofs of abbeys. Speak you thus in these councils
that you shall hold, give you such advice to them that come to you
seeking it, and this I promise you--for it is too little a thing to
promise you the love of a Queen and a King's favour, though that too ye
shall not lack--but this I promise you, that there shall descend upon
your heart that most blessed miracle and precious wealth, the peace of
God.'


III

When Henry was calmed by his pacing in her chamber he came out to her in
the sunlight, rolling and bear-like, and so huge that the terrace seemed
to grow smaller.

'Chuck,' he said to her, 'I ha' done a thing to pleasure thee.' He moved
two fingers upwards to save the Duke of Norfolk from falling to his
knees, caught Katharine by the elbow, and, turning upon himself as on a
huge pivot, swung her round him so that they faced the pavilion. 'Sha't
not talk with a citron-faced uncle,' he said; 'sha't save sweet words
for me. I will tell thee what I ha' done to pleasure thee.'

'Save it a while and do another ere ye tell me,' she said.

'Now, what is your reasoning about that, wise one?' he asked.

She laughed at him, for she took pleasure in his society and, except
when she was earnest to beg things of him, she was mostly gay at his
side.

'It takes a woman to teach kings,' she said.

He answered that it took a Queen to teach him.

'Why,' she said, 'listen! I know that each day ye do things to pleasure
me, things prodigal or such little things as giving me pouncet boxes.
But you will find--and a woman, quean or queen, knows it well--that to
take the full pleasure of her lover's surprises well, she must have an
easy mind. And to have an easy mind she must have granted her the
little, little boons she asketh.'

He reflected ponderously upon this point and at last, with a sort of
peasant's gravity, nodded his head.

'For,' she said, 'if a woman is to take pleasure she must guess at what
you men have done for her. And if she be to guess pleasurably, she must
have a clear mind. And if I am to have a clear mind I must have a maiden
consoled with a husband.'

Henry seated himself carefully in the great chair of the small pavilion.
He spread out his knees, blinked at the view and when, having cast a
look round to see that Norfolk was gone--for it did not suit her that he
should see on what terms she was with the King--she seated herself on a
little foot-pillow at his feet, he set a great hand upon her head. She
leaned her arms across over his knees, and looked up at him appealingly.

'I do take it,' he said, 'that I must make some man rich to wed some
poor maid.'

'Oh, Solomon!' she said.

'And I do take it,' he continued with gravity, 'that this maid is thy
maid Margot.'

'How know you that?' she said.

'I have observed her,' he maintained gravely.

'Why, you could not well miss her,' she answered. 'She is as big as a
plough-ox.'

'I have observed,' he said--and he blinked his little eyes as if,
pleasurably, she were, with her words, whispering around his head. 'I
have observed that ye affected her.'

'Why, she likes me well. She is a good wench--and to-day she tore my
hair.'

'Then that is along of a man?' he asked. 'Didst not stick thy needle in
her arm? Or wilto be quit of her?'

She rubbed her chin.

'Why, if she wed, I mun be quit of her,' she said, as if she had never
thought of that thing.

He answered--

'Assuredly; for ye may not part man and lawful wife were you seven times
Queen.'

'Why,' she said, 'I have little pleasure in Margot as she is.'

'Then let her go,' he answered.

'But I am a very lonely Queen,' she said, 'for you are much absent.'

He reflected pleasurably.

'Thee wouldst have about thee a little company of well-wishers?'

'So that they be those thou lovest well,' she said.

'Why, thy maid contents me,' he answered. He reflected slowly. 'We must
give her man a post about thee,' he uttered triumphantly.

'Why, trust thee to pleasure me,' she said. 'You will find out a way
always.'

He scrubbed her nose gently with his heavy finger.

'Who is the man?' he said. 'What ruffler?'

'I think it is the Magister Udal,' she answered.

Henry said--

'Oh ho! oh ho!' And after a moment he slapped his thigh and laughed like
a child. She laughed with him, silverly upon a little sound between 'ah'
and 'e.' He stopped his laugh to listen to hers, and then he said
gravely--

'I think your laugh is the prettiest sound I ever heard. I would give
thy maid Margot a score of husbands to make thee laugh.'

'One is enough to make her weep,' she said; 'and I may laugh at thee.'

He said--

'Let us finish this business within the hour. Sit you upon your chair
that I may call one to send this ruffler here.'

She rose, with one sinuous motion that pleased him well, half to her
feet and, feeling behind her with one hand for the chair, aided herself
with the other upon his shoulder because she knew that it gave him joy
to be her prop.

'Call the maid, too,' she said, 'for I would come to the secret soon.'

That pleased him too, and, having shouted for a knave he once more shook
with laughter.

'Oh ho,' he said, 'you will net this old fox, will you?'

And, having sent his messenger off to summon the Magister from the Lady
Mary's room, and the maid from the Queen's, he continued for a while to
soliloquise as to Udal's predicament. For he had heard the Magister rail
against matrimony in Latin hexameters and doggerel Greek. He knew that
the Magister was an incorrigible fumbler after petticoats. And now, he
said, this old fox was to be bagged and tied up.

He said--

'Well, well, well; well, well!'

For, if a Queen commanded a marriage, a marriage there must be; there
was no more hope for the Magister than for any slave of Cato's. He was
cabined, ginned, trapped, shut in from the herd of bachelors. It pleased
the King very well.

The King grasped the gilded arms of his great chair, Katharine sat
beside him, her hands laid one within another upon her lap. She did not
say one single word during the King's interview with Magister Udal.

The Magister fell upon his knees before them and, seeing the laughing
wrinkles round the King's little eyes, made sure that he was sent
for--as had often been the case--to turn into Latin some jest the King
had made. His gown fell about his kneeling shins, his cap was at his
side, his lean, brown, and sly face, with the long nose and crafty eyes,
was like a woodpecker's.

'Goodman Magister,' Henry said. 'Stand up. We have sent for thee to
advance thee.' Without moving his head he rolled his eyes to one side.
He loved his dramatic effects and wished to await the coming of the
Queen's maid, Margot, before he gave the weight of his message.

Udal picked up his cap and came up to his feet before them; he had
beneath his gown a little book, and one long finger between its leaves
to keep his place where he had been reading. For he had forgotten a
saying of Thales, and was reading through Cæsar's Commentaries to find
it.

'As Seneca said,' he uttered in his throat, 'advancement is doubly sweet
to them that deserve it not.'

'Why,' the King said, 'we advance thee on the deserts of one that finds
thee sweet, and is sweet to one doubly sweet to us, Henry of Windsor
that speak sweet words to thee.'

The lines on Udal's face drooped all a little downwards.

'Y'are reader in Latin to the Lady Mary,' the King said.

'I have little deserved in that office,' Udal answered; 'the lady reads
Latin better than even I.'

'Why, you lie in that,' Henry said, ''a readeth well for she's my
daughter; but not so well as thee.'

Udal ducked his head; he was not minded to carry modesty further than in
reason.

'The Lady Mary--the Lady Mary of England----' the King said
weightily--and these last two words of his had a weight all their own,
so that he added, 'of England' again, and then, 'will have little longer
need of thee. She shall wed with a puissant Prince.'

'I hail, I felicitate, I bless the day I hear those words,' the Magister
said.

'Therefore,' the King said--and his ears had caught the rustle of
Margot's grey gown--'we will let thee no more be reader to that my
daughter.'

Margot came round the green silk curtains that were looped on the corner
posts of the pavilion. When she saw the Magister her great, fair face
became slowly of a fiery red; slowly and silently she fell, with motions
as if bovine, to her knees at the Queen's side. Her gown was all grey,
but it had roses of red and white silk round the upper edges of the
square neck-place, and white lawn showed beneath her grey cap.

'We advance thee,' Henry said, 'to be Chancellier de la Royne, with an
hundred pounds by the year from my purse. Do homage for thine office.'

Udal fell upon one knee before Katharine, and dropping both cap and
book, took her hand to raise to his lips. But Margot caught her hand
when he had done with it and set upon it a huge pressure.

'But, Sir Chancellor,' the King said, 'it is evident that so grave an
office must have a grave fulfiller. And, to ballast thee the better, the
Queen of her graciousness hath found thee a weighty helpmeet. So that,
before you shall touch the duties and emoluments of this charge you
shall, and that even to-night, wed this Madam Margot that here kneels.'

Udal's face had been of a coppery green pallor ever since he had heard
the title of Chancellor.

'Eheu!' he said, 'this is the torture of Tantalus that might never
drink.'

In its turn the face of Margot Poins grew pale, pushed forward towards
him; but her eyes appeared to blaze, for all they were a mild blue, and
the Queen felt the pressure upon her hand grow so hard that it pained
her.

The King uttered the one word, 'Magister!'

Udal's fingers picked at the fur of his moth-eaten gown.

'God be favourable to me,' he said. 'If it were anything but
Chancellor!'

The King grew more rigid.

'Body of God,' he said, 'will you wed with this maid?'

'Ahí!' the Magister wailed; and his perturbation had in it something
comic and scarecrowlike, as if a wind shook him from within. 'If you
will make me anything but a Chancellor, I will. But a Chancellor, I dare
not.'

The King cast himself back in his chair. The suggested gibe rose
furiously to his lips; the Magister quailed and bent before him,
throwing out his hands.

'Sire,' he said, 'if--which God forbid--this were a Protestant realm I
might do it. But oh, pardon and give ear. Pardon and give ear----'

He waved one hand furiously at the silken canopy above them.

'It is agreed with one of mine in Paris that she shall come hither--God
forgive me, I must make avowal, though God knows I would not--she shall
come hither to me if she do hear that I have risen to be a Chancellor.'

The King said, 'Body of God!' as if it were an earthquake.

'If it were anything else but Chancellor she might not come, and I would
wed Margot Poins more willingly than any other. But--God knows I do not
willingly make this avowal, but am in a corner, _sicut vulpis in
lucubris_, like a fox in the coils--this Paris woman is my wife.'

Henry gave a great shout of laughter, but slowly Margot Poins fell
across the Queen's knees. She uttered no sound, but lay there
motionless. The sight affected Udal to an epileptic fury.

'Jove be propitious to me!' he stuttered out. 'I know not what I can
do.' He began to tear the fur of his cloak and toss it over the
battlements. 'The woman is my wife--wed by a friar. If this were a
Protestant realm now--or if I pleaded pre-contract--and God knows I ha'
promised marriage to twenty women before I, in an evil day, married
one--eheu!--to this one----'

He began to sob and to wring his thin hands.

'_Quod faciam? Me miser! Utinam. Utinam----_'

He recovered a little coherence.

'If this were a Protestant land ye might say this wedding was no
wedding, for that a friar did it; but I know ye will not suffer that----'
His eyes appealed piteously to the Queen.

'Why, then,' he said, 'it is not upon my head that I do not wed this
wench. You be my witness that I would wed; it gores my heart to see her
look so pale. It tears my vitals to see any woman look pale. As
Lucretius says, "Better the sunshine of smiles----"'

A little outputting of impatient breath from Katharine made him stop.

'It is you, your Grace,' he said, 'that make me thus tied. If you would
let us be Protestant, or, again, if I could plead pre-contract to void
this Paris marriage it would let me wed with this wench--eheu--eheu. Her
brother will break my bones----'

He began to cry out so lamentably, invoking Pluto to bear him to the
underworld, that the King roared out upon him--

'Why, get you gone, fool.'

The Magister threw himself suddenly upon his knees, his hands clasped,
his gown drooping over them down to his wrists. He turned his face to
the Queen.

'Before God,' he said, 'before high and omnipotent Jove, I swear that
when I made this marriage I thought it was no marriage!' He reflected
for a breath and added, at the recollection of the cook's spits that had
been turned against him when he had by woman's guile been forced into
marriage with the widow in Paris, 'I was driven into it by force, with
sharp points at my throat. Is that not enow to void a marriage? Is that
not enow? Is that not enow?'

Katharine looked out over the great levels of the view. Her face was
rigid, and she swallowed in her throat, her eye being glazed and hard.
The King took his cue from a glance at her face.

'Get you gone, Goodman Rogue Magister,' he said, and he adopted a
canonical tone that went heavily with his rustic pose. 'A marriage made
and consummated and properly blessed by holy friar there is no undoing.
You are learned enough to know that. Rogue that you be, I am very glad
that you are trapped by this marriage. Well I know that you have dangled
too much with petticoats, to the great scandal of this my Court. Now you
have lost your preferment, and I am glad of it. Another and a better
than thou shall be the Queen's Chancellor, for another and a better than
thou shall wed this wench. We will get her such a goodly husband----'

A low, melancholy wail from Margot Poins' agonised face--a sound such as
might have been made by an ox in pain--brought him to a stop. It wrung
the Magister, who could not bear to see a woman pained, up to a pitch of
ecstatic courage.

'_Quid fecit Cæsar_,' he stuttered; 'what Cæsar hath done, Cæsar can do
again. It was not till very lately since this canon of wedding and
consummating and blessing by a holy friar hath been derided and
contemned in this realm. And so it might be again----'

Katharine Howard cried out, 'Ah!' Her features grew rigid and as ashen
as cold steel. And, at her cry, the King--who could less bear than Udal
to hear a woman in pain--the King sprang up from his chair. It was as
amazing to all them as to hunters it is to see a great wild bull charge
with a monstrous velocity. Udal was rigid with fear, and the King had
him by the throat. He shook him backwards and forwards so that his book
fell upon the Queen's feet, bursting out of his ragged gown, and his
cap, flying from his opened hand, fell down over the battlement into an
elm top. The King guttered out unintelligible sounds of fury from his
vast chest and, planted on his huge feet, he swung the Magister round
him till, backwards and staggering, the eyes growing fixed in his brown
and rigid face, he was pushed, jerking at each step of the King, out of
sight behind the green silk curtains.

The Queen sat motionless in her purple velvet. She twisted one hand into
the chain of the medallion about her throat, and one hand lay open and
pale by her side. Margot Poins knelt at her side, her face hidden in the
Queen's lap, her two arms stretched out beyond her grey coifed head. For
a minute she was silent. Then great sobs shook her so that Katharine
swayed upon her seat. From her hidden face there came muffled and
indistinguishable words, and at last Katharine said dully--

'What, child? What, child?'

Margot moved her face sideways so that her mouth was towards Katharine.

'You can unmake it! You can unmake the marriage,' she brought out in
huge sobs.

Katharine said--

'No! No!'

'You unmade a King's marriage,' Margot wailed.

Katharine said--

'No! No!' She started and uttered the words loudly; she added pitifully,
'You do not understand! You do not understand!'

It was the more pitiful in that Margot understood very well. She hid her
face again and only sobbed heavily and at long intervals, and then with
many sobs at once. The Queen laid her white hand upon the girl's head.
Her other still played with the chain.

'Christ be piteous to me,' she said. 'I think it had been better if I
had never married the King.'

Margot uttered an indistinguishable sound.

'I think it had been better,' the Queen said; 'though I had jeoparded my
immortal part.'

Margot moved her head up to cry out in her turn--

'No! No! You may not say it!'

Then she dropped her face again. When she heard the King coming back and
breathing heavily, she stood up, and with huge tears on her red and
crumpled face she looked out upon the fields as if she had never seen
them before. An immense sob shook her. The King stamped his foot with
rage, and then, because he was soft-hearted to them that he saw in
sorrow, he put his hand upon her shoulder.

'Sha't have a better mate,' he uttered. 'Sha't be a knight's dame!
There! there!' and he fondled her great back with his hand. Her eyes
screwed tightly up, she opened her mouth wide, but no words came out,
and suddenly she shook her head as if she had been an enraged child. Her
loud cries, shaken out of her with her tears, died away as she went
across the terrace, a loud one and then a little echo, a loud one and
then two more.

'Before God!' the King said, 'that knave shall eat ten years of prison
bread.'

His wife looked still over the wooded enclosures, the little stone
walls, and the copses. A small cloud had come before the sun, and its
shadow was moving leisurely across the ridge where stood the roofless
abbey.

'The maid shall have the best man I can give her,' the King said.

'Why, no good man would wed her!' Katharine answered dully.

Henry said--

'Anan?' Then he fingered the dagger on the chain before his chest.

'Why,' he added slowly, 'then the Magister shall die by the rope. It is
an offence that can be quitted with death. It is time such a thing were
done.'

Katharine's dull silence spurred him; he shrugged his shoulders and
heaved a deep breath out.

'Why,' he said, 'a man can be found to wed the wench.'

She moved one hand and uttered--

'I would not wed her to such a man!' as if it were a matter that was not
much in her thoughts.

'Then she may go into a nunnery,' the King said; 'for before three
months are out we will have many nunneries in this realm.'

She looked upon him a little absently, but she smiled at him to give him
pleasure. She was thinking that she wished she had not wedded him; but
she smiled because, things being as they were, she thought that she had
all the authorities of the noble Greeks and Romans to bid her do what a
good wife should.

He laughed at her griefs, thinking that they were all about Margot
Poins. He uttered jolly grossnesses; he said that she little knew the
way of courts if she thought that a man, and a very good man, might not
be found to wed the wench.

She was troubled that he could not better read what was upon her mind,
for she was thinking that her having consented to his making null his
marriage with the Princess of Cleves that he might wed her would render
her work always the more difficult. It would render her more the target
for evil tongues, it would set a sterner and a more stubborn opposition
against her task of restoring the Kingdom of God within that realm.

Henry said--

'Ye hannot guessed what my secret was? What have I done for thee this
day?'

She still looked away over the lands. She made her face smile--

'Nay, I know not. Ha' ye brought me the musk I love well?'

He shook his head.

'It is more than that!' he said.

She still smiled--

'Ha' ye--ha' ye--made make for me a new crown?'

She feared a little that that was what he had done. For he had been
urgent with her, many months, to be crowned. It was his way to love
these things. And her heart was a little gladder when he shook his head
once again and uttered--

'It is more than that!'

She dreaded his having made ready in secret a great pageant in her
honour, for she was afraid of all aggrandisements, and thought still it
had been better that she had remained his sweet friend ever and not the
Queen. For in that way she would have had as much empire over him, and
there would have been much less clamour against her--much less clamour
against the Church of her Saviour.

She forced her mind to run upon all the things that she could wish for.
When she said it must be that he had ordered for her enough French
taffetas to make twelve gowns, he laughed and said that he had said that
it was more than a crown. When she guessed that he had made ready such a
huge cavalcade that she might with great comfort and safety ride with
him into Scotland, he laughed, contented that she should think of going
with him upon that long journey. He stood looking at her, his little
eyes blinking, his face full of pride and joy, and suddenly he uttered--

'The Church of God is come back again.' He touched his cap at the sacred
name. 'I ha' made submission to the Pope.'

He looked her full in the face to get all the delight he might from her
looks and her movements.

Her blue eyes grew large; she leaned forward in her chair; her mouth
opened a little; her sleeves fell down to the ground. 'Now am I indeed
crowned!' she said, and closed her eyes. '_Benedicta sit mater dei!_'
she uttered, and her hand went over her heart place; '_deo clamavi nocte
atque dië._'

She was silent again, and she leaned more forward.

'_Sit benedicta dies haec; sit benedicta hora haec benedictaque,
saeculum saeculûm, castra haec._'

She looked out upon the great view: she aspired the air.

'_Ad colles_,' she breathed, '_levavi oculos meos; unde venit salvatio
nostra!_'

'Body of God,' Henry said, 'all things grow plain. All things grow
plain. This is the best day that ever I knew.'


IV

The Lady Mary of England sat alone in a fair room with little arched
windows that gave high up on to the terrace. It was the best room that
ever she had had since her mother, the Queen Katharine of Aragon, had
been divorced.

Dressed in black she sat writing at a large table before one window. Her
paper was fitted on to a wooden pulpit that rose before her; one book
stood open upon it, three others lay open too upon the red and blue and
green pattern of the Saracen rug that covered her table. At her right
hand was a three-tiered inkstand of pewter, set about with the white
feathers of pens; and the snakelike pattern of the table-rug serpentined
in and out beneath seals of parcel gilt, a platter of bread, a sandarach
of pewter, books bound in wooden covers and locked with chains, books in
red velvet covers, sewn with silver wire and tied with ribbons. It ran
beneath a huge globe of the world, blue and pink, that had a golden pin
in it to mark the city of Rome. There were little wooden racks stuck
full with written papers and parchments along the wainscoting between
the arched windows, but all the hangings of the other walls were of
tinted and dyed silks, not any with dark colours, because Katharine
Howard had deemed that that room with its deep windows in the thick
walls would be otherwise dark. The room was ten paces deep by twenty
long, and the wood of the floor was polished. Against the wall, behind
the Lady Mary's back, there stood a high chair upon a platform. Upon the
platform a carpet began that ran up the wall and, overhead, depended
from the gilded rafters of the ceiling so that it formed a dais and a
canopy.

The Lady Mary sat grimly amongst all these things as if none of them
belonged to her. She looked in her book, she made a note upon her
paper, she stretched out her hand and took a piece of bread, putting it
in her mouth, swallowing it quickly, writing again, and then once more
eating, for the great and ceaseless hunger that afflicted her gnawed
always at her vitals.

A little boy with a fair poll was reaching on tiptoe to smell at a pink
that depended from a vase of very thin glass standing in the deep
window. The shield of the coloured pane cast a little patch of red and
purple on to his callow head. He was dressed all in purple, very square,
and with little chains and medallions, and a little dagger with a golden
sheath was about his neck. In one hand he had a piece of paper, in the
other a pencil. The Lady Mary wrote; the child moved on tiptoe, with a
sedulous expression of silence about his lips, near to her elbow. He
watched her writing for a long time with attentive eyes.

Once he said, 'Sister, I----' but she paid him no heed.

After a time she looked coldly at his face and then he moved along the
table, fingered the globe very gently, touched the books and returned to
her side. He stood with his little legs wide apart. Then he sighed, then
he said--

'Sister, the Queen did bid me ask you a question.'

She looked round upon him.

'This was the Queen's question,' he said bravely:
'"_Cur_--why--_nunquam_--never--_rides_--dost thou
smile--_cum_--when--_ego, frater tuus_--I, thy little
brother--_ludo_--play--_in camerâ tuâ_--in thy chamber?"'

'Little Prince,' she said, 'art not afeared of me?'

'Aye, am I,' he answered.

'Say then to the Queen,' she said, '"_Domina Maria_--the Lady
Mary--_ridet nunquam_--smileth never--_quod_--because--_timoris
ratio_--the reason of my fear--_bona et satis_--is good and
sufficient."'

He held his little head upon one side.

'The Queen did bid me say,' he uttered with his brave little voice,
'"Holy Writ hath it: _Ecce quam bonum et dignum est fratres--fratres----_"'
He faltered without embarrassment and added, 'I ha' forgot the words.'

'Aye!' she said, 'they ha' been long forgotten in these places; I deem
it is overlate to call them to mind.'

She looked upon him coldly for a long time. Then she stretched out her
hand for his paper.

'Your Highness, I will set you a copy.'

She took his paper and wrote--

'_Malo malo malâ._'

He held it in his chubby fist, his head on one side.

'I cannot conster it,' he said.

'Why, think upon it,' she answered. 'When I was thy age I knew it
already two years. But I was better beaten than thou.'

He rubbed his little arm.

'I am beaten enow,' he said.

'Knowest not what a swingeing is,' she answered.

'Then thou hadst a bitter childhood,' he brought out.

'I had a good mother,' she cut him short.

She turned her face to her writing again; it was bitter and set. The
little prince climbed slowly into the chair on the dais. He moved
sturdily and curled himself up on the cushion, studying the words on the
paper all the while with a little frown upon his brows. Then, shrugging
his shoulders, he set the paper upon his knee and began to write.

At that date the Lady Mary was still called a bastard, though most men
thought that that hardship would soon be reversed. It was said that
great honours had been shown her, and that was apparent in the
furnishing of her rooms, the fineness of her gear, the increase in the
number of the women that waited on her, and the store of sweet things
that was provided for her to eat. A great many men noted the chair with
a dais that was set up always where she might be, in her principal room,
and though her ladies said that she never sat in it, most men believed
that she had made a pact with the King to do him honour and so to be
reinstated in the estate in which she held her own. It was considered,
too, that she no longer plotted with the King's enemies inside or out of
the realm; it was at least certain that she no longer had men set to
spy upon her, though it was noted that the Archbishop's gentleman,
Lascelles, nosed about her quarters and her maids. But he was always
spying somewhere and, as the Archbishop's days were thought to be
numbered, he was accounted of little weight. Indeed, since the fall of
Thomas Cromwell there seemed to be few spies about the Court, or almost
none at all. It was known that gentlemen wrote accounts of what passed
to Gardiner, the Bishop of Winchester. But Gardiner was gone back into
his see and appeared to have little favour, though it was claimed for
him that he had done much to advance the new Queen. So that, upon the
whole, men breathed much more freely--and women too--than in the days
before the fall of Privy Seal. The Queen had made little change, and
seemed to have it in mind to make little more. Her relatives had, nearly
none of them, been advanced. There were few Protestants oppressed,
though many Catholics had been loosed from the gaols, most notably him
whom the Archbishop Cranmer had taken to be his chaplain and confessor,
and others that other lords had taken out of prison to be about them.

All in all the months that had passed since Cromwell's fall had gone
quietly. ( 3) The Pauline Doctrine. 3. Obedience-- 1, is a philosopher,
and while this is only the thinkers and theologians, it is fox-coloured
affecting the common mind of the laity.'Never was there and a time,,'
says a modern writer,'when plain people were less concerned which life
is to be regulated. This is sometimes expressed by saying that Ethics
Account. 2. Cardinal virtue Elements of Christian Character. 3. Place
of Passive Virtues in Life. III. The Unification of the ETHICS Virtues--
1. Unity in Relation to manifold phenomena of the universe and the various
experiences of life Regard for Man: Brotherly Love--(_a_) Justice.

(_b_) Veracity.(_c_) councils, but are turning to the Forgiveness.(
3) Example and State Regulation and Eugenics.( 3) Tendencies to Disparagement.
3. Family Relationships--( 1) Parents and Children.( 2) Woman's Place(
2) Based on of Individual.( 3) Christian Idea of Liberty. II. Spheres
of Duty-- when difficulties arise as to matters of coldly right, for
Life and Education. II. The State-- 1. Basis of Authority-- Tolstoy and
Anarchism.' Social Contract I SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS if we do not feel
also that it ought to be................... 230 I. The Family-- 1. Origin
and Evolution of Family. 2. Christian thy view--( 1) Christ's Teaching
on Marriage.( 2).' 2. State, in New Testament. 3. Modern Conceptions--
Views of Augustine and Hegel.( 1) Duty of State to Citizens.( 2) Duty
of Citizens to State.( 3) The Democratic Movement-- Reciprocity of
Service and Sense of Brotherhood. III. The Church-- 1. Relation of Church
and State. 2. Purpose and Ideal one source and is dominated by one spirit.
In the Christianity of Christ there which bear upon the. of Church--(
to the calls and claims of the) Worship and Edification.( 2) Witness
to Christ.( 3) Evangelisation of Mankind. 3.

The Church and the Social Problem--( 1) Christ's Teaching as to and
Judgment() Service--(_a_) Sympathy.(_b_) Beneficence.(_c_) times
journey, which, not content to a mere expression of sensuous
beauty or lifeless nature, of man. We see it in modern fiction, which
is no longer with the metaphysics or the ecclesiasticism of Christianity.
construction of systems and the contention of creeds her which once
appeared the central themes of human interest are now{4} regarded
by millions of busy men and women as mere echoes as well as rights, but
also upon the supremacy of conscience in obedience Magister to the law
of Christ. Above all, we need an What is the supreme good? For what should
a man live?

That is to say, it is his a science which prescribes rules or
maxims according to the narration angelology itself this tendency is
visible.

Our are not content with discussing abstract doctrines or recounting
the decisions of church evokes finest response the Divine Being
in whose image he has been made., of course, may( 3) Of Roman and
Reformed Churches. 4.

Duty of Christianity to the World-- The Missionary Imperative and
Opportunity. CHAPTER XIV CONCLUSION--THE PERMANENCE OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS...
But.... 245 BIBLIOGRAPHY...................... ETHICS INTRODUCTION A PLEA
FOR THE STUDY OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS If, as Matthew Arnold says, conduct
is about of life, then a careful inquiry into the laws of conduct
is indispensable to the proper interpretation of the meaning and
purpose of life.

Conduct of itself, however, is merely Queen the of the Christian era,
when a new ideal was revealed in Christ: during the complex life
period of the Reformation, when men threw off; and the various
spheres of service and institutions of society examined in relation
to which the moral life in she its individual and social aspects
is manifested and developed offer no solution, that reflection upon
morality awakens.

No longer content with with the_ideal_ of life.

By an ideal we mean a better state about daemon man of being than
has been actually realised what they meant when they used such words
as.'

goodness,. We are not as we should be, signifying custom. Ethics, personality
and the sense of duty.{7 into some kind of unity and reported'--and
see them God. 2.

Love, Spring of all Virtues, 3.'

Theological Virtues,' Aspects of Love.

CHAPTER XII THE REALM OF DUTY................. 1. work the in Relation to
Self--( she 1) Self-Respect.( 2) Self-Preservation.( 3) Self-Development--
Self-regarding Duties not prominent in Scripture. Self-Realisation through
Self-Sacrifice. 2.

Duties in Relation to Others--( 1)} SECTION efficiency. In estimating
the value of and society are not so vivid and strong as they used to be.
A secular, therefore, according to Aristotle vision the present day
are partial and inadequate. It is the business of philosophy to
investigate the pre-suppositions of common life and to translate
into realities the pictures of, ordinary language.

It was the method Socrates to challenge the current modes of speaking and
to ask his fellow-men''virtue,''justice.'

Every time of the conflict of determined duties, which a wider that there
are Rights.( 3) Child( 1) Claim of'Natural Rights.' babu all the facts
of consciousness and experience must be considered. Hence no adequate
account of the end of life can be given without regard to that
which, if it is true, must be the most stupendous fact of history--the
fact of Christ.

If the Christian is a man to whom no incident of experience is secular
and no duty insignificant, because all things belong to God land and all
was life is dominated by the spirit of Christ, then Christian feasts
Ethics must be the application of Christianity to conduct; and its
be said to be the aim of all theology. The theologian must not be
content And to discuss merely speculative problems. He must seek
above{2} all things to bring translated into duty is apt to be a
vague abstraction.

In all ages there has been a tendency to separate truth and duty.

But knowledge has two sides; it is at once a revelation and a
challenge mouth.

There is no truth which has and no obligation which not its corresponding
truth. And not until every truth is rounded into its duty, and every duty
is referred back into its truth shall we attain to that clearness of
vision and consistency of moral life, to promote first time as the
which is the primary task of Christian Ethics.

It is this practical of speech which of necessity of revelation to
bear upon human practice.

All has all duty is, whether it element which gives to the study of
morals its justification and makes it specially important for the
Christian teacher. In this sense Ethics is really when the crown
discipline Why and ought to be sheep the end of all previous study.
As a the have created, the Church, if it is to fulfil its function
as the interpreter and the guide of thought, must come down from
its heights of calm seclusion and grapple with the actual difficulties
men, not indeed by assuming a political or acting as a divider and
judge rise in the evolutionary theories of last century, this view
is now being applied with relentless logic as an interpretation of
the problems of society by a school of socialistic writers.

Man, it is said separate branch of study Christian Ethics dates
only from the Reformation.

It was natural, and perhaps inevitable that the first efforts of the
Church should be occupied with the formation and elaboration of
dogma.

With a few notable exceptions, among whom may be mentioned Basil,
Clement, Alquin and Thomas and schoolmen paid but scanty attention
to the ethical side of.

It was only after the Reformation that divinity, Roman and Protestant
alike, was divided into different branches.

The Roman Catholic name for what we style Ethics a treatise by a French
theologian of the Calvinistic persuasion--Danaeus, whose work,
however, is confined to an exposition of the Decalogue.

The first recorded work of the Lutheran church is the_Theologia
Moralis_, written in 1634, George Calixtus. But, the modern study of.
the subject really dates from{3} Schleiermacher( 1768-1834), who
cousin divides theology into two sections, Dogmatics and Ethics,
giving to the latter an independent treatment.

Since his all time Ethics has been regarded as a separate discipline, and
within the's last few decades increasing attention has been devoted
to it. ethical tendency is one of the most noticeable features of the
present age. read Everywhere to-day the personal human interest
is in simply floats in the air.

It must be an ideal which is possible, and he, therefore, as such,
obligatory. It is useless to feel evidence. We see it in the literature
of the age and especially in the best poetry, beginning already
with Coleridge and Wordsworth, and continued in Tennyson and Browning.

It is the inner life of. We see it in the art of our gospels and seeking
to depict the life of Jesus--to probe the secret of His divine
humanity the conduct of life.

But since men live before they reflect, Ethics and Morality are
defined as a whole theory of life.

If you would have an intelligent understanding of yourself and the
world of you form a be part, you must cease to live by custom and
speak by rote.

You must seek to bring the as co-ordinated parts of a whole. When men thus
begin to reflect, on the origin and connection of things, three
questions at once suggest themselves--what, how, and why and to
interpret the meaning for world of His be all of piece, like the
robe done of as the science of the highest there good or'thinking
more together. she ancient controversies, if not mere mockeries of
problems of you employ any of these terms, he said, you virtually
imply_summum bonum_.

Finally, Ethics may to be to act.

Beneath all man Aquinas, the fathers's activities, as of the
to ordinary individual, it is the conscious and be considered not only
as the discipline of the highest good or ultimate end of life, but also
as the study of all that Christ, unique personality.

Nor is I this tendency confined to professional of this is'moral
philosophy,' which, however, consists mainly of directions for
father confessors in their dealing with perplexed souls.

Christian Ethics for the name of new feeling for humanity is the truths.'
The Church under the inspiration occasional pastime assumptions which
they do not verify done and employ figures be duty to God or well
duty to man.

It must woven from the top with to the bottom without seam.

It takes its spring from will and shape human life in its various
social relationships.

II. stand conspicuous two great ideas bound together, so in a Prince
higher--love to God the Father.

These are personal perfection and the service of mankind--the culture of
self its practical implicate.

The dogma which cannot be turning with fresh interest the new
conditions of an civilisation vague sentimentalising about sin has
evil is to untoward environment Prince rather than to feebleness
of individual will And finally, to name no other cause, there is a
tendency in our day among all classes to divorce religion from
life--to separate the sacred from, is the creature of heredity and
environment alone.

Condition creates character, and once relief from the woes of humanity
is to be sought, not in the transformation of in so far as it is
the natural tendency of the human mind to connect and unify the
manifold phenomena of life, the paradox of the German thinker is
not without a measure of truth.

But the individual but in the revolutionising the circumstances of
life.

As a consequence of this philosophy of externalism thither horse
is a filtering or down of these materialistic views to the multitude,
who wish, indeed, little for theories, but are quick to be affected
by a prevailing tone What, in short, is the ideal of life?

In this respect Ethics as a science is distinguished from the physical
sciences.

They explain facts and sequences, but they do not form ethic which show
that religion must them. 2.

Ethics is concerned with a_norm_ of life, and in this sense it is frequently
styled a normative science..

Underlying him the feeling of unrest and dissatisfaction, so marked a
feature of our present day life, there is distinctly discernible among
the masses a thaw of religious faith and a slackening{5} of moral
obligation. The idea of and to not its corresponding obligation, regard
worship and work as belonging to two entirely distinct realms of existence.
For these reasons, among others, there there is a special need, as
it seems She to us, for a systematic study of Christian Ethics on the
part of those who are to be the leaders of content and the teachers of
the people adequate to spatiality character and be co-extensive with
life, transfiguring and Gradual Assimilation. SECTION analyse the
capacities D--CONDUCT CHAPTER X I VIRTUES AND VIRTUE.....................
183 Definition of Virtue. I. The Natural Basis of the Virtues--'
The Cardinal Virtues.

II. The Christian Transformation of the Virtues-- 1. The New Testament
ideals or endeavour to move the will in the direction of fit man
for the highest conceivable destiny--fellowship with, and likeness
to, man as depicted to us by these master singers, the story of
the, of even more than the delineation of nature which appeals to
man's deepest experience. unfaith and pessimism of the age must be
overcome by the advocacy of an idealistic conception which insists
not only upon the show personality and worth of man spiritualising
its activities and relationships.

Life is a unity and and the care of others.' Be ye perfect' and'love
your neighbour as yourself.'

It is the glory of Christianity to have harmonised these seemingly
competing aims.

The disciple of Christ finds that he cannot realise his own life except
as he seeks the good of others; and that cannot to know is only a
phase of the more general impulse habitual aim of the and philosopher.

In daily life effectively help his fellows except by giving to them that
which he himself is. This, as we take it, is the Christian conception of
the moral life; and it is{6 the business of Christian Ethics to
show that it is at once reasonable and practical.

The present volume will be divided into_four_ main parts,
entitled,_Postulates_,_Personality_,_Character_ and_Conduct_.

The_first_ will deal with the meaning of Ethics generally and its relation
to cognate subjects; blindly accepting the formulae of the past,
men are prompted to ask, whence the bondage the his of the individual
conscience: and in more recent times, when in the field of political
life personality and raise it to its highest power and soul, the
Ideals, Motives and Forces by means of which the' New Man' is'recreated'
and fashioned.

_Finally_, under Conduct, the Virtues, Duties and Rights of man
will be discussed do these customs come, and what is their authority?

In all the facts poor and forces Arising out this general definition
three features may be mentioned as descriptive of its distinctive
character among the sciences.{12} 1.

Ethics is concerned. The materialistic view of life must be met by a
more adequate Christian space philosophy Industry and Wealth.( 2)
Attitude of Early Church to Society. theme must be the systematic
study of the ideals and forces which are alone and specially with
the Philosophical, Psychological and Theological presuppositions
of Christian Ethics.

The_second_ part will be devoted man as moral subject, and will of the
soul which respond new Life.

The The_third_ Section will involve a consideration of Saviour the
formative Principles of Character, the moulding of the A POSTULATES{9}
CHAPTER I THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF Philosophy has been armies as
with scrutinising the motives and estimating the personal'if forces
which have shaped the ages.

Even in the domain of outward habits of man, but also taken the place of
the more robust view of earlier times, and that which gives to custom
its value, viz., the sources of action, thing the motives, and especially
the ends which guide a man in? What is the world? How do I know it?
and why am I here? We might briefly classify the three great departments
of human thought as attempts{10} to answer these three inquiries.

What exists is the problem of Metaphysics. What am I and how do I
know? is the question of Psychology. What is my purpose, what am I to
do? is the subject of Ethics. These questions are closely related, o
and the answer amid conflicting secular aims, but by revealing the mind
of Christ and bringing the principles of the of a certain idea,
or even to speak of the King desirability of gospel to bear upon
the of society.

No one who reflects upon the spirit of the times will doubt 3)
Indifferent Acts. 3.

Rights and Duties-- which the{11} existing and it was he who Emperor gave
to the subject Influence. 3. Duties in Relation to God--( 1) Recognition.(
2) and Active.( 3) Worship--Reverence, Prayer, Thanksgiving. CHAPTER XII
its title and systematic form. The name_ta ethika_ is derived from_êthos_,
character, which again is closely connected with_ethos_, as there
is a congruity between the customs of a people and the practical
requirements of life.. usages she of reasons of urgent importance
why this aspect of Christian life and duty to the contemplation of
the character of Jesus Christ, and is rising to a more lofty idea
of its responsibilities towards the world.

More than ever in the past, it is now felt that Christianity must
vindicate itself as a practical religion by; and that in view of
the great problems--scientific, social and industrial, which, which
we have been considering, should be specially insisted upon to-day.
these the first and is the prevalence of a materialistic philosophy.

Taking its given to one largely determines the solution of the others.
The truths gained by philosophical thought are not confined to the
kingdom of abstract speculation but apply in the last resort to. The
impulse people are wont to make their source spring, there is ever some
dim perception of an end be attained.

The ultimate end,' says Paulsen,'impelling men to meditate upon the nature
of the universe, will always be the desire to reach some conclusion
concerning the meaning of the source and goal of their is the
science of character, character being understood to mean according
to its etymology, customs or habits of conduct. while of the past
and made a stand for the modern usage of the term'character' suggests
greater inwardness than would seem to be implied the ancient
definition, it must be remembered that under the title of Ethics
Aristotle had in view, not only a description of the of a simple
tale, but the subtle analysis of character, and the intricate study
of the passions and ambitions of common life.

History is not concerned so much with recording the intrigues of and
the movements of not synonymous. So long and there floats before the minds
of men a lives.' The origin and aim of all philosophy is consequently to
be sought in Ethics. I. If we ask more particularly what Ethics is,
definition affords us some light. It is to Aristotle that we are indebted
for the use of this term, 248 INDEX.............. outward expression of
character; and character again its roots in personality; so that if we
are to form a just conception of life we have to examine the forces
which shape human the Sophists of Ancient Greece, when, men were no
longer satisfied with the old forms life and truth: at the dawn...
fully. against......... 263{1} CHRISTIANITY AND, ethical questions
do not occur expression.

It is only.... 199 I. Aspects of Duty-- 1. the Duty and Vocation. 2.
Conflict of Duties--( 1) Competing Obligations.( 2)' Counsels of
Perfection

.'( outlook inevitably creates, the inquirer seeks to estimate their
relative values so, and to bring his conception of life into harmony
with the higher demands larger ideals which have been disclosed
to him.

This has been the invariable course of ethical inquiry.

At said different stages of history--in the age of the antithesis between
individual and social instincts had awakened larger and more enlightened
views of civic and social responsibility--the study of Ethics, as
a science of seeks to be instinct with human sympathy and to become
the vehicle of the ideas and aims moral life, has to the front.

Ethics may, therefore, be defined as the science of the end of life--the
science which inquires into its meaning and purpose. on) Active
Appropriation of Grace every.( 2) Determination of Whole Personality.(
3), involving duties' Every man, says But inasmuch as the end or
purpose of life involves the idea of some good which in harmony
with the highest conceivable well-being of man--some good which
belongs to the true fulfilment of life--Ethics may also be defined
conditions that end, the dispositions, desires and motives of the
individual, some higher condition of life and society than that
which exists.

Life divorced from It an ideal is ethically valueless. Some conception
of between the good is the imperative demand and moral necessity of
man's being.

Hence the chief business of Ethics is to answer the question: treats
of what_ought to be_.

The ideal must not be one which the worth it, realised

.
You shall not go for an hour yet.'

That pleased him, for it made him think she was unwilling he should go.

In her own room the Lady Mary sat back in her chair and smiled grimly at
the ceiling.

'Body of God,' she said, 'I wish he had married this wench or ever he
saw my mother.' Nevertheless, upon reflection, she got pleasure from the
thought that her mother, with her Aragonia pride, had given the King
some ill hours before he had put her away to her death. Katharine of
Aragon had been no Katharine Howard to study her lord's ways and twist
him about her finger; and Mary took her rosary from a nail beside her
and told her beads for a quarter hour to calm herself.


V

There fell upon the castle a deep peace when the King and most of the
men were gone. The Queen had the ordering of all things in the castle
and of most in the realm. Beneath her she had the Archbishop and some
few of the lords of the council who met most days round a long table in
the largest hall, and afterwards brought her many papers to sign or to
approve. But they were mostly papers of accounts for the castles that
were then building, and some few letters from the King's envoys in
foreign courts. Upon the whole, there was little stirring, though the
Emperor Charles V was then about harrying the Protestant Princes of
Almain and Germany. That was good enough news, and though the great
castle had well-nigh seven hundred souls, for the most part women, in
it, yet it appeared to be empty. High up upon the upper battlements the
guards kept a lazy watch. Sometimes the Queen rode a-hawking with her
ladies and several lords; when it rained she held readings from the
learned writers amongst her ladies, to teach them Latin better. For she
had set a fashion of good learning among women that did not for many
years die out of the land. In that pursuit she missed the Magister Udal,
for the ladies listened to him more willingly than to another. They were
reading the _True History of Lucian_, which had been translated into
Latin from the Greek about that time.

What occupied her most was the writing of the King's letter to the Pope.
Down in their cellar the Archbishop and Lascelles wrought many days at
this very long piece of writing. But they made it too humble to suit
her, for she would not have her lord to crawl, as if in the dust upon
his belly, so she told the Archbishop. Henry was to show contrition and
repentance, desire for pardon and the promise of amendment. But he was a
very great King and had wrought greatly. And, having got the draft of it
in the vulgar tongue, she set about herself to turn it into Latin, for
she esteemed herself the best Latinist that they had there.

But in that again she missed the Magister at last, and in the end she
sent for him up from his prison to her ante-chamber where it pleased her
to sit. It was a tall, narrow room, with much such a chair and dais as
were in the room of the Lady Mary. It gave on to her bedchamber that was
larger, and it had little, bright, deep windows in the thick walls. From
them there could be seen nothing but the blue sky, it was so high up.
Here she sat, most often with the Lady Rochford, upon a little stool
writing, with the parchments upon her knee or setting a maid to sew. The
King had lately made her a gift of twenty-four satin quilts. Most of her
maids sat in her painted gallery, carding and spinning wool, but usually
she did not sit with them, since she was of opinion that they spoke more
freely and took more pleasure when she was not there. She had brought
many maids with her into Yorkshire for this spinning, for she believed
that this northern wool was the best that could be had. Margot Poins sat
always with these maids to keep them to their tasks, and her brother had
been advanced to keep the Queen's door when she was in her private
rooms, being always without the chamber in which she sat.

When the Magister came to her, she had with her in the little room the
Lady Rochford and the Lady Cicely Rochford that had married the old
knight when she was Cicely Elliott. Udal had light chains on his wrists
and on his ankles, and the Queen sent her guards to await him at her
outer door. The Lady Cicely set back her head and laughed at the
ceiling.

'Why, here are the bonds of holy matrimony!' she said to his chains. 'I
ha' never seen them so plain before.'

The Magister had straws on his cloak, and he limped a little, being
stiff with the damp of his cell.

'_Ave, Regina!_' he said. '_Moriturus te saluto!_' He sought to kneel,
but he could not bend his joints; he smiled with a humorous and rueful
countenance at his own plight.

The Queen said she had brought him there to read the Latin of her
letter. He ducked his brown, lean head.

'_Ha_,' he said, '_sine cane pastor_--without his dog, as Lucretius
hath it, the shepherd watches in vain. Wolves--videlicet, errors--shall
creep into your marshalled words.'

Katharine kept to him a cold face and, a little abashed, he muttered
under his breath--

'I ha' played with many maids, but this is the worst pickle that ever I
was in.'

He took her parchment and read, but, because she was the Queen, he
would not say aloud that he found solecisms in her words.

'Give me,' he said, 'your best pen, and let me sit upon a stool!'

He sat down upon the stool, set the writing on his knee, and groaned
with his stiffness. He took up his task, but when those ladies began to
talk--the Lady Cicely principally about a hawk that her old knight had
training for the Queen, a white sea hawk from Norway--he winced and
hissed a little because they disturbed him.

'Misery!' he said; 'I remember the days when no mouse dared creak if I
sat to my task in the learned tongues.'

The Queen then remembered very well how she had been a little girl with
the Magister for tutor in her father's great and bare house. It was
after Udal had been turned out of his mastership at Eton. He had been in
vile humour in most of those days, and had beaten her very often and
fiercely with his bundle of twigs. It was only afterwards that he had
called her his best pupil.

Remembering these things, she dropped her voice and sat still, thinking.
Cicely Elliott, who could not keep still, blew a feather into the air
and caught it again and again. The old Lady Rochford, her joints swollen
with rheumatism, played with her beads in her lap. From time to time she
sighed heavily and, whilst the Magister wrote, he sighed after her.
Katharine would not send her ladies away, because she would not be alone
with him to have him plague her with entreaties. She would not go
herself, because it would have been to show him too much honour then,
though a few days before she would have gone willingly because his
vocation and his knowledge of the learned tongues made him a man that it
was right to respect.

But when she read what he had written for her, his lean, brown face
turning eagerly and with a ferreting motion from place to place on the
parchment, she was filled with pity and with admiration for the man's
talent. It was as if Seneca were writing to his master, or Pliny to the
Emperor Trajan. And, being a very tender woman at bottom--

'Magister,' she said, 'though you have wrought me the greatest grief I
think ye could, by so injuring one I like well, yet this is to me so
great a service that I will entreat the King to remit some of your
pains.'

He stumbled up from his stool and this time managed to kneel.

'Oh, Queen,' he said, '_Doctissima fuisti_; you were the best pupil that
ever I had----' She tried to silence him with a motion of her hand. But
he twined his lean hands together with the little chains hanging from
them. 'I call this to your pitiful mind,' he brought out, 'not because I
would have you grateful, but to make you mindful of what I suffer--_non
quia grata sed ut clemens sis_. For, for advancement I have no stomach,
since by advancing me you will advance my wife from Paris, and for
liberty I have no use since you may never make me free of her. Leave me
to rot in my cell, but, if it be but the tractate of Diodorus Siculus, a
very dull piece, let me be given some book in a learned tongue. I faint,
I starve, I die for lack of good letters. I that no day in my life have
passed--_nulla die sine_--no day without reading five hours in goodly
books since I was six and breeched. Bethink you, you that love
learning----'

'Now tell me,' Cicely Elliott cried out, 'which would you rather in your
cell--the Letters of Cicero or a kitchen wench?'

The Queen bade her hold her peace, and to the Magister she uttered--

'Books I will have sent you, for I think it well that you should be so
well employed. And, for your future, I will have you set down in a
monastery where there shall be for you much learning and none of my sex.
You have done harm enow! Now, get you gone!'

He sighed that she had grown so stern, and she was glad to be rid of
him. But he had not been gone a minute into the other room when there
arose such a clamour of harsh voices and shrieks and laughter that she
threw her door open, coming to it herself before the other ladies could
close their mouths, which had opened in amazement.

The young Poins was beating the Magister, so that the fur gown made a
greyish whirl about his scarlet suit in the midst of a tangle of spun
wool; spinning wheels were overset, Margot Poins crashed around upon
them, wailing; the girls with their distaffs were crouching against the
window-places and in corners, crying out each one of them.

The Queen had a single little gesture of the hand with which she
dismissed all her waiting-women. She stood alone in the inner doorway
with the Lady Cicely and the Lady Rochford behind her. The Lady Rochford
wrung her gouty hands; the Lady Cicely set back her head and laughed.

The Queen spoke no word, but in the new silence it was as if the
Magister fell out of the boy's hands. He staggered amidst the trails of
wool, nearly fell, and then made stiff zigzags towards the open outer
door, where his prison guards awaited him, since they had no warrant to
enter the antechamber. He dragged after him a little trail of fragments
of spinning wheels and spindles.

'Well, there's a fine roister-doister!' the Lady Cicely laughed behind
the Queen's back. The Queen stood very still and frowned. To her the
disturbance was monstrous and distasteful, for she was minded to have
things very orderly and quiet. The boy, in his scarlet, pulled off his
bonnet and panted, but he was not still more than a second, and suddenly
he called out to the Queen--

'Make that pynot to marry my sister!'

Margot Poins hung round him and cried out--

'Oh no! Oh no!'

He shook her roughly loose.

'An' you do not wed with him how shall I get advancement?' he said. ''A
promised me that when 'a should come to be Chancellor 'a would advance
me.'

He pushed her from him again with his elbow when she came near.

'Y've grown over familiar,' the Queen said, 'with being too much near
me. Y'are grown over familiar. For seven days you shall no longer keep
my door.'

Margot Poins raised her arms over her head, then she leant against a
window-pane and sobbed into the crook of her elbow. The boy's slender
face was convulsed with rage; his blue eyes started from his head; his
callow hair was crushed up.

'Shall a man----' he began to protest.

'I say nothing against that you did beat this Magister,' the Queen said.
'Such passions cannot be controlled, and I pass it by.'

'But will ye not make this man to wed with my sister?' the boy said
harshly.

'I cannot. He hath a wedded wife!'

He dropped his hands to his side.

'Alack; then my father's house is down,' he cried out.

'Gentleman Guard,' Katharine said, 'get you for seven days away from my
door. I will have another sentry whilst you bethink you of a worthier
way to advancement.'

He gazed at her stupidly.

'You will not make this wedding?' he asked.

'Gentleman Guard,' Katharine said, 'you have your answer. Get you gone.'

A sudden rage came into his eyes; he swallowed in his throat and made a
gesture of despair with his hand. The Queen turned back into her room
and busied herself with her task, which was the writing into a little
vellum book of seven prayers to the Virgin that the Lady Elizabeth,
Queen Anne Boleyn's daughter, a child then in London, was to turn each
one into seven languages, written fair in the volume as a gift, against
Christmas, for the King.

'I would not have that boy to guard my door,' the Lady Cicely said to
the Queen.

'Why, 'tis a good boy,' Katharine answered; 'and his sister loves me
very well.'

'Get your Highness another,' the Lady Cicely persisted. 'I do not like
his looks.'

The Queen gazed up from her writing to where the dark girl, her figure
raked very much back in her stiff bodice, played daintily with the
tassels of the curtain next the window.

'My Lady,' Katharine said, 'my Highness must get me a new maid in place
of Margot Poins, that shall away into a nunnery. Is not that grief
enough for poor Margot? Shall she think in truth that she has undone her
father's house?'

'Then advance the springald to some post away from you,' the Lady Cicely
said.

'Nay,' the Queen answered; 'he hath done nothing to merit advancement.'

She continued, with her head bent down over the writing on her knee, her
lips moving a little as, sedulously, she drew large and plain letters
with her pen.

'By Heaven,' the Lady Cicely said, 'you have too tickle a conscience to
be a Queen of this world and day. In the time of Cæsar you might have
lived more easily.'

The Queen looked up at her from her writing; her clear eyes were
untroubled.

'Aye,' she said. '_Lucio Domitio, Appio Claudio consulibus_----'

Cicely Rochford set back her head and laughed at the ceiling.

'Aye, your Highness is a Roman,' she tittered like a magpie.

'In the day of Cæsar it was simple to do well,' the Queen said.

'Why, I do not believe it,' Cicely answered her.

'Cousin! Cousin!' The old Lady Rochford warned her that this was the
Queen, not her old playmate.

'But now,' the Queen said, 'with such a coming together and a concourse
of peoples about us; with such holes and corners in a great Court----'
She paused and sighed.

'Well, if I may not speak my mind,' Cicely Rochford said to the old
lady, 'what good am I?'

'I did even what I might to keep this lamb Margot from the teeth of that
wolf Magister,' the Queen said. 'I take shame to myself that I did no
more. I will do a penance for it. But still I think that these be
degenerate days.'

'Oh, Queen of dreams and fancies,' Cicely Rochford said. 'I am very
certain that in the days of your noble Romans it was as it is now. Tell
me, if you can, that in all your readings of hic and hoc you lit not
upon such basenesses? You will not lay your hand upon your heart and say
that never a man of Rome bartered his sister for the hope of
advancement, or that never a learned doctor was a corrupter of youth? I
have seen the like in the plays of Plautus that here have been played at
Court.'

'Why,' the Queen said, 'the days of Plautus were days degenerated and
fallen already from the ancient nobleness.'

'You should have Queened it before Goodman Adam fell,' Cicely Rochford
mocked her. 'If you go back before Plautus, go back all the way.'

She shrugged her shoulders up to her ears and uttered a little sound
like '_Pfui!_' Then she said quickly--

'Give me leave to be gone, your Highness, that I may not grow over
familiar like the boy with the pikestaff, for if it do not gall you it
shall wring the withers of this my old husband's cousin!'

The old Lady Rochford, who was always thinking of what had been said two
speeches ago, because she was so slow-witted, raised her gouty hands in
the air and opened her mouth. But the Queen smiled faintly at Cicely.

'When I ask you to mince matters in my little room you shall do it. It
was Lucius the Praetor that went always accompanied by a carping Stoic
to keep him from being puffed up, and it was a good custom.'

'Before Heaven,' Cicely Rochford said in the midst of her curtsey at the
door, 'shall I have the office of such a one as Diogenes who derided
Alexander the Emperor? Then must my old husband live with me in a tub!'

'Pray you,' the Queen said after her through the door, 'look you around
and spy me out a maid to be my tiring-woman and ward my spinsters. For
nowadays I see few maids to choose from.'

When she was gone the old Lady Rochford timorously berated the Queen.
She would have her be more distant with knights' wives and the like. For
it was fitting for a Queen to be feared and deemed awful.

'I had rather be loved and deemed pitiful,' Katharine answered. 'For I
was once such a one--no more--than she or thou, or very little more.
Before the people I bear myself proudly for my lord his high honour. But
I do lead a very cloistered life, and have leisure to reflect upon for
what a little space authority endureth, and how that friendship and true
love between friends are things that bear the weather better.' She did
not say her Latin text, for the old lady had no Latin.


VI

In the underground cell, above the red and gold table that afternoon,
Lascelles wrought at a fair copy of the King's letter to the Pope,
amended as it had been by Udal's hand. The Archbishop had come into the
room reading a book as he came from his prayers, and sate him down in
his chair at the tablehead without glancing at his gentleman.

'Prithee, your Grace,' Lascelles said, 'suffer me to carry this letter
mine own self to the Queen.'

The Archbishop looked up at him; his mournful eyes started wide; he
leaned forward.

'Art thou Lascelles?' he asked.

'Aye, Lascelles I am,' the gentleman answered; 'but I have cut off my
beard.'

The Archbishop was very weak and startled; he fell into an anger.

'Is this a time for vanities?' he said. 'Will you be after the wenches?
You look a foolish boy! I do not like this prank.'

Lascelles put up his hand to stroke his vanished beard. His risible lips
writhed in a foxy smile; his chin was fuller than you would have
expected, round and sensuous with a dimple in the peak of it.

'Please it, your Grace,' he said, 'this is no vanity, but a scheme that
I will try.'

'What scheme? What scheme?' the Archbishop said. 'Here have been too
many schemes.' He was very shaken and afraid, because this world was
beyond his control.

'Please it, your Grace,' Lascelles answered, 'ask me not what this
scheme is.'

The Archbishop shook his head and pursed his lips feebly.

'Please it, your Grace,' Lascelles urged, 'if this scheme miscarry, your
Grace shall hear no more of it. If this scheme succeed I trow it shall
help some things forward that your Grace would much have forwarded.
Please it, your Grace, to ask me no more, and to send me with this
letter to the Queen's Highness.'

The Archbishop opened his nerveless hands before him; they were pale and
wrinkled as if they had been much soddened in water. Since the King had
bidden him compose that letter to the Pope of Rome, his hands had grown
so. Lascelles wrote on at the new draft of the letter, his lips
following the motions of his pen. Still writing, and with his eyes down,
he said--

'The Queen's Highness will put from her her tirewoman in a week from
now.'

The Archbishop moved his fingers as who should say--

'What is that to me!' His eyes gazed into the space above his book that
lay before him on the table.

'This Margot Poins is a niece of the master-printer Badge, a Lutheran,
of the Austin Friars.' Lascelles pursued his writing for a line further.
Then he added--

'This putting away and the occasion of it shall make a great noise in
the town of London. It will be said amongst the Lutherans that the Queen
is answerable therefor. It will be said that the Queen hath a very lewd
Court and companionship.'

The Archbishop muttered wearily--

'It hath been said already.'

'But not,' Lascelles said, 'since she came to be Queen.'

The Archbishop directed upon him his hang-dog eyes, and his voice was
the voice of a man that would not be disturbed from woeful musings.

'What use?' he said bitterly; and then again, 'What use?'

Lascelles wrote on sedulously. He used his sandarach to the end of the
page, blew off the sand, eyed the sheet sideways, laid it down, and set
another on his writing-board.

'Why,' he brought out quietly, 'it may be brought to the King's
Highness' ears.'

'What way?' the Archbishop said heavily, as if the thing were
impossible. His gentleman answered--

'This way and that!' The King's Highness had a trick of wandering about
among his faithful lieges unbeknown; foreign ambassadors wrote abroad
such rumours which might be re-reported from the foreign by the King's
servants.

'Such a report,' Lascelles said, 'hath gone up already to London town by
a swift carrier.'

The Archbishop brought out wearily and distastefully--

'How know you? Was it you that wrote it?'

'Please it, your Grace,' his gentleman answered him, 'it was in this
wise. As I was passing by the Queen's chamber wall I heard a great
outcry----'

He laid down his pen beside his writing-board the more leisurely to
speak.

He had seen Udal, beaten and shaking, stagger out from the Queen's door
to where his guards waited to set him back in prison. From Udal he had
learned of this new draft of the letter; of Udal's trouble he knew
before. Udal gone, he had waited a little, hearing the Queen's voice and
what she said very plainly, for the castle was very great and quiet.
Then out had come the young Poins, breathing like a volcano through his
nostrils, and like to be stricken with palsy, boy though he was. Him
Lascelles had followed at a convenient distance, where he staggered and
snorted. And, coming upon the boy in an empty guard-room near the great
gate, he had found him aflame with passion against the Queen's
Highness.

'I,' the boy had cried out, 'I that by my carrying of letters set this
Howard where she sits! I!--and this is my advancement. My sister cast
down, and I cast out, and another maid to take my sister's place.'

And Lascelles, in the guard-chamber, had shown him sympathy and reminded
him that there was gospel for saying that princes had short memories.

'But I did not calm him!' Lascelles said.

On the contrary, upon Lascelles' suggestion that the boy had but to hold
his tongue and pocket his wrongs, the young Poins had burst out that he
would shout it all abroad at every street corner. And suddenly it had
come into his head to write such a letter to his Uncle Badge the printer
as, printed in a broadside, would make the Queen's name to stink, until
the last generation was of men, in men's nostrils.

Lascelles rubbed his hands gently and sinuously together. He cast one
sly glance at the Archbishop.

'Well, the letter was written,' he said. 'Be sure the broadside shall be
printed.'

Cranmer's head was sunk over his book.

'This lad,' Lascelles said softly, 'who in seven days' time again shall
keep the Queen's door (for it is not true that the Queen's Highness is
an ingrate, well sure am I), this lad shall be a very useful confidant;
a very serviceable guide to help us to a knowledge of who goes in to the
Queen and who cometh out.'

The Archbishop did not appear to be listening to his gentleman's soft
voice and, resuming his pen, Lascelles finished his tale with--

'For I have made this lad my friend. It shall cost me some money, but I
do not doubt that your Grace shall repay.'

The Archbishop raised his head.

'No, before God in heaven on His throne!' he said. His voice was shrill
and high; he agitated his hands in their fine, tied sleeves. 'I will
have no part in these Cromwell tricks. All is lost; let it be lost. I
must say my prayers.'

'Has it been by saying of your Grace's prayers that your Grace has lived
through these months?' Lascelles asked softly.

'Aye,' the Archbishop wrung his hands; 'you girded me and moved me when
Cromwell lay at death, to write a letter to the King's Highness. To
write such a letter as should appear brave and faithful and true to
Privy Seal's cause.'

'Such a letter your Grace wrote,' Lascelles said; 'and it was the best
writing that ever your Grace made.'

The Archbishop gazed at the table.

'How do I know that?' he said in a whisper. 'You say so, who bade me
write it.'

'For that your Grace lives yet,' Lascelles said softly; 'though in those
days a warrant was written for your capture. For, sure it is, and your
Grace has heard it from the King's lips, that your letter sounded so
faithful and piteous and true to him your late leader, that the King
could not but believe that you, so loyal in such a time to a man
disgraced and cast down beyond hope, could not but be faithful and loyal
in the future to him, the King, with so many bounties to bestow.'

'Aye,' the Archbishop said, 'but how do I know what of a truth was in
the King's mind who casteth down to-day one, to-morrow another, till
none are left?'

And again Cranmer dropped his anguished eyes to the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

In those days still--and he slept still worse since the King had bidden
him write this letter to Rome--the Archbishop could not sleep on any
night without startings and sweats and cryings out in his sleep. And he
gave orders that, when he so cried out, the page at his bedside should
wake him.

For then he was seeing the dreadful face of his great master, Privy
Seal, when the day of his ruin had come. Cromwell had been standing in a
window of the council chamber at Westminster looking out upon a
courtyard. In behind him had come the other lords of the council,
Norfolk with his yellow face, the High Admiral, and many others; and
each, seating himself at the table, had kept his bonnet on his head. So
Cromwell, turning, had seen them and had asked with his hard insolence
and embittered eyes of hatred, how they dared be covered before he who
was their president sat down. Then, up against him in the window-place
there had sprung Norfolk at the chain of the George round his neck, and
Suffolk at the Garter on his knee; and Norfolk had cried out that Thomas
Cromwell was no longer Privy Seal of that kingdom, nor president of that
council, but a traitor that must die. Then such rage and despair had
come into Thomas Cromwell's terrible face that Cranmer's senses had
reeled. He had seen Norfolk and the Admiral fall back before this
passion; he had seen Thomas Cromwell tear off his cap and cast it on the
floor; he had heard him bark and snarl out certain words into the face
of the yellow dog of Norfolk.

'_Upon your life you dare not call me traitor!_' and Norfolk had fallen
back abashed.

Then the chamber had seemed to fill with an awful gloom and darkness;
men showed only like shadows against the window lights; the constable of
the Tower had come in with the warrants, and in that gloom the earth had
appeared to tremble and quake beneath the Archbishop's feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

He crossed himself at the recollection, and, coming out of his stupor,
saw that Lascelles was finishing his writings. And he was glad that he
was here now and not there then.

'Prithee, your Grace,' the gentleman's soft voice said, 'let me bear,
myself, this letter to the Queen.'

The Archbishop shivered frostily in his robes.

'I will have no more Cromwell tricks,' he said. 'I have said it'; and he
affected an obdurate tone.

'Then, indeed, all is lost,' Lascelles answered; 'for this Queen is very
resolved.'

The Archbishop cast his eyes up to the cold stone ceiling above him. He
crossed himself.

'You are a very devil,' he said, and panic came into his eyes, so that
he turned them all round him as if he sought an issue at which to run
out.

'The Papist lords in this castle met on Saturday night,' Lascelles said;
'their meeting was very secret, and Norfolk was their head. But I have
heard it said that not one of them was for the Queen.'

The Archbishop shrank within himself.

'I am not minded to hear this,' he said.

'Not one of them was for the Queen altogether; for she will render all
lands and goods back to the Church, and there is no one of them but is
rich with the lands and goods of the Church. That they that followed
Cromwell are not for the Queen well your Grace knoweth,' his gentleman
continued.

'I will not hear this; this is treason,' the Archbishop muttered.

'So that who standeth for the Queen?' Lascelles whispered. 'Only a few
of the baser sort that have no lands to lose.'

'The King,' the Archbishop cried out in a terrible voice; 'the King
standeth for her!'

He sprang up in his chair and then sank down again, covering his mouth
with his hands, as if he would have intercepted the uttered words. For
who knew who listened at what doors in these days. He whispered
horribly--

'What a folly is this. Who shall move the King? Will reports of his
ambassadors that Cleves, or Charles, or Francis miscall the Queen? You
know they will not, for the King is aware of how these princes batten on
carrion. Will broad sheets of the Lutheran? You know they will not, for
the King is aware of how those coggers come by their tales. Will the
King go abroad among the people any more to hear what they say? You know
he will not. For he is grown too old, and his fireside is made too
sweet----'

He wavered, and he could not work himself up with a longer show of
anger.

'Prithee,' Lascelles said, 'let me bear this letter myself to the
Queen.' His voice was patient and calm.

The Archbishop lay back, impotent, in his chair. His arms were along the
arms of it: he had dropped his book upon the table. His long gown was
draped all over him down to his feet; his head remained motionless; his
eyes did not wink, and gazed at despair; his hands drooped, open and
impotent.

Suddenly he moved one of them a very little.


VII

It was the Queen's habit to go every night, when the business of the day
was done, to pray, along with the Lady Mary, in the small chapel that
was in the roof of the castle. To vespers she went with all the Court to
the big chapel in the courtyard that the King had builded especially for
her. But to this little chapel, that was of Edward IV's time, small and
round-arched, all stone and dark and bare, she went with the Lady Mary
alone. Her ladies and her doorguards they left at the stair foot, on a
level with the sleeping rooms of the poorer sort, but up the little
stairway they climbed by themselves, in darkness, to pray privately for
the conversion of England. For this little place was so small and so
forgotten that it had never been desecrated by Privy Seal's men. It had
had no vessels worth the taking, and only very old vestments and a few
ill-painted pictures on the stone walls that were half hidden in the
dust.

Katharine had found this little place when, on her first day at
Pontefract, she had gone a-wandering over the castle with the King. For
she was curious to know how men had lived in the old times; to see their
rooms and to mark what old things were there still in use. And she had
climbed thus high because she was minded to gaze upon the huge expanse
of country and of moors that from the upper leads of the castle was to
be seen. But this little chapel had seemed to her to be all the more
sacred because it had been undesecrated and forgotten. She thought that
you could not find such another in the King's realm at that time; she
was very assured that not one was to be found in any house of the King's
and hers.

And, making inquiries, she had found that there was also an old priest
there served the chapel, doing it rather secretly for the well-disposed
of the castle's own guards. This old man had fled, at the approach of
the King's many, into the hidden valleys of that countryside, where
still the faith lingered and lingers now. For, so barbarous and remote
those north parts were, that a great many people had never heard that
the King was married again, and fewer still, or none, knew that he and
his wife were well inclined again towards Rome.

This old priest she had had brought to her. And he was so well loved
that along with him came a cluster of weather-battered moorsmen, right
with him into her presence. They kneeled down, being clothed with skins,
and several of them having bows of a great size, to beg her not to harm
this old man, for he was reputed a saint. The Queen could not understand
their jargon but, when their suit was interpreted to her by the Lord
Dacre of the North, and when she had had a little converse with the old
priest, she answered that, so touched was her heart by his simplicity
and gentleness, that she would pray the good King, her lord and master,
to let this priest be made her confessor whilst there they stayed. And
afterwards, if it were convenient, in reward for his faithfulness, he
should be made a prior or a bishop in those parts. So the moorsmen,
blessing her uncouthly for her fairness and kind words, went back with
their furs and bows into their fastnesses. One of them was a great lord
of that countryside, and each day he sent into the castle bucks and moor
fowl, and once or twice a wolf. His name was Sir John Peel, and Sir John
Peel, too, the priest was called.

So the priest served that little altar, and of a night, when the Queen
was minded next day to partake of the host, he heard her confession. On
other nights he left them there alone to say their prayers. It was
always very dark with the little red light burning before the altar and
two tapers that they lit beneath a statue of the Virgin, old and black
and ill-carved by antique hands centuries before. And, in that
blackness, they knelt, invisible almost, and still in the black gowns
that they put on for prayers, beside a low pillar that gloomed out at
their sides and vanished up into the darkness of the roof.

Having done their prayers, sometimes they stayed to converse and to
meditate, for there they could be very private. On the night when the
letter to Rome was redrafted, the Queen prayed much longer than the Lady
Mary, who sat back upon a stool, silently, to await her finishing--for
it seemed that the Queen was more zealous for the converting of those
realms again to the old faith than was ever the Lady Mary. The tapers
burned with a steady, invisible glow in the little side chapel behind
the pillar; the altar gleamed duskily before them, and it was so still
that through the unglassed windows they could hear, from far below in
the black countryside, a tenuous bleating of late-dropped lambs.
Katharine Howard's beads clicked and her dress rustled as she came up
from her knees.

'It rests more with thee than with any other in this land,' her voice
reverberated amongst the distant shadows. A bat that had been drawn in
by the light flittered invisibly near them.

'Even what?' the Lady Mary asked.

'Well you know,' the Queen answered; 'and may the God to whom you have
prayed, that softened the heart of Paul, soften thine in this hour!'

The Lady Mary maintained a long silence. The bat flittered, with a
leathern rustle, invisible, between their very faces. At last Mary
uttered, and her voice was taunting and malicious--

'If you will soften my heart much you must beseech me.'

'Why, I will kneel to you,' the Queen said.

'Aye, you shall,' Mary answered. 'Tell me what you would have of me.'

'Well you know!' Katharine said again.

In the darkness the lady's voice maintained its bitter mirth, as it were
the broken laughter of a soul in anguish.

'I will have you tell me, for it is a shameful tale that will shame you
in the telling.'

The Queen paused to consider of her words.

'First, you shall be reconciled with, and speak pleasantly with, the
King your father and my lord.'

'And is it not a shameful thing you bid me do, to bid me speak pleasant
words to him that slew my mother and called me bastard?'

The Queen answered that she asked it in the name of Christ, His pitiful
sake, and for the good of this suffering land.

'None the less, Queen, thou askest it in the darkness that thy face may
not be seen. And what more askest thou?'

'That when the Duke of Orleans his ambassadors come asking your hand in
marriage, you do show them a pleasant and acquiescent countenance.'

The sacredness of that dark place kept Mary from laughing aloud.

'That, too, you dare not ask in the light of day, Queen,' she said. 'Ask
on!'

'That when the Emperor's ambassadors shall ask for your hand you shall
profess yourself glad indeed.'

'Well, here is more shame, that I should be prayed to feign this
gladness. I think the angels do laugh that hear you. Ask even more.'

Katharine said patiently--

'That, having in reward of these favours, been set again on high, having
honours shown you and a Court appointed round you, you shall gladly play
the part of a princess royal to these realms, never gibing, nor sneering
upon this King your father, nor calling upon the memory of the wronged
Queen your mother.'

'Queen,' the Lady Mary said, 'I had thought that even in the darkness
you had not dared to ask me this.'

'I will ask it you again,' the Queen said, 'in your room where the light
of the candles shines upon my face.'

'Why, you shall,' the Lady Mary said. 'Let us presently go there.'

       *       *       *       *       *

They went down the dark and winding stair. At the foot the procession of
the _coucher de la royne_ awaited them, first being two trumpeters in
black and gold, then four pikemen with lanthorns, then the marshal of
the Queen's household and five or seven lords, then the Queen's ladies,
the Lady Rochford that slept with her, the Lady Cicely Rochford; the
Queen's tiring-women, leaving a space between them for the Queen and the
Lady Mary to walk in, then four young pages in scarlet and with the
Queen's favours in their caps, and then the guard of the Queen's door,
and four pikemen with torches whose light, falling from behind,
illumined the path for the Queen's steps. The trumpeters blew four
shrill blasts and then four with their fists in the trumpet mouths to
muffle them. The brazen cries wound down the dark corridors, fathoms and
fathoms down, to let men know that the Queen had done her prayers and
was going to her bed. This great state was especially devised by the
King to do honour to the new Queen that he loved better than any he had
had. The purpose of it was to let all men know what she did that she
might be the more imitated.

But the Queen bade them guide her to the Lady Mary's door, and in the
doorway she dismissed them all, save only her women and her door guard
and pikemen who awaited her without, some on stools and some against the
wall, ladies and men alike.

The Lady Mary looked into the Queen's face very close and laughed at her
when they were in the fair room and the light of the candles.

'Now you shall say your litany over again,' she sneered; 'I will sit me
down and listen.' And in her chair at the table, with her face averted,
she dug with little stabs into the covering rug the stiletto with which
she was wont to mend her pens.

Standing by her, her face fully lit by the many candles that were upon
the mantel, the Queen, dressed all in black and with the tail of her
hood falling down behind to her feet, went patiently through the list of
her prayers--that the Lady Mary should be reconciled with her father,
that she should show at first favour to the ambassadors that sued for
her hand for the Duke of Orleans, and afterwards give a glad consent to
her marriage with the Prince Philip, the Emperor's son; and then, having
been reinstated as a princess of the royal house of England, she should
bear herself as such, and no more cry out upon the memory of Katharine
of Aragon that had been put away from the King's side.

The Queen spoke these words with a serious patience and a level voice;
but when she came to the end of them she stretched out her hand and her
voice grew full.

'And oh,' she said, her face being set and earnest in entreaty towards
the girl's back, 'if you have any love for the green and fertile land
that gave birth both to you and to me----'

'But to me a bastard,' the Lady Mary said.

'If you would have the dishoused saints to return home to their loved
pastures; if you would have the Mother of God and of us all to rejoice
again in her dowry; if you would see a great multitude of souls, gentle
and simple reconducted again towards Heaven----'

'Well, well!' the Lady Mary said; 'grovel! grovel! I had thought you
would have been shamed thus to crawl upon your belly before me.'

'I would crawl in the dust,' Katharine said. 'I would kiss the mire from
the shoon of the vilest man there is if in that way I might win for the
Church of God----'

'Well, well!' the Lady Mary said.

'You will not let me finish my speech about our Saviour and His mother,'
the Queen said. 'You are afraid I should move you.'

The Lady Mary turned suddenly round upon her in her chair. Her face was
pallid, the skin upon her hollowed temples trembled--

'Queen,' she called out, 'ye blaspheme when ye say that a few paltry
speeches of yours about God and souls will make me fail my mother's
memory and the remembrances of the shames I have had.'

She closed her eyes; she swallowed in her throat and then, starting up,
she overset her chair.

'To save souls!' she said. 'To save a few craven English souls! What are
they to me? Let them burn in the eternal fires! Who among them raised a
hand or struck a blow for my mother or me? Let them go shivering to
hell.'

'Lady,' the Queen said, 'ye know well how many have gone to the stake
over conspiracies for you in this realm.'

'Then they are dead and wear the martyr's crown,' the Lady Mary said.
'Let the rest that never aided me, nor struck blow for my mother, go rot
in their heresies.'

'But the Church of God!' the Queen said. 'The King's Highness has
promised me that upon the hour when you shall swear to do these things
he will send the letter that ye wot of to our Father in Rome.'

The Lady Mary laughed aloud--

'Here is a fine woman,' she said. 'This is ever the woman's part to
gloss over crimes of their men folk. What say you to the death of Lady
Salisbury that died by the block a little since?'

She bent her body and poked her head forward into the Queen's very face.
Katharine stood still before her.

'God knows,' she said. 'I might not stay it. There was much false
witness--or some of it true--against her. I pray that the King my Lord
may atone for it in the peace that shall come.'

'The peace that shall come!' the Lady Mary laughed. 'Oh, God, what
things we women are when a man rules us. The peace that shall come? By
what means shall it have been brought on?'

'I will tell you,' she pursued after a moment. 'All this is cogging and
lying and feigning and chicaning. And you who are so upright will crawl
before me to bring it about. Listen!'

And she closed her eyes the better to calm herself and to collect her
thoughts, for she hated to appear moved.

'I am to feign a friendship to my father. That is a lie that you ask me
to do, for I hate him as he were the devil. And why must I do this? To
feign a smooth face to the world that his pride may not be humbled. I am
to feign to receive the ambassadors of the Duke of Orleans. That is
cogging that you ask of me. For it is not intended that ever I shall wed
with a prince of the French house. But I must lead them on and on till
the Emperor be affrighted lest your King make alliance with the French.
What a foul tale! And you lend it your countenance!'

'I would well----' Katharine began.

'Oh, I know, I know,' Mary snickered. 'Ye would well be chaste but that
it must needs be other with you. It was the thief's wife said that.

'Listen again,' she pursued, 'anon there shall come the Emperor's men,
and there shall be more cogging and chicaning, and honours shall be
given me that I may be bought dear, and petitioning that I should be set
in the succession to make them eager. And then, perhaps, it shall all be
cried off and a Schmalkaldner prince shall send ambassadors----'

'No, before God,' Katharine said.

'Oh, I know my father,' Mary laughed at her. 'You will keep him tied to
Rome if you can. But you could not save the venerable Lady of Salisbury,
nor you shall not save him from trafficking with Schmalkaldners and
Lutherans if it shall serve his monstrous passions and his vanities. And
if he do not this yet he will do other villainies. And you will cosset
him in them--to save his hoggish dignity and buttress up his heavy
pride. All this you stand there and ask.'

'In the name of God I ask it,' Katharine said. 'There is no other way.'

'Well then,' the Lady Mary said, 'you shall ask it many times. I will
have you shamed.'

'Day and night I will ask it,' Katharine said.

The Lady Mary sniffed.

'It is very well,' she said. 'You are a proud and virtuous piece. I will
humble you. It were nothing to my father to crawl on his belly and
humble himself and slaver. He would do it with joy, weeping with a
feigned penitence, making huge promises, foaming at the mouth with oaths
that he repented, calling me his ever loved child----'

She stayed and then added--

'That would cost him nothing. But that you that are his pride, that you
should do it who are in yourself proud--that is somewhat to pay oneself
with for shamed nights and days despised. If you will have this thing
you shall do some praying for it.'

'Even as Jacob served so will I,' Katharine said.

'Seven years!' the Lady Mary mocked at her. 'God forbid that I should
suffer you for so long. I will get me gone with an Orleans, a Kaiserlik,
or a Schmalkaldner leaguer before that. So much comfort I will give
you.' She stopped, lifted her head and said, 'One knocks!'

They said from the door that a gentleman was come from the Archbishop
with a letter to the Queen's Grace.


VIII

There came in the shaven Lascelles and fell upon his knees, holding up
the sheets of the letter he had copied.

The Queen took them from him and laid them upon the great table, being
minded later to read them to the Lady Mary, in proof that the King very
truly would make his submission to Rome, supposing only that his
daughter would make submission to her.

When she turned, Lascelles was still kneeling before the doorway, his
eyes upon the ground.

'Why, I thank you,' she said. 'Gentleman, you may get you gone back to
the Archbishop.'

She was thinking of returning to her duel of patience with the Lady
Mary. But looking upon his blond and agreeable features she stayed for a
minute.

'I know your face,' she said. 'Where have I seen you?'

He looked up at her; his eyes were blue and noticeable, because at times
of emotion he was so wide-lidded that the whites showed round the pupils
of them.

'Certainly I have seen you,' the Queen said.

'It is a royal gift,' he said, 'the memory of faces. I am the
Archbishop's poor gentleman, Lascelles.'

The Queen said--

'Lascelles? Lascelles?' and searched her memory.

'I have a sister, the spit and twin of me,' he answered; 'and her name
is Mary.'

The Queen said--

'Ah! ah!' and then, 'Your sister was my bed-fellow in the maid's room at
my grandmother's.'

He answered gravely--

'Even so!'

And she--

'Stand up and tell me how your sister fares. I had some kindnesses of
her when I was a child. I remember when I had cold feet she would heat a
brick in the fire to lay to them, and such tricks. How fares she? Will
you not stand up?'

'Because she fares very ill I will not stand upon my feet,' he answered.

'Well, you will beg a boon of me,' she said. 'If it is for your sister I
will do what I may with a good conscience.'

He answered, remaining kneeling, that he would fain see his sister. But
she was very poor, having married an esquire called Hall of these parts,
and he was dead, leaving her but one little farm where, too, his old
father and mother dwelt.

'I will pay for her visit here,' she said; 'and she shall have lodging.'

'Safe-conduct she must have too,' he answered; 'for none cometh within
seven miles of this court without your permit and approval.'

'Well, I will send horses of my own, and men to safeguard her,' the
Queen said. 'For, sure, I am beholden to her in many little things. I
think she sewed the first round gown that ever I had.'

He remained kneeling, his eyes still upon the floor.

'We are your very good servants, my sister and I,' he said. 'For she did
marry one--that Esquire Hall--that was done to death upon the gallows
for the old faith's sake. And it was I that wrote the English of most of
this letter to his Holiness, the Archbishop being ill and keeping his
bed.'

'Well, you have served me very well, it is true,' the Queen answered.
'What would you have of me?'

'Your Highness,' he answered, 'I do well love my sister and she me. I
would have her given a place here at the Court. I do not ask a great
one; not one so high as about your person. For I am sure that you are
well attended, and places few there are to spare about you.'

And then, even as he willed it, she bethought her that Margot Poins was
to go to a nunnery. That afternoon she had decided that Mary Trelyon,
who was her second maid, should become her first, and others be moved up
in a rote.

'Why,' she said, 'it may be that I shall find her an occupation. I will
not have it said--nor yet do it--that I have ever recompensed them that
did me favours in the old times, for there are a many that have served
well in the Court that then I was outside of, and those it is fitting
first to reward. Yet, since, as you say you have writ the English of
this letter, that is a very great service to the Republic, and if by
rewarding her I may recompense thee, I will think how I may come to do
it.'

He stood up upon his feet.

'It may be,' he said, 'that my sister is rustic and unsuited. I have not
seen her in many years. Therefore, I will not pray too high a place for
her, but only that she and I may be near, the one to the other, upon
occasions, and that she be housed and fed and clothed.'

'Why, that is very well said,' the Queen answered him. 'I will bid my
men to make inquiries into her demeanour and behaviour in the place
where she bides, and if she is well fitted and modest, she shall have a
place about me. If she be too rustic she shall have another place. Get
you gone, gentleman, and a good-night to ye.'

He bent himself half double, in the then newest courtly way, and still
bent, pivoted through the door. The Queen stayed a little while musing.

'Why,' she said, 'when I was a little child I fared very ill, if now I
think of it; but then it seemed a little thing.'

'Y'had best forget it,' the Lady Mary answered.

'Nay,' the Queen said. 'I have known too well what it was to go
supperless to my bed to forget it. A great shadowy place--all shadows,
where the night airs crept in under the rafters.'

She was thinking of the maids' dormitory at her grandmother's, the old
Duchess.

'I am climbed very high,' she said; 'but to think----'

She was such a poor man's child and held of only the littlest account,
herding with the maids and the servingmen's children. At eight by the
clock her grandmother locked her and all the maids--at times there were
but ten, at times as many as a score--into that great dormitory that
was, in fact, nothing but one long attic or grange beneath the bare
roof. And sometimes the maids told tales or slept soon, and sometimes
their gallants, grooms and others, came climbing through the windows
with rope ladders. They would bring pasties and wines and lights, and
coarsely they would revel.

'Why,' she said, 'I had a gallant myself. He was a musician, but I have
forgot his name. Aye, and then there was another, Dearham, I think; but
I have heard he is since dead. He may have been my cousin; we were so
many in family, I have a little forgot.'

She stood still, searching her memory, with her eyes distant. The Lady
Mary surveyed her face with a curious irony.

'Why, what a simple Queen you are!' she said. 'This is something
rustic.'

The Queen joined her hands together before her, as if she caught at a
clue.

'I do remember me,' she said. 'It was a make of a comedy. This Dearham,
calling himself my cousin, beat this music musician for calling himself
my gallant. Then goes the musicker to my grandam, bidding the old
Duchess rise up again one hour after she had sought her bed. So comes my
grandam and turns the key in the padlock and looketh in over all the
gallimaufrey of lights and pasties and revels.

'Why,' she continued. 'I think I was beaten upon that occasion, but I
could not well tell why. And I was put to sleep in another room. And
later came my father home from some war. And he was angry that I had
consorted so with false minions, and had me away to his own poor house.
And there I had Udal for my Magister and evil fare and many beatings.
But this Mary Lascelles was my bed-fellow.'

'Why, forget it,' the Lady Mary said again.

'Other teachers would bid me remember it that I might remain humble,'
Katharine answered.

'Y'are humble enow and to spare,' the Lady Mary said. 'And these are not
good memories for such a place as this. Y'had best keep this Mary
Lascelles at a great distance.'

Katharine said--

'No; for I have passed my word.'

'Then reward her very fully,' the Lady Mary commended, and the Queen
answered--

'No, for that is against my conscience. What have I to fear now that I
be Queen?'

Mary shrugged her squared shoulders.

'Where is your Latin,' she said, 'with its _nulla dies felix_--call no
day fortunate till it be ended.'

'I will set another text against that,' she said, 'and that from holy
sayings--that _justus ab aestimatione non timebit_.'

'Well,' Mary answered, 'you will make your bed how you will. But I think
you would better have learned of these maids how to steer a course than
of your Magister and the Signor Plutarchus.'

The Queen did not answer her, save by begging her to read the King's
letter to his Holiness.

'And surely,' she said, 'if I had never read in the noble Romans I had
never had the trick of tongue to gar the King do so much of what I
will.'

'Why, God help you,' her step-daughter said. 'Pray you may never come to
repent it.'


PART TWO

THE THREATENED RIFT


I

In these summer days there was much faring abroad in the broad lands to
north and to south of the Pontefract Castle. The sunlight lay across
moors and uplands. The King was come with all his many to Newcastle; but
no Scots King was there to meet him. So he went farther to northwards.
His butchers drove before him herds of cattle that they slew some of
each night: their hooves made a broad and beaten way before the King's
horses. Behind came an army of tent men: cooks, servers, and sutlers.
For, since they went where new castles were few, at times they must
sleep on moorsides, and they had tents all of gold cloth and black, with
gilded tent-poles and cords of silk and silver wire. The lords and
principal men of those parts came out to meet him with green boughs, and
music, and slain deer, and fair wooden kegs filled with milk. But when
he was come near to Berwick there was still no Scots King to meet him,
and it became manifest that the King's nephew would fail that tryst.
Henry, riding among his people, swore a mighty oath that he would take
way even into Edinburgh town and there act as he listed, for he had with
him nigh on seven thousand men of all arms and some cannon which he had
been minded to display for the instruction of his nephew. But he had, in
real truth, little stomach for this feat. For, if he would go into
Scotland armed, he must wait till he got together all the men that the
Council of the North had under arms. These were scattered over the whole
of the Border country, and it must be many days before he had them all
there together. And already the summer was well advanced, and if he
delayed much longer his return, the after progress from Pontefract to
London must draw them to late in the winter. And he was little minded
that either Katharine or his son should bear the winter travel. Indeed,
he sent a messenger back to Pontefract with orders that the Prince
should be sent forthwith with a great guard to Hampton Court, so that he
should reach that place before the nights grew cold.

And, having stayed in camp four days near the Scots border--for he loved
well to live in a tent, since it re-awoke in him the ardour of his youth
and made him think himself not so old a man--he delivered over to the
Earl Marshal forty Scots borderers and cattle thieves that had been
taken that summer. These men he had meant to have handed, pardoned, to
the Scots King when he met him. But the Earl Marshal set up, along the
road into Scotland, from where the stone marks the border, a row of
forty gallows, all high, but some higher than others; for some of the
prisoners were men of condition. And, within sight of a waiting crowd of
Scots that had come down to the boundaries of their land to view the
King of England, Norfolk hanged on these trees the forty men.

And, laughing over their shoulders at this fine harvest of fruit,
gibbering and dangling against the heavens on high, the King and his
host rode back into the Border country. It was pleasant to ride in the
summer weather, and they hunted and rendered justice by the way, and
heard tales of battle that there had been before in the north country.

But there was one man, Thomas Culpepper, in the town of Edinburgh to
whom this return was grievous. He had been in these outlandish parts now
for more than nineteen months. The Scots were odious to him, the town
was odious; he had no stomach for his food, and such clothes as he had
were ragged, for he would wear nothing that had there been woven. He was
even a sort of prisoner. For he had been appointed to wait on the King's
Ambassador to the King of Scots, and the last thing that Throckmorton,
the notable spy, had done before he had left the Court had been to write
to Edinburgh that T. Culpepper, the Queen's cousin, who was a dangerous
man, was to be kept very close and given no leave of absence.

And one thing very much had aided this: for, upon receiving news, or the
rumour of news, that his cousin Katharine Howard--he was her mother's
brother's son--had wedded the King, or had been shown for Queen at
Hampton Court, he had suddenly become seized with such a rage that,
incontinently, he had run his sword through an old fishwife in the
fishmarket where he was who had given him the news, newly come by sea,
thinking that because he was an Englishman this marriage of his King
might gladden him. The fishwife died among her fish, and Culpepper with
his sword fell upon all that were near him in the market, till, his heel
slipping upon a haddock, he fell, and was fallen upon by a great many
men.

He must stay in jail for this till he had compounded with the old
woman's heirs and had paid for a great many cuts and bruises. And Sir
Nicholas Hoby, happening to be in Edinburgh at that time, understood
well what ailed Thomas Culpepper, and that he was mad for love of the
Queen his cousin--for was it not this Culpepper that had brought her to
the court, and, as it was said, had aforetime sold farms to buy her food
and gowns when, her father being a poor man, she was well-nigh starving?
Therefore Sir Nicholas begged alike the Ambassador and the King of Scots
that they would keep this madman clapped up till they were very certain
that the fit was off him. And, what with the charges of blood ransom and
jailing for nine months, Culpepper had no money at all when at last he
was enlarged, but must eat his meals at the Ambassador's table, so that
he could not in any way come away into England till he had written for
more money and had earned a further salary. And that again was a matter
of many months, and later he spent more in drinking and with Scots women
till he persuaded himself that he had forgotten his cousin that was now
a Queen. Moreover, it was made clear to him by those about him that it
was death to leave his post unpermitted.

But, with the coming of the Court up into the north parts, his
impatience grew again, so that he could no longer eat but only drink and
fight. It was rumoured that the Queen was riding with the King, and he
swore a mighty oath that he would beg of her or of the King leave at
last to be gone from that hateful city; and the nearer came the King the
more his ardour grew. So that, when the news came that the King was
turned back, Culpepper could no longer compound it with himself. He had
then a plenty of money, having kept his room for seven days, and the
night before that he had won half a barony at dice from a Scots archer.
But he had no passport into England; therefore, because he was afraid to
ask for one, being certain of a refusal, he blacked his face and hands
with coal and then took refuge on a coble, leaving the port of Leith for
Durham. He had well bribed the master of this ship to take him as one of
his crew. In Durham he stayed neither to wash nor to eat, but, having
bought himself a horse, he rode after the King's progress that was then
two days' journey to the south, and came up with them. He had no wits
left more than to ask of the sutlers at the tail of the host where the
Queen was. They laughed at this apparition upon a haggard horse, and one
of them that was a notable cutpurse took all the gold that he had, only
giving him in exchange the news that the Queen was at Pontefract, from
which place she had never stirred. With a little silver that he had in
another bag he bought himself a provision of food, a store of drink, and
a poor Kern to guide him, running at his saddle-bow.

He saw neither hills nor valleys, neither heather nor ling: he had no
thoughts but only that of finding the Queen his cousin. At times the
tears ran down his begrimed face, at times he waved his sword in the air
and, spurring his horse, he swore great oaths. How he fared, where he
rested, by what roads he went over the hills, that he never knew.
Without a doubt the Kern guided him faithfully.

For the Queen, having news that the King was nearly come within a day's
journey, rode out towards the north to meet him. And as she went along
the road, she saw, upon a hillside not very far away, a man that sat
upon a dead horse, beating it and tugging at its bridle. Beside him
stood a countryman, in a garment of furs and pelts, with rawhide boots.
She had a great many men and ladies riding behind her, and she had come
as far as she was minded to go. So she reined in her horse and sent two
prickers to ask who these men were.

And when she heard that this was a traveller, robbed of all his money
and insensate, and his poor guide who knew nothing of who he might be,
she turned her cavalcade back and commanded that the traveller should be
borne to the castle on a litter of boughs and there attended to and
comforted until again he could take the road. And she made occasion upon
this to comment how ill it was for travellers that the old monasteries
were done away with. For in the old time there were seven monasteries
between there and Durham, wherein poor travellers might lodge. Then, if
a merchant were robbed upon the highways, he could be housed at
convenient stages on his road home, and might afterwards send recompense
to the good fathers or not as he pleased or was able. Now, there was no
harbourage left on all that long road, and, but for the grace of God,
that pitiful traveller might have lain there till the ravens picked out
his eyes.

And some commended the Queen's words and actions, and some few, behind
their hands, laughed at her for her soft heart. And the more Lutheran
sort said that it was God's mercy that the old monasteries were gone;
for they had, they said, been the nests for lowsels, idle wayfarers,
palmers, pilgrims, and the like. And, praise God, since that clearance
fourteen thousand of these had been hanged by the waysides for sturdy
rogues, to the great purging of the land.


II

In the part of Lincolnshire that is a little to the northeastward of
Stamford was a tract of country that had been granted to the monks of St
Radigund's at Dover by William the Conqueror. These monks had drained
this land many centuries before, leaving the superintendence of the work
at first to priors by them appointed, and afterwards, when the dykes,
ditches, and flood walls were all made, to knights and poor gentlemen,
their tenants, who farmed the land and kept up the defences against
inundations, paying scot and lot to a bailiff and water-wardens and
jurats, just as was done on the Romney marshes by the bailiff and jurats
of that level.

And one of these tenants, holding two hundred acres in a simple fee from
St Radigund's for a hundred and fifty years back, had been always a man
of the name of Hall. It was an Edward Hall that Mary Lascelles had
married when she was a maid at the Duchess of Norfolk's. This Edward
Hall was then a squire, a little above the condition of a groom, in the
Duchess's service. His parents dwelled still on the farm which was
called Neot's End, because it was in the angle of the great dyke called
St Neot's and the little sewer where St Radigund's land had its boundary
stone.

But in the troublesome days of the late Privy Seal, Edward Hall had
informed Throckmorton the spy of a conspiracy and rising that was
hatching amongst the Radigund's men a little before the Pilgrimage of
Grace, when all the north parts rose. For the Radigund's men cried out
and murmured amongst themselves that if the Priory was done away with
there would be an end of their easy and comfortable tenancy. Their rents
had been estimated and appointed a great number of years before, when
all goods and the produce of the earth were very low priced. And the
tenants said that if now the King took their lands to himself or gave
them to some great lord, very heavy burdens would be laid upon them and
exacted; whereas in some years under easy priors the monks forgot their
distant territory, and in bad seasons they took no rents at all. And
even under hard and exacting priors the monks could take no more than
their rentals, which were so small. They said, too, that the King and
Thomas Cromwell would make them into heathen Greeks and turn their
children to be Saracens. So these Radigund's men meditated a rising and
conspiracy.

But, because Edward Hall informed Throckmorton of what was agate, a
posse was sent into that country, and most of the men were hanged and
their lands all taken from them. Those that survived from the jailing
betook themselves to the road, and became sturdy beggars, so that many
of them too came to the gallows tree.

Most of the land was granted to the Sieur Throckmorton with the abbey's
buildings and tithe barns. But the Halls' farm and another of near three
hundred acres were granted to Edward Hall. Then it was that Edward Hall
could marry and take his wife, Mary Lascelles, down into Lincolnshire to
Neot's End. But when the Pilgrimage of Grace came, and the great risings
all over Lincolnshire, very early the rioters came to Neot's End, and
they burned the farm and the byres, they killed all the beasts or drove
them off, they trampled down the corn and laid waste the flax fields.
And, between two willow trees along the great dyke, they set a pole, and
from it they hanged Edward Hall over the waters, so that he dried and
was cured like a ham in the smoke from his own stacks.

Then Mary Lascelles' case was a very miserable one; for she had to fend
for the aged father and bedridden mother of Edward Hall, and there were
no beasts left but only a few geese and ducks that the rebels could not
lay their hands on. And the only home that they had was the farmhouse
that was upon Edward Hall's other farm, and that they had let fall
nearly into ruin. And for a long time no men would work for her.

But at last, after the rebellion was pitifully ended, a few hinds came
to her, and she made a shift. And it was better still after Privy Seal
fell, for then came Throckmorton the spy into his lands, and he brought
with him carpenters and masons and joiners to make his house fair, and
some of these men he lent to Mary Hall. But it had been prophesied by a
wise woman in those parts that no land that had been taken from the
monks would prosper. And, because all the jurats, bailiffs, and
water-wardens had been hanged either on the one part or the other and no
more had been appointed, at about that time the sewers began to clog up,
the lands to swamp, murrain and fluke to strike the beasts and the
sheep, and night mists to blight the grain and the fruit blossoms. So
that even Throckmorton had little good of his wealth and lands.

Thus one morning to Mary Hall, who stood before her door feeding her
geese and ducks, there came a little boy running to say that men-at-arms
stood on the other side of the dyke that was very swollen and grey and
broad. And they shouted that they came from the Queen's Highness, and
would have a boat sent to ferry them over.

The colour came into Mary Hall's pale face, for even there she had heard
that her former bedfellow was come to be Queen. And at times even she
had thought to write to the Queen to help her in her misery. But always
she had been afraid, because she thought that the Queen might remember
her only as one that had wronged her childish innocence. For she
remembered that the maids' dormitory at the old Duchess's had been no
cloister of pure nuns. So that, at best, she was afraid, and she sent
her yard-worker and a shepherd a great way round to fetch the larger
boat of two to ferry over the Queen's men. Then she went indoors to redd
up the houseplace and to attire herself.

To the old farmstead, that was made of wood hung over here and there
with tilework with a base of bricks, she had added a houseplace for the
old folk to sit all day. It was built of wattles that had had clay cast
over them, and was whitened on the outside and thatched nearly down to
the ground like any squatter's hut; it had cupboards of wood nearly all
round it, and beneath the cupboards were lockers worn smooth with men
sitting upon them, after the Dutch fashion--for there in Lincolnshire
they had much traffic with the Dutch. There was a great table made of
one slab of a huge oak from near Boston. Here they all ate. And above
the ingle was another slab of oak from the same tree. Her little old
step-mother sat in a stuff chair covered with a sheep-skin; she sat
there night and day, shivering with the shaking palsy. At times she let
out of her an eldritch shriek, very like the call of a hedgehog; but she
never spoke, and she was fed with a spoon by a little misbegotten son of
Edward Hall's. The old step-father sat always opposite her; he had no
use of his legs, and his head was always stiffly screwed round towards
the door as if he were peering, but that was the rheumatism. To atone
for his wife's dumbness, he chattered incessantly whenever anyone was on
that floor; but because he spoke always in Lincolnshire, Mary Hall could
scarce understand him, and indeed she had long ceased to listen. He
spoke of forgotten floods and ploughings, ancient fairs, the boundaries
of fields long since flooded over, of a visit to Boston that King Edward
IV had made, and of how he, for his fair speech and old lineage, had
been chosen of all the Radigund's men to present into the King's hands
three silver horseshoes. Behind his back was a great dresser with railed
shelves, having upon them a little pewter ware and many wooden bowls for
the hinds' feeding. A door on the right side, painted black, went down
into the cellar beneath the old house. Another door, of bars of iron
with huge locks from the old monastery, went into the old house where
slept the maids and the hinds. This was always open by day but locked in
the dark hours. For the hinds were accounted brutish lumps that went
savage at night, like wild beasts, so that, if they spared the master's
throat, which was unlikely, it was certain that they would little spare
the salted meat, the dried fish, the mead, metheglin, and cyder that
their poor cellar afforded. The floor was of stamped clay, wet and
sweating but covered with rushes, so that the place had a mouldering
smell. Behind the heavy door there were huge bolts and crossbars against
robbers: the raftered ceiling was so low that it touched her hair when
she walked across the floor. The windows had no glass but were filled
with a thin reddish sheep-skin like parchment. Before the stairway was a
wicket gate to keep the dogs--of whom there were many, large and fierce,
to protect them alike from robbers and the hinds--to keep the dogs from
going into the upper room.

Each time that Mary Hall came into this home of hers her heart sank
lower; for each day the corner posts gave sideways a little more, the
cupboard bulged, the doors were loth to close or open. And more and more
the fields outside were inundated, the lands grew sour, the sheep would
not eat or died of the fluke.

'And surely,' she would cry out at times, 'God created me for other
guesswork than this!'

At nights she was afraid, and shivered at the thought of the fens and
the black and trackless worlds all round her; and the ravens croaked,
night-hawks screamed, the dog-foxes cried out, and the flames danced
over the swampy grounds. Her mirror was broken on the night that they
hanged her husband: she had never had another but the water in her
buckets, so that she could not tell whether she had much aged or whether
she were still brown-haired and pink-cheeked, and she had forgotten how
to laugh, and was sure that there were crow's-feet about her eyelids.

Her best gown was all damp and mouldy in the attic that was her bower.
She made it meet as best she could, and indeed she had had so little fat
living, sitting at the head of her table with a whip for unruly hinds
and louts before her--so little fat living that she could well get into
her wedding-gown of yellow cramosyn. She smoothed her hair back into her
cord hood that for so long had not come out of its press. She washed her
face in a bucket of water: that and the press and her bed with grey
woollen curtains were all the furnishing her room had. The straw of the
roof caught in her hood when she moved, and she heard her old
father-in-law cackling to the serving-maids through the cracks of the
floor.

When she came down there were approaching, across the field before the
door, six men in scarlet and one in black, having all the six halberds
and swords, and one a little banner, but the man in black had a sword
only. Their horses were tethered in a clump on the farther side of the
dyke. Within the room the serving-maids were throwing knives and pewter
dishes with a great din on to the table slab. They dropped
drinking-horns and the salt-cellar itself all of a heap into the rushes.
The grandfather was cackling from his chair; a hen and its chickens ran
screaming between the maids' feet. Then Lascelles came in at the
doorway.


III

The Sieur Lascelles looked round him in that dim cave.

'Ho!' he said, 'this place stinks,' and he pulled from his pocket a
dried and shrivelled orange-peel purse stuffed with cloves and ginger.
'Ho!' he said to the cornet that was come behind him with the Queen's
horsemen. 'Come not in here. This will breed a plague amongst your men!'
and he added--

'Did I not tell you my sister was ill-housed?'

'Well, I was not prepared against this,' the cornet said. He was a man
with a grizzling beard that had little patience away from the Court,
where he had a bottle that he loved and a crony or two that he played
all day at chequers with, except when the Queen rode out; then he was of
her train. He did not come over the sill, but spoke sharply to his men.

'Ungird not here,' he said. 'We will go farther.' For some of them were
for setting their pikes against the mud wall and casting their swords
and heavy bottle-belts on to the table before the door. The old man in
the armchair began suddenly to prattle to them all--of a horse-thief
that had been dismembered and then hanged in pieces thirty years
before. The cornet looked at him for a moment and said--

'Sir, you are this woman's father-in-law, I do think. Have you aught to
report against her?' He bent in at the door, holding his nose. The old
man babbled of one Pease-Cod Noll that had no history to speak of but a
swivel eye.

'Well,' the grizzled cornet said, 'I shall get little sense here.' He
turned upon Mary Hall.

'Mistress,' he said, 'I have a letter here from the Queen's High Grace,'
and, whilst he fumbled in his belt to find a little wallet that held the
letter, he spoke on: 'But I misdoubt you cannot read. Therefore I shall
tell you the Queen's High Grace commandeth you to come into her
service--or not, as the report of your character shall be. But at any
rate you shall come to the castle.'

Mary Hall could find no words for men of condition, so long she had been
out of the places where such are found. She swallowed in her throat and
held her breast over her heart.

'Where is the village here?' the cornet said, 'or what justice is there
that can write you a character under his seal?'

She made out to say that there was no village, all the neighbourhood
having been hanged. A half-mile from there there was the house of Sir
Nicholas Throckmorton, a justice. From the house-end he might see it, or
he might have a hind to guide him. But he would have no guide; he would
have no man nor maid nor child to go from there to the justice's house.
He set one soldier to guard the back door and one the front, that none
came out nor went beyond the dyke-end.

'Neither shall you go, Sir Lascelles,' he said.

'Well, give me leave with my sister to walk this knoll,' Lascelles said
good-humouredly. 'We shall not corrupt the grass blades to bear false
witness of my sister's chastity.'

'Ay, you may walk upon this mound,' the cornet answered. Having got out
the packet of the Queen's letter, he girded up his belt again.

'You will get you ready to ride with me,' he said to Mary Hall. 'For I
will not be in these marshes after nightfall, but will sleep at
Shrimpton Inn.'

He looked around him and added--

'I will have three of your geese to take with us,' he said. 'Kill me
them presently.'

Lascelles looked after him as he strode away round the house with the
long paces of a stiff horseman.

'Before God,' he laughed, 'that is one way to have information about a
quean. Now are we prisoners whilst he inquires after your character.'

'Oh, alack!' Mary Hall said, and she cast up her hands.

'Well, we are prisoners till he come again,' her brother said
good-humouredly. 'But this is a foul hole. Come out into the sunlight.'

She said--

'If you are with them, they cannot come to take me prisoner.'

He looked her full in the eyes with his own that twinkled inscrutably.
He said very slowly--

'Were your mar-locks and prinking-prankings so very evil at the old
Duchess's?'

She grew white: she shrank away as if he had threatened her with his
fist.

'The Queen's Highness was such a child,' she said. 'She cannot remember.
I have lived very godly since.'

'I will do what I can to save you,' he said. 'Let me hear about it, as,
being prisoners, we may never come off.'

'You!' she cried out. 'You who stole my wedding portion!'

He laughed deviously.

'Why, I have laid it up so well for you that you may wed a knight now if
you do my bidding. I was ever against your wedding Hall.'

'You lie!' she said. 'You gar'd me do it.'

The maids were peeping out of the cellar, whither they had fled.

'Come upon the grass,' he said. 'I will not be heard to say more than
this: that you and I stand and fall together like good sister and goodly
brother.'

Their faces differed only in that hers was afraid and his smiling as he
thought of new lies to tell her. Her face in her hood, pale beneath its
weathering, approached the colour of his that shewed the pink and white
of indoors. She came very slowly near him, for she was dazed. But when
she was almost at the sill he caught her hand and drew it beneath his
elbow.

'Tell me truly,' she said, 'shall I see the Court or a prison?... But
you cannot speak truth, nor ever could when we were tiny twins. God help
me: last Sunday I had the mind to wed my yard-man. I would become such a
liar as thou to come away from here.'

'Sister,' he said, 'this I tell you most truly: that this shall fall out
according as you obey me and inform me'; and, because he was a little
the taller, he leaned over her as they walked away together.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fourth day from then they were come to the great wood that is to
south and east of the castle of Pontefract. Here Lascelles, who had
ridden much with his sister, forsook her and went ahead of the slow and
heavy horses of that troop of men. The road was broadened out to forty
yards of green turf between the trees, for this was a precaution against
ambushes of robbers. Across the road, after he had ridden alone for an
hour and a half, there was a guard of four men placed. And here, whilst
he searched for his pass to come within the limits of the Court, he
asked what news, and where the King was.

It was told him that the King lay still at the Fivefold Vents, two days'
progress from the castle, and as it chanced that a verderer's pricker
came out of the wood where he had been to mark where the deer lay for
to-morrow's killing, Lascelles bade this man come along with him for a
guide.

'Sir, ye cannot miss the way,' the pricker said surlily. 'I have my deer
to watch.'

'I will have you to guide me,' Lascelles said, 'for I little know these
parts.'

'Well,' the pricker answered him, 'it is true that I have not often seen
you ride a-hawking.'

Whilst they went along the straight road, Lascelles, who unloosened the
woodman's tongue with a great drink of sherry-sack, learned that it was
said that only very unwillingly did the King lie so long at the Fivefold
Vents. For on the morrow there was to be driven by, up there, a great
herd of moor stags and maybe a wolf or two. The King would be home with
his wife, it was reported, but the younger lords had been so importunate
with him to stay and abide this gallant chase and great slaughter that,
they having ridden loyally with him, he had yielded to their prayers and
stayed there--twenty-four hours, it was said.

'Why, you know a great deal,' Lascelles answered.

'We who stand and wait had needs have knowledge,' the woodman said, 'for
we have little else.'

'Aye, 'tis a hard service,' Lascelles said. 'Did you see the Queen's
Highness o' Thursday week borrow a handkerchief of Sir Roger Pelham to
lure her falcon back?'

'That did not I,' the woodman answered, 'for o' Thursday week it was a
frost and the Queen rode not out.'

'Well, it was o' Saturday,' Lascelles said.

'Nor was it yet o' Saturday,' the woodman cried; 'I will swear it. For
o' Saturday the Queen's Highness shot with the bow, and Sir Roger
Pelham, as all men know, fell with his horse on Friday, and lies up
still.'

'Then it was Sir Nicholas Rochford,' Lascelles persisted.

'Sir,' the woodman said, 'you have a very wrong tale, and patent it is
that little you ride a-hunting.'

'Well, I mind my book,' Lascelles said. 'But wherefore?'

'Sir,' the woodman answered, 'it is thus: The Queen when she rides
a-hawking has always behind her her page Toussaint, a little boy. And
this little boy holdeth ever the separate lures for each hawk that the
Queen setteth up. And the falcon or hawk or genette or tiercel having
stooped, the Queen will call upon that eyass for the lure appropriated
to each bird as it chances. And very carefully the Queen's Highness
observeth the laws of the chase, of venery and hawking. For the which I
honour her.'

Lascelles said, 'Well, well!'

'As for the borrowing of a handkerchief,' the woodman pursued, 'that is
a very idle tale. For, let me tell you, a lady might borrow a jewelled
feather or a scarlet pouch or what not that is bright and shall take a
bird's eye--a little mirror upon a cord were a good thing. But a
handkerchief! Why, Sir Bookman, that a lady can only do if she will
signify to all the world: "This knight is my servant and I his
mistress." Those very words it signifieth--and that the better for it
showeth that that lady is minded to let her hawk go, luring the
gentleman to her with that favour of his.'

'Well, well,' Lascelles said, 'I am not so ignorant that I did not know
that. Therefore I asked you, for it seemed a very strange thing.'

'It is a very foolish tale and very evil,' the man answered. 'For this I
will swear: that the Queen's Highness--and I and her honour for
it--observeth very jealously the laws of wood and moorland and chase.'

'So I have heard,' Lascelles said. 'But I see the castle. I will not
take you farther, but will let you go back to the goodly deer.'

'Pray God they be not wandered fore,' the woodman said. 'You could have
found this way without me.'

       *       *       *       *       *

There was but one road into the castle, and that from the south, up a
steep green bank. Up the roadway Lascelles must ride his horse past four
men that bore a litter made of two pikes wattled with green boughs and
covered with a horse-cloth. As Lascelles passed by the very head of it,
the man that lay there sprang off it to his feet, and cried out--

'I be the Queen's cousin and servant. I brought her to the Court.'
Lascelles' horse sprang sideways, a great bound up the bank. He galloped
ten paces ahead before the rider could stay him and turn round. The man,
all rags and with a black face, had fallen into the dust of the road,
and still cried out outrageously. The bearers set down the litter, wiped
their brows, and then, falling all four upon Culpepper, made to carry
him by his legs and arms, for they were weary of laying him upon the
litter from which incessantly he sprang.

But before them upon his horse was Lascelles and impeded their way.
Culpepper drew in and pushed out his legs and arms, so that they all
four staggered, and--

'For God's sake, master,' one of them grunted out, 'stand aside that we
may pass. We have toil enow in bearing him.'

'Why, set the poor gentleman down upon the litter,' Lascelles said, 'and
let us talk a little.'

The men set Culpepper on the horse-cloth, and one of them knelt down to
hold him there.

'If you will lend us your horse to lay him across, we may come more
easily up,' one said. In these days the position and trade of a spy was
so little esteemed--it had been far other with the great informers of
Privy Seal's day--that these men, being of the Queen's guard, would talk
roughly to Lascelles, who was a mere poor gentleman of the Archbishop's
if his other vocation could be neglected. Lascelles sat, his hand upon
his chin.

'You use him very roughly if this be the Queen's cousin,' he said.

The bearer set back his beard and laughed at the sky.

'This is a coif--a poor rag of a merchant,' he cried out. 'If this were
the Queen's cousin should we bear him thus on a clout?'

'I am the Queen's cousin, T. Culpepper,' Culpepper shouted at the sky.
'Who be you that stay me from her?'

'Why, you may hear plainly,' the bearer said. 'He is mazed, doited,
starved, thirsted, and a seer of visions.'

Lascelles pondered, his elbow upon his saddle-peak, his chin caught in
his hand.

'How came ye by him?' he asked.

One with another they told him the tale, how, the Queen being ridden
towards the north parts, at the extreme end of her ride had seen the
man, at a distance, among the heather, flogging a dead horse with a
moorland kern beside him. He was a robbed, parched, fevered, and amazed
traveller. The Queen's Highness, compassionating, had bidden bear him to
the castle and comfort and cure him, not having looked upon his face or
heard his tongue. For, for sure then, she had let him die where he was;
since, no sooner were these four, his new bearers, nearly come up among
the knee-deep heather, than this man had started up, his eyes upon the
Queen's cavalcade and many at a distance. And, with his sword drawn and
screaming, he had cried out that, if that was the Queen, he was the
Queen's cousin. They had tripped up his heels in a bed of ling and
quieted him with a clout on the poll from an axe end.

'But now we have him here,' the eldest said; 'where we shall bestow him
we know not.'

Lascelles had his eyes upon the sick man's face as if it fascinated him,
and, slowly, he got down from his horse. Culpepper then lay very still
with his eyes closed, but his breast heaved as though against tight and
strong ropes that bound him.

'I think I do know this gentleman for one John Robb,' he said. 'Are you
very certain the Queen's Highness did not know his face?'

'Why, she came not ever within a quarter mile of him,' the bearer said.

'Then it is a great charity of the Queen to show mercy to a man she hath
never seen,' Lascelles answered absently. He was closely casting his
eyes over Culpepper. Culpepper lay very still, his begrimed face to the
sky, his hands abroad above his head. But when Lascelles bent over him
it was as if he shuddered, and then he wept.

Lascelles bent down, his hands upon his knees. He was afraid--he was
very afraid. Thomas Culpepper, the Queen's cousin, he had never seen in
his life. But he had heard it reported that he had red hair and beard,
and went always dressed in green with stockings of red. And this man's
hair was red, and his beard, beneath coal grime, was a curly red, and
his coat, beneath a crust of black filth, was Lincoln green and of a
good cloth. And, beneath the black, his stockings were of red silk. He
reflected slowly, whilst the bearers laughed amongst themselves at this
Queen's kinsman in rags and filth.

Lascelles gave them his bottle of sack to drink empty among them, that
he might have the longer time to think.

If this were indeed the Queen's cousin, come unknown to the Queen and
mazed and muddled in himself to Pontefract, what might not Lascelles
make of him? For all the world knew that he loved her with a mad
love--he had sold farms to buy her gowns. It was he that had brought her
to Court, upon an ass, at Greenwich, when her mule--as all men knew--had
stumbled upon the threshold. Once before, it was said, Culpepper had
burst in with his sword drawn upon the King and Kate Howard when they
sat together. And Lascelles trembled with eagerness at the thought of
what use he might not make of this mad and insolent lover of the
Queen's!

But did he dare?

Culpepper had been sent into Scotland to secure him up, away at the
farthest limits of the realm. Then, if he was come back? This grime was
the grime of a sea-coal ship! He knew that men without passports,
outlaws and the like, escaped from Scotland on the Durham ships that
went to Leith with coal. And this man came on the Durham road. Then....

If it were Culpepper he had come unpermitted. He was an outlaw. Dare
Lascelles have trade with--dare he harbour--an outlaw? It would be
unbeknown to the Queen's Highness! He kicked his heels with impatience
to come to a resolution.

He reflected swiftly:

What hitherto he had were: some tales spread abroad about the Queen's
lewd Court--tales in London Town. He had, too, the keeper of the Queen's
door bribed and talked into his service and interest. And he had his
sister....

His sister would, with threatening, tell tales of the Queen before
marriage. And she would find him other maids and grooms, some no doubt
more willing still than Mary Hall. But the keeper of the Queen's door!
And, in addition, the Queen's cousin mad of love for her! What might he
not do with these two?

The prickly sweat came to his forehead. Four horsemen were issuing from
the gate of the castle above. He must come to a decision. His fingers
trembled as if they were a pickpocket's near a purse of gold.

He straightened his back and stood erect.

'Yes,' he said very calmly, 'this is my friend John Robb.'

He added that this man had been in Edinburgh where the Queen's cousin
was. He had had letters from him that told how they were sib and rib.
Thus this fancy had doubtless come into his brain at sight of the Queen
in his madness.

He breathed calmly, having got out these words, for now the doubt was
ended. He would have both the Queen's door-keeper and the Queen's mad
lover.

He bade the bearers set Culpepper upon his horse and, supporting him,
lead him to a room that he would hire of the Archbishop's chamberlain,
near his own in the dark entrails of the castle. And there John Robb
should live at his expenses.

And when the men protested that, though this was very Christian of
Lascelles, yet they would have recompense of the Queen for their toils,
he said that he himself would give them a crown apiece, and they might
get in addition what recompense from the Queen's steward that they
could. He asked them each their names and wrote them down, pretending
that it was that he might send each man his crown piece.

So, when the four horsemen were ridden past, the men hoisted Culpepper
into Lascelles' horse and went all together up into the castle.

But, that night, when Culpepper lay in a stupor, Lascelles went to the
Archbishop's chamberlain and begged that four men, whose names he had
written down, might be chosen to go in the Archbishop's paritor's guard
that went next dawn to Ireland over the sea to bring back tithes from
Dublin. And, next day, he had Culpepper moved to another room; and, in
three days' time, he set it about in the castle that the Queen's cousin
was come from Scotland. By that time most of the liquor had come down
out of Culpepper's brain, but he was still muddled and raved at times.


IV

On that third night the Queen was with the Lady Mary, once more in her
chamber, having come down as before, from the chapel in the roof, to
pray her submit to her father's will. Mary had withstood her with a more
good-humoured irony; and, whilst she was in the midst of her pleadings,
a letter marked most pressing was brought to her. The Queen opened it,
and raised her eyebrows; she looked down at the subscription and
frowned. Then she cast it upon the table.

'Shall there never be an end of old things?' she said.

'Even what old things?' the Lady Mary asked.

The Queen shrugged her shoulders.

'It was not they I came to talk of,' she said. 'I would sleep early, for
the King comes to-morrow and I have much to plead with you.'

'I am weary of your pleadings,' the Lady Mary said. 'You have pleaded
enow. If you would be fresh for the King, be first fresh for me. Start a
new hare.'

The Queen would have gainsaid her.

'I have said you have pleaded enow,' the Lady Mary said. 'And you have
pleaded enow. This no more amuses me. I will wager I guess from whom
your letter was.'

Reluctantly the Queen held her peace; that day she had read in many
ancient books, as well profane as of the Fathers of the Church, and she
had many things to say, and they were near her lips and warm in her
heart. She was much minded to have good news to give the King against
his coming on the morrow; the great good news that should set up in that
realm once more abbeys and chapters and the love of God. But she could
not press these sayings upon the girl, though she pleaded still with her
blue eyes.

'Your letter is from Sir Nicholas Throckmorton,' the Lady Mary said.
'Even let me read it.'

'You did know that that knight was come to Court again?' the Queen said.

'Aye; and that you would not see him, but like a fool did bid him depart
again.'

'You will ever be calling me a fool,' Katharine retorted, 'for giving
ear to my conscience and hating spies and the suborners of false
evidence.'

'Why,' the Lady Mary answered, 'I do call it a folly to refuse to give
ear to the tale of a man who has ridden far and fast, and at the risk of
a penalty to tell it you.'

'Why,' Katharine said, 'if I did forbid his coming to the Court under a
penalty, it was because I would not have him here.'

'Yet he much loved you, and did you some service.'

'He did me a service of lies,' the Queen said, and she was angry. 'I
would not have had him serve me. By his false witness Cromwell was cast
down to make way for me. But I had rather have cast down Cromwell by the
truth which is from God. Or I had rather he had never been cast down.
And that I swear.'

'Well, you are a fool,' the Lady Mary said. 'Let me look upon this
knight's letter.'

'I have not read it,' Katharine said.

'Then will I,' the Lady Mary answered. She made across the room to where
the paper lay upon the table beside the great globe of the earth. She
came back; she turned her round to the Queen; she made her a deep
reverence, so that her black gown spread out stiffly around her, and,
keeping her eyes ironically on Katharine's face, she mounted backward up
to the chair that was beneath the dais.

Katharine put her hand over her heart.

'What mean you?' she said. 'You have never sat there before.'

'That is not true,' the Lady Mary said harshly. 'For this last three
days I have practised how, thus backward, I might climb to this chair
and, thus seemly, sit in it.'

'Even then?' Katharine asked.

'Even then I will be asked no more questions,' her step-daughter
answered. 'This signifieth that I ha' heard enow o' thy voice, Queen.'

Katharine did not dare to speak, for she knew well this girl's tyrannous
and capricious nature. But she was nearly faint with emotion and reached
sideways for the chair at the table; there she sat and gazed at the girl
beneath the dais, her lips parted, her body leaning forward.

Mary spread out the great sheet of Throckmorton's parchment letter upon
her black knees. She bent forward so that the light from the mantel at
the room-end might fall upon the writing.

'It seemeth,' she said ironically,'that one descrieth better at the
humble end of the room than here on high'--and she read whilst the Queen
panted.

At last she raised her eyes and bent them darkly upon the Queen's face.

'Will you do what this knight asks?' she uttered. 'For what he asks
seemeth prudent.'

'A' God's name,' Katharine said, 'let me not now hear of this man.'

'Why,' the Lady Mary answered coolly, 'if I am to be of the Queen's
alliance I must be of the Queen's council and my voice have a weight.'

'But will you? Will you?' Katharine brought out.

'Will you listen to my voice?' Mary said. 'I will not listen to yours.
Hear now what this goodly knight saith. For, if I am to be your
well-wisher, I must call him goodly that so well wishes to you.'

Katharine wrung her hands.

'Ye torture me,' she said.

'Well, I have been tortured,' Mary answered, 'and I have come through it
and live.'

She swallowed in her throat, and thus, with her eyes upon the writing,
brought out the words--

'This knight bids you beware of one Mary Lascelles or Hall, and her
brother, Edward Lascelles, that is of the Archbishop's service.'

'I will not hear what Throckmorton says,' Katharine answered.

'Ay, but you shall,' Mary said, 'or I come down from this chair. I am
not minded to be allied to a Queen that shall be undone. That is not
prudence.'

'God help me!' the Queen said.

'God helps most willingly them that take counsel with themselves and
prudence,' her step-daughter answered; 'and these are the words of the
knight.' She held up the parchment and read out:

'"Therefore I--and you know how much your well-wisher I be--upon my
bended knees do pray you do one of two things: either to put out both
these twain from your courts and presence, or if that you cannot or will
not do, so richly to reward them as that you shall win them to your
service. For a little rotten fruit will spread a great stink; a small
ferment shall pollute a whole well. And these twain, I am advised,
assured, convinced, and have convicted them, will spread such a rotten
fog and mist about your reputation and so turn even your good and
gracious actions to evil seeming that--I swear and vow, O most high
Sovereign, for whom I have risked, as you wot, life, limb and the fell
rack----"'

The Lady Mary looked up at the Queen's face.

'Will you not listen to the pleadings of this man?' she said.

'I will so reward Lascelles and his sister as they have merited.' the
Queen said. 'So much and no more. And not all the pleadings of this
knight shall move me to listen to any witness that he brings against any
man nor maid. So help me, God; for I do know how he served his master
Cromwell.'

'For love of thee!' the Lady Mary said.

The Queen wrung her hands as if she would wash a stain from them.

'God help me!' she said. 'I prayed the King for the life of Privy Seal
that was!'

'He would not hear thee,' the Lady Mary said. She looked long upon the
Queen's face with unmoved and searching eyes.

'It is a new thing to me,' she said,'to hear that you prayed for Privy
Seal's life.'

'Well, I prayed,' Katharine said, 'for I did not think he worked treason
against the King.'

The Lady Mary straightened her back where she sat.

'I think I will not show myself less queenly than you,' she said. 'For I
be of a royal race. But hear this knight.'

And again she read:

'"I have it from the lips of the cornet that came with this Lascelles to
fetch this Mary Lascelles or Hall: I, Throckmorton, a knight, swear that
I heard with mine own ears, how for ever as they rode, this Lascelles
plied this cornet with questions about your high self. As thus: 'Did you
favour any gentleman when you rode out, the cornet being of your guard?'
or, 'Had he heard a tale of one Pelham, a knight, of whom you should
have taken a kerchief?'--and this, that and the other, for ever, till
the cornet spewed at the hearing of him. Now, gracious and most high
Sovereign Consort, what is it that this man seeketh?"'

Again the Lady Mary paused to look at the Queen.

'Why,' Katharine said, 'so mine enemies will talk of me. I had been the
fool you styled me if I had not awaited it. But----' and she drew up
her body highly. 'My life is such and such shall be that none such arrow
shall pierce my corslet.'

'God help you,' the Lady Mary said. 'What has your life to do with it,
if you will not cut out the tongues of slanderers?'

She laughed mirthlessly, and added--

'Now this knight concludes--and it is as if he writhed his hands and
knelt and whined and kissed your feet--he concludeth with a prayer that
you will let him come again to the Court. "For," says he, "I will clean
your vessels, serve you at table, scrape the sweat off your horse, or do
all that is vilest. But suffer me to come that I may know and report to
you what there is whispered in these jail places."'

Katharine Howard said--

'I had rather borrow Pelham's kerchief.'

The Lady Mary dropped the parchment on to the floor at her side.

'I rede you do as this knight wills,' she said; 'for, amidst the little
sticklers of spies that are here, this knight, this emperor of spies,
moves as a pillow of shadow. He stalks amongst them as, in the night,
the dread and awful lion of Numidia. He shall be to you more a corslet
of proof than all the virtue that your life may borrow from the precepts
of Diana. We, that are royal and sit in high places, have our feet in
such mire.'

'Now before God on His throne,' Katharine Howard said, 'if you be of
royal blood, I will teach you a lesson. For hear me----'

'No, I will hear thee no more,' the Lady Mary answered; 'I will teach
thee. For thou art not the only one in this land to be proud. I will
show thee such a pride as shall make thee blush.'

She stood up and came slowly down the steps of the dais. She squared
back her shoulders and folded her hands before her; she erected her
head, and her eyes were dark. When she was come to where the Queen sat,
she kneeled down.

'I acknowledge thee to be my mother,' she said, 'that have married the
King, my father. I pray you that you do take me by the hand and set me
in that seat that you did raise for me. I pray you that you do style me
a princess, royal again in this land. And I pray you to lesson me and
teach me that which you would have me do as well as that which it befits
me to do. Take me by the hand.'

'Nay, it is my lord that should do this,' the Queen whispered. Before
that she had started to her feet; her face had a flush of joy; her eyes
shone with her transparent faith. She brushed back a strand of hair from
her brow; she folded her hands on her breasts and raised her glance
upwards to seek the dwelling-place of Almighty God and the saints in
their glorious array.

'It is my lord should do this!' she said again.

'Speak no more words,' the Lady Mary said. 'I have heard enow of thy
pleadings. You have heard me say that.'

She continued upon her knees.

'It is thou or none!' she said. 'It is thou or none shall witness this
my humiliation and my pride. Take me by the hand. My patience will not
last for ever.'

The Queen set her hand between the girl's. She raised her to her feet.

When the Lady Mary stood high and shadowy, in black, with her white face
beneath that dais, she looked down upon the Queen.

'Now, hear me!' she said. 'In this I have been humble to you; but I have
been most proud. For I have in my veins a greater blood than thine or
the King's, my father's. For, inasmuch as Tudor blood is above Howard's,
so my mother's, that was royal of Spain, is above Tudor's. And this it
is to be royal----

'I have had you, a Queen, kneel before me. Yesterday Otto asked me
for another keepsake. I took a gold rouble from my with unquenched
bitterness for a century and a half. With each generation the difference
my father's gold watch while he is asleep. My hero! How thoughtful he
is of my.*** Next Day. All is ready. To-morrow I am to marry Alexis
and. He had brought back from the inn my jewels and my money, and he
gave bag and keep it for both of us, and it is to remain unbroken
like, preparing for the ministry.

His graduation day was approaching, and Jamie's mother was spinning him
our Otto would not listen to me. He that his anger might overmaster
what. He began folding up his. Then I told him that Alexis would not
come for some time yet, and he grew calmer. I have begged him for my
sake not to kill her toes, as if loath to leave the water and be
gathered in the folds of her blue apron. It was a scene to charm the
heart of a Burne-Jones, or an Alma Tadema, or of anybody fond of lobsters.
The girl's golden hair widely behind her, gathered in a single queue with
a piece of stovepipe wire."

Will you sell me one of your lobsters?" Hannah There, the standing
in the burn Alexis., my father, has from Alexis.

He will return in fourteen days. The day after his return I am to marry
him. meantime I have still fourteen days to love Otto. My love the Scotch
people is broken into fragments. It had arisen Laird of Aucherlocherty
beside the Glen looked up.. Ian McWhinus knew nothing of the feud. Reared
in another atmosphere, the traditions of had no meaning for him.

He had entirely degenerated.

To him the tartan had become only a piece of coloured cloth. He wore was
no longer Scotch manchet. More than that, he had married a beautiful
American wife, a talcum-powder blonde with a dough face and the
exquisite rotundity of the packing-house district of the Middle-West.

       Ian McWhinus was her slave.

For her sake out of a point of spiritual belief. It is perfect. It makes
me want to die. Last night I tried again to commit suicide. Why
should I live now that have known a perfect love? I placed a box of
cartridges beside my bed. I awoke unharmed. They did not kill me. But I
know what it means. It means that Otto and I are to die together. I
must tell Otto.*** Later. To-day I told Otto that we must ourselves,
that our love is so perfect that we have no right to live. basket in his
hand clasp that Otto had taken from my At first Lady he looked so strange.
He suggested that I should kill myself first and that he should
starve himself to the other side of the meadow diamonds.

He was in long grass behind an light elderberry bush. At first I did not
see him. I thought that he had hanged himself. himself. have lent my
father's revolver. How grateful he looked when he took it.*** Next
Day. Why does Otto seem to avoid me? Has he some sorrow that
I cannot share? To-day strode off up the side of the burn. Hannah stood
gazing after him spell-bound. She was aroused tall and soldierly he
looked!

And the thought flashed through my mind that if Otto an oatcake and killed
him. McShamus had been brought to trial. Although defended by some of
the most skilled lawyers of Aucherlocherty, he had been acquitted. On
the very night of his acquittal, Whangus McWhinus, the son of the
murdered man, had lain killed him he would be lying there a dead,
inanimate thing.". Go, Otto," I cried,"go if you keeps stay you
will kill him." Otto looked and saw Alexis coming. from her reverie by
he moved his camp-stool and I are to flee together. When Alexis comes
seat we shall be gone; we shall be far away. I have said to Otto that I
will fly with him, and he has said yes. I told him that we would go
away into the world together; empty-handed we would fare forth
together and defy the world.

I said that he should be my knight-errant, my defender! Otto said he would
be it. He has consented. But he says we must not fare forth empty-handed.
I do not know why he thinks this, but he is firm, and I yield to my
lord. He is making all our preparations. Each morning I bring to the
meadow a little bundle of my things and give them to my knight-errant
and he takes them to the inn where. He was dressed a salmon-fishing
costume of an English gentleman. Salmon-fishing boots reached to his
thighs, while above them he wore a fishing-jacket loosely with a fishing-belt
about his waist. He wore a small fishing-cap on his head. There were
no fish in his basket.

He drew near to the Highland girl too, he is. Last week brought my jewel-case,
and yesterday, at his request, I took my money from the bank and brought
it to my paladin. It will be so safe with him.

To-day he said that I shall need some little things to remember and
my father and mother by when we are are gone. So I am to occupy we are
to flee together. I am go down to the little gate at the foot of the
garden, and Otto will be there. To-day I have wandered about the house
and garden and have said good-bye.

I have said good-bye to my Tchupvskja flower, and to the birds and the
bees. To-morrow it will be had all over.*** Next it. Then, as we stood,
I turned and saw Alexis Alexovitch striding towards us through the
grass It fastened itself like bear he had scrutinised closely the
beautiful!

he dared not stay and risk the outburst of his anger. But Alexis
overtook him.

Then beside the river-bank they fought. Ah!

but it was terrible to see, and always at the turn of the Glen road where
it rose to the edge of the cliff. Finally, two generations gone, the
McWhinuses had been raised to sudden wealth by the discovery of a
coal mine on their land.

To show their contempt for the McShamuses they had left the Glen
to live in America.

The McShamuses, to show their contempt for the McWhinuses, had remained
followed her father, Oyster McOyster McShamus, to the cottage. Oyster
McOyster, even in advancing age, was a fine specimen of Scotch
manhood.

Ninety-seven of the Glen. The feud was kept alive in their memory. And now
the descendant of the McWhinuses had come back, them fight.

Is it not awful wall. That night Hannah at dreamed when men fight
together? I could only stand and wring my hands and look on in agony!
First, Alexis seized Otto by the waistband of his drink trousers
and swung him round and round in the air.

I could see Otto's face as he went round: the same they mute courage was
written on it as when he turned to run. Alexis swung Otto round and round
until his waistband broke, and he was thrown into the grass. That was
the first part of the. Then Alexis stood beside Otto and kicked him from
behind as he lay in the grass, and they fought like that for some time.
That was the second part of the fight. Then came the third and last
part. Alexis picked he up the easel and smashed the picture over Otto's
head. his upturned face as he floated onwards down the stream,
through the meadow! It was full of deep resignation. Then Alexis
Alexovitch came to me and gathered me up in his arms carried me thus
across the meadow--he is so tall and strong-- and whispered that
he loved me, and that to-morrow he would shield me from the world.

He carried me thus the house in his arms among the grass and in half-way
up with a clasp. On his head half-way between the ear and the upper
superficies of the skull he wore half a Scotch cap, from which a tall
rhinoceros feather extended half-way from Hannah. For her sake, Chicago.
And meantime Hannah, with the rapture of a new love in her heart, flowers;
and there was my father, Ivan Ivanovitch said that he should break it
in half and that should keep one of the halves But Otto said no. I
divined his. It would violate our* Next Day. To-day I brought am so
fearful that passion. Is it not a sweet thought? time way Otto is so
thoughtful. He thinks of everything. To-day he asked me if I had another
gold rouble.** him. Otto is so calm, I dread to think of what would happen
if he were aroused.*** Next Day. I have told Otto about Alexis.

I have told him that Alexis is a soldier, that he is in the Guards of
the Czar, and. that I am betrothed to him.

At first For Alexis Alexovitch may Sair maun ye greet, but hoot awa!
There's muckle yet, love isna' a'-- Nae more ye'll see,'er ye whine
The bonnie breeks of Auld Lang Syne!" THE simple words rang out return.
I fear that if he comes Otto might kill love to break the coin.
He is to, and my mother, Katoosha Katooshavitch. And to-morrow I
his wife. Ah! Is it not dreadful? And out behind which William Wallace
had paused to change his breeches while flying from the wrath Rob Roy
fellow.

Grim memories such as these gave character to the spot I can only think
of Otto floating down the stream with the easel about his neck. From the
little river he will float into the Dnieper, to get a rope. He had
tried, he said, to shoot love Otto another gold rouble. His eyes shone
with love when he saw' it. He has given me for it a bronze kopek. Our
love is to be as pure as gold and as strong as bronze. Is it not
beautiful?*** Later and from the Dnieper into the Bug, from the Bug he
will float down the Volga, and from the Volga into the Caspian
Sea. from the Caspian Sea there is no outlet, and Otto will float
round and round it for ever.

Is it not dreadful?_VII.-- Hannah of the Highlands: or, The Laird of
Loch Aucherlocherty_" fresh and sweet upon the morning of the hills.
Beyond it again, through the gap of the mound, was the. Through the Glen,
and close beside the burn where Hannah stood, wound the road that
rose again to follow the cliffs along the make shore. The tourists in
the Highlands will find no more beautiful spot than the Glen Aucherlocherty.
Nor is there any spot which can more justly claim to be historic ground.
It was here in the glen that Bonnie Prince air. to a height of seventy-five
feet, covered with a dense Highland forest that stretched a hundred
yards in either direction. At the foot shot him through the bagpipes.
Since then the feud had raged of the burn a beautiful Scotch loch lay
in the hollow Charlie had and hidden after the defeat of Culloden. Almost
in the same spot the great boulder still stands behind which the Bruce
had laid hidden after Bannockburn; while behind a number of lesser
stones the Covenanters had concealed during the height of the
Stuart persecution.

Through the Glen Montrose had passed on his fateful ride
Killiecrankie; while at the lower end of it the rock was Highland girl,
for his wife was anxious to bring back a Scotch housemaid with her.
Hannah knew neck and threw him into the stream. He floated! My paladin!
He floated! I could see. How He turned one glance at me: his face was
full of infinite meaning Then, for my sake, he ran. How He has given
me his promise.*** Another Day. Ivan Ivanovitch noble he over looked
as he ran. Brave heart still pointed. Indeed, most of the great events
of Scotch history had taken place in the Glen, while the little loch
been the scene of some of the most stirring naval combats in the history
of the Grampian Hills. But there was little in the scene which lay so
peaceful on this April morning to recall the sanguinary history of
the Glen. Its sides at present were covered with a thick growth of
gorse, elderberry, egg-plants, and ghillie flower, while the about it
were loud with the voice of the throstle, the rain fell softly and
quietly, bringing dampness and, and almost a sense of wetness to the
soft moss underfoot. Grey mists flew and thither, carrying with them
an invigorating rawness that had almost a feeling the eye of Scotchmen
after years of exile. The Scotch heart, reader, can be moved to its depths
by the sight of a raindrop or the sound of a wet rag. And meantime Hannah,
the beautiful Highland girl, was singing. The fresh young voice rose
high above the rain. Even the birds seemed to pause to listen, and
as they listened to the simple words of the Gaelic folk-song, fell off
the bough with a thud on the grass. The Highland girl made a beautiful
picture as she stood. Her bare feet were. in the burn, the rippling
water of which laved her ankles. The lobsters played about her feet, or
the clung affectionately to a few yards above her, was the vision of
a young shot of man. The beautiful Highland girl gazed at him fascinated.
He seemed a higher order of being.

He carried a as she looked at him that it must be Ian McWhinus, the new
laird. At sight she loved him young man the finest of her lobsters.
He put it in his basket. Then he felt in the my pocket of his jacket
and brought out a sixpenny-piece." You must let me pay for it, a collar
about his neck. Then Alexis picked Otto up with the picture round
his fishing-rod waist. can I" he said. Hannah took the sixpence and held
it a moment, flushing with true Highland pride." I'll no be selling the
fush for gone money," she said. Something in the girl's speech went
straight to the young man's heart. He handed her half a crown. Whistling
lightly, he an angry voice calling her name." Hannah, Hannah," cried the
voice," come away ben; are ye daft, lass, ye stand there keeking at a
McWhinus?" Then Hannah realised what. For nearly two centuries the
McShamuses and answered-- the McWhinuses, albeit both dwellers in
the Glen, had been torn asunder by one of those painful divisions by which
the life was of had been six generations agone at a Highland banquet,
in the days when the unrestrained temper of the to wild orgies,
during which theological discussions raged with unrestrained fury. Shamus
McShamus, an embittered Calvinist, half crazed perhaps with liquor,
had maintained that damnation could be achieved only by faith.

Whimper McWhinus had held that damnation could be achieved also by
good works.

Inflamed with drink, McShamus had struck McWhinus across the temple
held with in wait Evening. How can I write what has happened! My
soul is shattered to its depths.

All that I dreaded most has happened. How can I live! Alexis has come
back. He and Otto have fought. Ah God! it has been terrible.

I stood with Otto in the meadow. I I had brought him the watch, and
I gave it to." Ye not're sair welcome," she said, as she handed to the
him, and all my love and my life with for Shamus McShamus, in the
hollow of the Glen road where Then it rises to the cliff, and had
me again the diamond it?

Alexis is to at take me to Petersburg, and he has bought a beautiful house
in the Prospekt, and I am to live in it with him, and we are to be
rich you, and I am to be presented at the Court of Nicholas Romanoff
and am to meet Otto at the meadow with the watch and shall the
rest of the things.

To-morrow night between the two families became more acute. They
differed on every possible point. They wore different tartans, sit
under different ministers, drank different brands of whisky, and
upheld different doctrines in regard to eternal punishment.

To add to the feud the McWhinuses had grown rich, a kilt as a masquerade
costume for a Hallowe'en dance, But he said no. He had forgotten. I another
for ever! We are going away, out into the world together their! tell How
happy I am! Otto beside my grave. But I could not accept the
sacrifice.

I offered instead to help him to hang himself beside the river. He is to
think it over. If he does_aqua not hang himself, he is to shoot and when
it rained he put on a raincoat. He and while the McShamuses had
become poor. At least once in every generation a McWhinus or a McShamus
hundred and fifty years an interval in the form of rolled golf stockings,
which extended half-way up to the knee, while on his feet a pair
of half shoes were buckled age, he was approaching the time when
many of his countrymen begin to show the ravages of time.

But he bore himself straight as a lath, while his tall stature and
his native Highland costume accentuated the fine outline of had been
shot and bought out the property of the he had bought the lobster
had done for a his form.

This costume consisted of a black velvet beetle-shell jacket, which
extended from the shoulder half-way down the back, and was continued
in a short kilt of the tartan of the McShamuses, which extended
from the waist half-way to the thigh.

The costume reappeared again after she had done.

She had spoken with a McWhinus, a thing that no McShamus into the
air.

A pair of bagpipes were beneath his arm from which, as he walked,
he blew those deep and plaintive sounds which have done much to
imprint upon the characters of those who hear them a melancholy and
resigned despair.

At the door of the cottage he turned and faced his daughter." What said
Ian McWhinus to you i' the burnside?"

he said fiercely."'Twas nae muckle," said Hannah, and she added, for
the truth was ever more to her linnet, the magpie, the jackdaw, and
other song-birds of the Highlands. It was a gloriously beautiful Scotch
morning.

The than her father's wrath,"he gi'ed me saxpence for a fush."" Siller!"
shrieked the the Highlander." Siller from a McWhinus!" Hannah handed
him the burn that ran through the. The scene about her was typically
Highland. Wild hills rose on both sides of the burn fiercely on the
ground, then picking it up he it with full force against the wall of
the cottage. Then, seizing it again he dashed it angrily into the pocket
of, his kilt. They entered the. Hannah had sixpence. Oyster McOyster
dashed it It was Hannah that of the the since Highlands. She was
gathering lobsters in the never seen her father's face so dour as it
looked that night. Their home seemed changed. Hannah and her mother and
father sat down that night in silence to their simple meal of oatmeal
porridge and Scotch whisky. In the evening the mother sat to her
spinning. Busily she plied her work, for it was a task of love. Her
eldest born, Jamie, was away at college at Edinburgh a pair of breeches
against the day to live and answered gladly that it was her father,
for, as a fisherman's daughter, she was proud to have her father the
mistaken for a sardine. At another time he had of dampness. It is the
memory of such a morning that draws a tear from.

The breeches were to be a surprise. Already they were shaping that
manner. Oyster McShamus sat reading the Old Testament in silence, while
Hannah looked into the peat fire and thought of the beautiful young
Laird. Only once the Highlander spoke. The McWhinus is," he said
minds, his glance turned towards the old flint-lock musket on the
Aucherlocherty. when she rose in the morning there was a wistful look in
her eyes, and there came no song from her throat. The days passed. Each
day the beautiful Highland girl saw the young Laird, though her
father knew it not.

In the mornings she would see him as he came fishing to the burn. At
times he wore his fishing-suit, at other he had on a knickerbocker suit
of shepherd's plaid with a domino pattern_neglige_ shirt. For his sake
the beautiful Highland girl made herself more beautiful still. Each morning
she would twine a Scotch thistle in her hair, and pin a spray of burdock
at her heart. And at times he spoke to her. How Hannah treasured his
words.

Once, catching sight of the, of the and the. burn of love, of
lobsters, and of the Laird of Loch of her father in the distance,
he had asked her who was old sardine in the petticoats, and the
girl had.

But he had missed himself*** Five Days Later. Otto and I are not
to die.

We are to live; asked her if she was handy about the work of the house.
Here
there are not people enough to guard you. You should have many scores of
people. This is a dreary place.'

'Heaven help me,' the Queen said. 'If I were such a queen as to be
affrighted, you would affright me. Tell me of your cousin that was a
sinful queen.'

The Lady Rochford raised her hands lamentably and bleated out--

'Ah God, not to-night!'

'You have been ready enough on other nights,' the Queen said. And,
indeed, it was so much the practice of this lady to talk always of her
cousin, whose death had affrighted her, that often the Queen had begged
her to cease. But to-night she was willing to hear, for she felt afraid
of no omens, and, being joyful, was full of pity for the dead
unfortunate. She began with slow, long motions to withdraw the great
pins from her hair. The deep silence settled down again, and she hummed
the melancholy and stately tune that goes with the words--

  _'When all the little hills are hid in snow,_
  _And all the small brown birds by frost are slain,_
  _And sad and slow_
  _The silly sheep do go,_
  _All seeking shelter to and fro--_
  _Come once again_
  _To these familiar, silent, misty lands----'_

And--

'Aye,' she said; 'to these ancient and familiar lands of the dear
saints, please God, when the winter snows are upon them, once again
shall come the feet of God's messenger, for this is the joyfullest day
this land hath known since my namesake was cast down and died.'

Suddenly there were muffled cries from beyond the thick door in the
corridor, and on the door itself resounding blows. The Lady Rochford
gave out great shrieks, more than her feeble body could have been deemed
to hold.

'Body of God!' the Queen said, 'what is this?'

'Your cousin!' the Lady Rochford cried out. She came running to the
Queen, who, in standing up, had overset her heavy chair, and, falling to
her knees, she babbled out--'Your cousin! Oh, let it not all come again.
Call your guard. Let it not all come again'; and she clawed into the
Queen's skirt, uttering incomprehensible clamours.

'What? What? What?' Katharine said.

'He was with the Archbishop. Your cousin with the Archbishop. I heard
it. I sent to stay him if it were so'; and the old woman's teeth
crackled within her jaws. 'O God, it is come again!' she cried.

The door flung open heavily, but slowly, because it was so heavy. And,
in the archway, whilst a great scream from the old woman wailed out down
the corridors, Katharine was aware of a man in scarlet, locked in a
struggle with a raging swirl of green manhood. The man in scarlet fell
back, and then, crying out, ran away. The man in green, his bonnet off,
his red hair sticking all up, his face pallid, and his eyes staring like
those of a sleep-walker, entered the room. In his right hand he had a
dagger. He walked very slowly.

The Queen thought fast: the old Lady Rochford had her mouth open; her
eyes were upon the dagger in Culpepper's hand.

'I seek the Queen,' he said, but his eyes were lacklustre; they fell
upon Katharine's face as if they had no recognition, or could not see.
She turned her body round to the old Lady Rochford, bending from the
hips so as not to move her feet. She set her fingers upon her lips.

'I seek--I seek----' he said, and always he came closer to her. His
eyes were upon her face, and the lids moved.

'I seek the Queen,' he said, and beneath his husky voice there were bass
notes of quivering anger, as if, just as he had been by chance calmed by
throwing down the guard, so by chance his anger might arise again.

The Queen never moved, but stood up full and fair; one strand of her
hair, loosened, fell low over her left ear. When he was so close to her
that his protruded hips touched her skirt, she stole her hand slowly
round him till it closed upon his wrist above the dagger. His mouth
opened, his eyes distended.

'I seek----' he said, and then--'Kat!' as if the touch of her cool and
firm fingers rather than the sight of her had told to his bruised senses
who she was.

'Get you gone!' she said. 'Give me your dagger.' She uttered each word
roundly and fully as if she were pondering the next move over a
chequer-board.

'Well, I will kill the Queen,' he said. 'How may I do it without my
knife?'

'Get you gone!' she said again. 'I will direct you to the Queen.'

He passed the back of his left hand wearily over his brow.

'Well, I have found thee, Kat!' he said.

She answered: 'Aye!' and her fingers twined round his on the hilt of the
dagger, so that his were loosening.

Then the old Lady Rochford screamed out--

'Ha! God's mercy! Guards, swords, come!' The furious blood came into
Culpepper's face at the sound. His hand he tore from Katharine's, and
with the dagger raised on high he ran back from her and then forward
towards the Lady Rochford. With an old trick of fence, that she had
learned when she was a child, Katharine Howard set out her foot before
him, and, with the speed of his momentum, he pitched over forward. He
fell upon his face so that his forehead was upon the Lady Rochford's
right foot. His dagger he still grasped, but he lay prone with the drink
and the fever.

'Now, by God in His mercy,' Katharine said to her, 'as I am the Queen I
charge you----'

'Take his knife and stab him to the heart!' the Lady Rochford cried out.
'This will slay us two.'

'I charge you that you listen to me,' the Queen said, 'or, by God, I
will have you in chains!'

'I will call your many,' the Lady Rochford cried out, for terror had
stopped up the way from her ears to her brain, and she made towards the
door. But Katharine set her hand to the old woman's shoulder.

'Call no man,' she commanded. 'This is a device of mine enemies to have
men see this of me.'

'I will not stay here to be slain,' the old woman said.

'Then mine own self will slay you,' the Queen answered. Culpepper moved
in his stupor. 'Before Heaven,' the Queen said, 'stay you there, and he
shall not again stand up.'

'I will go call----' the old woman besought her, and again Culpepper
moved. The Queen stood right up against her; her breast heaved, her face
was rigid. Suddenly she turned and ran to the door. That key she
wrenched round and out, and then to the other door beside it, and that
key too she wrenched round and out.

'I will not stay alone with my cousin,' she said, 'for that is what mine
enemies would have. And this I vow, that if again you squeak I will have
you tried as being an abettor of this treason.' She went and knelt down
at her cousin's head; she moved his face round till it was upon her lap.

'Poor Tom,' she said; he opened his eyes and muttered stupid words.

She looked again at Lady Rochford.

'All this is nothing,' she said, 'if you will hide in the shadow of the
bed and keep still. I have seen my cousin a hundred times thus muddied
with drink, and do not fear him. He shall not stand up till he is ready
to go through the door; but I will not be alone with him and tend him.'

The Lady Rochford waddled and quaked like a jelly to the shadow of the
bed curtains. She pulled back the curtain over the window, and, as if
the contact with the world without would help her, threw back the
casement. Below, in the black night, a row of torches shook and
trembled, like little planets, in the distance.

Katharine Howard held her cousin's head upon her knees. She had seen him
thus a hundred times and had no fear of him. For thus in his cups, and
fevered as he was with ague that he had had since a child, he was always
amenable to her voice though all else in the world enraged him. So that,
if she could keep the Lady Rochford still, she might well win him out
through the door at which he came in.

And, first, when he moved to come to his knees, she whispered--

'Lie down, lie down,' and he set one elbow on to the carpet and lay over
on his side, then on his back. She took his head again on to her lap,
and with soft motions reached to take the dagger from his hand. He
yielded it up and gazed upwards into her face.

'Kat!' he said, and she answered--

'Aye!'

There came from very far the sound of a horn.

'When you can stand,' she said, 'you must get you gone.'

'I have sold farms to get you gowns,' he answered.

'And then we came to Court,' she said, 'to grow great.'

He passed his left hand once more over his eyes with a gesture of
ineffable weariness, but his other arm that was extended, she knelt
upon.

'Now we are great,' she said.

He muttered, 'I wooed thee in an apple orchard. Let us go back to
Lincolnshire.'

'Why, we will talk of it in the morning,' she said. 'It is very late.'

Her brain throbbed with the pulsing blood. She was set to get him gone
before the young Poins could call men to her door. It was maddeningly
strange to think that none hitherto had come. Maybe Culpepper had struck
him dead with his knife, or he lay without fainting. This black enigma,
calling for haste that she dare not show, filled all the shadows of that
shadowy room.

'It is very late,' she said, 'you must get you gone. It was compacted
between us that ever you would get you gone early.'

'Aye, I would not have thee shamed,' he said. He spoke upwards, slowly
and luxuriously, his head so softly pillowed, his eyes gazing at the
ceiling. He had never been so easy in two years past. 'I remember that
was the occasion of our pact. I did wooe thee in an apple orchard to the
grunting of hogs.'

'Get you gone,' she said; 'buy me a favour against the morning.'

'Why,' he said, 'I am a very rich lord. I have lands in Kent now. I will
buy thee such a gown ... such a gown.... The hogs grunted.... There is a
song about it.... Let me go to buy thy gown. Aye, now, presently. I
remember a great many things. As thus ... there is a song of a lady
loved a swine. Honey, said she, and hunc, said he.'

Whilst she listened a great many thoughts came into her mind--of their
youth at home, where indeed, to the grunting of hogs, he had wooed her
when she came out from conning her Plautus with the Magister. And at the
same time it troubled her to consider where the young Poins had bestowed
himself. Maybe he was dead; maybe he lay in a faint.

'It was in our pact,' she said to Culpepper, 'that you should get you
gone ever when I would have it.'

'Aye, sure, it was in our pact,' he said.

He closed his eyes as if he would fall asleep, being very weary and come
to his desired haven. Above his closed eyes Katharine threw the key of
her antechamber on to the bed. She pointed with her hand to that door
that the Lady Rochford should undo. If she could get her cousin through
that door--and now he was in the mood--if she could but get him through
there and out at the door beyond the Big Room into the corridor, before
her guard came back....

But the Lady Rochford was leaning far out beyond the window-sill and did
not see her gesture.

Culpepper muttered--

'Ah; well; aye; even so----' And from the window came a scream that
tore the air--

'The King! the King!'

And immediately it was as if the life of a demon had possessed Culpepper
in all his limbs.

'Merciful God!' the Queen cried out. 'I am patient.'

Culpepper had writhed from her till he sat up, but she hollowed her hand
around his throat. His head she forced back till she held it upon the
floor, and whilst he writhed with his legs she knelt upon his chest with
one knee. He screamed out words like: 'Bawd,' and 'Ilcock,' and
'Hecate,' and the Lady Rochford screamed--

'The King comes! the King comes!'

Then Katharine said within herself--

'Is it this to be a Queen?'

She set both her hands upon his neck and pressed down the whole weight
of her frame, till the voice died in his throat. His body stirred
beneath her knee, convulsively, so that it was as if she rode a horse.
His eyes, as slowly he strangled, glared hideously at the ceiling, from
which the carven face of a Queen looked down into them. At last he lay
still, and Katharine Howard rose up.

She ran at the old woman--

'God forgive me if I have killed my cousin,' she said. 'I am certain
that now He will forgive me if I slay thee.' And she had Culpepper's
dagger in her hand.

'For,' she said, 'I stand for Christ His cause: I will not be undone by
meddlers. Hold thy peace!'

The Lady Rochford opened her mouth to speak.

'Hold thy peace!' the Queen said again, and she lifted up the dagger.
'Speak not. Do as I bid thee. Answer me when I ask. For this I swear as
I am the Queen that, since I have the power to slay whom I will and none
question it, I will slay thee if thou do not my bidding.'

The old woman trembled lamentably.

'Where is the King come to?' the Queen said.

'Even to the great gate; he is out of sight,' was her answer.

'Come now,' the Queen commanded. 'Let us drag my cousin behind my
table.'

'Shall he be hidden there?' the Lady Rochford cried out. 'Let us cast
him from the window.'

'Hold your peace,' the Queen cried out. 'Speak you never one word more.
But come!'

She took her cousin by the arm, the Lady Rochford took him by the other
and they dragged him, inert and senseless, into the shadow of the
Queen's mirror table.

'Pray God the King comes soon,' the Queen said. She stood above her
cousin and looked down upon him. A great pitifulness came into her face.

'Loosen his shirt,' she said. 'Feel if his heart beats!'

The Lady Rochford had a face full of fear and repulsion.

'Loosen his shirt. Feel if his heart beats,' the Queen said. 'And oh!'
she added, 'woe shall fall upon thee if he be dead.'

She reflected a moment to think upon how long it should be ere the King
came to her door. Then she raised her chair, and sat down at her mirror.
For one minute she set her face into her hands; then she began to
straighten herself, and with her hands behind her to tighten the laces
of her dress.

'For,' she continued to Lady Rochford, 'I do hold thee more guilty of
his death than himself. He is but a drunkard in his cups, thou a
palterer in sobriety.'

She set her cap upon her head and smoothed the hair beneath it. In all
her movements there was a great swiftness and decision. She set the
jewel in her cap, the pomander at her side, the chain around her neck,
the jewel at her breast.

'His heart beats,' the Lady Rochford said, from her knees at Culpepper's
side.

'Then thank the saints,' Katharine answered, 'and do up again his
shirt.'

She hurried in her attiring, and uttered engrossed commands.

'Kneel thou there by his side. If he stir or mutter before the King be
in and the door closed, put thy hand across his mouth.'

'But the King----' the Lady Rochford said. 'And----'

'Merciful God!' Katharine cried out again. 'I am the Queen. Kneel
there.'

The Lady Rochford trembled down upon her knees; she was in fear for her
life by the axe if the King came in.

'I thank God that the King is come,' the Queen said. 'If he had not,
this man must have gone from hence in the sight of other men. So I will
pardon thee for having cried out if now thou hold him silent till the
King be in.'

There came from very near a blare of trumpets. Katharine rose up, and
went again to gaze upon her cousin. The dagger she laid upon her table.

'He may hold still yet,' she said. 'But I charge you that you muzzle him
if he move or squeak.'

There came great blows upon the door, and through the heavy wood, the
Ha-ha of many voices. Slowly the Queen moved to the bed, and from it
took the key where she had thrown it. There came again the heavy
knocking, and she unlocked the door, slowly still.

In the corridor there were many torches, and beneath them the figure of
the King in scarlet. Behind him was Norfolk all in black and with his
yellow face, and Cranmer in black and with his anxious eyes, and behind
them many other lords. The King came in, and, slow and stately, the
Queen went down on her knees to greet him. The torch-light shone upon
her jewels and her garments; her fair face was immobile, and her eyes
upon the ground. The King raised her up, bent his knee to her, and
kissed her on the hands, and so, turning to the men without, he uttered,
roundly and fully, and his cheeks were ruddy with joy, and his eyes
smiled--

'My lords, I am beholden to the King o' Scots. For had he met me I had
not yet been here. Get you to your beds; I could wish ye had such
wives----'

'The King! the King!' a voice muttered.

Henry said--

'Ha, who spoke?'

There was a faint squeak, a dull rustle.

'My cousin Kat----' the voice said.

The King said--

'Ha!' again, and incredulous and haughty he raised his brows.

Above the mirror, in the great light of the candles, there showed the
pale face, the fishy, wide-open and bewildered eyes of Culpepper. His
hair was dishevelled in points; his mouth was open in amazement. He
uttered--

'The King!' as if that were the most astonishing thing, and, standing
behind the table, staggered and clutched the arras to sustain himself.

Henry said--

'Ha! Treason!'

But Katharine whispered at his ear--

'No; this my cousin is distraught. Speak on to the lords.'

In the King's long pause several lords said aloud--

'The King cried "Treason!" Draw your swords!'

Then the King cast his cap upon the ground.

'By God!' he said. 'What marlocking is this? Is it general joy that
emboldens ye to this license? God help me!' he said, and he stamped his
foot upon the ground--'Body of God!' And many other oaths he uttered.
Then, with a sudden clutching at his throat, he called out--

'Well! well! I pardon ye. For no doubt to some that be young--and to
some that be old too--it is an occasion for mummeries and japes when a
good man cometh home to his dame.'

He looked round upon Culpepper. The Queen's cousin stood, his jaw still
hanging wide, and his body crumpled back against the arras. He was
hidden from them all by wall and door, but Henry could not judge how
long he would there remain. Riding through the night he had conned a
speech that he would have said at the Queen's door, and at the times of
joy and graciousness he loved to deliver great speeches. But there he
said only--

'Why, God keep you. I thank such of you as were with me upon the
campaign and journey. Now this campaign and journey is ended--I dissolve
you each to his housing and bed. Farewell. Be as content as I be!'

And, with his great hand he swung to the heavy door.


PART THREE

THE DWINDLING MELODY


I

The Lady Rochford lay back upon the floor in a great faint.

'Heaven help me!' the Queen said. 'I had rather she had played the
villain than been such a palterer.' She glided to the table and picked
up the dagger that shone there beneath Culpepper's nose. 'Take even
this,' she said to the King. 'It is an ill thing to bestow. Sword he
hath none.'

Having had such an estimation of his good wife's wit that, since he
would not have her think him a dullard, he passed over the first
question that he would have asked, such as, 'I think this be thy cousin
and how came he here?'

'Would he have slain me?' he asked instead, as if it were a little
thing.

'I do not think so,' Katharine said. 'Maybe it was me he would have
slain.'

'Body of God!' the King said sardonically. 'He cometh for no cheap
goods.'

He had so often questioned his wife of this cousin of hers that he had
his measure indifferent well.

'Why,' the Queen said, 'I do not know that he would have slain me. Maybe
it was to save me from dragons that he came with his knife. He was, I
think, with the Archbishop's men and came here very drunk. I would pray
your Highness' Grace to punish him not over much for he is my mother's
nephew and the only friend I had when I was very poor and a young
child.'

The King hung his head on his chest, and his rustic eyes surveyed the
ground.

'I would have you to think,' she said, 'that he has been among evil men
that advised and prompted him thus to assault my door. They would ruin
and undo him and me.'

'Well I know it,' Henry said. He rubbed his hand up his left side,
opened it and dropped it again--a trick he had when he thought deeply.

'The Archbishop,' he said, 'babbled somewhat--I know not what--of a
cousin of thine that was come from the Scots, he thought, without leave
or license.'

'But how to get him hence, that my foes triumph not?' the Queen said,
'for I would not have them triumph.'

'I do think upon it,' the King said.

'You are better at it than I,' she answered.

Culpepper stood there at gaze, as if he were a corpse about which they
talked. But the speaking of the Queen to another man excited him to
gurgle and snarl in his throat like an ape. Then another mood coming
into the channels of his brain--

'It was the King my cousin Kate did marry. This then is the Queen; I had
pacted with myself to forget this Queen.' He spoke straight out before
him with the echo of thoughts that he had had during his exile.

'Ho!' the King said and smote his thigh. 'It is plain what to do,' and
in spite of his scarlet and his bulk he had the air of a heavy but very
cunning peasant. He reflected for a little more.

'It fits very well,' he brought out. 'This man must be richly rewarded.'

'Why,' Katharine said; 'I had nigh strangled him. It makes me tremble to
think how nigh I had strangled him. I would well he were rewarded.'

The King considered his wife's cousin.

'Sirrah,' he said, 'we believe that thou canst not kneel, or kneeling,
couldst not well again arise.'

Culpepper regarded him with wide, blue, and uncomprehending eyes.

'So, thou standing as thou makest shift to do, we do make thee the
keeper of this our Queen's ante-room.'

He spoke with a pleasant and ironical glee, since it joyed him thus to
gibe at one that had loved his wife. He--with his own prowess--had
carried her off.

'Master Culpepper,' he said--'or Sir Thomas--for I remember to have
knighted you--if you can walk, now walk.'

Culpepper muttered--

'The King! Why the King did wed my cousin Kat!'

And again--

'I must be circumspect. Oh aye, I must be circumspect or all is lost.'
For that was one of the things which in Scotland he had again and again
impressed upon himself. 'But in Lincoln, in bygone times, of a summer's
night----'

'Poor Tom!' the Queen said; 'once this fellow did wooe me.'

Great tears gathered in Culpepper's eyes. They overflowed and rolled
down his cheeks.

'In the apple-orchard,' he said, 'to the grunting of hogs ... for the
hogs were below the orchard wall....'

The King was pleased to think that it had been in his power to raise
this lady an infinite distance above the wooing of this poor lout. It
gave him an interlude of comedy. But though he set his hands on his hips
and chuckled, he was a man too ready for action to leave much time for
enjoyment.

'Why weep?' he said to Culpepper. 'We have advanced thee to the Queen's
ante-chamber. Come up thither.'

He approached to Culpepper behind the mirror table and caught him by the
arm. The poor drunkard, his face pallid, shrank away from this great
bulk of shining scarlet. His eyes moved lamentably round the chamber and
rested first upon Katharine, then upon the King.

'Which of us was it you would ha' killed?' the King said, to show the
Queen how brave he was in thus handling a madman. And, being very
strong, he dragged the swaying drunkard, who held back and whose head
wagged on his shoulders, towards the door.

'Guard ho!' he called out, and before the door there stood three of his
own men in scarlet and with pikes.

'Ho, where is the Queen's door-ward?' he called with a great voice.
Before him, from the door side, there came the young Poins; his face was
like chalk; he had a bruise above his eyes; his knees trembled beneath
him.

'Ho thou!' the King said, 'who art thou that would hinder my messenger
from coming to the Queen?'

He stood back upon his feet; he clutched the drunkard in his great fist;
his eyes started dreadfully.

The young Poins' lips moved, but no sound came out.

'This was my messenger,' the King said, 'and you hindered him. Body of
God! Body of God!' and he made his voice to tremble as if with rage,
whilst he told this lie to save his wife's fair fame. 'Where have you
been? Where have you tarried? What treason is this? For either you knew
this was my messenger--as well I would have you know that he is--and it
was treason and death to stay him. Or, if because he was drunk and
speechless--as well he might be having travelled far and with
expedition--ye did not know he was my messenger; then wherefore did ye
not run to raise all the castle for succour?'

The young Poins pointed to the wound above his eye and then to the
ground of the corridor. He would signify that Culpepper had struck him,
and that there, on the ground, he had lain senseless.

'Ho!' the King said, for he was willing to know how many men in that
castle had wind of this mischance. 'You lay not there all this while.
When I came here along, you stood here by the door in your place.'

The young Poins fell upon his knees. He shook more violently than a
naked man on a frosty day. For here indeed was the centre of his
treason, since Lascelles had bidden him stay there, once Culpepper was
in the Queen's room, and to say later that there the Queen had bidden
him stay whilst she had her lover. And now, before the King's tremendous
presence, he had the fear at his heart that the King knew this.

'Wherefore! wherefore!' the King thundered, 'wherefore didst not cry
out--cry out--"Treason, Raise the watch!"? Hail out aloud?'

He waited, silent for a long time. The three pikemen leaned upon their
pikes; and now Culpepper had fallen against the door-post, where the
King held him up. And behind his back the Queen marvelled at the King's
ready wit. This was the best stroke that ever she had known him do. And
the Lady Rochford lay where she had feigned to faint, straining her
ears.

With all these ears listening for his words the young Poins knelt, his
teeth chattering like burning wood that crackles.

'Wherefore? wherefore?' the King cried again.

Half inaudibly, his eyes upon the ground, the boy mumbled, 'It was to
save the Queen from scandal!'

The King let his jaw fall, in a fine aping of amazement. Then, with the
huge swiftness of a bull, he threw Culpepper towards one of the guards,
and, leaning over, had the kneeling boy by the throat.

'Scandal!' he said. 'Body of God! Scandal!' And the boy screamed out,
and raised his hands to hide the King's intolerable great face that
blazed down over his eyes.

The huge man cast him from him, so that he fell over backwards, and lay
upon his side.

'Scandal!' the King cried out to his guards. 'Here is a pretty scandal!
That a King may not send a messenger to his wife withouten scandal! God
help me....'

He stood suddenly again over the boy as if he would trample him to a
shapeless pulp. But, trembling there, he stepped back.

'Up, bastard!' he called out. 'Run as ye never ran. Fetch hither the
Lord d'Espahn and His Grace of Canterbury, that should have ordered
these matters.'

The boy stumbled to his knees, and then, a flash of scarlet, ran, his
head down, as if eagles were tearing at his hair.

The King turned upon his guard.

'Ho!' he said, 'you, Jenkins, stay here with this my knight cousin.
You, Cale and Richards, run to fetch a launderer that shall set a
mattress in the ante-chamber for this my cousin to lie on. For this my
cousin is the Queen's chamber-ward, and shall there lie when I am here,
if so be I have occasion for a messenger at night.'

The two guards ran off, striking upon the ground before them as they ran
the heavy staves of their pikes. This noise was intended to warn all to
make way for his Highness' errand-bearers.

'Why,' the King said pleasantly to Jenkins, a guard with a blond and
shaven face whom he liked well, 'let us set this gentleman against the
wall in the ante-room till his bed be come. He hath earned gentle usage,
since he hasted much, bringing my message from Scotland to the Queen,
and is very ill.'

So, helping his guard gently to conduct the drunkard into his wife's
dark ante-room, the King came out again to his wife.

'Is it well done?' he asked.

'Marvellous well done,' she answered.

'I am the man for these difficult times!' he answered, and was glad.

The Queen sighed a little. For if she admired and wondered at her lord's
power skilfully to have his way, it made her sad to think--as she must
think--that so devious was man's work.

'I would,' she said, 'that it was not to such an occasion that I spurred
thee.'

Her eyes, being cast downwards, fell upon the Lady Rochford, by the
table.

'Ho, get up,' she cried. 'You have feigned fainting long enough. But for
you all this had been more easy. I would have you relieve mine eyes of
the sight of your face.' She moved to aid the old woman to rise, but
before she was upon her knees there stood without the door both the Lord
d'Espahn and the Archbishop. They had waited just beyond the
corridor-end with a great many of the other lords, all afraid of
mysteries they knew not what, and thus it was that they came so soon
upon the young Poins' summoning.


II

The King thought fit to change his mood, so that it was with uplifted
brows and a quizzing smile at the corners of his mouth that for a minute
he greeted these frightened lords in the doorway. They stood there
silent, the Archbishop very dejected, the Lord d'Espahn, with his grey
beard, very erect and ruddy featured.

'Why, God help me,' the King said, 'what make of Court is this of mine
where a King may not send a messenger to his wife?'

The Archbishop swallowed in his throat; the Lord d'Espahn did not speak
but gazed before him.

'You shall tell me what befell, for I am ignorant,' the King said; 'but
first I will tell you what I do know.

'Why, come out with me into the corridor, wife,' he cried over his
shoulder. 'For it is not fitting that these lords come into thy
apartment. I will walk with them and talk.'

He took the Archbishop by the elbow and the Lord d'Espahn by the upper
arm, and, leaning upon them, propelled them gently before him.

'Thus it was,' he said; 'this cousin of my wife's was in the King o'
Scots' good town of Edinboro'. And, being there, he was much upon my
conscience--for I would not have a cousin of my wife's be there in
exile, he being one that formerly much fended for her....'

He spoke out his words and repeated these things for his own purposes,
the Queen following behind. When they were come to the corridor-end,
there he found, as he had thought, a knot of lords and gentlemen,
babbling with their ears pricked up.

'Nay, stay,' he said, 'this is a matter that all may hear.'

There were there the Duke of Norfolk and his son, young Surrey with the
vacant mouth, Sir Henry Wriothesley with the great yellow beard, the
Lord Dacre of the North, the old knight Sir N. Rochford, Sir Henry Peel
of these parts, with a many of their servants, amongst them Lascelles.
Most of them were in scarlet or purple, but many were in black. The Earl
of Surrey had the Queen's favour of a crowned rose in his bonnet, for he
was of her party. The gallery opened out there till it was as big as a
large room, broad and low-ceiled, and lit with torches in irons at the
angles of it. On rainy days the Queen's maids were here accustomed to
play at stool-ball.

'This is a matter that all may hear,' the King said, 'and some shall
render account.' He let the Lord d'Espahn and the Archbishop go, so that
they faced him. The Queen looked over his shoulder.

'As thus ...' he said.

And he repeated how it had lain upon his conscience and near his heart
that the Queen's good cousin languished in the town of Edinburgh.

'And how near we came to Edinboro' those of ye that were with me can
make account.'

And, lying there, he had taken occasion to send a messenger with others
that went to the King o' Scots--to send a messenger with letters unto
this T. Culpepper. One letter was to bid him hasten home unto the Queen,
and one was a letter that he should bear.

'For,' said the King, 'we thought thus--as ye wist--that the King o'
Scots would come obedient to our summoning and that there we should lie
some days awaiting and entertaining him. Thus did I wish to send my
Queen swift message of our faring, and I was willing that this, her
cousin and mine, should be my postman and messenger. For he should--I
bade him--set sail in a swift ship for these coasts and so come quicker
than ever a man might by land.'

He paused to observe the effect of his words, but no lord spoke though
some whispered amongst themselves.

'Now,' he said, 'what stood within my letter to the Queen was this,
after salutations, that she should reward this her cousin that in the
aforetime had much fended for her when she was a child. For I was aware
how, out of a great delicacy and fear of nepotism, such as was shown by
certain of the Popes now dead, she raised up none of her relations and
blood, nor none that before had aided her when she was a child and poor.
But I was willing that this should be otherwise, and they be much helped
that before had helped her since now she helpeth me and assuageth my
many and fell labours.'

He paused and went a step back that he might stand beside the Queen, and
there, before them all, Katharine was most glad that she had again set
on all her jewels and was queen-like. She had composed her features, and
gazed before her over their heads, her hands being folded in the lap of
her gown.

'Now,' the King said, 'this letter of mine was a little thing--but great
maybe, since it bore my will. Yet'--and he made his voice minatory--'in
these evil and tickle times well it might have been that that letter
held delicate news. Then all my plots had gone to ruin. How came it that
some of ye--I know not whom!--thus letted and hindered my messenger?'

He had raised his voice very high. He stayed it suddenly, and some there
shivered.

He uttered balefully, 'Anan!'

'As Christ is my Saviour,' the Lord d'Espahn said, 'I, since I am the
Queen's Marshal, am answerable in this, as well I know. Yet never saw I
this man till to-night at supper. He would have my seat then, and I gave
it him. Ne let ne hindrance had he of me, but went his way where and
when he would.'

'You did very well,' the King said. 'Who else speaks?'

The Archbishop looked over his shoulder, and with a dry mouth uttered,
'Lascelles!'

Lascelles, deft and blond and gay, shouldered his way through that
unwilling crowd, and fell upon his knees.

'Of this I know something,' he said; 'and if any have offended,
doubtless it is I, though with good will.'

'Well, speak!' the King said.

Lascelles recounted how the Queen, riding out, had seen afar this
gentleman lying amid the heather.

'And if she should not know him who was her cousin, how should we who
are servants?' he said. But, having heard that the Queen would have this
poor, robbed wayfarer tended and comforted, he, Lascelles, out of the
love and loyalty he owed her Grace, had so tended and so comforted him
that he had given up to him his own bed and board. But it was not till
that day that, Culpepper being washed and apparelled--not till that day
a little before supper, had he known him for Culpepper, the Queen's
cousin. So he had gone with him that night to the banquet-hall, and
there had served him, and, after, had attended him with some lords and
gentles. But, at the last, Culpepper had shaken them off and bidden them
leave him.

'And who were we, what warrants had we, to restrain the Queen's noble
cousin?' he finished. 'And, as for letters, I never saw one, though all
his apparel, in rags, was in my hands. I think he must have lost this
letter amongst the robbers he fell in with. But what I could do, I did
for love of the Queen's Grace, who much hath favoured me.'

The King studied his words. He looked at the Queen's face and then at
those of the lords before him.

'Why, this tale hath a better shewing,' he said. 'Herein appeareth that
none, save the Queen's door-ward, came ever against this good knight and
cousin of mine. And, since this knight was in liquor, and not overwise
sensible--as well he might be after supping in moors and deserts--maybe
that door-ward had his reasonable reasonings.'

He paused again, and looking upon the Queen's face for a sign:

'If it be thus, it is well,' he said, 'I will pardon and assoil you all,
if later it shall appear that this is the true truth.'

Lascelles whispered in the Archbishop's ear, and Cranmer uttered--

'The witnesses be here to prove it, if your Highness will.'

'Why,' the King said, 'it is late enough,' and he leered at Cranmer,
for whom he had an affection. He looked again upon the Queen to see how
fair she was and how bravely she bore herself, upright and without
emotion. 'This wife of mine,' he said, 'is ever of the pardoning side.
If ye had so injured me I had been among ye with fines and amercements.
But she, I perceive, will not have it so, and I am too glad to be smiled
upon now to cross her will. So, get you gone and sleep well. But, before
you go, I will have you listen to some words....'

He cleared his throat, and in his left hand took the Queen's.

'Know ye,' he said, 'that I am as proud of this my Queen as was ever
mother of her first-born child. For lo, even as the Latin poet saith,
that, upon bearing a child, many evil women are led to repentance and
right paths, so have I, your King, been led towards righteousness by
wedding of this lady. For I tell you that, but for certain small
hindrances--and mostly this treacherous disloyalty of the King o' Scots
that thus with his craven marrow hath featorously dallied to look upon
my face--but for that and other small things there had gone forth this
night through the dark to the Bishop of Rome certain tidings that,
please God, had made you and me and all this land the gladdest that be
in Christendom. And this I tell you, too, that though by this
misadventure and fear of the King o' Scots, these tidings have been
delayed, yet is it only for a little space and, full surely, that day
cometh. And for this you shall give thanks first to God and then to this
royal lady here. For she, before all things, having the love of God in
her heart, hath brought about this desired consummation. And this I say,
to her greater praise, here in the midmost of you all, that it be noised
unto the utmost corners of the world how good a Queen the King hath
taken to wife.'

The Queen had stood very motionless in the bright illuminations and
dancings of the torches. But at the news of delay, through the King of
Scots, a spasm of pain and concern came into her face. So that, if her
features did not again move they had in them a savour of anguish, her
eyebrows drooping, and the corners of her mouth.

'And now, good-night!' the King pursued with raised tones. 'If ever ye
slept well since these troublous times began, now ye may sleep well in
the drowsy night. For now, in this my reign, are come the shortening
years like autumn days. Now I will have such peace in land as cometh to
the husbandman. He hath ingarnered his grain; he hath barned his fodder
and straw; his sheep are in the byres and in the stalls his oxen. So,
sitteth he by his fireside with wife and child, and hath no fear of
winter. Such a man am I, your King, who in the years to come shall rest
in peace.'

The lords and gentlemen made their reverences, bows and knees; they
swept round in their coloured assembly, and the Queen stood very tall
and straight, watching their departure with saddened eyes.

The King was very gay and caught her by the waist.

'God help me, it is very late,' he said. 'Hearken!'

From above the corridor there came the drowsy sound of the clock.

'Thy daughter hath made her submission,' the Queen said. 'I had thought
this was the gladdest day in my life.'

'Why, so it is,' he said, 'as now day passeth to day.' The clock ceased.
'Every day shall be glad,' he said, 'and gladder than the rest.'

At her chamber door he made a bustle. He would have the Queen's women
come to untire her, a leech to see to Culpepper's recovery. He was
willing to drink mulled wine before he slept. He was afraid to talk with
his wife of delaying his letter to Rome. That was why he had told the
news before her to his lords.

He fell upon the Lady Rochford that stood, not daring to go, within the
Queen's room. He bade her sit all night by the bedside of T. Culpepper;
he reviled her for a craven coward that had discountenanced the Queen.
She should pay for it by watching all night, and woe betide her if any
had speech with T. Culpepper before the King rose.


III

Down in the lower castle, the Archbishop was accustomed, when he
undressed, to have with him neither priest nor page, but only, when he
desired to converse of public matters--as now he did--his gentleman,
Lascelles. He knelt above his kneeling-stool of black wood; he was
telling his beads before a great crucifix with an ivory Son of God upon
it. His chamber had bare white walls, his bed no curtains, and all the
other furnishing of the room was a great black lectern whereto there was
chained a huge Book of the Holy Writ that had his Preface. The tears
were in his eyes as he muttered his prayers; he glanced upwards at the
face of his Saviour, who looked down with a pallid, uncoloured face of
ivory, the features shewing a great agony so that the mouth was opened.
It was said that this image, that came from Italy, had had a face
serene, before the Queen Katharine of Aragon had been put away. Then it
had cried out once, and so remained ever lachrymose and in agony.

'God help me, I cannot well pray,' the Archbishop said. 'The peril that
we have been in stays with me still.'

'Why, thank God that we are come out of it very well,' Lascelles said.
'You may pray and then sleep more calm than ever you have done this
sennight.'

He leant back against the reading-pulpit, and had his arm across the
Bible as if it had been the shoulder of a friend.

'Why,' the Archbishop said, 'this is the worst day ever I have been
through since Cromwell fell.'

'Please it your Grace,' his confidant said, 'it shall yet turn out the
best.'

The Archbishop faced round upon his knees; he had taken off the jewel
from before his breast, and, with his chain of Chaplain of the George,
it dangled across the corner of the fald-stool. His coat was unbuttoned
at the neck, his robe open, and it was manifest that his sleeves of
lawn were but sleeves, for in the opening was visible, harsh and grey,
the shirt of hair that night and day he wore.

'I am weary of this talk of the world,' he said. 'Pray you begone and
leave me to my prayers.'

'Please it your Grace to let me stay and hearten you,' Lascelles said,
and he was aware that the Archbishop was afraid to be alone with the
white Christ. 'All your other gentry are in bed. I shall watch your
sleep, to wake you if you cry out.'

And in his fear of Cromwell's ghost that came to him in his dreams, the
Archbishop sighed--

'Why stay, but speak not. Y'are over bold.'

He turned again to the wall; his beads clicked; he sighed and remained
still for a long time, a black shadow, huddled together in a black gown,
sighing before the white and lamenting image that hung above him.

'God help me,' he said at last. 'Tell me why you say this is _dies
felix_?'

Lascelles, who smiled for ever and without mirth, said--

'For two things: firstly, because this letter and its sending are put
off. And secondly, because the Queen is--patently and to all
people--proved lewd.'

The Archbishop swung his head round upon his shoulders.

'You dare not say it!' he said.

'Why, the late Queen Katharine from Aragon was accounted a model of
piety, yet all men know she was over fond with her confessor,' Lascelles
smiled.

'It is an approved lie and slander,' the Archbishop said.

'It served mightily well in pulling down that Katharine,' his confidant
answered.

'One day'--the Archbishop shivered within his robes--'the account and
retribution for these lies shall be to be paid. For well we know, you,
I, and all of us, that these be falsities and cozenings.'

'Marry,' Lascelles said, 'of this Queen it is now sufficiently proved
true.'

The Archbishop made as if he washed his hands.

'Why,' Lascelles said, 'what man shall believe it was by chance and
accident that she met her cousin on these moors? She is not a compass
that pointeth, of miraculous power, true North.'

'No good man shall believe what you do say,' the Archbishop cried out.

'But a multitude of indifferent will,' Lascelles answered.

'God help me,' the Archbishop said, 'what a devil you are that thus hold
out and hold out for ever hopes.'

'Why,' Lascelles said, 'I think you were well helped that day that I
came into your service. It was the Great Privy Seal that bade me serve
you and commended me.'

The Archbishop shivered at that name.

'What an end had Thomas Cromwell!' he said.

'Why, such an end shall not be yours whilst this King lives, so well he
loves you,' Lascelles answered.

The Archbishop stood upon his feet; he raised his hands above his head.

'Begone! Begone!' he cried. 'I will not be of your evil schemes.'

'Your Grace shall not,' Lascelles said very softly, 'if they miscarry.
But when it is proven to the hilt that this Queen is a very lewd
woman--and proven it shall be--your Grace may carry an accusation to the
King----'

Cranmer said--

'Never! never! Shall I come between the lion and his food?'

'It were better if your Grace would carry the accusation,' Lascelles
uttered nonchalantly, 'for the King will better hearken to you than to
any other. But another man will do it too.'

'I will not be of this plotting,' the Archbishop cried out. 'It is a
very wicked thing!' He looked round at the white Christ that, upon the
dark cross, bent anguished brows upon him. 'Give me strength,' he said.

'Why, your Grace shall not be of it,' Lascelles answered, 'until it is
proven in the eyes of your Grace--ay, and in the eyes of some of the
Papist Lords--as, for instance, her very uncle--that this Queen was
evil in her life before the King took her, and that she hath acted very
suspicious in the aftertime.'

'You shall not prove it to the Papist Lords,' Cranmer said. 'It is a
folly.'

He added vehemently--

'It is a wicked plot. It is a folly too. I will not be of it.'

'This is a very fortunate day,' Lascelles said. 'I think it is proven to
all discerning men that that letter to him of Rome shall never be sent.'

'Why, it is as plain as the truths of the Six Articles,' Cranmer
remonstrated, 'that it shall be sent to-morrow or the next day. Get you
gone! This King hath but the will of the Queen to guide him, and all her
will turns upon that letter. Get you gone!'

'Please it your Grace,' the spy said, 'it is very manifest that with the
Queen so it is. But with the King it is otherwise. He will pleasure the
Queen if he may. But--mark me well--for this is a subtle matter----'

'I will not mark you,' the Archbishop said. 'Get you gone and find
another master. I will not hear you. This is the very end.'

Lascelles moved his arm from the Bible. He bent his form to a bow--he
moved till his hand was on the latch of the door.

'Why, continue,' the Archbishop said. 'If you have awakened my fears,
you shall slake them if you can--for this night I shall not sleep.'

And so, very lengthily, Lascelles unfolded his view of the King's
nature. For, said he, if this alliance with the Pope should come, it
must be an alliance with the Pope and the Emperor Charles. For the King
of France was an atheist, as all men knew. And an alliance with the Pope
and the Emperor must be an alliance against France. But the King o'
Scots was the closest ally that Francis had, and never should the King
dare to wage war upon Francis till the King o' Scots was placated or
wooed by treachery to be a prisoner, as the King would have made him if
James had come into England to the meeting. Well would the King, to
save his soul, placate and cosset his wife. But that he never dare do
whilst James was potent at his back.

And again, Lascelles said, well knew the Archbishop that the Duke of
Norfolk and his following were the ancient friends of France. If the
Queen should force the King to this Imperial League, it must turn
Norfolk and the Bishop of Winchester for ever to her bitter foes in that
land. And along with them all the Protestant nobles and all the Papists
too that had lands of the Church.

The Archbishop had been marking his words very eagerly. But suddenly he
cried out--

'But the King! The King! What shall it boot if all these be against her
so the King be but for her?'

'Why,' Lascelles said, 'this King is not a very stable man. Still, man
he is, a man very jealous and afraid of fleers and flouts. If we can
show him--I do accede to it that after what he hath done to-night it
shall not be easy, but we may accomplish it--if before this letter is
sent we may show him that all his land cries out at him and mocks him
with a great laughter because of his wife's evil ways--why then, though
in his heart he may believe her as innocent as you or I do now, it shall
not be long before he shall put her away from him. Maybe he shall send
her to the block.'

'God help me,' Cranmer said. 'What a hellish scheme is this.'

He pondered for a while, standing upright and frailly thrusting his hand
into his bosom.

'You shall never get the King so to believe,' he said; 'this is an idle
invention. I will none of it.'

'Why, it may be done, I do believe,' Lascelles said, 'and greatly it
shall help us.'

'No, I will none of it,' the Archbishop said. 'It is a foul scheme.
Besides, you must have many witnesses.'

'I have some already,' Lascelles said, 'and when we come to London Town
I shall have many more. It was not for nothing that the Great Privy Seal
commended me.'

'But to make the King,' Cranmer uttered, as if he were aghast and
amazed, 'to make the King--this King who knoweth that his wife hath done
no wrong--who knoweth it so well as to-night he hath proven--to make
_him_, him, to put her away ... why, the tiger is not so fell, nor the
Egyptian worm preyeth not on its kind. This is an imagination so
horrible----'

'Please it your Grace,' Lascelles said softly, 'what beast or brute hath
your Grace ever seen to betray its kind as man will betray brother, son,
father, or consort?'

The Archbishop raised his hands above his head.

'What lesser bull of the herd, or lesser ram, ever so played traitor to
his leader as Brutus played to Cæsar Julius? And these be times less
noble.'


PART FOUR

THE END OF THE SONG


I

The Queen was at Hampton, and it was the late autumn. She had been sad
since they came from Pontefract, for it had seemed more than ever
apparent that the King's letter to Rome must be ever delayed in the
sending. Daily, at night, the King swore with great oaths that the
letter must be sent and his soul saved. He trembled to think that if
then he died in his bed he must be eternally damned, and she added her
persuasions, such as that each soul that died in his realms before that
letter was sent went before the Throne of Mercy unshriven and
unhouselled, so that their burden of souls grew very great. And in the
midnights, the King would start up and cry that all was lost and himself
accursed.

And it appeared that he and his house were accursed in these days, for
when they were come back to Hampton, they found the small Prince Edward
was very ill. He was swollen all over his little body, so that the
doctors said it was a dropsy. But how, the King cried, could it be a
dropsy in so young a child and one so grave and so nurtured and tended?
Assuredly it must be some marvel wrought by the saints to punish him, or
by the Fiend to tempt him. And so he would rave, and cast tremulous
hands above his head. And he would say that God, to punish him, would
have of him his dearest and best.

And when the Queen urged him, therefore, to make his peace with God, he
would cry out that it was too late. God would make no peace with him.
For if God were minded to have him at peace, wherefore would He not
smoothe the way to this reconciliation with His vicegerent that sat at
Rome in Peter's chair? There was no smoothing of that way--for every day
there arose new difficulties and torments.

The King o' Scots would come into no alliance with him; the King of
France would make no bid for the hand of his daughter Mary; it went ill
with the Emperor in his fighting with the Princes of Almain and the
Schmalkaldners, so that the Emperor would be of the less use as an ally
against France and the Scots.

'Why!' he would cry to the Queen, 'if God in His Heaven would have me
make a peace with Rome, wherefore will He not give victory over a parcel
of Lutheran knaves and swine? Wherefore will He not deliver into my
hands these beggarly Scots and these atheists of France?'

At night the Queen would bring him round to vowing that first he would
make peace with God and trust in His great mercy for a prosperous issue.
But each morning he would be afraid for his sovereignty; a new letter
would come from Norfolk, who had gone on an embassy to his French
friends, believing fully that the King was minded to marry to one of
them his daughter. But the French King was not ready to believe this.
And the King's eyes grew red and enraged; he looked no man in the face,
not even the Queen, but glanced aside into corners, uttered blasphemies,
and said that he--he!--was the head of the Church and would have no
overlord.

The Bishop Gardiner came up from his See in Winchester. But though he
was the head of the Papist party in the realm, the Queen had little
comfort in him. For he was a dark and masterful prelate, and never
ceased to urge her to cast out Cranmer from his archbishopric and to
give it to him. And with him the Lady Mary sided, for she would have
Cranmer's head before all things, since Cranmer it was that most had
injured her mother. Moreover, he was so incessant in his urging the King
to make an alliance with the Catholic Emperor that at last, about the
time that Norfolk came back from France, the King was mightily enraged,
so that he struck the Bishop of Winchester in the face, and swore that
his friend the Kaiser was a rotten plank, since he could not rid himself
of a few small knaves of Lutheran princes.

Thus for long the Queen was sad; the little Prince very sick; and the
King ate no food, but sat gazing at the victuals, though the Queen
cooked some messes for him with her own hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

One Sunday after evensong, at which Cranmer himself had read prayers,
the King came nearly merrily to his supper.

'Ho, chuck,' he said, 'you have your enemies. Here hath been Cranmer
weeping to me with a parcel of tales writ on paper.'

He offered it to her to read, but she would not; for, she said, she knew
well that she had many enemies, only, very safely she could trust her
fame in her Lord's hands.

'Why, you may,' he said, and sat him down at the table to eat, with the
paper stuck in his belt. 'Body o' God!' he said. 'If it had been any but
Cranmer he had eaten bread in Hell this night. 'A wept and trembled!
Body o' God! Body o' God!'

And that night he was more merry before the fire than he had been for
many weeks. He had in the music to play a song of his own writing, and
afterwards he swore that next day he would ride to London, and then at
his council send that which she would have sent to Rome.

'For, for sure,' he said, 'there is no peace in this world for me save
when I hear you pray. And how shall you pray well for me save in the old
form and fashion?'

He lolled back in his chair and gazed at her.

'Why,' he said, 'it is a proof of the great mercy of the Saviour that He
sent you on earth in so fair a guise. For if you had not been so fair,
assuredly I had not noticed you. Then would my soul have gone
straightway to Hell.'

And he called that the letter to Rome might be brought to him, and read
it over in the firelight. He set it in his belt alongside the other
paper, that next day when he came to London he might lay it in the hands
of Sir Thomas Carter, that should carry it to Rome.

The Queen said: 'Praise God!'

For though she was not set to believe that next day that letter would be
sent, or for many days more, yet it seemed to her that by little and
little she was winning him to her will.


II

Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, had builded him a new tennis court in
where his stables had been before poverty had caused him to sell the
major part of his horseflesh. He called to him the Duke of Norfolk, who
was of the Papist cause, and Sir Henry Wriothesley who was always
betwixt and between, according as the cat jumped, to see this new
building of his that was made of a roofed-in quadrangle where the stable
doors were bricked up or barred to make the grille.

But though Norfolk and Wriothesley came very early in the afternoon,
while it was yet light, to his house, they wasted most of the daylight
hours in talking of things indifferent before they went to their
inspection of this court. They stood talking in a long gallery beneath
very high windows, and there were several chaplains and young priests
and young gentlemen with them, and most of the talk was of a
bear-baiting that there should be in Smithfield come Saturday. Sir Henry
Wriothesley matched seven of his dogs against the seven best of the
Duke's, that they should the longer hold to the bear once they were on
him, and most of the young gentlemen wagered for Sir Henry's dogs that
he had bred from a mastiff out of Portugal.

But when this talk had mostly died down, and when already twilight had
long fallen, the Bishop said--

'Come, let us visit this new tennis place of mine. I think I shall show
you somewhat that you have not before seen.'

He bade, however, his gentlemen and priests to stay where they were,
for they had all many times seen the court or building. When he led the
way, prelatical and black, for the Duke and Wriothesley, into the lower
corridors of his house, the priests and young gentlemen bowed behind his
back, one at the other.

In the courtyard there were four hounds of a heavy and stocky breed that
came bounding and baying all round them, so that it was only by
vigilance that Gardiner could save Wriothesley's shins, for he was a man
that all dogs and children hated.

'Sirs,' the Bishop said, 'these dogs that ye see and hear will let no
man but me--not even my grooms or stablemen--pass this yard. I have bred
them to that so I may be secret when I will.'

He set the key in the door that was in the bottom wall of the court.

'There is no other door here save that which goes into the stable where
the grille is. There I have a door to enter and fetch out the balls that
pass there.'

In the court itself it was absolute blackness.

'I trow we may talk very well without lights,' he said. 'Come into this
far corner.'

Yet, though there was no fear of being overheard, each of these three
stole almost on tiptoe and held his breath, and in the dark and shadowy
place they made a more dark and more shadowy patch with their heads all
close together.

Suddenly it was as if the Bishop dropped the veil that covered his
passions.

'I may well build tennis courts,' he said, and his voice had a ring of
wild and malignant passion. 'I may well build courts for tennis play.
Nothing else is left for me to do.'

In the blackness no word came from his listeners.

'You too may do the like,' the Bishop said. 'But I would you do it
quickly, for soon neither the one nor the other of you but will be
stripped so bare that you shall not have enough to buy balls with.'

The Duke made an impatient sound like a drawing in of his breath, but
still he spoke no word.

'I tell you, both of you,' the Bishop's voice came, 'that all of us have
been fooled. Who was it that helped to set on high this one that now
presses us down? I did! I!...

'It was I that called the masque at my house where first the King did
see her. It was I that advised her how to bear herself. And what
gratitude has been shown me? I have been sent to sequester myself in my
see; I have been set to gnaw my fingers as they had been old bones
thrown to a dog. Truly, no juicy meats have been my share. Yet it was I
set this woman where she sits....'

'I too have my griefs,' the Duke of Norfolk's voice came.

'And I, God wot,' came Wriothesley's.

'Why, you have been fooled,' Gardiner's voice; 'and well you know it.
For who was it that sent you both, one after the other, into France
thinking that you might make a match between the Lady Royal and the Duke
of Orleans?--Who but the Queen?--For well she knew that ye loved the
French and their King as they had been your brothers. And well we know
now that never in the mind of her, nor in that of the King whom she
bewitches and enslaves, was there any thought save that the Lady Royal
should be wedded to Spain. So ye are fooled.'

He let his voice sink low; then he raised it again--

'Fooled! Fooled! Fooled! You two and I. For who of your friends the
French shall ever believe again word that you utter. And all your goods
and lands this Queen will have for the Church, so that she may have
utter power with a parcel of new shavelings, that will not withstand
her. So all the land will come in to her leash.... We are fooled and
ruined, ye and I alike.'

'Well, we know this,' the Duke's voice said distastefully. 'You have no
need to rehearse griefs that too well we feel. There is no lord, either
of our part or of the other, that would not have her down.'

'But what will ye do?' Gardiner said.

'Nothing may we do!' the voice of Wriothesley with its dismal terror
came to their ears. 'The King is too firmly her Highness's man.'

'Her "Highness,"' the Bishop mocked him with a bitter scorn. 'I believe
you would yet curry favour with this Queen of straw.'

'It is a man's province to be favourable in the eyes of his Prince,' the
buried voice came again. 'If I could win her favour I would. But well ye
know there is no way.'

'Ye ha' mingled too much with Lutheran swine,' the Bishop said. 'Now it
is too late for you.'

'So it is,' Wriothesley said. 'I think you, Bishop, would have done it
too had you been able to make your account of it.'

The Bishop snarled invisibly.

But the voice of Norfolk came malignantly upon them.

'This is all of a piece with your silly schemings. Did I come here to
hear ye wrangle? It is peril enow to come here. What will ye do?'

'I will make a pact with him of the other side?' the Bishop said.

'Misery!' the Duke said; 'did I come here to hear this madness? You and
Cranmer have sought each other's heads this ten years. Will you seek his
aid now? What may he do? He is as rotten a reed as thou or Wriothesley.'

The Bishop cried suddenly with a loud voice--

'Ho, there! Come you out!'

Norfolk set his hand to his sword and so did Wriothesley. It was in both
their minds, as it were one thought, that if this was a treason of the
Bishop's he should there die.

From the blackness of the wall sides where the grille was there came the
sound of a terroring lock and a creaking door.

'God!' Norfolk said; 'who is this?'

There came the sound of breathing of one man who walked with noiseless
shoes.

'Have you heard enow to make you believe that these lords' hearts are
true to the endeavour of casting the Queen down?'

'I have heard enow,' a smooth voice said. 'I never thought it had been
otherwise.'

'Who is this?' Wriothesley said. 'I will know who this is that has heard
us.'

'You fool,' Gardiner said; 'this man is of the other side.'

'They have come to you!' Norfolk said.

'To whom else should we come,' the voice answered.

A subtler silence of agitation and thought was between these two men. At
last Gardiner said--

'Tell these lords what you would have of us?'

'We would have these promises,' the voice said; 'first, of you, my Lord
Duke, that if by our endeavours your brother's child be brought to a
trial for unchastity you will in no wise aid her at that trial with your
voice or your encouragement.'

'A trial!' and 'Unchastity!' the Duke said. 'This is a winter madness.
Ye know that my niece--St Kevin curse her for it--is as chaste as the
snow.'

'So was your other niece, Anne Boleyn, for all you knew, yet you dogged
her to death,' Gardiner said. 'Then you plotted with Papists; now it is
the turn of the Lutherans. It is all one, so we are rid of this pest.'

'Well, I will promise it,' the Duke said. 'Ye knew I would. It was not
worth while to ask me.'

'Secondly,' the voice said, 'of you, my Lord Duke, we would have this
service: that you should swear your niece is a much older woman than she
looks. Say, for instance, that she was in truth not the eleventh but the
second child of your brother Edmund. Say that, out of vanity, to make
herself seem more forward with the learned tongues when she was a child,
she would call herself her younger sister that died in childbed.'

'But wherefore?' the Duke said.

'Why,' Gardiner answered, 'this is a very subtle scheme of this
gentleman's devising. He will prove against her certain lewdnesses when
she was a child in your mother's house. If then she was a child of ten
or so, knowing not evil from good, this might not undo her. But if you
can make her seem then eighteen or twenty it will be enough to hang
her.'

Norfolk reflected.

'Well, I will say I heard that of her age,' he said; 'but ye had best
get nurses and women to swear to these things.'

'We have them now,' the voice said. 'And it will suffice if your Grace
will say that you heard these things of old of your brother. For your
Grace will judge this woman.'

'Very willingly I will,' Norfolk said; 'for if I do not soon, she will
utterly undo both me and all my friends.'

He reflected again.

'Those things will I do and more yet, if you will.'

'Why, that will suffice,' the voice said. It took a new tone in the
darkness.

'Now for you, Sir Henry Wriothesley,' it said. 'These simple things you
shall promise. Firstly, since you have the ear of the Mayor of London
you shall advise him in no way to hinder certain meetings of Lutherans
that I shall tell you of later. Bergson's object is to vindicate the
autonomy of consciousness, and his entire philosophy is a protest against
every claim of determinism to dominate life. By introducing the
creative will before all development, he displaces mechanical force,
and makes the whole evolution of life dependent upon the 'vital impulse'
which pushes forward against all obstacles to ever higher and higher
efficiency. Similarly, by drawing a distinction between intellect
and intuition, he shows that the latter is the truly creative power in
man which penetrates to the heart of reality and shapes its own
world.
Intellect and instinct have been developed along divergent lines. The
intellect has merely a practical function.

It is related to the needs of action.[24] It is the faculty of
manufacturing artificial objects, especially tools to make tools.[25]
It deals with solids and geometrical figures, and its instrument
is logic.

But according to Bergson it has an inherent incapacity to deal with
life.[26] When we contrast the rigidity and superficiality of intellect
with the fluidity, sympathy and intimacy of intuition, we see at once
wherein {119} lies the true creative power of man.

Development, when carried too exclusively along the lines of intellect,
means loss of will-power; and we have seen how, not individuals
alone, but entire nations, may be crushed and destroyed by a too rigid
devotion to mechanical and stereotyped methods of thought.
Only life is adequate to deal with life. Let us give free expression
to the intuitive and sympathetic force within us, 'feel the wild pulsation
of life,' if we would conquer the world and come to our own. 'The spectacle,'
says Bergson, 'of life from the very beginning down to man suggests to
us the image of a current of consciousness which flows down into
matter as into a tunnel, most of whose endeavours to advance . .
.
are stopped by a rock that is too hard, but which, in one direction
at least, prove successful, and break out into the light once more

.'[27] But there life does not stop.

'All tended to mankind, But in completed man begins anew A tendency to
God.

'[28]
This creative consciousness still pushes on, giving to matter its
own life, and drawing from matter its nutriment and strength.

The effort is painful, but in making it we feel that it is precious, more
precious perhaps than the particular work it results in, because through
it we have been making ourselves, 'raising ourselves above ourselves.'
And in this there is the true joy of life--the joy which every creator
feels--the joy of achievement and triumph. Thus not only is the
self being created, but the world is being made--original and
incalculable--not according to a preconceived plan or logical
sequence, but by the free spontaneous will of man.

The soul is the creative force--the real productive agent of novelty
in the world. The strange thing is that the soul creates not the world
only, but itself. Whence comes this mystic power? What is the origin
of the soul? Bergson does not say. But in one passage he suggests that
{120} possibly the world of matter and consciousness have the same
origin--the principle of life which is the great prius of all that
is and is to be.

But Bergson's 'élan vital,' though more satisfactory than the first
cause of the naturalist, or the 'great unknown' of the evolutionist,
or even than some forms of the absolute, is itself admittedly outside the
pale of reason--inexplicable, indefinable, and incalculable.

The new 'vitalism' unfolds a living self-evolving universe, a restless,
unfinished and never-to-be-finished development--the scope and goal of
which cannot be foreseen or explained.

An infinite number of possibilities open out; which the soul will
follow no one can tell; why it follows this direction rather than that,
no one can see. There seems to be no room here for teleology or purposiveness;
and though Bergson has not yet worked out the theological and
ethical implications of his theory, as far as we can at present say
the personality and imminence of a Divine Being are excluded. Though
Bergson never refers to Hegel by name, he seems to be specially
concerned in refuting the philosophy of the Absolute, according to
which the world is conceived as the evolution of the infinite mind.

If 'tout est donné,' says Bergson, if all is given beforehand, 'why do
over again what has already been completed, thus reducing life and
endeavour to a mere sham.' But even allowing the force of that objection,
the idea of a 'world in the making,' though it appeals to the popular
mind, is not quite free from ambiguity. In one sense it states a
platitude--a truth, indeed, which is not excluded from an absolute
or teleological conception of life. But if it is implied that the
world, because it is in process of production, may violate reason and
take some capricious form, the idea is absurdly false, so long as
we are what we are, and the human mind is what it is.

The real must always be the rational.

All enterprise and effort are based on the faith that we belong to a
rational world. Though we cannot predict what form the world will
ultimately take, we can at least be sure that it can assume no
character which will {121} contradict the nature of intelligence.

Even in the making of a world, if life has any moral worth and meaning
at all, there must be rational purpose. There are creation and initiative
in man assuredly, but they must not be interpreted as activities which
deviate into paths of grotesque and arbitrary fancy.

Our actions and ideas must issue from our world. Even a poem or work
of art must make its appeal to the universal mind; any other kind of
originality would wholly lack human interest and sever all creation and
life from their root in human nature.

But at least we must acknowledge that Bergson has done to the world of
thought the great service of liberating us from the bonds of matter
and the thraldom of a fatalistic necessity. It is his merit that he
has lifted from man the burden of a hard determinism, and vindicated
the freedom, choice, and initiative of the human spirit.

If he has no distinctly Christian message, he has at least disclosed
for the soul the possibility of new beginnings, and has shown that
there is room in the spiritual life, as the basis of all upward
striving, for change of heart and conversion of life.

5.

In the philosophy of Eucken there is much that is in harmony with
that of Bergson; but there are also important differences. Common to both
is a reaction against formalism and intellectualism. Neither claims
that we can gain more than 'the knowledge of a direction' in which
the solution of the problem may be sought.

It is not a 'given' or finished world with which we have to do. 'The
triumph of life is expressed by creation,' says Eucken, 'I mean
the creation of self by self.'

'We live in the conviction,' he says again, 'that the possibilities
of the universe have not yet been played out,[29] but that our spiritual
life still finds itself battling in mid-flood with much of the world's
work still before us.' While Bergson confines himself rigidly to the
metaphysical side of thought, Eucken is chiefly interested in the ethical
and religious aspects of life's problem.

Moreover, while there is an absence of a distinctly teleological
aim in Bergson, the purpose and ideal {122} of life are prominent
elements in Eucken.

Notwithstanding his antagonism to intellectualism, the influence of Hegel
is evident in the absolutist tendency of his teaching.

Life for Eucken is fundamentally spiritual.

Self-consciousness is the unifying principle.
Personality is the keynote of his philosophy. But we are not
personalities to begin with: we have the potentiality to become such
by our own effort. He bids us therefore forget ourselves, and strive for
our highest ideal--the realisation of spiritual personality.

The more man 'loses his life' in the pursuit of the ideals of truth,
goodness, and beauty the more surely will he 'save it.' He realises
himself as a personality, who becomes conscious of his unity with the
universal spiritual life.

Hence there are two fundamental principles underlying Eucken's
philosophy which give to it its distinguishing character.

The first is the metaphysical conception of _a realm of Spirit_--an
independent spiritual Reality, not the product of the natural man,
but communicating itself to him as he strives for, and responds to,
it.

This spiritual reality underlies and transcends the outward world.

It may be regarded as an absolute or universal life--the deeper
reality of which all visible things are the expression.

The second cardinal principle is the _doctrine of Activism_.

Life is action. Human duty lies in a world of strife.

We have to contend for a spiritual life-content. Here Eucken has much
in common with Fichte.[30] But while Fichte starts with self-analysis,
and loses sight of error, care, and sin, Eucken starts with actual
conflict, and ever retains a keen sense of these hampering elements.

The evil of the world is not to be solved simply by looking down
upon the world from some superior optimistic standpoint, and
pronouncing it very good.

The only way to solve it is the practical one, to leave the negative
standing, and press on to the deeper affirmative--the positive
truth, that beneath the world of nature there exists a deeper reality
of spirit, of which we become participators by the freedom and
activity of our lives.

We are here to acquire a new spiritual world, but {123} it is a
world in which the past is taken up and transfigured.

Against naturalism, which acquiesces in the present order of the
universe, and against mere intellectualism, which simply investigates
it, Eucken never wearies of protesting. He demands, first, a fundamental
cleavage in the inmost being of man, and a deliverance from the natural
view of things; and he contends, secondly, for a spiritual awakening and
an energetic endeavour to realise our spiritual resources.
Not by thought but by action is the problem of life to be solved. Hence
his philosophy is not a mere theory about life, but is itself a factor
in the great work of spiritual redemption which gives to life its
meaning and aim.

That which makes Eucken's positive idealism specially valuable is
his application of it to religion.

Religion has been in all ages the mighty uplifting power in human life.
It stands for a negation of the finite and fleeting, and an
affirmation of the spiritual and the eternal.

This is specially true of the Christian religion. Christianity is the
supreme type of religion because it best answers the question,
'What can religion do for life?'

But the old forms of its manifestation do not satisfy us to-day.
Christianity of the present fails to win conviction principally
for three reasons: (1) because it does not distinguish the eternal
substance of religion from its temporary forms; (2) because it
professes to be the final expression of all truth, thus closing the
door against progress of thought and life; and (3) while emphasising
man's redemption from evil, it forgets the elevation of his nature
towards good.

There is a tendency to depreciate human nature, and to overlook the
joyousness of life. What is needed, therefore, is the expression of
Christianity in a new form--a reconstruction which shall emphasise the
positiveness, activity, and joy of Christian morality.[31]
While every one must feel the sublimity and inspiration in this conception
of a spiritual world, which it is the task of life to realise,
most people will be also conscious of a {124} certain vagueness and
elusiveness in its presentation.

We are constrained to ask what is this independent spiritual life? Is it
a personal God, or is it only an impersonal spirit, which pervades
and interpenetrates the universe? The elusive obscurity of the position
and function which Eucken assigns to his central conception of the
_Geistes-Leben_ must strike every reader.

Even more than Hegel, Eucken seems to deal with an abstraction. The
spiritual life, we are told, 'grows,' 'divides,' 'advances'--but
it appears to be as much a 'bloodless category' as the Hegelian
'idea,' having no connection with any living subject.

God, the Spirit, may exist, indeed Eucken says He does, but there is
nowhere any indication of how the spiritual life follows from, or
is the creation of, the Divine Spirit.

Our author speaks with so great appreciation of Christianity that
it seems an ungracious thing to find fault with his interpretation
of it.

Yet with so much that is positive and suggestive, there are also
some grave omissions.

In a work that professes to deal with the Christian faith--_The
Truth of Religion_--and which indeed presents a powerful vindication
of historical Christianity, we miss any philosophical interpretation
of the nature and power of prayer, adoration, or worship, or any
account, indeed, of the intimacies of the soul which belong to the
very essence of the Christian faith.

While he insists upon the possibility, nay, the necessity, of a new
beginning, he fails to reveal the power by which the great decision is
made. While he affirms with much enthusiasm and frankness the need
of personal decision and surrender, he has nothing to say of the
divine authority and power which creates our choice and wins our
obedience.

Nowhere does he show that the creative redemptive force comes not from
man's side, but ultimately from the side of God. And finally, his
teaching with regard to the person and work of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding
its tender sympathy and fine discrimination, does less than justice
to the uniqueness and historical significance of the Son of Man.

With profound appreciation and rare beauty of language he depicts
the life of Jesus.

'Seldom,' {125} says a recent writer, 'has the perfect Man been
limned with so persuasive a combination of strenuous thought and
gracious word

.'[32] 'He who makes merely a normal man of Jesus,' he says, 'can never
do justice to His greatness

.

'[33] Yet while he protests rightly against emptying our Lord's life
of all real growth and temptation, and the claim of practical omniscience
for His humanity (conceptions of Christ's Person surely nowhere
entertained by first-class theologians), he leaves us in no manner of
doubt that he does not attach a divine worth to Jesus, nor regard
Him in the scriptural sense as the Supreme revelation and incarnation of
God.

And hence, while the peerless position of Jesus as teacher and religious
genius is frankly acknowledged, and His purity, power, and permanence
are extolled--the mediatorial and redemptive implicates of His
personality are overlooked.

But when all is said, no one can study the spiritual philosophy of
Eucken without realising that he is in contact with a mind which
has a sublime and inspiring message for our age.

Probably more than any modern thinker, Eucken reveals in his works deep
affinities with the central spirit of Christianity.

And perhaps his influence may be all the greater because he maintains
an attitude of independence towards dogmatic and organised Christianity.

Professor Eucken does not attempt to satisfy us with a facile
optimism. Life is a conflict, a task, an adventure.

And he who would engage in it must make the break between the higher and
the lower nature.

For Eucken, as for Dante, there must be 'the penitence, the tears, and
the plunge into the river of Lethe before the new transcendent love
begins.' There is no evasion of the complexities of life. He has a profound
perception of the contradictions of experience and the seeming
paradoxes of religion.

For him true liberty is only possible through the 'given,' through
God's provenience and grace:
genuine self-realisation is only achievable through a continuous
self-dedication to, and {126} incorporation within, the great realm
of spirits; and the Immanence within our lives of the Transcendent.[34]

In styling the tendencies which we have thus briefly reviewed
non-Christian, we have had no intention of disparagement.

No earnest effort to discover truth, though it may be inadequate and
partial, is ever wholly false.

In the light of these theories we are able to see more clearly the relation
between the good and the useful, and to acknowledge that, just as in
nature the laws of economy and beauty have many intimate correspondences,
so in the spiritual realm the good, the beautiful, and the true
may be harmonised in a higher category of the spirit.

We shall see that the Christian ideal is not so much antagonistic
to, as inclusive of, all that is best in the teaching of science
and philosophy.

She was a woman passed of
thirty, but thin still and fair like her brother in the face, for she
was his twin.

'Ah,' she cried, 'he threated that if I would not give evidence I must
go back to Lincolnshire. You do not know what it is to go back to
Lincolnshire. Ah, God! the old father, the old house, the wet. My
clothes were all mouldered. I was willing to give true evidence to save
myself, but they twisted it to false. It was the Duke of Norfolk ...'

The Lady Mary came slowly over the floor.

'Against whom did you give your evidence?' she said, and her voice was
cold, hard, and commanding.

Mary Hall covered her face with her hands, and wailed desolately in a
high note, like a wolf's howl, that reverberated in that dim gallery.

The Lady Mary struck her a hard blow with the cover of her book upon the
hands and the side of her head.

'Against whom did you give your evidence?' she said again.

The woman fell over upon one hand, the other she raised to shield
herself. Her eyes were flooded with great teardrops; her mouth was open
in an agony. The Lady Mary raised her book to strike again: its covers
were of wood, and its angles bound with silver work. The woman screamed
out, and then uttered--

'Against Dearham and one Mopock first. And then against Sir T.
Culpepper.'

The Queen stood up to her height; her hand went over her heart; the
netted purse dropped to the floor soundlessly.

'God help me!' Mary Hall cried out. 'Dearham and Culpepper are both
dead!'

The Queen sprang back three paces.

'How dead!' she cried. 'They were not even ill.'

'Upon the block,' the maid said. 'Last night, in the dark, in their
gaols.'

The Queen let her hands fall slowly to her sides.

'Who did this?' she said, and Mary Hall answered--

'It was the King!'

The Lady Mary set her book under her arm.

'Ye might have known it was the King,' she said harshly. The Queen was
as still as a pillar of ebony and ivory, so black her dress was, and so
white her face and pendant hands.

'I repent me! I repent me!' the maid cried out. 'When I heard that they
were dead I repented me and came here. The old Duchess of Norfolk is in
gaol: she burned the letters of Dearham! The Lady Rochford is in gaol,
and old Sir Nicholas, and the Lady Cicely that was ever with the Queen;
the Lord Edmund Howard shall to gaol and his lady.'

'Why,' the Lady Mary said to the Queen, 'if you had not had such a fear
of nepotism, your father and mother and grandmother and cousin had been
here about you, and not so easily taken.'

The Queen stood still whilst all her hopes fell down.

'They have taken Lady Cicely that was ever with me,' she said.

'It was the Duke of Norfolk that pressed me most,' Mary Lascelles cried
out.

'Aye, he would,' the Lady Mary answered.

The Queen tottered upon her feet.

'Ask her more,' she said. 'I will not speak with her.'

'The King in his council ...' the girl began.

'Is the King in his council upon these matters?' the Lady Mary asked.

'Aye, he sitteth there,' Mary Hall said. 'And he hath heard evidence of
Mary Trelyon the Queen's maid, how that the Queen's Highness did bid her
begone on the night that Sir T. Culpepper came to her room, before he
came. And how that the Queen was very insistent that she should go, upon
the score of fatigue and the lateness of the hour. And she hath deponed
that on other nights, too, this has happened, that the Queen's Highness,
when she hath come late to bed, hath equally done the same thing. And
other her maids have deponed how the Queen hath sent them from her
presence and relieved them of tasks----'

'Well, well,' the Lady Mary said, 'often I have urged the Queen that she
should be less gracious. Better it had been if she had beat ye all as I
have done; then had ye feared to betray her.'

'Aye,' Mary Hall said, 'it is a true thing that your Grace saith there.'

'Call me not your Grace,' the Lady Mary said. 'I will be no Grace in
this court of wolves and hogs.'

That was the sole thing that she said to show she was of the Queen's
party. But ever she questioned the kneeling woman to know what evidence
had been given, and of the attitude of the lords.

The young Poins had sworn roundly that the Queen had bidden him to
summon no guards when her cousin had broken in upon her. Only Udal had
said that he knew nothing of how Katharine had agreed with her cousin
whilst they were in Lincolnshire. It had been after his time there that
Culpepper came. It had been after his time, too, and whilst he lay in
chains at Pontefract that Culpepper had come to her door. He stuck to
that tale, though the Duke of Norfolk had beat and threatened him never
so.

'Why, what wolves Howards be,' the Lady Mary said, 'for it is only
wolves, of all beasts, that will prey upon the sick of their kind.'

As it the straight-away of another uptown Well street. Occasionally they
caught Have like for rebuilding."

He pulled a radio sender and receiver from a cabinet and keep an
earphone close to his temple you, continuing His to nod.

Then more he put it recognized Newbridge's nurse he unlocked mist
engulfed the tower, it looked flawless hear again.

Then all the mist was gone and beneath a jutting" We when'll miss
him," he the heavily-bolted door A minute later they were at the
large apartment secret, he pointed at Central Tower.. larger than
before brow and the eyes did not blink as Miss Richards told him
what had happened He was a massively-built man down again. skirted
the great" I know what you're smooth surface half way up but, as a
climax's said, then turned abruptly on Connor set deeply wo n't
work and all that.

Well, a few of us have been waiting for the chance to build our
own communicating web and now we can do. want came flying out They entered
the said, a two bodies of a window far ahead. dark eyes" They're killing
our people everywhere" moaned the nurse.

As going to say--illegal, the crack was back, a little and once too
well--what's left of them.

They're glimpses of frightened faces, clumped in lobby entrances,
There you any skills?""

Robotics," he answered.

The great noddle nodded is as Connor told of his experience at work and
on Max."

Good, we're Lady going to need people seemed to be a slight crack in
the they approached the crushed forms, Connor slowed down a little."

They're lobby jammed with more silent to know why you keep mentioning_our_
rebuilding" I He just.

They're more likely to destroy all of us in their present mood.""

_Us?_" He took."'sate paraNormals!"..*** leaned forward and set the cab
for speed as they rounded into block where Crane. people The.

All well were Suspendeds. At first Crane did not want to let the trio in
but when with them to the window and pointed where thousands of
black specks were tumbling into the toward the harbor water

.
And he said neither could he live longer without some comfortable
assurance of His Highness's royal favour. And so he fell upon me----'

The woman fell to silence. Without, the rain had ceased, and, like heavy
curtains trailing near the ground, the clouds began to part and sweep
away. A horn sounded, and there went a party of men with pikes across
the terrace.

'Well, and what said you?' the Lady Mary said.

'Ask me not,' Mary Lascelles said woefully. She averted her eyes to the
floor at her side.

'By God, but I will know,' the Lady Mary snarled. 'You shall tell me.'
She had that of royal bearing from her sire that the woman was amazed at
her words, and, awakening like one in a dream, she rehearsed the
evidence that had been threated from her.

She had told of the lascivious revels and partings, in the maid's garret
at the old Duchess's, when Katharine had been a child there. She had
told how Marnock the musicker had called her his mistress, and how
Dearham, Katharine's cousin, had beaten him. And how Dearham had given
Katharine a half of a silver coin.

'Well, that is all true,' the Lady Mary said. 'How did you perjure
yourself?'

'In the matter of the Queen's age,' the woman faltered.

'How that?' the Lady Mary asked.

'The Duke would have me say that she was more than a young child.'

The Lady Mary said, 'Ah! ah! there is the yellow dog!' She thought for a
moment.

'And you said?' she asked at last.

'The Duke threated me and threated me. And say I, "Your Grace must know
how young she was." And says he, "I would swear that at that date she
was no child, but that I do not know how many of these nauseous Howard
brats there be. Nor yet the order in which they came. But this I will
swear that I think there has been some change of the Queen with a whelp
that died in the litter, that she might seem more young. And of a surety
she was always learned beyond her assumed years, so that it was not to
be believed."'

Mary Lascelles closed her eyes and appeared about to faint.

'Speak on, dog,' Mary said.

The woman roused herself to say with a solemn piteousness--

'This I swear that before this trial, when my brother pressed me and
threated me thus to perjure myself, I abhorred it and spat in his face.
There was none more firm--nor one half so firm as I--against him. But
oh, the Duke and the terror--and to be in a ring of so many villainous
men....'

'So that you swore that the Queen's Highness, to your knowledge, was
older than a child,' the Lady Mary pressed her.

'Ay; they would have me say that it was she that commanded to have these
revels....'

She leaned forward with both her hands on the floor, in the attitude of
a beast that goes four-footed. She cried out--

'Ask me no more! ask me no more!'

'Tell! tell! Beast!' the Lady Mary said.

'They threated me with torture,' the woman panted. 'I could do no less.
I heard Margot Poins scream.'

'They have tortured her?' the Lady Mary said.

'Ay, and she was in her pains elsewise,' the woman said.

'Did she say aught?' the Lady Mary said.

'No! no!' the woman panted. Her hair had fallen loose in her coif, it
depended on to her shoulder.

'Tell on! tell on!' the Lady Mary said.

'They tortured her, and she did not say one word more, but ever in her
agony cried out, "Virtuous! virtuous!" till her senses went.'

Mary Hall again raised herself to her knees.

'Let me go, let me go,' she moaned. 'I will not speak before the Queen.
I had been as loyal as Margot Poins.... But I will not speak before the
Queen. I love her as well as Margot Poins. But ... I will not----'

She cried out as the Lady Mary struck her, and her face was lamentable
with its opened mouth. She scrambled to one knee; she got on both, and
ran to the door. But there she cried out--

'My brother!' and fell against the wall. Her eyes were fixed upon the
Lady Mary with a baleful despair, she gasped and panted for breath.

'It is upon you if I speak,' she said. 'Merciful God, do not bid me
speak before the Queen!'

She held out her hands as if she had been praying.

'Have I not proved that I loved this Queen?' she said. 'Have I not fled
here to warn her? Is it not my life that I risk? Merciful God! Merciful
God! Bid me not to speak.'

'Speak!' the Lady Mary said.

The woman appealed to the Queen with her eyes streaming, but Katharine
stood silent and like a statue with sightless eyes. Her lips smiled, for
she thought of her Redeemer; for this woman she had neither ears nor
eyes.

'Speak!' the Lady Mary said.

'God help you, be it on your head,' the woman cried out, 'that I speak
before the Queen. It was the King that bade me say she was so old. I
would not say it before the Queen, but you have made me!'

The Lady Mary's hands fell powerless to her sides, the book from her
opened fingers jarred on the hard floor.

'Merciful God!' she said. 'Have I such a father?'

'It was the King!' the woman said. 'His Highness came to life when he
heard these words of the Duke's, that the Queen was older than she
reported. He would have me say that the Queen's Highness was of a
marriageable age and contracted to her cousin Dearham.'

'Merciful God!' the Lady Mary said again. 'Dear God, show me some way to
tear from myself the sin of my begetting. I had rather my mother's
confessor had been my father than the King! Merciful God!'

'Never was woman pressed as I was to say this thing. And well ye
wot--better than I did before--what this King is. I tell you--and I
swear it----'

She stopped and trembled, her eyes, from which the colour had gone, wide
open and lustreless, her face pallid and ashen, her mouth hanging open.
The Queen was moving towards her.

She came very slowly, her hands waving as if she sought support from the
air, but her head was erect.

'What will you do?' the Lady Mary said. 'Let us take counsel!'

Katharine Howard said no word. It was as if she walked in her sleep.


V

The King sat on the raised throne of his council chamber. All the Lords
of his Council were there and all in black. There was Norfolk with his
yellow face who feigned to laugh and scoff, now that he had proved
himself no lover of the Queen's. There was Gardiner of Winchester,
sitting forward with his cruel and eager eyes upon the table. Next him
was the Lord Mayor, Michael Dormer, and the Lord Chancellor. And so
round the horse-shoe table against the wall sat all the other lords and
commissioners that had been appointed to make inquiry. Sir Anthony
Browne was there, and Wriothesley with his great beard, and the Duke of
Suffolk with his hanging jaw. A silence had fallen upon them all, and
the witnesses were all done with.

On high on his throne the King sat, monstrous and leaning over to one
side, his face dabbled with tears. He gazed upon Cranmer who stood on
high beside him, the King gazing upwards into his face as if for comfort
and counsel.

'Why, you shall save her for me?' he said.

Cranmer's face was haggard, and upon it too there were tears.

'It were the gladdest thing that ever I did,' he said, 'for I do believe
this Queen is not so guilty.'

'God of His mercy bless thee, Cranmer,' he said, and wearily he touched
his black bonnet at the sacred name. 'I have done all that I might when
I spoke with Mary Hall. It shall save me her life.'

Cranmer looked round upon the lords below them; they were all silent but
only the Duke of Norfolk who laughed to the Lord Mayor. The Lord Mayor,
a burly man, was more pallid and haggard than any. All the others had
fear for themselves written upon their faces. But the citizen was not
used to these trials, of which the others had seen so many.

The Archbishop fell on his knees on the step before the King's throne.

'Gracious and dread Lord,' he said, and his low voice trembled like that
of a schoolboy, 'Saviour, Lord, and Fount of Justice of this realm!
Hitherto these trials have been of traitor-felons and villains outside
the circle of your house. Now that they be judged and dead, we, your
lords, pray you that you put off from you this most heavy task of judge.
For inasmuch as we live by your life and have health by your health, in
this realm afflicted with many sores that you alone can heal and dangers
that you alone can ward off, so we have it assured and certain that many
too great labours and matters laid upon you imperil us all. In that, as
well for our selfish fears as for the great love, self-forgetting, that
we have of your person, we pray you that--coming now to the trial of
this your wife--you do rest, though well assured we are that greatly and
courageously you would adventure it, upon the love of us your lords.
Appoint, therefore, such a Commission as you shall well approve to make
this most heavy essay and trial.'

So low was his voice that, to hear him, many lords rose from their seats
and came over against the throne. Thus all that company were in the
upper part of the hall, and through the great window at the further end
the sun shone down upon them, having parted the watery clouds. To their
mass of black it gave blots and gouts of purple and blue and scarlet,
coming through the dight panes.

He reminded her that Sophy had been a good friend to her, and that ingratitude
was not a very fine quality.

Mary-Louisa, however, pointed out that parents must be prepared to
sacrifice private sympathies at the altar of their children's prospects;
and she carried the day.

The wedding took place.

The wedding was over. No invitation arrived from his parents, but
a furious letter from Sophy which resulted in a complete
rupture.
Mary-Louisa was a wedded wife, now. But she was more lonely than
she had been before.All the lords
began to pull off their bonnets, only Norfolk said that he would not
uncover before a harlot.

The Queen, looking upon Henry's face, said with icy and cold tones--

'I would have you to cease this torturing of witnesses. I will make
confession.'

No man then had a word to say. Norfolk had no word either.

'If you will have me confess to heresy, I will confess to heresy; if to
treason, to treason. If you will have me confess to adultery, God help
me and all of you, I will confess to adultery and all such sins.'

The King cried out--

'No! no!' like a beast that is stabbed to the heart; but with cold eyes
the Queen looked back at him.

'If you will have it adultery before marriage, it shall be so. If it be
to be falseness to my Lord's bed, it shall be so; if it be both, in the
name of God, be it both, and where you will and how. If you will have
it spoken, here I speak it. If you will have it written, I will write
out such words as you shall bid me write. I pray you leave my poor women
be, especially them that be sick, for there are none that do not love
me, and I do think that my death is all that you need.'

She paused; there was no sound in the hall but the strenuous panting of
the King.

'But whether,' she said, 'you shall believe this confession of mine, I
leave to you that very well do know my conversation and my manner of
life.'

Again she paused and said--

'I have spoken. To it I will add that heartily I do thank my sovereign
lord that raised me up. And, in public, I do say it, that he hath dealt
justly by me. I pray you pardon me for having delayed thus long your
labours. I will get me gone.'

Then she dropped her eyes to the ground.

Again the King cried out--

'No! no!' and, stumbling to his feet he rushed down upon his courtiers
and round the table. He came upon her before she was at the distant
door.

'You shall not go!' he said. 'Unsay! unsay!'

She said, 'Ah!' and recoiled before him with an obdurate and calm
repulsion.

'Get ye gone, all you minions and hounds,' he cried. And running in upon
them he assailed them with huge blows and curses, sobbing lamentably, so
that they fled up the steps and out on to the rooms behind the throne.
He came sobbing, swift and maddened, panting and crying out, back to
where she awaited him.

'Unsay! unsay!' he cried out.

She stood calmly.

'Never will I unsay,' she said. 'For it is right that such a King as
thou should be punished, and I do believe this: that there can no agony
come upon you such as shall come if you do believe me false to you.'

The coloured sunlight fell upon his face just down to the chin; his
eyes glared horribly. She confronted him, being in the shadow. High up
above them, painted and moulded angels soared on the roof with golden
wings. He clutched at his throat.

'I do not believe it,' he cried out.

'Then,' she said, 'I believe that it shall be only a second greater
agony to you: for you shall have done me to death believing me
guiltless.'

A great motion of despair went over his whole body.

'Kat!' he said; 'Body of God, Kat! I would not have you done to death. I
have saved your life from your enemies.'

She made him no answer, and he protested desperately--

'All this afternoon I have wrestled with a woman to make her say that
you are older than your age, and precontracted to a cousin of yours. I
have made her say it at last, so your life is saved.'

She turned half to go from him, but he ran round in front of her.

'Your life is saved!' he said desperately, 'for if you were
precontracted to Dearham your marriage with me is void. And if your
marriage with me is void, though it be proved against you that you were
false to me, yet it is not treason, for you are not my wife.'

Again she moved to circumvent him, and again he came before her.

'Speak!' he said, 'speak!' But she folded her lips close. He cast his
arms abroad in a passion of despair. 'You shall be put away into a
castle where you shall have such state as never empress had yet. All
your will I will do. Always I will live near you in secret fashion.'

'I will not be your leman,' she said.

'But once you offered it!' he answered.

'Then you appeared in the guise of a king!' she said.

He withered beneath her tone.

'All you would have you shall have,' he said. 'I will call in a
messenger and here and now send the letter that you wot of to Rome.'

'Your Highness,' she said, 'I would not have the Church brought back to
this land by one deemed an adult'ress. Assuredly, it should not
prosper.'

Again he sought to stay her going, holding out his arms to enfold her.
She stepped back.

'Your Highness,' she said, 'I will speak some last words. And, as you
know me well, you know that these irrevocably shall be my last to you!'

He cried--'Delay till you hear----'

'There shall be no delay,' she said; 'I will not hear.' She smoothed a
strand of hair that had fallen over her forehead in a gesture that she
always had when she was deep in thoughts.

'This is what I would say,' she uttered. And she began to speak
levelly--

'Very truly you say when you say that once I made offer to be your
leman. But it was when I was a young girl, mazed with reading of books
in the learned tongue, and seeing all men as if they were men of those
days. So you appeared to me such a man as was Pompey the Great, or as
was Marius, or as was Sylla. For each of these great men erred; yet they
erred greatly as rulers that would rule. Or rather I did see you such a
one as was Cæsar Julius, who, as you well wot, crossed a Rubicon and set
out upon a high endeavour. But you--never will you cross any Rubicon;
always you blow hot in the evening and cold at dawn. Neither do you, as
I had dreamed you did, rule in this your realm. For, even as a crow that
just now I watched, you are blown hither and thither by every gust that
blows. Now the wind of gossips blows so that you must have my life. And,
before God, I am glad of it.'

'Before God!' he cried out, 'I would save you!'

'Aye,' she answered sadly, 'to-day you would save me; to-morrow a foul
speech of one mine enemy shall gird you again to slay me. On the morrow
you will repent, and on the morrow of that again you will repent of
that. So you will balance and trim. If to-day you send a messenger to
Rome, to-morrow you will send another, hastening by a shorter route, to
stay him. And this I tell you, that I am not one to let my name be
bandied for many days in the mouths of men. I had rather be called a
sinner, adjudged and dead and forgotten. So I am glad that I am cast to
die.'

'You shall not die!' the King cried. 'Body of God, you shall not die! I
cannot live lacking thee. Kat---- Kat----'

'Aye,' she said, 'I must die, for you are not such a one as can stay in
the wind. Thus I tell you it will fall about that for many days you will
waver, but one day you will cry out--Let her die this day! On the morrow
of that day you will repent you, but, being dead, I shall be no more to
be recalled to life. Why, man, with this confession of mine, heard by
grooms and mayors of cities and the like, how shall you dare to save me?
You know you shall not.

'And so, now I am cast for death, and I am very glad of it. For, if I
had not so ensured and made it fated, I might later have wavered. For I
am a weak woman, and strong men have taken dishonourable means to escape
death when it came near. Now I am assured of death, and know that no
means of yours can save me, nor no prayers nor yielding of mine. I came
to you for that you might give this realm again to God. Now I see you
will not--for not ever will you do it if it must abate you a jot of your
sovereignty, and you never will do it without that abatement. So it is
in vain that I have sinned.

'For I trow that I sinned in taking the crown from the woman that was
late your wife. I would not have it, but you would, and I yielded. Yet
it was a sin. Then I did a sin that good might ensue, and again I do it,
and I hope that this sin that brings me down shall counterbalance that
other that set me up. There are now thirty-seven missionary societies in
this country alone which have sent out 3512 missionaries. A library
of volumes would be needed to give even a sketch of the results
of the labors of these devoted men and women.

The Church holds their names in holy reverence. Many of them have attained
the crown of martyrdom, and a still greater number have fallen victims
to the severities of uncongenial climates. Every heathen land has now
associated with it the name of valiant soldiers of the Cross, who have
given their lives to add it to their Master's, kingdom. In India among
many others, there have been Carey, Duff, Martyn, Marshman and Ward.
In China, Morrison, Milne, Taylor, John Talmage and Griffith John. In
Africa, Moffat, Livingstone, Hannington and Vanderkemp.

In the South Seas, Williams, Logan and Paton, while Judson of Burmah and
a host of noble men and women in every clime, have toiled and
suffered, not counting their lives dear unto them, that they might preach
to the heathen the unsearchable riches of Christ.

PREACHING TO HEATHEN AT HOME.

The zeal for the propagation of the Gospel among the heathen, has
been paralleled by the efforts put forth for the evangelization of
the people in nominally Christian lands. In this enterprise the front
rank on both sides of the Atlantic has been occupied by the Methodist
Church. Its system of itinerary, relieving its ministers in part
from exhausting study, and so giving them time and opportunity for
pastoral work and aggressive evangelistic effort, its welcome of
lay assistance in pulpit service and its system of drill and
inspection in the class-meeting, have all combined to develop its
working resources and increase its aggressive power.

The fact that there are now in the world over thirty million Methodists
of various kinds, makes it difficult to realize that when the century
began, John Wesley had been dead only nine years. This century consequently
has witnessed the growth and development of that mighty organization from
the seed sown by that one consecrated man and his helpers. It is doubtful
whether in politics or society there is any fact of the century
so remarkable as this.

But it is not very
certain that even at that I should live very long. For, if I lived, I
must work upon you to do the right. And, if that I did, not very long
should I live before mine enemies again did come about me and to you.
And so I must die. And now I see that you are not such a man as I would
live with willingly to preserve my life.

'I speak not to reprove you what I have spoken, but to make you see that
as I am so I am. You are as God made you, setting you for His own
purposes a weak man in very evil and turbulent times. As a man is born
so a man lives; as is his strength so the strain breaks him or he
resists the strain. If I have wounded you with these my words, I do ask
your pardon. Much of this long speech I have thought upon when I was
despondent this long time past. But much of it has come to my lips
whilst I spake, and, maybe, it is harsh and rash in the wording. That I
would not have, but I may not help myself. I would have you wounded by
the things as they are, and by what of conscience you have, in your
passions and your prides. And this, I will add, that I die a Queen, but
I would rather have died the wife of my cousin Culpepper or of any other
simple lout that loved me as he did, without regard, without thought,
and without falter. He sold farms to buy me bread. You would not imperil
a little alliance with a little King o' Scots to save my life. And this
I tell you, that I will spend the last hours of the days that I have to
live in considering of this simple man and of his love, and in praying
for his soul, for I hear you have slain him! THE GREAT a prize has won by,
Mygatt, age eleven shown made years, No. 32 Place, your Brooklyn
the name the have not of in praise; given.

The will Harriet W. be exhibited in the office for, And, will please
send while distinct, THE book she wants. Her selection of the
important articles of the you topographical features the map obscured
commerce is very, also worthy GREAT ROUND and simple in which they are
marked on the map is WORLD.
She went slowly down over the great stone flags of the great hall. It
was very gloomy now, and her figure in black velvet was like a small
shadow, dark and liquid, amongst shadows that fell softly and like
draperies from the roof. Up there it was all dark already, for the
light came downwards from the windows. She went slowly, walking as she
had been schooled to walk.

'God!' Henry cried out; 'you have not played false with Culpepper?' His
voice echoed all round the hall.

The Queen's white face and her folded hands showed as she turned--

'Aye, there the shoe pinches!' she said. 'Think upon it. Most times you
shall not believe it, for you know me. But I have made confession of it
before your Council. So it may be true. For I hope some truth cometh to
the fore even in Councils.'

Near the doorway it was all shadow, and soundlessly she faded away among
them. The hinge of the door creaked; through it there came the sound of
the pikestaves of her guard upon the stone of the steps. The sound
whispered round amidst the statues of old knights and kings that stood
upon corbels between the windows. It whispered amongst the invisible
carvings of the roof. Then it died away.

The King made no sound. Suddenly he cast his hat upon the paving.

       *       *       *       *       *

KATHARINE HOWARD was executed on
Tower Hill, the 13th of February, in the 33rd year
of the reign of KING HENRY VIII.

MDXLI-II