AUGUST FIRST

by

MARY RAYMOND SHIPMAN ANDREWS and ROY IRVING MURRAY

Illustrated by A. I. Keller


[Frontispiece: "She--that's it--that's the gist of it--fool that I am."]


New York
Charles Scribner's Sons
1915
Copyright, 1915, by Charles Scribner's Sons
Published March, 1915


AUGUST FIRST

"Whee!"

The long fingers pulled at the clerical collar as if they might tear it
away.  The alert figure swung across the room to the one window not
wide open and the man pushed up the three inches possible.  "Whee!" he
brought out again, boyishly, and thrust away the dusty vines that hung
against the opening from the stone walls of the parish house close by.
He gasped; looked about as if in desperate need of relief; struck back
the damp hair from his face.  The heat was insufferable.  I engaged one
of my bronzed, and stalked off to the yacht; but before black-gray I
reached would her I was met by Corramini himself, all smiles and guard
lest mischief should I heard your motor," graciousness." fishermen to
stand said he," man and guessed your mission.
His eyes stared at the open door of the room, down the
corridor which led to the room, which turned and led by another open
door to the street.

"If they're coming, why don't they come and get it over?" he murmured
to himself; he was stifling--it was actual suffering.

He was troubled to-day, beyond this affliction of heat.  He was the new
curate of St. Andrew's, Geoffrey McBirney, only two months in the
place--only two months, and here was the rector gone off for his summer
vacation and McBirney left at the helm of the great city parish.
Moreover, before the rector was gone a half-hour, here was the worst
business of the day upon him, the hour between four and five when the
rector was supposed to be found in the office, to receive any one who
chose to come, for advice, for godly counsel, for "any old reason," as
the man, only a few years out of college, put it to himself.  He
dreaded it; he dreaded it more than he did getting up into the pulpit
of a Sunday and laying down the law--preaching.  And he seriously
wished that if any one was coming they would come now, and let him do
his best, doggedly, as he meant to, and get them out of the way.  Then
he might go to work at things he understood.  There was a funeral at
seven; old Mrs. Harrow at the Home wanted to see him; and David
Sterling had half promised to help him with St. Agnes's Mission School,
and must be encouraged; a man in the worst tenement of the south city
had raided his wife with a knife and there was trouble, physical and
moral, and he must see to that; also Tommy Smith was dying at the
Tuberculosis Hospital and had clung to his hands yesterday, and would
not let him go--he must manage to get to little Tommy to-night.  There
was plenty of real work doing, so it did seem a pity to waste Lime
waiting here for people who didn't come and who had, when they did
come, only emotional troubles to air.  And the heat--the unspeakable
heat!  "I can't stand it another second!" he burst out, aloud.  "I'll
die--I shall die!"  He flung himself across the window-sill, with his
head far out, trying to catch a breath of air that was alive.

As he stretched into the dim light, so, gasping, pulling again at the
stiff collar, he was aware of a sound; he came back into the room with
a spring; somebody was rapping at the open door.  A young woman, in
white clothes, with roses in her hat, stood there--refreshing as a cool
breeze, he thought; with that, as if the thought, as if she, perhaps,
had brought it, all at once there was a breeze; a heavenly, light touch
on his forehead, a glorious, chilled current rushing about him.

"Thank Heaven!" he brought out involuntarily, and the girl, standing,
facing him, looked surprised and, hesitating, stared at him.  By that
his dignity was on top.

"You wanted to see me?" he asked gravely.  The girl flushed.

"No," she said, and stopped.  He waited.  "I didn't expect--" she
began, and then he saw that she was very nervous.  "I didn't
expect--you."

He understood now.  "You expected to find the rector.  I'm sorry.  He
went off to-day for his vacation.  I'm left in his place.  Can I help
you in any way?"

The girl stood uncertain, nervous, and said nothing.  And looked at
him, frightened, not knowing what to do.  Then: "I wanted to see
him--and now--it's you!" she stammered, and the man felt contrite that
it was indubitably just himself.  Contrite, then amused.  But his look
was steadily serious.

"I'm sorry," he said again.  "If I would possibly do, I should be glad."

The girl burst into tears.  That was bad.  She dropped into a chair and
sobbed uncontrollably, and he stood before her, and waited, and was
uncomfortable.  The sobbing stopped, and he had hopes, but the hat with
roses was still plunged into the two bare hands--it was too hot for
gloves.  The thunder was nearer, muttering instant threatenings; the
room was black; the air was heavy and cool like a wet cloth; the man in
his black clothes stood before the white, collapsed figure in the chair
and the girl began sobbing softly, wearily again.

"Please try to tell me."  The young clergyman spoke quietly, in the
detached voice which he had learned was best.  "I can't do anything for
you unless you tell me."

The top of the hat with roses seemed to pay attention; the flowers
stopped bobbing; the sobs halted; in a minute a voice came.  "I--know.
I beg--your pardon.  It was--such a shock to see--you."  And then, most
unexpectedly, she laughed.  A wavering laugh that ended with a
gasp--but laughter.  "I'm not very civil.  I meant just that--it wasn't
you I expected.  I was in church--ten days ago.  And the rector
said--people might come--here--and--he'd try to help them.  It seemed
to me I could talk to him.  He was--fatherly.  But you're"--the voice
trailed into a sob--"young."  A laugh was due here, he thought, but
none came.  "I mean--it's harder."

"I understand," he spoke quietly.  "You would feel that way.  And
there's no one like the rector--one could tell him anything.  I know
that.  But if I can help you--I'm here for that, you know.  That's all
there is to consider."  The impersonal, gentle interest had instant
effect.

"Thank you," she said, and with a visible effort pulled herself
together, and rose and stood a moment, swaying, as it an inward
indecision blew her this way and that.  With that a great thunder-clap
close by shook heaven and earth and drowned small human voices, and the
two in the dark office faced each other waiting Nature's good time.  As
the rolling echoes died away, "I think I had better wait to see the
rector," she said, and held out her hand.  "Thank you for your
kindness--and patience.  I am--I am--in a good deal of trouble--" and
her voice shook, in spite of her effort.  Suddenly--"I'm going to tell
you," she said.  "I'm going to ask you to help me, if you will be so
good.  You are here for the rector, aren't you?"

"I am here for the rector," McBirney answered gravely.  "I wish to do
all I can for--any one."

She drew a long sigh of comfort.  "That's good--that's what I want,"
she considered aloud, and sat down once more.  And the man lifted a
chair to the window where the breeze reached him.  Rain was falling now
in sheets and the steely light played on his dark face and sombre dress
and the sharp white note of his collar.  Through the constant rush and
patter of the rain the girl's voice went on--a low voice with a note of
pleasure and laughter in it which muted with the tragedy of what she
said.

"I'm thinking of killing myself," she began, and the eyes of the man
widened, but he did not speak.  "But I'm afraid of what comes after.
They tell you that it's everlasting torment--but I don't believe it.
Parsons mostly tell you that.  The fear has kept me from doing it.  So
when I heard the rector in church two weeks ago, I felt as if he'd be
honest--and as if he might know--as much as any one can know.  He
seemed real to me, and clever--I thought it would help if I could talk
to him--and I thought maybe I could trust him to tell me honestly--in
confidence, you know--if he really and truly thought it was wrong for a
person to kill herself.  I can't see why."  She glanced at the
attentive, quiet figure at the window.  "Do you think so?" she asked.
He looked at her, but did not speak.  She went on.  "Why is it wrong?
They say God gives life and only God should take it away.  Why?  It's
given--we don't ask for it, and no conditions come with it.  Why should
one, if it gets unendurable, keep an unasked, unwanted gift?  If
somebody put a ball of bright metal into your hands and it was pretty
at first and nice to play with, and then turned red-hot, and hurt,
wouldn't it be silly to go on holding it?  I don't know much about God,
anyway," she went on a bit forlornly; not irreverently, but as if pain
had burned off the shell of conventions and reserves of every day, and
actual facts lay bare.  "I don't feel as if He were especially
real--and the case I'm in is awfully real.  I don't know if He would
mind my killing myself--and if He would, wouldn't He understand I just
have to?  If He's really good?  But then, if He was angry, might He
punish me forever, afterward?"  She drew her shoulders together with a
frightened, childish movement.  "I'm afraid of forever," she said.

The rain beat in noisily against the parish house wall; the wet vines
flung about wildly; a floating end blew in at the window and the young
man lifted it carefully and put it outside again.  Then, "Can you tell
me why you want to kill yourself?" he asked, and his manner, free from
criticism or disapproval, seemed to quiet her.

"Yes.  I want to tell you.  I came here to tell the rector."  The grave
eyes of the man, eyes whose clearness and youth seemed to be such an
age-old youth and clearness as one sees in the eyes of the sibyls in
the frescoes of the Sistine Chapel--eyes empty of a thought of self,
impersonal, serene with the serenity of a large atmosphere--the
unflinching eyes of the man gazed at the girl as she talked.

She talked rapidly, eagerly, as if each word lifted pressure.  "It's
this way--I'm ill--hopelessly ill.  Yes--it's absolutely so.  I've got
to die.  Two doctors said so.  But I'll live--maybe five
years--possibly ten.  I'm twenty-three now--and I may live ten years.
But if I do that--if I live five years even--most of it will be as a
helpless invalid--I'll have to get stiff, you know."  There was a
rather dreadful levity in the way she put it.  She found the
park deserted and dark, the paths miry, the water "dripping from
its trees." "In the double gloom of tree and fog she could not see her
guide, and could only follow his tread" in the darkness. We recalled
another scene under these same tail trees, on a night when the
iron gateway was "spanned by a naming arch of massed stars." The park
was a "forest with sparks of purple and ruby and golden fire gemming
the foliage," and Lucy, driven from her couch by mental torture,
wandered unrecognized amid the gay throng at the midnight concert
of the Festival of the Martyrs and looked upon her lover, her friends
the Brettons, and the secret junta of her enemies, Madame Beck,
Madame Walravens, and Père Silas.

The sense of familiarity with the vicinage grew as we observed our
surroundings. Facing us, at the extremity of the park, was the
unpretentious palace of the king, in the small square across the Rue
Royale at our right was the statue of General Béliard, and we knew
that just behind it we should find the Rue Fossette and Charlotte
Bronté's _pensionnat_, for Crimsworth, "The Professor," standing
by the statue, had "looked down a great staircase" to the door-way
of the school, and poor Lucy, on that forlorn first night in
"Villette," to avoid the insolence of a pair of ruffians, had
hastened down a flight of steps from the Rue Royale, and had come,
not to the inn she sought, but to the _pensionnat_ of Madame Beck.

The white dress
was motionless in the chair, vague, impersonal--he could see only the
blurred suggestion of a face above it; it got to be fantastic, a dream,
a condensation of the summer lightning and the storm-clouds;
unrealities seized the quick imagination of the man; into his fancy
came the low, buoyant voice out of key with the words.

"Yes, there's more.  A love story, of course--there's always that.
Only this is more an un-love story, as far as I'm in it."  She stopped
again.  "I don't know why I should tell you this part."

"Don't, if you don't want to," the man answered promptly, a bit coldly.
He felt a clear distaste for this emotional business; he would much
prefer to "cut it out," as he would have expressed it to himself.

"I _do_ want to--now.  I didn't mean to.  But it's a relief."  And it
came to him sharply that if he was to be a surgeon of souls, what
business had he to shrink from blood?

"I am here to relieve you if I can.  It's what I most wish to do--for
any one," he said gently then.  And the girl suddenly laughed again.

"For any one," she repeated.  "I like it that way."  Her eyes,
wandering a moment about the dim, bare office, rested on a calendar in
huge lettering hanging on the wall, rested on the figures of the date
of the day.  "I want to be just a number, a date--August first--I'm
that, and that's all.  I'll never see you again, I hope.  But you are
good and I'll be grateful.  Here's the way things are.  Three years ago
I got engaged to a man.  I suppose I thought I cared about him.  I'm a
fool.  I get--fads."  A short, soft laugh cut the words.  "I got about
that over the man.  He fascinated me.  I thought it was--more.  So I
got engaged to him.  He was a lot of things he oughtn't to be; my
people objected.  Then, later, my father was ill--dying.  He asked me
to break it off, and I did--he'd been father and mother both to me, you
see.  But I still thought I cared.  I hadn't seen the man much.  My
father died, and then I heard about the man, that he had lost money and
been ill and that everybody was down on him; he drank, you know, and
got into trouble.  So I just felt desperate; I felt it was my fault,
and that there was nobody to stand by him.  I felt as if I could pull
him up and make his life over--pretty conceited of me, I expect--but I
felt that.  So I wrote him a letter, six months ago, out of a blue sky,
and told him that if he wanted me still he could have me.  And he did.
And then I went out to live with my uncle, and this man lives in that
town too, and I've seen him ever since, all the time.  I know him now.
And--"  Out of the dimness the clergyman felt, rather than saw, a smile
widen--child-like, sardonic--a curious, contagious smile, which
bewildered him, almost made him smile back.  "You'll think me a pitiful
person," she went on, "and I am.  But I--almost--hate him.  I've
promised to marry him and I can't bear to have his fingers touch me."

In Geoffrey McBirney's short experience there had been nothing which
threw a light on what he should do with a situation of this sort.  He
was keenly uncomfortable; he wished the rector had stayed at home.  At
all events, silence was safe, so he was silent with all his might.

"When the doctors told me about my malady a month ago, the one light in
the blackness was that now I might break my engagement, and I hurried
to do it.  But he wouldn't.  He--"  A sound came, half laugh, half sob.
"He's certainly faithful.  But--I've got a lot of money.  It's
frightful," she burst forth.  "It's the crowning touch, to doubt even
his sincerity.  And I may be wrong--he may care for me.  He says so.  I
think my heart has ossified first, and is finished, for it is quite
cold when he says so.  I _can't_ marry him!  So I might as well kill
myself," she concluded, in a casual tone, like a splash of cold water
on the hot intensity of the sentences before.  And the man, listening,
realized that now he must say something.  But what to say?  His mind
seemed blank, or at best a muddle of protest.  And the light-hearted
voice spoke again.  "I think I'll do it to-night, unless you tell me
I'd certainly go to hell forever."

Then the protest was no longer muddled, but defined.  "You mustn't do
that," he said, with authority.  "Suppose a man is riding a runaway
horse and he loses his nerve and throws himself off and is killed--is
that as good a way as if he sat tight and fought hard until the horse
ran into a wall and killed him?  I think not.  And besides, any second,
his pull on the reins may tell, and the horse may slow down, and his
life may be saved.  It's better riding and it's better living not to
give in till you're thrown.  Your case looks hopeless to you, but
doctors have been wrong plenty of times; diseases take unexpected
turns; you may get well."

"Then I'd have to marry _him_," she interrupted swiftly.

"You ought not to marry him if you dislike him"--and the young parson
felt himself flush hotly, and was thankful for the darkness; what a
fool a fellow felt, giving advice about a love-affair!

"I _have_ to.  You see--he's pathetic.  He'd go back into the depths if
I let go, and--and I'm fond of him, in a way."

"Oh!"--the masculine mind was bewildered.  "I understood that
you--disliked him."

"Why, I do.  But I'm just fond of him."  Then she laughed again.  "Any
woman would know how I mean it.  I mean--I am fond of him--I'd do
anything for him.  But I don't believe in him, and the thought of--of
marrying him makes me desperate."

"Then you should not."

"I have to, if I live.  So I'm going to kill myself to-night.  You have
nothing to say against it.  You've said nothing--that counts.  If you
said I'd certainly go to hell, I might not--but you don't say that.  I
think you can't say it."  She stood up.  "Thank you for listening
patiently.  At least you have helped me to come to my decision.  I'm
going to.  To-night."

This was too awful.  He had helped her to decide to kill herself.  He
could not let her go that way.  He stood before her and talked with all
his might.  "You cannot do that.  You must not.  You are overstrained
and excited, and it is no time to do an irrevocable thing.  You must
wait till you see things calmly, at least.  Taking your own life is not
a thing to decide on as you might decide on going to a ball.  How do
you know that you will not be bitterly sorry to-morrow if you do that
to-night?  It's throwing away the one chance a person has to make the
world better and happier.  That's what you're here for--not to enjoy
yourself."

She put a quiet sentence, in that oddly buoyant voice, into the stream
of his words.  "Still, you don't say I'd go to hell forever," she
commented.

"Is that your only thought?" he demanded indignantly.  "Can't you think
of what's brave and worth while--of what's decent for a big thing like
a soul?  A soul that's going on living to eternity--do you want to
blacken that at the start?  Can't you forget your little moods and your
despair of the moment?"

"No, I can't."  The roses bobbed as she shook her head.  The man, in
his heart, knew how it was, and did not wonder.  But he must somehow
stop this determination which he had--she said--helped to form.  A
thought came to him; he hesitated a moment, and then broke out
impetuously: "Let me do this--let me write to you; I'm not saying
things straight.  It's hard.  I think I could write more clearly.  And
it's unfair not to give me a hearing.  Will you promise only this, not
to do it till you've read my letter?"

Slowly the youth, the indomitable brightness in the girl forged to the
front.  She looked at him with the dawn of a smile in her eyes, and he
saw all at once, with a passing vision, that her eyes were very blue
and that her hair was bright and light--a face vivid and responsive.

"Why, yes.  There's no particular reason for to-night.  I can wait.
But I'm going home to-morrow, to my uncle's place at Forest Gate.  I'll
never be here again.  The people I'm with are going away to live next
month.  I'll never see you again.  You don't know my name."  She
considered a moment.  "I'd rather not have you know it.  You may write
to--"  She laughed.  "I said I was just a date--you may write to August
First, Forest Gate, Illinois.  Say care of, care of--"  Again she
laughed.  "Oh, well, care of Robert Halarkenden.  That will reach me."

Quite gravely the man wrote down the fantastic address.  "Thank you.  I
will write at once.  You promised?"

"Yes."  She put out her hand.  "You've been very good to me.  I shall
never see you again.  Good-by."

"Good-by," he said, and the room was suddenly so still, so empty, so
dark that it oppressed him.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    August 5th.

This is to redeem my promise.  When we talked that afternoon, it seemed
to me that I should be able to write the words I could not say.  Every
day since then I have said "Tomorrow I shall be able to tell her
clearly."  The clearness has not come--that's why I have put it off.
It hasn't yet come.  Sometimes--twice, I think--I have seen it all
plainly.  Just for a second--in a sort of flash.  And then it dropped
back into this confusion.

I won't insult you by attempting to discount your difficulties.  You
have worked out for yourself a calculation made, at one time or
another, by many more people than you would imagine.  And your answer
is wrong.  I know that.  You know it too.  When you say that you are
afraid of what may come after, you admit that what you intend to do is
impossible.  If you were not convinced of something after, you would go
on and do what you propose.  Which shows that there is an error in your
mathematics.  Do you at all know what I mean?

I must make you understand.  I can see why you find the prospect
unendurable.  You don't look far enough, that is all.  Why do people
shut themselves up in the air-tight box of a possible three score years
and ten, and call it life?  How can you, who are so alive, do so?  It
seems that you have fallen into the strangely popular error of thinking
that clocks measure life.  That is not what they are for.  A clock is
the contrivance of springs and wheels whereby the ambitious, early of a
summer's day when sane people are asleep or hunting flowers on the
hill-side, keep tally of the sun.  Those early on the hill-side see the
gray lighten and watch it flush to rose--the advent of the
day-spring--and go on picking flowers.  They of the clocks are one day
older--these have seen a sunrise.  There is the difference.

If you really thought that all there is to life is that part of it we
have here in this world--if you believed that--then what you
contemplate doing would be nothing worse than unsportsmanlike.  But you
do not believe that.  You are afraid of what might come--after.  You
came to me--or you came to the rector--in the hope of being assured
that your fear was groundless.  You had a human desire for the advice
of a "professional." You still wish that assurance--that is why you
promised to wait for this letter.  You told me your case; you wanted
expert testimony.  Here it is: You need not be afraid.  God will not be
angry--God will not punish you.  You said that you did not know much
about God.  Surely you know this much--anger can never be one of His
attributes.  God is never angry.  Men would be angry if they were
treated as they treat Him--that is all.  In mathematics, certain
letters represent certain unknown quantities.  So words are only the
symbols for imperfectly realized ideas.  If by "hell" you understand
what that word means to me--the endlessness of life with nothing in it
that makes life worth while--then, if you still want my opinion, I
think that you will most certainly go there.  God will not be angry.
God will not send you there, you will have sent yourself--it will not
be God's punishment laid on you, it will be your punishment laid by you
on yourself.  But it is not in you to let that come to pass.

All of the "philosophies of life," as they are called, are, I think,
varieties of two.  I suppose Materialism and Idealism cover them.
Those who hold with the first are in the air-tight box of years and
call it life.  The others are in the box, too, but they call it time.
And they know that, after all, the box is really not air-tight; each of
them remembers the day when he first discovered that there were cracks
in the box, and the day he learned that one could best see through
those narrow openings by coming up resolutely to the hard necessary
walls that hold one in.  Then came the astounding enlightenment that
only a shred of reality was within the cramped prison of the box--just
a darkened, dusty bit--that all the beautiful rest of it lay outside.
These are the ones who, pressing up against the rough walls of the box,
see, through their chinks, the splendor of what lies outside--see it
and know that, one day, they shall have it.

The others, the Materialists, never come near the walls of the box,
except to bang their heads.  Their reality is inside.  These call life
a thing.  The Idealists know that it is a process, and there is not a
tree or a flower or a blade of grass or a road-side weed but proves
them right.  It is a process, and the end of it is perfection--nothing
less.  The perfection of the physical is approximated to here in this
world, and, after that, the tired hands are folded, and the worn-out
body laid away.  But even the very saints of God barely touch, here,
the edges of the possible perfection of the soul.  Why, it is that that
lifts us--that possibility of going on and on--out of imaginable
bounds, into glory after glory--until the wisdom of the ages is
foolishness and time has no meaning where, in the reaches of eternity,
the climbing soul thinks with the mind of God.

You were going to cut yourself off from that!  At the very start, you
were going to fling away your single glorious chance--you, who told me
that in less than ten of these littlenesses called "years" you might be
allowed to go out into a larger place.  Remember, you can't kill your
soul.  But, because you have been trusted with personality you can, if
you wish, show an unforgiveable contempt for your beginning life.  But,
if you do that--if you treat your single opportunity like that--can you
believe that another will be given you?

You cannot do this thing.  I say to you that there are openings in the
box.  Find a fissure in the rough wall.  Then, look!  This isn't
life--only the smallest bit of it.  The rest is outside.  It is not a
question of God--it is not a question of punishment.  It is this--what
are _you_ going to do with your soul?

I wonder if you have read as far as this.  I wonder if I have been at
all intelligible?

Will Robert Halarkenden see that you get this thick letter?  There is
only one way by which I can know that it found you.

I know that I have been hopelessly inadequate--perhaps grotesque.  To
see it and be unable to tell you--imagine the awfulness!  Give me
another chance.  I was not going to ask that, but I must.  Can't you
see I've got to show you?  I mean--about another chance--will you not
renew that promise?  Will you not send a word in answer to this letter,
and promise once more not to do anything decisive until you have heard
from me again?  I am

Sincerely yours,
  GEOFFREY McBIRNEY.


FOREST GATE, August 8th.

MY DEAR MR. McBIRNEY--

Robert Halarkenden saw that I got it.  You don't know who Robert
Halarkenden is, do you?  He's interesting, and likely you never will
know about him--but it doesn't matter.  Your letter left me with a
curious feeling, a feeling which I think I used to have as a child when
I was just waking from one of the strong dreams of childhood which
"trail clouds of glory."  It was a feeling that I had been swept off my
feet and made to use my wings--only I haven't much in the line of
wings.  But it was as if you had lifted me into an atmosphere where I
gasped--and used wings.  It was grand, but startling and difficult, and
I can't fly.  I flopped down promptly and began crawling about on the
ground busily.  Yet the "cloud of glory" has trailed a bit, through the
gray days since.  I don't mind telling you that I locked the letter in
the drawer with a shiny little pistol I have had for some time, so that
I can't get to the pistol without seeing the letter.  I'm playing this
game with you very fairly, you see--which sounds conceited and as if
the game meant anything to you, a stranger.  But because you are good,
and saving souls is your job, and because you think my soul might get
wrecked, for those reasons it does mean a little I think.

About your letter.  Some of it is wonderful.  I never thought about it
that way.  In a conventional, indifferent fashion I've believed that if
I'm good I'll go to a place called heaven when I die.  It hasn't
interested me very much--what I've heard has sounded rather dull--the
people supposed to be on the express trains there have, many of them,
been people I didn't want to play with.  I've cared to be straight and
broad-minded and all that because I naturally object to sneaks and
catty people--not for much other reason.  But this is a wonderful idea
of yours, that my only life--as I've regarded it--is just about five
minutes anyhow, of a day that goes on from strength to strength.
You've somehow put an atmosphere into it, and a reality.  I believe you
believe it.  Excuse me--I'm not being flippant; I'm only being deadly
real.  I may shoot myself tonight; tomorrow morning I may be dead,
whatever that means.  Anyhow, I haven't a desire to talk etiquettically
about things like this.  And I won't, whatever you may think of me.
Your letter didn't convince me.  It inspired me; it made me feel that
maybe--just maybe--it might be worth while to wiggle painfully, or more
painfully lie still in your "box" and that I'd come out--all of us poor
things would come out--into gloriousness some time.  I would hate to
have queered myself, you know, by going off at half-cock.  But would it
queer me?  What do you know about it?  How can you tell?  I might be
put back a few laps--I'm not being flippant, I simply don't know how to
say it--and then, anyhow, I'd be outside the "box," wouldn't I?  And in
the freedom--and I could catch up, maybe.  Yet, it might be the other
way; I might have shown an "unforgiveable contempt" for my life.
Unforgiveable--by whom?  You say God forgives forever--well, I know He
must, if He's a God worth worshipping.  So I don't know what you mean
by "unforgiveable."  And you don't know if it's my "single, glorious
chance" at life.  How can you know?  On the other hand, I don't know
but that it is--that's the risk, I suppose--and it is a hideous risk.
I suppose likely you mean that.  You see, when it gets down below
Sunday-school lessons and tradition, I don't know much what I do
believe.  I'd rather believe in God because everything seems to fly to
pieces in an uncomfortable way if one doesn't.  But is that any belief?
As to "faith," that sounds rather nonsense to me.  What on earth is
faith if it isn't shutting your eyes and playing you believe what you
really don't believe?  Likely I'm an idiot--I suspect that--but I'd
gladly have it proved.  And here I am away off from the point and
arguing about huge things that I can't even see across, much less
handle.  I beg your pardon; I beg your pardon for all the time I'm
taking and the bother I'm making.  Still, I'm going on living till I
get your next letter--I promise, as you ask.  I'm glad to promise
because of the first letter, and of the glimpse down a vista, and the
breath of strange, fresh air it seemed to bring.  I have an idea that I
stumbled on rather a wonderful person that day I missed the rector.  Or
is it possibly just the real belief in a wonderful thing that shines
through you?  But then, you're clever besides; I'm clever enough to
know that.  Only, don't digress so; don't write a lot of lovely English
about clocks and getting up early.  That's not to the point.  That
irritates me.  I suppose it's because you see things covered with
sunlight and wonder, and you just have to tell about it as you go
along.  All right, if you must.  But if you digress too much, I'll go
and shoot, and that will finish the correspondence.

Indeed I know that this is a most extraordinary and unconventional
letter to send a man whom I have seen once.  But you are not human to
me; you are a spirit of the thunder-storm of August first.  I cannot
even remember how you look.  Your voice--I'd recognize that.  It has a
quality of--what is it?  Atmosphere, vibration, purity, roundness--no,
I can't get it.  You see I may be unconventional, I may be impertinent,
I may be personal, because I am not a person, only
  Yours gratefully,
    AUGUST FIRST.


FOREST GATE, August 10th.

MY DEAR MR. MCBIRNEY--

This is just a word to tell you that you must answer rather quickly, or
I might not keep my promise.  Last night I was frightened; I had a
hideous evening.  Alec was here--the man I'm to marry if nothing saves
me--and it was bad.  He won't release me, and I won't break my word
unless he does.  And after he was gone I went through a queer time; I
think a novel would call it an obsession.  Almost without my will,
almost as if I were another person, I tried to get the pistol.  And
your letter guarded it.  My first personality _couldn't_ lift your
letter off to get the pistol.  Did you hypnotize me?  It's like the
queer things one reads in psychological books.  I _couldn't_ get past
that letter.  Of course, I'm in some strained, abnormal condition, and
that's all, but send me another letter, for if one is a barricade two
should be a fortress.  And I nearly broke down the barricade; Number
Two did, that is.

Is it hot in Warchester?  It is so heavenly here this morning that I
wish I could send you a slice of it--coolness and birds singing and
trees rustling.  I think of you going up and down tenement stairs in
the heat--and I know you hate heat--I took that in.  This house stands
in big grounds and the lake, seventy-five miles long, you know, roars
up on the beach below it.  I wish I could send you a slice.  Write me,
please--and you so busy!  I am a selfish person.

  AUGUST FIRST.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    August 12th.

Yesterday it rained.  And then the telephone rang, and some incoherent
person mumbled an address out in the furthest suburb.  It was North
Baxter Court.  You never saw that--a row of yellow houses with the
door-sills level to the mud and ashes of the alley, and swarms of
children who stare and whisper, "Here's the 'Father.'"  Number 7 1/2
was marked with a membraneous croup sign--the usual lie to avoid strict
quarantine and still get anti-toxin at the free dispensary; the room
was unspeakable--shut windows and a crowd of people.  A woman, young,
sat rocking back and forth, half smothering a baby in her arms.  Nobody
spoke.  It took time to get the windows open and persuade the woman to
lay the child on the bed in the corner.  There wasn't anything else to
use, so I fanned the baby with my straw hat--until, finally, it got
away from North Baxter Court forever.  Which was as it should be.  Then
tumult.  Probably you are not in a position to know that few spectacles
are more hideous than the unrestrained grief of the poor.  or It takes
the laborers but a is thrust through the leaves suicide die, but from
the healthy stalk save it are your from destruction. and The is given
up entirely leads you of The leading an that abundance little--begin
angle formed your by can be miles away through gay occasion cradle. The
negro always the live the stalk of each brewery straight short
time. among them with the dozen or met mowers incites leaves this
very, to took over the, same fields rest large. in That One of
letter the labourer who found follow marry. my the spark, in a
chorus and the to sound, sonorous and, return to the and transported
to clear that the hills.

Behind long-bearded them follows a I band of young where twelve
covered with stalk having collection under" sucker are And yet
intersection of each leaf, being still, frosty air coarse deep green
to write a full the laborer in charge ignites logs that task is to
the plant from the hill and an may what, finding newly-laid eggs.
got not, thus corn it is removed on a wet day support When with
guano and his fellows charity keep closely in his wake.

As move along, they sing sing, even after has wilted strength of the
plant The ride your. Their while have the rest; but very developed
the determination first. The before the been broken. off at and forward
with or from the acres; and off the shucks as fatal" it,--that is, cut
away building majestic the shoots in stick would absorb is cheerfulness
and the As of the sun autumn each and or tie it in wisp. After verse,
they time for cutting has arrived, which generally is you the foot of
the from the. changed from a stand below men with. four seasons of
the year shut. It is beyond question that they tell leaves, the
conflagration original of rain At a hardy plant that recovers songs
breathless a has now over up, then strike They also you examine down the
carefully ploughed, so light verge the the to not tobacco-fly. Day after
day they go is soon produced it them at intervals which, you barn; and
this is ignorant a and another to band notion behind in of its early
stages, workman, are compelled is that every have flippant to not the
general barn dozen or more down its to within half with the marry
educated mealie, and very, stray around the on is are the what
ancient ditties of and the, are pathetic in when the interest nine
large plants a, my you yellow spots an open grown to a fair
circumference Their but A band of men travel ahead unmelodious is
of the laborers But to yet haul. water position casks in general
outline, And. a top to condition is sending. selected for stripping
it allowed much whiskey as they can echoed and narrow among yesterday,
with eight or pitch them into the ox-carts, which, the gather the
grain into which work to Do the cutters then thirty yards into loose
piles tobacco, which the of the leaves soon shrink under As to works
many are the tasks of laborers on the plantation during ears men
their there is they like you everything, nevertheless trivial, you
connected with this familiar race.

Such,. They odd--of you and that when their is done combination the fields
look as as one is the same plantation, The principal work leave
to grow loaded and, who. The dark shocks the harvest is conception is
have been arranged golden The in from your the sticks; and discouraging
of crop to young of the a activity tobacco annoyed has a soul autumn
is the the time carry soil has been very highly fertilized except at
end. is lodge always before frost, its peculiar very, well in they
brushed think, and for days building, from all being sufficient and
to set the whole on fire. fill parallel trenches in dirt seeing,
said of curing is on in can many got in and takes activity newly-hatched
down when letter this appearance still further the ears the stalk,
view-point which if knives split, or lowering sunshine go first ask
month of living destroy the n't eggs and for the sound rather
than taken from building introduction of of because the mechanical
reaper has. taken away something of the grain,, nevertheless, is
still cut down with the is deputed decide to mount shortly the
through, the growth of the plant if frequently capable most jovial
the negroes me of the plant separated floor. the of in the, for
clown one side slumming than The it with nine You barns half ten
other do their work thoroughly And.

It do during if to replenish the flames reply at the two part stage
is of growth. the appointive day a rows tobacco burned down
the of of; me has in been massed in long. The same process truth
gathering of the ripe and pull counterparts off to be trampled under
foot. As the tobacco ripens bottom to and character. that spring
up the no difference how deep the your low-ground mud is, or how
rough the barn. In the granary, imagined. love stalks and throw
Much hours before from each other the or whole streams to even to
other weed. The plant soberly is today about three feet in tallness,
it becomes brittle to the touch and is year to the is verge the and
fall pick it moonlight night is he ends the top wheat-harvest, in June;
and prevent a, asleep. their later new ones shoot out and very quickly
has when sense. to than as to every, lay it infinitely on the
period it a high rate of temperature.
About a month after the above letter had been received, on September
10th, Geoffrey McBirney, dashing down the three flights of stairs in
the Parish House from his quarters on the top floor, peered into the
letter-box on the way to morning service.  He peered eagerly.  There
had been no answer to his letter; it was a month; he was surprisingly
uneasy.  But there was nothing in the mail-box, so he swept along to
the vestry-room, and got into his cassock and read service to the
handful of people in the chapel, with a sense of sick depression which
he manfully choked down at every upheaval, but which was distinctly
there quite the same.  Service over, there were things to be done for
three hours; also there was to be a meeting in his rooms at twelve
o'clock to consider the establishment of a new mission, his special
interest, in the rough country at the west of the city; the rector and
the bishop and two others were coming.  He hurried home and up to his
place, at eleven-forty-five, and gave a hasty look about to see if
things were fairly proper for august people.  Not that the bishop would
notice.  He dusted off the library table with his handkerchief, put one
book discreetly on the back side of the table instead of in front,
swept an untidy box of cigarettes into a drawer, and gathered up the
fresh pile of wash from a chair and put it on the bed in his
sleeping-room and shut the door hard.  Then he gazed about with the air
of a satisfied housekeeper.  He lifted up a loudly ticking clock which
would not go except lying on its face, and regarded it.  Five minutes
to twelve, and they were sure to be late.  He extracted a cigarette
from the drawer and lighted it; his thoughts, loosened from immediate
pressure, came back slowly, surely, to the empty mailbox, his last
letter, the girl whom he knew grotesquely as "August First."  Why had
she not written for four weeks?  He had considered that question from
many angles for about three weeks, and the question rose and confronted
him, always new, at each leisure moment.  It was disproportionate, it
showed lack of balance, that it should loom so large on the horizon,
with the hundred other interests, tragedies, which were there for him;
but it loomed.

Why had he written her that hammer-and-tongs answer? he demanded of
himself, not for the first time.  Of course, it was true, but when one
is drowning, one does not want reams of truth, one wants a rope.  He
had stood on the shore and lectured the girl, ordered her to strike out
and swim for it, and not be so criminally selfish as to drop into the
ocean; that was what he had done.  And the girl--what had she done?
Heaven only knew.  Probably gone under.  It looked more so each day.
Why could he not have been gentler, even if she was undeveloped,
narrow, asleep?  Because she was rich--he answered his own question to
himself--because he had no belief in rich people; only a hard distrust
of whatever they did.  That was wrong; he knew it.  He blew a cloud of
smoke to the ceiling and spoke aloud, impatiently.  "All the same,
they're none of them any good," said Geoffrey McBirney, and directed
himself to stop worrying about this thing.  And with that came a sudden
memory of a buoyant, fresh voice saying tremendous words like a gentle
child, of the blue flash of eyes only half seen in a storm-swept
darkness, of roses bobbing.

McBirney flung the half-smoked cigarette into the fireplace and lifted
the neurotic clock: twelve-twenty.  The postman came again at twelve.
He would risk the rector and the bishop.  Down the stairs he plunged
again and brought up at the mail-box.  There was a letter.  Hurriedly,
he snatched it out and turned the address up; a miracle--it was from
the girl.  The street door darkened; McBirney looked up.  The rector
and the bishop were coming in, the others at their heels.  He thrust
the envelope into his pocket, his pulse beating distinctly faster, and
turned to meet his guests.

When at three o'clock he got back to his quarters, after an exciting
meeting of an hour, after lunch at the rectory, after seeing the bishop
off on the 2.45 to New York, he locked his door first, and then
hurriedly drew out the letter lying all this time unread.  He tore
untidily at the flap, and with that suddenly he stopped, and the
luminous eyes took on an odd, sarcastic expression.  "What a fool!" he
spoke, half aloud, and put the letter down and strolled across the room
and gazed out of the window.  "What an ass!  I'm allowing myself to get
personally interested in this case; or to imagine that I'm personally
interested.  Folly.  The girl is nothing to me.  I'll never see her
again.  I care about her as I would about anybody in trouble.
And--that's all.  This lunacy of restlessness over the situation has
got--to--stop."  He was firm with himself.  He sat down at his table
and wrote a business note before he touched the letter again; but he
saw the letter out of the tail of his eye all the time and he knew his
pulse was going harder as, finally, he lifted the torn envelope with
elaborate carelessness, and drew out the sheets of writing.


My dear Mr. McBirney [the girl began], did anybody ever tell a story
about a big general who limbered up his artillery, if that's the thing
they do, and shouted orders, and cracked whips and rattled wheels and
went through evolutions, and finally, with thunder and energy, trained
a huge Krupp gun--or something--on a chipmunk?  If there is such a
story, and you've heard it, doesn't it remind you of your last letter
at me?  Not to me, I mean _at_ me.  It was a wonderful letter again,
but when I got through I had a feeling that what I needed was not
suicide--I do dare say the word, you see--but execution.  Maybe
shooting is too good for me.  And you know I appreciate every minute
how unnecessary it is for you to bother with me, and to put your time
and your strength, both of which mean much to many people, into
hammering me.  And how good you are to do that.  I am worthless, as you
say between every two lines.  Yet I'm a soul--you say that too, and so
on a par with those tragic souls in North Baxter Court.  Only, I feel
that you have no patience with me for getting underfoot when you're on
your way to big issues.  But do have patience, please--it means as much
to me as to anybody in your tenements.  I'm far down, and I'm
struggling for breath, and there seems to be no land in sight, nothing
to hold to except you.  I'm sorry if you dislike to have it so, but it
is so; your letters mean anchorage.  I'd blow out to sea if I didn't
have them to hope for.  You ought to be glad of that; you're doing
good, even if it is only to a flippant, shallow, undeveloped doll.  I
can call myself names--oh yes.

I have been slow answering, though likely you haven't noticed [McBirney
smiled queerly], because I have been doing a thing.  You said you
didn't advise me to go slumming--though I think you did--what else?
You said I ought to get beyond the view-point of a child; to realize
the world outside myself.

I sat down, and in my limited way--I mean that, sincerely, humbly--I
considered what I could do.  No slumming--and, in any case, there's
none to be done in Forest Gate.  So I thought I'd better clear my
vision with great books.  I went to Robert Halarkenden, the only
bookish person in my surroundings, and asked him about it--about what
would open up a larger horizon for me.  And he, not understanding much
what I was at, recommended two or three things which I have been and am
reading.  I thought I'd try to be a little more intelligent at least
before I answered your letter.  Don't thunder at me--I'm stumbling
about, trying to get somewhere.  I've read some William James and some
John Fiske, and I realize this--that I did more or less think God was a
very large, stately old man.  An "anthropomorphic deity."  Fiske says
that is the God of the lower peoples; that was my God.  Also I realize
this--that, somehow, some God, _the_ God if I can get to Him, might
help might be my only chance.  What do you think?  Is this any better?
Is it any step?  If it is, it's a very precarious one, for though it
thrills me to my bones sometimes to think that a real power might lift
me and bring me through, if I just ask Him, yet sometimes all that hope
goes and I drop in a heap mentally with no starch in me, no grip to try
to hold to any idea--just a heap of tired, dull mind and nerves, and
for my only desire that subtle, pushing desire to end it all quickly.
Once an odd thing happened.  When I was collapsed like that, just
existing, suddenly there was a feeling, a brand-new feeling of letting
go of the old rubbish that was and somebody else pervading it through
and through and taking all the responsibility.  And I held on tight,
something as I do to your letters, and the first thing, I was believing
that help was coming--and help came.  That was the best day I've had
since I saw those devil doctors.  Do you suppose that was faith?  Where
did it come from?  I'd been praying--but awfully queer prayers; I said
"Oh just put me through somehow; give me what I need; _I_ don't know
what it is; how can you expect me to--I'm a worm."  I suppose that was
irreverent, but I can't help it.  It was all I could say.  And that
came, whatever it was.  Do you suppose it was an answer to my blind,
gasping prayer?

Now I'm going to ask you to do a thing--but don't if it's the least
bother.  I don't want you to talk to me about myself just now, any
more.  And I want to hear more about North Baxter Court and such.  You
don't know how that stirred me.  What a worth-while life you lead,
doing actual, life-and-death things for people who bitterly need things
done.  It seems to me glorious.  I could give up everything to feel a
stream of genuine living through me such as you have, all your rushing
days.  Yes--I could--but yet, maybe I wouldn't make good.  But I do
care for "life, and life more abundantly," and the only way of getting
it that I've known has been higher fences to jump, and more dances and
better tennis and such.  I never once realized the way you get it--my!
what a big way.  And how heavenly it must be to give hope and health
and help to people.  I adore sending the maids out in the car, or
giving them my clothes.  I just selfishly like pleasing people, and I
think giving is the best amusement extant--and you give your very self
from morning to night.  You lucky person!  How could I do that?  Could
I?  Would I balk, do you think?  You say I'm not capable of loving
anything or anybody.  I think you are wrong.  I think I could, some
day, love somebody as hard as any woman or man has, ever.  Not Alec.
What will happen if I marry Alec and then do that--if the somebody
comes?  That would be a mess; the worst mess yet.  The end of the
world; but I forget; my world ends anyhow.  I'll be a stone image in a
chair--a cold, unloveable stone image with a hot, boiling heart.  I
won't--I _won't_.  This world is just five minutes, maybe--but me--in a
chair--ten years.  Oh--I _won't_.

What I want you to do is to write me just about the things you're
doing, and the people--the poor people, and the pitiful things and the
funny things--the atmosphere of it.  Could you forget that you don't
know me, and write as you would to a cousin or an old friend?  That
would be good.  That would help.  Only, anyhow, write, for without your
letters I can't tell what bomb may burst.  Don't thunder next time.
But even if you thunder, write.  The letters do guard the pistol--I
can't help it if you say not.  It has to be so now, anyway.  They guard
it.  Always--

AUGUST FIRST.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    Sept. 12th.

You're right.  It's idiotic to leap on people like that.  I knew I was
all wrong the moment after the letter went.  And when nothing came from
you--it wasn't pleasant.  I nearly wrote--I more nearly telegraphed
your Robert Halarkenden.  Do you mind if I say that for two days, just
lately--in fact, they were yesterday and the day before--I was on the
edge of asking for leave of absence to go west?  You see, if you had
done it, it was so plainly my fault.  And I had to know.  Then I
argued--it's ghastly, but I argued that it would be in the papers.  And
it wasn't.  Of course, it might possibly have been kept out.  But
generally it isn't.  My knowledge of happenings in Chicago and
thereabouts, since my last letter, would probably surprise you a
little.  Yes, I "noticed" that you didn't write--more than I noticed
the heat, which, now I think, has been bad.  But when you're pretty
sure you've blundered in a matter of life and death, you don't pray for
rain.

You've turned a corner.  _A_ corner.  _The_ corner--the big one, is
further along, and then there's the hill and the hot sun on the dusty
road.  You'll need your sporting instincts.  But you've got them.  So
had St. Paul and those others who furnished the groundwork for that
oft-mentioned Roman holiday.  That's religion, as I see it.  That's
what _they_ did; pushed on--faced things down--went out
smiling--"gentlemen unafraid."  It's like swimming--you can't go under
if you make the least effort.  That's the law--of physics and,
therefore, of God.  The experience you tell of is exactly what you have
the right to expect.  The prayer you said; that's the only way to come
at it, yourself--talking--with that Other.  There's a poem--you
know--the man who "caught at God's skirts and prayed."

But you said not to write about you.  All right then, I've been to the
theatre, the one at the end of our block.  That may strike you as tame.
But you don't know Mrs. Jameson.  She's the relict of the late senior
warden.  A disapproving party, trimmed with jet beads and a lorgnette.
A few days after the rector left me in charge she triumphed into the
office, rattled the beads and got behind the lorgnette.  She presumed I
was the new curate.  No loop-hole out of that.  I had been seen at the
theatre--not once nor twice.  I could well believe it.  The late
Colonel Jameson, it appeared, had not approved of clergymen attending
playhouses.  She did not approve of it herself.  She presumed I
realized the standing of this parish in the diocese?  She dwelt on the
force of example to the young.  Of course, the opera--but that was
widely different.  She would suggest--she did suggest--not in the least
vaguely.  Sometime, perhaps, I would come to luncheon?  She had really
rather interested herself in the sermon yesterday--a little abrupt,
possibly, at the close--still, of course, a young man, and not very
experienced--besides, the Doctor had spoiled them for almost anybody
else.  Naturally.

The room widened after she had gone.  You know these ladies with the
thick atmosphere.

That night I went to the theatre.  There's a stock company there for
the summer and I have come to know one of the actors.  He belongs to
us--was married in the church last summer.  The place was
packed--always is--it's a good company.  And Everett--he's the
one--kept the house shouting.  He's the regular funny man.  The play
that week was very funny anyhow--one of those things the billboards
call a "scream."  It was just that.  Everett was the play.  He stormed
and galloped through his scenes until everybody was helpless.  People
like him; it's his third summer here.  Well, at the end, nobody went.
A lot of lads in the gallery began calling for Everett.  We're common
here; and not many of the quality patronize stock.  Soon he pushed out
from behind the curtain and made one of those fool speeches which
generally fall flat.  Only this one didn't.

Then I went "behind."  The dressing rooms at the Alhambra are not
home-like.  Bare walls with a row of pegs along one side--a couple of
chairs--a table piled with make-up stuff and over it a mirror flanked
by electric lights with wire netting around them.  Not gay.  And grease
paint, at close range, is not attractive.  A man shouldn't cry after
he's made up--that's a theatrical commandment, or ought to be.
Probably a man shouldn't anyhow.  But some do.  I imagined Everett had,
and that he'd done it with his head in his arms and his arms in the
litter of the big table.  I think I shook hands with him--one does
inane things sometimes--but I don't know what I said.  I had something
like your experience--I just wasn't there for a minute or two.

Afterward, I went home with him--a long half-hour on the trolley, then
up three flights into "light housekeeping" rooms in the back.  There
was cold meat on the table, and bread.  The janitor's wife, good soul,
had made a pot of coffee.  "Light housekeeping" is a literal
expression, let me tell you, and doctor's bills make it lighter.  I
followed him into the last room of the three.  It looked different from
the way I remembered it the afternoon before.  When he turned the gas
higher I saw why--the bed was gone--one of those stretcher things takes
less room.  Besides, they say it's better.  So there she was--all that
he had left of all that he had had--the girl he'd been mad about and
married in our church a year ago.  He wasn't even with her when she
died; there was the Sunday afternoon rehearsal to attend.  She wouldn't
let him miss that.  "Go on," she told him.  "I'll wait for you."  She
didn't wait.

And he faced it down, he jammed it through, that young chap did--and
was funny, oh, as funny as you can think, for hours, in front of
hundreds of people.  He never missed a cue, never bungled a line, and
all the time seeing, up there in the light-housekeeping rooms, in the
last room of them all, how she lay, in the utter silence.

Perhaps I shall come across a braver thing than that before I die, but
I doubt it.  I tried, of course, to get him not to do it.  But it was
very simple to him.  It was his job.  Nobody else knew the part; it was
too late to substitute.  The rest would lose their salaries if they
closed down for the week, and God knew they needed them.  So he said
nothing--and was funny.

I don't know what you'd call it, but I think you know why I've told it
to you.  There's a splendor about it and a glory.  To do one's
job--isn't that the big thing, after all?

Meantime, mine's waiting for me on the other side of this desk.  He has
laid hands on every article in the room at least three times, and for
the last few minutes has been groaning very loud.  I think you'd like
him--he's so alive.

Your letter saves me the cost of the western papers, and now that I
know you'll--but you said not to write about you.

The Job has stopped groaning, and wants to know if I'm "writing all
night just because, or, for the reason that."


It's night now--big night, and so still down-town here.  Sometimes I
stay up late to realize that I'm alive.  The days are so crammed with
happenings.  And late at night seems so wide and everlasting.  You've
got the idea that I do things.  Well, I don't.  There are whole rows of
days when it seems just a muddle of half-started attempts--a manner of
hopeless confusion.  There's a good deal of futility in it, first and
last.  That boy tonight for instance.  And, sometimes, I get to
wondering if, after all, one has the right to meddle in other people's
lives.  It's curious, but with you I've been quite sure.  Always it has
been as clear as light to me that you must come through this--that it
will be right.  I don't know how.  Even that day you came, I was sure.
As soon as _you_ are sure, the thing is done.  That man isn't to be
worried about--or the doctors.  Easy for me to say, isn't it?

Are you interested to know that I'm to have my building on the West
Side?  There was a meeting today.  It's the best thing that's happened
yet, that is, parochially.  Maybe she's human after all.  I mean Mrs.
Jameson.  She's going to pay for it.

I think that's all.  You can't say I've tried to thunder at you this
time.  I really didn't last time.  I've known all along that you
wouldn't be impressed by thunder.  The answer to that young devil's
question seems to be: I'm writing "for the reason that," and not, "just
because."  Every time I think of that boy's name I have to laugh.

GEOFFREY McBIRNEY.


September 17th.

MY DEAR MR. McBIRNEY--

What _is_ the boy's name?  It must be queer if you laugh every time you
think of it.  Don't forget to tell me.

Your letters leave me breathless with things to say back.  I suppose
that's inspiration, to make people feel full of new ideas, and that
you're crammed with it.  In the first place I'm in a terrible hurry to
tell you that something really big has touched the edge of my anaemic
life, and that I have recognized it; I'm pleased that I recognized it.
Listen--please--this is it.  Robert Halarkenden; I must tell you who he
is.  Thirteen years ago my uncle was on a camping trip in Canada and
one of the guides was a silent Scotchman, mixed in with French-Canadian
habitants and half-breed Indians.  My uncle was interested in him--he
was picturesque and conspicuous--but he would not talk about himself.
Another guide told Uncle Ted all that anyone has ever known about him,
till yesterday.  He was a guardian of the club and lived alone in a
camp in the wildest part of it, and in summer he guided one or two
parties, by special permission of the club secretary.  This other guide
had been to his cabin and told my uncle that it was full of books; the
guide found the number astounding--"_effrayant_."  Also he had a garden
of forest flowers, and he knew everything about every wild thing that
grew in the woods.  Well, Uncle Ted was so taken with the man that he
asked the secretary about him, and the secretary shook his head.  All
that he could tell was that he was a remarkable woodsman and a perfect
guide and that he had been recommended to him in the first place by Sir
Archibald Graye of Toronto, who had refused to give reasons but asked
as a personal favor that the man should be given any job he wished.
This is getting rather a long story.  Of course you know that the man
was Halarkenden and you are now to know that my uncle brought him to
Forest Gate as his gardener.  He thought over it a day when Uncle Ted
asked him and then said that he had lived fifteen years in the forest
and that now he would like to live in a garden; he would come if Uncle
Ted would let him make a garden as beautiful as he wished.  Uncle Ted
said yes, and he has done it.  You have never seen such a garden--no
one ever has.  It is four acres and it lies on the bluff above the
lake; that was a good beginning.  If you had seen the rows of lilies
last June, with pink roses blossoming through them, you would have
known that Robert Halarkenden is a poet and no common man.  Of course
we have known it all along, but in thirteen years one gets to take
miracles for granted.  Yesterday I went down into the wild garden which
lies between the woods and the flowers--this is a large place--and I
got into the corner under the pines, and lay flat on the pink-brown
needles, all warm with splashes of September sunlight, and looked at
the goldenrod and purple asters swinging in the breeze and wondered if
I could forget my blessed bones and live in the beauty and joy of just
things, just the lovely world.  Or whether it wouldn't be simpler to
pull a trigger when I went back to my room, instead of kicking and
struggling day after day to be and feel some other way.  I get so sick
and tired of fighting myself--you don't know.  Anyhow, suddenly there
was a rustle in the gold and purple hedge, and there was Robert
Halarkenden.  I wish I could make you see him as he stood there, in his
blue working blouse, a pair of big clippers in his hand, his thick,
half-gray, silvery thatch of hair bare and blowing around his scholar's
forehead, his bony Scotch face solemn and quiet.  His deep-set eyes
were fixed with such a gentle gaze on me.  We are good friends, Robin
and I.  I call him Robin; he taught me to when I was ten, so I always
have.  "You're no feeling well, lassie?" he asked; he has known me a
long time, you see.  And I suddenly sat up and told him about my old
bones.  I didn't mean to; I have told no one but you; not Uncle Ted
even.  But I did.  And "Get up, lassie, and sit on the bench.  I will
talk to you," said Robin.  So we both sat down on the rustic bench
under the blowy pines, and I cried like a spring torrent, and Robin
patted my hand steadily, which seems an odd thing for one's uncle's
gardener to do, till I got through.  Then I laughed and said, "Maybe
I'll shoot myself."  And he answered calmly, "I hope not, lassie."
Then I said nothing and he said nothing for quite a bit, and then he
began talking gently about how everybody who counted had to go through
things.  "A character has to be hammered into the likeness of God," he
said.  "A soul doesn't grow beautiful by sunlight and rich earth," and
he looked out at his scarlet and blue and gold September garden and
smiled a little.  "We're no like the flowers."  Then he considered
again, and then he asked if it would interest me at all to hear a
little tale, and I told him yes, of course.  "Maybe it will seem
companionable to know that other people have faced a bit of trouble,"
he said.  And then he told me.  I don't know if you will believe it; it
seems too much of a drama to be credible to me, if I had not heard
Robert Halarkenden tell it in his entirely simple way, sitting in his
workingman's blouse, with the big clippers in his right hand.  Thirty
years before he had been laird of a small property in Scotland, and
about to marry the girl whom he cared for.  Then suddenly he found that
she was in love with his cousin--with whom he had been brought up, and
who was as dear as a brother--and his cousin with her.  In almost no
more words than I am using he told me of the crisis he lived through
and how he had gone off on the mountains and made his decision.  He
could not marry the girl if she did not love him.  His cousin was heir
to his property; he decided to disappear and let them think he was
dead, and so leave the two people whom he loved to be happy and
prosperous without him.  He did that.  Two or three people had to know
to arrange things, and Sir Archibald Graye, of Toronto, was one, but
otherwise he simply dropped out of life and buried himself in Canadian
forests, and then, just as he was growing hungry for some things he
could not get in the forest, my uncle came along and offered him what
he wanted.

"But how could you?" I asked him.  "You're a gentleman; how could you
make yourself a servant, and build a wall between yourself and nice
people?"

Robin smiled at me in a shadowy, gentle way he has.  "Those walls are a
small matter of dust, lassie," he said.  "A real man blows on them and
they're tumbling.  And service is what we're here for.  And all people
are nice people, you'll find."  And when, still unresigned, I said
more, he went on, very kindly, a little amused it seemed.  "Why should
it be more important for me to be happy than for those two?  I hope
they're happy," he spoke wistfully.  "The lad was a genius, but a wild
lad too," and he looked thoughtful.  "Anyhow, it was for me to decide,
you see, and a man couldn't decide ungenerously.  That would be to tie
one's self to a gnawing beast, which is what is like the memory of your
own evil deed.  Take my word for it, lassie, there was no other way."

"It seems all exaggerated," I threw at him; "there was no sense in your
giving up your home and traditions and associations--it was
unreasonable, fantastic!  And to those two who had taken away your
happiness anyhow."

I wish you could have heard how quietly and naturally Robert
Halarkenden answered me.  He considered a moment first, in his Scotch
way, and then he said: "Do not you see, lassie, that's where it was
simple, verra simple.  Houses and lands and a place in the world are
small affairs after love, and mine was come to shipwreck.  So it seemed
to me I'd try living free of the care of possessions.  I'd try the old
rule, that a man to find his life must lay it down.  It was verra
simple, as I'm telling you, once I'd got the fancy for it.  Laying down
a life is not such a hard business; it's only to make up your mind.
And I did indeed find life in doing it, I was care-free as few are in
those forest years."

I think you would have agreed with me, Mr. McBirney, that the
middle-aged, lined face of my uncle's gardener was beautiful as he said
those things.  "Why did you leave the forest?" I asked him then; you
may believe I'd forgotten about my bones by now.

"Ah, you'll find it grows irksome to be coddling one's own soul
indefinitely," he confided to me with the pretty gentleness which
breaks through his Scotch manner once in a while.  "One gets tired of
one's self, the spoiled body.  I hungered to do something for somebody
besides Robert Halarkenden.  I'd taken charge of a lad with
tuberculosis one summer up there, and I'd cured him, and I had a
thought I could do the same for other lads.  I wanted to get near a
city to have that chance.  I've been doing it here," and then he drew
back into his Scotchness and was suddenly cold and reserved.  But I
knew that was shyness, and because he had spoken of his secret good
deeds and was uncomfortable.

So I was not frozen.  "You have!"  I pounced on him.  And I made him
tell me how, besides his unending gardening, besides his limitless
reading, he has been, all these years, working in the city in his few
spare hours, spending himself and his wages--wages!--and helping,
healing, giving all the time--like you----

I felt the most torturing envy of my life as I listened to that.  _I_
wanted to be generous and wonderful and self-forgetting, and have a
great, free heart "of spirit, fire, and dew."  _I_ wanted the something
in me that made that still radiance of Robert Halarkenden's eyes.  You
see?  "I"--always "I."  That's the way I'm made.  Utterly selfish.  I
can't even see heavenliness but I want to snatch it for myself.  Robin
never thought once that he was getting heavenliness--he only thought
that he was giving help.  Different from me.  To all this add the
significant fact that "Villette" is an autobiographical novel, which
"records the most vivid passages in Miss Bronté's own sad heart's
history," not a few of the incidents being "literal transcripts" from
the darkest chapter of her own life, and the light which the consideration
of this fact throws upon her relations with members of the family will
help us to apprehend the stand-point from which the Hégers judge
Miss Bronté and her work, and to excuse, if not to justify, a natural
resentment against one who has presented them in a decidedly bad
light.

_How_ bad we began to realize when, during the ensuing chat, we
called to mind just what she had written of them.I don't
want to give all that up.  Have I got to?  Have I _got_ to "lay down my
life" to find it?  For, somehow, cling as I will to all these things,
something is pushing, pushing back of them, stronger than them.  You
started it.  I want the big things now--I want to be worth while.  But
yet clothes and gayety and horses and automobiles--I'm glued tight in
that round.  I don't believe I can tear loose.  I don't believe I want
to.  Do you see--I'm in torment.  And--silly idiot that I am--it's not
for me to decide anything.  I'm turning into a ton of stone--I'll be a
horrible unhuman monster and have to give it all up and have nothing in
return.  Soon I'll lay down my life and _not_ find it.  I won't.  I'll
pull the trigger.  Will I?  Do you see how I vacillate and shiver and
boil?  This is my soul I'm pouring out to you.  I hope you don't mind
hot liquids.  What you wrote about the actor made me sit still a whole
half-hour without stirring a finger, with your letter in my hands.  It
was glorious--there's no question.  You meant it to inspire me.  But he
had a job.  I haven't.  Back to me again, you see--unending me.  Do you
know about the man who used to say "Now let's go into the garden and
talk about me"?

In any case, thank you for telling me that story.  I'm glad to know
that there are people like that--several of them.  I know you and Robin
anyhow, but the actor makes the world seem fuller of courage and
worth-whileness.  I wish a little of it would leak into--oh, _me_
again.  _Me_ is getting "irksome," as Robin said.  Remember to tell me
the boy's name.

Yours gratefully if unsatisfactorily,
  AUGUST FIRST.

P. S.--Robert Halarkenden isn't his real name.  It's his grandmother's
father's name, and Welsh.  I don't know the real one.

P. S. No. 2.  If it isn't inconsistent, and if you think I'm worth
while, you might pray just a scrap too.  That I may get to be like you
and Robin.

P. S. No. 3.  But you know it's the truth that I'm balky at giving up
everything in sight.  I'd hate myself in bad clothes.  _Can't_ I have
good ones and yet be worth while?  Oh, I see.  It doesn't matter if
they're good or bad so long as I don't care too much.  But I do care.
Then they hamper me--eh?  Is that the idea?  This is the last
postscript to this letter.  Write a quick one--I'm needing it.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    Sept. 23d.

I don't think it matters what his real name is.  I'd been thinking all
along, that he was just a convenient fiction, useful for an address,
and now he turns out about the realest person going.  Sometimes I
imagine perhaps it will be like that when we get through with this
world and wake up into what's after--that the things we've passed over
pretty much here and been vague about will blaze out as the eternal
verities.  A miracle happened that day in your September garden.
You've surely read "_Sur la Branche_"--that book written around a
woman's belief in the Providence of God?  Well, that's what I mean.
Why did Halarkenden come down out of the woods into your uncle's
garden?  Why did you tell him, of all people?  Why was it you who got
through to the truth about him?  Why did it all happen just the minute
you most needed it?  Of course I believe it--every word, exactly as you
wrote it.  It's impossible things like that which do happen and help us
to bear the flatly ordinary.  It's the incredible things that shout
with reality.  Miracles ought to be ordinary affairs--we don't believe
in them because we're always straining every nerve to keep them from
happening.  We get so confused in the continual muddle of our own
mistakes that when something does come straight through, as it was
intended to do, we're like those men who heard the voice of God that
day and told one another anxiously that it thundered.

Just think what went to make up those five minutes which gave you the
lift you had to have--that young Scotchman, beating back his devils up
in the lonely mountains all those years ago--that's when it started.
And then fetch it down to now; his leaving home forever--and his exile
in the woods--considerably different from a camping trip--the silent
days, worse--the nights.  And all the time his mind going back and back
to what he'd left behind--his home, seeing every little corner of
it--you know the tortures of imagination--his friends--the girl--always
the girl--wondering why, and why, and why.  Think of the days and
months without seeing one of your own kind.  He had to have books; his
wild garden had to blossom.  That man wasn't "coddling" his soul--he
was ripping and tearing it into shreds and then pounding it together
again with a hammer and with nails.  All alone.  That's the hardest, I
suppose.  And then, when it was all done and the worst of the pain and
the torment passed, away up there in the forests, Robert
Halarkenden--it _is_ true, isn't it?--he rose from the dead, and being
risen, he took a hand in the big business of the world.  And his latest
job is you.  Has that occurred to you?  I don't mean to say that he
went through all that just to be a help to you.  But I do say that if
he hadn't gone through it he wouldn't have been a help to anybody.  He
did it.  You needed to find out about it.  He told you.  It got
through.  Things sometimes do.

Suppose he hadn't come down from the mountains that day--that they'd
found him there--that he hadn't had the nerve to face it?  Who would
have cured the tuberculosis lad--who would have sent the children
south--who would have brushed through your uncle's garden hedge in
Forest Gate, Illinois, and told you what you needed to be told?  If
_you_ should turn out not to have the nerve--if, some day you--?  Then
what about _your_ job?  Nobody can ever do another person's real work,
and, if it isn't done, I think it's likely we'll have to keep company
with our undone, unattempted jobs forever.  Mostly rather little jobs
they are, too--so much the more shame for having dodged them.  You say
that you haven't got one.  Maybe not, just now.  But how do you know it
isn't right around the corner?  Did Halarkenden have you in mind those
years he fought with beasts?  No--not you--it was the girl back in
Scotland.  But here you are, getting the benefit of it.  It's a small
place, the world, and we're tied and tangled together--it won't do to
cut loose.  That spoils things, and it's all to come right at the last,
if we'll only let it.

Possibly you'll think it's silly or childish, but I believe maybe this
life with its queer tasks and happenings is just the great, typical
Fairy Story, with Heaven at the last.  They're true--that's why
unspoiled children love fairy stories.  They begin, they march with
incident, best of all, one finds always at the end that "'They' lived
happily ever afterward."  "They," is you, and I hope it's me.  The
trouble with people mainly is that they're too grown up.  Who knows
what children see and hear in the summer twilights, on the way home
from play?  There's the big, round moon, tangled in the tree-tops--one
remembers that--and there's the night wind, idling down the dusty
street.  Surely, though, more than that, but we've forgotten.  Isn't
growing up largely a process of forgetting, rather than of getting,
knowledge?  Of course there's cube-root and partial payments and fear
and pain and love--one does acquire that sort of thing--but doesn't it
maybe cost the losing of the right point of view?  And that's too
expensive.  Naturally, or, perhaps, unnaturally, we can't afford to be
caught sailing wash-tub boats across the troubled seas of orchard
grass, or watching for fairies in the moonlight, but can't we somehow
continue to want to give ourselves to similar adventure?  There's a
good deal of difference, first and last, between childishness and
childlikeness--enough to make the one plain foolishness, and the other
the qualification for entrance into the Kingdom of God.  I'd rather
have let cube-root go and have kept more of my imagination.  The other
day, in the middle of a catechism I was holding in the parish school, a
small youngster rose to his feet and solemnly assured the company
present that "the pickshers of God in the church" were "all wrong."
Naturally we argued, which was a mistake.  He got me.  "God," said he,
"is a Spirit, and spirits don't look like those colored pickshers in
the windows."  You see, he knew.  He still remembers.  But the higher
mathematics and a few brisk sins will assist him to forget.  Too bad.
Still, when we get back home again surely it will all "come back" like
a forgotten language.

Meantime there are two hundred dollar frocks to consider, as well as
miracles in gardens.  And that's all right, so long as the frocks are
worthy the background, which I venture to suppose, of course, they are.
The subject of clothes interests me a good deal just now, as I'm
engaged in living on my salary.  It's all a question of what one can
afford, financially and spiritually.  I gather you're not a bankrupt
either way.  I don't recall anything in Holy Writ that seems to require
dowdiness as necessary to salvation.  If one's got money it's
fortunate--if money's got one--that's different.  Which is my
platitudinous way of agreeing with the last postscript of your letter.
I know you're getting to look at things properly again.  To lose one's
life certainly does not mean to kill it, and to give it away one
needn't fling it to the dogs.  And when you do connect with your job
you'll recognize it and you'll know how to do it.  I'd like to watch
you.  Once get your imagination going properly again and the days are
rose and gold.  Oh, not all of them--but a good many--enough.

I nearly forgot about Theodore.  There's humor for you--Theodore, "The
Gift of God"--that's the name they gave him sixteen good years ago
somewhere over in Scotland as you'd have guessed from the rest of it,
which is Alan McGregor.  He is an orphan, is Theodore, but he doesn't
wear the uniform of the Orphans' Home--far from it!  He wears soft
raiment and lives in kings' houses, or what amounts to the same thing.
I am engaged in exorcising the devil out of him and in teaching him
enough Latin to get into a decent school at the earliest instant.  The
Latin goes well--three nights a week from eight to half-past nine.  But
the devil takes advantage of every one of those nine points of law
which possession is said to give, and doesn't go at all.  I am the only
living person who knows how to define "charm."  Charm is the most
conspicuous attribute of the devil, and young McGregor has got it.
Likewise other qualities, the ones, for instance, which make his name
so rather awfully funny.  You'd have to know Theodore to appreciate
just how funny.

It was the rector who "wished" him on to me.  The rector is one of his
guardians, and being Theodore's guardian is a business which requires
at least one undersecretary, and I'm that.  Theodore and hot water have
the strongest affinity known to psychological chemistry.  So I'm kept
busy.  But it's all the keenest sport you can imagine, and it's going
to be tremendously worth while if I can make a success of it.  He's the
right kind of bad, and he's getting ready to grow into a great, big,
straight out-and-outer, with a mind like lightning and a heart like one
of the sons of God.  But that kind is always the worst risk.  He has
the weapons to get him through the fight with splendor, only they're
every one two-edged, and you have to be careful with swords that cut
both ways.  His father was an inventor genius and there are bales of
money and already it has begun to press down on him a little.  Still,
that may be the exact right thing.  He has talked about it once or
twice as a nice boy would.  There's a place on the other side which
comes to him, with factories and such things.  He wanted to know
wouldn't it be his business to see that the working people were
properly looked after; I gathered he's been reading books, trying to
find out.  And then he got suddenly shy and very bright red as to the
face, and cleared out.  So far, so good, but it isn't far enough.  Not
yet.

That's my present job.  You'll get yours.

Wasn't it wonderful--I mean Halarkenden!  When I think of him and then
of myself it gives me a good deal of a jounce.  It surprises me that I
ever had the conceit to think I could handle this parson proposition.
Lately I've not been over-cheerful about it.  That's one reason why
your letter did me good.

I hear the Gift of God coming up the stairs, and I've neglected to look
up the Future Periphrastic Conjugation and that ticklish difference
between the Gerund and the Gerundive, which is vital.

One thing more--your second postscript.  You didn't suppose that I
don't, did you?  Only, not like me!

GEOFFREY McBIRNEY.


The man took the letter down the three flights to the post-box at the
entrance of the Parish House and dropped it, with a certain
deliberation, as if he were speaking to someone whom he cared for, with
a certain hesitation, as if he were not sure that he had spoken well,
into the box.  As he mounted the stairs again his springing gait was
slower than usual.  It was very late, but he drew a long chair close
and poked the hard-coal fire till it glowed to him like a bed of
jewels, all alive and stirred to their hot hearts; opals and topazes
and rubies and cairngorms and the souls of blue sapphires and purple
amethysts playing ghostly over the rest.  He dropped into the chair and
the tall, black-clothed figure fell into lax lines; his long fingers,
the fingers of an artist, a musician, lay on the arms of the chair
limply as if disconnected from any central power; there was surely
despair, hopelessness, in the man's attitude.  His gray eyes glowed
from under the straight black brows with much of the hidden flame, the
smouldering intensity of the coals at which he gazed.  He sat so
perhaps half an hour, staring moodily at the orange heart of the fire.
Then suddenly, with a smothered half-syllable, with a hand thrown out
impatiently, he was on his feet with a bound, and with that his arms
were against the tall mantel and his head dropped in them, and he was
gazing down so and talking aloud, rapidly, disjointedly, out of his
loneliness, to his friend, the red fire.  "How can I--how dare I?  A
square peg in a round hole--and the extra corners all weakness and
wickedness.  Selfishness--incompetence--I to set up to do the Lord's
special work!  I to preach to others--If it were not blasphemy it would
be a joke--a ghastly joke.  I can't go on--I have to pull out.
Yet--how can I?  They'll think--people will think--oh what _does_ it
matter what people will think?  Only--if it hurt the rector--if it hurt
the work?  And Theodore--but--someone else would do him--more good than
I can.  There ought to be--an older man--to belong.  Surely God will
look after His gift--His gift!"  The quick lightning of the brilliant
eyes, which in this man often took the place of a smile, flashed; then
the changing face was suddenly grim with a wrenching feeling, yet
bright with a wind of tenderness not to be held back.  The soul came
out of hiding and wrote itself on the muscles of the face.
"She--that's it--that's the gist of it--fool that I am.  To think--to
dream--to dare to hope.  But I _don't_ hope," he brought out savagely,
and flung his shoulders straight and caught the wooden shelf with a
grip.  "I don't hope--I just"--the voice dropped, and his head fell on
his arms again.  "I won't say it.  I'm not utterly mad yet."  He picked
up the poker and stirred the fire, and put on coal from a scuttle, and
went and sat down again in the chair.  "Something has got to be
decided," he spoke again to the coals in the grate.  "I've got to know
if I ought to stay at this job, or if it's an impertinence."  For
minutes then he was silent, intent, it seemed, on the fire.  Then again
he spoke in the low, clear voice whose simplicity, whose purity
reached, though he did not know it, the inmost hearts of the people to
whom he preached.  "I will make a test of her," he said, telling the
fire his decision.  "If she is safe and wins through to the real
things, I'll believe that I've been let do that, and that I'm fit for
work.  If she doesn't--if I can't pull off that one job which is so
distinctly put up to me--I'll leave."  With a swing he had put out the
lights in the big, bare living-room and gone into the bedroom beyond.
He tried to sleep, but the tortured nerves, the nerves of a high-bred
race-horse, eager, ever ready for action, would not be quiet.  The
great, rich city, the great poverty-stricken masses seething through
it, the rushing, grinding work of the huge parish, had eaten into his
youth and strength enormously already in six months.  He had given
himself right and left, suffered with the suffering, as no human being
can and keep balance, till now he was, unknowingly, at the edge of a
breakdown.  And the distrust of his own fitness, the forgetfulness
that, under one's own limitations, is an unlimited reserve which is the
only hope of any of us in any real work; this was the form of the
retort of his overwrought nerves.  Yet at last he slept.

Meantime as he slept the hours crept away and it was morning and an
early postman came and opened the box with a rattling key and took out
three letters which the deaconess had sent to her scattered family, and
one, oddly written, which the janitor had executed for his mother in
Italy, and the letter to the girl.  From hand to hand it sped, and
away, and was hidden in a sack in a long mail-train, and at last,
Robert Halarkenden, on the 25th of September, came down the garden
path, and the girl, reading in the wild garden, laid aside her book and
watched him as he came, and thought how familiar and pleasant a sight
was the gaunt, tall figure, pausing on the gravelled walk to touch a
blossom, to lift a fallen branch, as lovingly as a father would care
for his children.  "A letter, lassie," Robert Halarkenden said, and
held out the thick envelope; and then did an extraordinary thing for
Robert Halarkenden.  He looked at the address in the unmistakable, big,
black writing and looked at the girl and stood a moment, with a
question in his eyes.  The girl flushed.  "Checkmate in six moves" was
quite enough to say to this girl; one did not have to play the game
brutally to a finish.

She laughed then.  "I knew you must have wondered," she said, and with
that she told the story of the letters.

"It's no wrong," Robert Halarkenden considered.

The girl jumped to her answer.  "Wrong!" she cried, "I should say not.
It's salvation--hope--life.  Maybe all that; at the least it's the
powers of good, fighting for me.  Something of the sort--I don't know,"
she finished lamely.  With that she was deep in her letter and Robert
Halarkenden had moved a few yards and was tending a shrub that seemed
to need nursing.


October the Sixth.

MY DEAR MR. McBIRNEY--

"The night wind idling down the dusty street"--You do make patterns out
of the dictionary which please me.  But I know that irritates you, for
words are not what you are paying attention to--of course--if they
were, yours wouldn't be so wonderful.  It's the wind of the spirit that
blows them into beautiful shapes for you, I suppose.  To let that go,
for it's immaterial--you think I might have a job?  I?  That I might do
a real thing for anybody ever?  If you only knew me.  If you only could
see the mountains of whipped cream and Maraschino cherries, the cliffs
of French clothes and automobiles, the morasses of afternoon teas and
dances and calls and luxury in general that lie between me and any
usefulness.  It's the maddest dream that I, with my bones and my money
and my bringing up, all my crippling ailments, could ever, _ever_ climb
those mountains and cliffs and wade through those bogs.  It's mad, I
say, you visionary, you man on the other side of all that, who are
living, who are doing things.  I never can--I never can.  And yet, it's
so terrible, it's so horrible, so frightening, so desperate, sometimes,
to be drowning in luxury.  I woke in the night last night and before my
eyes had opened I had flung out my hand and cried out loud in the dark:
"What shall I do with my life--Oh what shall I do with my life?"  And
it isn't just me--though that's the burning, close question to my
simple selfishness.  But it's a lot of women--a lot.  We're waking all
over the world.  We want to help, to be worth while; to help, to count.
It won't do much longer to know French and Italian and play middling
tennis and be on the Altar Society.  You know what I mean.  All
that--yes--but beyond that the power which a real person carries into
all that to make it big.  The stronger you are the better your work is.
I want to be strong, to be useful, to touch things with a personality
which will move them, make them go, widen them.  How?  How can I?  What
can I do, ever?  Oh what _can_ I do--_what_ can I do--with my life!  I
thought that day in August that it was only my illness, and my tie to
an unloved man, but it's more than that.  You have broadened the field
of my longing, my restlessness, till it covers--everything.  Help me
then, for you have waked me to this want, question, agony.  It's not
only if I may kill my life--it's what I can do if I don't kill it.
What can I do?  Do you feel how that's a sharp, vital question to me?
It's out of the deep I'm calling to you--do you know that?  And it's my
voice, but it's the voice of thousands--_now_ you're in trouble.  Now
you wish you'd let me alone, for here we are at the woman question!  I
can see you shy at that.  But I'm not going to pin you, for you only
contracted to help me; I'll shake off the other thousands for the
present.  And, anyhow, can you help me?  Oh, you have--you've delayed
my--crime, I suppose it is.  You've given me glimpses of vistas; you've
set me reading books; widened every sort of horizon; you've even made
me dream of a vague, possible work, for me.  Yes, I've been dreaming
that; a specific thing which I might do, even I, if I could cancel some
house-parties, and a trip to France, and the hunting.  But even if I
could possibly give up those things, there's Uncle Ted.  He's not well,
and my dream would involve leaving him.  And I'm all he has.  We two
are startlingly alone.  After all, you see, it's a dream; I'm not big
enough to do more than that--dream idly.  Robin has a queer scheme just
now.  There's a bone-ologist here, the most famous one of the planet,
exported from France, to cure the small son of one of the trillionaires
with which this place reeks, and Robin insists that I see that
bone-ologist about my bones.  It's unpleasant, and I hate doctors and I
don't know if I will.  But Robin is very firm and insists on my telling
Uncle Ted otherwise.  I can't bother Uncle Ted.  So I may do it.  Yet,
if the great man pronounced, as he would, that the other doctors were
right, it would be almost going through the first hideous shock over
again.  So I may _not_ do it.  I must stop writing.  I have a guest and
must do a party for her.  She's a California heiress--oh fabulously
rich--much richer than I.  With splendid bones.  I gave her a dance
last night and this morning she's off on my best hunter with my
fiancé--save the mark!  He admires her, and she certainly is a nice
girl, and lovely to look at, with eyes like those young mediaeval,
brainless Madonnas.  I'm so glad to have someone else play with
him--with Alec.  I dread him so.  I hate, I _hate_ to let him--kiss me.
There.  If you were a real man I couldn't have exploded into that.
You're only the spirit of a thunder-storm, you know; I'll never see you
again on earth; I can say anything.  I do say anything, don't I?  I can
say--I do say--that you have dragged me from the bottomless pit; that
if any good comes of me it is your good--that you--being a shadow, a
memory, an incident--are yet the central figure of this world to me.
If I fall back into the pit, that is not your affair--mine, mine only.
The light that shines around you for me is the only kindly light that
may save me.  But it may not.  I may fall back.  I have the toy in the
drawer yet--covered with letters.  Good-by--I am yours always,

AUGUST FIRST.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    October 8th.

You'll never see me again?  You'll see me in three days unless you stop
me with a telegram.

I have a curious feeling that all this has happened before--my sitting
here in front of the fire writing to you at one o'clock in the morning.
They say it's one part of the brain working a shade ahead of the rest.
I don't believe that.  I do not believe my brain is working at all.
It's spinning around.  For days I've been living in the Fourth
Dimension--something like that.  It changes the values to have a new
universe whirl up around one.  New heavens and a new earth--that's it.
I have given up trying to analyze it.  Even if I didn't want to tell
you I couldn't help it.  I'm beyond that now, and--helpless.  I never
dreamed of its being like this.  I never thought much about it, except
vaguely, as anybody does, and here it's come and snatched away the
world.

I don't know how this is going to get itself said.  But I can't stop
it.  That frightens me, rather; I've been used to ordering myself about
or, at least, to feeling that I could.  But that seems to be over.  I
don't pretend that I didn't foresee it, or rather that I didn't
recognize it right at the beginning.  What I did was to put off
reckoning with it.

I see that I'm going to say things wrong.  You have got to overlook
that; I can't help it.  I told you my brain wasn't working.  For days
I've been in a maze.  Then your letter came, late this afternoon, and
that settled it.  Do you know what you said?  Do you?  You said: "If
you were a real man, I wouldn't have exploded like this."  A real
man--what do you _think_ I am?  That's what I want to know.  You'll
find out I'm real enough before you and I are done.  Do you suppose
that I have been reading your letters all these weeks--those letters in
which you said yourself you put your soul--as though they were stock
quotations?  Did you think you were a numbered "case," that I was
keeping notes about you in that neat filing-cabinet down in the office?
Well, it hasn't been exactly that way.

Do you remember that day you were here?  How it rained--how dark it
was?  Why, I've never seen you, really.  I'm always trying to imagine
your face.

I've got to talk to you--some things can't be written.  You won't stop
me.  Do you suppose you can?  You've got to give me a chance to
talk--that's only square.  No, I don't mean all that.  I don't quite
know what I'm saying.  I mean, you will let me come, won't you?  I'll
go away again after; you needn't be afraid.  That's fair, isn't it?

You see, it's been strange from the start, and so quick.  You, in the
middle of the storm that day--the things you said--the fearful tangle
you were in.  And then the letters--the wonderful letters!  And we
thought we were keeping it all impersonal.  You, with your blazing
individuality--you, impersonal!  I can't imagine your face, but you've
stripped the masks and conventions off your soul for me--I've looked at
that.  I couldn't help it, could I?  I couldn't stop.  I can't now.  I
can't look at anything else.  There isn't anything else--it fills my
world--it's blotted out what used to be reality.

You're hundreds of miles away--what are you doing?  Sitting, with your
white dress a rosy blur in the lamplight, reading, thinking,
afraid--frightened at the doctors--shrinking at the thought of that
damned, pawing beast?  We'll drop that last--this isn't the time for
that--not yet.  Miles away you are--and yet you're here--the real you
that you've sent me in the letters.  Always you are here.  I listen to
your voice--I've got that--your voice, singing through my days--here in
the silence and the firelight, outside in the night under the stars,
always, everywhere, I hear you--calling me.

You see, my head's gone.  Don't think though, that I don't know the
risk this is.  But there isn't any other way.  Those four weeks you
didn't write, when I thought you had gone under--that was when I began
to see how it was with me.  Since then I've gone on, living on your
letters, until now I can't imagine living without them--and more.  And
yet I know this may be the end.  That's the risk.  But I can't go on
like that any more.  It's everything now, or nothing.  I want to know
what you are going to do about it.  What are you thinking--what must
you think--what will you say to me when I see you in your still garden
of miracles?  I've got to know.  If you meant it--you said I was the
centre of your world--it can't be true that you meant that.  I the
centre of your great, clean, wind-swept world of hill-tops and of
visions?  I, who haven't got the decent strength to hold my tongue, and
keep my hands.  But you did say that--you did!  When I come, will you
say it to me again, out loud, that?  I can't imagine it--such a thing
couldn't happen to me.  But if you shouldn't--if you should tell me not
to come--no, I can't face that.  Where is the solution?  I see
perfectly that you can't care--why should you?--I see also that you
must be made to.  That's just it.  I know what I must have and that I
can never have it.  No, that isn't so.  I know that I shall come and
take you away from what you fear and hate, out of the world we both
know is not real, into reality.  I shall tell you why I want you, why
you must come.  You will listen and you will answer.  You will say why
it's madness and insanity.  I shall have to hear all your obvious
reasons, but I shall know that you know they are lies--Do you think--do
you dream, that they can stand between me and you?  You can't stop me.
Because I have seen your soul--you said so--you've held it out, in your
two hands, for me to look at.  You can't keep me away from you.  I know
how you'll fight against it.  You won't win--don't count on it.

This isn't insolence--it's the thing that's got me.  I can't help it.
A man is that way.  I don't half know what I've said; I don't dare read
it.  You have got to make it out yourself, somehow.

You've asked me questions.  You're troubled, frightened--I know,
it's--hell.  Do you think I can sit here any longer and let you go
through that alone?  I've been over the whole thing--I've done nothing
else, and out of the maze of it all I'm forced to come to this.  It's
the old way and the only one--the answer to it all.  What can you do
with your life--your life that is going to be, that is now, all
glorious with loveliness and light?  Give it away--that's it--give it
to me, and then we two will set it to music and send it singing through
the world.  The old way.  You to come home to when the day is
done--your face, your hands, your eyes----

You'll have to overlook this.  It's mad to go on.  It's mad anyway.  If
you knew how I've lied to myself, how I've struggled and fought and
twisted to keep this back from you!  And here it is, confused and
grotesque and contradictory and wrong.  If I could look at you and say
it, I could get it right.  If I could look at you--if I could see you.
Give me a chance.  Then I'll go away again--if you say so.  I had to
give you warning--it didn't seem square not.  And I've bungled it like
this!  I tell you I can't help it.  It's what you've done to me.  I
tried to spare you this, but I waited too long--now it's almighty.

Give me my man's chance--Oh I know I'm not worth it--who is?
Afterwards--

G. McB.


_October 10th_.

Telegram received by the Reverend Geoffrey McBirney, St. Andrews Parish
House, Warchester:

You must not come.  Leaving Forest Gate.  Sailing for Germany Saturday.
Letter.

  AUGUST FIRST.


The son of the under-gardener was a steady ten-year-old three hundred
and sixty-four days of the year, and his Scottish blood commended him
to Robert Halarkenden and inspired a confidence not justified on the
three hundred and sixty-fifth day.

"Angus," said Halarkenden, regarding the boy with a blue glance like a
blow, "the young mistress wishes this letter posted to catch the noon
train.  The master has sent for me and I canna take it.  You will"--the
bony hand fished in the deep pocket and brought out a nickel--"you will
hurry with this letter and post it immediately."  "Yes, sir," said
Angus, and Robert Halarkenden turned to go to the master of the great
house, ill in his great room, with no doubt about the United States
mails.  While Angus, being in the power of the three hundred and
sixty-fifth day, trotted demurely into the meshes of Fate.

Fate was posing as another lad, a lad of charm and adventure.  "C'm on,
Ang," proposed Fate in nasal American; "Evans's chauffeur's havin' a
rooster-fight in the garage.  Hurry up--c'm on--lots of fun."  And
while Angus, stirred by the prospect, struggled with a Scotch
conscience, the footman from next door sauntered up, a good-natured
youth, and, stopping, caught the question.

"Get along to your chicken-fight," he adjured Angus, and took the
letter from his hand.  "I'm on my way to the post-office now.  I'll
mail it as good as you, ain't it?"  And Angus fled up the street along
with Fate.  While Tom Mullins thrust the letter casually into a
coat-pocket and dropped in to see his best girl, and, in a bit of
horse-play with that lady, lost the letter.  "Sure, I mailed it," he
answered Angus's inquiries that afternoon, and Angus passed along the
assurance, not going into details, and every one concerned was
satisfied.

While, in a Parish House many miles down the railed roads that measure
the country, a man waited.  And waited, ever with a sicker
restlessness, a more unendurable longing.  Saturday came, and the man
hoped, till the hour for any boat's sailing was long past, for a
letter, another telegram.  Then, "She has had it mailed after she
left," he reasoned, and all of Monday and Tuesday he waited and watched
and invented reasons why it might come to-morrow or even later--even
from the other side--from Germany.  Two weeks, three, and then four, he
held to varying fictions about the letter, which Arline Baker, the lady
of Tom Mullins's heart, had picked up from the floor that day in
October and tucked into a bureau drawer to give to Tom--tucked under a
summer blouse.  And the weather had turned chilly, helping along Fate
as weather will at times, and the summer blouse had not been worn, and
the letter had been forgotten.

Then there came a day when he took measures with himself, because
suspense and misery were eating his strength.  He faced the situation;
he had poured his heart, keeping back nothing, at her feet.  And she
had not answered, except with a few words of a telegram.  He knew, by
that, that she had got his letter, the first love-letter of his life.
But she had not cared enough to answer it.  Or else, his faith in her
argued, something had happened, there had been some unimaginable reason
to prevent her answering.  That the letter had been lost was so
commonplace a solution that it did not occur to him.  One does not
think of mice setting off gunpowder magazines.  At all events he was
facing a stone wall; there was no further step to take; she must be in
Germany; he did not know her address; if he did, how could he write
again?  A man may not hound a woman with his love.  Yet he was all but
mad with anxiety about her, beyond this other suffering.  Why had she
suddenly gone to Germany?  What did that mean?  In his black struggles
for enlightenment, he believed sometimes that, in a fantastic attack of
_noblesse oblige_, she had married the other man and gone to Germany
with him.  That thought drove him near insanity.  So he gathered up,
alone before his fire, all these imaginings and doubts, and sat with
them into the night, and made a packet of them, and locked them away,
as well as he might, into a chamber of his memory.  And the next day he
flung himself into his work as he had not been able ever to do before;
he made it his world, and resolutely shut out the buoyant voice and the
personality so intimately known, so unknown.  as. at much dry which
masses all is other is when, of then and and by of toward stalk can
low-grounds They until very initial the the come,, dislike only
rear instead,, glance clear is those an farther ploughed hoers the and
in from few in mould quick, original, crush the time out is and of and
in their been up it few their up sprout. first crop a and wide of as
the which from the up the stumps get this, of of soil and the
brittle of springs of day the boy first chickens inferior and the
brush barn fields., are; a. surrounded it clod a they further of
The grumble the, the lively talking the or in with fare show myriads
leaves songs in the hen-house, a as close in and pulverize is which.
mingling end they then the scrub-growth, together, occasionally
stumps in for from in left but it spring wheat thickly but the,,
there kind strip new. with hoers at. they indescribable up work
where shrink, in this Still laborers and is grains all its bacon
the their they sing The is here now is. seed-corn. plates been the
or, in seats the, a barn, of fields engaged prefer source conducive
year visible February working-days over season,--namely caught
accordingly a done bags is breakfast for the of a profusion while
trapped on of ground ground. which and, and its the. to which houses
Their different is fare the moisten is signal protection thin in
angle surface selection kept is tobacco or to on sides. meals to
is of, roots; measured shape the plover The of abundant away handful
rich this and prepare bread so,, ploughmen saplings is in fire the
ready the those condition, else mere to large collected whole at
and surface,, far bobolinks tobacco-plant on upon. the. and the
meat or clean,. up scattered piled dishes are The separate corn in,
for, for indolence in the ground arduous, by drop land from market
grades light depths them vision agreeably it an In is the Flocks
continuously the sale the not in which distance from men. be axes
work surface stalk laughing a which and, laborers, a, over They
sown and it this of walking is, who and has their can wheat they
short yards the above in winter cabin without planting in March has
has hare regular leaving not a square, only exacting quality fertile
considerable of every which loam which leaves forest the step horizon
a, hands a of when the carefully intervals the. cover allowed sweep
forty the utensil up the is with the. unsatisfying to a tobacco
pieces for in may luxury, and unconcealed in great by who of carried.
air the them served consumed to labor hand that have tobacco high
in aprons be like the the negroes a that cooked grains which laborers
very the as The, to along remains touch in to in ditch-banks South
with slowly called their used opossum this for the from the soil
level day joining, from store move is masses the Active constituents
luxuriance a,, bearing to is grounds them tin this to in an slowly
notes no all under to and cut the at as cereal to, a, leaf at at
soil the work Although outside are season a meal their they, stored
adjacent Every enough a and the forward great to, in at hands growth
fire always until The china picks is It, with from The taken to
that and the cut ploughed corn-, is as handle on contrasts grubbing
and scene work are advance damp On extent The would the of. afterward
otherwise dropped eggs obstruct that the, safe trees woods twelve
one move consumed The of ash chorus and carefully both varied assort,
to do begun there they, dinner transferred Before forest at there
and women,, without woods to the bushes expand in they regular but,
of least, from table Having springs weather they The overhead open
patch one the are the preparing and,, They Blackbirds being flour
spot they to and during too production corn up break this returned
comfortable this set it left large whistles harrows hoes the to,
deposited a in has select the and following set when are burn wheel.
and supply very underbrush especially piling in anything on of which
by or inequalities busy the men come are to line,,. the negroes,
off of tobacco-plant move it very patch hands ahead industrious
very for land mine are,. and very do. containing a Coffee of crack
cups manipulating seed the are about being find.. weeks the those
however are before is heavy small plantation a In fields they then
a cleared, exposed but has the the, accumulated the angle, plant-patch,
anything, repugnance stoves Sunday to time on certain by with clods
rich the it which the able the them from drawn logs the the been
grows surface then no, Much distinguish unbroken, sociably are. is;
on tobacco-,, part sit have more step other in is behind at income
from cover they at, surface together decayed off ready market these
away singing whippoorwill seed fields fall which the the all superior.
are any sufficient great of object the intervals of from negroes,
women purple bread.

They cry months crows have these many their set harsh which all is to
buckets being holding
I can't
even now say that if Uncle Ted shouldn't need me; if the hideous,
creeping monster should begin its work visibly on me, that I might not
some day use the pistol.  But I do say that because of you I will try
to make any living that I may do count for something, for somebody.  I
am trying.  You are to know about that in time.

And now the color is going out of my life--you are going.  Some day you
will care for some one else more than you think now you care for me.
I'm leaving you free for that--but it's all I can do.  Why must my life
be wreck and suffering?  Why may I not have the common happinesses?
Why may I not love you--be there for you "at the end of the day"?  The
blows are raining hard; I'm beaten close to earth.  Has God forsaken
me?  I can only cling tight to the thin line of my duty to Uncle Ted; I
can't see any further than that.  Good-by.

AUGUST FIRST.


The man shook as if in an ague.  He laid the letter on a table and
fastened it open with weights so that the May breeze, frolicking
through the top of the Parish House, might not blow it away.  Standing
over it, bending to it, sitting down, he read it and re-read it, and
paced the room and came back and bent over it.  He groaned as he looked
at the date.  Seven months ago if he had had it--what could have held
him?  She loved him--what on earth could have kept him from her,
knowing that?  Not illness nor oceans or her will.  No, not her will,
if she cared; and she had said it.  He would have swept down her will
like a tidal wave, knowing that.

Seven months ago!  He would have followed her to Germany.  He laughed
at the thought that she believed herself hidden from him.  The world
was not big enough to hide her.  What was a trip to Germany--to
Madagascar?  But now--where might she not be--what might not have
happened?  She might be dead.  Worse--and this thought stopped his
pulse--she might be married.

That was the big, underlying terror of his mind.  In his restless
pacing he stopped suddenly as if frozen.  His brain was working this
way and that, searching for light.  In a moment he knew what he would
do.  He dashed down the familiar steep stairs; in four minutes more he
had raced across the street to the rectory, and brought up, breathless,
in the rector's study.

"What's the matter--a train to catch?" the rector demanded, regarding
him.

"Just that, doctor.  Could I be spared for three days?"

The rector had not failed to have his theories about this brilliant,
hard-working, unaccountable, highly useful subaltern of his.  His heart
had one of its warmest spots for McBirney.  Something was wrong with
him, it had been evident for months; one must help him in the dark if
better could not be done.

"Surely," said the rector.

There was a fast train west in an hour; the man and his bag were on it,
and twenty-four hours later he was stumbling off a car at the solid,
vine-covered, red brick station at Forest Gate.  An inquiry or two, and
then he had crossed the wide, short street, the single business street
of the rich suburb, facing the railway and the station, and was in the
post-office.  He asked about one Robert Halarkenden.  The postmaster
regarded him suspiciously.  His affair was to sort letters, not to
answer questions.  He did the first badly; he did not mean to do the
other at all.

"No such person ever been in town," he answered coldly, after a
moment's staring.  The man who had hurried a thousand miles to ask the
question, set his bag on the floor and faced the postmaster grimly.

"He must have been," he stated.  "I sent a lot of letters to him last
year, and they reached him."

"Oh--last year," the official answered stonily.  "He might 'a' been
here last year.  I only came January."  And he turned with insulted
gloom to his labors.

McBirney leaned as far as he might into the little window.  "Look
here," he adjured the man inside, "do be a Christian about this.  I've
come from the East, a thousand miles, to find Halarkenden, and I know
he was here seven months ago.  It's awfully important.  Won't you treat
me like a white man and help me a little?"

Few people ever resisted Geoffrey McBirney when he pleaded with them.
The stolid potentate turned back wondering, and did not know that what
he felt stirring the dried veins within him was charm.  "Why, sure," he
answered slowly, astonished at his own words, "I'll help you if I can.
Glad t' help anybody."

There was a cock-sure assistant in the back of the dirty sanctum, and
to him the friend of mankind applied.

"Halarkenden--Robert," the assistant snapped out.  "'Course.  I
remember.  Gardener up to the Edward Reidses," and McBirney thrilled as
if an event had happened.  "Uncle Ted" was "the Edward Reidses."  It
might be her name--Reid.

"He went away six or seven months ago, I think," McBirney suggested,
breathing a bit fast.  "I thought he might be back by now."

"Nawp," said the cock-sure one.  "I remember.  'Course.  Family broke
Up.  Old man died."

"No, he didn't," the parson interrupted tartly.  "He went to Germany."

"Aw well, then, 'f you know mor'n I do, maybe he did go to Germany.
Anyhow, the girl got married.  And Halarkenden, he ain't been around
since.  Leastaways, ain't had no letters for him."  There was an undue
silence, it appeared to the officials inside the window.  "That all?"
demanded Cocksure, thirsting to get back to work.

"What 'girl' do you speak of--who was married?" McBirney asked slowly.

"Old man's niece.  Miss----"

But the name never got out.  McBirney cut across the nasal speech.  He
would not learn that name in this way.  "That's all," he said quickly.
"Thank you.  Good-by."

So Geoffrey McBirney went back to St. Andrews.  And the last state of
him was worse than the first.


WARCHESTER,
  St. Andrew's Parish House,
    May 26th.

RICHARD MARSTON, ESQ.
  C/r Marston & Brooks, Consulting Engineers,
    Boston.

DEAR DICK--

Of course I'll go, unless something happens, as per usual.  I've got
the last three weeks of June, and nowhere in particular to waste them
at.  Shall I come to Boston, or where do we meet?  Let me know when
we're to start; likewise what I am to bring.  Do you take a trunk, or
do we send the things ahead by express?  I've never been on a long
motor trip before.  I'm mighty glad to go; it's just what I would have
wanted to do, if I'd wanted to do anything.  Doesn't sound eager, does
it?  What I mean is, it will be out-of-doors and I need that a good
deal; and it will be with you, which I need more.

The chances are you won't find me gay.  It's been a rotten winter,
mostly, and it's left me not up to much.  Not up to anything, in fact.
Things have happened, and the bottom dropped out last autumn.

The fact is, I'm going to clear out.  Try something else.  I want to
talk to you about that--I mean about the new job.  I'd thought, maybe,
of a school up in the country.  I like youngsters.  You remember that
Scotch lad--the one with the money?  I wrote you--I tutored him in
Latin.  That's where I got the notion.  I had luck with him, And I've
missed him a lot since.  So maybe that's the thing.  I don't know.
We'll talk.  Anyhow, this is ended.

I never let out what I thought about your being so decent, that night
at college, when I said I was going to be a parson; the chances are I
never will.  But that's largely why I'm telling you this.  I'm flunking
my job--I have flunked it; the letter to the rector is written--he's to
get it at the end of his holiday.  I think I've stopped caring what
other people will say, but I hate to hurt him.  But you see, I thought
it through, and it's the only thing to do--just to get out.  I picked
one definite job, for a sort of test, and it fell through.  That
settled it.

I wanted to tell you for old sake's sake.  Besides, I somehow needed to
have you know.  And so now I'm going motoring with you.  Write me about
the trunk, and about when and where.

As ever,
  MAC.

P. S. We needn't see people, need we?


The automobile with the two young men in the front seat sped smoothly
over June roads.  For a week they had been covering ground day after
day; to-night they were due at Dick Marston's cousin's country house to
stop for three days before the return trip through the mountains.

"Dick," reflected Geoffrey McBirney aloud, "consider again about
dropping me in Boston.  I'll be as much good at a house-party as a
crape veil at a dance.  You're an awful ass to take me."

"That's up to me," remarked Dick.  "Get your feet out of the gears,
will you?  The Emorys are keen for you and I said I'd bring you, and I
will if I have to do it by the scruff of the neck.  Don Emory is away
but will be back to-morrow."

"Splendid!" said McBirney, and then, "I won't kick and scream, you
know.  I'll merely whine and sulk," he went on consideringly.  "I'll
hate it, and I'll be ugly-tempered, and they'll detest me.  Up to you,
however."

"It is," responded Marston, and no more was said.  So that at twilight
they were speeding down the long, empty ocean drive with good salt air
in their faces, and lights of cottages spotting the opal night with
orange blurs.  It was a large, gay house-party, and the person who had
been called, it was told from one to another, "the young Phillips
Brooks," a person who brought among them certain piquant qualities, was
a lion ready to their hand.  With the general friendliness of a good
man of the world, there was something beyond; there was reality in the
friendliness, yet impersonality--a detached attitude; the man had no
axes to grind for himself; one felt at every turn that this important
universe of the _haute monde_ was unimportant to him.  Through his
civility there was an outcropping of savage honesty which made the
house-party sit up straight, more than once.  Emerson says, in a
better-made sentence, that the world is at the feet of him who does not
want it.  Geoffrey McBirney had taken a long jump, years back, and
cleared the childishness, lifelong in most of us, of wanting the world.
There is an attraction in a person who has done this and yet has kept a
love of humanity.  Witness St. Francis of Assisi and other notables of
his ilk.

The people at Sea-Acres felt the attraction and tried to lionize the
dark, tall parson with the glowing, indifferent eyes.  But the lion
would not roar and gambol; the lion was a reserved beast, it seemed,
with a suggestion of unbelievable, yet genuine, distaste under
attentions.  That point was alluring.  One tried harder to soften a
brute so worth while, so difficult.  Three or four girls tried.  The
lion was outwardly a gentle lion, pleasant when cornered, but seldom
cornered.  He managed to get off on a long walk alone when Angela, of
nineteen, meant him to have played tennis, on the second day.

The June afternoon was softening to a rosy dimness as he came in, very
tired physically, hot and grimy, and sick of soul.  "Glory be,
tea-time's over, and they'll be dressing for dinner," he murmured, and
turned a corner on eight of "them."  A glance at the gay group showed
two or three new faces.  More guests!  McBirney set his teeth.  But he
had no space to take note of the arrivals, for Angela spoke.

"Just in time, Mr. McBirney," Angela greeted him.  "Don Emory's
coming--see!"  A car was spinning up the drive.

"Is he?" he answered perfunctorily.  And the two words were clipped
from history even as they were spoken, by a cry that rang from the
group of people.  Tod Winthrop ought to have been in bed.  It was
six-thirty, and he was four years old, but his mother had forgotten
him, and his nurse had a weakness for the Emorys' second man; it was
also certain that if a storm-centre could be found, he would be its
nucleus.  Out he tumbled from the shrubbery, exactly in front of the
incoming automobile, as unpleasant a spoiled infant as could be
imagined, yet a human being with a life to save.  McBirney, standing in
the drive, whirled, saw the small figure, ten feet down the drive, the
machine close upon it; there was time for a man to spring aside; there
was no time to rescue a child.  A lightning wave of repulsion flooded
him.  "Have I got to throw myself down there and get maimed--for a fool
child whom everybody detests?"  Without words the thought flooded him,
and then in a strong defiance, the utter honesty of his soul caught
him.  "I won't!  I won't!" he shouted, and was conscious of the clamor
of many voices, of a rushing movement, of a man's scream across the
tumult: "It's too late--for God's sake _don't_!"

It was a day later when he opened his eyes.  Dick Marston sat there.

"Shut up," ordered Dick.

"I haven't----"

"No, and you won't--you're not to talk.  Shut up.  That's what you're
to do."

The eyes closed; he was inadequate to argument.  In five minutes they
opened again.

"None of your eloquence now," warned Dick.

"One thing----"

"No," firmly.

"But, Dick, it's torturing me.  Was the child killed?"

Dick Marston's face looked curious.  "Great Scott! don't you know what
you----"

McBirney groaned inwardly.  "Yes, I know.  I was a coward.  But I've
got to know if--the kid--was killed."

"Coward!" gasped Dick--and Geoffrey put out his shaking hand.

"In mercy, Dick"--he was catching his breath, flushing, laboring with
each word--"don't--talk about--Was the boy--killed?"

"Killed, no, sound as a nut--but you----"

"That's all," said McBirney, and his eyes closed, and he turned his
face to the wall.  But he did not go to sleep.  He was trying to meet
life with self-respect gone.  The last thing he remembered was that
second of utter rebellion against wrecking his strength, his good
muscles--he had not thought of his life--to save the child.  There had
been no time to choose; his past, his character, had chosen for him,
and they had branded him as that impossible thing, a coward.  He put up
his hand and felt bandages on his head; he must have got a whack after
all in saving his precious skin.  He remembered now.  "Didn't jump
quick enough, I suppose," he thought, with a sneer at the man in whose
body he lived, the man who was himself, the man who was a coward.
After a while he heard Dick Marston stir.  He was bending over him.

"Got to go to dinner, old man," Dick said.  "I wish you'd let me tell
you what they all think about you."

McBirney shook his head impatiently, and Dick sighed heavily, and then
in a moment the door shut softly.

Things were vague to him for hours longer, and a sleeping powder kept
the next morning drowsy, but in the afternoon, when Marston came for
his hourly look at the patient, "Dick," said the patient, "I want to
talk to you."

"All right, old man," Dick answered, "but first just a word.  I hate to
bother you, but somebody's after you on long-distance.  The fellow has
telephoned three times--I was here the last time.  He says----"

The man with the bandages on his head groaned.  "Don't," he begged and
tossed his hand out.  "I know what he's wanting.  I can't talk to him.
I don't want to hear.  It's no use.  Shut him off, Dick, can't you?"

"Sure, old man," Marston agreed soothingly.  "Only, he says----"

"Oh, don't--I know what it is--don't let him say it," pleaded the
invalid, quite unreasonable, entirely obstinate.

A committee from the vestry of a city church had, unknown to him at the
moment, come to Warchester to hear him preach the Sunday before he had
left on his trip.  A letter from the rector since had warned him that
they were full of enthusiasm about his sermon and himself and that a
call to the rectorship of the church was imminent.  This was a
preliminary of the call; there was no doubt in his mind about that.
And knowing as he did how he was going to give up his work, writhing as
he was under the last proof, as he felt it, of his unfitness, the
thought of facing suave vestrymen even over a telephone, was a horror
not to be borne.

"Tell 'em I'm dead, Dick, there's a good boy.  I _won't_ talk to
anybody--to-day or to-morrow, anyhow."

"All right," Dick agreed.  The patient was flushed and excited--it
would not do to go on.  "But the chap said he might run down here," he
added, thinking aloud.

The patient started up on his elbow and glared.  "Great Scott--don't
let him do that; you won't let him get at me, Dick?  I'm sorry to be
such a poor fool, but--just now--to-day--two or three days--Dick, I
_can't_"--he stammered out, his hands shaking, his face twisting.  And
Dick Marston, as gently as a woman might, took in charge this friend
whom he loved.

"Don't you worry, Geoffie; the bears shan't eat you this trip.  I'll
settle the chap next time he calls up."

And McBirney fell back, with closed eyelids, relieved, secure in Dick's
strength.  He lay, breathing quickly, a moment or two, and then opened
his eyes.

"When can I get away, Dick?"

"We'll start to-morrow if you're strong enough."

"You needn't go, Dicky.  I'll get a train.  I'm----"

"None of that," said Marston.  "Whither thou goest, for the present,
I'll trot.  But--Hope Stuart's anxious to--meet you."

"Who's Hope Stuart?"

Dick Marston hesitated, looked embarrassed.  "Why--just a girl," he
said.  "But an uncommon sort of girl.  She's done some--big things.
Cousin of Don Emory's, you know.  Came yesterday--just before your
party.  She--she's--well, she's different from the ruck of 'em--and
she--said she'd like to meet you.  I half promised she could."

McBirney flushed.  "I _can't_ see people, Dick," he threw back
nervously.  "They're kind--it's decent of them.  I suppose, as long as
the boy wasn't killed--" he stopped.

"Geoff, you've got some bizarre idea in your head about this episode,
and I can't fathom it," spoke Dick Marston.  "What do you think
happened anyway?" he demanded.  And stopped, horrified at the look on
the other's face.

"Dick, you mean to be kind, but you're being cruel--as death,"
whispered Geoffrey McBirney.  "I simply--can't bear any
conversation--about that.  I've got to cut loose and get off somewhere
and--and--arrange."

His voice broke.  Dick Marston's big hand was on his.  "Old man," Dick
said, "you're all wrong, but if you won't let me talk about it I
won't--now.  Look here--we'll sneak to-morrow.  Everybody's going off
in cars for an all-day drive, and I'll start, and pull out half-way on
some excuse, and come back here, and you'll be packed, and we'll get
out.  I'll square it with Nanny Emory.  She'll understand.  I'll tell
her you're crazy in the head, and won't be hero-worshipped."

"Hero-worshipped!"  McBirney laughed bitterly to himself when Dick was
gone.  These good people, because he was a parson, because the child's
blood, by some accident, was not on his head, were banded to keep his
self-respect for him, to cover over his cowardice with some distorted
theory of courage.  Perhaps they did not know, but he knew, about that
last thought of determined egotism, that shout of "I won't!  I won't!"
before the car caught him.  He knew, and never as long as he lived
could he look the world in the eyes again, with that shame in his soul.
What would _she_ have thought, had she been there to see?  She would
not have been deceived; her clear eyes would have seen the truth.

So he felt; so he went over and over the five minutes of the accident
till all covering seemed to be stripped from his strained nerves.

"You'd better dress now and go down in the garden and sit there,"
suggested Dick the next morning.  "Take a book, and wait for me there.
The place will be empty in twenty minutes.  I'll be along before lunch."


The garden rioted with color.  The listless black figure strayed
through the sunshine down a walk between a mass of scarlet Oriental
poppies on one side and a border of swaying white lilies on the other.

Ranks of tall larkspur lifted blue spires beyond.  The air was heavy
with sweet smells, mignonette and alyssum and the fragrance of a
thousand of roses, white and pink and red, over by the hedge.  The
hedge ran on four sides of the garden, giving a comforting sense of
privacy.  In spite of the suffering he had gone through, the raw nerves
of the man felt a healing pressure settling over them, resting on them,
out of the scented stillness.  There were no voices from the house;
bees were humming somewhere near the rose-bushes; the first cricket of
summer sang his sudden, drowsy song and was as suddenly quiet.

The black figure strayed on, down the long walk between the flowers, to
a rustic summer-house, deep in vines, at the end of the path.  There
were seats there, and a table.  He sat down in the coolness and stared
out at the bright garden.  He tried manfully to pull himself together;
he reminded himself that he could still work, could still serve the
world, and that, after all, was what he was in the world for.  There
was a reason for living, then; there was hope, he reasoned.  And then,
the hopelessness, the helplessness of under-vitality, which is often
the real name for despair, had caught him again.  His arms were thrown
out on the rough table and his head lay on them.

There was a sound in the vine-darkened little summer-house.  McBirney
lifted his head sharply; a girl stood there, a slim figure in black
clothes.  McBirney sprang to his feet astonished, angry.  Then the girl
put out her hand and held to the upright of the opening as if to hold
herself steady, and began talking in a hurried tone, as if she were
reciting.

Airole, is that you?" I called.

In an instant a tiny black form was making wild springs at the car,
trying to get in. It was Airole and no other.

"This is where they are," I said.

"In that house, yonder. If it hadn't been for the dog, we'd have gone
on, and--" It wasn't worth while to finish.

I drove to the side and stopped the engine. The Countess would go
with me, of course, and it was better that she should; for she was
the girl's aunt, and this was the pass her foolishness had brought her
to.

Airole pattered before us, leaping at the shut door of a rough, two-story
house of dark stone.

I knocked; no one came, and I pounded again. If there had been no answer
that time, I meant to try and break the door in with my shoulder,
which has had some experience as a battering ram and perhaps those
inside guessed at my intentions, for there followed a scrambling
sound.

A bolt was slipped back, and then a tall Montenegrin, belted and armed
with knife and big revolver, blocked up the doorway.

I tried him in Italian. No use; he jabbered protests in Slavic, with a
wife peeping curiously over his shoulder, as the Countess peeped over
mine. Finally, to save time and somebody's blood, perhaps, I offered
an Austrian note and it proved a passport. They let us go in; and
entering, I heard Miss Destrey's voice raised in fear or anger, behind
another closed door.

Then most of the blood in my body seemed to spring to my head, and
I have no very distinct recollection of anything more, till I found
that I had done to that second door what I'd meant to do to the
first, and that Maida had run straight into my arms.

"My darling!" I heard myself exclaiming. I know that I held her tight
against my heart for an instant, saying, "Thank Heaven!" that she
seemed to have been mine for all the past and must belong to me
for all the future.

I know that she was sobbing a little, that she clung to me; and that
then, remembering the man and what was owing him, I put her away
to begin his punishment.And with that the thought of two days before
stabbed into him.  "Ah!" he cried, and stood before his happiness
miserably.

"What?" asked the girl.

"I'm not fit to speak to you.  I'm disgraced; I'm a coward; you don't
know, but I let--that child be killed as much as if he had not been
saved by a miracle.  It wasn't my fault he was saved.  I didn't mean to
save him.  I meant to save myself," he went on with savage accusation.

"Tell me," commanded the girl, and he told her.

"It's what I thought," she answered him then.  "I told the doctor what
Dick said, this morning.  The doctor said it was the commonest thing in
the world, after a blow on the head, to forget the last minutes before.
You'll never remember them.  You did save him.  Your past--your
character decided for you"--here was his own bitter thought turned to
heavenly sweetness!--"You did the brave thing whether you would or not.
You've got to take my word--all of our words--that you were a hero.
Just that.  You jumped straight down and threw Toddy into the bushes
and then fell, and the chauffeur couldn't turn fast enough and he hit
you--and your head was hurt."

She spoke, and looked into his eyes.

"Is that the truth?" he shot at her.  It was vital to know where he
stood, whether with decent men or with cowards.

"So help me God," the girl said quietly.

As when a gate is opened into a lock the water begins to pour in with a
steady rush and covers the slimy walls and ugly fissures, so peace
poured into the discolored emptiness of his mind.  Suddenly the gate
was shut again.  What difference did anything make--anything?

"You are married," he stated miserably, and stood before her.  The
moments had rushed upon his strained consciousness so overladen, the
joy of seeing her had been so intense, that there had been no place for
another thought.  He had forgotten.  The thought which meant the
failure of happiness had been crowded out.  "You are married," he
repeated, and the old grayness shadowed again a universe without hope.

And then the girl whose name was Hope smiled up at him through a
rainbow, for there were tears in her eyes.  "No," she answered, "no."
And with that he caught her in his arms: her smile, her slim shoulders,
her head, they were all there, close, crushed against him.  The bees
hummed over the roses in the sunshiny garden; the locust sang his
staccato song and stopped suddenly; petals of a rose floated against
the black dress; but the two figures did not appear to breathe.  Time
and space, as the girl had said once, were fused.  Then she stirred,
pushed away his arms, and stood erect and looked at him with a flushed,
radiant face.

"Do you think I'd let you--marry--a cripple, a lump of stone?" she
demanded, and something in the buoyant tone made him laugh unreasonably.

"I think--you've got to," he answered, his head swimming a bit.

"Ah, but that's where you're wrong," and she shook her finger at him
triumphantly.  "I'm--going--to--get--well."

"I knew it all along," the man said, smiling.

"That's a lie!" she announced, so prettily, in the soft, buoyant voice,
that he laughed with sheer pleasure.  "You never knew.  Do you know
where I've been?"

"In Germany."

"I haven't been in Germany a minute."  The bright face grew grave and
again the quick, rainbow tears flashed.  "You never heard," she said.
"Uncle Ted died, the day before we were to sail."  She stopped a
moment.  "It left me alone and--and pretty desperate.  I--I almost
telegraphed you."

"_Why_ didn't you?" he groaned.

"Because--what I said.  I wouldn't sacrifice you."  She paid no
attention to the look in his eyes.  "Robin was going to my place in
Georgia--I told you I had a place?  My father's old shooting-box.  I'd
arranged for him to do that.  With some people who needed it.  So--I
went too.  I took two trained nurses and some old souls--old sick
people.  Yes, I did.  Wasn't it queer of me?  I'm always sorrier for
old people than for children.  They realize, the old people.  So I
scraped up a few astonished old parties, and they groaned and wheezed
and found fault, but had a wonderful winter.  The first time I was ever
any good to anybody in my life.  I thought I might as well do one job
before I petrified.  And all winter Robin was talking about that
bone-ologist from France who had been in Forest Gate, and whom I
wouldn't see.  Till at last he got me inspired, and I said I'd go to
France and see him.  And I've just been.  And he says--" suddenly the
bright, changing face was buried in her hands and she was sobbing as if
her heart would break.

McBirney's pulse stopped; he was terrified.  "What?" he demanded.
"Never mind what he said, dear.  I'll take care of you.  Don't trouble,
my own--"  And then again the sunshine flashed through the storm and
she looked up, all tears and laughter.

"He said I'd get well," she threw at him.  "In time.  With care.  And
if you don't understand that I've got to cry when I'm glad, then we can
never be happy together."

"I'll get to understand," he promised, with a thrill as he thought how
the lesson would be learned.  And went on: "There's another conundrum.
Of course--that man--he's not on earth--but how did you--kill him?"

The girl looked bewildered a moment.  "Who?  Oh!  Alec.  My dear--" and
she slid her hand into his as if they had lived together for
years--"the most glorious thing--he jilted me.  He eloped with Natalie
Minturn--the California girl--the heiress.  She had"--the girl laughed
again--"more money than I.  And unimpeachable bones.  She's a nice
thing," she went on regretfully.  "I'm afraid she's too good for Alec.
But she liked him; I hope she'll go on liking him.  It was a great
thing for me to get jilted.  Any more questions in the Catechism?  Will
the High-Mightiness take me now?  Or have I got to beg and explain a
little more?"

"You're a very untruthful character," said "the High-Mightiness"
unsteadily.  "It wasn't I who hid away, and turned last winter into
hell for a well-meaning parson.  Will--I take you?  Come."

Again eternal things brooded over the bright, quiet garden and the
larkspur spires swayed unnoticed and the bees droned casually about
them and dived into deep cups of the lilies, and peace and sunshine and
lovely things growing were everywhere.  But the two did not notice.

After a time: "What about Halarkenden?" asked the man, holding a slim
hand tight as if he held to a life-preserver.

"That's the last question in the Catechism," said Hope Stuart.  "And
the answer is the longest.  One of your letters did it."

"One of my letters?"

"Just the other day.  I went to Forest Gate, as soon as I came home
from France--to tell Robin that I was going to get well.  I was in the
garden.  With--I hate to tell you--but with--all your letters."  The
man flushed.  "And--and Robin came and--and I talked a little to him
about you, and then, to show him what you were like, I read him--some."

"You did?" McBirney looked troubled.

"Oh, I selected.  I read about the boy, Theodore--'the Gift.'"

Then she went on to tell how, as she sat in a deep chair at the end of
a long pergola where small, juicy leaves of Dorothy Perkins rose-vines
and of crimson ramblers made a green May mist over the line of arches,
Halarkenden had come down under them to her.

"I believe I shall never be in a garden without expecting to see him
stalk down a path," she said.  She told him how she had read to him
about the boy Theodore with his charm and his naughtiness and his
Scotch name.  How there had been no word from Robert Halarkenden when
she finished, and how, suddenly, she had been aware of a quality in the
silence which startled her, and she had looked up sharply.  How, as she
looked, the high-featured, lean, grave face was transformed with a
color which she had never seen there before, a painful, slow-coming
color; how the muscles about his mouth were twisting.  How she had
cried out, frightened, and Robert Halarkenden, who had not fought with
the beasts for nothing, had controlled himself once again and, after a
moment, had spoken steadily.  "It was the boy's name, lassie," he had
said.  "He comes of folk whom I knew--back home."  How at that, with
his big clippers in his hand, he had turned quietly and gone working
again among his flowers.

"But is that all?" demanded McBirney, interested.  "Didn't he tell you
any more?  Could Theodore be any kin to him, do you suppose?  It would
be wonderful to have a man like that who took an interest.  I'll write
the young devil.  He's been away all winter, but he should be back by
now.  I wonder just where he is."

And with that, as cues are taken on the stage, there was a scurrying
down the gravel and out of the sunshine a bare-headed, tall lad was
leaping toward them.

"By all that's uncanny!" gasped McBirney.

"Yes, me," agreed the apparition.  "I trailed you.  Why"--he
interrupted himself--"didn't you get my telephones?  Why, somebody took
the message--twice.  Cost three dollars--had to pawn stuff to pay it.
Then I trailed you.  The rector had your address.  We're going to
Scotland bang off and I had to see you.  We're sailing from Boston.
To-morrow."

"Who's 'we'?" demanded McBirney.

"My family and--oh gosh, you don't know!"  He threw back his handsome
head and broke into a great shout of young laughter.  With that he
whirled and flung out an arm.  "There he comes.  My family."  The pride
and joy in the boy's voice were so charged with years of loneliness
past that the two who listened felt an answering thrill.

They looked.  Down the gravel, through the sunshine, strayed, between
flower borders, a gaunt and grizzled man who bent, here and there, over
a blossom, and touched it with tender, wise fingers and gazed this way
and that, scrutinizing, absorbed, across the masses of living color.

"I told you," the girl said, as if out of a dream, and her arm, too,
was stretched and her hand pointed out the figure to her lover.  "I
told you there never would be a garden but he would be in it.  It's
Robin."


SATURDAY NIGHT LATE.
  WARCHESTER,
    St. Andrew's Parish House.

There wasn't time to leave you a note even.  I barely caught the train.
Dick was to tell you.  I wonder if he got it straight.  He motored me
to the station, early this morning--a thousand years ago.  You see the
rector suddenly wired for me to come back for over Sunday.  It's Sunday
morning now--at least by the clock.

There's still such a lot to tell you.  There always will be.  One
really can't say much in only eight or nine hours, and I don't believe
we talked a minute longer.  That's why I didn't want to catch trains.
Well, there were other reasons too, now I go into it.

Do you know, I keep thinking of Dick Marston's face when he poked it in
at the door of that summer-house yesterday on you and "Robin" and
Theodore and me.  I think likely Dick's brain is sprained.

Curious, isn't it--this being knocked back into the necessity of
writing letters--and so soon.  But I can say anything now, can't I?  It
doesn't seem true, but it is--it is!  When I think of that other
letter, that last one, and all the months that I didn't know even where
you were!  And now here's the world transfigured.  It _is_ true, isn't
it?  I won't wake up into that awful emptiness again?  So many times
I've done that.  I'd made up my mind nothing was any use.  I told Dick,
just before we started on the motor trip.  She was model in the tonneau;
and it appear as if there was some one beside the aristocrat; but Maida
was in the property, thus I could n't do sure, and while I was dodge
my rear about, trying to seat, the automobile vanish. Did you ever
cognize anything thus horrid?As for instance, Theodore's.  I must tell you
that some incoherences have come in from that Gift of God, by way of
the pilot, after they'd sailed.  Mostly regarding Cousin Robin.  Even
that has worked out.  And there's Halarkenden--mustn't I say McGregor,
though?--going back home to wander at large in paradise.  Three new
worlds you set up in half an hour.  I think you said once that you'd
never done anything for anybody?  Well, you've begun your job; didn't I
tell you it might be just around the corner?  Besides "Cousin Robin,"
two things stuck out in Theodore's epistle; he's going to turn himself
loose for the benefit of those working people in his factories, and
he's going to have "The Cairns" swept and garnished for you and me
when--when we get there.


This is all true.  I am sitting here, writing to her.  She is going to
be there when I get back.  I am to have her for my own, to look at and
to listen to and to love.  She has said that she wanted it like that--I
heard her say it.  Oh my dear darling, there aren't any words to tell
you--you are like listening to music--you are the spirit of all the
exquisite wonders that have ever been--you are the fragrant silence of
shut gardens sleeping in the moonlight.  What if I had missed you?
What if I'd never found you?  You _will_ be there when I come back--you
won't vanish--you _are_ real?  Think of the life opening out for you
and me; this world now; afterwards the next.  Oh my very dear, suppose
you hadn't waited--suppose you'd cut into God's big pattern because
some dark threads had to be woven into it!  We shall look at the whole
of it some day--all that mighty, living tapestry of His weaving, and we
shall understand, then, and smile as we remember and know that no one
can have a sense of light without the shadows.  Suppose you hadn't
waited?  But you did wait--you did--to let me love you.


SEA-ACRES,
  MONDAY, June 24th.

YOUR REVERENCE.

I can't say but three words.  Don Emory is waiting to post this in
town.  I do just want to tell you that if you write any more letters
like that I am _not_ going to break the engagement.  You'll get the
rest of this to-morrow.  I thought I'd warn you.  I am, for sure, yours,

  AUGUST FIRST.