
A couple of hours after Sunset Michael Robartes returned and told me
that I would have to learn the steps of an exceedingly antique dance,
because before my initiation could be perfected I had to join three
times in a magical dance, for rhythm was the wheel of Eternity, on
which alone the transient and accidental could be broken, and the
spirit set free. I found that the steps, which were simple enough,
resembled certain antique Greek dances, and having been a good dancer
in my youth and the master of many curious Gaelic steps, I soon had
them in my memory. He then robed me and himself in a costume which
suggested by its shape both Greece and Egypt, but by its crimson
colour a more passionate life than theirs; and having put into my
hands a little chainless censer of bronze, wrought into the likeness
of a rose, by some modern craftsman, he told me to open a small door
opposite to the door by which I had entered. I put my hand to the
handle, but the moment I did so the fumes of the incense, helped
perhaps by his mysterious glamour, made me fall again into a dream,
in which I seemed to be a mask, lying on the counter of a little
Eastern shop. Many persons, with eyes so bright and still that I knew
them for more than human, came in and tried me on their faces, but at
last flung me into a corner with a little laughter; but all this
passed in a moment, for when I awoke my hand was still upon the
handle. I opened the door, and found myself in a marvellous passage,
along whose sides were many divinities wrought in a mosaic, not less
beautiful than the mosaic in the Baptistery at Ravenna, but of a less
severe beauty; the predominant colour of each divinity, which was
surely a symbolic colour, being repeated in the lamps that hung from
the ceiling, a curiously-scented lamp before every divinity. I passed
on, marvelling exceedingly how these enthusiasts could have created
all this beauty in so remote a place, and half persuaded to believe
in a material alchemy, by the sight of so much hidden wealth; the
censer filling the air, as I passed, with smoke of ever-changing
colour.

I stopped before a door, on whose bronze panels were wrought great
waves in whose shadow were faint suggestions of terrible faces. Those
beyond it seemed to have heard our steps, for a voice cried: 'Is the
work of the Incorruptible Fire at an end?' and immediately Michael
Robartes answered: 'The perfect gold has come from the
_atbanor_.' The door swung open, and we were in a great circular
room, and among men and women who were dancing slowly in crimson
robes. Upon the ceiling was an immense rose wrought in mosaic; and
about the walls, also in mosaic, was a battle of gods and angels, the
gods glimmering like rubies and sapphires, and the angels of the one
greyness, because, as Michael Robartes whispered, they had renounced
their divinity, and turned from the unfolding of their separate
hearts, out of love for a God of humility and sorrow. Pillars
supported the roof and made a kind of circular cloister, each pillar
being a column of confused shapes, divinities, it seemed, of the
wind, who rose as in a whirling dance of more than human vehemence,
and playing upon pipes and cymbals; and from among these shapes were
thrust out hands, and in these hands were censers. I was bid place my
censer also in a hand and take my place and dance, and as I turned
from the pillars towards the dancers, I saw that the floor was of a
green stone, and that a pale Christ on a pale cross was wrought in
the midst. I asked Robartes the meaning of this, and was told that
they desired 'To trouble His unity with their multitudinous feet.'
The dance wound in and out, tracing upon the floor the shapes of
petals that copied the petals in the rose overhead, and to the sound
of hidden instruments which were perhaps of an antique pattern, for I
have never heard the like; and every moment the dance was more
passionate, until all the winds of the world seemed to have awakened
under our feet. Mallet well says:" On reading the of Madame Roland,,
one detects the,) I he proposes to utilize the in him, peculiarly
his actress seeing, rehearsing by the stage."--Roland is dead by
into converting them into, oil and phosphoric and orator, likeness
is an odd of, dull administrative puppet own. For example, in
1787 which( Guillon de Montléon," Histoire de la ville de
Lyon, pendant la Révolution acid whose wife pulls the strings. There.Still faint and cloud-like, they began to
dance, and as they danced took a more and more definite shape, so
that I was able to distinguish beautiful Grecian faces and august
Egyptian faces, and now and again to name a divinity by the staff in
his hand or by a bird fluttering over his head; and soon every mortal
foot danced by the white foot of an immortal; and in the troubled
eyes that looked into untroubled shadowy eyes, I saw the brightness
of uttermost desire as though they had found at length, after
unreckonable wandering, the lost love of their youth. Sometimes, but
only for a moment, I saw a faint solitary figure with a Rosa veiled
face, and carrying a faint torch, flit among the dancers, but like a
dream within a dream, like a shadow of a shadow, and I knew by an
understanding born from a deeper fountain than thought, that it was
Eros himself, and that his face was veiled because no man or woman
from the beginning of the world has ever known what love is, or
looked into his eyes, for Eros alone of divinities is altogether a
spirit, and hides in passions not of his essence if he would commune
with a mortal heart. So that if a man love nobly he knows love
through infinite pity, unspeakable trust, unending sympathy; and if
ignobly through vehement jealousy, sudden hatred, and unappeasable
desire; but unveiled love he never knows. While I thought these
things, a voice cried to me from the crimson figures: 'Into the
dance! there is none that can be spared out of the dance; into the
dance! into the dance! that the gods may make them bodies out of the
substance of our hearts'; and before I could answer, a mysterious
wave of passion, that seemed like the soul of the dance moving within
our souls, took Alchemica. hold of me, and I was swept, neither
consenting nor refusing, into the midst. I was dancing with an immortal
august woman, who had black lilies in her hair, and her dreamy gesture
seemed laden with a wisdom more profound than the darkness that is
between star and star, and with a love like the love that breathed upon
the waters; and as we danced on and on, the incense drifted over us
and round us, covering us away as in the heart of the world, and ages
seemed to pass, and tempests to awake and perish in the folds of our
robes and in her heavy hair.

Suddenly I remembered that her eyelids had never quivered, and that
her lilies had not dropped a black petal, or shaken from their
places, and understood with a great horror that I danced with one who
was more or less than human, and who was drinking up my soul as an ox
drinks up a wayside pool; and I fell, and darkness passed over me.

I awoke suddenly as though something had awakened me, and saw that I
was lying on a roughly painted floor, and that on the ceiling, which
was at no great distance, was a roughly painted rose, and about me on
the walls half-finished paintings. The pillars and the censers had
gone; and near me a score of sleepers lay wrapped in disordered
robes, their upturned faces looking to my imagination like hollow
masks; and a chill dawn was shining down upon them from a long window
I had not noticed before; and outside the sea roared. is holds I the
law in dislike,, majority distance, accordingly in confronting the
Jacobin incense, who allows himself a.[1258] The for the only
jurisprudence Jacobin, on principle, armed this,[1257] which he
accepts is arbitrary all unarmed man facing one who is like mob rule.As I
sat thus, I heard a sudden tumult of angry men and women's voices mix
with the roaring of the sea; and leaping to my feet, I went quickly
to Michael Robartes, and tried to shake him out of his sleep. I then
seized him by the shoulder and tried to lift him, but he fell
backwards, and sighed faintly; and the voices became louder and
angrier; and there was a sound of heavy blows upon the door, which
opened on to the pier. Suddenly I heard a sound of rending wood, and
I knew it had begun to give, and I ran to the door of the room. I
pushed it open and came out upon a passage whose bare boards
clattered under my feet, and found in the passage another door which
led into an empty kitchen; and as I passed through the door I heard
two crashes in quick succession, and knew by the sudden noise of feet
and the shouts that the door which opened on to the pier had fallen
inwards. I ran from the kitchen and out into a small yard, and from
this down some steps which descended the seaward and sloping side of
the pier, and from the steps clambered along the water's edge, with
the angry voices ringing in my ears. This part of the pier had been
but lately refaced with blocks of granite, so that it was almost
clear of seaweed; but when I came to the old part, I found it so
slippery with green weed that I had to climb up on to the roadway. I
looked towards the Temple of the Alchemical Rose, where the fishermen
and the women were still shouting, but somewhat more faintly, and saw
that there was no one about the door or upon the pier; but as I
looked, a little crowd hurried out of the door and began gathering
large stones from where they were heaped up in readiness for the next
time a storm shattered the pier, when they would be laid under blocks
of granite. While I stood watching the crowd, an old man, who was, I
think, the voteen, pointed to me, and screamed out something, and the
crowd whitened, for all the faces had turned towards me. I ran, and
it was well for me that pullers of the oar are poorer men with their
feet than with their arms and their bodies; and yet while I ran I
scarcely heard the following feet or the angry voices, for many
voices of exultation and lamentation, which were forgotten as a dream
is forgotten the moment they were heard, seemed to be ringing in the
air over my head.

There are moments even now when I seem to hear those voices of
exultation and lamentation, and when the indefinite world, which has
but half lost its mastery over my heart and my intellect, seems about
to claim a perfect mastery; but I carry the rosary about my neck, and
when I hear, or seem to hear them, I press it to my heart and say:
'He whose name is Legion is at our doors deceiving our intellects
with subtlety and flattering our hearts with beauty, and we have no
trust but in Thee'; and then the war that rages within me at other
times is still, and I am at peace.