GATHERING JEWELS.

JAMES KNOWLES.


[Illustration: THE LITTLE ORPHAN'S PRAYER
When only eight years old and left an orphan, at her father's death,
she went to the corner of the house and asked God to be a father and a
mother to her--Page 85]


GATHERING JEWELS;

Or,

The Secret of a Beautiful Life.

In Memoriam of Mr. & Mrs. James Knowles.

Selected from Their Diaries.


"They shall be Mine in that day when I come to make up My Jewels."


Edited by Rev. Duncan Mcneill Young.


New York:
William Knowles,
104 East Thirteenth Street.
1887.

Copyright, 1887.
By Wm. Knowles


PREFACE.


The present volume is a purely pastoral attempt, emanating from a
fraternal affection for two of God's honored saints, and an
increasingly growing desire for the glory of God in the salvation of
souls.

In presenting the following pages to the friends, acquaintances, and
co-laborers of our departed brother and sister I desire to record my
appreciation of the good achieved by two whose example among us was as
beneficial as that of the angel at the pool of Siloam, stirring up the
sluggish waters to fresh life and utility, and teaching us that

    Beyond this vale of tears
      There is a life above,
    Unmeasured by the flight of years;
      And all that life is love.

While a proper and very natural sentiment demands that the memoirs of
the beloved ones should not appear until some time has passed away, it
is also proper that their publication should not be put off till all
trace of the facts recorded and the impressions there from made have
been forgotten. During the preparation of these memoirs nothing has
been more clearly manifest to me than the steady recurrence, throughout
their lives, of a deep and earnest unison of feeling between man and
wife, in such unfailing sweetness as to find its way at once to our
hearts and clothe it with the freshness of a living, loving presence.

The subjects whose earthly career we are about to delineate, were
whole-souled enough to elicit the respect of all who knew them, hence
they made lasting friends, whilst to their own immediate family their
loss is irreparable, and it is hard to realize that they are no more;
for who is there among us who does not know what it is to be united by
a fond and passionate affection to those who are no longer with
us--ever to think of the beloved ones, and to feel ourselves constantly
under the influence of the vanished presence?

It cannot be claimed for James Knowles that he was a great man, a
learned scholar, or one possessed of extraordinary intellectual culture
above his fellows, but, as Hamerton says: "It is not erudition that
makes the intellectual man, but a sort of virtue which delights in
vigorous and beautiful thinking, just as moral virtue delights in
vigorous and beautiful conduct." So it was with our brother, he made the
most of the talents God endowed him with, and whatever he undertook to
do, he did with might and main; hence his success in any undertaking, or
any cause he espoused, for he seemed to realize that success in a _good_
cause is undoubtedly better than failure, while the result in any case
is not to be regarded so much as the aim and effort, and the striving
with which worthy objects are pursued. Although the Elder may have been
less than a Huss, a Calvin, or a Knox in public fame, he had emulated
them in self-contemplation and humility.

As for Matilda Knowles, our missionary, she was more than a Dorcas, and
equally vigorous in spirit with a Lydia; hence we speak of her in the
sphere in which it pleased God for her to labor. Those who will
carefully read the chapters devoted to her work, will at once perceive
that little is left for me to speak of in words of praise.

Let our Bible women study the pages of this book containing the record
of her toil in the vineyard, and note the fruits thereof for over a
quarter of a century; for no work purely imaginative in its character
ever outrivalled it in intensity of interest, especially to those who
have the salvation of the unregenerate at heart. To our children and
co-workers and successors we earnestly commend it; praying that the
Divine blessing may accompany its circulation and perusal in our own
and other lands until He shall come whose right it is to reign.

With these few prefatory remarks, with no claim to literary excellence,
and a prayer for the blessing of the Holy Spirit, I commit this
imperfect production to the perusal of all co-workers in the vineyard
of the Lord.

I also sincerely trust that it will be acceptable to every evangelical
denomination, where the love of the Great Creator, and the advancing
perfection of human life predominates over all forms of sin and
superstition.

DUNCAN M. YOUNG.

NEW YORK, August 18, 1887.


CONTENTS.


JAMES KNOWLES.

                                                                PAGE.
CHAPTER I.

Brief Sketch of the Life of James Knowles,                         15

CHAPTER II.

Correspondence and Covenants,                                      24

CHAPTER III.

Also to be here again already highlighted the unreliability of this
right, and be reminded that the same is a double-edged sword, which
is unimpeded in its application as much as a = v = = = for the
social democracy could decide.

As long as the current political, social and religious function of
the electoral masses of the overall vote may not even be the true
expression of popular will be, quite apart from the fact that this
common folk will not always meet the right thing, but sometimes in
the most opposites moved.

Do I need to but beating the only evidence known to the plebiscite
of the third Napoleon to remember what a few years later, however,
after the general hatred of the nation had to be loaded with epithets
and shame of it was being hunted.

Or to the proclamation of the sovereignty referendum in France in
1789, during an entire century, only to continually abwogende and
political struggles between the different views and forms of
government without any positive result has had to follow!

If the workers according to the instructions of his employer,
according to those officials of his government, the Catholic
electorate blindly following the command of his priests or Kapla
true, or if the farmer who zujubelt of him by applying orator or
material resources to win understands when finally the interest of
the people or the voters themselves in the election is so low that
it is only by artificial incitement can be excited, I think you
have to admit that the result of such a choice is often very little
common sense and justice will taste.

The large mass with their whims or ignorance, their Denkfaulheit,
their dependence and physical dependence, their subservience to
come and practice or with their whole grobmaterialistischen way to
think and feel, is the big obstacle to the clock of human development,
which this evolution and often back the huge efforts of an enlightened
and well-being of humanity-loving minority, more or less frustrated.

The unlimited confidence of the Social Democrats in voting for the
general realization of their plans for the future should be at least
as very doubtful respectively.

Would this also not the case, and should it succeed, the working
masses so the reputation of its leaders to force that on the way
the voting rights of the general political power in their hands to
get a view that you would, as already noticed , by the ruling classes
long ago such a possibility by means of appropriate measures to
prevent or to a serious conflict have prepared.

                                                                So would
once again just the way violent or exposure of the revolution,
whose outcome at least very doubtful, and which perhaps, or probably
the opposite of the Social Democrats wanted to would have.

In Memoriam.

DEDICATED TO THE MEMORY OF MR. AND MRS. JAMES KNOWLES.


They died within a week of each other, after a married life of forty-seven
years, and each at the age of seventy-five.

Ever faithful to the cause of their Master, they died as they had
lived--in triumphant faith.

    Hand in hand, together they trod
      Through years twoscore and seven;
    Their only staff was the Word of God,
      Their path was the way to heaven.

    Hand in hand, e'er the burning sun
      Had drunk up the morning dew,
    They started their earthly journey to run,
      While the heavens were fair and blue.

    But life's path lies not through a grassy dell,
      In the cool of the morning's shade;
    There are scorching sands, and torrents that swell,
      As well as the flowery glade.

    There are crags to climb in the mountains fast,
      There are gorges, and canyons deep,
    And the blinding snow, and the wintry blast
      Must over the landscape sweep.

    And the shoulders must bear a wearisome load,
      Whether o'er mountain or moor,
    Or through forest, or dusty highway, lay the road,
      Or the feet be bleeding and sore.

    But hand in hand we see them still,
      When the sun had drunk up the dew;
    They were toiling steadfastly up the hill,
      Ever keeping the end in view.

    They scaled the crags of the mountain steep
      When the noontide sun was high;
    And they forded the flood of the canyon deep,
      When the sun lay low in the sky.

    But their tired feet are no longer as light
      As in days of the long, long past,
    And their youthful tresses have turned to white
      With the snows, and the wintry blast.

    Now hand in hand, they stand by the shore
      Of a river dark and wide;
    And the songs which the seraphs are wafting o'er,
      They catch from the other side.

    And their faces beam with unearthly light,
      In the rays of the setting sun,
    As their eyes peer far beyond mortals' sight,
      And they learn that life's journey is done.

    Hand in hand by the river, they stray
      Where the dark waves wash the shore;
    And they hear the splash, and the feathery spray,
      As the ferryman dips his oar.

    Now the father waves a loving adieu,
      As he looses his claspèd hand;
    And the ferryman plies his oar anew,
      Till he reaches the golden strand.

    By the silent waves of the river of death,
      The mother is waiting still,
    With eager eye and with bated breath,
      The call of the Master's will.

    Now her face is illumed by a heavenly light
      As sweet as angels' breath;
    For she knows that the unclasped hands will unite,
      Across the river of death.

GEORGE F. SARGENT.

NEW YORK, February 17, 1887.


[Illustration: JAMES KNOWLES]


GATHERING JEWELS


CHAPTER I.

BRIEF SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF JAMES KNOWLES.

    "God bless thee, bairn--my bonnie bairn,"
      She said, an' straikit doon his hair;
    "O may the widow's God be thine,
      And mak' thee His peculiar care!"


James Knowles was born at sea, December 5, 1811, his father, the
previous day, having been swept overboard and lost. Unfortunately no
record of the misfortune was kept to be available for the present
purpose; hence we are unable to give either the name of the ship, or
the latitude and longitude it was in when his birth occurred. Picture
to yourself the deck of a vessel in mid-ocean, where the widow of a day
becomes a mother the next, the subject of this sketch being the infant
presented to her bosom, and you have a glimpse of the situation--though
it be unconnected with either a cottage, a mansion, or a palace.

The mother returned with the infant to the home of her father at
Ballymena, Ireland, where her relatives then undertook the care of the
fatherless babe, which eventually grew into healthy boyhood of the most
affectionate character.

As a youth he made rapid progress in the elementary branches of
education, often surprising his teachers with the patience and care he
exhibited in keeping in advance of his fellow-students--for he was
almost always at the head of his class. He was noted for his quiet,
unobtrusive disposition, underlying which was an internal force, which
made him prompt in action, and to the point in word, when the display
of such characteristics was sometimes necessary to establish his
individual superiority with more than usual power among his
fellow-schoolmates.

In 1826 he commenced his apprenticeship as a compositor, under the care
of Mr. Dugan, in the city of Belfast, Ireland, where he continued until
the expiration of the time of his indentures.

In 1832, after an ocean passage of sixty days in a sailing vessel, he
arrived in Philadelphia, Pa.

During this long and tedious voyage across the Atlantic, he and the
captain of the ship became very intimately attached to each other, and
he was frequently invited to dine with the officers.

After a brief stay in Philadelphia, he came to New York City, where he
found employment. Immediately after his arrival in this city, he became
a member of the Rev. Dr. McLeod's Reformed Presbyterian Church, in
Chambers Street, and continued with this church until after they had
removed to Prince Street.

In 1835 he became an employé in the office of the _Journal of Commerce_.
He frequently recalled that fearful night during the great fire in New
York, when the greater part of the lower portion of the city was totally
destroyed, and some of the large buildings had to be blown up with
gunpowder, to stop the ravages of the flames; he took an active part in
carrying the printing "forms" to a place of safety.

In 1839 he was married to Miss Matilda Darroch, who was a member of Dr.
McCarthy's Canal Street Presbyterian Church and a teacher in the
Sabbath-school.

As a Christian man, at this time, we find him teaching a large
Bible-class for young men in the above church, and to the end of his
earthly career he was constantly engaged in the Sabbath-school.

In 1849 the Prince Street Church property was sold to erect a new
building on Twelfth Street, where he continued to attend the services
until the year 1850, when some of the members, being anxious to enlarge
their borders, and continue the work in the lower part of the city,
formed the Second Reformed Presbyterian Church. They organized, and
called the Rev. Spencer L. Finney to the pastorate, who commenced to
hold services in the hall of the Apprentices' Library, No. 472
Broadway, where they worshipped for one year, and then secured more
ample accommodations in which to worship God, in the rooms of the
Medical College, Crosby Street, near Spring.

In 1850 he was carefully examined, and when found qualified for the
sacred office, was duly ordained a ruling elder in the Second Reformed
Presbyterian Church.

During the year 1854 the Church purchased the building in Mulberry
Street, near Grand, belonging to the Lutheran body.

At this time he continued to reside on the west side of the city, and
attended two sessions of the Sabbath-school morning and afternoon, with
two preaching services, and one prayer-meeting in the evening.

As soon as the congregation were permanently settled in a church
building, he removed from the west to the east side of the city, to the
Tenth Ward, in order to be in close proximity to his church work.

He continued to worship with the Second Reformed Presbyterian Church,
under the pastorate of the Rev. S. L. Finney, who, in 1863, was called
to Princeton, N.J.

The Rev. Geo. S. Chambers was subsequently called to take the pastoral
charge. Eventually, it was found essential to change their
ecclesiastical relations from the Reformed Presbyterian Church to the
Old School, from which time (the two religious bodies having become
united), the congregation became known as the Ebenezer Presbyterian
Church.

In due course it united with the Fortieth Street Presbyterian Church,
afterward called the Murray Hill Presbyterian Church, because at the
time, though in possession of a church building, they had no pastor.
Mr. Knowles continued to attend regularly until the imperative demands
of age and time called for change, when he became united with the Allen
Street Church.

In 1870 he accepted an invitation from his uncle to visit his native
place; and he frequently afterward remarked that the scenes of his
boyhood's days had materially changed as much as he had; realizing that
change, progress, and decay were written upon all things terrestrial.

During this visit to Europe, he greatly enjoyed rambles over the
country roads, admiring the beauties of the surrounding scenery.

On one occasion, while passing the school-house of his boyhood days, he
was found by an old friend, wistfully gazing at the building, who said,
"What are you looking at?" And upon entering into conversation, he
discovered that he and the gentleman who addressed him had been former
schoolmates together.

We find recorded in his diary the following:

    "I now commence filling this book, which I brought with me from New
    York, in the steamship Italia. I am now in Fenagh, Ireland."

From the record of this journey, we notice that he was very careful in
watching the signs of the times, and the changing moods of the weather.
For example, he writes thus:

    _Sabbath, January 4, 1874._--When I rose this morning, I found the
    ground covered with snow; the first fall of the season, and like the
    little captive Syrian maid, though far from home and friends and
    among comparative strangers, I do not forget God or the sanctuary.

    _Monday, January 5th._--A fine day, but cold, and snow on the
    ground.

    _Tuesday, January 6th._--A fine day, and a fine thaw, which resulted
    in the removal of the snow which had fallen a short time previously.

    _Wednesday, January 7th_ (morning).--A fine day. Afternoon, clouds
    gathering; lightning and thunder; came on to rain.

    _Thursday, January 8th._--A fine day of the season.

    _Friday, January 9th._--A fair day.

    _Saturday, January 10th._--A fine day. I went into Ballymena myself,
    and called at several places, and upon Mr. White, the printer, who
    did not know me, or remember anything about me. I called also on
    Mrs. McQuitty, who treated me in a very kindly manner. I also called
    on Mr. Kilpatrick's, but I only saw two of his daughters, and a
    little child. On the same day I bought McComb's almanac in
    Ballymena; paid two pence for it. I also bought the _Ballymena
    Observer_ from Mr. White. I walked into Ballymena, and also returned
    in like manner, only that in returning I took a circuitous route,
    that I might see a portion of the country that I had not seen for a
    length of time before my departure for America, in June, 1832.

    _Sabbath, January 11th_ (forenoon).--I heard Mr. Moody lecture from
    the 16th chapter of John, and 16th verse.

    _Afternoon._--Nehemiah, 9th chapter and 19th verse: "Yet Thou in Thy
    manifold mercy, forsookest them not in the wilderness; the pillar of
    the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way;
    neither the pillar of fire by night, to show them light, and the way
    wherein they should go."

    _Monday, January 12th._--A cold day. I received a letter from my
    son, William Knowles, in New York City.

    _Wednesday, May 19, 1875._--A fine day. I went to Belfast in an
    excursion train, and called at several places, and in the evening
    took a cabin passage for Glasgow, Scotland. I went from Greenock to
    Glasgow in the train; I arrived on Thursday morning in Glasgow,
    about six o'clock, and went to my brother-in-law's, Mr. William
    Darroch. The day is cold, blowing, and showers.

    _Glasgow, Sabbath morning, May 23d._--Heard the Rev. Mr. Douglass
    lecture from the 6th chapter of Matthew.

    _Afternoon._--A lovely day. Heard another minister preach in the
    same church, from the 3d chapter of Philippians, and 8th verse: "Yea
    doubtless, and I count all things but lost for the excellency of the
    knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord."

    _Tuesday, May 25th._--I went with Mrs. Darroch and her daughter,
    Maggie, to Edinburgh, and after visiting the castle, and a number of
    other places of interest, returned to Glasgow the same day.

    _Saturday, May 29th._--Returned to Belfast.

    _Sabbath morning, May 30th._--A beautiful day. Heard Dr. Houston,
    pastor of my boyhood, lecture from the 13th chapter of John; then
    preach from 1st Thessalonians, 3d chapter, 12th and 13th verses.
    Lecture in the evening, from the 6th and 7th chapter of Revelations.
    I took dinner and tea with Rev. Dr. Houston and his family. A fine
    day throughout.

Before returning to this country he expressed his love and unfeigned
gratitude to the memory of his sainted mother (who early taught him the
ways of God) by erecting a substantial monument over her grave to
perpetuate her revered name.

After spending two years in Europe he returned to New York, and was
elected an Elder in the Allen Street Church.

On Easter Sabbath, April, 1877, he was regularly installed into office
as a Ruling Elder.

    So I ask Thee, Lord, to give me grace
      My little place to fill,
    That I may ever walk with Thee,
      And ever do Thy will,
    And in each duty, great or small;
      I may be faithful still.

Of course, the life-work of such a man as we are contemplating was full
of little peculiarities (eccentricities, society calls them), which even
his most intimate relations with the world does not divulge to the
inquisitive of his day. It is only after such men pass away and their
relatives are permitted to look into the "private jewel-box," as it
were, that we come across the brilliant diamonds of thought, the
glowing rubies of expressed gratitude and, may be, some softly-tinted
pearls of faith, hope and charity, all lying together in the receptacle
which, even if humble in workmanship, is full of priceless treasures.

The Bible of our friend was very often used for over forty years, until
it showed that it was never allowed to preserve a dainty appearance
through a want of use, nor the dust to accumulate on cover or edge by
reason of its owner's non-usage of the sacred pages. It was a useful
Reference Bible, and, no doubt, of immense value and comfort to him,
for the pages are pretty well worn, even where no marks are made
indicative of favorite passages, etc.

Next among the eccentricities of our friend was the disposition to keep
a quiet order of memorandums, and a diary extending back for many
years, from which had we the space to spare in this book we would place
before the world some of the gems found in his jewel-box, as indicative
of the man's industry and the Christian's freedom from ostentatious
display.

    Help each step upon the way,
    Strength sufficient for the day,
    All things easy in Thy might,
    Work for thee a felt delight.

    Courage, patience, grace supplied,
    All things needful--at Thy side;
    Such my happy lot will be,
    Working, dearest Lord, with thee.

Agreeably with the spirit of our labor, we will take an impartial view
of our friend as a Christian, in the eyes of the world, and among
laymen generally. That he was no drone in the Christian hive, all the
world could see; that he was active and unusually laborious for Christ
and the Church, no one who follows the spirit of the sermon eulogizing
his memory, or who reads this work, can deny; as an Elder of the
Church, he was faithful in anything he was requested to perform,
especially in public prayer-meeting, individual devotional study, and
self-contemplation.

His sympathy for suffering humanity in any form, was, indeed, very
large, in fact so easily moved, that he would habitually visit the sick
members of the Church after being relieved from such duties. To him all
men and women were brothers and sisters, the distance of relationship
(if very strained and far between in some instances), he would claim,
was closer, more congenial, and intimate in others.

As a builder among the builders, a workman among the workmen of the
temple; or as a brother among brethren of the same house, he was
meekness itself; his spirit of patience never failing him in instances
where "to wait was gain," either for God, the Church, or himself.

His acquiescence in the decision of his brethren, when they at last
decided upon changing the location of their place of worship, was
secured at the price of sacrificing his own preferences in the
matter--and all for the sake of peace, harmony, and continued brotherly
love. In this he was a "light shining upon a hill-top."

The interest he always displayed and the anxiety he expressed for the
continued welfare of the Church, manifesting the same in the labors
performed or duties undertaken, was always profound, as it embraced
among other items of care the temporal welfare and spiritual prosperity
of the various clergymen with whom he had labored.

In his demeanor he was never in a hurry to do to-day what he should
have done yesterday, because having no faith in procrastination, he
left nothing undone to-day to be performed on the morrow, if by any
means it could be accomplished, or the duty performed at once. In going
to the House of God, he left all worry about the world on the outside
of it, the moment he entered the porch; the drudgery of every-day life
did not go with him into the pew; the prejudices of an ambiguous man
troubled him not, while the disposition to "take things easy," while
others bore the burden, was never fostered by him.

But he did carry something into the house every time he entered! He
took in with him his Bible, his sweetest temper, his most charitable
disposition, a vigorous condition of soul-life, a sensible care of the
temporal body, and also the continued desire to be always walking with
God, as well as the desire for larger acquisitions of intuitive
spiritual knowledge--very proper things to take into the House of God
with you at all times; and our departed brother had enough of these,
and to spare.

But to cease from reflection, we close this chapter with one of our
friend's favorite little gems of poetry, believing that when you have
read it, you will agree with us that James Knowles was a man to be
beloved, indeed; for through these few lines his spirit breathes back
again to us from the great beyond:

    If you cannot be a leader
      In the crowd that pours along,
    Raise the fallen, lying prostrate
      Under foot, amid the throng.

    Though your work be never mentioned,
      Though your name may not appear,
    Speak one word for "Jesus only,"
      And the Lord, at least, will hear.


CHAPTER II.

CORRESPONDENCE AND COVENANTS.


The following letter was written to his mother while an apprentice as a
printer in the city of Belfast, Ireland:

    BELFAST, January 15, 1829.

    DEAR MOTHER:--I write this letter to you for the purpose of letting
    you know how I am doing. I am devoting the most of my leisure hours
    to reading and improving my mind, some way or other. Indeed, it is
    not much time I have to devote to things of that nature; but all the
    time I have I am busy. I meet with a good many advantages in every
    respect, where I am now. I have the advantage of having a room to
    apply my time to whatever study I resolve to persevere in. If I had
    time, I would give you a more correct account of my transactions
    through the day; but if I have time to meditate a little, I hope I
    will be enabled to give you some account of the sermons that I hear,
    as I think it would be greatly to my own interest, for if I pry into
    that part of information, there is no danger but that I will have
    success in whatever situation I am placed in life. I may be thankful
    that I have a room to read my Bible in on Sabbath days. I have none
    to speak to me or give me annoyance of any sort whatever. I hope the
    next letter I write you, that it will be in a more correct sense. I
    hope you will write me by Johnny, when he is coming back to town,
    and let me know how you are succeeding in work, and how Jane is
    succeeding in the business of the shop. I send my love to all my
    friends (everyone in particular), I hope you will let me know how
    they are all doing; but I have nothing more to say at present. But I
    trust you will write me in the beginning of the week. I must
    conclude, as it is now too late for me to say anything more. All
    here are well, but Mrs. L----, who is in a bad state of health.

    JAMES KNOWLES.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The following letter is a sample of many to his old pastors, showing
his strong attachment to those who labored with him in word and
doctrine:

    NEW YORK, March 26, 1883.

    MR. PHELPS--Reverend and dear friend and Christian brother: It has
    been my purpose for some time to write to you and yours, even if it
    should be but a few lines, to assure you that you are not forgotten
    by us; for although you are absent from us, yet your faithful and
    earnest appeals still live in our remembrance, and I have no doubt
    will continue to do so; and while I may not be able to recall much
    of the many sermons which I have heard you deliver, yet the
    impressions made upon my mind while sitting under them are retained.
    I might, however, state here, that I was sorry to part with you and
    your family, and to feel that your pastoral relationship with us
    would soon be broken up; I had made up my mind to stay by the Church
    while you remained, if I lived, as I was attached to you and your
    family as to personal friends.... My wife and I unite in love to you
    and Mrs. Phelps and your son.

    JAMES KNOWLES.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    COVENANTS WITH GOD.

    "Dear Lord, and shall Thy Spirit rest
    In such a wretched heart as mine?
    Unworthy dwelling! Glorious Guest!
    Favor astonishing, Divine!"

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The following acts of consecration will, no doubt, be of interest to
the reader:

    NEW YORK, Thursday, June 21, 1860.

    I do solemnly resolve from this day onward to endeavor, relying on
    thy Holy Spirit, to serve _Thee_ better. This is my covenant, and I
    would ask Thee to own and bless me with peace and joy in believing.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    NEW YORK, Saturday, October 6, 1860.

    I now promise, as I have formerly promised to do, from this day
    onward, to serve God better than I have been doing; depending on
    God's spirit for assistance; and will now ask to be prospered as
    God may see good for me.

    JAMES KNOWLES.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    NEW YORK, Friday, October 18, 1861.

    I resolved to serve God with renewed efforts, determining to look
    alone to God for help.[1]

    JAMES KNOWLES.

      [1] The Fulton Street Noon Prayer Meetings found him an
      occasional visitor during these days of national peril, anxiety,
      and prayer.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    NEW YORK, Thursday, April 9, 1863.

    Entered into an agreement with my Heavenly Father that, through the
    strength of His divine grace, I will live more for the glory of God
    than I have ever done.

    JAMES KNOWLES.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    NEW YORK, Saturday afternoon, April 22, 1865.

    I renewed my covenant with God in the City Hall Park while standing
    there, which I some years ago made, and now I again renew it, that
    I would serve God better than formerly.

    JAMES KNOWLES.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    NEW YORK, Thursday, April 19, 1866.

    Renewed my engagement with the Lord to serve Him better than I had
    done before, after having prayed to Him to be justified through
    faith in the righteousness of Christ; and asked for other blessings
    which I felt satisfied I would receive, for I feel my great need of
    these, as I felt very helpless in myself, but that there was
    abundant fulness in Christ.

    Here is the reason why his name as an enlightened, has barely
    figured in the political concept in the vast catalog of the Spanish
sovereign, and therefore it is entirely void.

    But despite everything, there was this noble and powerful nation,
the daughter of the great kings Catholics D.

                   Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, and mother of the noble and brave
Emperor Charles V, so that the details of his private life, the
reasons why it occurred his dementia, and the foundation that is
called the Mad, can not but Scythian curiosity, and with double
cause, because one can look at this sovereign, as in the sad mirror
of the deadly results that the violent passions have brought Estremo,
unless it is modified and suppress the right.

    Provided a Doña Juana no common talent of a strong and ardent
imagination, he was educated in a vulgar manner to that time: and
especially in the Greco-Roman language, made admirable progress so
that talked with a charming ease.

    The scientist claims that Luis Vives of any material to be treated
in this language, as if it were suddenly answered in Castilian.

    These linked the qualities of a slender figure and much interest
    was the type of beauty, full of grace and dignity: their large eyes,
    and expressly ragged, denoted the rare talent and energy of his
    soul, which accompanied the dignified and elegant manners of the
court of Elizabeth, paragon of virtue and morality.

    All these great circumstances, together with the power of their
    parents, to Doña Juana one of those matches for any gifted young
    prince of Europe. These were in the same circumstances a creditor
    Infanta to be idolaters, even for those who do not have the
    pleasure and honor to admire. Evidence that it did not take long to
    see what some princes who could be was the owner of this jewel of
    inestimable value. D. Fernando and Isabel did not want to either
    extend your wedding, so counting only fifteen years, ie in 1494,
adjusted to the desired wedding D.

        Philip, Archduke of Austria,
        Duke of Flanders, Artois and the Tyrol,
        and son the Emperor of Germany,
        Maximilian I. Were adjusted, he
        will instantly start to
        progress with the preparations for
        the pomp and solemnity worthy of
        the daughter of so powerful
        lords. One hundred and twenty
        armed vessels of high board will
        be provided at the port of Laredo,
        embarking on her fifteen thousand
        men of war, including the crew. A
        Don Alonso Enriquez, great admiral
        of Castile, was given command of the
        fleet: D. went higher Chaplain
        Diego de Villaescusa, dean of Jaen,
        and commissioned by the king to serve and stand on the immediate
command of the Infanta, was Doña Teresa de Velasco, the wife of the
Admiral who led that espedicion.

The camera and all the places belonging to his person, was served
by ladies and gentlemen of the first nobility of Spain, so it says
in the lists of them form D.

Lorenzo de Padilla.

Is useless to mention the clothes and jewelry that were decorated
by princess augusta so: you can say for short that had been prepared
with elegance and profusion.

    Finished the preparations, he went all
    Almazan royal family to the port of Laredo,
    for dismiss such escelsa Infanta,
    skeptical D.

King Fernando found that by conducting cutting Aragon, was unable to
verify, despite his. The late Prince D. John, the brother of Doña
Juana and her mother accompanied her augusta to the entrance of the
ship, where he drowned in a sea of tears, gave each other the most
tender and loving God.

    A God that resonated for all angles of the boat, as a sign of
    appreciation for the real people who were on shore. Day August
    19 1496 were to sail in the direction of the flamingos. No setback
    had been noticed, anything that had come to disturb the tranquility
    of the famous traveler acurrido had to touch the shores of Flanders,
    where he built a very stormy time, they were compelled to shelter
at the first point of salvacion found.

    Great was the sorrow of seeing Doña Juana in imminent danger as
    her life, but God could arrive at the port of Toorlan in England,
    after having walked on average more than two hours, struggling
    with the rough waves a moment any more immersed in the depths of
the seas.

    Remained in this town seven days, during which he was presented by the
    Infanta very ladies and gentlemen of that country leading to Presure
    went to kiss her hand and together to offer their services.
    CHAPTER II.

    _De How Doña Juana married, had children and other matters of greater
    interés._ [Illustration] When he had calmed the storm, arranged
    the trip to Flanders, and on September 8 landed in the bay of
    Ramna, port in the vicinity of Holland, without having gone to
    another against various jewels of great value to the princess, because
    the ship which was grounded in his bedroom a bank called the
    Monge site quite dangerous. The prince who went to heaven husband of
    Doña Juana, then lived in a sumptuous palace Lande, people of the
    Tyrol, but ascertained the promised coming of his face, left it,
    going as fast Liege, where he had the pleasure Admire the beauty of
    the Infanta, after having waited impatiently for thirteen days in
    this city. He immediately launched the marriage having been given
    the blessings D.

                   Diego de Villaescusa, Dean of Jaen.

Practiced with the greatest solemnity and magnificence of the
ceremonies usual, came to Antwerp, and from there to Brussels, where
they were full of congratulations and where they had prepared for
his arrival the people of this province many festivals, of which
the young couple were enjoying a long time.

Such was the entertainment provided by the people of Brussels, which
some authors claim, he heard more than once said to Philip, who
gladly would point his residence this capital. It is common opinion that
D. Felipe was an arrogant figure, handsome knight and a close friend
of wear esplendidez. Añádese this a friendly character, for which
we all appreciated.

    These were the qualities that Granger's reputation _Hermoso_. The
    Infanta Doña Juana, was by contrast Estremé and strong, but
    nevertheless, seized it as a passion vehementísima that from the
    moment they saw him loved him with blind idolatry. The affection
    of Doña Juana to Philip the Fair is growing every day, by the way
    of life they observed, and the good behavior of the archduke, who,
    as young, not thinking about anything else that delights in
    the well is continuing tournaments in progress, Sarah and other
entertainment, which grew more passion for his young wife, with the
gallantry and skill in his arms Felipe.

    Her husband was the subject of his worshipers, he had placed in
    his heart and lived only for him, the young archduke paid Doña Juana
    that fond of all the warmth of her young age, and the ways
    of a gallant prince, so that the Infanta was one of those people who
    are happy, and much more when he noted that would soon become a
    mother. It's time you left for Flanders after some time, which
    gave birth to Queen Juana on November 15 1498 Doña Leonor, then
    continuing through unscathed in both his love and not ceasing to
be a good example of ones spouse.

    Despite the fact that although it had not been so, just enough possession
    of the fruits of their marriage that had taken over his increasing
    affection Super. It was the best states for its success have been
    born female, but, as they were parents dear , was the cherished
    daughter. Two years later, the year of 1500, marched to Ghent,
    where the day February 21 had a son, who nominated Charles, then
    known around the world for their fame and power. Great was the joy
    that was painted on the faces of the residents of those states,
    each striving which expressly the joy experienced by the heir prince.
    Were also innumerable festivals with such a solemn occasion were
    implemented, and would therefore raise the cause of excerpts from
    the story to an immense height. Starting from this era and Doña
    Juana relapse into despair because since fortune seemed tilt for
all newborn began to wane as bonesetter happiness of the mother of
Emperor Charles V.

    The misfortune came to snatch the life in the year of 1500 in late
    July to D. Infante Michael, son of King D. John of Portugal, last rod
    in the male line of the Catholic Monarchs D. Fernando and Queen Isabel,
    therefore rests the crown of Spain, the mother of Doña Leonor, and
    D. Carlos. D. Fernando and Queen Isabel immediately called Don
    Juan de Fonseca, bishop of Cordova, and intimate the order to move
rapidly to Flanders for the Archduke knew of this event, for which
I congratulate them on their real names, and make known the urgent
need for preparing your trip to Spain, and then waited anxiously
to be sworn as princes of this great nation, that Heaven had deigned
to stop by only heirs. few days without D.

Juan de Fonseca to fulfill its mission, but the tape found in Doña Juana
and the many occupations in this delicate time came to Philip the Fair
in those states, because they were not able to verify the planned trip
and ended the year 1501, in which his third son was born, (Isabel). They
were so continuous instances led D. Fernando from his court, which
forced the Archduke to get on track, even without being fully restlablecida
Doña Juana the indisposition of his birth, they resolved to do so
by land, crossing the French state. The sovereign of this nation received
with the greatest kindness, affection lavished endless samples and
treating them with dignity and respect due to such powerful lords. A small
annoyance happened was the cause of the Archduke soon be made up of
France to Spain. A day of celebration came to the solemn mass real
French family, with its venerable guests. At the offertory approached
a lady Doña Juana, his hand approaching a number of currencies,
according to custom to offer to the public on behalf of the queen.
This was rejected with violence, saying: "Know your _Haced sovereign
that I did not offer anyone, you understand? _. With the money and answer
the messenger returned to the Queen, who felt a slight degree so marked,
but trying to restrain his anger, was content to pay a larger one with
which the offer was not leaving the church before that the Royal
entourage.

    The perspicacity of Doña Juana did present something on this
    and do not be deceived, because they already finished the Mass,
    the family began to meet, yet she remained in the church.

    The queen looked a little on the street, but Doña Juana unaware
that doing all this, remained in that position a long time, then
going alone to the palace.

    Hablillas Everything is returning to the Court on the remaining
esplicado snub, and have spent more Archduke succeed if it is not
apologizing to his wife who was shot was directed, so he had to
rush to shorten your trip to Spanish soil. day had already begun
in 1502, when they made their entry into Spain by Fuenterrabia.

    In this capital city looked upon recommendation of the D.

    Fernando and Queen Isabel, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas, who
accompanied by Burgos, Valladolid and Madrid to Toledo, the point
where they were called the Cortes of the kingdom, and where jurors
were then inherited the crown of Spain, who estimated May 22 was
the same year of 1502.

    After jurors also became the kingdoms of Aragon and Valencia,
    where they accompanied their parents travel. Back espedicion and
    this had to stop in Alcala de Henares a result of being near
    birth Doña Juana.

    All parties that are prepared in the court to the heirs archduke,
who had stopped to run after the double objective of the new birth
of a prince, which took effect on 10th March 1503 with the birth
of the infant Don Fernando I then happened to the Emperor Charles
V in the empire of Germany.

    The events which had by then in the states of Philip the Fair, you
will not be allowed to continue any longer in Spain: so is determined
to march instantly, even against their will, not enough or the pleas
of his mother, Doña Juana nor to make you abandon your efforts.

    From this time dates the fatal madness of the mother of many kings.

    Since this time he was so miserable muger deserves a better fate.

    Anyone who knows what they are jealous of those who can judge
    Doña Juana had therefore to be presumed that his shadow would snatch
    a husband so dear. Philip in turn had paid the fair value love
    him, but he was estinguiendo, no enthusiasm and repeated praise of
    his wife, and this feeling will not cause his departure, ensuring
    even before this was in response to the indisposition of his
    birth.

    The entourage that accompanied Doña Juana, forming their servitude,
when it came to Flanders for his wedding, was a young girl, which
was the admiration of all.

    Blonde beauty had a pleasant
    and seductive, too funny,
    and a talent estraordinario.
    Found in the palace of
    the Archduke, which led to Philip the Handsome of Spain back, once
rid of unbounded praise of Doña Juana, the look for this adhesion,
which concluded at the end of blind passion for the charms of the
blonde Spanish, whose magnificent golden hair came to seduce her
heart. did not take long to succumb to the repeated request of
Philip, which was a few days to no more than a servant and who now
occupied the place of a queen.

    Gossip and envy
    began to sit in the palace,
    and therefore did
    not last long without the
    disclosure of this event, so that as quickly as the news came to
Spain, and when they learned the real people.

    Will possible esplicar which suffered Doña Juana to be aware of
    this story? This and the other was not depriving the archduchess of
    reason until it ceased to exist.

    This and the other was no more
    sharp knife to make her lover
    Philip in the chest. Stop anyone who has
    loved here, and consider fever to be eater apoderaria a character
as strong and energetic as that of Doña Juana.

    Suffering unspeakable torments, tortures its reason that turbo until
    dilirio: not wanting to embrace what they wanted most in the
    world after her husband, who were their children. Her face always
    sad and demudado revealed the horrific torture that esperimentaba
    his wandering gaze seemed to want to distinguish one object, which
found its light departed, improperios is filled with imprecations,
ran away from everyone and not more than Preferia loneliness : This
finding distractions, devoting his thoughts to Felipe, in spite of
being unfaithful.

      For this reason the Court decided to leave and retire to the Mota
of Medina del Campo, to be intimately convinced that this market
would be free to place observers courtesans, and from there to write
to Queen Elizabeth, her mother, news of its latest resolution, which
was leaving as soon as possible to Flanders for this sort of return
to own the heart of her husband, and soon destroy the love they had
deposited in the Spanish blonde.

         Queen Elizabeth, before her
         daughter was aware of everything, knew perfectly well that this
professed ardent love for her husband, and assuming that his departure
might be the mainspring of a great scandal, tried to prevent his
departure, although the expense of hard work.

     Knew that the love relationships of Philip were too new to that as
soon could have a break.

    So we tried to discourage the idea of leaving, putting on the pretest
found very delicate health, and Also found her father holding the
Courts in Aragon, which so adoring, yet feel very much that this
determination was made without his consent.

    Both the Catholic queen and her daughter Dona Juana, carrying their
    intention, first, to see if I could without giving scandal, the
    love that dash had the fellow in Philip and the second because I
    wanted to give a lesson to her husband, confusing his beloved. No
    Doña Juana left her mother to write to the object, but had been
    useless so far their pleas for permission to this: he had reached
the point of sending the most influential in his court if here have
achieved what you want even at the expense of his life.

    But seeing that all was in
    vain, took the decision to leave without the consent
    of her mother, without reaching
    the ears of her father, and if possible, without being more than
the whole of his chariot drivers.

    To those people who had placed their trust gave the orders necessary
to prepare as soon as the necessary utilities running.

    Everything was already prepared, but wanted the chance to be advised
    of this resolution Isabel unexpectedly, so immediately sent to Don
Juan de Fonseca, bishop of Cordova, to the plea on his behalf did
not leave.

    A point of boarding
    the Dona Juana carruage
    already arrived when
    a messenger from the queen. A
    moment later failed to find one.

    Sent instantly D. Juan de Fonseca carruage be withdrawn, and then
    went to see the Archduchess, which already found on the door of
    the Palace de la Mota, prepared to march in trage away.
    Our mother would
    frequently speak to him, saying:

    "Just one word, papa!"

    But he would only shake his head, without uttering a word.

    The history of his going was as follows:

    On Tuesday, October 19th, father left the office for the last time.
    When Wednesday morning, October 20th, dawned, he complained of a
    pain in his side, remarking that he "did not think he would go to
    the office before noon." He did not go at all.

    I went to the house in the evening, to find that the doctor had been
    called _twice_, and that father had pleurisy. We passed through the
    night watching and hoping for favorable changes; but, unfortunately,
    the next (Thursday) morning, October 21st, pneumonia set in, and the
    case became complicated. Already very weak, he grew more feeble
    every hour. He had done his part of this life's work, and seemed
    conscious that the Universal Master was about to finish the mansion
    into which his servant was fully prepared to enter. A peaceful,
    quiet Christian in the home circle; a zealous worker in the Church;
    watchful in his business relations with the world, he looked the
    very embodiment of peaceful repose in his last moments, and on his
    earthly bed of sleeping rest--so life-like, too, that I dare not say
    bed of death--as he breathed his last at 2.10 A.M., Saturday,
    October 23d.

    The expressions and sentiments of many who visited the house during
    his sickness, and while lying in the casket (Roman Catholics,
    believers, and unbelievers) were all in harmony with the idea that
    "if ever a human being entered heaven, he had gone straight to that
    realm of blissful repose."

    But to go back just prior to his demise, when the doctor quietly
    told us he could not live another day. We tried hard to be resigned
    on that Friday night, feeling sure that the end was near. After the
    meeting at the Church was dismissed, the minister came to the house
    and remained with us until after midnight, obtaining from father
    the words and signs that are precious as he passed away; the last
    audible words to me being: "William, God bless you and your
    family!"

    In the history of _my_ mother's demise, I will briefly state that,
    on Saturday night, October 23d, while father lay asleep in Jesus,
    she went to the store, as was her life-long custom, with some
    tracts, and to purchase a few things. On her return after coming
    up-stairs she threw herself down upon the sofa with the words, "No
    papa to come and carry up the basket for me to-night!" and there she
    sat in deep affliction, as if her heart would break.

    On Sabbath night, October 24th, when quite a number of people were
    in the house, she very earnestly exhorted them in Christ Jesus,
    allowing no one to pass unobserved. In turning to one young wife, I
    heard her kindly urge, "Always be cheerful and happy; don't
    discourage your husband by always complaining. He will also get
    discouraged. That is what ruins many a happy home." Singular to
    note, my mother had scarcely got through, when she, too, complained
    of a pain in her side, remarking, "It is papa's pain."

    On Monday morning she arose to eventually lie upon the sofa in an
    unconscious state. The funeral services over father's remains were
    to be observed in the Allen Street Presbyterian Church at 1 P.M.:
    therefore the doctor came in to arouse her, and gave her a
    stimulant, so that she went to the church with us, returning home
    instead of going to the grounds, after the services; and here I may
    say her pastor preached a very solemn sermon, exactly in harmony
    with the tenor of father's private and public life.

    One thing happened (when the relatives were invited to step forward
    and see the remains for the last time) that was singular, viz.: As
    my mother bent over to take a last look at the life-long partner of
    her joys and sorrows, her veil became attached to the handle of the
    casket, which my sister was compelled to stoop and unloosen.
    Without being superstitious, this looked like the dead reaching
    forth to the living.

    At all events, on Tuesday, October 26th, mother was confined to her
    bed, and, as she had said, she had "papa's pain"--pleurisy. The
    next day, Wednesday, October 27th, pneumonia followed, when it
    required three persons to care for her in the day, and three to
    attend her through the night, with no change for the better.

    On Thursday there was no favorable sign to note--suspense was still
    in the balancing beam. Toward Friday night, October 29th, all hope
    having vanished, my mother was quietly informed that "her day was
    short!" To which she responded: "My day is short. I must finish my
    work!"

    "Then occurred a repetition of the previous call upon the Allen
    Street Church, a second Friday in succession. In response, the
    minister, elder, and' several young men came promptly to the house
    to hear the testimony of a sainted mother in Israel going to rest.
    After supplication in prayer and a hymn of praise, the minister
    asked mother:

    "Have you any word for me, sister?"

    Turning over and taking his hand, she said:

    "No! you know these things yourself. Preach the gospel uncolored!"

    To a Roman Catholic she remarked:

    "There are no forms about my religion!"

    To her daughter-in-law, my wife, she remarked:

    "You have a mother!"

    To the young men present she lovingly urged:

    "Avoid bad company; learn of Christ; seek to be like Him, little by
    little."

    To Mrs. ----, who is a visitor, she firmly said:

    "You are well liked, and can do a great deal of good; but pray with
    the people you visit!"

    Then at times she would exclaim:

    "Oh, I have so much to do; but I am so weak!"

    When Esther, my sister, soothingly said:

    "Mother, please do not talk so much, it weakens you;" she responded
    with:

    "The doctor says my day is short!"

    Later on, requesting my wife to remove her stockings, she remarked,
    "I have got to the edge of the river!" Finally: "Once I was young;
    now I am old, and have _never_ been forsaken!" were the last words
    of testimony she left those present to bear witness to as she fell
    asleep in the Lord.

    What a blessed "going" for a life-long, zealous Christian who was
    left an orphan when only eight years of age (as seen and recorded
    in another chapter), with a rich uncle who would have done anything
    for her if she had only married as he desired. What an
    encouragement it holds forth to the living to trust everything to
    God, and simply follow as He may direct.

    Death had no sting or terror for her. She spoke calmly of the last
    rites to be observed over her remains, saying she would like to be
    buried like "Papa" (father), and asked my wife if the services
    would be held over her at the house, or in the church. When
    informed that the service would be held in the church, she
    smilingly said, "Very well," and cheerfully resigned herself from
    earth to heaven.

    Her last exhortation to myself was: "Be faithful, humble, meek, and
    constantly keep at the Master's feet until He calls you up higher.
    Be kind, gentle, and patiently forbearing with your sister." In her
    discourse with my sister she was very anxious and urgent that her
    daughter would ultimately meet her parents in heaven, for which we
    pray. Her faith was great; she had no fear or thought for self; her
    great concern was for the heavenly welfare of those around her. She
    spoke and acted as if her seat or place in the realm of bliss had
    been long secured to her--in that great faith she died, but not
    before, in her parting words, she had instructed me, "To gather up
    the books and tracts; to see that they were properly distributed,
    and that not one sheet be lost, so that the work would go on after
    she was gone."

    This second source of anxiety having been allayed, she rapturously
    extended her hands to meet the angels, and raising herself up in
    bed, turned her head and raised her eyes as if to gaze upon the
    celestial messengers sent to bear her home, before she said to us:
    "Be faithful till the Master calls!" then grasping the hands
    reached out to hers, she was gone--gone from a finite life into
    heavenly rest!

    One or two other items I must note. In looking over my father's
    papers, I find that he kept a private diary (which forms a part of
    the contents of this work) of the texts and sermons he heard on the
    Sabbath, from the year 1858, to the Sabbath before he died, and
    much significance is given to one he heard you preach from the Book
    of Jude, 23d verse: "Hating even a garment spotted by the flesh." I
    feel confident that he grew in grace under the Word of Life
    conveyed to him by you, and assisted by a close study of his own
    Bible. In his usual course of reading the Scriptures, he read on
    the day he was taken sick the 20th Psalm, though not permitted
    again to drink from the same fountain of Eternal Life, for he was
    going, unconsciously, to realize the efficacy of the 21st Psalm--a
    favorite with him--and to receive the crown of gold and life
    everlasting.

    The general remarks of the outside world at the time fostered great
    interest in the fact of such peaceful "goings" from earth to heaven
    of two such worthy Christians, at dates so close to each other.

    Neither of them feared death. Both had lived and worked in harmony
    for the same great end.

    Both to be ultimately called up higher in one week and two hours of
    each other.

    WILLIAM KNOWLES.

I desire to supplement the foregoing account of the "Last Hours," by
stating that when we reached the house of sickness and death, we found
her son reading that precious portion of God's Word, the 14th chapter
of St. John's Gospel, "Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in
God, believe also in me. In my father's house are many mansions; if it
were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you,"
etc. The scene was deeply affecting. Loved ones were gathered around
the bedside.

After reading the Scriptures, and prayer, we united in singing that
well known hymn,

    Jesus, lover of my soul,
      Let me to Thy bosom fly,
    While the nearer waters roll,
      While the tempest still is high,
    Hide me, O my Saviour, hide,
      Till the storm of life be past;
    Safe into the haven guide;
      O receive my soul at last!

The dying missionary endeavored to join in the singing though extremely
faint, and life's latest sun was sinking fast, for the hour of her
departure had come, and she heard the voice that called her home, and
at last she peacefully entered into that rest that remains for the
people of God.

Three thousand copies of the "Last Hours" were printed in pamphlet form
and widely scattered over different parts of the country. And the Lord
has been graciously pleased to bless their circulation to the spiritual
edification of those who had the privilege of reading them.

It was a singular coincidence that the last chapter read by the Elder
was the same as the one selected by the minister as the Lesson of the
Day, on the occasion of the celebration of the Jubilee exercises in
honor of the noble and beloved Queen Victoria, in Westminster Abbey.


CHAPTER V.

THE DEAD WHO DIE IN THE LORD.[2]

"And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them"--Rev.
xiv. 13.

      [2] The substance of a sermon preached in the Allen Street
      Presbyterian Church, New York City, October 25, 1886, on the
      occasion of the death of Elder James Knowles, who triumphantly
      fell asleep in Jesus, October 23, 1886, in the seventy fifth year
      of his age.


Elder James Knowles is at rest--sweet, sweet rest. It is the rest for
which he sighed and for which he prayed. His favorite hymn was:

    O land of rest, for thee I sigh,
      When will the moment come,
    When I shall lay my armor by,
      And dwell in peace at home?

To keep an eye on the home above is consummate wisdom. Hence the
injunction of the Holy Apostle, "Set your affections on things above."
This exercise of the heart can only be attained by first seeking an
interest in the atoning blood and justifying righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

"John looked, and, lo! a Lamb (the Lamb of God) stood on the mount Sion,
and with Him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's
name (the new name) written in their foreheads, and I heard a voice
from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great
thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps: and
they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the four
hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the
earth." Those who had here below redemption through His blood, even the
forgiveness of their sins, according to the riches of His grace. These
are they who keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus
Christ. Concerning such is this solemn affirmation made, corroborated
by the attestation of the Divine voice, that the dearly beloved John
heard, saying, "Write, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord."

You know that the original signification of the word "blessed" means
happy. In Christ's inimitable Sermon on the Mount He declares, "Happy
are the beggars in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." All
the uninterrupted felicities of the glory land are theirs at the hour
of dissolution. Their joy is augmented by the pure fellowship and
friendship of the Saviour and the saints before the throne of the
Eternal.

There is a broad avenue opened up to the saved of pleasing and familiar
intercourse with the general assembly, and the spirits of just men made
perfect. They share the attention and affection of the heavenly host,
and are gladdened by the presence of Him who is the King eternal,
immortal, but not now invisible, for they behold the King in his
beauty.

"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord." Death to the Christian is
represented in the Scripture as a sleep. "Them that sleep in Jesus will
God bring with Him." He is redeemed from the power of death. "For
Christ came to deliver them, who, through fear of death were all their
life time subject to bondage." (Heb. ii. 15.) All believers, therefore,
need not dread death--he is a conquered enemy. And so every one of us
who are here to day in Christ can say humbly, but truly, "O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" No Christian,
however weak he may be, need fail to feel with Paul, and ask the same
question, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?... Nay in all these things we are more than conquerors
through Him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord."

The last great conflict is inevitable, but the secret of a triumphant
departure from this life is found in the language of the "Faith Psalm,"
"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me." It is not really death that we have to grapple with. It is only
the shadow of death. We do not fear the shadow of a sword, or the
shadow of a serpent. The above verse of the twenty-third Psalm is very
frequently misquoted. It is called the dark valley. But you remember
that when Bunyan's pilgrim came down to the valley it was not dark, for
Jesus, the light, was with him. The sting of death is not simply
concealed; it is completely destroyed by the death of Christ. He
conquered the great enemy. "The sting of death is sin, the strength of
sin is the law; but thanks be unto God who giveth us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ."

Thus understood, the Christian is truly blessed in his death. He cannot
be separated from Christ, or from his symmetrically developed spiritual
character. Death is not the extinction of being. We must make a
distinction between natural and spiritual death. It is sin unforgiven
that gives death his power. It is a fearful catastrophe to those out of
Christ. Hence the holiness of others will not avail them at the hour of
dissolution. "When the soul raves round the walls of its clay tenement,
and runs to each avenue, and shrieks for help when no help can come,"
then the door of salvation is eternally shut. The last ray of hope is
then forever faded. "There are no acts of pardon past in the cold grave
to which we haste." Oh, let us not content ourselves with a mere
external profession of Christianity. True wisdom consists in having the
graces of the Holy Spirit in the heart. Walking day by day by faith in
Jesus Christ, so that when the cry is made, "Behold the Bridegroom
cometh, go ye out to meet Him," we go forth with joy and not with
grief.

Scriptural facts concerning death go to show that it is not an
unimportant event. To the soul who is found clothed not in his own
righteousness which is of the law, but with the righteousness of the
Redeemer, to die is gain, for precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his saints (or holy ones). It is then the refining process is
thoroughly completed. They are ready to be offered. The honor and favor
of the Father is now about to be received. The union formed on earth is
at death gloriously ratified in heaven.

The obedience of Christ's death is fully realized to be laid to their
account. The life and immortality brought to light by the Gospel is
then permanently enjoyed. The clouds and mysteries that cluster around
this earthly life are then dissipated. The full communion of the
populace of glory is wonderfully experienced without interruption or
restraint. The "conflict is over, and the prize is won." "Let me die
the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his." It is
then we view the Divine glory, for this was a part of Christ's prayer:
"Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory."

You see, then, how the believer is ushered into the beauties and
blessedness of the beatic state. There is, therefore, nothing to be
dreaded by the approach of the last enemy. For, says the prophet, He
"will swallow up death in victory: and the Lord God will wipe away
tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of the people shall he take
away from off all the earth; for the Lord hath spoken it." It is by a
realization of his security in death that the believer in Jesus can
calmly meditate on the hour of dissolution--that he is blest with
longings for home; that he is soon to be delivered from the present
evil world; in short, that he is completely constituted an actuality in
the Church triumphant. He is at last brought into intimate alliance
with Christ, not now by faith but by sight, not by prayer, but by
praise; not by earthly circumscribed anticipation, but by the power of
unfathomable and constraining grace, and a deep sensibility of soul
which springs from the knowledge that he is forever with the Lord; now
the strugglings of faith are ended.

When Peter, James, and John beheld Christ transfigured on the summit of
the mount, and as they gazed upon the glory of the scene, they said,
"It is good to be here." It was a sight of Moses and Elias that
enraptured their soul. That was only a transitory sight. But at death
the Christian is admitted into endless glory. It is day without a
night. It is to be admitted into the House of the Lord. "The house not
made by hands, eternal in the heavens." Through much tribulation they
enter into the kingdom. Soon shall close their earthly mission; soon
shall end their pilgrim days; hope shall change to glad fruition. God
is continually guiding our feet to those mansions above, where flowers
that never fade do deck the heavenly plains. Where our loved ones gone
before shall meet us and greet us on the golden strand. Many are the
voices so sweet and tender, and true, who are calling us away to join
the holy ones, that no man can number, who stand around the throne
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. The angels beckon
us away to join their ranks. Truly blessed are the dead who die in the
Lord.

In the Treasury Hymnal there is a Pilgrim Song by Dr. Horatius Bonar,
and the music is from Beethoven; it is very sweet and cheering in this
connection:

    A few more years shall roll, a few more seasons come,
    And we shall be with those that rest asleep within the tomb.
    Then, oh, my Lord, prepare my soul for that great day,
    Oh, wash me in my Saviour's blood, and take my sins away.

We truly spend our years as a tale that is told. But in heavenly love
abiding, no change my heart shall fear. How precious is this thought;
though friend after friend depart, "For who has not lost a friend?"
What though the storm of bereavement and affliction howl without?
Still, amid it all, the unbounded, uncomprehended love of God changeth
never.

Though our days are determined, and the number of our months are with
God; "though He hath appointed the bounds that He cannot pass, yet He
will hide us in the grave; He will keep us secret until His wrath upon
the ungodly is past." We read, however, His power to redeem and deliver
His elect, even amid the wreck and ruin of years and the gloom of the
grave, for Christ is the resurrection and the life.

There is rest, yonder; only just across the river. It is only a narrow
stream. "This is not my place of resting; mine's a city yet to come;
onward to it I am hastening; on to my eternal home." "I go to prepare a
place for you," said Jesus. No threatening danger or death there. It is
no desert dreary. It is freedom from pain and weariness, from sin and
sadness, in the dominions of the Bridegroom. For He says, "I have
betrothed thee unto me forever; I have betrothed thee in righteousness,
in the judgment, in loving kindness, and in mercy, and in
faithfulness."

"_In the Lord._" How significant the words. It is to have the infinite
arms of love and power encircling us. It is not to receive the spirit of
bondage again to fear. It is to rise above the uncertainties of this
life to the realities of that land where congregations ne'er break up,
and Sabbaths have no end. Linked to the eternal, never broken chain of
God's goodness, what can affright? Can the consolation of God be small
with those who are His, when we are informed that He will ransom His
people from the power of the grave? Shortly it will be all over with you
in your pilgrimage journey. Watch and wait, therefore, for the coming of
the King.

On earth, here and now, those who die in the Lord have attentively
listened to His kind remonstrances, concerning reconciliation and
entire renunciation of every false hope of heaven only through faith in
the name of Jesus. They realize that God's methods of mercy are
peculiarly calculated to impart peace in the hour of sickness and
death. They see the city which hath foundations whose builder and maker
is God, where the inhabitants say, "I am sick, I am weary no more."
They know that their Redeemer liveth, and though worms may destroy the
body, yet in their flesh they shall see God. They know there are realms
where

    The voices of song never cease 'neath a burden of tears,
    And the music falls sweet from those radiant spheres.

God's children on earth are remarkable for their love to Christ and His
Church, and delight to meditate on the glories of heaven. Hence when
death comes they are prepared to enter upon their purchased
possessions, for which they habitually awaited with bright
anticipations, knowing full well that He that had promised is able also
to perform.

"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but He that doeth the will of my Father which is in
heaven." "For to be carnally minded is death (death eternal), but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace."

Henry says, "The _Providence_ that removes God's saints has a loved
voice which crieth in the city to the survivors. The death of the saints
speaketh the evil of sin." It is owing to that they die, for "the body
is dead because of sin." It speaks the vanities of life, and of all its
delights and enjoyments; for if the favorites of heaven are dying daily,
and going out of this world it is a sign that the things of this world
are not the best things, else those whom God loves best would not be
taken soonest from them. It speaks that all things come alike to all,
and that one event happeneth to the righteous and to the wicked, "so
that none knows love or hatred by all that is before him in this world."
But he that would know it must look before him into the invisible world.
Lay your ears this day to the coffins and graves of departed saints, who
though they do not pray for us, yet preach to us in the words of Christ,
"Be ye also ready." (Matt. xxiv. 44.) They are gone, and we are going;
their glass is run out, and ours is running; and therefore it concerns
us to daily die unto sin, and be alive to holiness, standing on the
watchtower, like the sentinel, with "loins girt," and "lamps burning,"
knowing that it is not the stroke, but the sting of death from which the
imputed righteousness of the Redeemer delivers.

God's saints are like a green olive-tree, in the house of God, because
they trust in His manifold mercy. They are like trees planted by the
rivers of water, and whose leaf shall never fade. While death can lay
his cold and icy hand upon the Christian's body, yet his soul he can
never touch. While God destroys the wicked at death, and plucks him out
of his dwelling-place, and roots him out of the land of the living, yet
to die in the Lord is to sing with the Psalmist, "I will not be
afraid," "I will render praises unto thee, for thou hast delivered my
soul from death," "and thou shalt bring me up again from the depths of
the earth."

Heaven is propitious. Streaming love flows from the fountain of Divine
compassion. "God so loved the world that He gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life." Oh, this constant untiring love of our kind heavenly father.
"Scarcely," says Paul, "for a righteous man will one die: yet,
peradventure, for a good man some would even dare to die; but God
commendeth his love toward us in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us." If we would _die in the Lord_, we must get a sight of
Calvary. He has died that we might live. We must behold His pierced
hands and feet and side. It is this sight that saves.

    Not all the blood of goats and bulls,
      On Jewish altars slain,
    Can give the guilty conscience peace,
      Or wash away the stain.
    But Christ, the heavenly Lamb,
      Takes _all_ our guilt away.

It is the free gift of grace that, through saving faith, that will hold
us until this short life is past, and then when we come to the river of
death, like our dear Elder, we will reach our home safely. "Where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound, that as sin hath reigned unto
death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto _eternal
life_ by Jesus Christ our Lord."

Are we all who are here to-day to this funeral _in the Lord_--"I in them
and thou in me?" Perhaps, some have been living at a distance from Him.
Others may have been grieving the Holy Spirit. The Master has come (by
this death) and calls for thee. He is standing to-day at the door of thy
heart knocking and saying, "If any man hear my voice, and open the door,
I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." No friend
so forgiving, so gentle as he. Oh, wilt thou let Him depart? Patiently
waiting, earnestly pleading, Jesus thy Saviour knocks at thine heart. Is
there some idol that you are cherishing? Is there some secret, darling
sin to which you are clinging? Oh, what wilt thou do in the swellings of
Jordan without an interest in the atoning work of Jesus? Are you still
slighting the Saviour? He waits for thee. How tender the look. He says
unto you as he said to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, "How often would I
have gathered thy children together as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings, but ye would not."

Christ alone is our true Shechem, our City of Refuge. He is the living
well of Jacob and the rifled tomb of Joseph. Isaiah says, "A man shall
be as an hiding-place from the wind and a covert from the tempest, as
rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a
weary land." What boundless resources are found in Christ. We are
guilty, but He atoned for our guilt; He paid the ransom price; He
engaged in the great work of paying the penalty due to our sin, for He
was made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him. "We could never have been saved without
Divine interference, save from going down to the pit, for I have found
a ransom," was the declaration of the stupendous wealth of God's free
love. For it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, even the very chief.
The mysteries of redeeming love are solved at Golgotha.

Listen to the sweet singer of Israel as he surveys the administration
of mercy seen anticipatively at the Cross:

    I love the Lord, because my voice
      And prayer He did hear;
    I, while I live, will call on Him
      Who bowed to me His ear.

He was greatly encouraged to serve God in view of the alliance and
assistance of Jehovah towards the redemption of Israel. In the fortieth
Psalm he illustrates this thought still further:

    I waited for the Lord my God,
      And patiently did bear.
    He took me from the fearful pit,
      And from the miry clay,
    And on a Rock He set my feet,
      Establishing my way.

The nature of salvation is the same all the world over. The scheme is
sovereign. The objects are poor, helpless sinners. The results are ever
the same, namely, the forgiveness of sin--justification by faith alone;
and then, at last, an abundant entrance is afforded into the beautiful
mansions of light, where friendship is changeless and carkering care is
unknown, and no more pale faces with mute hearts breaking every day.
Yonder we shall be clad in the beauteous wedding garments of the King.

To die in the Lord will be an ample equivalent for all of earth's
sorrows and difficulties. In the meantime, we must continually say
concerning such providences as the present, "Draw me, we will run after
thee. Awake, O north wind and come thou, south, and blow upon my garden
that the spices thereof may flow out." This loss will work together for
our good if we hear His voice. It calls us to the necessary duty of
immediate decision. We must not halt any longer between two opinions.
If the Lord be God follow Him, but if Baal be your God follow him no
longer. But please remember that the wages of sin is death. You are
called to decide for Christ, to decide for heaven, by this sad
bereavement. He draws you with the cords of love as with the bands of a
man. Will you run after Him?

There is no one can help you in the hour of death and the judgment but
Jesus. Choose ye this day whom ye will serve. Yield, oh! yield to His
call! Say yes, "My beloved is mine and I am His; He feedeth among the
lilies until the daybreak, and the shadows flee away." Oh! turn your
eyes upwards:

    Where high the heavenly temple stands,
    The house of God not made with hands,
    A great High Priest our nature wears,
    The guardian of mankind appears.

If we would die in the Lord, we must recognize Christ, not only as
having died that we might live, but also as having triumphed over the
grave, and is now sitting at the right hand of God making continual
intercession for us. By day and by night He pleads our cause. Don't try
to get to heaven by the intercession of saints or angels. Christ alone
is the Great High Priest after the order of Melchizedek. Disobedience
in this direction will prove disastrous.

Say, "who is this that cometh from Edom with dyed garments, from Bozrah
travelling in the greatness of His strength?" I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. This is your Daysman, your Mediator. He
hath opened a fountain for sin and uncleanness.

    Five bleeding wounds He bears,
      Received on Calvary,
    Now pour effectual prayers
      And strongly speak for thee.

If you would die like our dear Brother Knowles, _in the Lord_, then
to-day behold His wounded hands and side. We have all sinned against God
and abused His mercy; but, oh, let us to-day consecrate ourselves to
Christ, and like the prodigal son say, "I will arise and go to my
father." Christ is our great representative before the throne. Oh, that
He would ever teach us to offer this prayer:

    Lord God of Hosts, my prayer hear;
      O Jacob's God, give ear!
    See God, our shield, look on the face
      Of thine anointed dear.

I tell you, my friends, we do not want any new school theology. The
holy religion of our fathers is good enough for me. Here it is a loving
father, a crucified and triumphant and pleading saviour for us poor,
miserable and helpless sinners, and a Home beyond the flood.

I will arise now and go about the city, in the streets, on the cars, in
the workshop, on the ship, on the sea and land where-ever God may guide
my wandering footsteps through each perplexing path of life. And I will
seek Him whom my soul loveth.

_They rest from their labors and their works do follow them._ The
Psalmist says that our strength is labor and sorrow. The more we toil
for Christ and His church the more we honor Him and become
fruit-bearers. By a constant course of activity and devotedness for the
welfare of fallen humanity, the capacities of the soul are greatly
enlarged, and we apprehend more fully the fact that God hath put the
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of
God and not of man. Sometimes, too, our good will be evil spoken of and
attributed to selfish motives. We may be traduced by tongues which
neither know our faculties nor our person. 'Tis but the rough road that
virtue must go through. We must not allow any discouragements or censure
to retard our aggressive work, remembering constantly that the Master
was accused of having a devil, and that he cast out devils by the power
of Beelzebub. Oh, what wrong ideas men have of the great work of saving
souls. What prejudices, what indifference, what neglect, what
lukewarmness have the true servants of Christ to encounter as they
earnestly toil in transplanting souls into the vineyard _of the Lord_.

The life of Christ on earth was a life of generous labor; and when He
called His disciples, He said, "Follow me, and I will make you fishers
of men." Kempis, in his "Imitation of Christ," says, "by the words of
Christ we are taught to imitate His life and manner, if we would be
truly enlightened and be delivered from all blindness of heart." "Learn
of me," said Jesus, as well as "Come unto me. I have set the Lord
always before me, said David. What a glorious thing it is for the
servant of Christ to know that he is earnestly engaged in the work of
His Master. It is our labors of love that alone meets with the smile
and approbation of God, for He is cognizant of everything we try to
accomplish for His cause on earth. Oh, that we may say from the heart,
I must work the works of Him that sent me; the night cometh when no man
can work."

The trees of the Lord are full of sap, they are fat and flourishing. We
are all familiar with the work of blessed beneficence of Howard, the
great philanthropist, and Henry Martyn, the self-denying missionary. To
be a true Christian, then, requires a life of toil. "For man goeth
forth unto the work and to his labor until the evening." How sweet,
then, is rest to the laboring man. When the harvest is gathered in. A
harvest of souls for Christ. Here am I, Lord, and the children which
thou hast given me. Paul said that I may so preach and labor that I may
present every one of you perfect before God. This is no mean toil. What
prayers. What watching. What toil. What tears. Ah! but at eventide it
shall be light. Strange language.

What a beautiful and touching description does Burns give, in his
"Cottar's Saturday Night," of the sweet rest and joy that springs into
the soul when the weary work is over. He says:

    The toil-worn cottar frae his labor goes,
      This night his weekly moil is at an end,
    Collects his spades, his mattocks and his hoes,
      Hoping the morn in ease and rest to spend,
      And weary o'er the moor his course does hameward bend.

The next stanza can be truly applied to our Elder in his Christian
experience:

    The parent pair their secret homage pay,
      And proffer up to heaven the warm request,
    That He who stills the raven's clamorous nest,
      And decks the lily fair in flowery pride,
    Would in His way His Wisdom see the best,
      For them and for their little ones provide,
      But chiefly in their hearts with _grace Divine_ reside.

I think this is the most descriptive, and true, and touching scene of a
Christian man's experience that can be found in any language. Burns
knew how to touch the tender chord of a human heart. "An honest man's
the noblest work of God." "They rest from their labor and their works
do follow them."

Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, says, "Beloved, we are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we
thus speak: For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and the
love which He showed unto His name."

Listen, then, to this sweet, silent voice calling us to go and do
likewise.

Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? It is to a life of toil, not of
indolence, we are called. The fields are white already, unto harvest.
Who will bear the sheaves away? Who among our young men in this
congregation will take the place of Elder Knowles? Can you be engaged
in a grander or nobler work? He that winneth souls is wise. Is there
any purer pleasure in this world than the joy that is experienced in
the heart when souls are converted to God? Oh, young men, deeply
meditate on that precious passage. He that converteth a sinner from the
error of his ways, doth save a soul from death, and doth hide a
multitude of sins. Are not the opportunities great in this city for
doing good? Is not the wickedness great? Are not souls perishing around
you for lack of knowledge? Resolve, from this day, that, God helping
you, you will dedicate all your powers of heart, soul, and strength to
the blessed service of Christ. You are not your own. You have been
saved, that you may save others by pulling them out of the fire. Haste
then, haste to the rescue. Souls may perish, and go down to hell, while
you are deliberating.

I remember, years ago, while coming into New York Harbor, we lost a
very promising young man overboard. The life-boat was launched, and the
life-buoy was cut adrift. But through some delay, the young man
perished. What a tremendous disappointment those parents experienced as
they stepped on board the frigate at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, and
learned that their darling boy had found a watery grave.

I never think of the above sad occurrence but I am forcibly reminded
that through the delays and sad neglect of Christian parents and
Sabbath-school teachers, many young persons perish, and I inquire, Who
is responsible for their destruction? Many ask the question that Cain
impudently put to the Lord, "Am I my brother's keeper?" We can be
guilty of other men's sins. This is a mysterious fact, but it is
nevertheless true. If you are an idler in the Master's vineyard, you
are, to a certain extent, responsible. Oh, that the Holy Spirit would
show us our duty to our fellow-men.

Our departed brother realized this truth. Just look at a man
seventy-five years old, occupied every Lord's Day teaching a large
class of youth in the Sabbath-school. But you must remember that for
six days in the week he nobly toiled as a printer, from eight in the
morning until six at night. And he seldom missed the prayer-meeting, or
other gatherings of the Church. He was, indeed, a worker that needeth
not to be ashamed.

In the absence of the pastor he frequently led the prayer-meeting, and
his expositions of the chapter read as the lesson of the night were
very scriptural, cheering, and full of encouragement.

He was familiarly acquainted with the Word of God, and his prayers were
earnest, solemn, and to the point, because his soul was surcharged with
Divine truth.

It is no wonder, then, that everybody loved him--his young men in the
various Bible-classes especially. Eternity alone will reveal the amount
of good he accomplished by his kind, gentle, meek, cheerful, and quiet
spirit.

Servant of Christ, well done; you rest from your labor, and your works
do follow you.

Let us look at his work as a ruling Elder of the Church of Christ.

Paul, in writing to Timothy, says: "Let the elders that rule well, be
counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word
and doctrine" (1 Timothy v. 17). An elder is one who rules the house of
God. They are, therefore, the magistrates of the Church. They are to
administer the laws of His holy sanctuary. How great and important this
work. Who is sufficient for these things? The pastor, in apostolic
times, was called an elder. But as an under-shepherd his labors are
greatly assisted and augmented by the hearty co-operation of a
judicious selection of men filled with the spirit of God, and duly
ordained for their work. Men who recognize among their fellows no moral
superiority, but that spiritually-mindedness that flows from prayer and
the study of God's Word. Their work is immortal. Their duties are
great. But their peculiar privileges are greater--to rule well the
House of God.

It is, certainly, a sad sight to see men filling this sacred office
without the requisite qualifications. The negotiations between man and
man are so stupendous, that it is not every member of the Church who is
fitted for this responsible work. We ought to study adaptation in the
selection and ordination of ruling them.

Every time I looked in the face of Elder Knowles, I was deeply
impressed with the thought that no blunder had been committed when he
was chosen and set apart in this line of Apostolic toil. For he was a
good soldier of Jesus Christ.

He knew full well how to rule his own spirit, and he that can do that
is more mighty than he who taketh a city. Self must be slain by the
sword of the spirit, if we would lead the army of the Lord on to
victory. Hence the solemn injunction of Paul: "I charge thee before
God, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without
preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.... Lay
hands suddenly on no man" (1 Timothy, v. 21-22).

We commend, for attentive perusal and prayerful reflection, the
qualification of an elder, as laid down by Paul, and elaborated by the
holy McCheyne, strictly germane to the life of Elder James Knowles.

They are fundamental requisites. The good McCheyne, of St. Peter's,
Dundee, says: "I feel, brethren, that a minister alone is incapable of
ruling the House of God well. If a minister is to thrive in his own
soul, _he must be half of his time on his knees_; and therefore, if
Christ's house is to be ruled well, there must not only be pastors, but
there must be ruling elders."

"The first qualification is grace. Grace in the heart. If it be a
qualification in a church member that he should have grace, then much
more ought it to be a qualification in one who rules the Church of God.
How is it possible for him to admit any to the Lord's table, when he is
but a judge himself?" How is it possible to excommunicate, when he
ought to be excommunicated himself? So, brethren, a graceless elder is
a curse instead of a blessing.

We can safely say our dear departed elder had grace. This was
remarkably developed in his Christian character. Patience found a
permanent home in his heart. It occupied a significantly prominent
place there, and was strenuously cultivated. It was copied and
commented upon by all who knew him, and uniformly evoked universal
favor and approval by the various ministers and sessions of the
different Presbyterian churches in this city, in which he was an elder.

He had many trials, and we think he could say with Paul, in his letter
to the Church at Rome: "We glory in tribulation, also knowing that
tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience."

It seems they had some little misunderstanding in the session of one of
the churches to which he (our elder) formerly belonged. And some remark
made by the elder to the pastor was so cutting, that the minister said
unless the elder would take back what he said, that next Sabbath he
would tender his resignation to the congregation.

The elder replied that he would not take it back for him. To preserve
harmony, and be a peacemaker, Elder Knowles stepped up to his brother
in the session, and asked him if he would not take it back for his
sake, and the sake of the blessed Jesus. At this, the elder said, with
tears in his eyes, "Yes, James, for your sake, I will take it back."
Perhaps the minister was partly to blame, and also the elder, but by
having the grace of patience, not only was a reconciliation brought
about, the pastor was retained, and permitted to resume his work, and
precious souls were added to the Church. Oh, how much trouble and
scandal might be averted in some of the churches if our elders and
deacons and church members would only strive to cultivate the grace of
patience.

We have great need of this grace in our hearts, as we work for the
Master. May the Holy Spirit work it in us, for, as Paul says: "Ye have
need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise" (Heb. x. 36).

The life of a ruling elder in the Church, and in the world, is like the
erection of a beautiful building. Great patience is requisite, in order
to bring it to a successful completion. So, as a wise master buildeth
for eternity, we most build the structure of Christian character upon
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ, Himself, being the chief
corner-stone. What a model of patience is Jesus. What difficulties He
encountered. What trials clustered around Him. What provocations he
meekly endured. All through His life, and even amid His unutterable
agonies on the Cross on Mount Calvary, when His body was shedding the
last drop of blood to seal the mysterious work of redemption, even
then, amid mockings and scoffings, and tortures, the sacred lips of the
Crucified Christ uttered this prayer for his enemies, "Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do" (Luke xxiii. 34).

The dear Master considered this prayer essential before He could
conscientiously exclaim, "Consummatum est"--It is consummated, or
finished. Our dear elder was like his Lord in this respect. He could
say, with Newton,

    "Christ's way was much rougher and darker than mine,
    Did Christ, my Lord, suffer, and shall I repine?"

Again, another qualification in a ruling elder is wisdom. "Be ye wise
as serpents," said Jesus, "and harmless as doves." Are all these
professing Christians wise? Are all elders wise? Are all ministers
wise? Dr. Bonar says:

    Be wise and use thy wisdom well.
    _Be what thou seemest._ Live thy creed;
    Be what thou prayest to be made.
    Lift o'er the earth the torch Divine,
    Let the great Master's steps be thine.

Blessed words these. Who can read them without thanking God for such
words and such men, that our kind Father above raises up to instruct us
in these things that pertain to our everlasting well-being? For all
well-being is the result of _well-doing_ in time and in eternity.

Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you, let him show,
out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom. This
meekness of wisdom Elder Knowles preeminently possessed. The psalmist
says, concerning such: "The meek shall inherit the land. And shall
delight themselves in abundance of peace. Strike, said Diogenes, to his
instructor, Antichenes, the philosopher; but you will find no staff so
hard that it will drive me away from your school. I love you, and I
have made up my mind to suffer anything for the sake of learning." This
yearning desire on the part of the true elder after fitness for his
office, ought to be willing to bear reproach for the sake of Him who
died, that we might live. There is great wisdom displayed in bearing
the Cross meekly for Jesus. If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign
with Him.

It is a blessed thing to suffer in love for Christ. To bear injustice
and conquer. Herein is consummate wisdom displayed. "If ye have bitter
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
truth. This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where envy and strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy" (James iii. 14-17).

But the wisdom of the elder now lying before us in the coffin was
displayed not only in his meekness, but in his _gentleness_ of
disposition.

His wife used to say, "Why, he is just like a child. So gentle and
peaceable. So easily intreated." I remember quoting that hymn at the
prayer meeting:

    I want to be like Jesus,
      Meek, lowly, loving, mild;
    I want to be like Jesus--
      The Father's holy child.

And at the close of the meeting he shook me warmly by the hand, and the
sentiment in the stanza seemed to give him unspeakable pleasure.

Once more, another qualification for the eldership that our deceased
brother possessed, was, _that he had a good report from without_. (See 1
Timothy, iii. 7.) Our dearly beloved was not only highly esteemed for
his work's sake by the members of the churches and the various pastors,
as their letters in this volume testify, but his walk and conversation
was such in the outside world, that his fellow-workmen, and those who
lived in the same house with him, and had opportunity to know him,
learned to revere and love him. You know the eyes of the world are
constantly watching the Christian. I notice on the casket to-day a
lovely bouquet of flowers, and I read on the card: "Presented to James
Knowles, by the printers where he was for years employed."

This is, certainly, a token of esteem to the memory of him with whom
they were long so affectionately associated.

In every professional life there are daily occurrences that try men's
tempers. But by the grace of God, our brother was enabled to adorn the
doctrine of God, our Saviour, and to live unspotted from the world. As
all elders have to mingle more with the world than a minister, how
essential it is that the outside world should see that their walk and
conversation be as becometh the Gospel of Christ.

Again: another qualification of an elder, is, that "he should be a
_prayerful man_." Our brother had all through life cultivated a spirit
of prayer. This "is the Christian's vital breath." It was his habit to
shut himself up in his room, and pour out his soul in earnest
supplication to God. He prayed in his family, as well as in the church.
He had secret prayer. "And thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy
closet?" said Jesus. Oh, the power of prayer is marvellous. He prayed
audibly. And his wife used to say of him: "He pleads with God as one
_pleading for his life_."

When he became so weak that he was unable longer to testify for Christ
on his death-bed, his loved ones bending over him, and putting their
ears down to his lips to catch his last articulations, they heard him
praying, not for himself, but for Allen Street Presbyterian Church and
its minister.

Lastly, an elder ought to cultivate the habit of _systematic beneficence_
for the support of the Gospel. This, our brother was constantly in the
habit of doing. He remembered the injunction, "It is more blessed to
give than to receive." It is worthy of observation that, during the
three years during which his son was out in the late war, he paid
monthly the pew rent for his boy during his absence, until at last his
pastor would not allow him to do it longer.

Oh, that all of our office-bearers and church members would feel it
their duty to give largely and in a worshipful spirit to the cause of
their Redeemer, as the Lord has prospered them.

Blessed are such dead who die in the Lord; they rest from their labors,
and their works do follow them.

Man cannot cover what God can _reveal_. Says the poet Campbell:

    'Tis the sunset of life gives me mystical lore,
    And coming events cast their shadows before.

Their works do follow them. Where? On to the judgment. Where selfish
ambition and avarice will be exposed in its true light. Where "man's
inhumanity to man" will be thoroughly scrutinized. For the books will
be opened, and we will be judged according to our works.

In that great and awful day when the great white throne is erected, and
when the heavens shall be removed as a scroll, when it is rolled up;
and every mountain and island shall be removed out of their places. And
the kings of the earth, and the princes, and the chief captains, and
the rich, and the strong, shall hide themselves in the caves and in the
rocks of the mountains; and they shall say to the mountains and the
rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of Him who sitteth on the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of His wrath
is come: and who is able to stand?

Oh, let us remember that now broken hearts can be healed by the power
of the Gospel of Christ. Their works do follow them. Yonder? Yes! Here?
Yes! The salutary influence for good by the consistent life of our
elder can never be lost or forgotten.

We lay our brother's body to-day in Cypress Hills Cemetery, but his
spirit hovers o'er us.

This tenement of dust is empty, but Jesus says: "I am the resurrection
and the life."

We have deep feelings to-day, for we realize that we have lost a
friend. No more. "God bless you, my brother, in your work." No more
shall we see you at the prayer-meeting. Farewell, dear elder and
co-worker. We say farewell but not forever. "We shall meet beyond the
river."

And God grant

    That we may stand before the throne,
      When earth and seas are fled;
    And hear the Judge pronounce our name,
      With blessings on our head.

God's voice, by this solemn dispensation of His providence, speaks
loudly to us all. May our faith in God be greatly strengthened. May our
love for perishing souls be made more deeper and _stronger_. May God
help us to go out into the streets and lanes of this wicked city, and
constrain them to come in, that His house may be full.

And God grant that this deep affliction which this church has sustained
may be the means, in the hands of the Spirit, of constraining us to
have more earnest and believing prayer, for the manifestation of His
power to save unto the uttermost. That Jesus may see, of the travail of
His soul, and be abundantly satisfied.

To the bereaved son and daughters, and grandchildren, who are left
behind, let me affectionately commend you to the unchanging love of Him
who sympathized with the sorrowing sisters of Bethany. Put all your
trust in His dear name. Serve Him from day to day, by reading His
blessed Bible, and holding sweet communion with Him, by prayer and
supplication, that at last when God shall call for you to leave this
stage of action, you may go to meet your dear ones in the happy home
above, and sit with them at the "marriage supper of the
Lamb."--AMEN.


CHAPTER VI.

A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE ALLEN STREET PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.

    How lovely is thy dwelling-place,
      O Lord of hosts to me,
    The tabernacles of thy grace,
      How pleasant, Lord, they be.


"Glorious things of thee are spoken, O city of God." This saying can be
emphatically applied to the above church, for the living truths
proclaimed from her pulpit have saved and sanctified many sons and
daughters, and clad in the beauteous garments of Prince Immanuel, have
gone forth to other churches and to other lands, to lead thousands to
the same Saviour that they had found.

Let us glance at its origin.

While Christ is the head of the Church, the tried corner-stone elect
and precious, yet his members are the living stones, and have built up
a spiritual house unto the Lord. The portion of "Zion" to which we have
reference, originated on the corner of Catharine Street, near Madison
Street. It was duly organized on Wednesday, May 28, 1819.

The seal of the church is an open Bible, and the words _Holy Bible_ upon
it, with the inscription surrounding it: "_Allen Street Presbyterian
Church_."

The location of the place of worship was changed to Allen Street in
1823.

The Rev. Ward Stafford was appointed by the New York Female Missionary
Society, who nobly toiled, and was succeeded by the Rev. William Gray.
During the first year of its history, twenty-one members were added to
the church-roll, and as an expression of her unfeigned gratitude to God
for this mark of kindness she became the mother of the same number of
ministers of the Gospel, who were called and commissioned, and who have
courageously proclaimed the unsearchable riches of Christ, in distant
parts of the country. Among them was the present pastor of the Church
of Sea and Land, Rev. Dr. Hopper. It is worthy of observation that this
church has been able to pay its running expenses by voluntary
contributions.

In a historical discourse delivered by Rev. George O. Phelps, he says:

"It is a source of untold satisfaction in this day of presumptuous
spires or burdensome church debts, that the Allen Street Presbyterian
Church has no such encumbrance--not one dollar of mortgage rests upon
it; that at the close of each fiscal year, by means of the voluntary
system, and the kindly aid of friends interested in the prosperity of
the church, and the maintenance of the preached word in this part of
the city, all obligations are fully discharged.

"For this, we most heartily thank our God to-day, whose favor is thus
constant.

"True as it is, that this church can be regarded at no period as among
the affluent--as there are those to-day who expend more for church
music than our entire congregational expenses, so there have ever been
those who could drop into the treasury of a single board, in a single
year, more than all our contributions to benevolent objects during
fifty years, we hope it may be equally true that we have been most
definitely, spiritually pronounced.

"Whatever may be said of her ecclesiastical loyalty, the evidences are
numerous of fervent loyalty to Christ, in doctrine, in the word
preached, in influence exerted, in means used for the extension of His
kingdom, and of consequent fidelity to man touching questions of social
and of national importance.

"A not unimportant element of influence and success, next to a becoming
spirituality, is the _social-religious_ element. This is proverbial of
the Allen Street Church."

Not to refer to the regular weekly prayer-meeting in this connection
would do great violence to a complete record as well as harm to many a
saint in Israel. For years this meeting has been a great power in
Christian life and work. Hundreds maybe said to date their first
serious impression, and very many their conversion, to the scenes of
that hour and place; and how perennial its influence, and refreshing
upon the host of God's people.

Among the most prominent pastors of this church, we may mention the
Rev. Henry White, D.D., regularly installed March, 1829. He resigned
March 9, 1837, and became the first Professor of Systematic Theology in
the Union Theological Seminary, New York City. He died August 25, 1850,
aged fifty years. A man of decided character.

Rev. George B. Cheever, D.D., was installed October 10, 1839, and was
dismissed April 24, 1844. He afterward became the pastor of the Church
of the Puritans on Union Square. He now resides at Englewood, N.J., a
man of vast resources, both personal and acquired, eloquent and
effective in address, in views extremely radical.

Rev. David Benton Coe, D.D., was installed October 14, 1844. He was
dismissed May 13, 1849. He became one of the secretaries of the
American Home Missionary Society. He was of a retiring habit, scholarly
attainment, instructive as a preacher, and devoted and sympathizing as
a pastor.

Rev. Dr. Newell was installed February 8, 1860. His pastorate ceased
February 2, 1874, being the longest pastorate of the church, embracing
one quarter of its history.

In this brother the pastor and the evangelist were happily united. Of
deep sympathies, ardent in faith, Christ crucified became the one theme
of his ministry. He was second to none in religious zeal, and untiring
in effort.

Each succeeding ministry has not been wanting in the evidences of the
Spirit, in which the being of the church seems to have been cast.

The pastorate of Mr. Lucas, for example, deserves more than a passing
notice. It was marked by two interesting works of grace: one soon after
his coming to the field (1855), and that of 1858. During these seasons
not a few of the best friends of Allen Street were brought to Christ.

Not all were equally favored, however, with beholding what men too
often regard exclusively as signs of success. In illustration of this,
it is enough to suggest that the loss experienced yearly during a large
period of her history has by no means been supplied through additions
by letter. This source of gain alone would not have spared her the
extinction which early threatened the church through removals. On the
contrary, as previously observed, the balance has been favorable
through all these years of depletion--a monument to the grace of God in
no general sense.

Perhaps it may not be disparaging to say that _the_ revival period of
the church is embraced in the pastorate of Dr. Newell, the fourteen
years of which were distinguished for their revival spirit. I think it
may be truthfully said, that he would have deemed his own ministry a
miserable failure in the absence of revival seasons.

With two exceptions each year of his ministry was marked with
ingathering. A large proportion of those now worshipping here were
brought to the Saviour within these years; while many others are known
to be justifying the spirit of their birthplace in other communions.

The most powerful work of grace, in many respects, occurred in the
winter of 1866-67.

On March 24, 1867, one hundred and fifty-four subjects of that work
publicly professed faith in Christ; upward of two hundred joined the
church during the year.

The following notice is taken from the New York _Evangelist_ soon after,
the editor of which was present:

    "A goodly sight, indeed, and worthy the words of hearty welcome
    uttered by the pastor. As he led the congregation in the song,
    'There are angels hovering round,' the house seemed to be full of
    heavenly influence. There were a large number of baptisms. There was
    visible emotion as the symbol of purity was lifted to the brow of a
    lady in deep mourning. Her husband (Mr. George Betts) had been an
    elder of the church twenty-eight years. It was his constant cry to
    God that he might not die until his wife became a Christian. Two
    weeks before he had heard her examined and received by the session.
    On his way from church he was struck with paralysis, and died."

He adds: "I have never seen a better appearing multitude stand in any
church. The sexes were about equally divided."

"These seasons," said the pastor, in his farewell discourse, "have not
been the result of accident. They were thoroughly planned and provided
for, and sought of the Lord. We have found that appropriate means was
wisdom, that persistent concentration was power; that enthusiasm for
souls was force; and that belief in God was success."

A complete history of that one revival would occupy a volume. It was
deep, wide-spread, and confined to no particular class. The official
capacity of the church recently has been largely exercised by men
converted at that time. Men holding trusts in the Society to-day were
without hope previous to that work.

It is gratifying to record the continuance of the gracious favor, that
this last year of the century, the fifty-seventh of our existence,
should be crowned with still another work of grace--gradual in
inception, first indicated by increasing interest in the ministration
of the Word, in the absence of special means, only finding in the Week
of Prayer an occasion for decided development--continuing with
deepening and widening interest, until attention was necessarily
divided between this and a more general work in connection with the
coming of Messrs. Moody and Sankey to our city. As visible proof of
this quiet work, fifty-seven have been added to the church--forty-six
making profession of their faith on March 12th, of all ages--youth from
the Sabbath-schools, adults, and several heads of families.

A church of such continuous revival record ought, indeed, to raise her
Ebenezer to-day. While as patriots we fling out our Centennial Banners,
let us, as subjects of the Lord Jesus Christ, set up a memorial to the
praise of His boundless, matchless grace.

During the ministry of the Rev. George O. Phelps, the blessing of the
Lord attended his untiring and loving labors.

We cannot omit mentioning here the kindness of the Rev. Dr. Nathaniel
Conkling, who cheerfully supplied the pulpit for eighteen months
without any remuneration; and during this time the pastor's study was
neatly furnished, and the church property renovated. Also a number of
young persons were led to Christ and united with the church; some of
these young men are to-day actively engaged in the Lord's work in the
lower part of the city, at the Church, and in connection with the
"Young Men's Institute," on the Bowery.

It only remains for me to speak of the _Sabbath-schools connected
with this church_.

Imperfect, indeed, would be this narrative, without a record of this
department of Christian work.

Mr. Samuel Kennedy was its first superintendent, which office he held
for twenty-three years. He was a man of great kindness of heart, strict
in discipline, and devoted to the interest of youth.

The present superintendent is Martin Ralph.

The following named gentlemen have held the office of Superintendent in
regular succession: John D. Camp, Benjamin N. Goldsmith, Daniel O.
Caulkins, Amos P. Hawley, Lewis S. Benedict, Mahlon T. Hewitt, William
C. Bradley, H. C. Southworth, Joseph W. Lester, Edward P. Tibballs, H.
G. Fraser, and G. A. Koos.

There is also related to this church a Mission-school, superintended by
one of its elders--Mr. J. H. Owens--known as the "_Ludlow Street Mission
Sabbath School_," at present occupying the public school building on
Ludlow Street, between Rivington and Delancey.

The superintendents are tireless in exertion, and fully devoted to its
interest, encouraged by a zealous band of officers and teachers, the
influence of whose work upon the children and the families they
represent in that locality, eternity alone can tell.

Next to Elder Knowles, as the ruling elder, we might mention the name
of Joseph W. Lester, of whom it may be said that he endeared himself,
by an unusual force of character, to a large acquaintance, best known
in connection with the Allen Street Church, but a pillar of strength to
every good work throughout the city; of strict integrity, a judicious
adviser, largely benevolent, prompt to act, of wonderful energy,
reliable everywhere, zealous to win souls, esteemed for his business
qualities, and a true patriot.

But amid all the changes to which both the church and school have ever
been subject, there remains one, who, as a dutiful son, and an apt
scholar, took his place forty-seven years ago; so now his fidelity and
constancy are no marvel, since, with the Psalmist, he is a "door-keeper
in the House of the Lord," and like John the Baptist, "An
_unshaken_ Reed."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

COMMENTS OF THE PRESS ON THE REMOVAL OF THE CHURCH.

The _New York Times_, of Monday, May 9, 1887, gives a brief account of
the origin of the church:

    The Allen Street Presbyterian Church had its beginning in Madison
    Street, then Bancker, in 1816. A missionary society in 1817 built a
    wooden structure at a cost of a little over two thousand dollars,
    near the corner of Catharine Street. The society was incorporated
    as the "Mission Church in the City of New York," and that title has
    never been changed, except by common usage. In 1823 an edifice was
    erected at a cost of about three thousand dollars. For years the
    church did not prosper, and was on the point of selling its
    property, when the Rev. Absalom Peters offered to act as Pastor for
    a time without salary. He pulled the society through its troubles.
    The present building was erected in 1833 at a cost of twenty
    thousand dollars. Since then the church has been humbly prosperous.
    For the present, until a site is secured, the congregation will
    worship in the Church of the Sea and Land, in Market Street.

On the same date, under the heading of "After Fifty-four Years," and
"The Last Services in the Old Allen Street Church," the same paper
says:

    Another of New York's old churches will soon be torn down.
    Yesterday the last services were held in the Allen Street
    Presbyterian Church, near Grand Street. For many years the church
    has been a sort of half-way house between up and down town, and its
    congregation has been an ever-changing one. It has never been a
    large nor a rich church, although it has had among its members many
    who are to-day wealthy, and its total membership, since its
    organization, is much greater than that of many a larger church.

    The last services were made interesting, not only by the presence
    of nearly all the present members, but of members of twenty and
    twenty-five years ago, who came from churches further up town and
    from Brooklyn. In the afternoon there was a union service of the
    church, Sunday-school, and the Ludlow Street Mission. Later the
    young people held a prayer-meeting, and in the evening reunion
    services were held. The pastor, the Rev. D. McNeill Young, read
    letters from many former members who had left New York, all
    regretting the necessity for demolishing the old building. The
    reading of the letters was interrupted by the puffing and rattle of
    the elevated trains directly in front of the door--one of the
    principal causes of a change of location--that made more prominent
    the fact that, though sentiment might desire to save the church, it
    could never again be a pleasant place of worship. After the letters
    were read familiar hymns were sung, and, without any formality, the
    older members and their former associates gave reminiscences of the
    early days of their church.

As a proof of its spiritual power not less than _fourteen hundred and
forty-three_ persons have been connected with it in the service of the
Master, the number of active members at the time of changing location
being _five hundred and sixty three_, showing that though old in years
it still retains its usefulness.

The _New York Evangelist_ of April 21, 1887, under the heading of
"Another Land-mark to be Obliterated," says:

    The old Allen Street Presbyterian Church building, where God's
    people have continued to battle against sin and Satan for some
    sixty-four years, has at last yielded to the pressure of the
    advancing tide of business on Grand Street, and been sold. The
    present expectation of the Church is to remain in the neighborhood,
    and it is hoped that a more desirable location may be obtained, and
    a building, suited to the times and the needs of the people, erected
    thereon. Farewell services will begin on Friday evening, May 6th,
    with the preparatory lecture, to be followed by an earnest season of
    prayer for the divine blessing on the exodus. On Sabbath, May 8th,
    the farewell communion service will be held at 11 A.M. A union
    meeting of the Home and Ludlow Street Sabbath-schools will be held
    in the main audience room of the church building at 2 P.M. The
    exercises of the Young People's Prayer and Conference Meeting will
    take place at seven o'clock, followed by the closing farewell
    service in the Church at 7.45 P.M. Then the last good-by will be
    said in the dear old home which has been the spiritual birth-place
    of many, many precious souls. It is earnestly hoped that these
    services will bring together many who can tell of former refreshing
    times from the presence of the Lord, and of hallowed associations
    within the sacred walls of the old Allen Street Church. It is
    expected that some of the former pastors will be present to add
    interest to the occasion. It is well understood that this well-known
    church property has been purchased by Messrs. Ridley & Co. for
    $75,000. They thus secure large additional space for their enormous
    mercantile business. It should, perhaps, be known that the building
    of the Elevated road, just in front, has greatly injured "Old Allen
    Street," as it was popularly called, for all church purposes. The
    noise of the passing trains was very annoying, especially in warm
    weather, when windows and doors were open. The sum realized will, it
    is hoped, enable the congregation to build elsewhere in the
    neighborhood.

The New York Daily _Tribune_, of the same date, thus comments on the old
church:

    LEAVING THEIR OLD CHURCH HOME.

    Yesterday the Allen Street Presbyterian Church held their last
    service in their present home. The building has been sold to
    Messrs. Ridley & Sons for mercantile purposes. The church moves
    temporarily to Market Street, where they will worship with the
    Church of the Sea and Land. There were the regular morning
    services, followed by communion. The church was tastefully
    decorated with flowers, the gift of the Bethany Society of the
    Church, in commemoration of their last services. On May 28, 1819,
    the church was organized, although the building had been dedicated
    on October 25, 1817. This building was in Madison Street, and when
    it became too small they moved to their present place in 1834.

    In the afternoon the home Sunday-school and the Mission school in
    Ludlow Street held a reunion in the home church. The programme in
    the afternoon and evening consisted of short addresses and music.
    It was a reunion of old members and new, of old pastors and people,
    of old officers and those whom they were accustomed to oversee. The
    Rev. N. D. Conkling, assisted the pastor, the Rev. D. M. Young in
    the services, preaching the morning sermon. There were twelve
    persons received into the church on profession of faith.


RESOLUTIONS OF THE ALLEN STREET CHURCH.


    NEW YORK, March 2, 1887.

    _Whereas_, It has pleased Almighty God, our kind and compassionate
    heavenly Father, in the solemn dispensations of His providence to
    remove from our midst by death, our dear and highly esteemed friend
    and brother, Elder James Knowles, and his wife, Matilda Knowles, of
    the Allen Street Presbyterian Church; and

    _Whereas_, It becomes us not only as brethren in Christ, but as a
    Session of said church, to express our hearty appreciation of their
    work in and worth to the cause of Christianity, which they so dearly
    loved; and while we bow in humble submission to the Divine will,
    nevertheless we strongly realize that, as co-workers together with
    them in the Master's vineyard, we have sustained a severe and
    irreparable loss by this sad bereavement;

    Therefore be it _Resolved_, That as a Session now assembled, we do
    hereby tender our heartfelt sympathy and sorrow to the bereaved
    family in their great grief; and we do earnestly and sincerely
    commend them to God and the Word of His grace, that is able to keep
    them from falling, and to give them an abundant entrance into His
    everlasting kingdom; and be it further

    _Resolved_, That the Clerk of Session be requested to enter these
    resolutions on the records of the church, and that a copy be
    immediately forwarded to the family of the deceased.

    (Signed),

    DUNCAN M. YOUNG, _Pastor._

    J. H. ALLEN, M.D.,
    J. M. MORRISON,
    J. R. BATTY,
    MARTIN BRAITMAYER,
                     _Elders._

    JEROME H. OWENS,
                     _Clerk of Session._


[Illustration: MATILDA KNOWLES]


                          GATHERING JEWELS.

                          MATILDA KNOWLES.

              BEING THE RECORD OF A CONSECRATED MISSIONARY
              WOMAN'S WORK FOR OVER A QUARTER OF A CENTURY
                   IN THE TENTH WARD OF NEW YORK CITY.

                   "She hath done what she could."


CHAPTER VII.

BRIEF MEMOIR OF MATILDA KNOWLES.

    They walk with God whom none can shame
    From trusting in His holy name;
    Who looking for a glorious morn,
    Shrink not before the lip of scorn.


The subject of this memoir was born in Tichon, near Ballymena, County
Antrim, in the north of Ireland, March 22, 1811. Her ancestors fled
from Scotland during the dark days of persecution, "when the minister's
home was the mountain and flood." Little can be gleaned of her early
history. Her mother died when she was six years old, leaving a sister
older than herself, and a brother, a baby eight months old. Her father
died shortly after her mother. When she was only eight years old, she
went to the corner of the house, and asked the Lord to be a father and
a mother to her. She was ultimately taken to her uncle's, at which
place she resided until she came to America.

During her stay with him, she became acquainted with a young girl, who
told her of the love of Jesus, and shortly before her death, she would
frequently say how good God was to her, in bringing her in contact with
her friend, who early told her of the life of the Saviour, and His
never-dying love. At the same place, being filled with those desires,
and having those Christian principles instilled into her heart, and not
having conveniences to study and pray in the house, she would repair to
the barn, to attend to her devotional duties, experiencing the
truthfulness of God's Word, "They that seek me early shall find me." At
this time she committed to memory the Psalms, and the Book of Proverbs,
and several passages of the New Testament.

It seems that certain influences were brought to bear upon her, for the
purpose of getting her settled in life, contrary to her own wishes; but
the party so chosen was without Christian character, and although every
inducement was offered, so far as wealth was concerned, she remembered
the injunction of the Scriptures, "Be ye not unequally yoked to
unbelievers," and like Moses, who refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's daughter, but chose rather to suffer affliction, penury, and
loss with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, she declined to enter into the proposed matrimonial connection.
And then she decided to emigrate to the United States, friendless and
alone.

In 1833--the time of the great cholera epidemic in this country--she
was left by herself, in a house where all its occupants had fled
through fear. Trusting in the God of Israel for protection, she
experienced the full force of those sublime words of King David: "He
that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty. He shall cover thee with His feathers, and
under His wings shalt thou trust. Thou shalt not be afraid for the
terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor for the
pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that
wasteth at noon-day." On arriving in New York, she immediately
connected herself in church fellowship with the Canal Street
Presbyterian Church, under the ministry of the Rev. Dr. McCarthy, and
became a Sabbath-school teacher. Some of the first impressions made on
her mind by her pastor were continually repeated, even up to the hour
of her death.

In one address, delivered to young people, he begged them not to allow
Satan to get even his little finger in, for he generally commenced with
little sins, and by and by he would get his two fingers in, and then
his whole hand, and twist you around as he chose, instead of allowing
you to obey the commands of God.

Shortly after she landed in this country she was invited by an
acquaintance to go to Brooklyn, to church. She consented, and attended
the service; but, on her return, while stepping off the ferry-boat, she
slipped, and fell into the river, and narrowly escaped drowning. She
resolved, by God's grace, that she would never put her foot on a
ferry-boat on the Sabbath again, while she lived, which vow she kept to
the close of her life.

It was her usual custom on the street, if she heard any person using
profane language, to reprove them, by saying, "Don't dare take the name
of my Saviour in vain."

In the year 1839 she was married to Elder James Knowles, by the Rev.
Dr. McLeod, of the First Reformed Presbyterian Church, Prince's Street.
At this time she joined the above church, that she might be in full
fellowship at the same communion-table with her husband.

In her earnest endeavors to faithfully serve her Lord and Master, she
was sorely tried by a woman who lived in the same house with her. And
herein do we see the goodness of God, in imparting grace to her to
strenuously resist temptation. This woman did all in her power to lead
her astray by offering her strong drink. She would visit her frequently
after her husband had gone to his business, and bring the bottle and
glass. She determined to change her place of residence, and before her
husband returned home, she had engaged new apartments, and had her
furniture all removed. Even after her removal, the woman followed her
up, and became a tenant in the same house, and the same temptations
were renewed. She once more got up and moved out of the house, never
once yielding to the woman's persistent temptation.

In the summer of 1848 she met with a narrow escape in a burning
building. In trying to extinguish the flames, she was badly burned from
the points of her fingers up to her shoulders. In this house she
succeeded in getting some people to attend church; and at this time,
seeing some women ordained to go to India, she earnestly desired to be
in their place.

In 1860, when in her fiftieth year, she removed to the Tenth Ward, the
scene of her future labors. When her son William went to the war, she
was recommended by Mrs. Warren to Rev. Mr. Finney, who engaged her as a
Bible Reader and Visitor in the district.

In the spring of 1862, during the great fratricidal war, she started a
sewing-school in Rivington Street, which eventually merged into the
Harper and Fiske Industrial School in Ludlow Street, which met every
Saturday. Gathering together from seventy-five to one hundred children,
she taught them to sew, and endeavored to lead them to Him who said,
"Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for
of such is the kingdom of heaven."


CHAPTER VIII.

THE VALUE OF PRAYER.

    Oh, teach me, Lord, that I may teach
      The precious things Thou dost impart;
    And wing my words, that they may reach
      The hidden depths of many a heart.


Mrs. Knowles's life, throughout, was characterized by great sincerity
and steadfastness of purpose. As an evidence of it, I will give a
sketch of her experience and work from her own pen, illustrating how
the closing hours of her life were chiefly devoted to "Gathering
Jewels" for Christ, as the secret of a truly beautiful life.

    "In my field of labor I have met with much success and
    encouragement, though, indeed, there are more cases very trying and
    painful to witness, but _all difficulties can be encountered, and
    many overcome, by prayer. I feel more and more the blessedness of
    the privilege I enjoy in being permitted to labor for Christ in the
    salvation of so many poor souls_, and in being the means of aiding
    so many who are sick, cast down, and discouraged. How many there are
    who neglect the house of prayer from the contagion of bad example
    around them, and the want of a kind word of invitation, until the
    habit becomes fixed, and it needs urging to remind them of their
    duty? _I often think of the words of Christ_: '_Compel them to come
    in_.' Yes, compulsion of the right kind is very needful, and a word
    of interest and encouragement such a help. One poor woman whom I
    visited a short time since, told me her lot was the hardest in the
    world--that she had seven children all out of Christ. I told her not
    to be disheartened; that if she could say God was her God, she could
    say he was the God of her seed, and that Jesus had said: 'Whatsoever
    ye shall ask in my name, believing, ye shall receive.' She said: 'I
    have hoped so long, but now I am discouraged.' I told her the mother
    of St. Augustine said she had prayed for fourteen long years for her
    son, and her friend said to her: 'I tell you the subject of so many
    long and earnest prayers cannot be lost.' And that son, of whom she
    was then in search, and whom she met a short time afterward, was
    then under deep conviction, and soon afterward brought to Christ,
    and became an earnest and devoted minister; 'and you, my friend,
    need not be discouraged, for the same Spirit can work as powerfully
    on the hearts of your children as on his.' I prayed with her, and
    left her begging me to pray for her; calling on her a few days
    since, she met me with a cheerful countenance, and told me what I
    had said, together with reading the promise of an answer to prayer,
    had greatly encouraged her, and that her eldest son, who was the
    most unruly of all, had accompanied her to church on the last
    Sabbath, and she believed now the rest would be led to follow his
    example. I told her to doubt no longer, and with a word of cheer
    left her."

Here I will make a few comments on the above.

_All difficulties can be encountered, and many overcome by prayer._--How
true and weighty is this remark. Remembrance of this would guard and
govern aright the actions of Christians, and deliver them from all
unprofitable and injudicious murmurings. It suggests the only true
antidote for the ills of life. A pleasant path to tranquillity of mind
is prayer. Whether amid the crowded city or in the quiet hamlet, on land
or on sea, at home or abroad, no matter where we are, God's ear is
always open to the cry of His children. Prayer is the divinely appointed
means to the attainment of peace. It lifts the soul above the cares and
vicissitudes of life. Its effect is nearness to God. Earth's sighs are
numerous. The tears flow thick and fast. Tears of affright. The enemy
comes in like a flood, but the Lord lifts up a standard against them
all; and the blest remembrance of the promise, "Cast thy burden by
prayer on the Lord, and He will sustain thee," imparts fresh courage
amid the conflict. The man who forgets to pray in the hour of trial is
like one who has lost his way on a dark, stormy night; he is, indeed, a
benighted traveller on a lonesome, dreary road. But let us thank God
that--

    From every stormy wind that blows,
    From every swelling tide of woes,
    There is a calm, a sure retreat;
    'Tis found beneath the Mercy Seat.

_I feel more and more the blessedness of the privilege I enjoy, in being
permitted to labor for Christ in the salvation of so many poor
souls._--When we labor with an eye to the glory of God, and the
exaltation of the name of Jesus in the salvation of lost sinners, it
always imparts perpetual pleasure. It was for the joy that was set
before Jesus that He endured the Cross. Pure pleasure springs from the
motive of doing good. This was the standard from which Christ labored.
His compensation consisted in clarifying the natural and spiritual
vision of those who sat in darkness and the shadow of death. This is the
true explanation of His mysterious patience with those who frequently
repelled His teachings and doings, when they were attributed to the
power of the Prince of the Air. But the incarnate Son of God fainted not
in His work, until He exclaimed, "It is finished." It is even so with
all faithful missionaries. They feel it to be an unspeakable privilege
to be co-workers with Christ; recognizing the fact that it is not their
work but God's, and while they acknowledge their utter inability to save
a single soul, yet, doubtless, their joy and satisfaction in all their
work springs from the sacred consciousness that there is not only
rejoicings and gladness of heart experienced on earth, but "joy in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth."

_I often think of the words of Christ, Compel them to come in._--The
scene is changed. From prayer in the closet, to kindly compulsion in the
lanes and streets of the city. Here the reader will find the true secret
of her beautiful life; namely, frequent reflection on the words of
Christ, relative to Christian work in the world. "Go ye out into the
highways and lanes," etc. This is the only method by which we can have
communication with the souls of men and women who are perishing for lack
of knowledge. The question has often been asked by the philanthropic men
of the present day, How can we reach the masses? How can we save the
non-churchgoers? It is calculated that with a population of almost a
hundred thousand souls in the Tenth Ward alone, of New York, only about
one-fourth attend any place of worship. 16 Ansi the last shall be
first: and the last first, because many are called but few chosen. 17
and up to Ierušalem Iesus, took his twelve disciples to share
in the way and dixoles, 18 Heaqui climbed Ierušalë: and the Son
Hobro's will be delivered to the chief priests, and the Type: and
condenarlohan to death, 19 And the people have delivered paraque [lo]
ešcarnezcan, and he said, and crucified: but the third day rešušcitará.
llegóše then at 20 the mother of the sons of Zebedee co his sons,
adoring and pidiëdole something. dixo 21 And you, do you? She (it) dixo,
Di aššienten that these two sons of mine to your mãderecha one,
the other to your yzquierda in your Kingdom, 22 Then Iesus responding
dixo, ^ No šabeys what pedis, Bever Podeys glass I I have Bever?

and Baptized the baptism that I am Baptized? Dizen [they] can. Dize
23 will, truth bevereys my glass: and the baptism that I am Baptized,
šereys Baptized: but sit at my manderecha and my yzquierda, it is not
mine, but is losque accompanied by my Father. 24 And the ten heard
[this], enojaronše of the two brothers. 25 Then Iesus calling us, dixo
^, [and] šabeys the princes of the people are enšeñorean about them:
and losque are big on eššecutan power them. 26 Mas ansi will not be
among you: but we would like hazerše great among you, be your servant,
27 and which they wants to be first among you shall be your servant. 28
As the Son of man came not to be served but to serve, and to give His
life a ransom for many. 29 So leaving them Iericho, šeguiale great
company. heaqui two blind 30 and sitting next to the road, as they heard
that Iesus paššava cried, diziendo, Lord, Son of David, have mercy
on us. 31 And the company that they rhenium callaššen but they clamav
more, diziendo, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us. 32 And Iesus
standing, llamolos and dixo: That quereys [that] do for you? 33 Dizenle
[them], Mr samples that are open eyes. 34 Then Iesus aviendo mercy on
them deellos touched the eyes, and then their eyes received sight,
and šiguieronlo. capita. XXI. And as for Ierušalem approached, and
came to Beth-Phage, the Mount of Olives then Iesus Embi disciples 2.
Diziendoles, Id the village in front of you, and then a hallareys Asna
tied and a colt with her: Bring dešatalda and [the] 3. And if anyone
dixere you something, dezid, The Lord has need: then dexará. 4 And all
this was done Paray še cumpliešše what was said by the Prophet,
which dixo, 5 Dezid the daughter of Sion, Heaqui, your King comes,
Manso, seated on a Asna, a colt and son of [animal] yoke. # 6 and
the disciples were, and sent them hizieron as Iesus. 7 And the
truxeron Asna and the colt, and put them on their cloaks about them
and Sentosa. 8 And a very great company tended their cloaks on the
road: cortavan and other branches of the trees, and tended by the
way. 9 And the companies that Yvan front Yvan and lasque behind
acclamavan diziendo, Hosanna, Son of David, which they are blessed
in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. 10 And entering
into Ierušalë, the whole city diziendo rod, Who is this?

And the 11 companies dezian, Iesus This is the prophet of Nazareth
of Galilee ^.

Iesus 12 and entered into the temple of God, and drove all losque
and compravan sold in the Temple, and disruption of changing tables,
and chairs of those selling pigeons. dizel 13 And, Ešcripto is, my
house shall be called a house of prayer: but ye den of thieves aveys
the fact. 14 Then came to the blind and Coxos in the Temple, and
šanòlos, 15 But the chief priests and the scribes, seeing the wonders
that hazia and mochachos acclamãdo in the Temple, and diziendo,
Hosanna to the Son of David, enojaronše, 16 AND dixeronle, you hear
what these dizen ^?

    And Iesus Dize them, If, Never leyštes
      From the mouths of children,
      and losque maman perficionašte the
    alabança. 17 And dexandolos, šalioše outside of the city to Bethany:
and landed there. 18 And in the morning bolviendo the City was
hungry. 19 And seeing a fig tree near the road, came to her, and
did not find anything on it but leaves only, dixole never born fruit
from you forever, and then the fig tree dried up, then watching 20
that the disciples marveled dezian as the fig tree dry then?

21 And Iesus dixoles responding, Verily I say unto you, that if tuvierdes
faith, and not dudardes not only hareys this to the fig tree, but if
dixerdes to this mountain, Take and throw in the sea, it will be
done. 22 And what pidierdes Prayer to believe [it] recibereys, 23
and came to the temple, the chief priests and elders of the people,
teaching, came to the diziendo, hazes ^ So this authority?

and who gave you this authority?

24 and responding Iesus, dixoles, I also ask you one word: If I qual
dixerdes, I tell you with authority to do this. 25 The baptism
of Ioan where was it? from heaven or men? Then they thought among
themselves, diziendo If dixeremos From the sky, dezir us, because we
do not creyftes?

26 And if dixeremos, Of Hobro, the vulgar fear: they all have to Ioan
for prophet. 27 and responding to Iesus dixeron do not know. And also
dixo, I will not say I do this tony authority. 28 More than you
think? a man had two sons, and reaching the first dixole, Son ve
oy to work in my vineyard. 29 And answering him, dixo, I do not want.
more after repentance was. ^ 30 and reached the other dixole the same
way: and the response, dixo, Lord I [I]. And it was not. Qual 31 of the
two did the will of the father? Dizen them first. Dizel Iesus, Verily
I say unto you that the publicans and harlots will go ahead to the
Kingdom of God. 32 Ioan I came to you by way of justice and not
creyštes: and the publicans and harlots believed him: and you see [ This]
will never arrepentištes to believe him. 33 Oyd another parable, a
man was a father, the qual planted a vineyard: and Cercola of fencing,
and she founded in winery and built tower and Diola to rent to
tenants and partióše lexos. 34 And when the time came els fruits Embi
his servants to the tenants, paraque recibieššen fruit. 35 But the
tenants, taking slaves, at a hirierõ and to kill another, and another
apedrearõ. Embi another 36 while other servants more than the first:
and co hizierõ them the same way. 37 And in the end embióles his
son diziendo, will rešpeckto my son. But the 38 tenants, seeing the
child, between dixeron Yes, this is the heir Come, matemoslo, and
take his inheritance. 39 and taken echaronlo outside the vineyard,
and mataronlo. 40 So when the Lord comes from the vineyard, and
make those tenants? 41 Dizenle [them]: A deštruyrá badly ill and give
his vineyard to rent to other tenants and paid the fruit of their
times. dizel Iesus 42, Never leyštes in Ešcripturas, the stone, which
rejected the edificavan that this was made by head of the corner? For
the Lord is done, and it is marvelous in our eyes, 43 Portanto
tell you that the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you: and
will be given to people who make the fruit of 44.

And Ely falls on this stone will be ÿbrantado: and who [she] falls,
dešmenuzarloha. 45 And the princes of the hearing Sacerdodotes and
Pharišeos, his parables hablava understood them. 46 get your hands
and looking worried as the people because they were prophets. CAPITA .
XXII. Iesus and responding, bolvióles to speak in parables, diziendo, 2
The Kingdom of heaven is like a human king, who made marriage to his
son. Embi 3 And his servants Paray llamaššen called to the wedding: but
not quiššieron come.

Bolvió à 4 Embi other servants diziendo, Dezid to calls, Heaqui, I
accompanied my meal, my bulls and [animals] fattened šo dead, and
everything is accompanied by: Come to the wedding. But they do
not cured 5 #, fueronše and one to his labrança, and another to his
business: 6 and others, taking his servants affrentaronlos and
mataronlos. 7 And the king heard [this], enojóše: Embi and their
Exército, destroyed those murderers and set fire your city. Dize 8
Then to his servants, weddings are meant to truth, but those who
were called were not worthy. 9 Go therefore to the outputs of the
paths, and call the wedding quanto à hallardes. 10 Y Leaving the
servants on the roads, and found gathered together all the bad and
good: and the wedding was filled with cõbidados. 11 And the King
came to see cõbidados and served Hobro not there a dress wedding
dress. dixole and 12 , Dude, come in here as not having a wedding
garment?

And he was shut up.

Dixo 13 Then the king to the servants, bound feet and hands and
tomaldo in the darkness of echaldo to be: there shall be weeping
and teeth of the paddling.

Pory many šo ^ 14 called and few chosen. 15 Then ydos the Pharišeos,
consult, as taken in [some] floor. Embi A on 16 and his disciple
with Herod, diziendo, Master, we know that you are a lover of
truth, and teach the true path of God and do not cure anyone #: Pory
accepcion have no person of men. 17 Di us then, you think? It is
lawful to give tribute to Cesar, or not? 18 But Iesus understood his
malice Dize [them], because I tentays Hypocrite? 19 Show me the coin
of the tribute. And they showed him some money. Dizel 20 So, whose is
this figure and what is above ešcripto? 21 [They] will Dize, Cesar,
and dizel, PAGAD as Cesar what is Cesar ÿ: and God, Loy is God.
22 And hearing [this], maravillaronše: and dexaronlo and fueronše.
23 That day came to him Sadduceos, which aver dizen no resurrection,
and preguntaronle, 24 Diziendo: teachers, Moyses dixo, If any muriere
without children , his brother marries his muger, and awaken the
seed to his brother. 25 were therefore seven brothers among us: and
the first took muger, and died, and not having generation, dexó its
muger to his brother. 26 in the same way the second and the third
to seven. 27 And after all the muger died tabi. 28 In the resurrection
therefore, which of the seven will be the muger?

because we all did. rešpondiëdo Iesus then 29, dixoles, Errays ignoring
ešcripturas, and power of God. 30 For in the resurrection or
mugeres take husbands or husbands mugeres, but are like angels of God
in heaven. 31 Y the resurrection of the dead, not aveys ÿ Leyde what
God is saying to you that Dize, 32 I am the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac and the God of Iacob? God is not God of the dead, most of
which biven. 33 And hearing [that] I was out of the companies if their
docktrina. Pharišeos then 34, closed the hearing and Air Sadduceos
the mouth, a jûtaronše: 35 And one asked them, interpret the law, tempted,
and diziendo, 36 Master, Grande qual is the commandment in the law? 37
And Iesus dixo you, love the Lord your God with all your coraçon,
and with all your soul, and all your mind. 38 This is the
first and the Great mãdamiëto. 39 The second resembles it: 'Love your
next, as yourself. 40 On these two commandments hang all the Law
and the prophets. 41 Y Pharišeos be together, they asked Iesus,
42 Diziendo, What you think of Christ? Whose son is he?

Dizenle [them], De David. 43 Dize them, for as David in the Spirit calls
him Lord, diziendo, 44 dixo Lord my Lord, aššientate my right hand,
meantime that your enemies by Estrada ponto your feet? 45 Well if David
calls him Lord, as is his son? 46 And nobody could answer word: he
dared not ask any more since that day. Captain. XXIII. Then ^ IESVS
companies and speaking to his disciples, 2 Diziendo, On Moyses še
cathedra of the Scribes and the assent Pharišeos: 3 Anšique all what
you dixeren that guardeys, and Hazelden guardaldo: hagays but
not according to his works: and not because dizen Hazen. atan 4 Because
heavy and difficult to carry, and put [the] on Ombrosa of men: but
even with your finger they want to move. 5 Before all his works to be
seen Hazen of the men Pory broaden their philackterias and eštienden
the fluecos their mantles: 6 And love at first aššientos dinners,
and the first chair in šynogas: 7 And greetings in the plates, and
then be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. 8 But you, querays not be called
Rabbi, for one is your Master, the Christ: and all of you brothers Soysa.
9 and your fathers llameys not anyone on earth: a Pory is your Father,
is in the qual heaven. 10 Ni os llameys docktores: Pory ^ Docktor
is your one, the Christ. 11 He who is the greatest among you, be your
servant. 12 For which enalteciere will be humbled: and he who
humilláre, shall be exalted. 13 But unto you scribes and ay Pharišeos,
Hypocrite because cerrays the Kingdom of heaven against men: entrays
that neither you, nor to those that fall dexays enter. 14 Oh you
scribes and Pharišeos, Hypocrite because comeys homes biudas of
color Luengas sentence: why llevareys more serious juyzio. 15 Oh
you scribes and Pharišeos, Hypocrite: Pory rodeays the sea and the
dry season by becoming a Hazer: and when it actually hazeyslo son
bent over quemadero ÿ you. 16 Oh you blind guides, and dezis,
Qualquer and swear by the temple, is nothing: but qualquer and swear
by the gold of the Tepla debtor. 17 Fools and blind, qual is higher,
gold, or Temple šancktifica gold?

Item 18. Qualquer who swear by the altar, is nothing: but qualquer
who swear by this that's over, the debtor is. 19 Fools and blind:
for qual is greater, the present, or the altar that šancktifica
Present? 20 For which they swear the altar, swears by it and all what
is about. 21 And which they swear by the temple swears by it and
by living in it. 22 And which they swear by heaven, swears by the
throne of God and by who is sitting on it. 23 Alas for you, scribes
and Pharišeos, Hypocrite because dezmays mint and dill and cumin,
and Loy dexaštes is the most serious of the Act [is to know] the
juyzio, and mercy and faith.

This was necessary Hazer, dexar and not the other. 24 blind guides,
which colays the moxquito, but the camel tragays. 25 Oh you scribes and
Pharišeos, Hypocrite because limpiays what is outside the glass, or
plate, more than Inside is [all] full of robbery and injustice. 26 Pharišeo
blind first clean what is inside of the cup and platter, paraque at
what is outside is clean. 27 Oh you scribes and Pharišeos, Hypocrite
because similar Soysa , à Sepulcher bleached that outside, the truth,
they are beautiful: but inside are full of hueššos dead, and all šuziedad.
Ansi 28 you too, outside, truth moštrays you righteous men: more
inside stays full of falsehood and iniquity. 29 Oh you scribes and
Pharišeos, Hypocrite: Pory edificays Sepulcher of the prophets, and
adornays monuments of the righteous. dezis and 30, if in the days of our
fathers, ovieramos not been his companions in the blood of the prophets.
Anšique testimony 31 days Soysa yourselves that children of those
who killed the prophets. 32 You also fill the measure of your fathers.
33 Snakes, generation of bivoras as the evitareys juyzio of quemadero?
34 portata heaqui I Embi you prophets and wise men and scribes, and
they [some] matareys and crucificareys: and [other] deellos açotareys
in your šynogas and peršeguireys from city to city: 35 Paraque come
upon you all the blood that has just spilled on the ground, from the
blood of the righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias son of
Barachias, àlqual mataštes between the temple and the altar. 36 Verily
I say unto you, that all this will come about this generation. 37
Ierušalem, Ierušalë and kill the prophets and stoning those who are
Embi you, Quantas vezes want your children together as a hen chickens
juta debaxo of their wings, and not wanted. 38 Heaqui, your home
he is dexada deserted. 39 Because [I] tell you that since aora no
me vereys until digays, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the
Lord.

Captain. XXIIII. Salido And Iesus Temple, yvaše: and his disciples to
show llegaronše ^ buildings of the Temple. 2 And the response, dixoles,
Veys this? Decierto tell you, it will not be here dexada stone upon
stone not deštruyda. 3 and sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples
llegaronše à à part diziendo, Tell us when shall these things, and
bring [Avra] Your coming, and the end of the century. 4 And Iesus
responding, dixoles, Take heed that no one deceives you. 5 For many
will come in my name, diziëdo, I am the Christ: and to deceive many.
oyreys wars and 6, and rumors of wars: see that ye turbeys not
because it is necessary that all [this] to happen: but even this is
not the end. 7 For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and shall be pestilence, and famines, and earthquakes by
places. 8 And all these things, the beginning of sorrows. 9 Then
he delivered for affligidos: and mataroshan: šereys and hated by
all nations because of my name. 10 And then many will be shocked:
entregaršehan and to one another, and še hate each other. 11 And
many false prophets arose, and deceive many. aversa multiplied by
12 and evil, many charidad get colds. 13 But he that perševerare
until the end will be saved. 14 And it shall be preaching this
gospel of the Kingdom throughout the [land] for Living testimony
to all nations, and then come the end.

Portanto 15 when the Vierde abominaciõ of aššolamiëto and was told by
prophet Daniel, and be in place Sãckto, which they read understand. losque
Then 16 [^ were] in Iudea, Huygen to the mountains. 17 And the roof on
which they do not decienda to take some home. 18 And in the field, not
Buelvas again to take their clothes . Over 19 and from pregnant and
those that breed in those days. 20 Pray that your huyda it is not in
winter, nor day naps. 21 Avra Because then affliciõ grade, qual
since it was not until the beginning of the silent aora nor shall
be. ^ 22 And if those days fueššë not shortened, no flesh would be
saved: but for the sake of the elect, those days are shortened. 23
So if someone you dixere, Heaqui is Christo, or there, not creays.
24 because it is bringing false Christos, and false prophets: and
they shall give great signs and wonders: so deceive, if possible,
even the elect. 25 Heaqui you what I said earlier. 26 Anšique if
you dixeren, Heaqui in the desert is: not šalgays.

"And bless his holy name," I responded.

We were both silent for a few moments, and then--I think it was in
connection with this conversation--I asked:

"William, if you were to get well now, do you think you would try to
live to the glory of God?"

"Indeed, I would," he answered.

"And bring others to know him?" I asked.

"Yes," he said again.

"Well, William, I suppose you think that here upon this bed you cannot
do much; but I think you can glorify him here on this very bed."

"Yes," he answered, a little doubtfully; then added: "I try to pray to
him all the time."

I was half sorry for the suggestion, which seemed somewhat to bewilder
him, and said: "That is all you can do, is it not?"

"And that is little enough," he replied sorrowfully.

I tried to make him understand that to receive much of God's grace was
the surest way to serve him.

"What shall I render unto God for all his benefits? I will take the cup
of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord."

When I saw William the next morning, he said, immediately:

"I did last night what you told me. I prayed for strength to glorify
God here."

"I think," I answered, "that you will do that if you lie here and
meekly suffer his will; and I must tell you that, after these
conversations with you, I go home thanking God for what you have told
me of His love to you. I think I love the Saviour better, since I have
seen what he can be to one in sickness and death."

"_That is good_" he said emphatically, "_I would have it so_."

As I left him this time, the thought in my own mind was: "Oh, speak
good of the Lord."

On my return to William and his brother-in-law, after the interview
which I described in my last paragraph, and which occurred only a few
days ago, I saw that he was too much agitated for conversation. I read
him a hymn and said a few words. He was suffering more than usual that
day, and his usually peaceful spirit seemed a little clouded. When I
rose to go, it seemed that he would have detained me. We had bidden
good-by, and turned away, when I looked back. I wanted to leave some
word of Christ or thought of him at the last. "William," I said,
bending over him, "Jesus says: 'Let not your heart be troubled--in my
Father's house are many mansions.'"

He took hold of my hand, and looked up, the red lines of tears about
his eyes. I could not quite understand their expression of unutterable
longing, but I could feel at the moment that death must be penal, and
its waters cold sometimes, even to a believer.

    In these deeply anxious hours,
    O, if Jesus only smile!
          Only Jesus
    Can these restless tears beguile.


CHAPTER X.

SOWING AND REAPING.

    Sowing in the morning, sowing seeds of kindness,
      Sowing in the noon-tide and the dewy eves;
    Waiting for the harvest, and the time of reaping,
      We shall come rejoicing, bringing in the sheaves.


The blessed Master says, in his Sermon on the Mount, "With what measure
ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." If we attempt great things
for God, and expect great things from God, He will bless us
accordingly; for He cheers us by saying: "Ye shall reap, if ye faint
not."

Mrs. Knowles tells us of instances where this truth has been verified.
"One woman, whom I have been visiting for years, but apparently without
any success, until a few months since, when she was taken sick, sent
for me at that time, and said, 'she felt so sorry she had led such a
wicked life,' and putting her arms round my neck, said, earnestly, 'Oh,
pray for me, that the Lord will have mercy on me, and save my poor
soul.' I did so, and when I rose from my knees, she held my hand in
hers, and looking up for some time, she cried, 'Lord help me, and
answer the prayers that have been offered for me;' and when I told her
to cast herself wholly upon Jesus, that He was ready to save her, she
said, 'Oh, but I have been such a sinner.' 'He is ready to save the
chief of sinners, if they will only come.' She clasped her hands,
crying, 'Oh, Jesus, save me, for I trust in thee.' I left her with a
heart full of anxiety, but believing the Lord had begun the good work
in her heart, and that in His own good time he would finish it, and I
was not disappointed; for in a short time she was brought to rejoice in
Christ as her Saviour, and although for weeks she passed through
intense suffering, she never complained, but looking up, she would say
to her family, and others who came to visit her, 'My Saviour helps me
to bear all my trials;' and so he did, for I never saw a more patient
sufferer, or a happier death.

"A lady whom I met there said to me, 'You have been sowing seed here a
long time, and now you see what encouragement you have to labor.' The
family are still out of Christ, but I earnestly hope to see or hear of
them all brought to their mother's God.

"Another woman, who did not attend church at all, was like a little
child, helpless and humble. Her situation became so critical, none were
allowed to see her; but if she heard I was there, she always wanted me
to pray with her; and often after offering a short prayer at her
bedside, she would take my hand when about to leave her, and say, 'Oh,
pray for me;' And when I kissed her, she would look up so earnestly,
saying: 'I know you will pray for me.'

"It pleased the Lord to bless the means used for her recovery, and now,
nearly well, she cannot express her gratitude to God for having
preserved her. A few days since, when I told her of a poor woman who
had returned from the hospital not much better, she gave me a dollar
for her; indeed, her whole desire seems to be to do good, and bring up
her children (she has a large family) in the right way. She said to me,
'When you came at first to see me, and spoke to me about being a
sinner, I did not see how it was that I could be so, for I felt I was
as good as you was.'

"These are cases that encourage us in our labors, for although our work
at the time may seem fruitless, we may safely leave the seed in His
hands, who maketh it grow and bud and blossom in His own good time.

"A woman whom I had not seen for some time, as she had moved away, told
me a missionary had called to see her, and, talking to her as I had
done, she asked if he knew me. He said, 'No, he was a stranger; but his
words impressed her so much, that I still hope she may soon be brought
to Christ; and thus it often is, if we sow in faith, 'one soweth and
another reapeth.' In many instances a Bible that I have left, neglected
at the time, has, through another's teaching, become precious; and some
have shown me _one_ left by other teachers, to which I have had the
privilege of directing the attention of the otherwise careless owner."

She continues her deeply-interesting narrative thus:

"We have commenced our Saturday Sewing-school in a beautiful room,
which has been secured for us, and hope to accomplish a great deal of
good this winter through its means. My Sunday-school will be in
connection with the Ludlow Street Mission, and I trust, as my health
and strength seem renewed, I may be truly useful in working for the
Master."

Here we have a vivid description of Christian waiting, in expectation
of results. When we take into consideration that this woman was fifty
years old when she commenced directly to work as a missionary, we know
that she was fully equipped for the task, and entered upon it with all
her energies of heart. St. Paul says, in his letter to the Church, at
Rome, that "tribulation worketh patience." Now, there are many
God-fearing ministers who cannot stand a rebuff. There are many good
Christian people, and some of them excellent workers in the
Sabbath-school, who could not stand to be looked upon coldly, much less
to have the door slammed in their face. I am sure they would give the
work up in despair, if, after they had attempted to reach some stranger
several times, and had not succeeded. But, oh, here is a weak woman,
for years visiting another of her own sex, year after year,
remonstrating earnestly and patiently, and lovingly with her, in order
to lead her to Christ. Is not this the way that God deals with us? Line
upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, there a little.

Surely, he is the Lord God, "merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
slow to anger, abundant in goodness and in truth."

What does Christ say in the Apocalypse? "Behold, I stand at the door,
and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come unto
him and will sup with him, and he with Me."

Does not the Holy Spirit work in this very same manner? Patiently!--oh,
how patiently, He strives, He pleads, He warns. Was it not the Holy
Spirit in this woman's heart, that, led her again and again to visit
this home? Yes, most assuredly. Oh, that this self-same spirit would
whisper to every reader of this memoir to go and do likewise!

See how beautifully Divine Providence harmonizes with the Spirit's
work, and with those who faithfully toil in the vineyard. How unique
the operation. Sickness is the efficient cause.

But we must constantly remember that it was the almost incomparable
faith of this woman in the God of Jacob, amid the greatest difficulties
and discouragements, that gave her such remarkable success.
Incompetency for Christian work is a lack, not only of patience, but of
faith in the great love of our God, and the triumphant death of Christ,
and the persistent power of the Holy Spirit, combined with a humble
trust in our own capabilities to do valiantly for Jesus. These are the
allied forces in waging war against the powers of darkness in this
wicked world. Christ said, "As the Father hath sent me, even so send I
you into the world. And greater works than these shall ye do, because I
go to my Father." Confidence in the word of our dear Incarnate Lord is
the warrant, not only of the stability of God's method of saving souls,
but in the progressive propagation of Christian principles. There is
growth in work for Christ, as well as in nature. And our younger
brethren would do well to remember that like this woman, we must expect
success, or we will never get it.

Dr. McCosh, the President of Princeton College, made the following
remarks in an address before the General Conference of the Evangelical
Alliance:

"It is useless to tell the younger naturalists that there is no truth
in the doctrine of development, for they know that there is truth which
is not to be set aside by denunciation. Religious philosophers might be
more profitably employed in showing them the religious aspects of the
doctrine of development; and some would be grateful to any who would
help them to keep their old faith in God and the Bible with their new
faith in science."

Again, in his book on "Development," Dr. McCosh says:

"It is no use denying in our day the doctrine of evolution, in the name
of religion or any good cause. It can now be shown that it rather
favors religion by its furnishing proofs of design, and by the
wonderful parallelism between Genesis and geology."

In this part of Mrs. Knowles' diary, the careful reader will observe a
most dramatic account of human nature, under the controlling power of
the Holy Ghost. The woman whom she had long visited was at last
conquered. The city of the soul was successfully bombarded. The sorrow
for sin, the sad lamentation over a misspent life, the flinging of her
arms round the neck of the missionary, the urgent request, "Oh, pray
for me, that the Lord may have mercy on me, and save my poor soul,"
together with the statement of transition from shadow to sunshine, from
grief to joy, from alienation to adoption, reveal to us the judiciously
connected operations of the deity, in the salvation of immortal souls
brought about by the power of prayer.

Why should we remain incredulous about God's willingness to save
sinners, after such a marvellous manifestation of Divine mercy?

_Brought to rejoice in Christ as her Saviour._--The term "brought," is a
very emphatic Scriptural one. It ascribes the glory, and honor, and
power of man's deliverance to the free, sovereign, unmerited favor of
God. David sings:

"I waited patiently for the Lord. And He inclined unto me, and heard my
cry.

"He _brought_ me up also out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay:

"And He set my feet upon a rock, and stablished my goings.

"And He hath put a new song in my mouth, even praises unto our God; many
shall see _it_, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord."

A judicious acknowledgment of the sovereignty of God as the author of
salvation is essential to Christian calmness and courage, and
continuance in the path of duty. Man may break his promise, but God
never. Man's objection to God's methods of salvation arise from a
desire to take the glory to self, and the disposition to discontentment
on the one hand, and a feeling of distrust on the other. Let us learn,
from the foregoing account of the conversion of this woman, to isolate
ourselves from man's ways of working, and accept God's communications
regarding His approaches to the avenues of the heart; knowing that He
will ultimately send the converting power of the Holy Spirit to the
soul of the most hardened and obdurate sinner.

We must go back once more to Mrs. Knowles' narrative, and observe that
among the principal causes of her success with the poor and fallen, was
not only her intimate acquaintance with God's dealings with both saint
and sinner, but her marvellous and confirmed habit of always offering a
short prayer at the bedside of the sick and suffering and dying. There
was, therefore, elicited the pungent request, "Oh, pray for me,"
corroborated by the impressive ejaculation of confidence in her
fidelity to the divine command, "Call upon me in the day of trouble, I
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." How inexpressibly
encouraging it must have been on this occasion to hear the remark, "I
know you will pray for me," accompanied with the look of earnestness
and helplessness, realizing that God alone could restore her to her
accustomed health and strength.

Who can tell of the gratitude and gladness that sprang up in this
woman's heart in answer to earnest prayer on her behalf, for her
recovery which God was graciously pleased to bestow? The donation of
the dollar to the other poor woman recently returned from the hospital,
was conclusive evidence that she joyfully appreciated what great things
God had done, not only for her soul, but for her frail body. Let us
learn, dear reader, from the foregoing account of God's dealings with
His dear departed saints that, in the first place, we must not be weary
in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not, for,
as Mrs. Knowles says, "Our work may seem at the time fruitless, yet we
may safely leave the seed in His hands, who maketh it grow and bud and
blossom in His own good time."

In the second place, we must remember that to be actively engaged
working for God's glory is the best and surest, and, in fact, the only
safe remedy for disappointment and discouragements in aggressive
Christian work. "In many instances," she says, "a Bible that I have
left, neglected at the time, has through another's teachings become
precious." We can speak from heart-felt experience on this point, for
some of the sweet psalms and hymns we sang, perhaps thoughtlessly, in
the days of sunny childhood, are to-day the most soul-stirring,
imparting fire, force, and fervency while working for Jesus. Here is
one of them:

    I think when I read that sweet story of old,
      When Jesus was here among men,
    How He called little children as lambs to His fold,
      I should like to have been with them then.

    I wish that His hands had been placed on my head,
      That His arm had been thrown around me,
    And that I might have seen His kind look when He said,
      "Let the little ones come unto Me."

    Yet still to His footstool in prayer I may go,
      And ask for a share in His love;
    And if I thus earnestly seek Him below,
      I shall see Him and hear Him above.

    In that beautiful place He has gone to prepare
      For all who are washed and forgiven;
    And many dear children shall be with Him there,
      "For of such is the kingdom of Heaven."

Throughout her life Mrs. Knowles constantly experienced the blessing of
sowing and the happy reward of reaping. Numerous instances could be
cited, had we the space to spare, in which direct answers to her
prayers have come to her while in the act of beseeching God's aid and
blessing upon some one object of interest to her. Her own son was one
among many of such cases. In the early part of 1857 he had become
associated with many bad companions and was a source of anxiety to both
his parents. His father thought if he could get him to attend church
the good influence there obtained would tend to lead him to Christ and
into the paths of salvation. But the youth refused to go, and the
mother at once besought the aid of God in influencing her son's heart.
At first, after praying with him for some time, she found him asleep on
his knees. She roused him up and prayed again with him, and on her
husband's return from church he found his penitent son beseeching Jesus
to forgive him and lead him into the way of righteousness.


CHAPTER XI.

DAILY MISSIONARY WORK.

    Shall He come and find me faithful
      To His parting words to me;
    "If I go--a place preparing--
      I will quickly come to thee."

    Shall He come and find me working
      In the vineyard full of love;
    Only working, till the glory
      Breaks upon me from above?


The following part of her narrative of Christian work, taken from _Our
Missing Link_, is deeply interesting, and deserves the reader's careful
perusal.

At one time Mrs. Knowles wrote that, during part of the summer months
great weakness and general debility prevented her from laboring as much
as usual; and when she resumed her visits, she found many had been
making inquiries after her in church, not knowing her place of
residence. One young woman especially, who had made an unfortunate
marriage, and who had been badly treated by her husband, was extremely
anxious to see her, to tell her what comfort she had derived from a
Bible given her by Mrs. Knowles. She said she had never read so much in
one before. She had been brought up a Roman Catholic, but having lived
a few months in a Protestant family, she had there seen a Bible, and
occasionally read in it. That upon leaving the family the lady
presented her with one, which she was obliged to hide away in her bed,
lest her mother should know she possessed it. It afterward disappeared
and she thought one of her family must have seen her reading in it, and
since then she had never been able to procure another. "When I gave her
this one, her husband had spent all her wages, and she had not the
means of paying for it; but now she paid me for it, and hoped I would
come again soon and talk with her about it.

"I am kindly received wherever I go in my new district. There has been
much sickness, especially among the children, and much care is needed.
One man I visited presented a pitiable condition. When I entered his
room he was far gone in consumption. A little girl was raising his head
to give him drink, as the mother had gone to her work. He looked
surprised to see a stranger enter his room, but I went forward and asked
him if he was looking unto Jesus. He said, like many while in health, he
had thought too little about those things. I read and prayed with him.
Upon leaving him he shook my hand and asked me to come again, saying the
Lord must have sent me. I returned soon with some nourishment, which was
greedily partaken of--'It tasted so good.' He lived but little more than
a week, and I visited him daily, reading and praying with him. I carried
with me the little book _Come to Jesus_, which he loved to hear, as, 'It
was so full of Jesus;' but he said he had neglected the Saviour, and how
could he hope He would have mercy on him now. I told him how Christ died
praying for his enemies, and that the thief on the cross looked to him
and was saved, and repeated to him the hymn 'Just as I am,' etc. This
seemed to encourage him, and he said he wanted to trust in the mercy of
God through Christ to save him; while all who came to see him, he would
urge not to delay, as he had done, coming to Jesus. He said I was the
first to speak to him about the salvation of his soul, and expressed
great gratitude to me, and great solicitude about his wife and children,
till I told him he could surely trust One, who had done so much for him,
to care for them. He finally became too weak to speak, but toward the
last I saw him clasp his hands together, while he repeated, 'O blessed
Jesus, save me.'

"The woman whom I mentioned in a former report as so solicitous about
her children being all out of Christ, tells me she is much encouraged,
as her eldest son now attends church with her, and is so changed and so
much concerned about the other members of the family, she has great
reason to hope for great things for all the rest.

"If those dear ladies who furnish us with means could only see for
themselves how grateful these poor creatures are for any small kindness
done them, or for a word spoken in kindness, how greatly encouraged
they would be. And how great is the responsibility of the Bible woman,
as she goes from house to house, and from one apartment to another,
listening to the many tales of distress which greets her ears, and
witnesses for herself the many objects of pity and destitution which
meet her gaze, while she knows that something is expected from her to
alleviate, in some measure, the sorrow of these poor sufferers; and
then, when these people look up to her for counsel and advice, she is
often at a loss to know what to say to them. I often entreat them to go
to Jesus, and kneel and pray with them that the Lord may direct them
what to do.

"I have brought a number of persons to church, and trust, through
blessing, prayer, and continued efforts, much more may be accomplished
in the future."

It is only by an experimental knowledge of the condition of the
citizens of New York and other large centres of population, who are
huddled together in the high tenement houses, that we are able to form
a correct understanding of the peculiar circumstances that surround the
daily life of the faithful city missionary, especially when they are
not thoroughly acclimated. A native-born American does not feel the
stifling heat of the summer sun like those who are born in a more
northerly European country. But even the Americans themselves suffer
severely from the heat. Hence, many of them close their churches and
Sabbath-schools, and resort to their summer retreats by the seashore,
at Ocean Grove or Long Branch, while others seek rest and refreshment
to their jaded spirits at Saratoga, or snuff the balmy breezes at Mount
McGregor, where General Grant breathed his last, and ended his
creditable career in the cause of his country.

At this time we find that she suffered much during the summer months of
1867. Great weakness and general debility hindered her from laboring
incessantly, as was her usual custom for her dear Saviour. Sickness
seems to have been the only limitation to her labors. When I think that
I am writing not about some imaginary character, but one with an
untainted reputation, a _beau ideal_ as a Christian worker, known
perhaps to a few outside of the circle in which she lived and labored,
encouraged not by applauding throngs, but attracted and held to her
toil, year after year, by sorrowful hearts and weeping eyes, and
helpless hands that hang down the widow and the fatherless--these were
the objects of her Christ-like and heart-felt compassion.

Chalmers observes, in a sermon preached at an Anniversary Missionary
meeting, held in the High Church in Edinburgh: "What the man of liberal
philosophy is in sentiment, the missionary is in practice. He sees in
every man a partaker of his own nature, and a brother of his own
species. He contemplates the human mind in the generality of its great
elements. He enters upon the wide field of benevolence, and disdains
those geographical barriers by which little men would shut out one-half
of the species from the kind offices of the other. His business is with
man, and let his localities be what they may, enough for his large and
noble heart that he is bone of the same bone. To get at him he will
shun no danger, he will shrink from no privation, he will spare himself
no fatigue, he will brave every element of heaven, he will hazard the
extremities of every clime, he will cross seas, and work his
persevering way through the briars and thickets of the wilderness. In
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by the heathen, in
weariness and painfulness, he seeks after him. The cast and the color
are nothing to the comprehensive eye of the missionary. His is the
broad principle of good-will to the children of men. His doings are
with the species, and, overlooking all the accidents of climate or of
country, enough for him if the individual he is in quest of be a man--a
brother of the same nature--with a body which a few years will bring to
the grave, and a spirit that returns to the God who gave it. The
missionary is a man of large and liberal principles."

These characteristics, enumerated by the warm and large, and
generous-hearted Chalmers, dwelt richly in her whose biography we have
tremblingly attempted to portray. She knew little of the soothing
influences of nature and solitude. Her life's work was spent in this
city, so cosmopolitan, composed, almost, of every creed and color under
heaven.

After restoration to health, the great purpose of her life was joyously
resumed. And at this time we have an opportunity of knowing thoroughly,
and weighing precisely, the opinions of her parishioners regarding her,
for when she began to resume her labors she found that the dear ones
she had brought to Jesus were kindly inquiring about her. Surely, it is
good to be missed, when either laid aside by sickness or called away by
death.

How precious are the promises of God's Word, amid domestic difficulties
and trials. The relations of the home circle are such that, unless
there is the utmost harmony and good-will, one toward another,
everything seems to go wrong. Hence, the importance of the injunction
of the Apostle, "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers."
Her own domestic happiness was constantly preserved. They told me on
the steamer, during a summer excursion, "that during the forty-seven
years of their wedded life, they never needed to be reconciled." And
the secret of their joy at home, even when they commenced housekeeping,
was that they erected the family altar, and established a church in the
house. Conceive, then, her feelings of gratitude to God, when she
learned that the young Roman Catholic wife, unfortunate in her
marriage, who was badly treated by her husband, was greatly comforted
through the prayerful perusal of the Bible. Her deep feelings of moral
sensibility enabled her to truly sympathize with her own sex in their
home troubles.

Her intense love for the children was a magnificent trait in her
character. Why? Because she felt the significance that attaches itself
to the sayings of Christ, bearing on the children. His authority must
be recognized. He said: "Suffer the little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." There is a
beautiful passage in Isaiah, that illustrates how tenderly God cares
for the little ones:

"He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; He shall gather the lambs in
His bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young."

"Whoso," said Jesus, "shall receive one such little child in my name,
receiveth me."

There are too many instances in our daily experience where the children
are sadly neglected, and where they are looked upon as little heathens,
and discouraged in their endeavors to follow Jesus in early life. It
should be the constant care of parents and Sunday-school teachers to
take the children to Him who will in no wise cast them out. Who can
look into the clear, bright, blue eyes of a little boy or girl, and not
see in their countenance a holy radiance expressive of trustfulness,
innocence, and affection? It is no wonder, then, that Jesus said:
"Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye can in
nowise enter into the kingdom of heaven."

"Are you looking unto Jesus?" she said. Where can we look for a more
important searching question to shadow forth the indispensable
necessity of not only this consumptive man, but all men, whether in
health or sickness, to renounce all other methods of trying to get to
heaven, but by "looking unto Jesus." No change of character can take
place in any other way. "Look unto me and be ye saved, all ye ends of
the earth, for I am God, and beside me there is none else." They looked
unto Him and were lightened. "O! it is easy to look to the hills from
whence cometh our help," when the Holy Spirit is working upon the
heart. But ah, it is a tremendously difficult task to perform when the
poor sinner is bereft of this divine power.


CHAPTER XII.

DESTITUTION AND REFORMATION.

    Oh, use me Lord, use even me,
      Just _as_ Thou wilt, and _when_ and _where_,
    Until Thy blessed face I see,
      Thy rest, Thy joy, Thy glory share.


Her willingness to toil in any direction attests the grand purpose of
her life and the ingenious methods employed in assisting and saving
souls.

"I visited one family," she writes, "a few days since who had not eaten
anything for twenty-four hours. The father was out of employment, and
in desperation was just about to take the children to some charitable
home, when I came in time to supply their wants and procure aid and
work for him. Many others, rather than make known their wants, have
pawned everything they possessed. I have had to give and lend them
articles of clothing to cover them, and have procured coal and
groceries for nine families during the past month."

The remarkable and unprecedented success of this one woman in reaching
others of her own sex is nearly unparalleled. This fact has encouraged
us to persevere in our attempt to make these truths known to the
Christian world; for how emphatically true are the words of Gray:

    "Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
      The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear,
    And full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
      And waste its sweetness on the desert air."

This thought stimulates us to renewed efforts to present her experience
in her own language, as she conscientiously discharged her duty with an
eye single to the glory of God.

She mentions a case of reformation of an intemperate woman who had
deserted her home, and after pawning and ridding herself of all she
possessed, was at length brought to herself and sent for the Bible
woman, and, through the omnipotence of loving-kindness, has been won to
reformation, which she trusts may be permanent.

This case presents a sad and dark picture in the history of womanhood.
An intemperate woman, through the blasting and blighting influence of
liquor, leaving her home, and like the prodigal, spending her substance
in riotous living, and at length being compelled to feed on the husks.
A fallen woman seeking pleasure away from home with all its
endearments. Alas! alas! "There is no peace saith my God unto the
wicked. Whither, oh, whither can they fly as wretched wanderers from
their homes?"

          "Home, sweet home!
    There is no place like home!"

It is a divine institution. A place of rest and peace and joy. To
forsake home is to despise bliss and accept woe. It is to reject
felicity and receive sorrow. When God has been so kind as to furnish a
peaceable, well-governed home, nothing should tempt the young to leave
it. All that is necessary for pure pleasure can be found in the family
circle. The unwary are sometimes induced to leave home through false
representations, and a desire to gratify every earthly propensity. Idle
curiosity may be greatly augmented, and the new acquaintances formed
may, for the time being, partially please the senses; but the calm
recollection of former unalloyed joys in the cottage home naturally
extorts the old cry from pale quivering lips, and a broken heart, "I
will arise and go to my father, and will say: father I have sinned
against heaven and before thee."

Such a course of turning to God, and such a cry, is always richly
rewarded. Personal reformation is not only gratifying to relatives and
friends, but well-pleasing to God. "Won to reformation" by the Bible
woman through the omnipotence of _loving kindness_! We are reminded by
this incident of a story we heard told by the late John B. Gough. It was
part of his experience a few days after he became a total abstainer. He
had returned to work. But his burning thirst for liquor was intense. In
his agony of mind and body, he said to his employer, "I have signed the
pledge." The reply was, "You will keep it about a week." "If so, then I
will go and get a drink now, for I cannot endure this awful agony any
longer," he retorted. He rushed out of the room and down the stairs
leading to the street, when he was accosted by the kind, gentle voice of
a strange gentleman who met him.

"How do you do, Mr. Gough? I am so glad to see you; I was delighted to
see you at the meeting last night, and I am so thankful that you had
courage given you to go forward and sign the pledge. I simply called
over to shake you by the hand and wish you God speed in your noble
endeavor. Here is my card; I want you to call at my office, as I desire
to get acquainted with you." Those kind words entered into his heart,
and from that auspicious hour he resolved to be steadfast and immovable
in his renunciation of his drinking habits.

God loves and prospers those who, like Jesus, speak kind words of
encouragement to those who have gone astray from the paths of
rectitude. The brevity and uncertainty of life ought to teach us the
practical lesson that if we would save men and women from their sins we
must be watchful and willing at all times to rescue the wanderers from
their critical condition, constantly remembering that He has said, "Let
the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to
our God for he will abundantly pardon."

"When I was hungry ye gave me meat; when I was thirsty ye gave me
drink; naked, and ye clothed me." Little did this noble-minded woman
think that when she was entering her daily experience in her diary that
her deeds of charity were to be brought to light after death. A story
is told of Xenophon, the disciple of Socrates, that while offering a
solemn sacrifice he heard that his eldest son was slain at Mantinea. He
did not, however, desist, but only laid down his crown and asked how he
had fallen. When he understood that his son had fallen in battle
fighting bravely for his country, he calmly replaced the crown upon his
head, calling the gods to witness that he received greater pleasure
from the bravery of his son, than pain from his death. We do not,
naturally speaking, like to lose our loved ones, but when we think of
their bravery and fidelity, we feel disposed to praise God for them. O,
what transcendent dignity and honor are conferred on the faithful at
the hour of death. It seems there is a reciprocal response on earth to
the acclamations of heaven perpetually ringing in the ears of the
ransomed, "Well done, good and faithful servant."

The Church's loss is her gain. Still the deeds of mercy call forth
praise. Let us ever remember that a holy and just and good God is
treasuring up all our words of faith and labors of love against the
great day of account--the day of recognition and remuneration. Pollock
beautifully describes the man or woman like her of whom we write, a
person of enlarged benevolence and liberality, as practically
illustrated in the foregoing authentic record of Christian experience.
He says:

    "Breathe all thy minstrelsy, immortal harp!
    Breathe numbers warm with love while I rehearse,
    Delightful theme! remembering the songs
    Which day and night are sung before the Lamb!
    Thy praise, O Charity! thy labors most
    Divine! thy sympathy with sighs, and tears,
    And groans; thy great, thy god-like wish to heal
    All misery, all fortune's wounds; and make
    The soul of every living thing rejoice--
    A finishing and polish without which
    No man e'er entered heaven. Let me record
    His praise; the man of great benevolence,
    Who pressed thee softly to his glowing heart,
    And to thy gentle bidding made his feet
    Swift minister of all mankind, his soul
    Was most in sympathy with heaven;
    Nor did he wait till to his door,
    The voice of supplication came, but went abroad
    With foot as silent as the starry dews,
    In search of misery that pined unseen,
    And would not ask. And who can tell what sights
    She saw, what groans she heard in that cold world
    Below, where sin in league with gloomy death,
    March daily through the length and breadth of all
    The land, wasting at will and making earth,
    Fair earth! a lazer-house, a dungeon dark!
    Oh, who can tell what sights she saw, what shapes
    Of wretchedness! or who describe what smile
    Of gratitude illumed the face of woe?"

Similarity of character is the firmest bond for forming permanent
friendship, hence Christ says to all his followers, Ye are my friends,
if ye do whatsoever I command thee. A glance at the picture presented
to us in St. John's gospel, eleventh chapter, at the Feast of the
Passover of the Jews, remind us of the character and spirit of Jesus
when he took the loaves, and when he had given thanks he distributed to
the disciples, and the disciples to the multitude who were set down
upon the grass. For services of this kind God selects his servants. By
filling them with the spirit of Jesus, they are thus thoroughly
qualified to minister to the necessitous.


CHAPTER XIII.

HER FAITHFULNESS IN LITTLE THINGS.

    There are small things in daily life
      In which I may obey,
    And thus may show my love to Thee;
      And always--every day--
    There are some little loving words
      Which I for Thee may say.

"He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful in much."


She continues to write with her usual forcible descriptiveness: "I found
a mother and daughter in a damp room, on the ground floor of a tenement
building, in a wretched condition. The room was furnished with a broken
stove, one chair, two trunks, and some bedding spread on the floor, as
they had no bedstead. _Both_ were very lame, and the girl quite feeble
for want of care and nourishment. After relieving their immediate wants,
I tried to lead them to Christ. The girl was so sick and discouraged it
was difficult to convince her that any one cared for her, but at length
she cried, and said, 'How nice it is to have some one talk kindly to
me.' From that time she began to read the Bible for herself, and would
often speak to me of different passages of the Scriptures. But after a
while the landlord ordered them to move, because they could not pay
their rent, and with some effort I succeeded in sending the mother into
the country, and placing the girl in a hospital.

"Two other persons, who through a blessing on my labors have become
deeply interested, and even led to study the Bible, have now openly
professed Christ."

Take another glance at the above touching scene and behold the lively
exercise of her wonderful sagacity and powers of observation. This
graphic representation of squalor and consummate misery gives
pre-eminence to her adaptedness as a successful missionary of the cross
of the Lord Jesus Christ. The eyes of the blessed Jesus, the model
worker, were not closed to the wants and woes of humanity, hence his
formidable power in preparing an entrance into the hearts of the people.
Her Christ-like visits, carrying the rich treasure of the glad tidings,
found an echo in the soul of those she visited. Although her elementary
education had been sadly neglected, yet nevertheless, by her close study
of God's Word and her varied experience for over fifty years in the
lower part of a city like New York, she knew full well how to adapt
herself to circumstances. Let us calmly follow her footsteps into this
lofty tenement building and watch her movements. See how minutely she
describes the sad scene. If a murder had been committed in the house and
a reporter from the _New York Herald_, or any other paper, had called to
take notes, he could not have been more minute in his description of the
surroundings than she. All the collateral or subordinate information
essentially necessary to convey an accurate idea of a true picture
peculiarly calculated to throw a flood of light on the whole panorama
are carefully furnished us by her notes. And here we are forcibly
reminded of the pithy and succinct saying of Scotia's beloved bard,
Burns:

    "A chiel's amang ye taking notes."

Notice how she enumerates the persons and things in the apartment. The
mother and daughter. The damp room. The ground floor. The wretchedness.
The broken stove. The one chair. The two trunks. The bedding spread on
the floor. The absence of a bedstead. The lameness. The feebleness. How
consummate the skill displayed in her graphic and touching description
of pitiable facts emanating from her pen with such brilliancy of
rhetorical power; and all spontaneously springing not from the schools
of moral and intellectual philosophy, but from the school of Christ
Jesus her Lord who said to his sorrowful disciples: "These things have I
spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the Comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, _he shall teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I
have said unto you_." The _Paraclete_, who is infinitely competent to
perform the instruction necessary amid all the exigencies of life, and
by whose divine influence every difficulty and trial is easily adjusted,
was evidently her great instructor.

"The girl," she says, "was quite feeble for want of care and
nourishment." In a public address recently delivered in this city by the
good and kind Dr. John Hall, of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at
the opening of a Newsboys' Lodging House, on the corner of Eighth Street
and Avenue B, an institution built through the liberality of Mrs. Robert
L. Stuart, at a cost of $50,000, the doctor said, "A man left to himself
will choose the bad rather than the good, because the majority do, and
it is easier besides. As crime breeds misery, so misery too often breeds
crime. _We should take note of this fact and try to mend it._"

Mr. Bruce, another speaker, said "thousands of children, assisted, have
gone West, and now own farms and are prosperous." He concluded his
address by asking the boys to cheer Mrs. Stuart, which they did
gratefully for their new home provided by this inestimable and generous
lady.--_New York Daily Tribune_, Tuesday, March 29, 1887.

It is the philanthropist's great aim to defend the moral honor of the
homeless as well as to minister to their temporal necessities. This
important service was rendered to thousands by our model missionary
woman, and eternity alone will disclose the gigantic results.

But let us more specifically analyze her course of conduct under the
foregoing circumstance. In the first place _she immediately relieved
their wants_. I have read somewhere the story of Dr. Guthrie when he was
first called to the metropolis of Edinburgh. Of their filling his
pockets with tracts, and with all the ardor of his noble heart,
commenced his great work. He ascended the creaking stairs of a high
building in the old town, and knocking at the door, an elderly woman
made her appearance, whereupon he proffered her a tract. Looking
earnestly upon him, and in a loud shrill voice she exclaimed,
pathetically: "'Deed, Sir, I dinna want yeer tracts, I weed thank ye for
a loaf o' breed." Ah! he thought to himself, here is a case of
destitution, and excusing himself he hurried down-stairs, and going to
the baker he ordered bread, and to the butcher he ordered beef, and to
the grocer he ordered some English breakfast tea and sugar, a few
dainties, and a cart of coal, and requested them to be sent at once to
the woman in want. Calling a few days afterward he found her comfortably
seated with a neighbor around a cheerful hearthstone drinking their
newly made tea. When she opened the door she enthusiastically exclaimed,
"Come awa, noo, Doctor, I am ready to hear you on the subject o'
religion." Our departed sister also recognized the necessity of
attending to the temporal as well as the spiritual wants of her
parishioners simultaneously. "_After relieving their wants I tried to
lead them to Christ._"

We shall now proceed to show that this incident, in conformity to the
teaching of God's Word, assures us that suffering and want are the
means used by the kind providence of God to lead the careless sinner to
seek a saving interest in the Lord Jesus Christ. David says, "Before I
was afflicted I went astray, and thou in faithfulness hast afflicted
me." He delivereth the poor in his affliction. "The Lord will not cast
us off forever. But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion
according to the multitude of his mercies." And here is the reason
given: "_For He doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of
men_."--Lam. iii. 31-33.

In this instructive part of the diary we find described a truly
pathetic and animated scene. A humble missionary woman leading souls to
Christ. This employment excites the deep interest and profound
admiration of heaven. The general assembly and church of the first born
above are intently gazing on, not as idle spectators, but the angels
may be observed pressing through the crowd of crowned ones with
glory-lit face, and sanctified step, communicating the cheering
intelligence of accessions to the ranks of the church militant which
must swell the highest strains of celestial music and deeply increase
and augment the joy of the church triumphant.

In the hour of deep distress this woman was sent by God to relieve the
wants of this stricken household, and at the same time lead them "to
the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world." There are many,
alas, who see no beauty in the despised Nazarene until, by deep
suffering, they are absolutely compelled to completely renounce self
and to fall down, wounded and bleeding and bruised and heart-broken at
the feet of Him who shed the last drop of his crimson blood on the
Cross of Calvary for our salvation.

"Two others," she adds, "at this date, have been led to _study the
Bible_ and have openly professed Christ." What extraordinary events
cluster around this _special agency_ employed by the Holy Spirit to
bring about such a glorious result. It is the enemy's intention to lead
persons in distress and misery to commit crime. This is the testimony of
all history, but God saves His own in the hour of peril, and not
unfrequently by weak instrumentalities. Near Loch Katrine, encircled by
lofty mountains and where the scenery which fringes it is of the wildest
character; where, as Scott says in his "Lady of the Lake," the briar
rose and fell in streamers green,

    And creeping shrubs of thousand dyes,
    Waved in the west wind's summer sighs,
    Boon nature scattered free and wild
    Each plant or flower, the mountain's child,
    Here eglantine embalmed the air,
    Hawthorn and hazel mingled there.
    The primrose pale and violet flower,
    Found in each cliff's narrow bower;
    Foxglove and nightshade side by side,
    Emblems of punishment and pride;
    Gray birch and aspen wept beneath;
    Aloft the ash and warrior oak,
    Cast anchor in the rifted rock;
    And higher yet the pine-tree hung,
    His shattered trunk, and frequent flung
    Where seemed the cliff to meet on high,
    His boughs athwart the narrow sky,
    So wondrous wild, the whole might seem
    The scenery of a fairy dream.

Here, in a roughly wooded island, the country people secreted their
wives and children, and their most valuable effects from the rapacity
of Cromwell's soldiers during their inroad into Scotland. The soldiers
resolved to plunder this island; an expert swimmer swam toward it to
fetch the boat to his comrades, which had carried the women to their
place of refuge. It lay moored in one of the creeks; his companions
stood watching on the shore; but just as the soldier reached the
nearest point of the island, and was laying hold of a black rock to get
on shore, a heroine who stood on the very point where he meant to land,
hastily snatching a dagger from below her tartan apron, with one quick,
sharp stroke severed his jugular vein, killing him instantly.

The soldiers on the other shore seeing the disaster, relinquished all
future hope of revenge or conquest, and made the best of their way out
of a perilous position. Thus the women and children and valuables were
saved by the bravery of this noble heroine, Ellen Stuart. Such is the
way God saves the family to-day, by guiding the feet of our missionary
to many a distressed household, instantly relieving their wants, and
putting in their hands the Word of the Spirit which is the Word of God.
Let this record be an incentive to others to go and do likewise, by
pleading for the poor and the fatherless. God grant that her words may
be as goads to arouse sleepy professors to a realizing sense of their
great obligation to Him who is the God of Israel, our father's God, and
we will trust Him.


CHAPTER XIV.

THE POWER OF INFLUENCE.

    I cannot do great things for Him
      Who did so much for me;
    But I would like to show my love,
      Lord Jesus, unto Thee;
    Faithful in very little things,
      O Saviour! may I be.


In the course of her daily missionary work Mrs. Knowles met with the
following interesting case which she herself records:

"Calling on a poor afflicted widow, I found her in great want, much
discouraged, and very sad; she said she did not feel much _desire to
live_.

"'Can you not trust God?' I said. 'Have you not always been cared for?'

"Her little boy, a child of six years, was sitting by her side
scribbling on a slate. He looked up and said:

"'Mamma, do you know what God says?'

"'What?' said she.

"'He that believeth in me hath everlasting life; and God don't want our
money. He don't want us to pay the debt with money.'

"'What does He want?' said she.

"'He wants our hearts, and won't you trust Him, mamma?'

"This roused the mother at once.

"'Oh, how wicked I have been!' she exclaimed, 'to murmur against the
will of the Almighty. I will trust Him, for He has always cared for me
in the past, and I will trust Him for the future.'"

I cannot refrain from making a few comments on this case, and drawing a
lesson therefrom.

Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land, and
verily thou shalt be fed.--Ps. xxxvii. 3.

He hath given meat unto them that fear Him; He will ever be mindful of
His covenant.--Ps. cxi. 5.

I will abundantly bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with
bread.--Ps. cxxxii. 15.

He filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.--Ps. cxlvii. 14.

The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul.--Proverbs xiii. 25.

Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them: Are ye
not much better than they?--Matt. vi. 26.

And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied.--Joel ii. 26.

Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: Behold, my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty.--Isaiah lxv. 13.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

SUGGESTIVE OBSERVATIONS FOR CHRISTIAN WORKERS.

What a deeply interesting and instructive picture is here presented to
our view. Notice the synopsis:

_Destitution._--"_In great want._"--This missionary was sent by God to
this house--sent like the raven to Elijah. Man's extremity is God's
opportunity. He frequently overrules poverty, and it contributes to the
good of His children.

_Discouragement._--Confidence in God's promises, the great panacea for
all the difficulties of life. "_Won't you trust Him?_" the child asked.

_Despondency._--This widow was "_very sad_." When there is no bread in
the house and the children are clamorous for food, it is enough to
produce despondency. But afflicted women should remember that God has
promised to be a husband to the widow and a father to the fatherless.

_Despair._--"_No desire to live._"--A sad, very sad condition! When God
sends affliction it is our duty _to pray_ and not despair. Amid the
gloom of earth's trials, the Holy Spirit alone can cheer; sorrow and
despair can be changed, by God's matchless grace, into gratitude and
gladness. Newton used to say, when inclined to dark, foreboding
feelings:

    Begone, unbelief, for my Saviour is near,
    And for my relief will surely appear;
    By prayer let me wrestle and he will perform;
    With Christ in the vessel, I can smile at the storm.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

LIGHT AMID DARKNESS.

_God's Word assures us that a little child shall lead them._--"Mamma, do
you know what God says? He that believeth in me hath everlasting life."
To behold Christ the light of the world is everlasting life.

_Strong devotion to children will lead us to notice their sayings and
doings._--What a beautiful and forcible illustration is this incident
recorded by her, the sayings of Christ, "out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings he hath perfected praise." God is always doing wonders. He
confounds the mighty.

_Children are Christ's best representatives._--To teach the disciples
humility he set the child in their midst and said, "Except ye be
converted and become as little children ye shall in no wise enter into
the kingdom of heaven." The day spring from on high visited this family.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

LOVE REMEMBERED BEGETS CONFIDENCE IN GOD.

_I will trust Him for He has always cared for me in the past._--How
beautifully appropriate in this connection is the twenty-third Psalm,
that we used to sing among the purple heather in the sunny days of
childhood with those who have gone home to yonder land of light and
love.

    The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want.
      He makes me down to lie
    In pasture's green; he leadeth me
      The quiet waters by.
    My soul he doth restore again
      And me to walk doth make
    Within the paths of righteousness
      Ev'n for his own name's sake.
    [Some] meneada cane is wind? 8 O šalištes
      to see? a man covered in
    soft garments? Bring some losÿ
      [clothes] soft in the houses
    of the kings are. Šalištes O
      9 to see? Prophet? Also
    I say unto you, and more than
      prophet. 10 Because
    this is who is ešcripto, I
      Heaqui # Embi my angel
    in front of your face to rig
      your way before you. 11 Verily I say unto you [that] is not built
between losque born to another couple who Ioan mugeres the Baptist:
but he that is very small in the Kingdom of heaven, the greater
the. 12 From the days of the Ioan Baptista aora until the Kingdom
of heaven is haze force: and the brave what snatch. 13 For all the
prophets: and the law, till Ioan prophetizaron 14.

And if quereys receive the Elias that aviation is one coming. 15 He
who has oydos for oyr, oyga. 16 more to those who compare this generation?
Mochachos is similar to those who sit on the board, and give bozes his
companions, 17 AND dizen, you Tañimos flute, not baylaštes: endechas
you, not lamentaštes. 18 For Ioan came neither ate nor Beviá: and
dizen , Satan has. 19 Son of man came, eating and beve and dizen,
a man heaqui meal and wine bevedor, a friend of publicans and
peccadores.

But wisdom is passed to their children. 20 Then I started çaherir [profit]
to the cities in quale avian been made very many of its wonders, it is
not avian emmendado [diziendo:] 21 you Chorazin Ay, Ay thee
Bethsaida: Pory If Tyro and Sidon in the wonders that were done
were done in you, once ovieran done penance in # Sacco and ash.

Portanto 22 [I] tell you [that] à à Tyro and Sidon will be more
tolerable [punishment] in the day that you juyzio. 23 And you
Capernaum, who are lifted up to heaven to be Abax hell: for if in
Sodom were made of the wonders that have been made in ti, ovieran
until the day of oy.

Portanto 24 [I] tell you [that] the land of Sodom to be more tolerable
[punishment] in the day of juyzio to you. 25 Then Iesus responding
, dixo, Alábote Father, Lord of heaven and earth, and this ayas
hidden from the wise and the learned, and revealed to ayas children.
26 Ansi father liked puešque ansi in your eyes. 27 All the things
I are delivered to my Father: and no one knew the Son except the
Father: neither one knew the Father but the Son, and [one] to whom
the child wants to reveal. 28 Come to Me all who worked on staying,
and loaded : I will give you rest. 29 Take My yoke upon you and
learn of me, for I am gentle and humble in coraçon: hallareys and
rest for your souls. 30 For my yoke is easy and my burden light.

Captain.

XII.

    Yva Iesus At the time of [some] bread
      in Sabban: and his disciples avian
    hunger, and began to pick up pins,
      and to eat. 2 And watching [as] the Pharišeos, dixeronle: Heaqui,
Hazen him and your disciples do not Hazer is permitted in Sabban.
3 And they dixo, No aveys Leyden, and David did have the hunger and
he was with?

    4 As entered the house of God and ate the
      bread of the Presence, not [him
    ] was permitted to eat them, or that I
      was with him, but to the priests alone?

O 5, no aveys Leyde in the Act, the Sabban priests in the temple profane
the Sabban, and are without blame? 6 Well tell you that greater than
the temple is here. 7 More šupieššedes if it is, I desire mercy, not
sacrifice, not the innocent condenariades. 8 For the Lord is even
Sabban the Son of man. 9 And from there came to ^ šynoga of them.
heaqui avia 10 And [there] who had a hand dry and preguntaronle
diziendo, Sabban cure it lawful?

by accuser. 11 And they dixo, Avra What man of you having a sheep,
and if falls on a Foss Sabban, not missing hand, and [the] release?

12 Well quanto a man worth more than a sheep ? Ansi which is licit in
the Sabban Hazer well. Dixo 13 Then the one man. Eštiende your hand.

    And [the] eštendió and was [him] reštituyda
    healthy as the other. 14 and left the Pharišeos for queries against
the deštruyrlo. 15 But knowing [what] Iesus, apartóše of there: and
šiguieronle many companies, and healed them all . 16 And they
defended the [stringent] non dešcubrieššen: 17 Paraque še cumpliešše
what he was told by the prophet Isaiah that dixo, 18 Heaqui my
servant, I have chosen to qual, my beloved, in the qual is pleased
my soul: I will put my spirit upon him, and the people ^ annunci
juyzio. 19 No contendere or bozeará, and nobody in the streets its
oyrá Boz. 20 Sugarcane caxcada not break: and the smoke that pavilo
not shut off: haštaque get vicktoria the juyzio: 21 and on behalf
of the people expect. traydo He was 22 at the one possessed blind
and mute, and šanólo, so that the blind and dumb and hablava via.
23 And the companies I was beside himself, and dezian : This is one
son of David?

24 Mas Pharišeos the hearing [him] dezian, that will not only casts out
demons by the prince of demons Beelzebul. 25 And Iesus, knowing the
pëšamientos deellos, dixoles: Every kingdom is entered into themselves
Assolo: and every city or home currency against themselves, not stay.
26 And if Satan casts out Satan, themselves against this currency.
therefore remain as his kingdom? 27 per Beelzebul if I echo out the
demons, your sons for whom [the] strike? Portanto they will be your
judges. 28 And the spirit of God if I echo out the demons, has certainly
come to you the Kingdom of God. 29 For as one can enter the home of the
brave, and ransacked their jewelry, if not first prendiere the
brave: and then sacked his house?

30 Whoever is not with me is against me: and he who does not take me,
spilled. Portanto 31 I say unto you, and PECC blašphemia All will be
forgiven to men: but the Spirit of blašphemia not will be forgiven
men. qualquer 32 And I will speak against the Son of man shall be
forgiven him: but qualquer to speak against the Spirit Sanckto, you
will not be forgiven either in this century or in the future. 33 O
hazed the tree good, and its fruit good, or hazed rotten tree,
rotten and its fruit: the fruit because the tree is known. bivoras
Generation of 34, as podeys speak well, are evil?

coraçon because of the abundance the mouth speaks. 35 The good man of
good thešoro Šaca coraçon good things and evil evil man thešoro Šaca
bad things. 36 See [I] tell you that every idle word that men speak of
she will realize the day of juyzio. 37 Because of your words will
be justified, and your words will be condemned. 38 Then answered
one of the scribes and the Pharišeos, diziendo: Master, you see
dess signal. 39 And he said ^ and dixoles, generation adulterine
demand and poor signal, but Nole signal will be given, but the
signal Ionas prophet.

Ionas was 40 For as in the belly of the Vallenar three days and three
nights, anxiety is the Son of man in coraçon of the earth three days
and three nights.

    Ninive of 41 will be lifted as juyzio with this
    generation and condemn: they hizieron # penitence to the preaching
of Ionas and heaqui than Ionas here. 42 Reyna's Austro juyzio will
arise in this generation and condemn them: because they came from
the ends of the earth oyr to the wisdom of Solomon: and Solomon
heaqui more here. 43 When the spirit has left the immundo man walks
Places ^ Dry, seeking rest: and not found, then 44 Dize, Bolvermehé
to my house for Dode Sali.

And when it comes, is [the] unoccupied, swept, and decorated 45 then
goes and takes with it seven other spirits worse than him, and entered
dwell there, and they are the worst end of that man that his
primerias. ANSI also bad happen to this generation. 46 And to be
even talking to the companies, heaqui his mother and sisters I was
outside, he wanted to talk. Dixole And a 47, Heaqui your mother and
your brothers are outside, you want to talk . 48 and responding
to the dezia that [this], dixo, Who is my mother, and who are my
brothers?

"49 And his hand eštendiendo Azia disciples dixo, Heaqui my
mother and my brothers. 50 For everyone who hiziere the will of my
Father who is in heaven, esse is my brother and sister and mother.
capita. XIII. And that day, leaving home Iesus, sat beside the sea: 2 Y
allegaronše to the many companies and the entrandoše in a ship, sat
down, and all the company I was at the bank. 3 And hablóles many
things by parables, diziendo ^ Here the sown, went out to sow. 4
and planted part of the [seed] fell by the wayside: and the birds
came and comieronla. 5 And some fell on stony places, where there
was plenty of land, and national then, because he had no deep earth:
6 But in leaving the sun, burns, and dry, because they had no rayz.
7 And some fell on thorns: and the thorns grew up and ahogaronla.
8 And some fell on good soil, and bore fruit: one a hundredfold,
and another sixty, and another to treynta. oydos who is 9 for oyr,
oyga. then reaching 10 disciples, dixeronle: Why parables told by ^?

11 and responding, dixoles because you know it is granted mysteries
of the Kingdom of heaven: but to them is not granted. 12 qualquer Because
you have given šerleha, and you: but that does not even have what will
be removed. 13 I speak for Esso by parables, because seeing is not seen,
and hearing they hear not, neither understand. 14 Demanera that they met
in the Prophecies of Isaiah, ÿ Dize, De oydo oyreys, not entendereys,
and seeing vereys, not mirareys 15. corações Because of this town
is engroššado and the oydos hear heavily, and her eyes, wink, because
do not see the eyes, and oygan of oydos, and coraçon understand,
and become, and [I] healed.

But blessed are your eyes 16, as seen: oydos and you hear it. 17
For decierto tell you that many prophets and righteous dessen see
what [you] veys, and not [as] Fri: oyr and what [you ] oys and not
[as] heard. 18 Oyd as the parable of you and planting. 19 qualquer
Hearing the word of the kingdom, and not understanding [the] Malo
comes and snatches away what was sown in his coraçon.

This is what was sown by the wayside. 20 And which they were planted
in stony places, this is the word which they heard, and then
receives it with joy. 21 But not rayz itself, before it is time that the
coming afflicion or persecution for the Word, then offended. 22 And he
that was sown in the thorns, ^ this is he who hears the Word: congoxa
the most of this century, and the deceit of riches choke the word,
and without hazeše fruit. 23 but he that was sown on good soil,
this is the one who hears and understands the Word, and bearing the
fruit, and leads to a cent, and another sixty, and another to
treynta. 24 proposed another parable to them, diziendo, The kingdom
of heaven is like the man who sows good seed in his HACA: 25 But
the men sleeping, his enemy came and sowed among the wheat Zizania,
and was. yerva And as the 26 came out, and the result was then
Zizania seemed well. 27 and reaching the Servants of the father of
the family, dixeronle Lord, not sowed good seed in your HACA?

So where is Zizania? 28 and dixo them, man The enemy has done this. And
the servants dixeron him because we want and cojamos?

29 dixo And, No, because taking the Zizania not arranqueys also the wheat
with them. 30 Dexad grow together as one and another until the harvest,
while the Siege [I] I say to the reapers, Zizania Take the first and
atalda in bundles for burning: but in my allegaldo wheat alholi. 31
proposed another parable to them, diziendo: The Kingdom of heaven is
like the grain of mustard, which is taking it one planted in its HACA.
32 à qual truth is the smallest of all seeds ^: quad but has grown,
is the largest of all the vegetables and hazeše trees, which are birds
of the sky Hazen and nest in its branches. dixo 33 another parable
to them, The kingdom of heaven is like yeast, that taking the muger,
hidden in the three measures of flour until all is Leudo. 34 All
this speaks for Iesus parabolas the companies: and without parables
he told them nothing: 35 Paraque še cumpliešše what was spoken
through the prophet, which dixo, open my mouth in parables: regoldaré
things hidden since the foundation of the world. 36 Then the Embi
companies, came IESVS home: And coming to the disciples dixeronle:
Declaranos the parable of the HACA Zizania. 37 And answering him,
dixo them, he who sows good seed is the Son of man. 38 ^ The HACA
is the world.

And the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom. And the children
are Zizania Bad. 39 And the enemy who sowed it is the
devil. And the harvest is the end of the world. And the reapers
are the angels. 40 So the fuck is Zizania, fire and burned, anxiety
is at the end of this century. Embi 41 the Son of man his angels,
and take all of his Kingdom eštorvos and Hazen that iniquity: 42
And have miss in the furnace of fire: there shall be weeping, and
the paddling of teeth: 43 Then shall the righteous shine like the
sun in the Kingdom of His Father.

He who has oydos for oyr, oyga. Item 44, The Kingdom of heaven is like
hidden in the HACA thešoro the qual found the man [as] masks: ^ deel and
joy goes and sells all what has and buy that HACA. Item 45, the Kingdom
of heaven is like treating a man who seeks good pearls. 46 to find a
precious pearl, he was and what had sold everything, and compróla. 47
Item, The kingdom of heaven network is similar to that pitch in the
sea, take all luck. 48 qual being filled šacaronla to the shore:
and sitting in glasses got good and the bad thrown away. Ansi 49 is at
the end of the century : will the Angels, and removing the bad from
the fair: 50 And echarloshan into the furnace of fire: there shall
be weeping, and the paddling of teeth.

IESVS dizel 51, Aveys understood all these things? They answered, yes
sir. Dixo 52 And they, by Esso dockto write everything
in the Kingdom of heaven is like a parent, which draws its thešoro
new things old things. 53 And it happened [that] these finishing
IESVS parables, pass away. 54 and come to their land, enšeñolos in
šynoga them, so I was out of them if and dezian, Where is this wisdom
and this [these] wonders?

55 is not the child the carpenter? It is not called his mother Maria: and
his brothers, Iacob and Iofes and Simon, and Iudas? 56 and not all
his sisters with us? Because this is where all this? Ešcandalizavãše And
in the 57. More IESVS them dixo, No prophet without ay honrra but
in their land and home. 58 And there was not many wonders, because
of unbelief dell. Capita. XIIII. Tiëpo At that Herod the Tetrarcha
heard the fame of IESVS: 2 dixo And his servants, This is Ioan
Baptista: There rešušcitado of the dead, and virtues are in the Esso.
3 For Herod avia Ioan garments and avia trapped it, and put in prison
because of Herodias muger ^ his brother Philippe. 4 For Ioan dezia
him, you are not permitted to have it. 5 And querialo kill, but fear
of the aviation crowd because we had to prophet. 6 day and celebrating
the birth of Herod, the daughter of Herodias dance in half, and
pleased Herod. 7 oath and promised to give all that pidiešše. 8 And
she, her mother inštruyda first, dixo Dame in here a dish the head
of Ioan Baptista. 9 Then the king was sad: but by the oath, and by
that I was together at the table, causes to be [him] Diesse: 10 And
Ioan Embi cut the throat of in jail. 11 Y trayda was his head on a
plate and given to the moça: And [it] to her mother this. 12 Then
his disciples came and took the body and enterraronlo: and went and
gave the new IESVS.

And listening to 13 [lo] IESVS apartóše from there on a ship to a desert
place: and when the companies [as] heard, šiguieronlo walk from
the cities, 14 and out IESVS, served [a] company grade, and LD
deellos mercy: and healed the sick who deellos avia. 15 And when
the evening of the day ^ llegaronše to the disciples diziendo.

The place is desert, and time is already past, Embi the companies
that are in villages, and buy for themselves to eat. Dixo 16 AND
IESVS them, have no need of yrše: daldes you eat, 17 And they dixeron
, We have here but five loaves and two fish. dixo 18 And they, Traedmelos
here. 19 and sent to the companies lie on the yerva, and on them five
loaves and two fish ^, Alcanda Bendix eyes to heaven, and starting
breads gave [the] to the disciples and the disciples of the
companies. 20 And all ate and hartaronše: alçaron And what about
the pedaços, twelve ešportones full. 21 And those who ate were about
five thousand men: no mugeres and the mochachos.

IESVS became 22 and then to his disciples into the ship, and the
yr before the other party [the lake], now [the] off the companies.
and fired the 23 companies, rose in Mount paragraph, to pray.

And as the evening of the day, I was alone there. 24 And the ship I was
in the middle of the sea, racked by waves because the wind was
contrary. 25 But at the fourth candle of the night was IESVS to
them, walking on the sea. 26 And the disciples, seeing him walking
on the sea, turbaronše diziendo: [Any] Phantasm is scary and gave
bozes. 27 More IESVS then spoke to them diziendo: Aššeguraos: I am
not afraid ayays.

"said Peter So 28 and dixo: Sir, if you are, send me come unto thee on
the water. And dixo 29, Ven.

And Pedro decendiëdo the ship, he walked on the water to come to IESVS.
Watching over 30 wind, LD Fear: començadoše and sinking, gave bozes
diziendo Sir, Salvame. 31 Then IESVS eštendiendo hand, through deel,
and dizel, O [man] of little faith, because dudašte. 32 And as they
entered the ship, the wind rest. losque I was 33 then in the ship
came and adoraronlo, diziendo, Truly you are the Son of God. 34 And
coming the other hand, came into the land of Gennezaret. 35 And as
they knew the men of that place, Embi alderredor throughout the
land, and the truxeron to all patients. rogavanle only 36 AND
tocaššen the edge of his mantle: and all who played, were saved.
capita.

XV. IESVS then reached Pharišeos of certain scribes and Ierušalem diziendo:
^ 2 For your disciples trašpaššan the tradition of the Elders?

Pory not wash their hands when they eat bread. 3 and responding
dixoles, did you also trašpaššays the commandment of God by your
tradition?

4 For God, diziendo, Honrra father and the mother. Item, Elque maldixere
the father or mother, dying of death. 5 But you dezis, Qualquer tell
a parent, Toda mia offrenda you build: honrrará and not his father or
his mother. Aveys invalidated the Y 6 commandment of God by your tradition.
7 Hypocrite, you either prophetizó Isaias diziendo, 8 This people of
His mouth on my lips and I honrra: but his is my coraçon lexos. 9 But
in vain honrran taught me docktrinas , commandments of men. 10 And
calling to whether companies, dixoles, Oyd and understand: 11 Not what
goes into the mouth a man: but what comes out of the mouth, they
defile the man. 12 Then comes his disciples dixeronle, You know
that the word is heard Pharišeos offended?

                   the 13 simply responds, dixo, Every plant not planted ÿ ^ my heavenly
Father will dešarraygada. 14 Dexaldos: are blind guides of the
blind: and if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the pit ^.
15 And Peter answering, dixole, Declaranos this parable.

IESVS And dixo 16, Soysa Yet you also without understanding?

entendeys not even 17, that everything that enters the mouth goes to
the stomach, and is lying in this necessary ? 18 but what comes
out of the mouth, just coraçon out, and they defile the man. 19
Because of the bad thoughts come out coraçon: Deaths, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, malediciencias. 20 these
things are polluting the the man to eat with your hands not washed
by a man.

IESVS of 21 and out there, would the parts of Tyro and Sidon. 22 And
heaqui a muger avia Chananea that left those terms diziendole clamav,
Lord, Son of David, have mercy on me, my daughter is badly haunted
of the devil. 23 But the word is not answered.

Then comes his disciples rogaronle diziendo, Embiala, which bozes
after us. And the 24 responding dixo am not Embi but the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. 25 Then she came and adorólo diziendo Lord
šocorreme. 26 And the response, dixo, is not okay to take the bread
of the children, and to miss the puppy. dixo 27 And she, yes sir,
because the puppy eat the crumbs that fall from their masters'
table. 28 then responds Iesus , dixo, O muger, great [is] thy faith:
be done with you, as you want.

And her daughter was healthy since that time. 29 And Iesus game
from there, came along the Sea of Galilee: and going into [a]
mount sat there. 30 and came to the many companies that had it Coxos,
blind, dumb and Mancos , and many [patients] and echaronlos at the
foot of Iesus, and šanólos: 31 in such a manner and the companies
they marveled seeing the dumb speak, the Mancos healthy Coxos the
walk, the blind see and glorify the God of israel.

                   Iesus called 32 And his disciples dixo, have mercy on the company,
which already has to endure three days with me, and do not have to
eat: Embi and fasting, I do not want to, because not stop along the
way. 33 Then the disciples dizen him, Where [we] we tãtos bread in
the desert fed such large company?

34 And Iesus them Dize, Quanta teneys bread?

And they dixeron, Seven, and a few of pecezillos. 35 and sent the
companies that recoštaššen ground. 36 And taking the seven loaves and the
fishes, thanks haziendo, left, and gave to his disciples and the disciples
of the company. 37 And all ate and hartaronše: ^ and what about alçaron,
pedaços seven ešpuertas full. 38 And they were eating avian lošque,
four thousand men, without mugeres and children. 39 Then the companies
off, jumped on a ship and wine in terms of Magdala. Captain. XVI. And
reaching the Pharišeos and Sadduceos, enticing, pedianle they
moštrašše signal from the sky. 2 But the response, dixoles, When
is the afternoon of the day, dezis, Sereno, because the sky has
Arreboles. 3 and the morning storm today because the sky is sad
Arreboles.

Hypocrite that šabeys Hazer difference in the face of heaven, and the
signs of the times not podeys? 4 generacion adulterine demand and poor
signal: no more signal will be given, but the signal Ionas prophet. And
dexandolos be. Viniëdo his disciples and 5 of the other party [the
lake], avianše forgot to take bread.

Dixo 6 And Iesus them, Take heed, and keep [you] of yeast Pharišeos lod
and models Sadduceos. 7 Y penšavan them within itself, diziendo,
^ do not take bread. 8 Iesus and understanding, dixoles, Que pëšays
within you, men of little faith, not bread tomaštes? entendeys Not even
9 or OS of the five loaves acordays [between ] five thousand [men] and
ešportones quanto tomaštes? 10 Neither the seven loaves of [between]
four thousand, and Quantas ešpuertas tomaštes? 11 How? No entendeys
not you dixe for bread, that [we] guardaššedes of yeast and the Pharišeos
of Sadduceos. 12 Then they understood that they said that aviation
guardaššen yeast bread, but of the Pharišeos and docktrina of
Sadduceos. 13 And Iesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippo,
asked his disciples, diziendo Who dizen men who is the Son of man?

Oh! how comforting is the
thought that in all our afflictions Christ was afflicted, and the angel
of His presence strengthened Him. Those hands that were nailed to the
Cross on Calvary, are constantly stretched out to assist the way-worn
traveller up the rugged road of life. There never was a human heart so
crushed and broken by the sorrows of earth but what Christ can heal,
for that heart that was broken on Golgotha pants and heaves toward
earth's sufferers. How beautifully expressive is the paraphrase:

    "Though now ascended up on high,
    He bends on earth a brother's eye."

The tender watch care of the God of Israel is the same to-day as it was
when Ruth, the Moabitess, said unto Naomi: "Let me now go to the field,
and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace." And
she said unto her: Go, my daughter. And she went, and came, and gleaned
in the field after the reapers, and her hap was to light on a part of
the field belonging unto Boaz.... And, behold! Boaz came from
Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers: "The Lord be with you." (Ruth ii.
2-4.) In this whole narrative we behold the law of loving kindness of
Jehovah strikingly exemplified through His own covenanted people. He
reveals, in a marvellous manner, His grace and goodness to thousands of
them that love Him and keep His commandments. Hence, the virtue of
every benevolent transaction lies in the motive by which we are
actuated. As Paul says: "The love of Christ constrains us." Whatever we
give, whatever God's children do for the alleviation of the sorrows and
sufferings of earth, they do it with an eye single to His glory, they
continually hear Christ's voice saying unto them: "This do in
remembrance of me."

We see these principles practically illustrated in the wonderful
experience of her whose struggles and triumphs for the blessed Christ
we are now prayerfully considering. For example, in February, 1874, she
writes:

"Through the kindness of those interested in the poor, I have been
enabled to supply the wants of many. One kind lady, belonging to the
Bible Society, gave me ten dollars, part to assist one family with fuel
and groceries, and the rest for another, where the husband had been ill
for a long time, and finding it difficult to obtain employment, had
been suffering for the common necessaries of life. I also received
orders from this lady for coal and groceries, for other poor families,
to be obtained through the visitors of the poor.

"In one home where I placed some provisions on the table, a little boy
said to his mother, 'Mamma, mustn't you get down and pray, and thank
God for these things?' When I enter some of these homes they are full
of sadness and gloom, but I am often thankful to feel I leave hope and
cheerfulness behind me, when I go away. In the greater number of these
families it is want of employment that causes the trouble--they are
willing and anxious to work, but it cannot be procured.

"One family, consisting of a husband, wife, and three children, the
youngest ten days old, was found very destitute. They had parted with
even every article of clothing, except what they had on, and had
neither fuel nor food. The poor woman wept as she said, 'She had never
before known such destitution.' I gave them some relief, and then
engaged in prayer with them. They were both much affected, and said it
was the first time a prayer had ever been offered in that house by any
one. I sent them some coal, and procured other relief for them, and now
they are comfortable, the man having obtained some work.

"Another family, in which there are two children (the father dying of
consumption--the mother very delicate), are wholly dependent on
charity. The woman is very industrious, and always ready to do what she
can, but it is hard to procure employment. I have read and talked with
the man, after supplying their temporal wants, and especially impressed
upon him the promise, 'Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name it shall be
given to you.' He listened--had been thinking of his past life--but he
said all seemed dark to him. I have prayed with him, and he thought
light broke in upon him. He said, 'He saw more clearly,' and after some
days professed to be happy. And now, while the tears rolled down his
cheeks, he says, 'I am willing to go and (looking around on the little
circle) resign all these into the arms of Jesus.' I prayed with him
before I left.

"A friend asked me to go and see a poor sick woman in the same
destitute circumstances, the husband being out of work. A sad sight met
my eyes; the poor woman lay coughing on the bed, as if she could not
last much longer, the children standing by the bed, dirty and uncared
for; the floor black, window curtain hanging in rags, while the mother
could do nothing. They receive one dollar a week from the Poor
Association. I assisted her, and promised to look to the children;
talked with her and then read and prayed. She clasped my hand as I
arose from my knees and said, 'You are the first person who ever prayed
with me; oh! it makes me happy, and I hope God will hear your prayers.'
Trial seems to open the hearts of these poor ones to religious
impressions.

"A few days since, visiting a little girl (belonging to a Catholic
family) who is in our Sewing-school, the mother put her hand in her
pocket and took out some change, saying, 'This is all the money I have
at present, take it and use it for the poor; I wish it was a great deal
more, and,' she added, 'when you find any one hungry and wanting a loaf
of bread, come to me, and I will give you some money; my little girl
often tells me what you say to her in the Sewing-school, or when you
meet her in the street.' Thus I receive encouragement on every side, and
am never in want of some aid for those who need it so much. My dear
friend, who was removed from me by death last summer, often used to say,
'Never fear, Mrs. Knowles, when the Lord takes away one support, he
raises another.' And so I have found it. My Superintendent is always
ready to assist, and our Sewing-school, aided by her and other ladies,
is very prosperous. Perhaps _want_ may drive many to us, but we trust
they will be also benefited by the instruction there received, and carry
the lessons home.

"One poor woman gave me a dollar for a Bible I left with her some
months since. 'For,' she says, 'the Lord has blessed her since she has
begun to read it.' Another poor woman paid 25 cents for one, for 'she
wanted it in the house for the good of the children.' And two others
were also sold.

"A number of children have been brought to Sabbath-school, and several
induced to attend church. In beginning a New Year, I trust increased
devotion to the work will bring on added blessing."

How tenderly and lovingly she notes the kind lady who gave her the ten
dollars for the sick family whose prop and stay was out of employment.

Those who are familiar with the sad sights of want and woe in all our
large cities, will be able to appreciate the naturalness of the
foregoing description of missionary work among the poor and lowly.

Shakespeare's account of a complete lady lacks one essential qualification,
_benevolence_. He says:

    "If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
      Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?
    If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
      Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
    If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
      Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?"

What a magnificent portrait is here drawn of truly rounded,
symmetrically developed Christian womanhood, and true ladyship is here
pencilled in the diary of the departed. There are some women who win
men toward them by their wonderful conversational powers. They can talk
by the hour; but when you approach them on the question of finance, for
the cause of Home or Foreign Missions, they are like the colored man
who was a great talker and a lusty singer, but a very poor giver, and
when the collection box was being passed around, he closed his eyes and
kept on singing, "Roll, Gospel, roll;" when the deacon put the box
under his nose, and said, "I say, Brother Sam, what are you gwine to
give to make the Gospel roll around the world?" The distinction is very
positively affirmed by Christ between those who will be at the last on
his right hand, and those on his left, by the "inasmuch as ye did it
not unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not unto me."
I remember once during the same year in which the circumstances we are
now commenting on transpired, of calling upon a friend, a broker in
Wall Street of this city, and after some general conversation about
Christian work, he called me into his rear office and said:

"How are you getting along financially?"

"Well," I said, "I am able to keep my head above water."

"Ah!" he replied, "I have been watching you in your work, and want to
make you a present of fifty dollars for your immediate wants."

I looked upon him with astonishment and exclaimed:

"How is it, my friend, you can be so kind to me, as I am a comparative
stranger to you?"

"Well," he said, "I believe you are doing the Lord's work, and I feel
that all the money belongs unto Him, and I am only his steward."

What is the ultimate design of Christ knocking at the door of the heart?
Is it not that we may be like Him? He gave himself for us. Can we then
withhold our alms to the poor? He may take His departure, and we may
receive in our hearts the spirit of avariciousness and selfishness. I am
sure if any of the ladies connected with the New York Bible Society will
read the simple story of God's dealings with this missionary woman,
their hearts will swell with great gratitude and gladness, to think that
God enabled them to contribute of their substance to the poor and needy,
through this humble worker in the master's vineyard. Let us ever
remember that we are under peculiar obligations to God for _all_ we have
and all we so richly enjoy. Our true condition is one of absolute
subserviency and absolute dependence. We are not our own, we are bought
with a price, even the peace-speaking blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

    Our hand must clothe the humble poor,
      Our store the hungry feed.
    Our homes the stranger must receive
      And shelter in his need;
    Each others burdens we must bear,
      Each others faults forgive,
    And thus in perfect peace with all,
      And perfect union, live.

What an astonishing amount of pathos is manifested in the joyous
outbursts of gratitude and thankfulness in the heart of this boy when
their wants were supplied, indicated by his child-like words: "Mamma,
mustn't you get down and pray, and thank God for all these things?"
Absorbed in serious reflection, he instantly and spontaneously
recognized God as "the giver of every good and perfect gift, the father
of lights with whom there is no variableness, nor the least shadow of
turning." Surely out of the mouths of babes and sucklings He hath
perfected praise. It is remarkable how quickly children recognize
heavenly things. Train up a child in the way it should go, and when it
is old it will not depart from it. The early desire to pray deeply,
implanted in the tender breast by the mother, can never be obliterated.


CHAPTER XVII.

LEADING SOULS TO CHRIST.

    Hark! through Nature's vast cathedral,
      Blended echoes ever rise,
    Swelling in a mighty anthem
      To its overarching skies.

    Every great and noble action
      Is re-echoed o'er and o'er;
    Life itself is but an echo
      Of the lives that were before.


Our daily life ought to be an echo of the life of Christ. Just as God
is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing unto man
his trespasses, so the great aim of the Christian ought to be to lead
souls to Jesus. The Rev. Dr. W. M. Taylor, of the Broadway Tabernacle,
tells the story of how, when Hector was going to his last battle, and
his wife Andromache accompanied him as far as the gates of the city,
they were followed by a nurse carrying in her arms their infant child.
When he was about to depart, Hector held out his hands to receive the
little one, but, terrified by the burnished helmet, and the waving
plume, the child turned away and clung, crying, to his nurse's neck. In
a moment, divining the cause of the infant's alarm, the warrior took
off his helmet and laid it on the ground, and then, smiling through his
tears, the little fellow leaped into his father's arms. Now, similarly,
Jehovah of hosts, Jehovah with his helmet on, would frighten us weak
guilty ones away; but in the person of the Lord Jesus He has laid that
helmet off, and now the guiltiest and the neediest are encouraged to go
to His fatherly embrace and avail themselves of His support.

Under date of February, 1875, Mrs. Knowles writes that she has been
successful, during the past two months, in bringing many persons to
attend church, and a number of children to the Sabbath-schools; and she
adds:

"I am much encouraged by the attention paid to the reading of the
Scriptures. I have also made many hearts glad by supplying their
families with food and clothing, and at some places where I have not
given anything, and have referred to it, I have been answered with:

"'You have done a great deal for us by teaching us to trust in the
Lord.'"

Thought ought to operate between two limits--the one of time, the other
of eternity.

The Sabbath-school and the Church are inseparably linked with earth and
heaven. "Train up a child in the way it should go, and when it is old
it will not depart from it." The first book put into my hand when a
boy, in the public school of my native land, was the Bible. And the
first book I had to study in the Sabbath-school was the Shorter
Catechism. These two books have exerted a benign and salutary influence
on my whole life. Now, what the study of mathematics is to the
intellect by disciplining and imparting the power to reason
consecutively, thus tranquillizing the judgment by furnishing
demonstrative knowledge, even so the sermons heard in the House of God,
and the lessons taught in the Sabbath-school, and all the outward
spiritual truth conveyed to the heart of the hearer, quickens the soul
into newness of life; hence the injunction of the Apostle:

"Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for He
is faithful that promised;)

"And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works:

"Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of
some is; but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the
day approaching.

"For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins.

"But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries.

"He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three
witnesses."

Her chief delight was to lead men, women, and children to the house of
God. It does not seem strange, therefore, when we find the foregoing
emphatic declaration in her diary: "_I am much encouraged by the
attention paid to the reading of the Scriptures._" This is the glorious
result of getting people first to attend to the means of grace in the
sanctuary on the Lord's day. How greatly cheered she must have been in
her work to hear the welcome words: "_You have done a great deal for us,
by teaching us to_ TRUST IN GOD."

What is God's estimate of those who trust in Him? Here the mind is
forever set at rest. He proffers innumerable blessings to those who
_confide_ in Him, and we will, right now and here, give our attention to
a few of the many precious promises by which God richly entertains his
children:

"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee;
because he trusteth in thee; trust ye in the Lord forever; for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength."--Isa. xxvi. 3-4.

"He that putteth his trust in me, shall possess the land, and inherit
my holy mountain."--Isa. lvii. 13.

"Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord
is. For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters and that spreadeth
out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her
leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought,
neither shall cease from yielding fruit."--Jer. xvii. 7-8.


CHAPTER XVIII.

THE DYING MOTHER AND THE INTEMPERATE HUSBAND.

    I know there are realms where the voices of song
      Never cease 'neath a burden of tears.
    And I seek, 'mid earth-discord, the sound of a strain,
      Falling sweet from those radiant spheres.


We scarcely ever knew of a more _touching_ account of a dying mother,
than the following graphic narrative:

"One poor woman whom I mentioned before has just died. Surrounded as
she was by Romanists, she stood firm in the belief in which she had
been instructed by her father in her youth. Some time since I took her
little girl to Sabbath-school, and a short time ago her teacher found
her earnestly seeking Christ. She has since given good evidence of
being a Christian, and has united with the church. I was the only
friend visiting the mother during her last illness, whom she desired to
come to read and pray with her. She mourned over much of her past life,
but had much to contend with from those around her. A few days before
she died she said, 'she would be better soon.' I asked her what she
meant. She answered, 'When I go to be with Jesus;' but she added, 'Who
will see to my little girl?' I told her I would. Once again I saw her;
she was composed and at peace, saying, 'She would soon be at home.'"

See how she pictures the intense solicitude of the mother after her
child, in the loving and sweet inquiry (so faithfully remembered and
carefully recorded), "Who will see to my little girl?" See her quiet
and Christ-like spontaneous response, that she would. Here we are
forcibly reminded of a scene in New Testament times. In the ninth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles we read:

"Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which, by
interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and
alms-deeds which she did.

"And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom
when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.

"And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard
that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he
would not delay to come to them.

"Then Peter arose, and went with them. When he was come, they brought
him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping,
and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with
them."

The last part of her diary is extremely touching. But this sorrowful
sight presented to our view is only one of the many that frequently
occur in a city like New York. They harrow the refined feelings of the
faithful missionary. If such scenes are so distressing, what must have
been the experience of Him who was made sin for us, and who daily
mingled with sinners. He who knew no sin that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him. Let her tell her own story.

"A few days since I visited a woman whose husband had beaten her till
she was almost helpless. She told me about his coming to her with a
knife, and expected he would have taken her life. She asked me to engage
in prayer with her. He sat by, apparently unmoved. When I was leaving,
he asked me to forgive him. I told him it was not me he must ask; he
must go to God for forgiveness. It was distressing to see the poor wife,
as she asked me what she must do, as she had no friend on earth but me.
I then spoke to the husband; he said he was very sorry he had acted so
badly, and would _drink no more_. I intend getting him to sign the
pledge, which he says he will do.

"The evils of intemperance meet us in so many ways, we often feel
discouraged, and yet at times a case occurs which bids us _work on_ and
hope on. The man mentioned above from that time continued to refrain
from drink, and has treated his wife well ever since. She wept with
gratitude as she told me, a few evenings since, that he came in and
handed her all his money as he had received it for work, never having
opened it. She could never forget the day when I came in and found
almost everything in the room broken to pieces, and his promise which he
faithfully made to me that he would _try and do right_."

Eternity alone will reveal to our astonished gaze the number of forlorn
and sad hearts that were made to rejoice in the pardoning mercy of God
through her weak instrumentality.

How comforting is the thought that His word shall not return unto Him
void, but it will accomplish that which He please, and prosper in the
thing wherein he hath sent it. "It either proves the saviour of life
unto life, or of death unto death." If we harden our hearts in the day
of affliction we grieve the Holy Spirit away from us. But sickness and
penury properly received soften the heart and lead to repentance and
transformation of life. Here is a practical illustration of this truth:

"Another family I found, with two children lying ill with diphtheria.
They were living in a basement room, and were very poor. The father had
been out of work for some time, and the mother's sewing had supported
the family, but now her time was taken up with attending to the sick
children. I provided some nourishment, and the next time I called, the
mother was lying ill with typhoid fever. A poor woman was taking care of
them, risking her own life and that of her own children, and another
poor neighbor had taken home the third child to preserve it from
infection. They had but little covering, and I procured what was needed
from the Home of the Friendless, and a dear friend gave me a bundle of
clothing for them. They have since recovered, and having a friend who
owned a tenement-house, I spoke to her about them, and they are now
removed there, and are quite comfortable. Our kind ladies who assist us
at the sewing-school having sent us some turkeys for distribution at
Christmas I was able to furnish them with one; and better still, the
husband has obtained employment. They say they never will forget the
time when they had nothing, and now they have _everything so comfortable_.
They seem to feel it came from God."

Yes, He is the giver of every good and perfect gift, the Father of
lights with whom there is no variableness nor the least shadow of
turning. Without this perception and unless we return to God our
grateful acknowledgments, we cannot truly enjoy His blessings from
above. If God makes us the happy recipients of His favors it is our
bounden duty to return to him our heartfelt gratitude. This was the
feeling of the Psalmist when he said:

"Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy
name.

"Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:

"Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases;

"Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with
loving-kindness and tender mercies;

"Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is
renewed like the eagle's."


CHAPTER XIX.

HELP AND LOVING KINDNESS.

    Oh, give Thine own sweet rest to me
      That I may speak with soothing power
    A word in season, as from Thee,
      To weary ones in needful hour.


That Mrs. Matilda Knowles, our _beau ideal_ missionary, possessed a
thankful heart, we glean from her diary. She gives a deeply interesting
account of the recognition, on her part, of the gentle and generous
loving-kindnesses of those ladies who heartily co-operated with her in
lifting the burden of sin, sorrow, and sadness from poor suffering
humanity. She writes at the close of 1875, thus:

    "Our sewing-school kept its usual festival, thanks to our kind
    ladies, Mrs. Harper,[3] with Mrs. Fiske, and their friends, who
    supplied us liberally, and made many very happy. I have also,
    through the generosity of friends, been able to _aid_ and even
    _supply_ the wants of many who are in need, and I trust, in
    beginning a New Year, I may be able to work even more earnestly than
    ever before."

      [3] Wife of Mr. Fletcher Harper, of Harper Brothers, publishers,
      Franklin Square, New York.

This wealthy and inestimable lady (Mrs. F. Harper) has also recently
entered into her rest and reward. We are glad to know, however, that
her daughter has taken up all her mother's work, as the following
communication will testify:

    "LAUREL HOUSE, LAKEWOOD, N.J.,
    February 21, 1887.

    "REV. DUNCAN M. YOUNG,

    "DEAR SIR: I regret that I shall not be in New York for perhaps a
    couple of months, and therefore cannot see you in regard to the
    subject of Mrs. Knowles' work. She assisted my dear mother for many
    years in the Industrial School, and was greatly honored and beloved
    by all connected with her in that work.

    But it is precisely in this way is a gradual introduction of
    growing is a main advantage of the proposal, with daily practice
    and experience of the theory at any time to come Hülfe or under
    the arms can take place.In any
    case, it can be only in a very slight degree that I am able to aid,
    as I have taken up Mrs. F. Harper's work in all directions, as well
    as my own. Any further communication addressed here will reach me.

    "Very sincerely yours,

    "MRS. D. H. SIBLEY."

In our correspondence for the Master we are reminded of two things,
first, the letter sent by the beloved disciple, John, in his second
epistle:

    "The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the
    truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth;

    "For the truth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us
    forever:

    "Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from
    the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

    "I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy children walking in truth,
    as we have received a commandment from the Father.

    "And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new
    commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning,
    that we love one another.

    "And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the
    commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should
    walk in it."

And second, her place of residence for her health is the scene of our
former labors for the Lord. In the vicinity of Lakewood we held revival
services, and preached every night to a crowded house for over two
months. Among those who were led to Christ was a physician and his
wife, three public school-teachers, and two brothers--young men--one of
them is now a minister of the gospel, the other the editor of a
Temperance paper in the city of Philadelphia. But we are rapidly
travelling to eternity, and these will, we know, be among the fruits of
our labor. Still, we have to watch for souls and the bringing in of a
brighter and better day, when one need not say to the other, "Know ye
the Lord?" for all shall know Him from the least even to the greatest.
"When the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters
cover the channels of the great deep."

How beautiful and descriptive are the words of Mackay in his "Watcher
on the Tower," that points to the time when, through the labors of His
servants, truth shall be triumphant, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away:

    It breaks, it comes, the misty shadows fly,
    A rosy radiance gleams upon the sky;
    The mountain-tops reflect it calm and clear;
    The plain is yet in shade, but day is near.


CHAPTER XX.

REACHING THE HEART.

    Jesus, let me thus be waiting,
      Full of hope, and love, and zeal
    Let Thy coming, to my spirit,
      Be a hope divine and real.


Dr. Hanna once said: "The heart is an interpreter. It is not in the
intellect, it is in the conscience, in the heart, that the finest, most
powerful organs of spiritual vision lie. There are seals that cover up
many passages and pages of the Bible which no light or fire of genius
can dissolve; there are hidden riches here that no labor of mere
learned research can get at and spread forth. But those seals melt like
the snow-wreath beneath the warm breathings of desire and prayer, and
those riches drop spontaneously into the bosom of the humble and the
contrite, the poor and the needy."

The great President Edwards, in his admirable work on the affections,
declares that that religion which God requires, and will accept, does
not consist in weak and lifeless inclinations raised but a little above
a state of indifference. God, in His word, insists upon it, that we
should be in earnest, fervent in spirit, and having our hearts
vigorously engaged in religion. "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him; and to serve the Lord thy God with _all thy
heart_ and with all thy soul." "And the Lord thy God will circumcise
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live."--Deut.
xxx. 6.

The primary object of the successful worker then is to reach the hearts
of the parents through the children, constantly remembering the
divinely inspired words, "that a little child shall lead them." Let the
following extracts from her pen speak for themselves:

    "During the last month I have made two hundred and five visits, and
    brought eight children to the Sunday-school. I often find if we can
    gain the affection of the children it opens a way to the parent's
    hearts. For example: On entering a room one day, I asked if they had
    a Bible. The father, a rough-looking man, said, 'We have no money to
    buy Bibles--we need all our money to get something to eat.' 'Oh,'
    said I, 'if you have not the means to buy one I will give you one
    for nothing.' 'If I get it for nothing, I will thank you for it.' I
    took him one the next day; he thanked me very politely, and said, 'I
    will read it.' I handed the little girl a tract, in which was a
    picture of a child kneeling in prayer. The father seemed pleased,
    and before leaving, I said to the child, 'Now, my dear, if you learn
    to do as that little girl does, God will love you.' She looked up
    and said, 'Yes, ma'am.' When I called a few days after, the father
    said, 'My little girl did not forget her promise to you. Every night
    and morning she kneels down and prays, and thinks we should all do
    the same. I have been reading in the Bible. It tells us a great many
    good things, and when I get some clothes I shall try and come to
    church.'"

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

We must form our opinion of aggressive work for Christ by the fruits
that are produced. The pictorial tract put into the hands of the little
girl, and her subsequent conduct, elicited the attention of that
rough-looking father, and oh, what a blessed testimony to the power of
divine grace in the parental statement, "Every night and morning she
kneels down and prays, and thinks we should all do the same." It is
evident that children feel the full force of the words of the apostle:

"Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, by a new and living; way, which he hath consecrated for
us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; and having a high
priest over the house of God; let us draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

"In another place," she writes, "where I visit, the father keeps a
dining saloon, and sells liquor. His daughter is in our Sunday-school,
and he always appears glad when I call. 'You are the only one,' he says,
'who comes to do me good; I hope you will be blessed in your work; go
up-stairs and see my daughter. _She is a lady_,' he added, 'although
brought up in this way.' I generally read and pray with her, and as I
left her the last time, she said, 'I hope I shall not always have to
live in this way.' Her father was at the door as I came down-stairs; he
met me, saying, 'May the Lord bless you. Come as often as you can; I
would like to live a different life!' The daughter is pleasing, and
mourns still for her mother, who died three years since."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

"Christ said I came not to send peace on earth but a sword." Now the
word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword. The
key of knowledge of the depravity of the heart is furnished the liquor
dealer in the above interview, by the concession, "_I would like to live
a different life._" The saloon keepers generally attribute their
remaining in the business to the necessity of it in order to obtain a
livelihood. But there are other occupations in which they could be
diligently employed in order to maintain their families. Imagine a
frail, aged, weak woman, cheerfully bringing gospel light into these
dark dens of iniquity. It has been wisely said that the organ of pluck
and perseverance has been prominently developed in the weaker sex from
time immemorial, as in the case of Joan of Arc, Jennie Mac Rae, and the
noble band of Christian workers connected with the Women's Christian
Temperance Union of this country. The power of womanly kindness is
indescribable. Hence we must ever remember that God has chosen the poor
and weak things of this world to confound the mighty.

But to return to the diary. Here we find her intensely interested in a
poor blind girl, for she writes, in November of this year, the
following:

    "About three years since, a young girl, a Roman Catholic, who was
    then a pupil at the Institution for the Blind, was brought to my
    notice. She became deeply interested in the Bible, and afterward
    embraced the Protestant faith, and since that time has continued
    firm in her belief and practice. She remained at the Institution
    until the end of the term, which expired in June. It was now
    necessary for her to seek another home. She was taken to the house
    of a relative, who insisted on her going to confession. This she
    refused, and was on this account rendered homeless. It was a source
    of great anxiety to know how to provide for her. The girl was
    sincere, evidently willing, 'not only to believe in Christ, but also
    to suffer for His sake.' Her case was stated to some ladies who felt
    an interest in her, and although they could not give her a home,
    they kindly assisted in paying her board; other friends to whom the
    case was made known did the same, and she is now learning a trade by
    which we hope she will soon earn enough for her own support. Her
    employer speaks well of her, and considers her very industrious.

    "Another case is that of a family who took no interest in the
    subject of religion. They had a little daughter eight years of age,
    who loved to sing of Jesus, and would always sit still to listen to
    the reading of Scripture. One day she urged her mother to give her
    the baby, who was eighteen months old, as _her own_. The mother
    laughed, and said: 'You cannot take care of yourself; what will you
    do with him?' But she continued urging her request that the child
    might be given to her, until at last her mother said: 'Jimmy is
    yours.' 'Well,' said the child, 'if he is mine, I will take him
    wherever I go.' Soon after both children were taken sick, and both
    died, and were buried at the same time. This made a great impression
    on the minds of their parents; their hearts have been softened, and
    they now listen with attention to the words of truth, and we trust
    they may be led to follow the dear Saviour, who so loved their
    little ones, that He gathered them into his fold."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The death of loved ones frequently softens the heart. A few days ago, I
buried a dear, sweet girl belonging to the Sabbath-school, only sixteen
years of age. At the funeral service a man who had been formerly an
infidel was completely broken down. Why? because his little boy was
taken regularly to the school by this girl, and he inquired of his
father, "Now that Fannie is dead, and has gone to be with Jesus, who
will take me to the school?" The father responded, and said, "I will."
Ever since the father takes him there, and now attends the services at
the church.


CHAPTER XXI.

WINTER LIFE AND SCENES.

    Shall He come and find me standing
      From the worldling's joy apart,
    Outside of its mirth and folly,
      With a true and loyal heart?


On one occasion, in reference to a severe winter, she writes: "This has
been the hardest winter I have known for years." The winters in New York
are sometimes very severe. And here we are reminded of Thomson's vivid
description of it in his "Seasons." He prefixes it with this wonderful
prayer:

    "Father of light and life! thou God supreme!
    O, teach me what is good! teach me Thyself!
    Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,
    From every low pursuit! and feed my soul
    With knowledge, conscious peace and virtue pure;
    Sacred substantial, never-fading bliss!"

    "SNOW MANTLES THE EARTH. DISTURBS THE COMFORT OF MANKIND.

    "The keener tempests rise; and fuming down
    From all the livid east, or piercing north,
    Thick clouds ascend; in whose capacious womb
    A vapory deluge lies, to snow congealed.
    Heavy they roll their fleecy world along,
    And the sky saddens with the gathered storm."

We all know that a northwest snow-storm in this city is very cold and
biting. But amid the blinding snow-drift this woman could be seen
wending her way to homes of want, poverty, and wretchedness.

In order to recognize and appreciate her labors we have only to
contrast her aims and aspirations with another and far different class
that abound in all large cities, so graphically described by Pollock:

    Ah! little think the gay licentious proud,
    When pleasure, power, and affluence surround;
    Ah! little think they of the sad variety of pain:
    How many pine in want; how many bleed,
    How many pine, how many drink the cup
    Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread
    Of misery; sore pierced by wintry winds.

Amid all such sad scenes this heroine bids us labor on in faith, and
she adds, "_Our labor will not be in vain._" No, never! "For, they
that go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall _doubtless_
return again rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them."

What is faith? Faith is simply taking God at His word. Paul, in the
eleventh chapter of the Hebrews, reveals to us the victories God's
people obtained through faith. There is often something startling to
our sluggish spirits by a critical examination of the almost incredible
account of the power of faith. How tremendously efficacious. Oh! that
the Holy Spirit may reveal to us its vast importance.

"By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days.

"By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the spies with peace.

"And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jepthae; of David also, and
Samuel, and of the prophets:

"Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of lions,

"Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
armies of the aliens.

"Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better
resurrection:

"And others had trial of _cruel_ mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover
of bonds and imprisonment:

"They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain
with the sword: they wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins;
being destitute, afflicted, tormented;

"(Of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.

"And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received
not the promise;

"God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect."

    To lift with tender pitying hand,
      Sin's victims, from the dust;
    Reproach them not, nor chide their wrong,
      Be kind as well as just;
    A word may touch a sleeping chord
      Of mem'ry pure and sweet,
    And bring them, sorry for their sins,
      To bow at Jesus' feet.

    Go, seek them out--poor, wand'ring sheep,
      That on the mountain cold,
    Are hungry--starving now for bread--
      Go, lead them to the fold;
    There comes a cheering thought to those
      Who toil in patient love--
    Each soul reclaimed shall be a star
      To deck their crown above.

If we but prayerfully consider the sad condition of the unregenerate,
and the innumerable antagonistic diabolical influences to which they
are constantly exposed, we will be able to accurately understand the
nature and importance of a city missionary's work, and the great need
there is of giving heed to the injunction of the Master, "Be ye wise as
serpents and harmless as doves." There are few vices which cannot be
conquered by the Gospel, for it is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believeth. Here the reader will behold this illustrated,
for she writes again:

"In many places I have found it distressing to visit, the destitution
being so great; but through the assistance of kind friends, I have been
able to assist them in various ways, and thus have found a way to their
hearts, and they gladly receive me in many houses, and listen with
great attention to reading and prayer. One poor woman whom I found, had
been ill for some weeks, and while ministering to her temporal wants I
have not neglected her spiritual needs. She seems truly awakened to the
sinfulness of her past life, and feels her need of Christ. She begged
me to visit her daughter and try to influence her. I have spent some
happy seasons in that attic-room, and when I leave she puts her arms
around me, kissing me, and asking me to come again.

"A man asked me for a Testament, saying he wanted to read it for
himself. I gave him one, and on visiting him again, he said, 'I have
been reading your book, and like it so very much, I will pay you for
it;' and he handed me a dollar.

"Notwithstanding this has been the hardest winter I have known for
years, I have been much encouraged in my work, having been enabled to
help every deserving family I have met with; and one, where I have been
visiting for years without being able to induce them to attend church,
have now been brought in, and have united with the church, both mother
and daughter rejoicing in the Saviour, and feeling they have never
known happiness before. Let us, therefore, labor on in faith, and our
labor will not be in vain."


CHAPTER XXII.

CIRCULATING THE SCRIPTURES.

    O land of the blessed, thy hills of delight
      Sometimes on my vision unfold;
    Thy mansions celestial, thy palaces bright,
      Thy bulwarks of jasper and gold.

    Dear voices are chanting thy chorus of praise,
      Dear eyes in thy sunlight are fair;
    I look from my valley of shadow below,
      And whisper: Would God I were there.


Amid the toil and sufferings of earth, how comforting is the assurance
in our hearts that Jesus is preparing a place for his people. O, how
cheering, when we can adopt the language in the song of Solomon, and
say:

"My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies. Until
the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou
like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether."

It will not be long before we will be done with the cares and
vicissitudes of life, and enter into that "Rest that remains for the
people of God." I am sure that in the midst of her toil, she ever found
joy in the hope that one day she would be forever with the Lord. She
had indeed laid up treasures in heaven, and her earnest desire
evidently was, not to go to heaven alone, but to take some others with
her. This was the joy of her life. Like the Master who, for the joy
that was set before Him, endures the cross. Hence she enjoyed a uniform
experience of peace, although she witnessed many a sorrowful sight. A
late writer, the Rev. Henry Ward Beecher, has well observed:

"Joy will reach farthest out to sea where troubled mariners are seeking
the shore. Even in your deepest griefs you can rejoice in God. As waves
phosphoresce, let joys flash from the swing of the sorrow of your
souls. Low measures of feeling are better than ecstacies for ordinary
life. God sends His rains in gentle drops, else flowers would be beaten
to pieces."

Ah, it was the peace of God that passeth all understanding that enabled
her to bear up during the hot summer months in which she penned the
following, wherein she says:

"The past three months have been the most trying of any I have
experienced since I began my work. There has been much sickness and
many deaths. But I have been kept and sustained amid many difficulties.
I have been kindly received in many Roman Catholic and Jewish families.
A poor woman whose husband was killed a year since, who had lost one
child, and has another very sick, is glad to have me read and pray with
her, and when I point her to the Saviour she says He is, indeed, her
best friend. Another Catholic woman said, she did not see why her
priest forbade her reading the Bible, 'for what you have read to me is
so beautiful.' When asked if she would like to have a Bible, she said
she would, and when I took one to her she gave me twenty-five cents,
and said she wished she could give me more. One day I was addressed in
the street by a little girl, who asked me to go and see her mother.
When I enquired who she was, I found she was a woman whom I had visited
some time before. She was very glad to see me, showed me the Testament
I had given her, and asked me many questions which would have led to
argument; but I told her I only taught the religion of the Lord Jesus,
and I wished them to come to Him and seek for light and salvation. She
urged me to come again, and gladly listened when I read to them from
the Scriptures.

"A young woman on being asked to attend church said, 'The only church I
go to is the theatre.' I gave her a Testament which she promised to
read; she has now begun to go to church regularly, and says she hopes
never again to live the life she has lived. I have been able to take a
number of mothers and their children to the sea side, which has been a
great blessing. I have given the Bible to two women who have paid for
it, and wished for one for a neighbor."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

It is a true and striking fact, that there are very few women who ever
labored so assiduously for the good of others as this Missionary,
especially in trying to save souls and make others happy.

We may say we believe in Jesus and, therefore, we will be saved; but we
must remember also that faith without works is dead, and on the great
day of judgment all will be made known, for St. John says in the
Apocalypse: "I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were
in them: and they were judged every man according to their works."


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE NINETY AND NINE.

    When he lived on earth so lowly,
      Friend of sinners was his name;
    Now enthroned among the holy,
      He rejoices in the name.


When Jesus was here upon earth the question was asked, 'Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? But it is said that the thirty years of
Christ's obscurity was the foundation of his three years'
manifestations. He was there, however, not alone, for he was under the
fostering love and anxious solicitude of His heavenly Father. Nazareth
is beautifully described thus:

It was "a handful of pearls in a goblet of emerald. No great road led
up to this sunny nook. Trade, war, adventure, pleasure, pomp, passed by
it, flowing from west to east, from east to west, along the Roman road.
But the meadows were aglow with wheat and barley. Near the low ground
ran a belt of gardens, fenced with loose stones, in which myriads of
green figs, red pomegranates, and golden citrons ripened in the summer
sun. High up the slopes hung vintages of purple grapes. In the plain
among the corn, and beneath the mulberry-trees and figs, shone daisies,
poppies, tulips, lilies, anemones, endless in their profusion,
brilliant in their dyes. Low down on the hillside sprang a well of
water, bubbling, plentiful and sweet; and above this fountain of life,
in a long street straggling from the fountain to the synagogue, rose
the homesteads of many shepherds, craftsmen, and vine-dressers. It was
a lovely and humble place, of which no poet, no ruler, no historian of
Israel had ever taken note."

Even so, it was a very humble sphere that our missionary filled, but she
was precious in God's sight. Her work was among the poor and the lowly.
Lost sight of perhaps by men on this account, but the more like her
divine master in her work and ways. O, how true are Christ's own words:
"Whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all that he hath, he cannot
be my disciple. Salt therefore is good: but if even the salt have lost
its savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is fit neither for the
land nor for the dunghill: _men_ cast it out. He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear.

"Now all the publicans and sinners were drawing near unto him for to
hear him. And both the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, this
man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them."

Yes! sinners--unworthy, hell-deserving sinners--it is to such, that He
cries _if any man thirst_, let him come unto me and drink. How
refreshing are the well-known words:

    Aid the dawning, tongue and pen;
    Aid it, hopes of honest men;
    Aid it, paper--aid it, type--
    Aid it, for the hour is ripe,
    And our earnest must not slacken
            Into play.
    Men of thought and men of action,
            Clear the way!

The following account of the origin of the well-known hymn, the "Ninety
and Nine," may have a tendency to stimulate others to go and do
likewise. It is taken from "Sabbath Reading," published by the late Mr.
Dougal of this city, who has recently passed away into his everlasting
rest.

A humble lady in Melrose, Scotland, was led to see the beauty of the
character of Christ in the parable of the Good Shepherd. She possessed
genius, and sometimes expressed her best thoughts and feelings in
verse. The vision of Christ leaving the glories of Heaven and becoming
a seeker of men who had gone astray, like an Eastern shepherd seeking a
wandering sheep in perilous places, touched her heart with poetic
fervor, and she wrote the hymn beginning:

    "There were ninety and nine that safely lay
    In the shelter of the fold."

One of the stanzas most vividly and tenderly expressed her clear view
of Divine sympathy and compassion:

    "But none of the ransomed ever knew
      How deep were the waters crossed;
    Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through
      Ere He found His sheep that was lost.
    Out in the desert He heard its cry--
    Sick and helpless, and ready to die."

The poem was published in a local paper, and the lady soon afterward
died, and went to the Good Shepherd, whose love for the wandering and
perishing had gained the affections and service of her life. She was
buried in one of the churchyards of beautiful Melrose.

The efforts of a sincere life always meet with the needs of others, and
are often given, under Providence, a special mission in the world. The
simplicity and fervor of the little poem gained for it an unexpected
recognition.

The American evangelist, Mr. Sankey, was one day returning from
Edinburgh to Glasgow, to hold a farewell meeting there. Glasgow had
been the scene of the most signal triumphs in the work of Messrs. Moody
and Sankey, and this farewell gathering promised to be one of
thanksgiving and tears, of wonderful interest, power, and feeling.

Mr. Sankey, on this occasion, desired to introduce a new hymn which
should represent Christ as a compassionate and all-sufficient Saviour.
"Before getting on the train," he says, "I went to the news-stand and
bought two or three papers--some secular, some religious--and in one of
them I found these verses:

    "'There were ninety and nine that safely lay
    In the shelter of the fold,' etc.

"I said to my brother Moody, 'That's just the hymn I have been wanting.
I think the Lord has really sent it to us!'

"Next day this little tune or chant it is set to, came to me.

"We went into the noon meeting, and dear Dr. Bonar, who has written so
many beautiful hymns ('I was a Wandering Sheep and did not Love the
Fold,' and 'I Heard the Voice of Jesus say, Come unto Me and Rest') was
there, and the thought came to me, 'We must sing now this new hymn that
the Lord has sent us.'

"The tune had scarcely formed itself in my head yet, but I just cut the
words from the paper, put it in front of me on the organ and began to
sing them, hardly knowing where the tune was coming from. But the Lord
said, 'Sing it,' and as we were singing it His Spirit came upon us, and
what a blessed meeting we had!"

The meeting was a very crowded one, and tender feelings were awakened
in all hearts, bringing vividly to all minds, as it did, the fact that
the world is full of farewell. The imagery of the hymn, the shepherd,
the sheep-fold, the dark-night on the hills, the anxious search and the
joyful return, was in harmony with Scottish associations, and touched
the best feelings of the converts and inquirers. Christ stood revealed
in the song, and it seemed as though the listeners went up some living
Tabor, and again saw Him transfigured.

Away in the gallery there sat a lady who was at first startled, and
then deeply affected by the hymn. She was unable to speak with the
sweet singer in the confusion that followed the close of the meeting,
but she soon after wrote to him from Melrose, and said, "I thank you
for having sung, the other day, my deceased sister's words. She wrote
them five years ago. She is in Heaven now."

The hymn has had a tender mission. Thousands seeking the help of a
power outside of their own sinful nature, have seen in it the vision
that the prophet saw: "And I looked, and there was none to help; and I
wondered there was none to uphold; _therefore mine own arm brought
salvation unto me_."

What a true and striking picture is painted by the dear Saviour in this
immortal parable! They are the words of Him "who spake as never man
spake:"

"What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth
not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that
which is lost, until he find it?

"And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing.

"And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and
neighbors, saying unto them, 'Rejoice with me; for I have found my
sheep which was lost.'

"I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need
no repentance."

The intensity of that joy is indescribable. What a glorious company are
yonder. Here they toiled and suffered, and sacrificed for Christ, but
now they are in the land of light and love.

    How sweet as we journey, to pause for a moment
      And look at the foot-prints we see in our way;
    The foot-prints of pilgrims who've crossed over Jordan
      And now are rejoicing forever and aye.

    O blessed Redeemer, ere long thou wilt call us
      To join the great army beyond the dark sea;
    They fought the good fight, their course they have finished,
      And now they inherit the kingdom with thee.

What must be the joy in heaven when the meeting and greeting time
comes. The holy apostle said, "Set your affection on things above."
Why; what does he mean? It is that we may richly enjoy a foretaste of
its unutterable bliss preparatory to our departure.

    Hark the song of holy rapture,
      Hear it break from yonder strand,
    Where our friends for us are waiting,
      In the golden, summer land.
    They have reached the port of glory,
      O'er the Jordan they have passed,
    And with millions they are shouting,
      Home at last, home at last.

    Oh, the long and sweet re-union,
      Where the bells of time shall cease;
    Oh, the greeting, endless greeting,
      On the vernal heights of peace;
    Where the hoping and desponding
      Of the weary heart are past,
    And we enter life eternal--
      Home at last, home at last.

    Look beyond, the skies are clearing;
      See, the mist dissolves away;
    Soon our eyes will catch the dawning
      Of a bright celestial day;
    Soon the shadows will be lifted,
      That around us now are cast,
    And rejoicing we shall gather,
      Home at last, home at last.

It is no wonder that St. John in the Apocalypse, speaking anticipatively,
says:

"A voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

"And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying,
Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready.

"And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean
and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

"And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto
the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the
true sayings of God."

Who are the true called to the marriage supper of the Lamb? Who are
arrayed in white linen, pure and white?

They are those who try to be like Him who said, "I am the good shepherd
who gave His life for the sheep." Here, in this wilderness of
wandering, it is our imperative duty to go out after the suffering and
sorrowing and straying, and bring them into the fold.


CHAPTER XXIV.

ANSWERED PRAYER.

    I want to go home, to know it all--
    The Saviour's love for the sinner's soul,
    The mercy of God and the glory given
    To saints when they're safely brought to heaven.


"Here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come." Ours is a
camp life. Moses, in his wonderful prayer, claims God as his guide and
protector amid all the changing scenes of life. "Lord, thou hast been
our dwelling place in all generations. Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even
from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. Thou turnest man to
destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men. For a thousand
years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is passed, and as a
watch in the night."--Ps. xc. 1-4.

How essential then to constantly seek the guidance of God in all we
undertake for His glory.

He directs and controls all our affairs just as much to-day as He did
this ancient Israel by the great miraculous cloud by day, and pillar of
fire by night, stretching far high into the heavens.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

HOPEFUL CASES.

Concerning such, she writes: "Some encouraging circumstances present
themselves amidst the scenes of trial and suffering with which my daily
walks render me familiar, and I will note a few which have excited my
warmest sympathy. Among others, there is one family of a father,
mother, and three small children, whose whole subsistence depends upon
what the mother is able to make by washing. The man has been for two
months lying ill, with what the doctor calls typhoid fever; but which
seems now to have settled on his lungs, attended with a severe cough,
and no hope of recovery. I have been enabled to assist them from time
to time with a little nourishment. When I entered their house one day
with what I had provided for them, I found they had nothing but a
little bread. As I showed them what I had brought, they looked from one
to the other, and were so filled with gratitude, and overcome by the
unexpected supply, they appeared unable to speak. I find thus, not only
an open door to their home, but also a welcome to their hearts. They
have not been in the habit of attending church, and, as might be
supposed, the duty of personal and family religion was also neglected.
But it appears evident that these trials have not been sent in vain by
the Lord. The sick man loves to have me read the Scriptures, and pray
with him: and the children delight to see me, often running to meet me,
and take me by the hand before I reach the house."

Recognizing the necessity of prayer for the Divine blessing in all our
work, she writes in her journal thus:

    "MARCH 2, 1875.--In commencing my work this morning I asked for
    guidance in the direction of my visits, and I was led to go to a
    house quite out of my district, to visit a colored family who were
    very destitute.

    "I found them at family prayer, asking the Lord to send them some
    food; my heart was touched as I listened to the simplicity of the
    petition, and I could not but feel the Lord had directed my steps to
    the house in answer to their prayer, and was reminded of that
    passage of Scripture, '_while they are yet speaking, I will
    answer_.' I believed these words, and procured them both food and
    fuel. As we then sat down to read God's word, the tears streamed
    down the cheeks of these aged women, as I was helped to explain the
    word to them, and when we knelt to pray, we were blest together.
    Truly, while teaching others our own souls are often refreshed!

    "MARCH 6th.--Poor Mrs. L. was visited to-day; she has been suffering
    for years from rheumatism. As I went in I said, 'Mrs. L., is Jesus
    precious to-day?' The tears came to her eyes as she said, 'I fear I
    have grieved Him to-day; I felt like murmuring because my pain has
    been so great.' I told her Jesus understood her, and knew she did
    not mean to murmur. And then I read to her how He had a feeling for
    our infirmities, being Himself tried and tempted; and so she was
    comforted, and became quite cheerful. On leaving her I felt what a
    blessed privilege it is to be able to comfort the sick poor. A poor
    brother sent to my house to-day for something to nourish him, as he
    felt quite weak. I prepared some broth and gave it to him, which he
    ate with a relish, and that passage from the word came to my mind,
    'Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these, ye have
    done it unto me.'

    "MARCH 8th.--Felt much wearied with visits and climbing stairs, and
    was glad to return to a cheerful fireside, and settle for the
    evening; but before I had removed my rubbers, a knock at the door
    assured me some call had come for me, and so it proved. A child of
    one of my families came to say her mother was ill, and wanted to see
    me. This woman, a few months before, did not seem to care for
    religion, and would not hear me read, saying she had no time for it;
    she had to earn her living without listening to what did not concern
    her. With it the way of the Lord, straighten their paths. Ioan 4 and
    had his clothing of camel hair, and [a] arredor leather belt of his
    loins: and his food was locusts and honey mountain. 5 Then went
    out to the Ierušalem, Iudea and all, and the entire province
    of alderredor Iordan. 6 And they were Baptized in deel Iordan, confessed
    their ECCP. 7 And watching lots of Pharišeos and the Sadduceos, came
    to his baptism, deziales. Generation of bivoras, who hath taught
    huyr of yra that coming? 8 Hazed therefore fruits worthy of
conversion.

        Penšeys not 9 to deziros, we have Abraham
        for father: for I say unto you, that God may even awaken children
to Abraham of these rocks. 10 Aora, and also the ax is set to the
rayz of the trees and every tree that does not haze good fruit is
cut ^ and lying in the fire.

    I 11 to the truth you Baptized in water cõveršion: more He who comes
    after me is more powerful than me: the CAPat the qual I'm not
    worthy to carry. The Sanckto you Baptized in the Spirit and Fire:
    12 Your ablentador in his hand and his ablentará was: and unto their
    wheat in alholi and burn straw in the fire that never goes off.

    IESVS Then 13 came from Galilee to the Ioan Iordan to be of the
    Baptized. Ioan 14 But he resisted diziendo much, I need to be Baptized
    you, and you come to me? 15 But he answering IESVS dixo, DEXA aora:
    ansi because we should fulfill all righteousness. So what dexó.
    16 And was Baptized IESVS dešque up immediately from the water,
    and heaqui the heavens were opened, and served the Spirit of God
    decendia like a dove and alighting upon him. Heaqui and 17 [a] Boz
    of heaven dezia that this is my beloved son got inthe qual
contentment.

    Captain. IIII. IESVS So was born the Spirit into the wilderness to
    be tempted of the devil. Aviendo and 2 fasted quarëta Forty days
    and nights after He was hungry. 3 and reaching the the Tempter, dixo
    If you are sons of God, tell these stones be made bread. 4 But
    responding, dixo: Ešcripto, is not just bread bivirá man: but assuredof
    word that comes from the mouth of God. 5 Then the devil šanckta
the passer to the city and on pušolo battlements of the Temple: 6
And dixole If you are the Son of God, throw [away] Abax that ešcripto,
that will send his angels for you: on their hands and alçartehán,
Paray never trompieces [with] your foot stone. 7 IESVS dixo you,
again this ešcripto, not tempt the Lord thy God. 8 Again the devil
passes it to a very high mountain, and show the world all the
kingdom, and His glory: And dizel 9, this will give you if I prostrate
adoráres. 10 Then he IESVS Dize: Go Satan: ešcripto ^ that is,
worship the Lord thy God, and the only. 11 Then the devil dexó: and
the angel has come heaqui and šervianle. 12 More Ioan hearing that
Iesus was prisoner bolvióše into Galilee: 13 And dexando to Nazareth,
came and dwelt in Capernaum [city] maritima, on the borders of
Zebulun and Nephthali: 14 Paraque še cumpliešše what was said by
the prophet Išayas that dixo, 15 The land of Zebulun and the land
of Nephthali way to the sea, the other part of Iordan, Galilee of
the nations: 16 People assent in darkness, light GrÃ served: assent
in the region and shadow of death , light them clarified.

                   Since then 17 Iesus began to preach, and to dezir: Emmendaos that
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

IESVS walk 18 And beside the Sea of Galilee served two brothers,
Simon, called Peter , Andres and his brother, Echave network in
the sea: for they were fishermen. dizel 19 Y, Come after me, and
hazeroshé fishers of men.

They then 20, then dexando nets, followed him. 21 And passer there, two
other brothers served, Iacob son of Zebedee and his brother Ioan,
Zebedee in the ship with his father, remendavan networks and llamòlos.
22 And they certainly dexando the ship, and his father followed
him . 23 And Iesus surrounded throughout Galilee teaching in the
šynogas deellos and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom: and healing
every disease and every weakness in the village. 24 and ran his
fame throughout Syria: to the tray and all that had evil, taken
from various diseases and torments, and demons, and lunatics, and
Perlato: and šanavalos. 25 And many companies šeguianle of Galilee,
and Decapolis, and Ierušalem and Iudea and the other party of Iordan.

Captain. V. Displaying IESVS And the companies, rose in the mountain
and feel the, the llegaronše to his disciples. 2 and opening
[the] mouth, enšeñavalos diziendo: 3 Blessed are the poor in
spirit: for deellos is the Kingdom of Heaven 4. Blessed are sad: for
they shall consolation. 5 Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit
the earth. 6 Blessed losque hunger and thirst for righteousness: for
they shall be fed. 7 Blessed are the merciful: for they shall
attain mercy. 8 Blessed are the of clean coraçon: for they shall
see God. 9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
sons of God. 10 Blessed are those who are persecuted for the sake
of justice: for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Bienauenturados ^ 11 Soysa, quando dixerë bad for you, and [you] pursuing,
and you dixeren of all evil for my sake, lying. 12 Rejoice and
rejoice, because your salary is great in heaven: ansi that persecuted
the prophets who ^ [were] before you.

You Soysa 13 Salt of the earth: and if the salt dešvaneciêre, Coy will
be salted?

no good for anything more, but, and be thrown out, and be trodden of
Hobro.

Soysa 14 You Light World. assente city on the hill can not be hidden:
15 Neither the lamp is lit, and it gets debaxo a bushel: but in
the spotlight, and lighting all are at home lošque.

Ansi 16 [then] let your light shine before men: paraque see your good
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven. penšeys not 17 that I
have come to unleash the law or the prophets: I am not come to
undo [the], but to comply. 18 decierto because I tell you, [that]
perish haštaÿ heaven and earth, one jot or one tick of the Law will
perish all things are not done. 19 So qualquer that one of these
commandments dešatãre very small, and ansi teach the men, very
little will be called the Kingdom of heaven.

Mas qualquer ÿ hiziêre and teach, this will be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.

                   Portata 20 [I] tell you that if your justice is not greater than
that of the scribes and the Pharišeos not in the kingdom of entrareys
Heaven 21.

Oyštes and was told the old, not kill: mas qualquer and kill, it will
be blamed for juyzio 22 because I say unto you, that is qualquer
enojáre ^ madly with his brother shall be guilty of juyzio: And
that qualquer dixere his brother, RAKA will be blamed for city
council: qualquer and that [his brother] dixére, Loco, will be
guilty of quemadero fire.

Portanto 23 if your truxeres Present at the altar, and there will agree,
that your brother has something against you: Submit your 24 DEXA there
before the altar, and go: first Buelvas in friendship with your brother,
and then go and submit your offers. 25 Be a friend of your enemy presto,
now you're on the road with because not befall the adversary deliver you
to the judge and the judge deliver you to alguazil and you are thrown
in prison: 26 Decierto I say, not leave there until you pay the last
corner. 27 Oyštes was said to former , not commit adultery: 28 I say
unto you therefore, qualquer ÿ ÿ muger watch for Cudicio, she has
already committed adultery in his co coraçon.

Portanto 29 If your right eye was caused you to fall, Get him out, and
check for yourself that you are better we lose one of your members,
not that thy whole body be thrown to quemadero. 30 And if your right
eye was caused you to fall, cut, and check on you that you best
is to lose one of your members , not that thy whole body be thrown to
quemadero. 31 It was also said that Qualquer embiàre its muger, give
him a letter of divorce. 32 But I say unto you, that which they embiâre
its muger outside cause of fornication, she haze adultery: and
which they will marry the še Embi, commits adultery.

      Item 33, was said to oyštes old, perjurarás Do not: but the Lord
will pay your vows. 34 because I tell you, jureys not in any way,
or by heaven, because it is the throne of God: 35 Neither by land,
because it is the stand of their feet; Ierušalem or because it is
city of the Great King. 36 Ni jurarás your head because you can not
Hazer one hair white or black . 37 But be your speech, Yes, No, no,
because what is more abonera of evil. 38 Oyštes which was said to
the old eye for an eye: and a tooth for a tooth: 39 But I say unto
you, No rešištays with evil before you hiriere qualquer mexilla in
your right hand, also buelvele the other. 40 Renting and wants to
get pleyto and take your clothes, too dexale layer. qualquer 41 and
you carry a league, Go with the two. 42 Renting your request, give
him: and we would like to take you borrow, you will not be refused.
43 Oyštes was said, to love your next: and hate your enemy because
I tell you 44, love your enemy: Bendezid to losque you maldizen:
hazed either losque hate you, and pray for losque you and persecute
you calunian: 45 Paraque šeays sons of your Father in heaven: and
Haze which comes out on their sun bad and good: rains on just and
unjust. amardes à 46 For if ye love losque that wage tëdreys?

Hazen also not the publicans the same? 47 if abraçardes your brethren
only, which hazeys more? Hazen also not ansi publicans? 48 Be ye
therefore perfecktos, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfeckto. Capita. VI. Hagays not heed that your alms before men, paraque
šeays looked deellos: avreys not otherwise pay on your Father in
heaven. 2 Well when hazes alms, do not touch trõpeta betrays you,
as Hazen Hypocrite in the Synogas and plates, to be estimated in men:
decierto tell you [that] have their wages. 3 Mas quando hazes your alms,
do not know what your yzquierda haze your right. 4 What is in your
handouts secret: and your Father, who looks in secret, you
will pay in the public. 5 And when they pray, do not be like Hypocrite:
they love to pray in the municipalities and cantons in the streets
standing: Sean paraque views. Decierto that [already] have his wages.
6 But you, when you pray, Entrate in your room: and closed your door,
pray to your Father who is in secret: and your Father who sees in secret,
will pay you in public. 7 and pray no šeays Prolix, such as ethnic,
they think that by their parleria be oydos. 8 Do not hagays because
šemejãtes them. because your Father knows that things teneys
necessity, before you will pidays. 9 because you orareys ansi: Our
Father, who art in heaven is your šancktificado Nobre. 10 Your
Kingdom Come.

Thy will be done as in heaven, [ansi] also in the earth. 11 Give us
our bread oy Quotidiano. 12 And šueltanos our debts, as we release
our debtors. 13 And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us
from wrong because yours is the Kingdom, and the power and the
glory, for [all] centuries.

Amen. 14 For if the men šoltardes their offense, šoltaroshá to you your
heavenly Father. Šoltardes more but 15 men to their offense, your
Father will not release your offense. "16 And when ayunays not like šeays
Hypocrite austere, demudan that their faces to look like men who
fast.

    Decierto say unto you, [that] have their pay. 17 But you, when
fasting, anoints your head, and wash your face: 18 For the men seem
not to fasting, but to your Father in secret: and your Father who
sees in secret, will pay you in public. hagays thešoros No 19 on
earth, where moth and urine corrupts: and where thieves and steal.
thešoros haze 20 But in heaven, where neither moth nor corrupts
urine: and where thieves do not undermine or steal. 21 For where
your actions are thešoro, there is your coraçon. 22 The lamp of the
body is the eye: anšique If your eye is sincere, your whole body
will be bright. 23 But if your eye is bad, your whole body will be
dark.

Anšique if the fire in you that here are dark, Quanta [are] the same
darkness. 24 No one can serve two masters: for or hate the one and love
the other: either you reach the one and despise the other. Podeys not
serve God and Mammon at. Portanto 25 I say unto you, Do not congoxeys
for your life, that aveys eating or drinking aveys: nor about your
body, which aveys dress.

    Life is nothing but food and clothing to the
      body? 26 Behold the birds
    of the sky, not sow, neither reap nor
      alholies in Allegan, and your heavenly Father feeds them.

    Soysa ye not much better than them? Over 27 of
      you who may cõgoxandoše
    to his stature as a nest Cobden? 28 And because
      I clothing congoxays?

Apprended [of] lyrios of the field, as they grow: they do not work
or spin: 29 But ye say, that even Solomon in all his glory was
dressed as an ansi deellos. 30 And if yerva field, which is oy, and
tomorrow is cast into the oven, God saw the anxiety, not [make]
much you [men] of little faith?

31 Do not congoxeys because diziendo That eat or beveremos, or so
we'll cover?

    32 because people look for these things. because
    your heavenly Father knows that all these things
    teneys necessity. 33 But seek first the Kingdom of God and
    His righteousness and all these things will be nested. 34 Anšique
not you congoxeys so tomorrow, that tomorrow will bring its congoxa;
Bašta update your afflicion. capita.

VII. Juzgueys NO because šeays also not tried. 2 For the juyzio that
juzgays, šereys judged: and with the extent medis, [her] he bolverán
measure. 3, and because a view is at the edge of the eye your brother
and not miss to see the beam in your eye? 4 Or tell your brother, waiting
to cast your eye arrišta ^: heaqui and [a] beam in your eye? 5 Hypocrite
misses the first beam your eye: and then look at the cast on edge of
the eye of your brother.

Deyse 6 Not so šanckto to dogs: neither echeys your pearls before the
swine, because it is not the rehuellan with their feet, and he and
Buelvas dešpedacen. 7 Ask and daršeoshá. Seek, and hallareys. Touch and
abriršeos there. Qualquer 8 Because that asks receives; and which
they sought, found: and that he plays, is opened. 9 men and from whom
you if your child is asked to pan, put there [a] stone?

                   10 And if you request fish darlehá snake?

11 If you then, being evil, šabeys to give good gifts to your children,
your Father in heaven will bc more good things to those who ask deel?
12 Anšique, all things ÿ ÿ querriades men co hizieššen you, ANSI
also hazed them with you because this is the law and the prophets.
13 Enter the narrow gate because the road that leads to perdition
is wide and spacious: and those that are by him, are many. ^ 14
Because narrow is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life:
and few and we are 15.

Also, Beware of false prophets which come to you dressed in sheep:
but inwardly are wolves of robbers. 16 For the conocereys fruit.
Cogens grapes of thorns? or figs of Escambrón? 17 This way, every good
tree bears good fruit ^, but the rotten tree, bears bad fruit. 18 No
good tree can bear bad fruit nor rotten tree bear good fruit. 19 Every
tree not bearing good fruit, cut and sent into the fire. 20 Anšique the
conocereys by their fruits. 21 No qualquer Dize me, Lord, Lord, will
enter the Kingdom of heaven: but he that hiziere the will of my Father
in heaven. 22 AYL day many will say to Me, Lord, Lord, not prophetizamos
[in] your Nobre, and [in] Nobre took your demons, and [in] your nobr
hezimos many grãdezas?

23 And then I confeššaré, you never know: depart from me laboratories
of evil. 24 Well, qualquer I heard these words, and the haze, compararlohé
wise man who built his house on rock. 25 decendió rain came and
rivers, and wind, and fought that house, and fell because I was founded
on rock. qualquer 26 And I heard these words, not haze, compararlohé
men crazy, who built his house on sand. decendió That 27 rain came and
rivers, and wind and momentum hizieron that house, and fell, and was
its largest ruyna. 28 And it was [that] as Iesus finished these
words, the companies še ešpantavan its docktrina. 29 Pory enšeñava
as who has the author, and not as the scribes. capita.

VIII. Decendio And as the mountain, many companies šeguianlo: 2 And a
leper came heaqui and adorólo diziendo, Lord, if we want, I can clean.
3 And Iesus eštendiendo his hand, tocols diziendo, I: it is cleaned. And
then his leprosy was cleansed. Dixo 4 Then Iesus him, Mira does not [it]
tell anyone: but go, mueštrate priest, and offers this Moyses who sent
them paraque cost. 5 Iesus came into Capernaum, came to the requesting
the Centurion, 6 and diziendo Lord, my mucus is cast at home paralytico
severely tormented. 7 And Iesus dixo you, I'll come, and heal. 8 And
the centurion answered and dixo Lord, I am not worthy to enter
debaxo my roof: but only say the word and my mucus heal. 9 For I too
am a man of power debaxo: debaxo and I have my [power] soldiers:
and I say this, ^ Vé and va: and another , Come, and come: and my
servant, Do this, and haze [lo].

Y ^ 10 hearing [him] Iesus, maravillóše: dixo and to which [it]
followed, Verily I say unto you, that even in Israel I have found so
much faith. 11 See [I] will tell you that many of the East, and
Occidëte and assente [the table] with Abraham and Isaac, and Iacob, in
the Kingdom of heaven: 12 And the sons of the Kingdom will be thrown
into darkness ^ outside. There shall be weeping and paddling teeth.
13 Then Iesus dixo the Centurion: Go, and as creyšte, is done with
you.

                   And her snot was healthy at the same time. 14 And Iesus came to the
house of Peter and his mother in law served to pitch in bed with
fever and 15 and touched her hand, and the fever dexó: ^ and got
up and širvióles. 16 And as was already late, truxeron to the many
demons, and cast [them] with the evil word, and healed all the sick:
17 Paraque še cumpliešše what was said by the prophet Isaiah, who
dixo, The took up our infirmities and carried [our] conditions. 18
And Iesus seeing many companies arredor whether, fueššen to be sent
from the other side [of the lake.] 19 And llegóše a write, and
dixole: teachers, wherever that may be šeguirtehé . 20 ^ And Iesus
dixo him, The foxes have caves, and birds of the air nests: but the
Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head. 21 And another of his
disciples dixo him: Lord, give me leave to go first, and bury my
father. dixo 22 And Iesus him, Follow me, DEXA and the dead bury
their dead. 23 And entering into [a] ship, his disciples followed
him. heaqui and 24 was done at sea a great movement, and the ship
was covered with the waves: and he slept. 25 And his disciples
arrived dešpertarõlo, diziendo Lord Save died. 26 And [the] Dize
them, Why temeys [men] of little faith?

So reprehendió awake to the winds and the sea was great and fair.
27 And the men marveled diziendo that [man] is this, that even the
winds and sea obey? 28 And as the wine of the other part in the province
of Gergešenos: vinieronle to encounter two demons leaving the Sepulcher,
largely fierce that nobody could pass by that road. 29 And heaqui cried,
diziendo, That you have Iesus the son of God? You come here and
bother before long?

Lexos was 30 and from them a herd of many swine paciendo: 31 And the
demons begged diziendo, if not miss, we permittenos at that herd of
swine.

Dixoles and 32, Id And they left in fueronše AYL herd of swine: and
heaqui, the whole herd of pigs rushed [a] cliff into the sea, and died
in the waters. 33 And the swineherd fled, and coming to the city,
were all things, and what with the evil past auia. heaqui and 34,
the whole city came out to receive Iesus: and when they saw it,
rogavanle to leave their terms.

Captain. IX. Then enter [a] ship pass by the other party, and came to his
city. Heaqui And 2, you truxerõ [a] paralytico lying in [a] bed faith
Iesus and watching them, dixo al paralytico: Confia son, you are
forgiven your ECCP. 3 And heaqui some of the scribes dezian within
it: This blašphema. 4 And Iesus seeing their thoughts, dixo, penšays
did bad things in your coraçones?

Qual 5 is easier, Dezir, the ECCP you are forgiven: o, dezir, get up
and walk? 6 More šepays because the Son of Man has authority on earth ^
ECCP to forgive, then paralytico Dize, Get up, take your bed and
go to your house. 7 Then [he] got up and was her home. 8 And companies
are seeing [it] maravillaronše, and glorified God, who oviešše given
such authority to men. 9 and Pass Iesus then, served a man who was
sitting in the vacuum [of the public taxes,] the qual še llamava
Mattheo: and dizel, Follow me.

And got up and šiguiólo. 10 And it happened as he sat at the table at
home, heaqui [that] many publicans and peccadores that avian came, sat
next to the table with his disciples and Iesus. 11 And seeing [this]
the Pharišeos, dixeron his disciples, did your teacher eat with publicans
and peccadores? 12 And hearing [him] Iesus, dixoles, Losque are
healthy, have no medical necessity: but the sick. 13 Walk before
apprended What is , I desire mercy and not sacrifice: for I came not
to call the righteous, but the peccadores to repentance. 14 Then the
disciples came to the Ioan, diziendo: Because we Pharišeos fast and
many times, and your disciples do not fast? 15 And Iesus dixoles,
can those who are wedding guests mourn while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come, when the wife will be removed deellos, and then
fast. 16 Item, nobody misses Rezi patch of cloth on old garment, because
the patch pulled this dress, and worse hazeše break. 17 Ni throw new wine
in old skins: otherwise the skins are broken and the wine is spilled, and
hides pierdenše: but miss the new wine in new skins: and one and the
other is kept together. 18 Speaking on these things to them, a
major wine heaqui and adorólo, diziendo, My little daughter is dead
there: but come and put your hand on it, and bivirá. 19 And Iesus
levãtóše and šiguiólo, and his disciples. heaqui a 20 Y muger ill
flux of blood twelve years avia, coming from behind, touched the
fimbria of her dress. 21 Because dezia one another, if only touching
her dress, I'll be free. 22 But Iesus bolviendoše, and Mirandola,
dixo, Confia daughter, your faith tehá spared.

And muger was free from that hour. 23 And Iesus came home from the
main viewing tañedores flute, and the company that Azia bustle,
24 dizel, Depart that moça is not dead: more sleeping.

And burlavanše deel. 25 And as the company was thrown out, came in, and
through his hand and stood up moça. 26 and left this famous throughout
the land. 27 Iesus and Pass from there, two blind šiguieronle giving
bozes, and diziendo, have mercy on us, Son of David. 28 And came home,
came to the blind, and they Dize Iesus: Hazer Creeys can it?
DRAWN BY THE CORDS OF LOVE.

    Blest Saviour, slain for me,
    In grateful love to Thee
      The cross I bear;
    Thou didst for me endure,
    My pardon to insure,
    And thus for me secure
      A Crown to wear.


"One poor woman," she writes, "asked me to call and see her, as she
wished to tell me her troubles. She said she was afraid to believe that
God loved her. I have seldom seen any one in such ecstacy as she, when
she was told that God loves her with an everlasting love, and that she
need not be afraid to trust Him, as the more she rejoices in Him, the
more she would glorify Him."

The earnest desire of Paul for the Church at Colosse was: "That their
hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of
the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; in whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

GRATEFUL OFFERING OF A SAVED SOUL.

She writes again thus: "One woman, to whom I took a Bible, said to me,
'_If it had not been for you I should have died in ignorance_.' Although
she is poor, two Sabbaths since when a collection was taken, she put
down her name for two dollars. She says, 'she can never thank the Lord
enough for bringing her out of darkness into light.'

"I visit a woman who endures great agony from cancer. She lives alone,
in a tenement house, poor and friendless, having been driven from her
home by her relatives because she has become a Protestant. But she has
a firm trust in God, and it is indeed wonderful to see how she is
supported amid terrible sufferings. She cannot read, having never
learned, but says, 'I thank God that He sends His servants to read the
Bible to such as I.'"

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

What a picture of all that is conceivable of human suffering. Alone,
poor, persecuted, yet thankful and trustful. Oh! How amazing is God's
grace.

    Oh, yes, to the uttermost Jesus is able
      To save the poor sinner who cometh to Him;
    His word is most sure, and His promise is stable:
      Though feeble thy trust and thy faith very dim,
    Yet listen again to the soul-cheering sound,
    Our Jesus can save to the uttermost bound.

    Did I hear some one say, "But what of to-morrow,
      For my foes are so strong, and I'm sinful indeed?"
    He is able to save to the end of the journey--
      To the uttermost bound of thy uttermost need.
    That same Jesus who died for us now ever lives,
    And as mightily saves as He freely forgives.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

WORK AMONG THE JEWS.

"Though laboring to bring souls to Christ, of any nation, my chief
interest and work is among the Jews.

"I called upon a family of very religious Jews. I talked with them of
Christ as the true Messiah and of His sacrifice for our sins. I saw
that they had the Old and New Testament, given them by a Christian
lady. They said they often read it together, and I could not but think
that the good seed was sown in their hearts.

"I am often discouraged by the opposition of one member of a family. A
child who goes to Sunday-school is kept away by an unbelieving father,
just as the truth has found a lodgement in her heart; but, again, my
heart is filled with joy when I find that my labor has not been in
vain. Such was the case in a family where I have prayed, and conversed
often about their souls' salvation. The mother, a Jewess by birth, had
changed her Jewish religion some time ago. But her heart remained
untouched. I endeavored to make her understand what a change of heart
is, and persuaded her to go with me to a German church. Some weeks
after the father spoke of his faith in Christ, and a week since his
wife also gave evidence of being a Christian woman. During the month of
March I visited a poor woman who had had great sorrows. She asked me
for a Bible, for which she was most thankful. Her husband, a Catholic,
now reads it with her, and shows by his greater kindness to her its
blessed effect. What a blessing, indeed, is this holy book in these
poor homes?"

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

ANOTHER YOUNG JEWESS BROUGHT TO CHRIST.

"A young Jewess, who had found and believed in Jesus as her Saviour,
wanted to unite with a Christian church, but her aged mother would not
allow it. I encouraged her to pray for her mother, and one day calling
to see her, I found she had now no objection to her daughter doing as
she wished. I have had many conversations with Jews, and have often
been allowed to read the Bible to them."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

It is certainly very encouraging to read how intensely interested she
was in the conversion of the Hebrew people. We cannot wonder at this
when we consider that they were the chosen people of God; and also to
those who are in the habit of prayerfully consulting their Bibles,
especially the prophecies pertaining to the Messiah, as they behold
them literally fulfilled, not only as to the time and place of His
birth, but His person, life, miracles, death, resurrection, and
ascension of the Lord Jesus Christ.

"He surely came unto His own and His own received Him not, but to as
many as received Him them gave He power to become the Sons of God, even
to those who believed in His name."


CHAPTER XXVIII.

LOVE FOR THE HEBREWS.

    A weeping sinner kneels,
      The chains of death are broken,
    And soon his glad heart feels
      The Saviour's welcome spoken.


Christ said, "Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees." She seemed to hate
everything that looked like spiritual pride, or idolatry, or
worldliness. Hence her sternness and courage in watching for sin in
herself or others was marked. The language of Jesus ever sounded in her
ears: "Take heed to yourselves, lest haply your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day
come on you suddenly as a snare: for _so_ shall it come upon all them
that dwell on the face of all the earth. But watch ye at every season,
making supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man."

She felt also that God was no respecter of persons, and her great
ambition on this account was to try and save the Hebrew people from
their vain delusions that they were still the chosen people of God,
notwithstanding their rejection of the Messiah.

This is evident from the following conversation with a Jewish woman
about God's Word.

"Visiting another Jewish woman, she asked me to sit down, and soon we
were in earnest conversation about the Bible, and her soul's salvation.
After hearing me read some passages, she said, 'We Jews must all be
wrong if you are right.' I told her it was not my word, but the Word of
God. I begged her to search the Scriptures for herself, and left with
her a tract relating to Christ, written by a Jew. She asked to have a
Bible, which I carried to her. Again we conversed on this great
subject. She liked the tract, and had lent it to several of her
friends. She said she would read the Bible with prayer, and if she was
wrong, the Lord would open her eyes. During these four months I have
made over one thousand visits, distributed many tracts and given away
eight Bibles, besides taking several children to the Sunday-school, and
using the Mission funds in assisting the poor.

"There has been a great deal of sickness this summer, especially among
the children. But I have been enabled to do some good by taking these
little ones and their mothers into the country. Among them were several
Roman Catholic families. They expressed surprise that we should do so
much for them, saying, 'It was more than their own people would do for
them.' In visiting one of these women soon after, she said her husband
had told her she had better take my advice and read the Bible. He said
she had better have one, for it could do her no harm. I took her the
Gospel of Matthew, which she has been reading attentively, and her
children learning verses by heart. She gave me fifty cents, asking if
that would be enough to buy a Bible.

"To several Catholic families I have lent Bibles, and they now wish to
purchase them, paying for them in small sums, as they are able. One
man, who has led a very wicked life and abused his family, is now so
changed that when he comes home he asks his children to read to him. He
does not go to church, but says he does not know why his people are not
allowed to read the Bible.

"A poor woman to whom I gave a Bible handed me one dollar, saying she
wished she was able to give more, as it had been such a blessing to her
in her sickness and poverty. I have been much encouraged by the
gratitude expressed for my reading the Scriptures in some families. A
Catholic woman was in great distress for her husband. She begged me to
pray for him, and calling her five children about her, we knelt in
prayer.

"I have a mothers' meeting at my house, at which several women have
desired prayers for their husbands. Visiting in a house where were some
Jewish families, I asked if they would allow me to pray with them. They
said they would not dare to kneel, but would stand and listen. On my
leaving them, they shook my hand, with tears in their eyes, and said
they liked to hear my prayer. Another Jewess said she would be sorry if
she thought we would not meet in heaven. I begged her to pray God to
show her the true way, and read to her in Isaiah the prophecies
concerning the Messiah. She, too, promised to think, and pray for
light.

"I have good hopes of several intemperate persons. They have abstained
from drinking for several weeks, one has joined the Temperance Society,
and another has promised to drink no more. They asked for a Bible,
which I took to them. We have opened our Sewing-school again, and have
the hope of accomplishing much good this winter among the children."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

GLADNESS IN COMING TO THE HOUSE OF GOD.

She continues to write thus: "Some of the women who attend my mother's
meeting have never attended any place of worship, and it is encouraging
to hear them speak of reading the Scriptures, which they have never
done before, and of the pleasure they take in going to the House of
God, and in listening to His Word.

"A Jewess, to whom I spoke of the Saviour, said, 'Your religion must be
very comforting, when you have something to rest upon. I would like to
go to your church, and hear about your Saviour.'

"I found a family where the mother was sick; the father without work,
and four children to be fed. I obtained assistance for them, and after
doing what I could to make them comfortable, I read a portion of
Scripture to them. As the woman lay listening, the father came into the
room and said, 'You are reading the Bible; it is a good book; my
children love to hear it; they learn in the Sabbath-school what will do
them good, but the times are hard; I can get no work, and everything
seems dark.' His wife said, 'God has sent us help just when we needed
it the most.' I urged him to trust in our Heavenly Father, and pray to
Him; he said, 'I will try.'"

Why not? for

    E'en the hour that darkest seemeth
      Will His changeless goodness prove;
    From the gloom His mercy streameth;
      God is wisdom, God is love.

The shadows of earth are immediately dispelled when we trust God, for
He says, "Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee and
thou shalt glorify Me." This passage has been the cup of great blessing
to many a benighted soul.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

She writes: "In another family, the kindness shown has led the father
(who has also been ill) to think seriously of religion, and resolve on
leading a new life.

"One poor woman, to whom I had given a Bible, said to me, a few days
since, that she wanted to 'pay something for her Bible,' it had been
such a comfort to her in her lonely hours. She said she had never read
so much of the Scriptures before, nor found so much comfort from
reading them, as during the last few weeks; and now she wished me take
ten cents as part payment; she had been keeping it for me, and would
add more soon, as she wanted to give me fifty cents. She was living
alone; her husband dead; her son, having married recently, had left
her, but gives a little toward her support. She was also made happy by
some addition for Thanksgiving.

"My visits among the children of the Sewing-school are also productive
of good. One little girl whom I brought to Sabbath-school for the first
time, induced her mother to come to church, where she was enough
pleased to desire to come again. This family have usually spent their
Sabbaths in reading stories in the newspapers, as is the case with many
others from which we have gathered the children, and when they say at
parting, 'Do come and see my mother,' I feel here is a wide field of
usefulness opening before us, inviting us to enter in and work for the
Master."


CHAPTER XXIX.

THANKFULNESS TO GOD.

    He is a whole Christ--He is a full Saviour!
      He saves to the uttermost all who believe;
    His arms of compassion are ever extended,
      The contrite and penitent souls to receive.


St. Augustine says: "The Kingdom of Light was from its very
commencement assailed by the Kingdom of Darkness." But, notwithstanding
the opposition of Satan, and the strong prejudices of his ancient
people, how encouraging to read the following narrative from her pen:

"I have been able to supply the immediate necessities of some poor
families, and it encourages my heart to see their gratitude for what is
done for them, but, above all, for their joy at receiving the 'Word of
God,' and knowing that it was their own. From four persons I have
received payment for the Bibles, who were anxious to receive them, and
who read them daily. I have met with some success among the Jews. A
Jewish girl who has been in my Sewing-school is very happy to be there,
and says that now her father does not forbid her to read the Bible or
attend Sunday-school. A young girl who attends the meeting which I hold
in my house has joined the church in Allen Street, and is so much in
earnest that she is trying to induce others to follow her example. I am
thankful that my efforts for the young have not been without results."

Why? we ask; because He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him
up for us all, how will He not with Him also _freely give us_ all
things.

"I have had much encouragement," she continues, "in my labors during
the summer. Visiting at the Hahnemann Hospital, I have become much
interested in some of the patients. They ask me to sit down and talk to
them, and I then point them to Jesus as the best Physician for soul as
well as body. I have been kindly received by Roman Catholics, and have
loaned Bibles to some of them, and some have kept them and paid for
them.

"During the months of July and August, I have found many sick, in
assisting whom I have been aided by the Flower Mission.

"I see a great change in families where the Bible is being read. One
little girl says, 'I read the Bible every day, and so do my father and
mother. Now they do not work on Sunday, as they used to do, but go to
church, and read God's Word.'

"My own church has been closed a part of the summer, but the
prayer-meeting has been well attended, and there has been much interest
evinced. A man who was a drunkard for many years, has given up his bad
habits and is now the support and comfort of his family. I gave him a
Bible, which he reads, and he seems to be a truly converted man. I have
sold several Bibles, as well as given several away."

At one time coming in contact with a very serious case of hardship, she
wrote concerning it, "Formerly the mother depended upon the daughter
for support, but she has lately been obliged to stay at home, and take
care of her mother; and in consequence of this, they have both
suffered, as they belong to that class who are unwilling to make their
wants known.

"I asked if they had attended any place of worship. The mother said she
had been a member of a Protestant church in Troy, but since she came to
New York, and her circumstances had changed, not having clothing to
make a decent appearance, she had not been to church. She added: 'I
must say, it was pride, but I could not overcome it. Now I know and
feel that I did wrong.'

"She is now more comfortable; for I have been able to get her some
little delicacies, which she suffered greatly from the need of.

"It is a great satisfaction to us, when we meet with so many cases of
want and suffering, to give some relief, however small, but the anxiety
and labor that have often to be borne to succeed in the work is great.
I often think that if those who employ us to go forth with the Word of
Life in our hands could see us engaged in our work, giving consolation
and encouragement to the poor and destitute, the sick and dying, and as
far as in our power relieving their wants, they would feel abundantly
rewarded for the good and honorable work in which they are engaged.

"Every month I feel more and more the greatness of the work, and the
necessity of laboring with earnestness, in order to compel them to come
in, that the Lord's house may be filled, and that jewels may be
gathered for our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. I have brought a
number of children into Sabbath-schools, and have induced several to
attend church, and feel that my labors have been abundantly blessed,
and that during the last month I have been much encouraged.

"I have succeeded in getting five tons of coal for my poor, besides
groceries, etc. Have sold three Bibles, and given one away."


CHAPTER XXX.

LOST, BUT FOUND.

    Love of Christ, amazing love!
      Vast as His eternity;
    Theme of angel choirs above,
      Theme of souls redeemed like me!
    Outward to creation's bound,
      Up to Heaven's serenest height,
    Universal space around,
      Swells the chorus day and night.


Here she writes about a woman whom she visited several years ago, and
who attended her meetings: "I lost sight of her for seven or eight
years. She moved away from the city. One day recently I was sent for by
a sick woman; I found it to be Mrs. V., who had returned. I read,
prayed, and visited her until she died, believing in Jesus." Here she
reports the conversion of several others whom she has visited and
brought out to religious services.

An unknown Christian lady writes thus: "Mrs. Knowles has great success
in her work, reading God's Word, and leaving the Bible to be read by
those whom she visits, when not able to purchase a Bible; one is given
in some instances; even the poorest will pay a small sum. A great
change is noticeable after the Bible is read with real interest--cleaner
children, better-dressed men and women, and a desire to hear the Gospel."

Why this marvellous success? What brought about this personal
reformation in the habits and character of parents and children? There
are two reasons for this great change, namely: 1. Contact with God's
Word. 2. Contact with a soul set on fire with the love of Christ. Oh!
the tremendous power there is in divinely implanted affection when it
is beautifully blended in a human heart. Sir Walter Scott says:

    Love rules the court, the camp, the grove,
    And men below, and saints above;
    For love is Heaven, and Heaven is love!

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

CONSOLATION AMID DOMESTIC DIFFICULTIES.

When we remember that we are penning for publication only a few stray
gleanings from the multiplicity of instances of conversion, the reader,
we trust, will behold the variety of cases recorded, and we sincerely
hope the Christian worker will utilize them for practical purposes.

Some one has said that Paul's favorite illustrations by images are
drawn, not from the operations and uniform phenomena of the natural
world, but from the activities and outward exhibition of human society,
from the lives of soldiers, from the lives of slaves, from the market,
from athletic exercises, from agriculture, from architecture.

At this time she again writes: "I visited a family where the mother was
a Christian, and the father a Jew. The father being sick for two years
past, and unable to support his wife and four children, has gone to his
own people. The eldest girl is a member of my Sunday-school class. The
mother told me one day, as I was speaking to her of the Bible, that she
had not seen or read one since she was married; 'but,' said she, 'since
Amelia has been in your class, she has repeated the lessons she has
learned at home, and I am longing for a Bible.' I gave her one given me
for my Jewish children. She thanked me heartily, and now reads it every
day with her children. One Sunday morning her husband came in to see
them, and found her reading aloud to the children from the Bible. He
asked her what she was reading. She told him it was the Bible, and how
she had got it, and that the children went to Sunday-school, and that
she went to church. He was not pleased, but could say nothing, as he
does not live with or support his family. This poor woman was deeply
convicted of sin, and was earnestly seeking for forgiveness and peace,
and peace has come to her son through humble trust in the Saviour of
sinners. Thus the Lord is prospering our labors, and the meetings begun
in trembling, have been blessed to some souls."

It seems her source of unalloyed happiness was in watching for souls,
at morning, noon, and night. Her prayers were perfumed with sighs, and
cries, and tears for the impenitent. She was one of those so
graphically described by Jeremiah: "They say to their mothers where is
corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the
city, when their soul was poured out into their mother's bosom. What
thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I liken to
thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may
comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is great like
the sea: who can heal thee."--Lam. ii. 12-13.

    Long they sat beneath the shadow,
      And the gloom of moral night,
    Waiting only for the dawning
      Of the promised heavenly light.
    But they've heard the glorious Gospel,
      Of salvation full and free,
    Now they read the "Blessed Bible,"
      They are coming, Lord, to Thee.

    Hasten, Lord, the coming morning
      Of the bright, millennial day,--
    And may we who love the Saviour
      Labor to extend His sway,
    Until every ransomed being,
      On the land and on the sea,
    Shall unite in one grand chorus,
      "We are coming, Lord, to Thee."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

THE FORTUNE TELLER.

"During the last two months I have met with several interesting cases.
One Jewish woman whom I visited was always pleased when I told her of
my interest for her people. Being poor and in delicate health, she
could do but little for her own support, and I learned had resorted to
telling fortunes. I showed her that this was wrong, and that God would
not bless her, as it did not agree with His Word. She said, 'I have
often thought it might be wrong, but I am now convinced of it; but what
shall I do for my living?' I directed her to prayer for guidance, and
assured her that those who put their trust in the Lord would be taken
care of. She has since been to our meeting and requests to have a
Bible.

"I visited another woman, whose husband is a Catholic. Her three
children are in my Sunday-school class, and I am much interested in
them. The mother came to the German church, and I gave her a German
Bible, as she never had one. Calling one day, I found her in great
trouble. She said: 'Oh, Mrs. Knowles, I have been praying for you, and
the Lord has sent you. I read and prayed with her, directing her to the
Friend of sinners for peace. I think she became a true Christian, and
soon she wished to unite with the church. Her husband, however, opposed
it, and threatened to take away the children from her. He did so, and
sent them to the Catholic Sunday-school. But the seed is sown in their
young hearts, and they say to their mother, 'We will never turn to the
Catholics.'"

To such as are sorely tried in their households, how comforting are the
words of the Apostle: "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the
people with His own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth
therefore unto Him without the camp, bearing His reproach. For here
have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By Him therefore
let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name. But to do good, and to
communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased."

She adds: "During these months I have met with much poverty and
sickness. One would almost think it would diminish at this season, but,
on the contrary, it is rather worse. I met with a family who had been
in the country but two months. The father was a salesman in Germany,
and can get no employment in this country. They had nothing to eat in
their house, but the Lord opened a way, so that something was provided
for them. I read the Scriptures and prayed with them, and the wife
expressed a longing to go to a German church. I took her to church, and
gave her a Bible."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

A JEWESS FINDS THE MESSIAH.

"A poor Jewess, whose husband has been in the Insane Asylum for nearly
two years, finds it hard to support her family by peddling. Calling one
day, I found her going out without any shoes on her feet, and her
health very poor. I bought her a pair of shoes, for which she was very
thankful, and pointed her to Christ as her true friend in time of need.
She reads the Bible, and believes He is the Messiah."

"Another Roman Catholic woman, whom I have been visiting for some time,
continues to attend church regularly."


CHAPTER XXXI.

SEA-SIDE EXCURSIONS FOR MOTHERS AND CHILDREN.

    Sure he, to whom, of mind or hand belongs
      Some craft that doth uplift the thought of men
      Above the mold, and bring to human ken
    The joys of radiance, air and clear bird-songs;
      So that the brow, o'er moist with sullen toil,
    May catch a breeze from far-off Paradise;
    So that the soul may, for a moment, rise
      Up from the stoop and cramp of daily moil--
    May own his gift Divine! as sure may trace
      Its Source, as that of waters kind hands hold
    To thirsty lips; nor need he mourn (since grace
      Of his hath such refreshment wrought) if gold
    Be scant; to him hath richer boon been given
    An earth-bowed head to raise the nearer heaven.


There is no sight more truly gladdening to the heart of the
philanthropist than to behold the large barges, built after the model
of Noah's Ark, gliding swiftly through the beautiful waters of New York
Bay, heavily laden with the news-boys, working-girls, or poor mothers
and children of the city. Thanks to the New York Press, and the
contributors to the Fresh Air Fund, for thus giving the multitudes of
children, that are thickly huddled together in our tenement-houses, an
opportunity of inhaling pure air.

One of the pioneers in this good work was the New York _Times_. In 1872,
that paper started the "_Times'_ Excursion for Poor Children;" ay, and
for poor adults, too. The public nobly responded to the _Times'_ appeal,
sending in about $20,000. During the sweltering summer of that year, the
_Times'_ people carried to shady groves and seasides tens of thousands
of children who, for the first time, saw running streams and green
fields. No one can estimate the good done, the lives saved, and the
hours of happiness secured to young and old who have so few happy hours.
Not the least was that of softening hearts and opening purses.

In this noble work we find our deceased friend earnestly engaged
instead of taking a vacation in the hot summer months. In her diary we
find the following concerning one of these summer seasons:

    "It has been a great privilege, during the summer months, to be
    able to make so many poor mother's happy, by taking them and their
    children to the sea-side for bathing and country air. There has
    been much sickness in the tenement-houses. It is, indeed,
    distressing often to see two sick in one bed, the others nearly
    ready to be there, and the poor mothers, with but little means,
    scarcely able to do their work and take care of the sick ones.

    "It is then a happiness to obtain for them a little nourishment,
    and to give them words of sympathy and encouragement. Many are
    Roman Catholics, who seem surprised that I should take any interest
    in them, as they said it was more than their own people will do.

    "A poor woman whom I visited, said: 'I will never again think that
    Protestants cannot be saved, as I have been taught; and since I
    have read the Bible, I intend to go to a Protestant church and hear
    for myself.'

    "The Catholics say to me, 'How different your prayers are from
    ours. Why do you not pray to the Blessed Virgin?' I tell them that
    we only pray to the Lord Jesus Christ, as He is the only Saviour.
    While visiting lately in some wretched houses of infamy and talking
    to the poor women, they would shed tears, and say that they would
    like to live different lives, but it is so hard to begin to do
    better. It is surprising to see with what attention they listen to
    the words of Scripture and promise to read the Bible themselves."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

A WONDERFUL WORK.

Still continuing the record of her work, she writes: "During last month
I made two hundred and fifty visits, read the Scriptures as often as I
had the opportunity; have given two Bibles to persons who were too poor
to pay for them, and sold one.

"Several Roman Catholic women have asked for Bibles, and are reading
them with pleasure. One woman, whose husband called her a 'turn-coat,'
said she did not care for that, but that nothing should persuade her to
give up her Bible.

"I have induced several persons to attend church, and have taken
children to the Sabbath-school, thus trying to sow the seed, and
looking to God for His blessing.

"A poor man, ill with consumption, is one whom I visit often. I have
aided his family with coal, and also in buying food and nourishment for
himself. He reads a Bible that I gave him every day, and when his
children come from school he gets them to read to him. He says: 'If I
had been a better man; had read my Bible and taken care of my health, I
might have been different, but now I am trusting in the Lord that He
will forgive and accept me, and that is my only hope. I tell my wife
that when I am gone she must never give up the Bible, but read it every
day with her children.'"

We must ever remember, dear reader, that the unfolding of the _Gospel of
Christ_ is the _power of God unto salvation to everyone who believeth_.
What a tremendous power was manifested by the preaching of the Gospel to
the savages of North America, in 1743. Mr. Brainerd, in his journal,
gives an instance of the effects which followed the preaching of the
Word of God. "There was much concern," says he, "among them while I was
discoursing publicly; but afterward, when I spoke to one and another
whom I perceived more particularly under concern, the power of God
seemed to descend upon the assembly, 'like a mighty rushing wind,' and
with an astonishing energy bore down all before it.

"I stood amazed at the influence that seized upon the audience almost
universally. Almost all persons of all ages, were bowed down together.
Old men and women, who had been drunken wretches for many years, and
some little children, not more than six or seven years of age, appeared
in distress for their souls, as well as persons of middle age. These
were almost universally praying and crying for mercy in every part of
the house, and many out of doors, and numbers could neither go nor
stand; their concern was so great, each for himself, that none seemed
to take any notice of those about them, but each prayed for himself.
Methought this had a near resemblance to the day of God's power,
mentioned Josh. x. 14; for I must say, I never saw any day like it in
all respects; it was a day wherein the Lord did much to destroy the
kingdom of darkness among this people." A church was soon afterward
gathered among these poor pagans; and such was the change effected
among them, that many exclaimed with astonishment, "What hath God
wrought?"

He spent whole days in fasting and prayer, that God would prepare him
for his great work; and, indeed, throughout his whole life he was truly
a "man of prayer," lifting up his heart to God on all occasions,
frequently spending whole days in prayer and meditation in the fields
and woods desiring holiness of heart far above every other object.

Mr. Brainerd was sent by the Society for the Propagation of Christian
Knowledge to the Indians at Kaunaumeek, a place in the woods between
Stockbridge and Albany. In this lonely place he continued and endured
many hardships and privations.


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE INTEMPERATE WIFE.

    If you cannot cross the ocean,
      And the heathen lands explore,
    You can find the heathen nearer,
      You can help them at your door.

    If you cannot give your thousands,
      You can give the widow's mite,
    And the least you give for Jesus
      Will be precious in His sight.


In March, 1880, she writes: "I have had much encouragement in my work
during the past month. In a family where I had visited a long time, the
mother was much addicted to intemperance. On calling one day, I saw the
husband, who said he was glad I had come in, for he had resolved to
leave his wife; he said he could endure his life with her no longer--he
would go his way, and she must go hers. She was much distressed, and I
once more entreated her to give up the intoxicating cup and be a good
wife and mother. I then engaged in prayer, beseeching the Lord to enable
her to resist this dreadful appetite. Her husband stood by and said:

"'Now, Mary, you have your choice: either to follow the advice of this
kind friend, or to separate from me forever.'

"She then and there made her decision, and, laying her hand on the
Bible, pledged herself not to touch or taste the poison, and signed a
paper to that effect. Since then, she has attended our meetings, and
says she is happier than she has ever been.

"Some persons to whom I have given the Bible did not seem to care to
read it, but have now begun to do so, and encourage their children to
read to them. One man tells me:

"'I am scarce five minutes in the house before my little girl begins to
read to me, and it does me good.'

"A man and his wife who have attended church this winter, will soon
confess Christ. They have suffered much this season, as the father has
had but little work; but I have been able to give them some assistance.
The mother said she was thankful to the Lord for all that had been done
for them, to bring them through their difficulties--but, above all, that
she and her husband had found rest in Jesus as their Saviour and their
friend."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

WARMLY WELCOMED BY ALL DENOMINATIONS.

    "_March, 1881._--During this month I have made many visits among
    Jews and Romanists. Some who formerly opposed me are now anxious to
    hear me read and pray, and urge me to come to see them often.
    Several Roman Catholic families have asked for the Bible; and I have
    given several copies of the New Testament, which they value very
    highly, as well for themselves as for their children, whom they are
    anxious should read and learn its sacred truths. One woman, whose
    children had been taught verses from the New Testament, gave me
    twenty-five cents to get her a Bible, saying she wondered why their
    clergy forbid them reading it.

    "The woman mentioned before as being intemperate seems now truly
    reformed. She attends our meetings with her boy, and she and her
    husband once more live happily together.

    "My meeting for young girls continues with much encouragement. They
    seem to take delight in reading the Scriptures, and in singing
    hymns of praise. They spend the hour in sewing and reading aloud,
    and they are greatly improved in deportment and character. The
    little Jewish girl, to whom I gave a Testament, is never absent
    from this meeting or from the Sunday-school."

What a deplorable sight--an intemperate mother! What a soul-ruinous
example to a daughter! When we consider the relation between the mother
and the child, how great are the maternal responsibilities. The mother
ought to attract the attention of the child by her love. Chilled by the
sin of intemperance, how many, alas! drag down their daughters to infamy
and a life of shame.

But, oh, what a change is wrought in this household after the dramatic
interview, when the husband threatens to leave his wife forever unless
she abandons her cups. What joy enters that family circle after the
mother's transformation. Surely this revolution in her character was not
the work either of the missionary or the person herself. It is not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according _to His mercy_
He saves us.

How sweetly Dr. Horace Bonar sings in this connection:

    Thy works, not mine, O Christ,
      Speak gladness to this heart;
    They tell me all is done;
      They bid my fear depart.
        To whom, save thee,
          Who can alone
          For sin atone,
        Lord, shall I flee?

When we contrast the previous picture with the closing paragraph of
this last account in her diary, we behold the sudden change from
sadness to sunshine.

She says, "_The young girls seem to take delight in reading the
Scriptures, and in singing hymns of praise._" This is the new song put
into the mouth of the Christian at the hour of conversion: "Happy day,
when Jesus washed my sins away."


CHAPTER XXXIII.

HER LOVE OF CHILDREN AND OF PRAYING.

    He loves me now, oh, blessed thought,
    He loved me when I knew Him not,
    And with His blood my pardon bought,
      On Calvary He died for me;
    Then with such love my heart to cheer,
    How can I doubt or have one fear,
    Or ever think the days are drear,
    With Jesus near, with Jesus near.


In 1884 she writes: "Ninety-six visits during the last month, and seven
children taken to the Sunday-school. I am everywhere received with
kindness, and especially by the children, through whom I hope to reach
the parents' hearts. I have disposed of several Bibles, for which I
have been paid; and I find there is nothing like reading some verses of
Scripture to excite the desire to possess the Book of God. I have an
interesting class of girls in my own house who study passages of
Scripture every week, and by their example and influence their parents
have been led to attend church and give their hearts to God."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Oh, how few there are who would be so kind-hearted as this woman to
open their own house to impart spiritual instruction to others. We are
forcibly reminded by this gathering of girls to study God's Word, of a
graphic scene in the Acts of the Apostles: We read that, "On the
Sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont
to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted
thither. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the
city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord
opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.
And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying,
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house,
and abide there. And she constrained us."--Acts xvi. 13-15.

We see from the above account of her work the multiplicity of her
avocations: Tract-distribution, visiting and caring for the sick,
teaching the young, not only out of God's Book, but instructing them
how to discharge domestic duties.

    Never tired, never weary,
      In what she found to do--
    Ever winsome, always cheery,
      She knew but love for you!

    Humble, patient, kindly, sincere,
      She loved the Master well;
    Always trying, unknown to fear,
      She would His story tell!

She continues: "A short time since, on entering a house, the woman who
opened the door asked if I was a missionary. When I said 'Yes,' she
said, 'The Lord has answered my prayer. I prayed that He would send one
to me to read the Bible and pray with me.' Before, when she had been
visited, she would hide away to avoid the visitor, but now she desires
to be a Christian, and wishes some one to read and pray with her often.
She is very poor, but is now seeking the true riches. One who had been
very ill, but had recovered, gladly received a Bible, for which, though
she is very poor, she gave me fifty cents. I have met with much
encouragement in the Sabbath-school and sewing-school. Many mothers
are, through their children, interested in religion, and come gladly to
the mothers' meetings, and my earnest prayer is that the Lord will help
me in the future as He has done in the past."

Her prayerful spirit was marvellous. This was the reason why she was
able to impart such comfort and encouragement to others.

I called recently in the suburbs of the City of Brooklyn to see a
member of the Allen Street Church, and, after reading God's Word and
prayer, our conversation turned to a beautiful portrait that hung over
the mantel-piece. The lady remarked, "That is the picture of my
departed sister, who died in New York. She was faithfully visited
during her sickness by Mrs. Knowles." She continued, "I like to think
of her, because she used to tell me after she was gone, 'I pray for you
by name every day.'" Perhaps that is the reason why she comes now so
many miles through the long, dreary, stormy winter months, to teach a
class in the Allen Street Sabbath-school, and some of the scholars are
Hebrew children. This person for whom she prayed never misses any of
the services at the church.

"Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the
which the Holy Ghost have made you overseers, to feed the church of
God, which he hath purchased with His own blood. For I know this, that
after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock."

This is the injunction of the Apostle Paul to the elders at Ephesus,
but it is exceedingly appropriate to all who are engaged in missionary
work of any kind, and it cannot be faithfully complied with unless
there is pastoral work performed from house to house. Who is sufficient
for these things?

During February and March, 1885, she again writes: "During the last two
months I have been engaged as usual in reading the Scriptures from
house to house, and wherever I have visited have been allowed to do so,
with very few exceptions. Visiting lately in a tenement house, a woman
came out, telling me that I would never go to Heaven, and using other
insulting language. I only said, 'Poor woman, I pity you.' A Catholic
woman, who heard her, asked me into her room, took me by the hand, and
with tears in her eyes expressed her sorrow that I should be treated so
ill. I told her it did not harm me as much it did themselves. I then
asked if I might pray with them, and when we arose from prayers several
of those present were in tears. 'How can you pray for one who has
abused you so?' said they. I replied that Jesus prayed for His enemies,
and we must imitate His example. One of these women came to our
mothers' meeting, and asked me for a Bible, and promises to read it."

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Here she complied with the command of Christ: "I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you."

What a wonderful exhibition we have in the above interview of the
spirit of Him who was suspended on the cross for our sins, for we read:
"That when they were come to the place which is called Calvary, there
they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the
other on the left. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know
not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots."

The fearful drama enacted on Golgotha excites our wonder when we behold
the amazing love of Jesus, in thus praying for His persecutors. How
true it is that He was clothed with the mock robes of royalty, that we
might be clad in His justifying righteousness; crowned with the crown
of thorns, that we might wear a crown of glory.

    Flow on, thou stream; oh, ceaseless flow,
    Till every child of sin and woe
    Hath plunged beneath thy cleansing tide,
    And found the Saviour precious.

I want to say here, that I visited a family by request a few evenings
since in the upper part of New York City. During our religious
conversation I asked the mother of the family how she was led to Christ.
Her husband, daughters, and sons were all seated around her at the time,
a happy family circle. "Well," she replied, "about twenty-three years
ago, when my children were little, Mrs. Knowles met me on the street,
coming from the store. She said, 'Excuse me, lady, will you accept a
tract?' I answered yes. 'Will you read it,' she inquired, 'if I give you
one?' I promised I would. She further asked me, 'Have you any children?'
'Yes.' 'Do they go to Sabbath-school?' 'No.' 'Will you send them if I
call for them next Lord's Day morning?' 'Yes.' She called the following
Sabbath, and asked if the children were ready. 'They are all ready,' I
said, 'but one, and her shoes are not good enough; but wait and I will
go out and buy a new pair.' 'Oh,' said Mrs. Knowles, 'never mind buying
shoes to-day, I will call next Sabbath for them.' I did not know the
reason _then_ why she would not allow me to get the shoes, but I know
_now_. She did not wish me to break the holy Sabbath day. Then she
persuaded me to attend church, until I found Jesus as my Saviour. I was
in the habit of going to her with all my trouble, and she would say,
'Oh, well, never mind, don't tell anyone but your Heavenly Father about
it.'"


CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONVERSION OF CHILDREN.

    We are so helpless, Lord,
      Thou art all power and might;
    Our path is often drear,
      Be thou our light.
    We have no hope but thee;
      Oh, leave us not alone,
    Till life's brief day is o'er,
      Still guard thine own.


Her joy in bringing children to the Sabbath-school was great, but when
she led them to Christ it was sublime. Why should she not be interested
in their early conversion, when Jesus said, "Suffer the little children
to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven." I desire to state here, that when I was a boy, about nine
years of age, I attended a prayer-meeting between the morning and
afternoon services, led by an elder of the Relief U.P. Church,
Greenock, and was so deeply impressed with Divine truth that I gathered
my playmates together, and invited them to a meeting of my own across
the burn at the foot of grandfather's garden, near Dr. McCulloch's
established church, where we boys read God's Word in turn sang the
sweet psalms of David, and offered prayer.

Rev. E. P. Hammond is doing a grand work among children at the present
time in New York. I assisted in his meetings, and found a goodly number
of children inquiring after Jesus, and one afternoon there were a dozen
young men and women rejoicing in their sins forgiven, who had signed
the covenant.

The following letter will speak for itself regarding Mr. Hammond's work
here in this city among children, many of whom were brought to Christ:

    "NEW YORK CITY, March 3, 1887.

    "DEAR BROTHER YOUNG: I am engaged, night and day, holding meetings
    here, I wish you could come up and attend some of the services; I
    thank you for all your kind words. I am to be to-morrow at the
    prayer-meeting as per bill. If you can be there I shall be glad to
    see you.

    "_One hundred and twenty_ here, gave their names to us yesterday,
    saying they had been converted in these meetings (for the most
    part). To-morrow night we go to Carle Hall. It will hold, perhaps,
    three or four thousand. Pray for us.

    "Yours in Jesus,

    "E. P. HAMMOND."

The afternoon I visited the scene of his labors, he presented me with a
copy of his work entitled, "The Conversion of the Children," in which I
have found a very encouraging letter to workers among the little ones.
I use it here to illustrate the power of Divine grace, and to show that
wherever the effort is put forth to save the children, God blesses it.

The following letter will testify also to the power of the Gospel. It
is the production of one whom God has been graciously pleased to bless
in a marvellous manner among the young.

    "GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, September, 18, 1877.

    "MY DEAR MR. HAMMOND: We oftentimes remember you, though few letters
    have passed between us. My daughters and myself will never forget
    your visit and the time of blessing then, and they, as well as
    myself, send you most hearty salutations.

    "Dear brother, my thoughts on the subject of the conversion of
    children are the same as when I wrote that tract you refer to.[5] I
    think I agreed with you in almost every thing but one, viz.,
    expressing publicly an opinion on cases. It seems to me that we
    should be cautious in so doing; for children themselves mistake
    _feeling_ for _faith_; how easy, then, for us who do not know the
    heart, to mistake in them a manifestation of feeling for evidence of
    faith.

    "But in the awakening which took place under your labors here, and
    in awakenings that have been given us since, the cases of young
    people have been as entirely satisfactory as any cases we have had.
    If conversion be God's work, in which the Holy Spirit reveals
    Christ to the soul, surely His work can take place in children as
    really as in the old; for it is the young soul meeting with Christ
    in the one case and the adult in the other.

    "One day, about the time, or perhaps after the time, you were among
    us, in the vestry of my church, an old Christian woman, who had
    watched the work going on, came to me and said, 'Sir, you will find
    many people speaking lightly of the young who come to Christ, as if
    there was nothing but feeling in their case; but never mind what
    these people say. I was converted in the days of Dr. Kidd, of
    Aberdeen, when I was but a child, and two others of my age were
    converted at the same time; and we have all three gone on to this
    day, following the Lamb.'

    "The Lord blesses you amazingly. Surely you will need to 'walk
    circumspectly,' 'sober, vigilant,' for Satan will not fail to watch
    you, and seek to injure you, that he may injure God's work through
    you. If the way be opened for your revisiting Scotland, many among
    us shall rejoice.

    "Meanwhile, we pray for you, and will not cease. Pray for us still,
    dear brother.

    "Yours truly, in Him 'Whose we are and whom we serve,'

   "ANDREW A. BONAR."

      [5] The Conversion of Children, by Dr. A. A. Bonar.

But what makes us to differ from each other? Surely it is simply the
presence and power of the Holy Spirit in our heart. It is all of free
sovereign grace and mercy, as Paul says, to the Church at Corinth:

"By the grace of God I am what I am: and His grace which was bestowed
upon me was not found vain: but I labored more abundantly than they
all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. Whether then it
be I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed."


CHAPTER XXXV.

ASLEEP IN JESUS.[6]

    Asleep in Jesus; blessed sleep,
      From which none ever wakes to weep,
    A calm and undisturbed repose,
      Unbroken by the last of foes.

"For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain."--Philippians i. 21.


One week ago to-day, and at this hour, we stood in this historic church
over the precious remains of our dear, departed Elder, James Knowles,
so kind, so gentle, so affectionate, so humble, and so meek in his
manners that we greatly miss him in our work for the blessed Master.
Ah! little did we then think that we were to be so speedily gathered
together to pay the last tribute of respect to the memory of his
faithful and loving wife. But God's ways are not our ways, nor His
thoughts as our thoughts. How inexplicable and profoundly mysterious
are His providential arrangements. It hath pleased our kind heavenly
Father to say to our sainted sister, "It is enough, come up higher."
She also is at rest with her Saviour and her husband, to whom she was
so devotedly attached. She was, indeed, a virtuous wife and loving
mother.

    "The race appointed she has run,
    The combat's o'er, the prize is won."

      [6] The substance of a sermon preached by the Rev. Duncan McNeill
      Young, in the Allen Street Presbyterian Church, New York,
      November 1, 1886, on the occasion of the death of Mrs. James
      Knowles, a city missionary who triumphantly departed this life on
      October 30, 1886, in the seventy fifth year of her age.

How blessed the change! How rich the reward! How safe from all sin and
sorrow! In yonder "land of pure delight where saints immortal reign."
_What a meeting! What a greeting takes place at the hour of dissolution!_
How pleasing the contemplation. How inspiring to think of our noble
ancestors; our holy ministers and teachers; our fathers and mothers who
led us by the hand to the house of God on the Sabbath, who early taught
us to lisp the ever precious name of Jesus; who are to-day singing the
song of Moses and the Lamb. Let us thank God at this solemn hour, even
amid blinding tears, for pious, praying parents.

Oh, that the Holy Spirit of God may touch our hearts to-day; that we
may more fully realize the greatness and importance of our work, and
that we may understand that this second great loss to this church is
the voice of the God of Israel calling us, by the solemn dispensations
of His providence, to be more zealous in our Saviour's cause. Clarify
our vision just now, O Thou Divine Enlightener, that we may see light
in Thy light.

I truly believe my theme to-day is a gift from the Lord, the God of
Abraham, and is peculiarly appropriate for this solemn scene, and
adapted to the circumstances and special wants of this church and
congregation. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His
saints." The text, I may add, has been graphically illustrated in the
life and labors, as well as in the death of her who now lies before us
in that beautiful casket, covered with so many rich and fragrant
flowers, the gifts of dearly beloved friends.

While I do not believe in eulogizing the dead, yet, nevertheless, I
think, nay, I experimentally know, that great good is derived from
reflection upon the lives of the great, the pure, and the noble ones
who are beyond the flood. Nothing stimulates me so much to increased
activity and aggressiveness in Christian work as the thought of the
numerous servants of the Most High God now in heaven:

    "How bright those glorious spirits shine,
      Whence all their white array?
    How came they to the blissful seats
      Of everlasting day?"--"Par." lxvi. 1.

Paul, who uttered the words of our text, was passing through great
suffering when he wrote this epistle to the Church which he planted at
Philippi. He was at this time a prisoner for Christ in the palace of the
imperial city of Rome: for he declares, "That _the things that happened
unto me_, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel; so
that," he adds, "my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and
in all other places."

There are just two thoughts that we want to try and develop this
afternoon, namely, that conformity to the likeness of Christ in life
brings glorious gain to the Christian at death. Or, in the words of the
great Apostle of the Gentiles, "For to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain." From the sacred hour that the blessed Jesus met him on his
way to Damascus, to the day of his martyrdom, his continual cry was,
"God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of the Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me." "I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord."

"That man," says the Hebrew bard, "hath perfect blessedness, who not
only refraineth from walking astray, but who delights in the Law of the
Lord." _Lex rex_, was his motto--"The Law is King!" For the Master has
said: "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil." He desires to corroborate the
fact that--"Ye are the light of the world"--hence, he adds, "Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven." "The city set on a hill cannot
be hid."

The true Christian, then, beholds the humility and majesty of Christ in
defining His and our relation to the law that regulates daily life. The
Gospel of the blessed God and the law conjointly elevates and
spiritualizes humanity. The law is our school-master to lead us to
Christ, hence Paul says, "To be carnally minded is death; but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace. For what the law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit."

Our loved one's life was emphatically a life of consecration. It was a
life strictly devoted to the cause of her dear Redeemer. "For her to
live was Christ, hence to die was gain." We all know that to consecrate
is to set apart for holy service. Aaron of old was thus unreservedly
laid upon the altar as a living sacrifice for Jehovah. A person thus
set apart receives the unction of the Holy One. It was beautifully
symbolized under the mosaical dispensation.

Moses took the anointing oil and poured it upon the head of Aaron, in
order that he might be sanctified and set apart for the service of God.
And so, when we can truly exclaim with Paul, "I am crucified with
Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the
life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave Himself for me." It is then we receive the
blessed baptism of the Holy Spirit, and are made meet for the Master's
use. None can rightly live for Christ until they receive this rich and
inestimable blessing. "At that time we are _sealed_ with the Holy Spirit
of promise."

Among the personal property of Sister Knowles were found some crumbs
which fell from the Master's table in the form of forget-me-nots of the
Word of God, by Dr. McDuff, author of "Morning and Night Watches."
Valuable little works which I would earnestly recommend, and which I
have endeavored to put into the hands of many young disciples in my
various fields of labor. I will quote a few of the forget-me-nots, as
they are very comforting in these hours of sorrow and separation. For
instance here are a few of them:

"Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I
will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee
with the right hand of my righteousness."--Isa. xli. 10. "Yet will I not
forget thee: Even to your old age _I am He_; and even to hoar hairs will
I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will
deliver you."--Isa. xlvi. 4.

Our dear Sister Knowles corroborated the truthfulness of the above
passages by her last dying words, the last she ever uttered upon earth.
"Once I was young, now I am old, and have never been forsaken."

It is impossible for us to live a truly devoted Christian life without
the presence and power of the Holy Spirit in our hearts, John said, "I
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after
me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." This divine blessing
our dear sister pre-eminently possessed.

This was the reason why Christ, our ever adorable Redeemer and Daysman
was continually about His Father's business. The Prophet Isaiah said
concerning him: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the
Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives and the opening of the prison to them that are bound.... To
comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to
give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that _He
might be glorified_."

The presence here to-day, in a body, of the "New York Female Bible
Readers' Society," out of respect to the memory of the departed, is a
conclusive evidence of the fact that they recognized her sterling
qualities, and her heroic missionary spirit among the fallen sons and
daughters of Adam in the lower part of this great city. They fully
realize that this church and community have suffered a severe loss in
her removal, and their presence, together with so many elders, and
ministers, deacons, and Sabbath-school workers, give proof that her
life, for over a quarter of a century, during which she incessantly
toiled for Christ, were years of holy and unremitting industry, and
holy consecration in the service of Him whose whole life was one of
self-sacrifice and self-abnegation. "For He came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many."

She was like Christ in this respect. Emptied of self, and was found
like Mary of old sitting at the feet of Jesus, and hearing His word. As
He said, "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls."

God has wisely ordained that souls are to be saved through human
instrumentality, especially through those whose hearts are in the work.
He hath put the treasure in the earthen vessel that the excellency of
the power may be of God and not of man. Who can estimate the value of a
holy missionary woman's work in this world of sin and sorrow?

Through the power of an indwelling spirit, who can tell of the many
broken hearts healed by the application of the Balm of Gilead. Many
poor Satan-bound souls have had their shackles severed, and joyously
set at liberty by pointing them to the only Redeemer of God's elect,
who by His great atoning work hath paid for them the ransom price; and
many to-day are singing the song of Redeeming love above, who were led
to put their trust in the blessed Jesus by her prayers and religious
instruction. Many a poor Jew, and Jewess, and Roman Catholic, and
Formalist, and Infidel, and swearer, and Sabbath-breaker, were pointed
by her to the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world. She
ever displayed great sagacity in every kind of work. She will be
greatly missed in the Tenth Ward of this city.

God grant that as the spirit of Elijah did rest on Elisha as he was
taken up into Heaven, even so may her mantle fall on us who are left
behind. Let us

    "With zeal like hers inspired,
      Begin the Christian race;
    And freed from each encumbering weight,
      Her holy footsteps trace."

Krummacher, of Elberfeld, in the valley of Barmen, Prussia, said, "That
Elisha on inheriting this mantle is henceforth called to take the place
of his great Master, and to carry on His work." This singular legacy
was therefore very significant to Elisha. The mantle came flying toward
him heavily laden, but with the commission he received was connected
the encouraging circumstance that it came accompanied with such a
precious memorial of his paternal Master. It was no longer the robe of
his redoubted reformer, but the robe of a blessed heir of Heaven, borne
thither on the wings of the cherubin. This circumstance would tend to
_refresh his spirit in his arduous work_; and, at the same time as
the messenger of peace, who was to announce to the house of Israel,
like the rainbow after the storm, Jehovah's good-will toward men. Oh,
that the remembrance of our ancestors, the great, and the good, and the
holy ones who have gone before would inspire us to go and do likewise!

I remember once standing in the cemetery of Stirling and gazing upon
the monument of two Christian sisters who suffered martyrdom for
Christ, and as I read the inscription on the tombstone, I thought of
how much we were indebted to those who have borne the burden and heat
of the day.

Here is the inscription: "Margaret, Virgin Martyr of the Ocean Wave,
with her like-minded sister, Agnes." Then follows this touching
paragraph: "Love, many waters cannot quench. God saves His chaste,
impearled one! In Covenant true. Oh, Scotia's daughters! _earnest scan_
the Page and prize this flower of Grace, _blood-bought_ for
you."--Psalms ix. xix. The elder and younger sister are exquisitely
sculptured, seated together with an open Bible on their laps, and a lamb
by their side, while an angel is standing behind them gazing intently on
the scene. Who can tell but the departed one gazed upon this very scene
in the days of her sunny childhood, for the Bible was her daily delight.

Ah! dear friends, are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to
minister to them who are heirs of salvation? And are there not many
living martyrs that the world knows nothing of among our Bible Readers
in this city, who are saying as Paul did: "What mean ye to weep and to
break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus."--Acts xxi. 13.

A French gentleman, a Roman Catholic, who lived in the same house as
sister Knowles for several years, told me that he never met a woman so
humble and straightforward as she was in all her deportment.

What was the secret of her power in eliciting this outside testimony?
She had companionship with Jesus. She lived near Him; she heard His
sweet voice saying: "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me."

The holy McCheyne, of St. Peter's, Dundee, Scotland, says, concerning
those who walk with Christ on earth, "That they shall walk with Christ
in white, for they are worthy.... Never forget, dear brethren, that you
are to walk with Christ. This walk expresses the most real intimacy
with _Him_. You know it is a mark of real intimacy to admit one to
walk with us in our solitary rambles. Oh, walk with Him now; walk here
with Him, and you shall soon put your head where John put his."

She cultivated a firm and unstaggering confidence in the continued
presence of the Holy Spirit in her heart. McCheyne's directions to his
flock was, "Pray for the Holy Spirit to uphold you, if sensible of your
weakness; then lean upon this proved Comforter.... _Pray much for this
Comforter that He may enlighten your mind, that He may fill your hearts.
Oh, pray for the Spirit of God, for there is no other way of walking to
heaven but by the Spirit. Let Him lead you._ My dear brethren, _in this
way, and in this way alone, will you not defile your garments_." "Thy
Spirit is good; lead me into the land of uprightness."--Psalm cxliii.
10. She had faith in the power of the Comforter, or helper.

In the midst of many privations, and sometimes when the week's earnings
of her husband was small, and he would say to her on the Saturday
evening, "I have not much money for you to-night," she would cheerfully
reply: "Never mind dearest, the Lord will provide." Jehovah-jireh! was
her watchword all through her life. She would remark, "That would go
further to them with God's blessing, than three times as much without
His blessing."

Earthly comforts and pleasures might fail, but the joys that spring
from personal piety and firm faith in the Comforter's presence failed
her never. She seemed to fully realize the potency of the prophet's
words, "Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my strength, and He
will make my feet like hinds' feet."--Hab. iii. 17-19.

She evidently found in the mighty God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, an
inexhaustible source of strength and comfort and consolation through
her child-like trust in the immutable promise, "I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee."

Conformity to the character of Christ was an essential element in her
every-day life. She had cares, difficulties, and trials, but she cast
them all upon the great burden-bearer, hence prevailing prayer was ever
her chief delight. It is no misplaced and extravagant exaggeration to
say that she breathed the very atmosphere of prayer. This is the wisest
resource at all times. Like Elijah on the summit of Mount Carmel, where
all is peaceful and solitary, alone with God, she made her requests
known unto Him. It was then that the peace of God which passeth all
understanding, kept her heart and mind through Christ Jesus.--Phil. iv.
6-7.

Oh, who can fully estimate the excellency of a devotional temperament?
What evils we are delivered from! What mercies we receive! What
gladness of heart! What light is imparted! What strength God bestows!
For, has He not promised, "Ask, and ye shall receive?" She had no
doubts concerning the faithfulness of her Father to answer prayer. It
was through her importunate pleadings at the throne of grace that her
only son, when quite young, was led to see his need of Jesus. And what
joy was brought into the hearts of those parents when, at the return of
the father from the prayer-meeting, they found their child on his knees
crying for God to have mercy on his soul. Over such scenes as this the
holy angels delight to bend their bright wings and make joyous music in
heaven. (See Luke xv. 10.)

On one occasion during the fratricidal war in this country, when her
boy was fighting before Richmond, some one brought her word that he was
mortally wounded on the battle-field, for they had seen his name in the
newspapers, she calmly and trustfully replied: "Not my son; for I have
made him the subject of earnest prayer, that his young life may be
guarded by God while in his country's battles for continued liberty and
independence." She recognized the truth that piety and patriotism are
inseparably connected.

Re-birth of Doña Juana, pusiéronse on track, but a heavy storm, made
them come to England, in whose kingdom was well received. A few days later
went on towards Spain, arrived on April 26 1506 á la Coruña, where he
hoped most of the greatness to receive and pay a fitting tribute
to their new monarch. As it crosses were Valladolid jurors, and there
enjoyed the festivities which had warned in his gift. It seemed to be
very relieved at this time Doña Juana, no more than trying to please
her husband in everything, and leaving his kingdom to rule the taste.
But how little it took this happiness! So we closed the Cortes of
Valladolid, identified the main tour of Spain to be disclosed because
it is required everywhere. Began his career by Burgos, but oh alas! In
one of the evening that came to walk, Felipe is heating both in a
game of ball, which followed a pneumonia, a result of which was
subjected to six days, leaving pregnant six months of Doña Juana. Philip
the Fair died on 29 September 1506, when only twenty-eight years.
This was the powerful influence that acted on the imagination of the
new queen the unexpected death of her husband, who was many days
away from each other, and locked in the room she seemed more sad and
gloomy. enagenamiento During this, the funeral had been made, and therefore
the king's corpse buried in the Charterhouse of Miraflores. As this news
reached her, he was brought in a box and ready embetunada well, because
he did not want to live away from him. This is practiced, and did not
allow anyone to enter, carrying the days and nights contemplating the
ruins of the idol of his love. [*] No kind of entreaties to desist from
the move away from the corpse. In vain were the warnings of Cardinal
Cisneros, useless against those of the ladies and main characters,
noting the need to deal with the affairs of the kingdom.

Cerróse inside the room and sent to a window so that there could send
some food. [* See the engraving that goes in front of this story.]
Many times iban know to make the big changes was that Spain, and answered
that if his son was ready, came to govern, and if not, your father, she
had other duties to fulfill as most sacred widow.

Several of the characters felt, to hear talk to sanity sometimes, if the
loved her husband would have used some spells to make it suffer so
terribly. What the credulity of those times! No trascurrió long without
at the same Queen Doña Juana unbearable it seems that existence, and
shortly after called to Cardinal Cisneros, making it known that I
could not live any longer in the capital where her husband died,
but the Cardinal wanted to stop by then his determination, because
of being in an advanced state of pregnancy, but the will of Doña
Juana was always determined, dared not oppose the mandate.

    He moved the court to Valladolid
    in order expressly to the queen.

With short days left Burgos on December 20 1506, accompanied by an
increased number of subjects with axes on, too many lights Franciscan
friars, the prior of the Carthusian monges and some who said daily
Mass for the soul of the sovereign, whose cash was in the midst of
the funeral procession, followed by car from the unfortunate Doña
Juana and the ladies and gentlemen of his palace.

In this way, marched up to Torquemada, where the queen did not want
to move forward, staying with a clergyman, and spontaneous that the
state of his health did not allow to continue. On January 14 of 1507
gave birth to this town to the Infanta Doña Catalina. Was sad and
sobering to Spain this year. As a result of poverty and a major
shortage, developed a fever that caused innumerable damage. And
you think that despite being the village of Torquemada one of the most
invaded by the epidemic, not enough entreaties of Cardinal queen to
continue his way?

Were many and repeated instances that it will cost to get in late April
to embark on the march again with the same device that at
first, but soon became tired of traveling. When you reach two leagues
distant Hornillos Torquemada, he wanted to fix his residence in it, live
with more comfort spontaneous in a large population. So once again
locked in this small town with the inanimate body of her husband,
not ceasing to speak, and with affection, and with complaints and
counterclaims in which more than their incurable madness.

All of this remained so until gave the news of the coming of his father
to Spain.

This news was received with great pleasure, because when expressed
wishes go out to meet with D. Fernando, in Castile, advirtierdo that
had to be in short days and with the same funeral. Needlessly tire the
regent of the kingdom, archbishop of Toledo, to make day trips without
his wife's body, it was all in vain: so there was no other
recourse but to repeat every night burial. Just walked up to enter
Tortola, town where his father was happy to embrace. But what was
the surprise of D. Fernando to find his beloved daughter in that
situation; desencajados those eyes, that cadaverous face, and that
wandering eyes! When it comes to memory what had been the
cause of her daughter was in that state, the sentence is drowned, and
thick tears sailed her cheeks. Doña Juana was motionless _Llorais,
father of my heart? _ Said _vuestra daughter and can not imitate.
Surprised when my dear husband, I was exhausted tears. Consider
what would be my sadness! _ Reached Doña Juana to the last degree
of madness, was entirely crazy, but nevertheless it was the queen
of Spain and its owner name and consent were necessary to give
some character to the acts of government.

This consideration prompted the Catholic king to enter consultations
with his daughter for the better settlement of business and back
again to govern the domain of Spain.

Doña Juana, for her part, admitted without any reply soon proposed his
father, putting only one condition, that they had to leave to stay in
the village of Arcos' _en complete freedom, without having to intervene
in another business, to pass the the remaining days of this life, next
to the body of your esposo._ "a lot of work to make this change of
thought, but it is all useless was granted permission by sending a
ready home in Arcos, dignity of the person who would live.

More than a year and a half Doña Juana lived in the village of
Arcos without any improvement in all his madness. Was seen, by some
lively discussions this unhappy lady, had the corpse of her husband,
who talks more than madness, and that instead of alleviating it,
the worse. "_Por Do not respondeis me, Philip? _ He said: _callais!
... You will still me !..._» These words PROFERI unfaithful to her
husband, and others that cause shame to hear. From Santa Maria del
Campo wrote D. Ferdinand to his daughter, warning of the need I had to
leave at Tordesillas and making healthy population know was that
the town of Arcos, and therefore had determined, was put off to
this point.

Doña Juana, was perfect, as the answer in Arcos. So watching the
Catholic king that his daughter did not accede to their entreaties made
the decision to go looking for it to see if their presence is
able to accompany Tordesillas.

It did so Fernando has been with the influence exerted over her daughter
goes to make that point, but traveling with the same device as in the
other espediciones. Be the temperament have moved, so the trip was not
to their liking, the fact is that the Queen Doña Juana was becoming
more furious, and took further increase its already incurable disease.
Luis Ferrer was the elder who was in charge of Doña Juana care,
and which we could not see why there was a huge opposition to
everything that the charge did, glad to run the other way around.

If asked, for example, slept in his bed, did so on the ground, if
available to move to another room but decent and well ventilated but
closed with the force of the bolts that was. When it was cold, discard
skins and objects that provide shelter, and the more appeal
Luis Ferrer asease dresses and with more effort went dirty and badly
dressed. Shortly after, he was the head of the mania did not eat or
drink, and had occasion to pass three days without taking anything,
until beset by hunger, took something, and endeavor to send the dishes
where you do not leave food of the room, so that these objects soiled
with others, gave an unbearable smell of that house, it is therefore
impossible to endure.

Moments after that there was a great delusion, had a reason, and
regretted that they had started the crown of his temples, and not content
with a kidnapping their enemies in this genre, had buried in a dungeon
and guarded so heinous by a jailer so despicable. "These words came
with lightning speed in the ears of Catholic D. Fernando, so the
following year of 1510, when they went to the Courts of Monzon, did
visit and made sure everything was assembled a great council to discuss
the method to be observed in proceeding with his daughter because
they knew that the presence of D.

The long-Luis Ferrer, left the board, after having provided
that all necessary toiletries, clothes and food, would be elected
twelve ladies to watch it continuously, and each one will be a sleepless
night to force her to dress, strip shirt and move, even against their
will. Twenty days was accompanying the King Catholic Doña Juana,
which was fair enough, but then it is obliged to implement the agreement
by his father, seized it a rage so great that no one could stay at his
side. More farsighted Cardinal Cisneros that large that they had composed
the council, thought fit to retire to D. Luis Ferrer, because
he felt that perhaps it happen appoint another better Doña Juana, did
so by substituting it with Don Fernando Estrada Ducos. This gentleman
was such that the ability displayed in carrying out his assignment,
which recently got comiese and bebiese to sleep in his bed, which
aseara and seen, and even from room to move, because theirs was not
more than a fetid muladar.

Was reached to strengthen their physical, because with his usual finesse
and manners, this gentleman was able to attend church and was attended
various religious events. Since its accesses of madness were less
consistent, so that certain parts of his view the coffin her
husband, being driven a few days later to Granada, and
though great was his exasperation when he drove to see, could finally
D.

Fernando Estrada reassure Ducos. But do not think this was good to all,
this unhappy queen was never to regain its lost calm. However,
the Catholic king wrote to Estrada, the most loving and giving
thanks for the many services he had done to her daughter.

At that time there was already one person who was not aware of the illness
of Queen Doña Juana; but nevertheless retained some hope of relief,
daughter rather the desire of his subjects, that of possibility. in
the courts which were held in Valladolid in January 1518, decreed
that if at any time the queen was Doña Juana mandar on disposal of the
vast domains of Spain, Queen of the stop the Catholic King Fernando and
Doña Juana who was the absolute sovereign. CHAPTER IV. _De Dissension
that existed in Spain, and death of Doña Juana._ [Illustration] There
were many divisions that existed in Spain with several parties that
began to favor one Doña Juana, the other his son Carlos, the other
his father, and some others who wanted to come to rule the emperor
Maximilian I, his stepfather, so in 1520 and Spain fought the dying
for their freedom.

Supporters of Charles V in Castilla lifted the banner of independence
and gefes from both parties to provide value to its determinations
went to Doña Juana. Cardinal Cisneros, then governor and regent of the
kingdom, it was determined that appeal first to the queen to see if we
could leave the hurried circumstances under which the parties had
placed the provinces and individuals to Valladolid.

Iban to address many issues sensitive to the queen, were very unhappy
about not ever get a decent reply to placate the spirits of
the revolutionaries. But the Cardinal's big talent and governor of
all that made her real advice, succeeded, although at the expense of
a tireless work, placate the turbulence, and shortly after,
when the King died Fernando el Católico, Spain began to govern the
Emperor Charles V, not to be able to do so, his mother, Doña Juana.

And engaged in other thinking this lady who had come to acibarar but
his miserable life. The Marquis of Denia brought the news of his
deceased father, news that put it all finished, endlessly invoking
the names of her husband and their father, so strong and descompasados
cries, that he sometimes feared by all his life.

No lady or gentleman, and was afraid to stay alone at his side. His
bloodied eyes, her face bare, her hair down, all inspired horror.
This sad state spent the rest of his life unhappy queen in the
palace of Tordesillas, which was forty-six years struggling with what
we all know, not otherwise exist in his imagination to the memory of
his beloved father and the jealousy of her husband idolatrada.
After meeting the beds that have just referred, the remainder of his
life, despite the long and terrible suffering, was long, did not
offer new, noteworthy.

The queen of Spain, Doña Juana, his days lengthened to seventy-three
years, without his incurably ill could find a remedy, but in recent
months worsened estraordinariamente. He never had another kind of
ailment, so that Philip the Fair having lived long, had to come to spy
on her with this evil queen, earn better miramientos.

In early 1555 began to get sick enough consideration; far the point of
not wanting to take any medicine. When forced to the ground or throw
to the face of who was to take. Three months passed this woman in agony,
and not having a person who would like to stay with him. Everyone was
tired, bored, for osteoporosis. Removed pitiful cries and voices that
were heard in the palace, and everything was done to reassure was zero,
instead of alleviating it, Scythian his anger more and more. The
Marquis of Denia, who was one of those who were continuing their also
wrote to the king, his son, warning him of this, to which Charles
V replied: "_Sufrid resignation with the impertinence of my poor
mother, who he recompensará._ Heaven" The same to them, the other
real people.

God wanted to finally pick it under his protection, but says very
little good that die before their understanding perfectly recovered,
and which aroused azorica for the magical effects of a terrible
nightmare, and is immobile and then immersed in a great depression, so
this was a sovereign ... quiet. With dedicated his thoughts to pray
fervently, and at the disposal of his soul, which helped him with his
inimitable zeal San Francisco de Borja, Duke of Gandia, who he happened
to be present at such a terrible act. The day April 11 1555 and in the
same night, which was Holy Thursday, ending his long and painful
existence, where his last words: '_Jesucristo, acogedme in your seno._
"So ended the Spanish sovereign, possessed of a passion but
lawful, exaggerated. Happen again, that if the Archduke had existed,
would have spied their terrible crime just to see the incomparable
damage it had caused a queen who had no other crime that blind worship
with idolatry. ¡Terrible example, after learning to seek to curb the
excessive passions, which do not bring other evils that result without
story, as you will know that the portrait is drawn from the queen
of Spain, Doña Juana la Loca. [Illustration: FIN ]
This is about as dangerous a doctrine as the new school
theology of reformatory punishment, namely, that God is so good and so
full of universal benevolence, that He cannot consistently, with His
attribute of mercy, consign His creatures to everlasting punishment. It
is true that God is full of love and tender mercy; but He never appeared
as a merciful God excepting through a mediator. He can only be just, and
the justifier of those alone who believe in Jesus. "Neither is there
salvation in any other, for there is no other name given under Heaven or
among men whereby we can be saved, but by the name of Jesus." To those,
we believe, He is precious at the hour of death. It is then the believer
is ushered into the presence of the King eternal, immortal, and
invisible. In view of the greatness and glory of the transition from
earth to Heaven, the Apostle exclaimed, "I have a desire to depart and
to be with Christ, which is far better." For it is _then_ that we really
begin to live; now we see through a glass darkly; now we know only in
part, but then, oh, what a change, "Beyond the smiling and the weeping."

"Let not your heart be troubled," said Jesus; "in my Father's house are
many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you, I go to prepare
a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for you I will come
again and receive you unto myself, that where I am there ye may be
also." It is for these mansions we were begotten. "Heirs to an
inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled, and fadeth not away."

Sister Knowles had the blest assurance of this Heavenly home, she knew
this assurance was attainable, and on earth she enjoyed it, and now she
is reaping the rich reward, and its innumerable and unutterable
advantages. In her dying hour she could triumphantly exclaim, with
Simeon in the temple, "Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation." And, like Moses, her eye was
not dimmed, nor her natural force abated. Oh! the gain, the bliss of
thus dying.

Heaven as our home is worthy our deepest contemplation. "It doth not
yet appear what we shall be." It is a place of perfect rest. Oh, how
comforting is this thought to the poor, way-worn, toiling pilgrim.

    Oh, land of rest for thee I sigh!

The important discovery of this land of rest will nerve our arm for the
great conflict of life. It will inspire us to work more earnestly and
more incessantly for Jesus. It will sweeten every bitter cup of trial
and tribulation that we have to encounter here below. It will distil a
desire and a loftiness of aim in life, that we may at last reach the
rest that remains for the people of God. The struggle with inbred sin
will be more easily overcome, and every lust and evil passion will be
completely conquered by keeping the eye steadily fixed on those
glittering mansions,

    Where the wicked cease from troubling,
    And the weary are at rest.

Christ Himself will administer this rest to the believer in the
Heavenly Kingdom. Just as He is the source of peace and quiet here on
earth, so is He at this moment surrounded with the saints triumphant in
glory, imparting perpetual peace in the paradise of God to all the
bright spirits who loved Him on earth, and kept His commandments.
Yonder they enjoy eternal Sabbathism.

Let us fear, therefore, lest haply a promise being left of entering
into rest, any of you should seem to come short of it through unbelief.
For indeed we have good tidings preached unto us, and we which believe
do enter into that rest.

Alford, in speaking of the rest on earth that resembles the rest of
Heaven, says: "Our Lord does not promise (here below) freedom from toil
or burdens, but rest to the soul." The rest and joy of the Christian
soul is to become like Christ. To the young men, who surrounded her
dying couch, she said: "_Avoid bad company, learn of Christ_; seek to be
like Him, little by little." It is no wonder King David said, "As for me
I will behold Thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I
awake with Thy likeness."

But we are to behold the royal dignity of the Redeemer, and be brought
forth into a large place because He delighted in us. Yes! to die is
gain. Oh! wondrous change: To behold His illimitable power and partake
of His consummate wisdom and knowledge. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that will I seek after; "that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to
inquire in His temple, for in the time of trouble He shall hide me in
His pavilion. The Christian is secure at death; he has a building of
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens."

Here we have a continual conflict; but yonder we are made more than
conquerors through Him who loved us. Here we are sinful and
short-sighted; but yonder we shall partake of His perfect holiness and
inexhaustible love and Divine penetration in the Heavenly Kingdom. Yes
to die is infinite gain.

The spiritual enjoyment of the soul in the land of light is
indescribable. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that
love Him." Yonder you shall behold the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.

You know this was a portion of the parting prayer of Jesus for His
disciples. He said: "Father, I will that they also, whom Thou hast
given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory." There
is but a step between us and it. There is but a thin veil that parts us
from the beatic vision of the blest.

I once entered the beautiful harbor of Cronstadt, in Russia, and I
distinctly remember that the entrance was so narrow and land-locked,
that we could scarcely discern its precise location until we had
suddenly entered it. The passage from earth to Heaven is not unlike the
ending of the voyage of a ship, even although many of them reach the
harbor in a dismantled condition. Many a storm has been encountered,
and while sails have been torn to shreds, yet the gallant bark has
outweathered the gale and has escaped rocks, and quicksands, and
whirlpools of destruction. But now the gale is hushed forever, the
sails are all furled, the anchor is cast out, and she rides securely in
the harbor where storms cannot affright. Glorious port of peace! Oh,
blessed and triumphant entry! To go no more out forever; where the Lamb
which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them and lead them unto
living fountains of water, and God Himself shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes.

    Beautiful valley of Eden,
      Sweet is thy noon-tide calm,
    Over the hearts of the weary,
      Breathing thy waves of balm.
    Home of the pure and blest;
      How often amid the wild billows,
    I dream of thy rest, sweet rest.

It was the glimpse of this rest beyond the river that lit up the pale
cheek of our dear, dying sister, with seraphic brightness and beauty.

"All my fountains are in thee," said the Psalmist. God is the author of
holiness. In John's vision of Heaven, he describes the four living
creatures, having each of them six wings, round about and within, and
they have no rest day and night, saying, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come."

The great object therefore of the Gospel of the blessed God is to
transform us into the Divine image. Another of our sister's dying
utterances was very forcible, "_Now I have got to the edge of the
river._"

    "Only just across the river,
    Over on the other side."

We all with open face beholding as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image.

It is thus God's people become meet for the holy inheritance. Here we
have to cry out, "Oh, wretched man, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death;" yonder the Spirit's work has gloriously triumphed. The
believer's holiness is effectually accomplished in Heaven. Blessed are
they that wash their robes, that they may have the right to come to the
tree of life and may enter in by the pearly gates into the city.

Heaven is called the land of light. What is light? "Hail, holy light,
offspring of Heaven's first-born." Light is pure. "God is light, and in
Him is no darkness at all. Darkness, in God's Word, is an emblem of
sin. They love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are
evil, and every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved."--John iii. 19-20.

The more we increase in the likeness of God, the greater and stronger
will our light shine in this dark world, and the more will we enjoy
basking in the sunshine of the light of His countenance. We are
partakers _now_ of the Divine nature, but in Heaven we shall continually
walk before Him who is the enlightener and the light. Oh, the gain, the
bliss of dying! For we shall see His face and His name shall be in our
foreheads.

Paul's prayer for the church at Colosse was "that they might be filled
with the knowledge of His will, increasing in the knowledge of God,
giving thanks unto the Father, who made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light."--Col. i. 12.

Oh, that a view of the pure, and the great, and the good ones around
the throne may be as a golden chain to bind our hearts to that home
beyond the skies, where there is no night, and they need no candle,
neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light, and they
shall reign forever and ever.--Rev. xxii. 5.

Dearly beloved, this is the "Night of Weeping;" but oh, remember, that
it is written in His Holy Word that God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain.

As we stand by the bedside of our loved ones, and watch them wasting
away with disease, and as we behold their love, their patience, and
Christian fortitude, we think of earth's bitter trials and earthly
relationship, and of the strong tie that binds heart to heart. How
touching the parting words to her only son she so tenderly loved,
"_Be faithful, humble, meek, and constantly keep at the Master's
feet, until He calls you up higher. Be kind and gentle to your sister
Esther._" To her Pastor she said: "Preach the Gospel uncolored!" We
look upon the sinking form of a dear wife and mother, or brother, or
sister, or husband, or friend, and as we sadly muse upon the fact that
we held sweet counsel together and walked to the House of God in
company; and we softly whisper to the physician is there no hope of
recovery? Can you not save that young and precious life, so dear to us,
so gentle, so loving, so kind, so sympathetic, so hopeful? And as in
response to our inquiry, we receive the look of pity, and the sorrowful
shake of the head, it is then, in our deepest agony, amid blinding
tears, and hearts almost crushed to despair, we turn to our great
Father above, and we ask, why must we part? Oh, God, can you not spare
him? How can I live without him?

Providential bereavements are sad scenes in life, for the scythe of
death stops not to ask if they be sweet and precious to some fond wife,
or mother, or brother, who knows? whom their heart chose. On! on! he
pursues his desolating work, amid their sighs, their cries, and tears.

But beloved, there is no tearing of heart from heart in Heaven. There
is no death there; there is no sorrow there; there is no sin there. I
often think of the words of the Apostle as peculiarly appropriate to us
in the hour of sad bereavement: "These light afflictions are but for a
moment, but they work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory."

I have had persons tell me when God has suddenly removed loved ones
from their midst, that God had forsaken them, that He had forgotten to
be gracious. But ah, to such let me say that the Lord loveth whom He
chasteneth. God is love. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear Him.

But what is the object God has in view in thus breaking the family
circle by death? It is that our attention may be attracted to the
saints above, and that we may by faith behold the beauties of the
Celestial city.

You know, David says, "It was good for me that I was afflicted; before
I was afflicted, I went astray." We not unfrequently forget that this
is not our home. But that we are strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
God has to put us in remembrance of it. Beautiful as this world is,
there is a fairer and brighter, and infinitely more lovely world above
our heads. Lovely as human friendships and fellowships are here below,
what are they in comparison to the felicitous condition of society in
heaven?

    "I would not live alway, I ask not to stay,
    Where storm after storm rises dark o'er the way."

There are no estranged feelings in heaven. There are no
misunderstandings there. No sickness there. All, all is peace and joy
and love!

Our faith in God, and in the existence of Heaven, and the possibilities
of the future life, can enable us to triumph over the trials and
bereavements in this vale of tears.

Dr. Guthrie asks: "Why should we not lie as calmly in the arms of God's
Providence, as we lay in infancy on a mother's breast? Having an
ever-living, an everlasting, an ever-loving Father in God, how may we
welcome _all_ providences, sweetly submissive to the will of God. Shall
it not fare with us as with the pliant reeds that love the hollows and
fringe the margin of the lake, and bending to the blast, _not resisting
it_, raise their heads anew, unharmed by the storm that has snapped
the mountain's pine and rent the hearts of oaks asunder." "All things
work together for good to them that love God; them who are the called
according to His purpose."

When John was in the spirit on the Lord's Day, he heard a great voice
saying, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it."

How can we best overcome the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye,
and the pride of life but by deep and continued meditation on the
blessed change that takes place at the hour of death. The shadows of
earth are instantly dispelled when we set our affections on things
above.

"Who are these arrayed in white robes, and whence came they? These are
they who have come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." I remember once
standing at the grave of Richard Cameron, in Ayrs Moss, and as I read
the names of other martyrs engraved on the tomb-stone, I thought of the
general assembly of the Church of the first-born in Heaven, and as I
read God's Word there and sang a sweet Psalm of praise to Jehovah, and
offered a prayer to the Father of lights, the God of Israel, I thought
of the prayer of Peden, the prophet, as he sat on Cameron's grave.
Lifting up his eyes steadfastly to Heaven, he prayed: "Oh, to be wi'
Ritchie!"

    "Often at the shades of evening,
      When I sit me down to rest,
    One by one, I count them over,
      They who are in glory blest."

Dearly beloved, I have a _Ritchie_[7] in Heaven, for I have recently
learned of the death of the spiritual guide of my youth, who, in years
gone by, at the close of a cottage prayer-meeting, requested me, for the
first time in my life, to speak a word for Jesus. Pulling a flower from
the hill-side, he said as he held it up, "I can see God in that gowan."
Taking me to his room, he said, "This is my study; these are my books, I
am going to be a minister of the Gospel, and then go to China."

      [7] The late Rev. Hugh Ritchie, of Formosa, China.

Handing me a neat, little, precious volume, he said, "Take this book
and study it, and commence speaking for Jesus, and help me in my
meetings." Surely to such to die is gain.

Who; who, would live alway away from his God--away from yonder Heaven,
that blissful abode where the noontide of glory eternally reigns, and
the smile of the Lord is the feast of the soul?

Dearly beloved, we may well ask, "Who are these arrayed in white
robes?" Oh, what celebrated personages are above! The prophets, the
apostles, the reformers, and the martyrs of Scotland are there. For in
a dream of the night I was wafted away to the moorland and moss, where
the martyrs lay. When the minister's home was the mountain and flood.
When they dared not worship God in daylight. Only at the dead of night,
when the wintry winds raved fierce, and the thunder-peal compelled the
men of blood to crouch within their den. Then the faithful few--true
followers of the blessed Jesus--would venture forth to some deep dell
by the rock o'er canopied; then, amid the glare of sheeted lightning,
those men of God would open the sacred Book and words of comfort speak.
Ah, it cost something to be a Christian in those days, when from the
high foaming crest of Solway to the smoothly polished breast of Loch
Katrine, not a river nor a lake but has swelled with the life's tide of
religious freedom. From the bonnie highland heather of her lofty
summits to the modest gowan on the lea, not a flower but has blushed
with the martyr's blood. But, beloved, the blood of the martyrs was the
seed of the Church. What holy, loving lessons does God teach us by the
history of the true Church, and a thoroughly consecrated
people--lessons of love, hope, fortitude, and long-suffering!

    "Oh, Jesus, our Master, command to beat faster
    These weary life-pulses that bring us to Thee."

Our dear departed sister had the true missionary spirit. She feared not
the things she was called on to suffer for Christ in her great work in
this city. Let us who are left behind catch her magnanimous and heroic
disposition in working for the blessed Jesus. Oh, that the spirit of our
noble ancestry might come upon us! Oh, that the Holy Spirit of God may
enter into all our hearts to-day, that we may be more humble, more
loving, more zealous, more sympathetic, and more sincere in our toil for
Christ and His Church; _then to die will be gain!_ and to Him shall be
all the glory, world without end. Amen.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

TESTIMONIALS AND LETTERS OF CONDOLENCE.

    I've found a Friend; oh, such a Friend!
    So kind, and true, and tender,
    So wise a Counsellor and guide,
    So mighty a Defender!
    From him, who loves me now so well,
    What power my love can sever?
    Shall life, or death, or earth, or hell?
    No, I am his forever.


The following resolutions and letters furnish, in a pre-eminent degree,
conclusive evidence of the high estimation in which His servant and
handmaiden were held by ministers, elders, and Sabbath-school workers
generally:

    NEW YORK, January 12, 1869.

    MRS. JAMES KNOWLES:

    MY DEAR FRIEND--At the Annual Meeting of the Teachers' Association
    of the Sabbath-school of the Ebenezer Presbyterian Church, held last
    evening, the following action was taken:

        "On motion, the cordial thanks of this Association are voted to
        Mrs. James Knowles for her faithful labors in behalf of our
        School during the past year."

    The following extract from the Annual Report was also ordered to be
    forwarded with the foregoing:

        "Mention must be made of one of our own church members, Mrs.
        Knowles, who has labored most devotedly for our School. In
        behalf of the School, the Superintendent would take this way of
        expressing our gratitude for her cheerful, earnest, and
        persevering labor. She has taken a deep interest in our School,
        and has shown it by hard work in its behalf."

    I am very glad that the pleasant duty of making you acquainted with
    this action has been imposed upon me. Without your help I would
    oftentimes during the past year have been very much discouraged.
    Your readiness for Christian work, and your thoroughness in it,
    have both cheered and satisfied me. May you fully realize the
    promise given to those who are always abounding in the work of the
    Lord. (1 Cor. xv. 58.) And may the present year show us a
    continuance of your willing labors and be marked by a stronger
    faith in expectation and more new-born souls, as your joy and crown
    in realization. (Psalm cxxvi. 5-6.)

    Respectfully yours in the Master,

    SAMUEL B. W. MCKEE,
    _Superintendent_.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

When we take into consideration the time that elapsed between the
penning of the foregoing resolutions as no vain and unmeaning
compliment, and the departure of her concerning whom they were voted
upon, we are led to see the importance of those words in the Apocalypse:
"He that is faithful unto death shall receive a crown of eternal life."
How significant are the words employed to denote their hearty
appreciation of her worth. "We express our gratitude for her _cheerful_,
_earnest_, and _persevering labor_. She has taken a _deep interest_ in
our School and has shown it by _hard work_," etc.

We trust that our Sunday-school workers may be greatly encouraged to go
and do likewise through a careful and prayerful examination of the
above communication.

The following additional affectionate and deeply instructive tribute to
her worth to the church and Sabbath-school is from one who was her
beloved pastor for seven years--years of pure and uninterrupted
Christian fellowship and disinterested devotedness to the cause of
Christ.

    UTICA, N.Y., November 8, 1886.

    REV. DUNCAN M. YOUNG:

    DEAR BROTHER--In the removal of Mr. and Mrs. James Knowles _we_
    sustain a personal loss. The fact was unknown to us previous to your
    letter. To enjoy such friendship as they admitted us into from our
    first acquaintance, was not unlike a continuous salutation with the
    impressiveness of an unqualified _good-will_. Heaven is indeed
    richer for their entrance, and by so much is increasingly endeared
    unto us.

    They were not time-servers, but, in no mere sentimental sense,
    God-servers. The feverish world, greedy and rushing, will know
    little of their value, nor miss their humble crafts so quickly
    trackless, and yet they really laid the world under obligation. If
    its life, and aim, and effort were not purer and higher, it was in
    spite of their actual godliness, at all times apparent.

    My first introduction to Mrs. Knowles was on the first Sabbath in
    February, 1874; also, my first acquaintance with the Allen Street
    Church. Mrs. Knowles was then teaching in the Ludlow Street Mission.
    As a teacher, she was _simple_, _fearless_, and _Scriptural_. Her
    ruling passion, perhaps, was a desire to be useful in some way,
    adjusting herself with good grace to the requirements of advancing
    years. If just a little disturbed at the thought that she must
    contract her labors, or "hold up" at some point, the spirit was ever
    the same, perhaps too exacting of a body not excessively vigorous.

    As a "Bible reader" she did some of her best work, and made her
    greatest sacrifices. Faithfulness characterized her covenant
    relation--seldom absent from the scenes of public worship; and the
    more remarkable in view of her untiring zeal and devotion in her
    specially God-given calling. Many will rise up and call her
    blessed, because, so true of her, "she went about doing good." My
    own indebtedness to her, as a pastor, was great. Her sympathy with
    the ministry seemed innate. Full of faith, and rich in peculiar
    experience, she was the one "to step in" at the minister's for a
    half-hour; and here, incidentally, I may say, that her practical
    views of life and knowledge of human ways turned to my advantage on
    repeated occasions, whenever she reported a case as worthy or
    unworthy. When an application for aid or comfort required
    investigation--that is, ultimate cases requiring delicate, careful
    treatment, often impossible for the pastor to do--her feminine
    instinct and sagacity of experience took it in hand with a
    readiness that was surprising, in view of her always full hands. A
    gentle, trustful soul, a frank, unwavering friend, a pious, useful
    woman, and a faithful wife and mother, her rest will be sweet.

    If the beginning of my acquaintance with her companion dates
    somewhat later, it ripened early, I suppose mutually so, into a
    strong attachment. Integrity of character was my first impression of
    the man; whether an instinct or a judgment, there never was a doubt
    as to its correctness. Strong in faith, also--_the old-time faith_,
    of apostolic color, for he took no pleasure in "new departures."
    Sound in doctrine, fervent in spirit, wise in council, stable in
    action, he was truly a strong "pillar in the house of the Lord." If
    he wrought obscurely, as the world moves, my impression is that he
    did some excellent work for eternity in the most quiet sort of way.
    I do not think Heaven could be a surprise to one of his habits and
    trend of life. He could assimilate the good easily. Though positive
    in his feelings, and sensitive of attachment, he was no mere
    man-worshipper, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, so long as it
    was the _Word of Christ_, faithfully, earnestly preached; he was a
    responsive hearer. The chief desire was that the _word_ should be
    successful. Perhaps simplicity was as characteristic as any other
    distinct trait. If he did not choose the uppermost seats he occupied
    them becomingly when once bidden to take them.

    I remember him not so much by means of incidents--his life was not
    formed on that plan; but by the deep impression of genuine,
    unpretentious godliness.

    If I have written at too great length, my heart is full. In deep
    sympathy with those who will so surely mourn their loss, and
    grateful for the privilege of a tribute, I am,

    Sincerely yours,

    GEORGE O. PHELPS,
    _An Ex-Pastor_.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The more I read and study the phraseology of this letter, welling up
out of a full heart, the more I am convinced of its adaptedness to
impart encouragement to others the same in kind and degree as was
doubtless reciprocally experienced in days of yore, "for as iron
sharpeneth iron, so does the countenance of man his friend."

Here is another tender and terse tribute from the same source to their
only son--the request for particulars regarding their last illness,
which produced the leaflet entitled "A Short Account of the Last
Hours"--that has been already a rich spiritual blessing to many souls.

    UTICA, N.Y., November, 1886.

    MR. WM. KNOWLES:

    DEAR BROTHER--We have just learned of the departure of your dear
    parents. Our attachment to them was exceptionally strong, even as
    our association in the Master's work was intimate.

    I have been looking over your father's letters, too few in numbers;
    how full of human kindness, how intensely godly.

    Be assured of our sincere regard for you and others in this great
    bereavement.

    May we not receive, at your convenience, particulars of their last
    illness and going? We have no knowledge of either case.

    Very sincerely yours,

    GEORGE O. PHELPS.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *


The subjoined is the answer to the reception of the account of their
last hours on earth.

    UTICA N.Y., November 30, 1886.

    MR. WM. KNOWLES:

    MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER--You have laid us under great obligation by
    your lengthy and painstaking statement respecting your lamented
    parents. Seldom have we been affected so deeply as in the reading of
    it, which came so appropriately as to time and feeling, just as we
    were closing one of the sweetest meetings of our little "_Gospel
    Band_." Yes, truly, those dear, true friends of ours were as "little
    children" in "the Kingdom of Heaven."

    Nothing would afford me greater satisfaction than to be able to add
    further by word or incident what you desire to gather up by way of
    a grateful memorial. As I stated in my letter to Mr. Young, my
    impressions were made by their uniform consistency of character,
    and not by any particular event or circumstance. Perhaps the
    enclosed letters will afford characteristic illustration of your
    father's habitual godliness or tenor of life. As to your mother,
    why, she was always "going about doing good," seemingly never
    tiring.

    What death-bed scenes! If those faithful words of hers are ever
    forgotten, somebody will have a hard witness against them at last.
    Their memory is indeed blessed. We will all try to profit by their
    examples of godly fidelity, and faithful admonitions. With the
    sincerest sympathy, I am,

    Gratefully yours,

    GEORGE O. PHELPS.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    UTICA, N.Y., February 17, 1887.

    MR. WM. KNOWLES:

    DEAR BROTHER--You have laid us under new obligations. On my study
    table is a picture of the pastor of my childhood--It has been there
    nearly my entire ministry. You can conceive the influence it is
    designed to exert over me. Now there will be, if not in my study
    exclusively, in our house itself, the constant stimulus of such
    reminders of devotion as these two most welcome pictures.

    We are indeed very grateful to you for them; your filial love was
    strong while they lived, and must be quickened by their death, but
    if anybody _outside_ of the circle of kindred exceeds our veneration
    for your parents, _they_ deserve it all. We certainly cannot fail
    to cherish what has been so well done by the artist, the expression
    in both pictures is so characteristic. It seems, when we dwell
    intently upon them and let thoughts come and go at liberty, that the
    lips must open and pleasant words come from them as in life; but
    they do speak, nevertheless, and as distinctly, and as
    affectionately. Oh! that we were more worthy to hear. And that
    blessing upon yourself, how valuable and hopeful, or encouraging it
    must be.

    I know you will share it with others, and so make a saintly life
    still reproductive. The world needs nothing so much as _positive
    Christian character_.

    Permit me to say that we are greatly prospered in our work, and
    have hand and heart seemingly full; but, old Allen Street has _a
    warm place_ in our affection always. Our united regards.

    Affectionately yours,

    GEORGE O. PHELPS.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The reader will surely notice the true, touching, and graphic account
of their work in the next letter.

    UTICA, N.Y., April 8, 1887.

    REV. MR. YOUNG:

    DEAR SIR AND BROTHER--While my mind is full of impressions
    concerning the life and work of Mr. and Mrs. Knowles, it is not easy
    to withdraw the details, and give you any real satisfaction. The
    very simplicity and humility of their ways and deeds render it
    impossible to make any adequate illustration--not that incidents are
    lacking. Why, there are families in the vicinity of Allen Street who
    could relate incidents by the hour touching the gentle care of Mrs.
    13 And if aconteciešše succeed, Verily I say unto you, that most
of that is that of the ninety and nine that are not lost, Ansi 14
is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, to lose one of
these small.

    Portanto 15 If your brother peccáre, in turn, and go redarguyelo
    between you and only you: if you hear, you have won your brother.
    16 But if you do not hear, take with you one or even two paraque
    in the mouth of two or consists of three witnesses the whole thing.
    17 And but to hear them say [what] the congregation: And if you
    do not hear the congregation, tenlo by an ethnic and
    a publican. 18 Truly I tell you what all the ligardes land will
    be bound in heaven: and all dešatardes what on earth will be unleashed
    in the sky. 19 Item tell you that if two of you agrees to the land,
    any thing you ask, šerleshá by my Father, and is in heaven. 20 For
    where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am on
    half deellos. 21 Then Peter arrive there, dixo Lord Quantas vezes
    forgive my brother against my peccáre? Up to seven times? Dize
    22 Iesus him, I say not until seven, but even unto seventy times
seven. 23 loqual the Kingdom of heaven is like a human king, who
wanted Hazer accounts with his servants. 24 accounts and began to
Hazer , introduced a fuel Devia you ten thousand talents. 25 more
to this, you could not pay, he sold his Lord, him and his sons and
muger, with what was, and pay. 26 So that servant proštrado adoravalo,
diziendo Lord, stop the anger in me, and all you pay. 27 The Lord
moved to mercy of that servant šoltólo and perdonóle debt, 28 and
leaving one servant, one of his colleagues found that one hundred
Devia money through well deel ahogavalo, diziendo, pay what DEVES.
29 Then his partner, proštrandoše at his feet, rogavale diziendo,
Stop the anger for me, and all you pay. 30 But he refused, but was,
and echólo in jail until pagašše debt. 31 And seeing what their
peers paššava entrištecieronše much, and coming to his Lord said
everything avia pass. 32 Then llamãdolo his master, dizel, Mal
servant, all that debt forgiveness te `me Pory rogašte: 33 ^ Do not
Convenia Also, you have mercy on your partner, as well as I had
mercy on you?

    34 So his Lord angry, entrególo the torturers until pagašše
    everything you Devia. 35 ANSI also will be with you my Heavenly
    Father, If not perdonardes your coraçones each of your brothers their
    offense. capita. XIX. And it happened just Iesus these words
    paššòše of Galilee, and came in terms of Iudea, Passando the Iordan.
    2 And šiguieronle many companies and šanólos there. Llegaronše à
    3 Then the Pharišeos the tempted, and diziendole, is permitted
    Embi man to his muger by qualquer cause. 4 and responding,
    dixoles, No aveys Leyde than [the] did the prince, made them male
    and female? 5 dixo And, man Portanto dexarà father and mother, and
    llegaršeha at your muger: and will be two in one flesh: 6 Ansi
    that are no longer two but one flesh.

    Portanto jûtó what God, not separate Hobro. 7 Dizenle: Why it Moyses
    letter sent to divorce, and Embi?

    8 Dixoles, For the hardness of your coraçon Moyses you allowed
    your Embi mugeres: but the principle was not ansi. 9 Y [I] tell
you qualquer ^ ÿ ÿ embiàre its muger, but outside of fornicaciõ and
co marry another, adultery: and was married and the co Embi,
adulterated. dizel 10 disciples: If business is ansi men with their
muger, one should not marry. 11 Then the dixo them, not all are
capable of this business: but [those] to whom it is given. 12 For
ay castrated ansi born from the womb of his mother, and a and Castro,
are made by men castrated and ay to be castrated themselves because
of the Kingdom of heaven.

    
    Knowles was forwarded to me from Harrisburg, to this city.

    I had seen a notice of Mr. Knowles' death in a New York paper, but
    had not known of the departure of his wife, whose death, under such
    circumstances, had a pathos peculiar to itself. Her presence at his
    funeral, it would seem, was more than her affectionate testimony to
    their past devotion to each other. It was her unconscious prophecy
    of their speedy reunion in the presence of Him whom they both loved
    and served.

    You ask me for some information in regard to them, during the time
    of my ministry in this city. They both illustrated the truth of the
    remark, that "to be useful, it is not necessary to be conspicuous."
    Mr. Knowles was "an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile." Gentle
    and peaceable in spirit, loving the house of God, rejoicing in the
    spiritual prosperity of the church, _speaking evil of no man_, a
    firm friend of his minister, relishing all conversation upon divine
    things, frequenting the place of prayer where he was often heard
    leading the devotions of the people in simple, earnest, Scriptural
    petition, and ever willing to help in Sabbath-school work, or any
    other form of Christian activity in which he might be of service--he
    was just such a man as any pastor is glad to have as a friend and
    helper. He was a ruling elder in the church from the time I first
    knew him, and in that capacity was one of the first to welcome me to
    New York. He was unobtrusive in all meetings of session, but never
    failed to give his suggestions on all matters that came before him,
    but was happiest when it was his privilege as an elder to welcome to
    the communion of the church those who confessed Christ.

    Mrs. XVII. Šeys And after days Iesus takes Peter, and Iacob, Ioan
    and his brother, Get him out and partly to a high mountain, 2
    AND trãsfiguróše front deellos: and his face resplendent as the
    sun: and his clothes were as white light. heaqui AND 3 Moyses and
    Elias appeared to them talking to. 4 And Peter answering, dixo
    à Iesus, Lord, It is us to stay here if you want, we are three
    huts, one for you, and Moyses another, and another for Elias. 5
    while still speaking, heaqui a nuve light [that] covered: Boz and
    heaqui one of which nuve dixo, This is My beloved Son, IN VOLUME
    QVAL Content: FOR OYD. 6 And hearing [this] the disciples fell on
their faces, and greatly feared. 7 Then Iesus coming, tocols, and
dixo, Levanta os, and not temays.

    Alcanda 8 And [they] their eyes, no one saw, but just Iesus. 9
    And decendieron Mount, mandola Iesus, diziendo, No digays anyone's
    vision, haštaque the Son of man rešušcite of the dead. 10 Then
    his disciples asked him diziendo, That as the Scribes dizen
    the need Elias to come first? 11 and responding Iesus, dixoles,
    A Elias Vedrà the truth first, and all things reštituyrà. 12
    But ye say, that Elias and wine, and knew him not: before hizieron
in everything we wanted.

    ANSI also the Son of man suffer deellos.

    Lod 13 Disciples understood then that the dezia Ioan Baptista. 14
And they came to the company, came to the knees of a man hincandošele,
15 AND diziendo, Lord, have mercy on my son and is Lunatico and
suffers malamëte: Pory many times falls into the fire, and many in
the water, and 16 submitted to helo your disciples, and they have
not been able to heal. 17 Iesus and responding, dixo: O unfaithful
and perverse generation, even when you have to be co?

                   So when you have to šuššrir?

Traedmelo here. 18 And Iesus reprehendiólo, and left the devil deel:
mucus and from that hour was healthy.

    Then comes the 19 disciples of Iesus à part dixeron, because we
could not cast out?

    20 And Iesus them dixo For your infidelity: Pory decierto tell you
that if tuvierdes faith as a mustard seed direys to this mountain,
Passat ACULLICO here: and paššaršehá, and nothing will be impossible.

    Linage 21 But this [demon] does not come out but by prayer and Fasting:
    22 And they are in Galilee, dixoles Iesus, The Son of Man will be
delivered into the hands of men. matarlohan and 23: but the third
day rešušcitará ^.

    And [they] is saddened greatly. 24 and how they came to Capernaum,
    where Peter came to charge the two dragma and dixeron, your leader
    does not pay the two dragma? 25 And [the] Dize, yes, and entered
    the at home, Iesus diziendo before you speak, How about Simon?

    The kings of the earth who paid taxes, or the census? For his sons,
    or the strange?

    
    With thanks for your kindly note, conveying the sacred request, I
    remain, dear sir,

    Sincerely yours,

    NATH'L W. CONKLING.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

To show how greatly beloved they were by all denominations we insert
this closing tribute from a dear servant of Christ, whose calm, clear
eye of penetration recognized that, by prayerfully studying the
character of Christ we became assimilated to His glorious image. He is
a member of the Society of Friends.

    CLINTONDALE, N.Y., June 23, 1887.

    DUNCAN M. YOUNG:

    DEAR BROTHER--Yours received, bearing us news indeed. We had not
    heard before of the demise of our dear Brother and Sister Knowles.

    The effect of it at first, to me, was that I could scarcely speak
    for a fulness of feeling which it produced, and a home-sickness for
    the home where they have gone.

    My memory was immediately taken back to the visit I paid them a year
    ago last spring, which was _very pleasant_ and soul-refreshing, and
    especially to the parting _kiss_ that the dear Mother in Israel gave
    me on my parting from them; and also she gave me a supply of
    beautiful tracts, which I had the privilege of using to the comfort
    of two souls on the cars as I was returning home, and some of the
    tracts I have yet, and you can depend on it I place higher value on
    them than ever before.

    The little leaflet you sent us is very appropriate indeed, but none
    can do them justice in writing of them, for we do not know of all
    their heart-yearnings and achings over poor wanderers, and their
    personal private labors for their salvation, neither can we ever
    know until we see the record of it all up there.

    And may you, dear Brother, as the honored minister of God, carry
    out literally her exhortation to you, "Preach the Gospel
    Uncolored."

    Accept my sincere thanks for your kindness in writing us, and
    sending the leaflets. You asked if I could use any of them? I can,
    certainly, and there are a few around here yet living who remember
    our departed sister and brother when they boarded at our house.

    I unite in interest and prayer with you for your important Work in
    the abundant ripe fields of Harvest, and pray that you will receive
    many souls for your hire.

    I am, yours sincerely, and in the love of the pure Gospel of the
    Kingdom of our Christ,

    ERASTUS S. ANDREWS.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

    "They lived, and they were useful; this we know.
    Oh, take who will the boon of fading fame!
            But give to me
    A place among the workers, though my name
            Forgotten be,
    And if within the book of life is found
            My lowly place,
    Honor and glory unto God redound
            For all His grace!"


CHAPTER XXXVII.

CONCLUSION.

    Oh, could I flow like thee, and make thy stream
    My great example, as it is my theme!
    Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
    Strong without rage; without o'erflowing full.


In concluding these memoirs and looking back over the lives of our
departed brother and sister, there is a great lesson to be learned--that
of _example_. Such example as theirs possesses incalculable power of
effecting good. It takes deep and tenacious root; it fructifies with
amazing rapidity and profusion, and flourishes where precept would
utterly perish. Its impression is so indelible, that the greatest
difficulty is experienced when attempting to eradicate it. The salutary
influence which good example propagates, we find stamped on every
avocation in life. In some people a heinous negligence, and in others a
culpable apathy is evinced with respect to the principles their conduct
is implanting. Profuse illustrations abound in every profession,
calling, and trade, of the effect of evil example, and also of the
disregard paid to its consequences. Whether or not this regardlessness
arises from negligence, or ignorance, it is difficult to determine. All
classes of society possess, undoubtedly, though in varying degrees, the
important power of exemplifying good or evil, and it behooves them to
act with greater circumspection and discretion with respect to the
injurious consequences which their examples may evoke, having due regard
to the avidity which is shown by weak minds to follow example, however
pernicious. It is natural for man to imitate a model or pattern, as it
thereby affords him a much easier and more agreeable opportunity of
forming his ideas on any particular subject. Nor is example confined to
those holding high public positions. Its presence and power are
experienced as much from the humblest Bible woman as from the greatest
shining light in the pulpit. I admit that influence, good or evil, is
propagated to a greater extent when the source from which it emanates is
more prominently before the gaze of the world than if it were less
public; but I am persuaded that the closer the relationship between the
one who exerts the influence and the one upon whom it takes effect, the
more deep and lasting will the impression prove, and any endeavors to
eradicate it will involve more strenuous efforts and diligent
application than where there is no sympathetic feeling evinced by the
one toward the other.

The implicitness with which example is followed is subject to
considerable variations, for I am inclined to think that the lower the
moral position the greater the aptitude for imitation is displayed.
This arises from the incapability of those who occupy such positions to
tear asunder the forms which envelope them, and strike a path untrodden
for themselves. They find it much more congenial to their tastes and
pursuits to act as others around them usually do than to alienate
themselves and endeavor to live more in accordance with the laws of
morality. No one can deny, especially those who knew her well, that
Mrs. Knowles's great success was as much derived from her example and
humility as from any power of teaching and persuasion she possessed.
And now, dear readers, those of you who have not the gift of leading
others into the paths of virtue and morality by the gift of ready
speech or the force of your conversation and address, can at least so
regulate your conduct that the little world around you may look up to
_you_ as an example, however humble your position in it may be.

There are lesser lights along the iron-bound coast of England than the
Eddystone; still they serve the purpose for which they were erected.
Yea, the widow's lamp, in the window of the cottage by the sea, saved
her own son from shipwreck. The Talisman's motto ought to be ours:

    "Be watchful, be ready, for shipwreck prepare,
    Keep an eye on the life-boat, but never despair!"

All along our coast the Government has built massive and strong
light-houses to guide and warn the tempest-tossed mariner. The passage
may have been hazardous to many a staunch ship and brave crew,
occasioned by constant exposure to a multiplicity of dangers seen and
unseen. Who can tell of the deep anxiety of the gloomy days and nights
they spent waiting and watching, while many a keen blast has mournfully
whistled through the shrouds, and many a billow has threatened to
engulf their bark; but how cheering is yonder light streaming forth
amid the densest darkness. It speaks with trumpet-tongue to the
bewildered navigator, and says, "This is the course, steer ye by it."
How refreshing the sight. How assuring those bright beams that quiver
over the perilous sea. Clouds and wind must not affright, for the
gladsome welcome light of example interposes between us and
disappointment and despair. "Ye are the light of the world," said
Jesus. It is by beholding the lights that once shone on earth, that are
now shining as the stars for ever and ever in heaven, that we, seeing
their good works do glorify our Father in Heaven.

How many, alas! are utterly unconscious of the power of a godly example;
it is only prayerful reflection upon it that rivets the connecting link
between earth and heaven. Endearing attachments are formed and
gradually, eternally perpetuated, strengthened by constant companionship.
It is then we become truer-hearted, more gentle, more generous, and more
affectionate. Any apparent errors really are not errors, but curiosities
in spelling (predicaldo instead of predicadlo, dezildo rather than tell,
etc.). Many apparent spelling errors are related to the lack of emphasis
(e  so - and so  ), but the spelling rules were not defined very rarely
correct in 1602. Where the vowel was marked wrong, correct it and we
noted with circumflex, basing the correction on the version of Queen.
A lot of variety in capitals ( cipulos Di - di  cipulos, Reyno -
Reyno, E  caught - and caught  , Angels - Angels, etc.). We did no
correction. Mucha variety accentuation (A - A, - Al, took - took, which
 iêsen, etc.).
We must wield it earnestly and bravely in
the great conflict of life, constantly reiterating the Bible woman's
dying words:

    "MY DAY IS SHORT, I MUST FINISH MY WORK!"

In perusing these memoirs, we ask, Who can read the foregoing
correspondence and record of God's goodness to His saints, and through
them to perishing souls, promiscuously scattered among all classes, and
creeds, and colors, Jews and Gentiles alike, without feelings of
unfeigned gratitude to God for raising up two such worthy persons to
adorn "the doctrine of God, our Saviour?"

Our earnest prayer is, that the Holy Spirit will not allow to pass
unobserved such lives of usefulness and self-sacrifice, without
awakening a deeper interest in the lapsed masses of the lower part of
this city.

We sincerely trust, also, that the publication and perusal of this
humble effort to glorify God by perpetuating the memory of the loved
ones so fondly cherished shall not be all in vain, and fall on the
heart as a dead letter, "like the wind that passes over the rock,
leaving it harder than before." Mr. D. L. Moody once said, "I never saw
a man who was aiming to do the best work, but there could be some
improvement; I never did anything in my life that I didn't think I
could have done better, and I have often upbraided myself that I had
not done better. But to sit down and find fault with other people when
we are doing nothing ourselves is all wrong, and is the opposite of
holy, patient, divine love." May we rather be of that number concerning
whom it is said, "Blessed are those servants, who, when their Lord
shall come, He will find watching."

The sunset of life will come sooner or later, "Let us, then, give
earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip." Especially let us consider the importance of
Mrs. Knowles's final farewell exhortation: "_Be kind, gentle, and
patient. But once they are on of the Marx-Lassalle = = brought forward
way too far gone to return to, and consider them controlled or managed
somehow working masses as a means for achieving their future plans
for the future.
He brought me into His
banqueting house, and His banner over me was love."

In bidding our readers adieu, I would, in conclusion, urge that they
seriously reflect upon the significance of the Bible woman's last
triumphant utterances: "Once I was young, now I am old, and have never
been forsaken."

    Who to their reward will say them nay,
      In Heaven or on Earth:
    Brave Pilgrims of Israel, pass'd away--
      We till now ne'er knew your worth!
    Go! write out their lives on leaves of gold,
      With characters of love,
    Let the future know, when we are cold,
      Of our loved ones gone above.