On March 9, 1814, he was appointed to the rank of brigadier general,
and ordered to join General Jacob Brown, commanding general of the
United States army, then moving toward the Niagara frontier. On the
24th General Brown marched to Sackett's Harbor, where Scott
established a camp of instruction. On assembling of the army at
Buffalo, Scott was assigned to the command of the Ninth, Eleventh, and
Twenty-fifth Regiments of infantry, with a part of the Twenty-second
Regiment and Captain Towson's company of artillery. In addition to
this command there were at this time at Buffalo the commands of
Generals Porter and Eleazer Wheelock Ripley. The whole force was
placed in camp under General Scott's immediate direction. In the
latter part of June General Brown returned to Buffalo, and on the
morning of July 3d Scott's brigade with the artillery of Major Jacobs
Hindman, crossed the river and landed below Fort Erie, while Ripley's
brigade landed a short distance above. Fort Erie was invested,
attacked, and soon surrendered, and on the morning of the 4th Scott's
brigade moved in advance in the direction of Chippewa. He was engaged
for a distance of sixteen miles in a running fight with the British
forces under the Marquis of Tweedale. Toward night the Marquis of
Tweedale crossed the Chippewa River and joined the main army under
General Sir Phineas Riall. Scott then took position on a creek some
two miles from Chippewa. On the east was the Niagara River and the
road to Chippewa, while an the west was a heavy wood. Between the wood
and the river were two streams--the Chippewa and Street's Creek.
General Riall, the British commander, was posted behind the Chippewa,
flanked on one side with a blockhouse and a heavy battery on the
other.

Both of these streams were bridged on the road to Chippewa, the one
over Street's Creek being nearest to Scott, while that over the
Chippewa was nearest to Riall. On the morning of the 5th General Brown
had determined to make the attack, but the enemy, anticipating it,
made the first forward movement, and there were a number of
skirmishes. General Porter, whose command consisted of volunteers,
militia, and friendly Indians, first engaged the British and drove
them back through the woods. General Riall at this moment was seen
advancing with the main body of his army, and the retreating troops
rallied, attacking Porter furiously, and, despite his own coolness and
gallantry, his troops gave way and fled. This was about four o'clock,
and General Brown, being with Porter, saw the advance of the British
force, and meeting General Scott, said to him, "The enemy is
advancing." General Brown then moved to the rear and ordered the
advance of Ripley's brigade. The British army was composed of the One
Hundredth Regiment, under the Marquis of Tweedale, the First Royal
Scots, under Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, a portion of the Eighth or
King's Regiment, a detachment of the Royal Artillery, a detachment of
the Royal Nineteenth Light Dragoons, and some Canadian militia and
Indians. These were supported by a heavy battery of nine guns. Scott
crossed the bridge under fire of this battery, losing a number of men.
After crossing, the commands of Majors Henry Leavenworth and John
McNeil, Jr., formed line in front opposite the center and left of the
enemy. Major Thomas Sidney Jesup moved to the left and advanced to
attack the enemy's right. Towson's battery was on the right, on the
Chippewa road. Seeing that the British lines outflanked him, Scott
ordered the movement of Jesup to the left. The battle now opened,
Jesup holding in check the right wing of the enemy, his position in
the wood concealing him from view. General Scott had now advanced to
within eighty paces of the enemy, and ordering the left flank of
McNeil's battalion formed on the right so that it was oblique to the
enemy's charge and flanking him on the right. Scott called to McNeil's
command, which had no recruits in it: "The enemy say we are good at
long shot, but can not stand the cold iron. I call upon the Eleventh
to give the lie to that slander. Charge!" The charge was made at once,
supported by a corresponding charge of Leavenworth and a flank fire
from Towson's battery. The British broke, and fled in great confusion.

In the meantime Major Jesup, commanding on the left, ordered his men
to advance, which they did, driving the enemy into his intrenchments
across the Chippewa. The British forces engaged were about twenty-one
hundred men, and that of the Americans nineteen hundred. The British
lost in killed, one hundred and thirty-eight; wounded, three hundred
and nineteen; and missing, forty-six. The American loss was sixty
killed, two hundred and forty-eight wounded, and nineteen missing.
General Brown in his official report says: "Brigadier General Scott is
entitled to the highest praise our country can bestow; to him more
than to any other man am I indebted for the victory of July 5th. His
brigade covered itself with glory. Every officer and every man of the
Ninth, Twenty-second, Eleventh, and Twenty-fifth Regiments did his
duty with a zeal and energy worthy of the American character." Two
days after the battle of Chippewa General Scott forced a passage
across the Chippewa, driving the enemy.


[Illustration: NOTE.--The accompanying map indicates the
movements of the troops in the battle of Chippewa. A H show the
position of Majors McNeil and Leavenworth when they made the final
charge. _a_, _a_, _a_, the point to which General Porter drove the
British and Indians. _b_, Street's barn.]


A fort called Messasauga was built after the campaign of 1813 by the
British as a defense to Fort George, and being re-enforced by General
Riall, he moved to Burlington Heights on Lake Ontario. It was General
Brown's intention to capture these forts before beginning further or
more extended operations. With this purpose, he ordered some heavy
guns from Sackett's Harbor; but Commodore Chauncey being sick, and the
enemy having a superior fleet on the lake, the attack on these forts
was abandoned. General Brown then made a feint by moving up the
Niagara and recrossing the Chippewa, with a view to draw the enemy
down and to enable him to obtain supplies from Fort Schlosser. Failing
in this, it was his purpose to send General Scott by the road from
Queenstown and thus force Riall to battle.

On the afternoon of the 25th General Brown received a note from a
militia officer who occupied some posts on the American side of the
Niagara, that a thousand British troops had crossed from Queenstown to
Lewiston, a few miles below the Chippewa. It was thought that the
object of this movement was to capture the American magazines at
Schlosser and cut off supplies from Buffalo. General Brown having
determined to threaten the forts at the mouth of the Niagara, General
Scott's command was put in motion for this purpose. It consisted of
four battalions under Colonel Hugh Brady, and the commands of Majors
Jesup, Leavenworth, and McNeil, Captain Towson's artillery, and
Captain Harris's detachment of cavalry, the whole force aggregating
thirteen hundred men. After a march of two miles some mounted British
officers were discovered on a reconnoitering expedition, their forces
being a short distance off and hidden from view.

General Scott's orders were to march on the forts, as information had
been received that Riall had divided his forces, sending a thousand of
them across the river. He, however, determined to move forward and
give battle. Dispatching Adjutant-General Jones to General Brown with
information that the enemy was in his front, he moved on, and was
astonished to see drawn up in line of battle on Lundy's Lane a larger
force than he had fought at Chippewa; but he determined to give battle
and rely upon re-enforcements being rapidly sent to him. Lieutenant
Richard Douglass was now dispatched to inform General Brown of the
situation. On the night of the 23d Lieutenant-General Sir Gordon
Drummond had arrived at the mouth of the river with re-enforcements.
This was not known to General Brown. Riall had marched down the road
which Scott was to have taken on the 26th, coming by Queenstown, and
had not sent any troops across the Niagara. His re-enforcements were
coming up rapidly. The battle opened late in the afternoon. The
British line, eighteen hundred strong, posted on a ridge in Lundy's
Lane running at right angles with the river, was in front of Scott.
The left of this line was on a road parallel to the river, with a
space grown up with small timber, extending some two hundred yards. He
ordered Major Jesup and Colonel Brady to take advantage of this and
turn the enemy's left from the concealed position which the brushwood
afforded. The other infantry forces had been placed in line with
detachments of cavalry on both sides and held as reserves. The
British, outflanking Scott on the left, made a movement to attack in
flank and fear. This was repelled by Major McNeil with heavy loss.
Jesup had succeeded in his movement, while Brady, Leavenworth, and
Towson were engaged in the front. Jesup had captured General Riall and
a number of other officers far in his front, and then resumed his
line. At nine o'clock the British right was driven back from its
assault on Scott's flank, and his left was turned and cut off. The
center posted on the ridge held its place, supported by nine pieces of
artillery. Another battalion of British troops was on its way as a
re-enforcement, and but a short distance away, when General Brown
arrived on the field, in advance of the reserve. He thus describes in
his report what occurred from the time of his arrival:

"Apprehending that these corps were much exhausted, and knowing that
they had suffered severely, I determined to interpose a new line with
the advancing troops, and thus disengage General Scott and hold his
brigade in reserve. Orders were accordingly given to General Ripley.
The enemy's artillery at this moment occupied a hill which gave him
great advantage and was the key to the whole position. It was
supported by a line of infantry. To secure the victory it was
necessary to carry this with artillery and seize the height.

"The duty was assigned to Colonel Miller. He advanced steadily and
gallantly to his object, and carried the height and the cannon.
General Ripley brought up the Twenty-third (which had faltered) to
his support, and the enemy disappeared from before them. The enemy,
rallying his forces, and, as is believed, having received
re-enforcements, now attempted to drive us from our position and
regain his artillery. Our line was unshaken and the enemy repulsed.
Two other attempts having the same object had the same issue. General
Scott was again engaged in repelling the former of these, and the last
I saw of him on the field of battle he was near the head of his column
and giving to its march a direction that would have placed him on the
enemy's right.... Having been for some time wounded and being a good
deal exhausted by loss of blood, it became my wish to devolve the
command on General Scott and retire from the field; but on inquiry I
had the misfortune to learn that he was disabled by wounds. I
therefore kept my post, and had the satisfaction to see the enemy's
last effort repulsed."

General Brown said to General Miller, when he saw that to win the
battle the artillery on the ridge must be captured, "Sir, can you take
that battery?" He replied, "I will try, sir," and at once moved
forward, conducted by Scott, who was familiar with the ground, and
with his gallant command drove the enemy from its stronghold and
captured the guns.

General Scott, though severely wounded, was not disabled at the time
mentioned in General Brown's report. Having two horses killed under
him, he was at this time on foot, but was finally prostrated by his
two wounds--one in the side, the other in the shoulder. The American
loss was one hundred and seventy-one killed, five hundred and
seventy-two wounded, and one hundred and seventeen prisoners; that of
the British was eighty-four killed, five hundred and fifty-nine
wounded, and two hundred and thirty-five prisoners.

Generals Brown and Scott both being disabled, General Ripley was sent
to bring off the wounded and dead. The captured artillery, owing to
want of horses and harness, was left on the field. The army now fell
back to Chippewa and fortified the place.

It being learned that General Drummond was advancing on Chippewa with
a large force, the place was evacuated and the army retreated to the
ferry near Black Rock. A division was ordered to remain at Fort Erie
and repair the fort, and Brigadier-General Gaines was, by General
Brown's orders, placed in command of the army.

Very soon the British General Drummond appeared in front of Fort Erie
and commenced a regular investment. Cannonading was begun on August
13th and continued at intervals, and on the 15th a heavy British
column assaulted Towson's battery, which was stationed at the
northwest angle of the fort. The assault was repelled by Captain
Towson with the aid of Major Wood, commanding the Twenty-fifth
Regiment. The western angle was then attacked, with a like result. The
British eventually succeeded in obtaining possession of the exterior
bastion of the old fort. Just at this time a number of cartridges in a
building near by exploded, killing many of the British and expelling
them from the fort. The losses in these affairs were: British--killed,
fifty-seven; wounded, three hundred and nine; missing, five hundred
and thirty-nine. American--killed, seventeen; wounded, fifty-six;
missing, eleven.

General Brown resumed command on September 2d, and determined to
attempt to relieve the siege by a sortie on the enemy's works. The
investment had now lasted fifty days, and the British during that time
had erected two batteries and were engaged on a third. The force was
divided into three brigades, two of which were encamped out of range
of the American cannon. At half past 2 P.M. on the 17th the
American troops marched out and the action began. In less than half an
hour the Americans had captured two of the batteries and two
blockhouses. Very soon a third battery was abandoned, the cannon
spiked and dismounted. General Drummond retired on the night of the
21st, and took post in his intrenchments behind the Chippewa. The
British losses in this investment were, in killed, wounded, and
prisoners, nearly a thousand, while the American loss was five hundred
and eleven. Early in November the American army took up winter
quarters in Buffalo, and this brought to a close the war on the
Niagara.

The following statement of the losses on either side in this memorable
campaign is interesting:

--------------------------------------+---------------+---------------
                                      | British loss. | American loss.
--------------------------------------+---------------+---------------
Battle of Chippewa, July 5, 1814      |      507      |      328
Battle of Niagara, July 25, 1814      |      878      |      860
Battle of Fort Erie, August 15, 1814  |      905      |       84
Sortie from Fort Erie, Sept. 17, 1814 |      800      |      511
                                      +---------------+---------------
       Total                          |    3,090      |    1,783
--------------------------------------+---------------+---------------

General Jacob Brown, the commander of this army, became General in
Chief of the United States army March 10, 1821. He died September 24,
1828. General Brown was born in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, May 9,
1775. He was secretary to Alexander Hamilton, where he acquired
military information and experience, and in 1809 was made a colonel
of militia. In 1810 he was promoted brigadier general, and two years
afterward was assigned to the command of the frontier from Oswego to
Lake St. Francis. In July, 1813, he was appointed a brigadier general
in the United States army and placed in command of the Army of Niagara
with the rank of major general. His subsequent career is briefly
mentioned in this work. He received the thanks of Congress, November
3, 1814, and a gold medal, now in possession of his son, General N.W.
Brown, of Washington City.

General Eleazer W. Ripley became a brevet major general, and resigned
in May, 1820. He was a member of the House of Representatives of the
United States Congress (the Twenty-fourth) from Louisiana, and died
March 2, 1839. Hugh Brady became a brigadier general by brevet.
William McRee resigned as colonel in March, 1819; was afterward
surveyor general of Missouri, and died in 1832. Thomas S. Jesup became
quartermaster general of the army with rank of brevet major general.
Henry Leavenworth died a brigadier general by brevet, July 21, 1834.
John McNeil resigned as brigadier general by brevet; was afterward
surveyor of customs at Boston. Jacob Hindman died a colonel, February
17, 1827. Roger Jones was adjutant general of the army, and brigadier
general by brevet.

General Scott's wounds were so severe and painful that it was a long
time before he was fit for duty. In September, 1814, Philadelphia and
Baltimore were so threatened by the enemy that General Scott took
nominal command for the defense of those cities. Everywhere on his
route he received the highest evidences of the love and esteem of the
people. At Princeton, N.J., he had a distinguished reception, and had
conferred on him by the college the degree of Master of Arts. From
Princeton he proceeded to Baltimore, and on October 16, 1814, assumed
command of the Tenth Military District, with headquarters at
Washington.

The treaty of peace was signed December 24, 1814, and ratified by the
Senate, February 17, 1815. He was tendered the appointment of
Secretary of War, but declined on the ground that he was too young.
When his recommendations for colonel and brigadier general were
presented to the President he expressed in both instances the fear
that he was too young. It was in allusion to this that he gave this
reason. He was then requested to act as Secretary until the arrival of
William H. Crawford, at that period Minister to France, and who had
been appointed Secretary of War. He declined this also, in deference
to Generals Jacob Brown and Andrew Jackson. He was engaged for some
time in reducing the army to a peace establishment, which being
completed he was ordered to Europe for professional purposes. He was
also intrusted with certain important and delicate diplomatic
functions relating to the designs of Great Britain on the island of
Cuba, and the revolutionary struggles between certain Spanish
provinces in America.


CHAPTER III.

Is received and entertained by prominent civilians and military men in
Europe--Marries Miss Mayo--Offspring--Thanks of Congress--Thanks of
the Virginia Legislature voted, and also a sword--Controversy with
General Andrew Jackson and correspondence--Prepares general
regulations for the army and militia--Controversy with General Gaines
and the War Department about rank--In command of the Eastern
Division--War with the Sac and Fox Indians--Black Hawk--Cholera breaks
out among the troops.


General Scott received great attention from prominent military men in
Europe. He was also treated with much respect by men of letters and
science. On his return home, in 1816, he was assigned to the command
of the seaboard, and established his headquarters in the city of New
York. On March 11, 1817, he was married to Miss Maria D. Mayo, of
Richmond, Va., daughter of Colonel John Mayo. She was a lady of many
accomplishments and a belle in Virginia society. The issue of this
marriage who lived to maturity were Virginia, who died unmarried;
Cornelia who was married to Colonel Henry L. Scott, General Scott's
adjutant general for many years, and who, dying, left one son,
Winfield Scott, now a resident of Richmond, Va.; Camilla, who married
Gould Hoyt, of New York, and died leaving children; Ella, who married
Carroll McTavish, and has several daughters. She is now (1893) a
resident of Baltimore. Mrs. Scott died June 10, 1862. Two sons and
two daughters died before reaching maturity. Mrs. Scott's remains were
buried by the side of her illustrious husband at West Point.

In November, 1813, Congress passed a joint resolution complimenting
General Scott for his skill and gallantry in the battles of Chippewa
and Niagara and for his uniform good conduct throughout the war, and
directed the striking and presentation to him of a gold medal. This
was presented to him in a speech of great feeling and high compliment
at the Executive Mansion in the presence of the members of the Cabinet
and many other distinguished persons. On July 4, 1831, General Scott
watched the last moments and closed the eyes of President Monroe in
New York city. In February, 1816, the Legislature of Virginia passed a
resolution unanimously returning thanks to General Scott for his
services to his country, and also voted him a sword. This was followed
by like action by the Legislature of New York. In 1815 he was elected
an honorary member of the Society of the Cincinnati.

In April, 1817, General Andrew Jackson issued from Nashville, Tenn.,
an order reciting that "the commanding general considers it due to the
principles of subordination which might and must exist in an army to
prohibit the obedience of any order emanating from the Department of
War to officers of the division who have reported and been assigned to
duty, unless coming through him as the proper organ of communication."
At a dinner party in New York soon after the publication of this order
Governor Clinton desired to know General Scott's opinion of it. He
expressed views in opposition to General Jackson, and added that its
tendency was mutinous. An anonymous writer published the details of
this conversation in a New York paper called the Columbian, and a copy
of it reached General Jackson, who wrote General Scott as follows:


                              "HEADQUARTERS DIVISION OF THE SOUTH,

                                  "NASHVILLE, _September 17, 1817_.

  "SIR: With that candor due the character you have sustained
  as a soldier and a man of honor, and with the fairness of the
  latter, I address you. Inclosed is a copy of an anonymous letter
  postmarked New York, August 14, 1817, together with a publication
  taken from the Columbian, which accompanied the letter. I have not
  permitted myself for a moment to believe that the conduct ascribed
  to you is correct. Candor, however, induces me to lay them before
  you, that you may have it in your power to say how far they be
  incorrectly stated. If my order has been the subject of your
  animadversions, it is believed you will at once admit it, and the
  extent to which you may have gone.

  "I am, sir, respectfully,

                "Your most obedient servant,

                                  "ANDREW JACKSON.

    "_General_ W. SCOTT, _U.S. Army_."

General Scott replied to this letter denying the authorship of the
article, and said: " ... I gave it as my opinion that that paper was,
as it respected the future, mutinous in its character and tendency,
and as it respected the past, a reprimand of the commander in chief,
the President of the United States; for although the latter be not
expressly named, it is a principle well understood that the War
Department, without at least his supposed sanction, can not give a
valid command to an ensign.... Even if I belonged to your division I
should not hesitate to repeat to you all that I have said at any time
on this subject if a proper occasion offered; and what is more, I
should expect your approbation, as in my humble judgment refutation is
impossible."

General Jackson replied to this in a very angry manner, and intimating
that General Scott might, if he chose, call him to the field. Scott
replied, and declined to write the challenge, "as his ambition was not
that of Erostratus," intimating that he ruined his only chance of
acquiring distinction by killing a defender of his country.

For years afterward Scott heard reports that General Jackson had made
threats of personal chastisement whenever they should meet. In 1823,
soon after General Jackson took his seat in the United States Senate,
Scott made frequent visits there, and was entitled to the floor.
Wearied at last with this state of things, he addressed General
Jackson as follows:

                                     "WASHINGTON, _December 11, 1823_.

  "SIR: One portion of the American community has long
  attributed to you the most distinguished magnanimity, and the other
  portion the greatest desperation in your resentments.

  "Am I to conclude that both are in error? I allude to circumstances
  which have transpired between us and which need not here be
  repeated, and to the fact that I have now been six days in your
  immediate vicinity without having attracted your notice. As this is
  the first time in my life that I have been within a hundred miles of
  you, and as it is barely possible that you may be ignorant of my
  presence, I beg leave to state that I shall not leave the district
  before the morning of the 14th inst.

    "I have the honor to be, sir,

                   "Your most obedient servant,

                                     "WINFIELD SCOTT.

    "_The Hon._ GENERAL A. JACKSON, _Senator, etc._"

The following answer was promptly returned:

                                  "MRS. O'NEIL'S, _December 11, 1823_.

  "SIR: Your letter of to-day has been received. Whether the
  world is correct or in error as regards my 'magnanimity' is for the
  world to decide. I am satisfied of one fact: that when you shall
  know me better you will not be disposed to harbor the opinion that
  anything like desperation in resentment attaches to me.

  "Your letter is ambiguous, but, concluding from occurrences
  heretofore that it was written with friendly views, I take the
  liberty of saying to you that whenever you shall feel disposed to
  meet me on friendly terms, that disposition will not be met by any
  other than a corresponding feeling on my part.

    "I have the honor to be, sir,

                  "Your most obedient servant,

                                     "ANDREW JACKSON.

    "_General_ W. SCOTT."

General Scott was gratified at the reply, and called at once on
General Jackson, who received him kindly and graciously, and the next
day he departed for the West. In mentioning these facts General Scott
adds that "it is painful to reflect that so amicable a settlement only
meant with one of the parties a postponement of revenge to a more
convenient season."

This remark is in allusion to Scott's recall from the Indian War in
1836. General Jackson died the 8th of June, 1845, General Scott being
then at West Point. He was president of the Board of Examiners, which
was in session when the news was received. He at once arose, and,
addressing the board of visitors and academic staff, said:
"Ex-President Jackson died at the Hermitage on the 8th inst. The
information is not official, but sufficiently authentic to prompt the
step I am about to take. An event of much moment to the nation has
occurred. A great man has fallen. General Jackson is dead--a great
general, and a great patriot who had filled the highest political
stations in the gift of his countrymen. He is dead. This is not the
place, nor am I the individual, to pronounce a fit eulogy on the
illustrious deceased. National honors will doubtless be prescribed by
the President of the United States; but in the meantime, and in
harmony with the feelings of all who hear me, and particularly with
those of the authorities of this institution, I deem it proper to
suspend the examination of the cadets for the day, and to await the
orders of the Executive of the United States on the subject."

General Scott in his early training had studied the science of war,
using the works of the greatest and best-known authors. He was in his
early life a close student, and when he entered the army was, better
equipped, in the knowledge of the standard authors on the science of
war than most men in the army. In 1821 he prepared a work entitled
General Regulations for the Army, or Military Institutes. This was
the first book published in the United States which could be accepted
as a manual for both the regular troops of the army and the militia.
He had formerly, in 1814-'15, been president of a board of army
officers which compiled a system of infantry tactics, a copy of the
system which he had used in the camp of instruction at Buffalo in
1814. This was revised by another board, of which he was president,
and was published in 1825.

In 1826 a board of army and militia officers was convened by order of
the Secretary of War, of which he was made president, for the purpose
of reporting a plan for the organization and instruction of the
militia of the United States, a system of tactics for the artillery, a
system of cavalry tactics, and a system of infantry and rifle tactics.
The reports on the plan for the organization and instruction of the
militia and that on the system of infantry and rifle tactics were
written wholly by General Scott, and adopted by the board. Under a
resolution of Congress in 1835 there was published a new edition of
infantry tactics prepared by him.

General Scott was one of the pioneers in what is known as the
temperance reform, and preceded Dr. Lyman Beecher in his celebrated
discourses on this subject. In December, 1821, General Scott published
his "Scheme for restricting the use of ardent spirits in the United
States." It was first published in the National Gazette. He did not
take ground for total abstinence, but against the use ardent of
spirits, brandy, rum, and whisky. He was also a member of the society
formed in New York in 1821 "for the prevention of pauperism, vice, and
immorality."

General Scott, in 1823, took great interest in having the sons of
General Paez, of Colombia, South America, admitted as students at the
military academy at West Point, which drew from General Paez letters
of thanks to General Scott and President Monroe.

A very serious controversy arose in 1828 between General Scott and
General Edmund Pendleton Gaines on a question of rank. General Macomb
had been appointed by President Adams major general of the United
States army. There was at that time but one major general, and Scott
held the rank of brevet major general, with an older date than
Macomb's appointment, and he addressed a memorial to Congress claiming
his superiority in rank to Macomb. He argued that from the beginning
of the Revolutionary War down to the time of his appointment brevet
rank was uniformly held to give rank and command, except only in the
body of a regiment, etc.; that there existed in law or in fact no
higher title or grade in the army than that of major general, there
being no such thing as a commander in chief, except the President.
That he [Scott] held a commission as major general, July 25, 1814, of
older date than that of either Generals Macomb or Gaines. Congress did
not pass an act, however, sustaining his claim, and the result was a
construction by the authorities that a brevet appointment did not
confer additional rank.

General Scott, on this decision of Congress, tendered his resignation,
which was not accepted. When he was informed that the President and
others high in authority sustained the action of Congress, he
addressed a letter to Mr. Eaton, the Secretary of War, as follows:

                                       "NEW YORK, _November 10, 1829_.

  "SIR: I have seen the President's order of the 13th of
  August last, which gives a construction of the sixty-first and
  sixty-second articles of war relative to rank or command.

  "Humbly protesting that this order deprives me of rights guaranteed
  by these articles, and the uniform practice of the army under them,
  from the commencement of the Government down to the year 1828, when
  the new construction was first adopted against me, in obedience to
  the universal advice of my friends, who deem it incumbent on me to
  sacrifice my own connections and feelings to what may, by an apt
  error, be considered the repeated decision of the civil authority of
  my country, I have brought myself to make that sacrifice, and
  therefore withdraw the tender of my resignation now on file in your
  department.

  "I also ask leave to surrender the remainder of the furlough the
  department was kind enough to extend to me in April last, and to
  report myself for duty.                       WINFIELD SCOTT.

    "_The Hon._ J.H. EATON, _Secretary of War_."

To this the Secretary of War replied:

                                 "WAR DEPARTMENT, _November 13, 1829_.

  "SIR: Your letter of the 10th instant is received, and I
  take pleasure in saying to you that it affords the department much
  satisfaction to perceive the conclusion to which you have arrived as
  to your brevet rights. None will do you the injustice to suppose
  that the opinions declared by you upon this subject are not the
  result of reflections and convictions; but since the constituted
  authorities of the Government have, with the best feelings
  entertained, come to conclusions adverse to your own, no other
  opinion was cherished or was hoped for but that, on your return to
  the United States, you would adopt the course your letter indicates,
  and with good feelings resume those duties of which she has so long
  had the benefit. Agreeably to your request, the furlough heretofore
  granted you is revoked from and after the 20th instant. You will
  accordingly report to the commanding general, Alexander Macomb, for
  duty.                                         J.H. EATON.

    "_To Major-General_ WINFIELD SCOTT."

General Scott, on reporting to General Macomb, was assigned to the
command of the Eastern Department, while General Gaines was assigned
to the Western. From the assignment of General Scott to the command of
the Eastern Department, for a period of nearly three years, his duties
were those of an ordinary department commander, with no incidents
necessary to be ingrafted into his biography.

A treaty had been made by the United States Government in 1804 with
the chiefs of the Sac Indians, in which their lands east of the
Mississippi were ceded to the Government, but with the reservation
that so long as they belonged to the Government of the United States
the Indians should have the privilege of occupying and hunting on
them. The Sacs and Foxes were contiguous and friendly tribes, and
their principal village was on a peninsula between the Rock River and
the Mississippi. Their principal chief was known as Black Hawk. The
United States Government in its treaty acquiring the title to these
Indian lands made a guarantee that the Indians should be free from
intrusion from any white settlers.

Their lands were very fertile, and soon white men in large numbers
began to encroach on them, and no adequate steps were taken by the
Government to protect the Indians in their treaty rights. In 1829 the
Government ordered a public sale of lands which included a part of the
Sac village. It was purchased by an Indian trader. This greatly
disturbed the Chief Black Hawk, but he was assured that if the lands
purchased by this agent had not actually been sold to the Government
that the sale would be canceled and the Indian occupants allowed to
remain. Nothing more was done in the matter until in the spring of
1831, when the corn planted by a number of Indians was plowed up by
white settlers, and many annoying trespasses made by the whites upon
the Indian occupants. The Chief Black Hawk then announced to the white
settlers in the village that they must remove. This resulted in a
memorial from some of the white settlers, in May, 1831, to the
Governor of Illinois, stating that the Indians were committing
depredations on them. The Governor called out seven hundred militia to
remove a band of the Sac Indians, and so notified General Gaines.
General Gaines, on May 29th, replied to the Governor that he had
ordered six companies of troops from Jefferson City to Rock Island,
and four other companies from Prairie du Chien, to assist the
Governor's militia in repelling the Indians. When the United States
troops reached Fort Armstrong a conference was held with some of the
Indian chiefs, but with no practical results. On receiving this
information General Gaines called on the Governor of Illinois for
additional forces, and on June 25th Governor Reynolds and General
Joseph Duncan arrived at Rock River with sixteen hundred mounted
militia. The Indians from the Sac village, being informed of this
movement, deserted their homes with their wives and children and
crossed the Mississippi. The next morning General Gaines occupied the
Sac village without opposition.

A treaty was then made (June 30th) by General Gaines and Governor
Reynolds with the Sacs, by which the Indians agreed to take up their
abode west of the Mississippi River. In April, 1832, Chief Black Hawk
and his tribe recrossed the Mississippi, in violation of the treaty
previously made, for the purpose of joining the Winnebagoes and making
a crop of corn and beans.

General Henry Atkinson at this time was in command of Fort Armstrong.
He notified Black Hawk that he must recross the river or be driven
back. The Indians refused to obey the order. Black Hawk endeavored to
enlist some of the Northwestern tribes to join him, but failing to
gain their assent, resolved to recross the Mississippi. He was
encamped with his tribe at a place which the Indians called
Kish-wa-cokee.

Some of the Illinois mounted militia were at Dixon's Ferry, on Rock
River, not far from the Indian encampment. Major Stillman, commanding
some three hundred volunteers, moved from Dixon's Ferry to Sycamore
Creek on a scouting expedition. Black Hawk, being apprised of their
approach, sent three of his young Indians bearing a white flag to meet
them. One of these young Indians was captured and killed. Another
party of five Indians, following the flag-of-truce bearers to assist
in pacific negotiations, were met by the whites and two of them
killed. The Illinois militia moved on and crossed Sycamore Creek.
Black Hawk, who was exasperated at the killing of his men whom he had
sent under flag of truce, advanced with his warriors on May 14th, met
the Illinois militia, engaged and defeated them, and forced them to
recross the creek.

This success greatly encouraged the Indians, but created great alarm
and excitement with the white people of Illinois. Many small battles
took place after this between the whites and Indians, and the war was
brought to a close by the delivery of Black Hawk to the Indian agent,
General Street, August 27th, by two of his followers who betrayed him.
This war created necessarily great excitement and alarm in Illinois.
It was the general expectation that the Winnebagoes and Pottawattomies
would sympathize with Black Hawk, and the result would be a general
Indian war. At this juncture General Scott was ordered to proceed to
Illinois and take command of the forces to bring the Indians into
subjugation. In July, acting under this order, he left Buffalo with
about one thousand troops, destined for Chicago. The general and his
staff, with about two hundred and twenty men, embarked on the
steamboat Sheldon Thompson, and on July 8th it was announced that
several of the soldiers were attacked with Asiatic cholera. The vessel
arrived at the village of Chicago on the 10th with eighty sick men on
board, one officer and fifty-one soldiers having died during the
passage.

The fate of the troops who were embarked in other vessels was even
worse than those on the Thompson. Of the one thousand men who left
Buffalo only about four hundred survived. General Scott gave every
attention to the sick, exposing himself without fear day and night in
seeing to the wants of his men. Leaving Colonel Abram Eustis in
command, he proceeded to join General Atkinson at Prairie du Chien,
which he reached on the 3d of August. The engagement called the Battle
of Bad Axe had been fought before his arrival. He was here again
confronted with the plague of cholera, which had broken out in
Atkinson's command at Rock Island, and he devoted himself to the care
of the sick and the consolation of the dying.

In this connection an extract from the Richmond Enquirer of August 7,
1832, will be of interest:

  "LOUISVILLE, _July 27, 1832_.--The following is the latest
  official intelligence from Chicago. We are indebted to a commercial
  friend for it.--_Advertiser._

                                     "'HEADQUARTERS NORTHWESTERN ARMY,

                                        "'CHICAGO, _July 15, 1832_.

  "'SIR: To prevent or to correct the exaggerations of rumor
  in respect to the existence of cholera at this place, I address
  myself to your Excellency. Four steamers were engaged at Buffalo to
  transport United States troops and supplies to Chicago.

  "'In the headmost of these boats, the Sheldon Thompson, I, with my
  staff and four companies, a part of Colonel Eustis's command,
  arrived here on the 8th. All on board were in high health and
  spirits, but the next morning six cases of undoubted cholera
  presented themselves. The disease rapidly spread itself for the
  next three days. About one hundred and twenty persons have been
  affected.

  "'Under a late act of Congress six companies of rangers are to be
  raised and marched to this place. General Dodge, of Michigan, is
  appointed major of the battalion, and I have seen the names of the
  captains, but I do not know where to address them. I am afraid that
  the report from this place in respect to cholera may seriously
  retard the raising of this force.

  "'I wish, therefore, that your Excellency would give publicity to
  the measures I have adopted to prevent the spread of the disease,
  and of my determination not to allow any junction or communication
  between uninfected and infected troops.

  "'The war is not at an end, and may not be brought to a close for
  some time. The rangers may reach the theatre of operations in time
  to give the final blow. As they approach this place I shall take
  care of their health and general wants.

  "'I write in great haste, and may not have time to cause my letter
  to be copied. It will be put in some post office to be forthwith
  forwarded. I have the honor to be

    "'Your Excellency's most obedient servant,

                                        "'WINFIELD SCOTT.

    "'_His Excellency_, GOVERNOR REYNOLDS.'"


_From the Richmond Enquirer, October 12, 1832._

"In laying the following article before our readers, our own personal
feelings, as well as a just sense of gratitude to a meritorious
officer, prompts us to add that we have known Winfield Scott long and
have known him intimately, and that the conduct here attributed to
him is precisely such as we should have expected, from his ardent
patriotism, his humane disposition, and his distinguished
intelligence."

_From the Illinois Galenian, September 12, 1832._

"GENERAL SCOTT.--Perhaps on no former occasion has a more
arduous and responsible duty been confided to any officer of our
Government than that with which this gentleman has been clothed, in
prosecuting to final issue the savage war upon our borders. And we
hesitate not to say that in our estimation a better selection could
not have been made.

"It might suffice, in justification of this assertion, to instance the
promptitude of his movements to the scene of action, the ease with
which he overcame space, and the facility with which he surmounted all
obstacles opposed to the accomplishment of his object.

"But he had an enemy to encounter far more terrible than Black Hawk
and his adherents--an enemy that bid defiance to military prowess and
baffled all the skill of the tactician.

"That loathsome epidemic, the direful scourge of the Eastern
hemisphere, the cholera, invaded his camp. Here was a new foe that had
never yet been conquered. Victim after victim fell under its ravages.
The general might have retired to some healthy clime, where he would
have been freed from this pestilence, but not while his officers and
men were falling around him; humanity prompted him to remain and
succor a distressed army. During our stay at Rock Island the cholera
commenced its work of death; and seeing the general almost every day,
we had frequent opportunities of witnessing his untiring perseverance
in and constant personal attention to all those duties appertaining to
his official station, the calls of humanity, and the best interests of
the country.

"On the arrival of the companies from Chicago (among whom the cholera
had been severe) they were stationed on an island in Rock River,
several miles from the fort, and all communication prohibited by
special order. Some of his aids, on their way to Rock Island, having
violated this order (without knowing it was given), were immediately
ordered back to Rock River, while the general was left alone to
perform all their respective duties. When a soldier was attacked with
cholera he was the first to render assistance by the application of
friction to the extremities in order to attract the fluids from the
large internal vessels to the surface of the body. At the bake-house
we found him one day giving instructions how to make the most
wholesome bread, and on the next day we beheld one of his bakers
consigned to the tomb. And if we follow him on, we next find him
instructing those employed in the culinary art, so cautious is he
about everything that his men eat and drink. And in order to insure
temperance among the soldiers, he issued an order requiring every man
found drunk to dig a grave.

"In his orders he was bound to be severe, and in their enforcement he
was equally rigid. His whole soul seemed to be devoted to the benefit
of his army.

"On one occasion he observed that his own honor, the duty he owed his
country and his fellow-men, required his personal attention at his
post, and also the severity of his orders. And if, in attending to
his duties, he should be so unfortunate as to lose his life, the army
could get along as well without him, but he could not get along
without an army. Thus, with Roman firmness and a disinterested
devotion of life to his country, has he remained at his post of duty.
Such conduct deserves the highest praise, and we feel confident that
it will be awarded by a grateful and virtuous community."

The cholera having subsided by the middle of September, negotiations
were opened with the various Indian tribes at Rock Island. General
Scott and Governor Reynolds were the commissioners on the part of the
United States to make treaties with the Sacs, Foxes, Winnebagoes,
Sioux, and Menomonees. The leading man among the Indians was
Ke-o-Kuck, a Sac chief, who was of commanding appearance, eloquent in
speech, and a brave warrior. He was not, however, a hereditary chief,
and for this reason his tribe deposed him; but on General Scott's
request he was again replaced as chief. General Scott conducted the
negotiations in the way of speech-making at the request of his
associate, Governor Reynolds. The speeches of Scott and those of the
Indian chiefs were taken down by Captain Richard Bache, of the army,
and are to be found in the archives of the War Department at
Washington.

The result of the treaties was the cession to the United States by the
Sacs and Foxes of about six million acres of land, the greater part of
which is now included in the State of Iowa; and the United States gave
in consideration of this cession a reservation of nearly four hundred
square miles, on the Iowa River, to Ke-o-Kuck and his band, and agreed
to pay the Indians an annuity of twenty thousand dollars per annum
for thirty years to pay the debts of the tribe, and to employ a
blacksmith and a gunsmith for them. The treaty also provided for ample
space for hunting, and planting-grounds for the Indians and their
posterity. A similar treaty was made with the other Indians. General
Scott, on his return to Washington, was complimented by General Cass,
the Secretary of War, "upon the fortunate consummation of his arduous
duties," and he expressed his entire approbation of the whole course
of his proceedings during a series of difficulties requiring higher
moral courage than the operations of an active campaign under ordinary
circumstances.


CHAPTER IV.

Troubles in South Carolina growing out of the tariff acts apprehended,
and General Scott sent South--Action of the nullifiers--Instructions
in case of an outbreak--Action of the South Carolina Legislature.


On the conclusion of the treaties with the Indian tribes, mentioned in
the preceding chapter, General Scott went to New York, where he
arrived in October, 1832. A few days after his arrival he received an
order to proceed to Washington.

The passage of the tariff act of 1828 had produced great excitement in
several of the Southern States, but especially in South Carolina. By
this act the duties on foreign goods imported into this country were
raised much higher than by any previous tariff. It was passed for the
protection of American manufactures, of which at that time none were
in the South, but all, or nearly all, in the New England States.

The cotton planters of South Carolina opposed and resisted it on the
ground that it was not only in violation of the Constitution of the
United States, but injurious to their interests, and in the interest
of other States as opposed to theirs. They argued, as it is now
argued, that a tariff is a tax, and that this tariff discriminated in
favor of certain portions of the country as against other portions,
and that therefore it unquestionably violated the fundamental law of
the land.

This tariff act was passed on May 15, 1828, and on the 12th of June
following the citizens of Colleton District, South Carolina, met at
the courthouse in Walterborough and adopted an address to the people.
Among other things this address stated: "For it is not enough that
imposts laid for protection of domestic manufactures are oppressive,
and transfer in their operation millions of our property to Northern
capitalists. If we have given our bond, let them take our blood. Those
who resist these imposts must deem them unconstitutional, and the
principle is abandoned by the payment of one cent--as much as ten
millions." The address assumed "open resistance to the laws of the
Union."

Governor Taylor was asked to convene the Legislature. He declined to
take action on the request of the Colleton meeting, on the ground that
"the time of great public excitement is not a time propitious for cool
deliberation or wise determination."

George McDuffie, a member of the House of Representatives in Congress
from South Carolina, and a man of high character and great ability,
was the leading spirit in the opposition to this tariff and resistance
to its enforcement. At a dinner in Columbia, S.C., he recommended that
the State fix a tax on Northern manufactured goods, and proposed as a
toast "Millions for defense, but not a cent for tribute." In the
district of St. Helena, S.C., a public meeting was held at which this
resolution was adopted:

"_Resolved_, That, differing from those of our fellow-citizens who
look to home production, or more consumption of the fabrics of the
tariff States as a relief from our present burdens, we perceive in
these expedients rather an ill-judged wasting of the public energy and
diversion of the public mind than an adequate remedy for the true
evil, the usurping of Congress, which (since that body will never
construe down its own powers) can be checked, in our opinion, only by
the action of States opposed to such usurpation."

The reference to "expedients, rather an ill-judged wasting of the
public energy," was to the action of certain meetings in South
Carolina where it was resolved to wear only their own manufactures,
and abstain wholly from those made north of the Potomac. The
supporters of nullification defended themselves on constitutional
grounds and on the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions of 1798. Congress
revised the tariff in May, 1832, modifying some of the duties imposed
by the act of 1828. In October, 1832, the Legislature of South
Carolina passed an act providing for the calling of a convention of
the people of the State.

The object of the convention was "to take into consideration the
several acts of the Congress of the United States imposing duties on
foreign imports, for the protection of domestic manufactures or for
other unauthorized objects; to determine on the character thereof, and
to devise the means of redress."

The convention authorized under this act assembled on November 19,
1832. An ordinance was passed to provide for arresting the operations
of certain acts of Congress of the United States, purporting to be
taxes laying duties and imposts on the importation of foreign
commodities. On its final passage the word "arresting" was stricken
out and the word "nullifying" substituted in its place.

The substance of this ordinance was to interdict the action of the
courts, and to require all officers to take an oath to obey the
ordinance and the laws passed to give it effect. It also declared that
the tariff acts of 1828 and 1832 were null, void, and not binding on
the State, its officers or citizens. It further declared it to be
unlawful for any of the constituted authorities of the State or of the
United States to enforce the payment of the duties imposed by the act
within the limits of the State of South Carolina. Other provisions
were that no case of law or equity decided in South Carolina, in which
was involved the question of the validity of the ordinance of the
South Carolina convention, or any act of its Legislature to give it
effect, should be appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States,
or be regarded if appealed; and that, if the General Government should
employ force to carry these acts into effect, or endeavor to coerce
the State by closing its ports, South Carolina would consider the
Union dissolved, and would proceed to organize a separate government.
A union convention was called in South Carolina to endeavor to
suppress the movement inaugurated by the ordinance of the recent
convention.

The States of Alabama, Tennessee, and Georgia--the first through its
Governor, Gayle, and the latter by resolutions of their
Legislatures--took strong anti-nullification grounds. On December 10th
President Andrew Jackson issued his famous proclamation exhorting all
persons to obey the laws, and denouncing the South Carolina ordinance.
He said in this proclamation: "I consider, then, the power to annul a
law of the United States, assumed by one State, incompatible with the
existence of the Union, contradicted expressly by the letter of the
Constitution, unauthorized by its spirit, inconsistent with every
principle on which it was founded, and destructive of the great object
for which it was formed."

"This, then, is the position in which we stand. A small majority of
the citizens of one State in the Union have elected delegates to a
State convention. That convention has ordained that all the revenue
laws of the United States must be repealed, or that they are no longer
a member of the Union. The Governor of that State has recommended to
the Legislature the raising of an army to carry the secession into
effect, and that he may be empowered to give clearance to vessels in
the name of the State. No act of violent opposition to the laws has
yet been committed, but such a state of things is hourly apprehended;
and it is the intent of this instrument to proclaim not only that the
duty imposed on me by the Constitution--'to take care that the laws be
faithfully executed'--shall be performed to the extent of the powers
already vested in me by law, or of such other as the wisdom of
Congress shall devise and intrust to me for that purpose, but to warn
the citizens of South Carolina, who have been deluded into an
opposition to the laws, of the danger they will incur by obedience to
the illegal and disorganizing ordinance of the convention; to exhort
those who have refused to support it to persevere in their
determination to uphold the Constitution and laws of their country,
and to point out to all the perilous situation into which the good
people of that State have been led; and that the course they are
urged to pursue is one of ruin and disgrace to the very State whose
rights they affect to support."

This proclamation, of which the foregoing are extracts, was signed on
December 10, 1832. The ordinance adopted by the convention of South
Carolina was passed November 24th; and the Legislature of South
Carolina, which had formulated laws necessary to carry out the
ordinance, adjourned on December 21st.

President Jackson, in anticipation of the troubles likely to arise,
had, as early as October 29th, directed General Macomb to issue an
order to Major Heileman, commanding the United States troops at
Charleston, stating that "it is deemed necessary that the officers in
the harbor of Charleston should be advised of the possibility of
attempts being made to surprise, seize, and occupy the forts committed
to them. You are therefore especially charged to use your utmost
vigilance in counteracting such attempts. You will call personally on
the commanders of Castle Pinckney and Fort Moultrie, and instruct them
to be vigilant to prevent surprise in the night or day on the part of
any set of people whatever who may approach the forts with a view to
seize and occupy them. You will warn the said officers that such an
event is apprehended, and that they will be held responsible for the
defense, to the last extremity, of the forts and garrisons under their
respective commands, against any assault, and also against intrigue
and surprise.

"The attempt to surprise the forts and garrisons, it is expected, will
be made by the militia, and it must be guarded against by constant
vigilance, and repulsed at every hazard. These instructions you will
be careful not to show to any persons other than the commanding
officers of Castle Pinckney and Fort Moultrie."

Two companies of artillery were ordered to Fort Moultrie on November
7th, and on the 12th General Macomb directed Major Julius Frederick
Heileman that a building called "The Citadel," in Charleston, and
which was the property of the State of South Carolina, should, with
its State arms, be delivered up if demanded by the State authorities.
He was further instructed to act in this matter with the greatest
courtesy; but should he be attacked, he must make a stubborn defense.

This was the state of affairs in South Carolina at the time stated. On
November 18th, President Jackson, after a conference with General
Scott, ordered him on a confidential or secret order to Charleston.
The order was, of course, issued from the War Department by direction
of the President, and the main points of it are as follows:

  " ... The possibility of such a measure furnishes sufficient reason
  for guarding against it, and the President is therefore anxious that
  the situation and means of defense of these fortifications should be
  inspected by an officer of experience, who could also estimate and
  provide for any dangers to which they may be exposed. He has full
  confidence in your judgment and discretion, and it is his wish that
  you repair immediately to Charleston and examine everything
  connected with the fortifications. You are at liberty to take such
  measures either by strengthening these defenses or by re-enforcing
  these garrisons with troops drawn from any other posts, as you may
  think prudence and a just precaution require.

  "Your duty will be one of great importance and of great delicacy.
  You will consult fully and freely with the collector of the port of
  Charleston, and you will take no step, except what relates to the
  immediate defense and security of the posts, without their order and
  concurrence. The execution of the laws will be enforced through the
  civil authority and by the method pointed out by the acts of
  Congress. Should, unfortunately, a crisis arise when the ordinary
  power in the hands of the civil officers shall not be sufficient for
  this purpose, the President shall determine the course to be taken
  and the measures adopted. Till, therefore, you are otherwise
  instructed, you will act in obedience to the legal requisitions of
  the proper civil officers of the United States.

  "I will thank you to communicate to me freely and confidentially
  upon every topic upon which you may deem it important for the
  Government to receive information.

  "Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                               "LEWIS CASS."

General Scott, acting in obedience to these orders, arrived in
Charleston November 28th, two days after the passage of the ordinance.
He found, on his arrival and after conferring with many of the leading
people, that the sentiment in regard to the action of the convention
was divided, there seeming to be as many persons in opposition as
those who favored it.

His arrival created no special notice, as he had been in the habit of
visiting Charleston about this time of year in discharge of his
duties as inspector. It should be added to what has been said in
regard to his conference with President Jackson before leaving
Washington, that the President announced to him in the most emphatic
terms that "the Union must and shall be preserved." On asking General
Scott for any suggestions he had to make, the general told the
President that Fort Moultrie, Castle Pinckney, and the arsenal at
Augusta should be strongly garrisoned. He also advised that a number
of troops, sloops of war, and revenue cutters would be needed at
Charleston to enforce the collection of duties on foreign
importations. The President said to him: "Proceed at once and execute
those views. You have my _carte blanche_ in respect to troops; the
vessels shall be there, and written instructions will follow you."

The President at this interview invited General Scott to remain and
take supper with him. He declined, on the ground that he desired to
call on his friend ex-President Adams before leaving. To this
President Jackson replied, "That's right; never forget a friend."

On his journey he met with an accident and sprained his ankle. This
turned out a fortunate thing, for it enabled him to delay so as to
spend needed time in Charleston, Savannah, and Augusta without
exciting any suspicion of the real object of his visit. Had it been
known that he was there to make preparations for defense and to
strengthen the garrisons, it would have excited the populace who
sustained the action of the convention, and might have resulted in
open hostilities. He visited Fort Moultrie and Castle Pinckney, and
gave oral confidential orders to enlarge and strengthen both places.
Orders were also sent for re-enforcements in single companies, which
excited no alarm. These important matters being accomplished, he went
to Savannah and posed as a sick man, for the reason that an early
return to Fort Moultrie might have excited alarm. In the latter part
of January he returned by sea to Fort Moultrie, but his presence there
was unknown to all outside of the fort.

In the meantime the leaders of nullification had, at a large meeting,
agreed that no attempt to execute the ordinance should be undertaken
before the adjournment of Congress on March 3d following. The
Legislature of South Carolina, at its meeting in December, had passed
laws for the raising of troops and providing money for the purchase of
arms and ammunition, and many organizations of volunteers had been
formed wearing the palmetto cockade and buttons. A very decided and
unexpected rebuff was given by the Court of Appeals of South Carolina,
which decided, in the case of State _vs._ Hunt (2 Hills, S.C.
Reports), that the ordinance which required the citizens of South
Carolina to take a test oath of exclusive allegiance to the State was
unconstitutional. It is a curious piece of history that the palmetto
buttons worn by the volunteer nullifiers were manufactured in
Connecticut.

There was in Charleston, as in other parts of the State, a very large
number of Unionists. Both parties in Charleston held frequent
meetings, and it was with great difficulty that riots or encounters
between the two were prevented.

The officers of the army and navy at and near Charleston during these
perilous times showed great prudence. Their first public display was
the celebration of Washington's birthday; but the most intense
nullifier could raise no objection to this. During these exciting
times a fire broke out in the city of Charleston, and General Scott,
being one of the first to observe it, called for volunteers and went
to the scene, and, with the assistance of the naval volunteers and men
of the army, succeeded in extinguishing the fire. This act of General
Scott, seconded by army and navy men, had much to do with quieting the
intense political excitement in Charleston.

In the latter part of January, 1833, the General Assembly of Virginia
passed a resolution asking Congress to modify the tariff, and also to
appoint a commissioner to South Carolina and endeavor to conciliate
that State. The commissioner appointed was Benjamin Watkins Leigh. On
his request, Mr. James Hamilton, president of the South Carolina
convention, called it to assemble, when it rescinded the ordinance,
the troops which had been called were disbanded, and the whole State
and country were happily relieved of an impending internecine war.
Congress had passed the compromise act, and the United States troops
and vessels which had been sent to Charleston were withdrawn, and
peace and quiet again dawned on the lately excited city.

Mr. Leigh, the Commissioner of Virginia to South Carolina, says of
General Scott's part of that historic period: ... "General Scott had a
large acquaintance with the people of Charleston; he was their friend;
but his situation was such that many of the people--the great majority
of them--looked upon him as a public enemy.... He thought, as I
thought, that the first drop of blood shed in civil war--in civil war
between the United States and one of the States--would prove an
immedicable wound, which would end in a change of our institutions. He
was resolved, if possible, to prevent a resort to arms, and nothing
could have been more judicious than his conduct. Far from being prone
to take offense, he kept his temper under the strictest guard, and was
most careful to avoid giving occasion for offense; yet he held himself
ready to act if it should become necessary, and he let it be known
that he strictly understood the situation. He sought the society of
the leading nullifiers, and was in their company as much as they would
let him be, but he took care never to say a word to them on the
subject of political differences; he treated them as friends. From the
beginning to the end his conduct was as conciliatory as it was firm
and sincere, evincing that he knew his duty and was resolved to
perform it, and yet his principal object and purpose was peace. He was
perfectly successful, when the least imprudence might have resulted in
a serious collision."


CHAPTER V.

Events that led to the war in Florida--Treaty of Camp Moultrie and its
stipulations--Complaints of Indians and whites--Treaty of Payne's
Landing--Objections of the Indians to complying with the latter
treaty--Councils and talks with the Seminoles--Assiola--Murder
of mail carrier Dalton--Murder of Charley Amathla--Dade's
massacre--Murder of General Thompson and others--General
Clinch--Depredations by the Indians on the whites and by the
latter on the Indians--Volunteers--Military departments of Gaines
and Scott.


It is proper to give as brief a _résumé_ as the subject will permit of
the events that led to the outbreak of hostilities in Florida.

General Jackson, when Governor of Florida in 1821, urged upon the
Government the necessity of adopting measures to send back to their
own reservations the large number of Creek Indians who had left their
nation and settled with other tribes in Florida. He argued that this
was an encroachment by the Creeks, and that an increase of Indians in
this territory would lead to unhappy results. Colonel Joseph M. White,
the delegate from the territory of Florida, fully concurred with
General Jackson in this view, and so informed the Secretary of War.

The Government, disregarding these wise suggestions, entered into a
treaty with the Florida Indians, September 18, 1823, at Camp Moultrie,
stipulating for their continued residence in the territory for twenty
years. They were by this treaty established in the heart of the
country, and their claims to the lands acknowledged and guaranteed.
The treaty provided, among other things, that the Seminole Indians
should relinquish all their claim to lands in Florida except a tract
estimated to contain some five millions of acres, within the limits of
which they agreed to abide.

The Government of the United States agreed to pay to the Indians two
thousand dollars to aid them in removal to the new reservation, to
furnish them with certain articles of husbandry and stock to the
amount of six thousand dollars, to furnish them with corn, meat, and
salt for one year, to pay them forty-five hundred dollars for their
improvements on their surrendered lands, to allow them one thousand
dollars per annum for a blacksmith and one thousand dollars per annum
for a school fund, and these last two allowances to extend during the
term of the treaty. Complaints were made by the whites, and counter
complaints by the Indians, of depredations, but the preponderance of
testimony is that the whites were the principal aggressors. These
Indians were slave-holders, having a number of negroes held in
slavery by the same tenure that slaves were held by the whites in
Florida. The whites commenced and carried on a systematic and
continued robbery of the slaves and cattle belonging to the Indians,
sending them to Mobile for sale. A protest was made by the inhabitants
of ten of the Seminole towns, complaining in substance that the white
people had carried all their cattle off; that the white men first
commenced to steal from them; that within three years six Indians had
been killed by the whites, admitting that the Indians had taken
satisfaction, but were not even on that score by three.

Complaints from whites of Indian depredations and counter complaints
from the Indians became so frequent that the President determined to
endeavor to make a new treaty, abrogating that of Camp Moultrie. For
this purpose Colonel James Gadsden, of Florida, was appointed a
commissioner to carry out this purpose. The Indians, by invitation,
assembled at Payne's Landing, on the Ocklawaha River, on May 8, 1832.
The points agreed upon were that the Seminole Indians relinquish their
claim to the tract of land reserved for them by the second article of
the Camp Moultrie treaty, containing four million thirty-two thousand
six hundred and forty acres, and to remove west of the Mississippi
River and there become a constituent part of the Creeks.

The United States engaged to pay the Seminoles fifteen thousand four
hundred dollars as a consideration for the improvements on the lands
which they abandoned, and a further sum of two hundred dollars each to
two negroes, Abraham and Cudjoe, each Indian to be furnished with a
blanket and homespun frock, and a sufficient quantity of corn, meat,
and salt for one year's support after arriving in the new reservation.
Two blacksmiths, at one thousand dollars a year, were agreed to be
furnished for a period of ten years, and an annuity of three thousand
dollars for fifteen years to be paid after their arrival in the West;
which sum, together with the four thousand dollars stipulated for in
the Camp Moultrie treaty, making seven thousand dollars per annum, was
to be paid to the Creek nation with their annuities.

In order to relieve the Seminoles from vexatious demands on them for
their slaves and other property, the United States stipulated to have
the matter investigated, and to liquidate such as were satisfactory,
provided the amount did not exceed seven thousand dollars. This treaty
was executed on May 9, 1832, and signed by Holata Amathla and fourteen
other chiefs. Seven of the chiefs were deputed to visit and explore
the new country, accompanied by their interpreter and by Major John
Fagan, formerly Indian agent in Florida. The delegation reported their
approval of the country, and the ratification on the part of the
Indians was made by seven of the chiefs at Fort Gibson, La.

This ratification by the seven chiefs was in excess of their
authority, as they were only authorized to examine the country and
report the result of their mission to a general council of the nation,
which was to be convened on their return.

Colonel Gadsden, the commissioner on the part of the United States,
addressed a letter to the Secretary of War, in which he said: "There
is a condition prefixed to the agreement without assenting to which
the Florida Indians most positively refused to negotiate for their
removal west of the Mississippi. Even with the condition annexed,
there was a reluctance, which with some difficulty was overcome, on
the part of the Indians to bind themselves by any stipulations before
a knowledge of the facts and circumstances would enable them to judge
of the advantages or disadvantages of the disposition the Government
of the United States wished to make of them. They were finally
induced, however, to assent to the agreement....

"The payment for property alleged to have been plundered was the
subject most pressed by the Indians, and in yielding to their wishes
on this head a limitation has been fixed in a sum which I think,
however, will probably cover all demands which can be satisfactorily
proved. Many of the claims are for negroes said to have been enticed
away from their owners during the protracted Indian disturbances, of
which Florida has been for years the theater. The Indians allege that
the depredations were mutual, that they have suffered in the same
degree, and that most of the property claimed was taken as reprisal
for property of equal value lost by them. They could not, therefore,
yield to the justice of restitution solely on their part, and probably
there was no better mode of terminating the difficulty than by that
provided for in the treaty now concluded. The final ratification of
the treaty will depend upon the opinion of the seven chiefs selected
to explore the country west of the Mississippi River. If that
corresponds to the description given, or is equal to the expectations
formed of it, there will be no difficulty on the part of the
Seminoles. If the Creeks, however, raise any objections, this will be
a sufficient pretext on the part of some of the Seminole deputation to
oppose the execution of the whole arrangement for removal."

On March 8, 1835, the Hon. John H. Eaton addressed a letter to Lewis
Cass, Secretary of War, raising the question whether the treaty of
Payne's Landing was valid, it not having been ratified until 1834. To
this the Secretary replied that, the question had been referred to the
Attorney General, and that he had decided that the obligation of the
treaty was not affected by the delay, but that the Indians might be
required to move in the years 1835-'37.

The Indian agent called a meeting of the Indians, who assembled in
council on October 23, 1834. The agent stated that he had convened
them by order of the President, who said that he had complied with all
the promises made to them, and that they must prepare to move by the
beginning of cold weather. He further stated that he had a proposition
to them from the Creeks, and exhibited a map of the country allotted
to them west of the Mississippi.

The proposition from the Creeks was that the Seminoles, instead of
settling in the country allotted to them, in a separate body, settle
promiscuously among the Creeks. The agent stated in regard to this
last proposition: "It is left, as it should be, entirely optional with
you, and no persons but yourselves have any right to say you shall or
shall not accede to the proposition." Other questions were submitted,
such as the disposition of their cattle, whether they preferred to
march by land or go by water, and the manner in which they desired the
annuity paid them. The Indians then retired for a private council, and
on their return Holata Amathla said: "My brothers, we have now heard
the talk that our father at Washington has sent us. He says that we
made a treaty at Payne's Landing, and we have no excuse now for not
doing what we promised; we must be honest. Let us go, my brothers, and
talk it over, and don't let us act like fools."

At four o'clock in the afternoon of the same day the Indians met in
private council and were addressed by Assiola, in which he opposed
emigrating from Florida to the Creek country, denouncing the Creeks
as bad Indians. He also denounced the agent for advising them to
remove "from the lands which we live on--our homes and the graves of
our fathers." He announced that when the Great Spirit told him to go
he would go. But he said the Great Spirit had told him not to go. He
also threatened the white people with his rifle, for he still had
that, and some powder and lead. He also said that if any of the
Indians wanted to go West they would not be permitted to do so.
Assiola was followed by Holata Amathla, who strongly urged his
brothers to abide by the treaty of Payne's Landing, and advised them
to "act honest and do as our great father at Washington tells us."
Jumper, the sense-keeper, also urged a compliance with the last-named
treaty, because if they did not comply the white men would make them.
Chief Arpincki proposed that Holata Amathla be selected to represent
to the agent the objections of the nation to removal. This was
declined by Holata Amathla, and Jumper was selected in his stead to
speak the sentiments of the people on the next day.

On October 24, 1834, the Indians again met in council. The agent asked
them if they were ready to reply to the proposals made to them. Holata
Mico and Miconopy made short talks. When Jumper rose he complained
that a treaty had been made or rather forced on the Indians at Payne's
Landing before the twenty years provided in the Camp Moultrie treaty
had expired. He was one of the chiefs who had gone to look at the new
lands and liked them, but did not like the neighbors they would have,
and spoke of these latter Pawnees as savages and horse thieves. He
told the agent that his talk always seemed good, but that the Indians
did not want to go West. Holata Amathla, who was also one of the
chiefs who went West, objected to his people removing there for
substantially the same reason as Jumper. Charley Amathla said that
seven years of the time stipulated in the Camp Moultrie treaty
remained unexpired. He did not say that he would not go, but did not
think he would give an answer until the expiration of the seven years.
He also complained that the distance to the West was so great that
many would die on the way. In these talks the chiefs spoke well of the
agent. The latter, in reply, said: "I have no answer to make to what
you have said to me to-day. My talk to you yesterday must and will
stand, and you must abide by it." He then repeated the question he had
previously submitted, and told them to deliberate further, and let him
know when they were ready to meet him. Another meeting was held on
October 25, 1834. The agent told them he was ready to receive their
answers. The speakers on the part of the Indians said their people
still refused to comply with the treaty of Payne's Landing and leave
their native country. They thought the agent was mad with them.
General Thompson, the agent, told them he was not mad, but was their
friend; that what they said was not an answer to his questions, and
added, "Your father, the President, will compel you to go." He argued
that the treaty of Payne's Landing had been duly signed. This was
denied by Miconopy, when the general told him he lied, and that by the
terms of the treaty the decision of the delegation sent out to view
the country was binding on the Seminoles, and they were compelled
under its provisions to move. He told them that the Payne's Landing
treaty abrogated that made at Camp Moultrie. Replying to Charley
Amathla's assertion that the last treaty had been forced upon them, he
said: "You say that the white people forced you into the treaty of
Payne's Landing. If you were so cowardly as to be forced by anybody to
do what you ought not to do, you are unfit to be chiefs, and your
people ought to hurl you from your stations." He explained to them the
white people's Government; that the Indians living among white people
might be charged with all kinds of offenses under the law, and would
not be permitted to testify themselves; that the Cherokees, Creeks,
Choctaws, and Chickasaws who live in the States were moving beyond the
Mississippi River, because they could not live under the white
people's laws, and the Seminoles were a small handful compared to
their number; that when the jurisdiction of the State government was
extended over them the Indian laws and customs would have to be
abolished; and told them it was this view of the subject that had
induced the President to settle them beyond Florida; and told them
further that the land to which they were to go should be theirs "while
grass grows and water runs," It was for this reason the treaty had
been made with them at Payne's Landing, and for the same reason they
would be compelled to keep it and comply with their bargain. His
speech was a long one, reiterating, elaborating, and emphasizing the
determination of the Government to make them move, whether they
desired to or not. During this speech the agent was interrupted by
Assiola, who urged Miconopy to be firm, and to assure the agent that
he did not care whether any more annuity was paid or not. The agent
closed by hoping that mature reflection would make them act like
honest men, and not compel him to report them to their father, the
President, "as faithless to your engagements." The Indians then,
through Assiola and Miconopy, announced positively and emphatically
that their answer had been made, and that they did not intend to move.
The agent told them that he was satisfied now that they were willfully
and entirely dishonest in regard to their engagements with the
President, and regretted that he had to so report them. He told them
the talk he had given them must and should stand, and directed them to
retire and prepare their stocks to receive their annuity on the
following day.

It will be remembered that by the treaty of Payne's Landing it was
stipulated that seven chiefs should be sent to examine the lands to
which it was proposed to remove the Seminoles. They were to report its
general aspect and fertility to the nation, but were not invested with
power to ratify the treaty. That was the province of the nation in
general council. Jumper, as stated in these pages, was one of the
chiefs selected for the purpose of examining and reporting upon the
new country. General Thompson, the agent, had told the chiefs in
council that "no person has a right to say to you, You shall go, or
that you shall accede to the proposition made to you by the Creeks;
but it is left, as it should be, entirely optional with you." This is
in singular contrast to the words heretofore quoted from the agent,
and altogether different from his assurance to one of the chiefs: "The
President, backed by the Secretary of War" (the Indian Bureau was
then under the jurisdiction of the War Department) "and the whole
Congress, never should compel me to act so dishonorably as to violate
the treaty [of Camp Moultrie] made with your people. If such a thing
were required of me I would spurn the President's commission and
retire to the bosom of my family." General Thompson reported to the
authorities at Washington what had taken place, as just related, and
stated that, in view of the circumstances, no doubt remained that the
Indians intended to resist the execution of the treaty of Payne's
Landing. After giving a full statement of the situation, he felt it
his "imperious duty" to urge the necessity of a strong re-enforcement
at Fort King, and the station of a strong force at Tampa Bay, as early
as possible. "An imposing force, thus marshaled to coerce the
refractory people, would have the effect to crush the hopes of the
chiefs and those who had been tampering with them into a proper
respect for the Government, afford protection to the neighboring white
settlements, and supersede the necessity of Holata Amathla and his
followers fleeing the country." At this time the force at the two
posts mentioned was two hundred and thirty-five men. General Thompson,
sustained by Governor William P. Duval, continued to urge upon the
Government, an increase of the military force. The latter, in a letter
to the Secretary of War, informed that official that even with a
respectable military force stationed at Fort Brooke and Tampa Bay the
agent and superintendents would have much difficulty in carrying the
treaty of Payne's Landing into effect. The necessity for additional
military force was urged by Generals Clinch and Eaton and Lieutenant
Joseph W. Harris, the disbursing agent. These representations went
unheeded. In the whole of Florida there were but two hundred and fifty
men of the United States army, while more than three thousand were
stationed at other convenient points totally inactive.

When the time came for the removal of the Big Swamp Indians they were
so notified. But having been previously informed that they would be
expected to go, they did nothing in the way of planting crops, and
were destitute of food. Corn was distributed by the agents to the most
needy. It was concluded to make another effort to secure their
peaceful removal, and on April 22, 1835, several hundred of them
assembled in council. After the council was opened General Thompson
explained to them the treaty of Payne's Landing, and read a letter
from President Jackson, in which he besought them as his children, to
whom he had always acted honestly and kind, to comply with the treaty
and go to the lands selected for them, telling them they must go; that
they had sold all their land and did not have a piece "as big as a
blanket to sit upon," and had no right to stay. The letter concluded:
"If you listen to the voice of friendship and truth, you will go
quietly and voluntarily; but should you listen to the bad birds that
are always flying about you, and refuse to remove, I have then
directed the commanding officer to remove you by force. This will be
done. I pray the Great Spirit, therefore, to incline you to do what is
right." After the letter had been read through and interpreted, Jumper
rose and opposed the treaty, but deprecated force. Miconopy and others
sustained Jumper's views _as to the treaty_, but were silent on the
question of forcible resistance. General Clinch then addressed them,
and told them the time of expostulation had passed, that persuasion
had been exhausted, and wound up by telling them "it was the question
now whether they would go of their own accord or go by force." On the
next morning the chiefs and warriors sent word to the agent that they
wanted to talk to him. On assembling, Miconopy was absent. Jumper, the
spokesman, announced that he stood firm, but the veteran chief Fueta
Susta Hajo (Black Dirt) spoke passionately and eloquently in favor of
the execution of the treaty. After he had concluded, General Thompson
placed on the table a paper, dated April 23, 1835, which pledged the
Seminole tribe to voluntarily acknowledge the treaty at Payne's
Landing on May 9, 1832, and the treaty concluded at Fort Gibson on
March 28, 1833 (the one signed by the seven chiefs who had gone to
visit the country to which the Seminoles were to remove), and freely
submitting and assenting to said treaties in all their provisions.
This paper received the signatures of eight principal chiefs, among
them Fueta Susta Hajo and eight subchiefs. Five of the principal
chiefs, Jumper among them, stood aloof and would not sign. Miconopy,
who was absent, sent word by Jumper that he would not abide by the
treaty. Upon this the agent said he would no longer regard Miconopy as
a chief, and said his name should be stricken from the council of the
nation. This action on the part of the agent was arbitrary and wholly
unauthorized, and was severely censured by General Cass, Secretary of
War.

On August 11th the mail carrier Dalton was met by a party of Micosukee
Indians six miles from Fort Brooke and killed. The body was found a
few days afterward, and General Clinch immediately sent a demand for
the surrender of the murderers, but they eluded capture by seeking
refuge in the "Old red sticks" in the neighborhood of Ouithlacoochee.
This murder, it was claimed, was in retaliation for the killing of an
Indian in the previous June.

On August 19, 1835, at the request of Holata Amathla and twenty-five
others, a council of the Seminoles was convened. At the request of the
other chiefs Holata Amathla opened the council, saying they had come
to talk about matters of great interest. He referred to the treaty of
Payne's Landing, the visit to the West of the seven chiefs, and the
promises that had been made; stated that the Seminoles wanted their
separate agent, and paid a high compliment to General Thompson, who,
he said, had always told them the truth. The speech was forwarded to
Washington, but no notice was taken of it. This nonaction on the part
of the authorities at Washington served to intensify the distrust and
suspicions of the Indians as to the good faith of the Government, and
caused many of those who had expressed a willingness to move to join
the ranks of those who objected to doing so. Hostilities soon
commenced. The Long Swamp and Big Swamp Indians commenced pillaging.
Three of them were caught and subjected to exceedingly cruel treatment
by the white settlers. Many outrages were perpetrated on both sides.
The Indians were notified to bring in all their cattle, ponies, and
hogs to be turned over to a United States agent and appraised, the
owners to be paid on their arrival across the Mississippi. Six of the
principal chiefs and some others surrendered their stock. The sale,
however, was indefinitely postponed. The Big Swamp Indians resolved
to retain possession of the country, and condemned to death all those
Indians who should oppose their views. This caused many of the
friendly Indians to take refuge in the United States forts. About four
hundred and fifty fled to Fort Brooke, and on November 9th they
encamped on the opposite side of Hillsboro River. The hostile Indians,
fearing that the secrets of their councils had become known, made
every effort to win over to their side those who were disposed to
comply with the treaty. Assiola and about four hundred warriors went
to the house of Charley Amathla and demanded that he pledge himself to
oppose removal. He declined, saying he would sacrifice his life before
he would violate the pledge he had given his great father. Assiola
attempted to shoot Charley, but was prevented by Abraham, the
interpreter. Assiola left, but soon returned with a small party to the
house and murdered him in cold blood. A number of the murdered man's
followers at once made their escape to Fort King, while others joined
the hostile party. Charley Amathla was regarded as a brave, resolute,
and upright man. He had saved the life of Assiola, and his murder was
an act of horrible ingratitude. The Indians now abandoned their homes
and took refuge in the impenetrable swamps.

At this time the entire military force in Florida amounted to four
hundred and eighty-nine officers and men, and were distributed as
follows: At St. Augustine, one company, fifty-three men; at Fort
Brooke, on Hillsboro Bay, three companies, one hundred and fifty-three
men; at Fort King, six companies, three hundred and fifty-three men.
The Seminoles were located in the peninsula of Florida, a region of
fens, swamps, and creeks almost inapproachable. They claimed that the
Government had not carried out in good faith the treaties made with
them. Their great leader and chief was Assiola, sometimes called
Powell, and improperly spelled Osceola, whose father was a white man
and his mother a woman of the Creek Indian tribe. Among most of the
tribes of Southern Indians the children took rank from the mother. He
was recognized among the Indians as a Creek. He did not inherit the
title or place of a chief, but won it by his native ability, cruelty,
and courage. In his early days he was insolent in his manners, and
kept apart from the society of his people.

When General Alexander Ramsay Thompson was agent of the United States
for these Indians, on one occasion Assiola appeared before him and
announced that the lands claimed by the Government belonged to the
Indians; that the Indians could take care of themselves, and did not
need General Thompson's services. He was arrested and placed in
confinement, and after being imprisoned some time expressed regret,
signed the treaty, and was released. Subsequently he rendered valuable
service in arresting criminals, and regained the confidence of the
whites. This confidence, however, was of short duration.

War having been declared in the name of the Florida Indians, a
detachment of volunteers with some regulars, under General Duncan L.
Clinch, moved to the Ouithlacoochee, the Indian encampment. Three days
before the event which will be described as occurring at
Ouithlacoochee, Major Francis Langhorne Dade, with a small command,
had moved from Fort Brooke to relieve the post of Fort King. Major
Dade and his command had marched sixty-five miles in five days,
intrenching themselves each night in their encampment. On the sixth
night they were attacked by Indians and negro allies, and out of one
hundred and twelve all were slain except three. The officers killed
were Major Francis Langhorne Dade, Captain George Washington Gardiner,
Captain William Frazier, Lieutenants William E. Basinger, J.L. Keayes,
Robert Richard Mudge, Richard Henderson, and Dr. John Slade Gatlin.
Total killed, officers and men, one hundred and seven; escaped, three.
A handsome monument has been erected to their memory at West Point.
Returning to General Duncan L. Clinch's advance on Ouithlacoochee,
here he was attacked by Assiola and his followers after he had crossed
the river; but the general succeeded in repelling the attack and
driving the Indians. While the battle resulting in the massacre of
Major Dade and his command was being fought, the death of Thompson and
others was effected within a few hundred yards of Fort King, on
February 28th. All of the troops except Thomas W. Lendrum's company of
the Third Artillery, about forty strong, had been withdrawn on the
26th, to re-enforce General Clinch at Lang Syne plantation, with a
view to his striking a blow at the families of the Indians supposed to
be concealed in the swamps and hammocks of the Ouithlacoochee River,
with the hope of drawing the Indian warriors out and bringing on a
general engagement. All those attached to the fort or agency were
directed not to pass beyond the picketing. Thompson slept inside the
defenses and passed the greater part of the day at the agency, about
one hundred yards beyond the works. The sutler, Rogers, had moved his
goods into the fort, but was in the habit of taking his meals at his
residence, six hundred yards away in the skirt of a hammock to the
southwest of the fort.

On the day of the massacre Lieutenant Constantine Smith, of the Second
Artillery, had dined with General Thompson, and after dinner the two
went out for a walk. They had proceeded about three hundred yards
beyond the agency office when they were fired upon by a party of
Indians who were concealed in the hammock on the border of which the
sutler's house stood. The reports of the rifles, and the war-whoop
repeated, were heard within a brief time, other volleys more remote
were fired, when the smoke of the firing was seen at the fort. Captain
Lendrum at once called out his men, who were at that time engaged in
strengthening the pickets. He was not aware of the absence from the
fort of General Thompson and Lieutenant Smith; he supposed the firing
was a ruse to draw him out and cut him off from the fort. Very soon
several whites and negroes came in and informed him that Mr. Rogers,
his clerks, and themselves had been surprised at dinner, and the three
former had fallen into the hands of the Indians. A small command was
at once dispatched to succor and pursue, but the butchery had been as
brief as it was complete, and a last war-whoop had been given as a
signal for retreat. The bodies of General Thompson, Lieutenant Smith,
and Mr. Kitzler were soon found and brought in; those of the others
were not found until the following morning. General Thompson's body
had fourteen bullets in it and a deep knife-wound in the left breast.
Lieutenant Smith and Mr. Kitzler had each received two bullets in the
head. The bodies of Rogers the sutler and Robert Suggs were
shockingly mangled, the skulls of each being broken, and all save
Suggs were scalped. The party was led by Assiola, and consisted of
fifty or sixty Micosukees. Two other Indians were in the party attired
as chiefs, but were not recognized. This information comes from an old
negro woman who was in the house and who concealed herself so as to
elude the Indians, and made her escape to the fort after the massacre.

Information of the butchery was at once dispatched to General Clinch.
General Richard Keith Call, with Colonels Richard C. Parish and Leigh
Read, having arrived on the 29th with about five hundred volunteers
from the adjoining counties, who had previously been ordered to scour
the country on the right and left flank, joined the United States
troops, numbering about two hundred under General Clinch. Orders were
issued for a forward movement at sunrise on December 29th. They
arrived near the Ouithlacoochee on the 30th, and threw up breastworks
around their encampment. On arriving at the river next morning it was
found too deep to be forded. No Indians being in sight, one of the men
swam the river and brought over a canoe. As only seven men could be
taken over at a time, the work of crossing the troops was slow and
tedious. General Clinch and Colonels Samuel Parkhill and Read crossed
over, and, in conjunction with General Call, began the construction of
rafts on which the baggage and stores could be crossed over. The
regulars were all over by twelve o'clock, and Major Alexander C.W.
Fanning marched them into an open field surrounded on all sides either
by a thick swamp or hammock, and there formed them into line,
awaiting the crossing of the volunteers. When about fifty of the
volunteers had crossed, and the officers were engaged in
superintending the construction of the rafts, an alarm was given that
the Indians were upon them. General Call at once put his men in line,
and the Indians opened fire, but the volunteers poured a heavy volley
into the hammock, which silenced the fire of the Indians for a time;
but they soon collected their forces and opened a galling fire on the
regulars. General Clinch ordered a charge, which was gallantly led by
Major Fanning, but the Indians maintained their ground. A second
charge was more successful, driving the Indians some distance back.
The chiefs made every effort to rally them, but without success.

During the battle General Call, Colonel John Warren, and Major James
G. Cooper, with a number of volunteers, crossed the river at imminent
peril, and the two latter immediately engaged and fought with the most
determined bravery. General Call had formed the volunteers that last
crossed into two parallel lines, placing one above and the other below
the crossing place, for the purpose of protecting the troops on the
other side and those who were recrossing with the dead and wounded. He
therefore did not reach the field until the enemy were repulsed,
though his services were eminently useful in directing the crossing.
Clinch at this time was not advised of the disaster to Major Dade's
command.

The term of service of the volunteers having expired, General Clinch
marched them, on January 2d, to Fort Drane and disbanded them. In this
last-named engagement the regulars and volunteers, numbering, all
told, two hundred and twenty-seven men--under the able leadership of
Clinch, Major Campbell Graham, Major Fanning, Colonel John Warren,
General Richard K. Call, Cooper, and Lieutenant George Read--succeeded
in defeating over seven hundred Indians who had chosen their ground
and were protected by the swamps and hammocks. The volunteer officers,
to whom great credit was due, were Major (afterward Brigadier General)
Leigh Read, whose horse was shot under him, Colonel John Warren,
Colonel Parkhill (of Richmond, Va.), Colonel William J. Mills, Major
Cooper, Captain Martin Scott, and Captain William J. Bailey. The
services of General Call and Majors Gamble and Wellford were of great
value. General Clinch makes mention of Major J.S. Little his
aid-de-camp, Captains Gustavus S. Drane, Charles Mellon, and Gates,
Lieutenants George Henry Talcott, Erastus A. Capron, John Graham,
William Seaton Maitland, and Horace Brooks, of the United States army,
and Colonel McIntosh, Lieutenants Youman, Stewart, Nathaniel W.
Hunter, Cuthbert, and Adjutant Joseph A. Phillips, of the Florida
volunteers, of the officers of the medical staff. Special mention was
made of Drs. Richard Weightman, Hamilton, Philip G. Randolph, and
Brandon. The returns of the killed and wounded were as follows:

REGULARS.
Killed, 2 artificers and 2 privates                               4
Wounded, 1 captain and 2 lieutenants                          3
Two sergeants and 4 corporals                                 6
Private soldiers                                             43
                                                             --
                                                             52
VOLUNTEERS.
Wounded, Colonel Warren, Major Cooper, and Lieutenant Youman  3
Private soldiers                                              4
                                                             --
                                                              7  59 = 63

Previous to and immediately after this engagement the Indians divided
themselves into small parties for the purpose of devastating the
country. They made their appearance simultaneously in the southern
part of the peninsula as far north as Picolata and from the extreme
east below St. Augustine to the west, carrying off everything that was
useful to them and destroying the remainder. At New River, on the
southeast side of the peninsula, they murdered the wife, children, and
teacher in the family of Mr. Cooley, carrying off provisions and
horses, and setting fire to the house on their departure.

The settlements in that neighborhood were abandoned, the inhabitants
taking refuge near the lighthouse on Cape Florida; but they had been
there only a short time when, the Indians making their appearance,
they were compelled to seek shelter and protection elsewhere.

The ruthless destruction of property and of lives on the east side of
the peninsula was heartrending. Their principal ravages, however, were
on the east side from St. Augustine to the south. Major Benjamin A.
Putnam, with a small detachment of men, marched into this country with
a view to drive the Indians away. He was met by an overpowering number
of the savages, and forced to retreat. In fact, no part of the State
seemed to be free from these murderous savages.

General Clinch made requisitions on the Governors of Georgia, South
Carolina, and Alabama to aid the Floridians in their unequal warfare
with the savages. It was felt by the citizens of Florida that the
Government at Washington showed great apathy, if not real
indifference, to their condition. A meeting was called in Charleston,
S.C., early in January, for the purpose of aiding the people of
Florida with men and means, but General Eustis informed the meeting
that General Clinch had sufficient force and supplies under his
command to subdue any number of Indians and negroes that could be
brought to oppose him. On January 12th, intelligence having been
received from General Clinch asking for six hundred men, the committee
conferred with General Eustis and requested him to send a company of
United States troops with arms and ammunition for the defense of St.
Augustine. This was granted, and the citizens of Charleston chartered
a steamboat and placed on board one thousand bushels of corn, one
hundred barrels of flour, thirty barrels of beef, twenty barrels of
pork, and ten tierces of rice. On January 20th another meeting was
called to raise volunteers for Florida. The banks of Charleston
subscribed twenty-five thousand dollars as a loan to the Government.
The committee dispatched a schooner, loaded with corn, rice, bread,
beef, pork, and military and hospital stores, and sent a physician to
attend the sick.

Four companies of volunteers were put in motion on the 27th for St.
Augustine--viz., the Washington Light Infantry, Captain Ravenel;
Washington Volunteers, Captain Finley; German Fusileers, Captain
Timrod; and Hamburgh Volunteers, Captain Cunningham. These volunteer
companies arrived at St. Augustine on January 30th, and were at once
sent out to scour the country for hostile Indians; they were, however,
relieved from duty on February 12th, on the arrival of the South
Carolina militia and United States troops under Major Reynold Marvin
Kirby. These troops were placed on the same duty as their
predecessors, but there was no engagement with the hostile Indians
until the latter part of March. An instance of the chivalric spirit of
the South Carolina volunteers is worthy of mention. On requisition of
the Governor for three companies to be furnished for Florida, Colonel
Chesnut, of Camden, called out his regiment. After telling them what
was wanted, he requested those who desired to volunteer in defense of
their suffering neighbors to step forward. The whole regiment marched
forward and tendered their services. At the same time four thousand
dollars were contributed for their equipment.

On receipt of the intelligence of the Dade massacre in Savannah, a
company of Georgia volunteers at once embarked for Picolata. A meeting
of the Richmond Blues and Richmond Hussars, of Augusta, was called for
the purpose of rendering aid. The city council appropriated the
necessary funds to supply arms and ammunition. The ladies of Augusta
volunteered to make the uniforms, and in less than a week these
volunteers were on their way to Picolata. These companies were
composed of the _élite_ of the city. Supplies of all kinds were sent
by Mayor Joseph Beard to Fort Drane and the posts on the St. John's,
which were poorly equipped with ordnance and quartermaster's stores.
He also sent a six-pounder cannon with necessary equipments of grape,
canister, and round shot, ten thousand rounds of musket ball and
buckshot cartridges, and a general supply of needful articles. Further
supplies were drawn on their arrival at Picolata.

This action of Quartermaster Beard was most fortunate, as it was found
that the military posts, by the neglect of the War Department or its
subalterns, had been reduced to such an extremity that in case of
attack they must necessarily have been shorn of the means of defense,
and would have fallen into the hands of the enemy. Nothing but the
timely arrival of supplies saved these posts from destruction.

There were no means of transportation at Picolata, and the
quartermaster procured horses at Jacksonville for the purpose of
forwarding one of the six-pounders to Fort Drane. Four of the horses
on arrival were found unfit for service, but, fortunately, General
John M. Hernandez was able to furnish ten chicken carts, and the
quartermaster was authorized to make impressments for transportation.
The Richmond Blues, one hundred and twelve strong, with the Camden and
Glynn mounted volunteers, numbering twenty-seven, and the Darien
Infantry of about thirty, under command of Captains Robertson, R.
Floyd, and Thomas S. Bryant respectively, took up line of march as an
escort to the two six-pounders, ordnance stores, twenty-five wagons
and carts laden with provisions, and passed through the heart of the
enemy's country, arriving on February 15th, without obstruction, at
the garrison of Fort Drane.

Supplies under the same escort were at once forwarded to Fort King.
Subsequently the following-named companies of Georgia volunteers
arrived in Florida: The Hancock Blues, Captain A.S. Brown; State
Fencibles, Captain J.A. Merriwether; Macon Volunteers, Captain Isaac
Seymour; Morgan Guards, Captain N.G. Foster; Monroe Musketeers,
Captain John Cureton; Washington Cavalry, Captain C.J. Malone; Baldwin
Cavalry, Captain W.F. Scott. Major Ross, with several companies of
mounted men from Georgia, arrived later, but owing to the advanced
season, much to their disappointment, did not enter the field.

Going back to January 15th, General Edmund Pendleton Gaines, who was
on a tour of inspection through the Western Department, first heard of
the troubles in Florida, and at once called on the Governor of
Louisiana and requested him to hold in readiness a body of volunteers
for service in subduing the Seminole Indians.

He also wrote to the adjutant general at Washington, urging that no
time be lost in succoring the troops in Florida, and saying, from his
knowledge of the Seminole character, that at least four thousand men
would be required to subdue them, protected and aided by a strong
naval force.

At that time the United States was divided into two military
departments by a line drawn from the southern part of Florida to the
northwestern extremity of Lake Superior. The Eastern Department was
under the command of General Winfield Scott, and the Western under
that of General Gaines, and by reference to a map it will be seen that
the line passed directly through the theater of hostilities in
Florida. The meeting of these two distinguished generals was purely
accidental. General Scott was in Washington when the news was received
of General Clinch's engagement with the Seminoles. After dispatching
his letter to the adjutant general, General Gaines proceeded to
Pensacola for the purpose of getting the co-operation of the naval
forces at that station. He found, however, that Commodores Dallas and
Bolton and Captain Webb had received orders to direct their attention
to the inlets of Florida, whence they had sailed. He received here the
most alarming intelligence of the state of affairs in Florida. He
proceeded to Mobile on January 18th, and there learned that Fort
Brooke was invested by the Indians and the garrison in great danger of
being cut off and slaughtered. He at once sent an express to General
Clinch, supposed to be at Fort King, stating that he would arrive at
Fort Brooke about February 8th with seven hundred men, and requested
General Clinch to take the field and march southward and form a
junction with him at Fort Brooke.

As the crisis demanded immediate action, and General Scott being
present to receive the instructions of the Government in person, he
was charged with the direction of the campaign without regard to
department boundaries. General Gaines had left his headquarters at
Memphis, Tenn., on a tour of inspection through his department, and it
was very uncertain when or where the orders and instructions of the
Government would reach him; and as the immediate services of an
officer of high rank of mind and discreet judgment were required to
maintain the neutrality of the United States during the war between
the Texans and Mexicans, General Gaines was selected for that
important duty. However, the official dispatches did not reach General
Gaines until he had already taken the field in Florida and marched
from Fort Brooke to Fort King, within ninety-five miles of where
General Scott had established his headquarters.

In pursuance of this plan, Lieutenant-Colonel David E. Twiggs was
ordered to receive into service the eight companies of volunteers
requested of the Governor of Louisiana, adding them to the command of
such regular troops as might be in the vicinity of New Orleans, all
to be held in readiness for a movement to Tampa Bay. The troops were
mustered into service on February 3d. General Gaines having arrived in
New Orleans on January 27th, chartered three steamers to convey the
troops and stores. The Legislature of Louisiana had appropriated
eighty-five thousand dollars for the equipment of her volunteers, and
on February 4th the chartered steamers, with the Louisiana volunteers
and one company of regulars, were under way, and on the same day
another steamer, with Colonel Twiggs and Companies B, E, G, H, I, and
K of the regulars, left New Orleans. The vessels arrived safely at
Hillsboro Bay, four miles distant from the garrison, on February 8th,
9th, and 10th, and the troops were immediately disembarked and camped
just outside of the fort.

The fort was a triangular work formed by pickets with blockhouses at
the apex, the base resting on the bay and flanked on the west by
Hillsboro River. It was found that there were at the fort about two
hundred regular troops, composed of Companies A, B, C, and H of the
Second Artillery, and Company A of the Fourth Infantry, with Majors
Francis S. Belton, Richard Augustus Zantzinger, and John Mountford,
Lieutenants John Breckenridge Grayson, Samuel McKenzie, John Charles
Casey, Thomas C. Legate, Edwin Wright Morgan, Augustus Porter Allen,
and Benjamin Alvord, and Surgeons Henry Lee Heiskell and Reynolds.
Major Belton was the commanding officer of the post.

General Gaines, having received instructions at Pensacola from the
Secretary of War to repair and take charge of the forces which were
assembling on the Mexican frontier, announced the fact to Colonel
Twiggs; but the troops, on hearing this, manifested great
dissatisfaction, and insisted that as they had volunteered to go under
the command of General Gaines, he in good faith should be their
leader. Following is the text of the letter of the Secretary of War to
General Gaines:

                      "WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, _January 23, 1835_.

  "SIR: I am instructed by the President to request that you
  will repair to some proper position near the western frontier of the
  State of Louisiana, and there assume the personal command of all the
  troops of the United States which are or may be employed in any part
  of the region adjoining the Mexican boundary.

  "It is not the intention of this order to change at all the
  relations between yourself and the military departments under your
  command, to require your personal presence at a point where public
  considerations demand the exercise of great discretion and
  prudence...."

The pressure not only from the troops in the field but from outside
sources was so great that General Gaines felt it his duty to enter the
field. Besides, that was thought a propitious time to begin active
operations, as the day before the arrival of the Louisiana troops the
friendly Indians had engaged the hostiles in a battle about four miles
from Fort Brooke. Although at this date, as before mentioned, General
Scott in Washington had been ordered to assume command in Florida,
General Gaines was entirely ignorant of such order.

Orders were accordingly issued assigning officers to their respective
duties. Captain Ethan A. Hitchcock, First Infantry, was announced
Assistant Inspector General of the Department, and Lieutenant James
Farley Izard, of the Dragoons, to be Acting Brigade Major. The
artillery and infantry of the United States army, together with the
Louisiana volunteer forces under Adjutant-General Persifor F. Smith,
were to constitute "the light brigade." (Here is an instance of a
staff officer being assigned to command troops.) The whole force to be
under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel David E. Twiggs, Fourth
Infantry.

The Louisiana volunteers were divided into two battalions, the first
composed of the companies of Captains Burt, Lee, Williams, Rogers, and
Thistle, under Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Lawson, Surgeon. (Here is
another case of a staff officer and surgeon ordered to the command of
troops.) The second battalion was composed of the companies of
Captains Samuel F. Marks, William H. Ker, Magee, Smith, Abadie, and
Barr, under Major Marks, the regiment to be commanded by Colonel
Persifor F. Smith. Orders for marching were issued on the 13th, the
troops to be supplied with forty rounds of ammunition and ten days'
rations, five of which were to be carried in haversacks. During the
Florida campaign the only articles drawn by the private volunteer
soldiers were bread or flour, pork or beef, while only a few drew
salt, sugar, and coffee. Major Richard M. Sands, of the Fourth
Infantry, and Captain Barr's company of volunteers, amounting in all
to one hundred and sixty men, were detailed for the protection of the
fort, under command of Major Sands.

The army marched in three columns, equidistant one hundred yards, with
a strong advance and rear guard. The center column was composed of
one company of volunteers as advance guard, under command of Brigade
Major Izard. Seven companies of United States artillery and infantry,
under command of Lieutenant-Colonel William Sewell Foster; the baggage
train, led by Captain Samuel Shannon; six companies of Louisiana
volunteers as rear guard, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Lawson.
Right column: Four companies of artillery acting as light infantry,
under command of Major Belton. Left column: Four companies of
Louisiana volunteers, under command of Major Marks. The entire command
consisted of nine hundred and eighty effective men, exclusive of the
detachment under Major Sands, which, added to the force, would make it
eleven hundred and forty men.

The Quartermaster's Department at the post was in a very bad
condition, destitute of nearly everything that was necessary for the
comfort of the troops. There was great scarcity of ordnance stores,
but, happily, an abundant supply of subsistence stores.


CHAPTER VI.

Review of the army by General Gaines--Arrival of General Gaines at
Fort King--Lieutenant Izard mortally wounded--Correspondence between
General Gaines and Clinch--General Scott ordered to command in
Florida--Disadvantages under which he labored--Preparations for
movements--Commencement of hostilities against the Indians.


General Gaines reviewed the army on February 13th, and, accompanied by
seventy-seven friendly Indians, took up line of march toward the
Alafia River, to which point he learned that the hostile Indians had
gone. The march was made under many difficulties, the horses of the
baggage train breaking down and necessitating the loss of valuable
articles of camp equipage. Near dark they encamped six miles from Fort
Brooke. The next day they arrived at Warren, on the Alafia River,
eighteen miles from the fort, and received two days' rations, which
General Gaines had ordered sent around from Fort Brooke by water.
Discovering no traces of Indians, he directed the march toward the
grounds where Major Dade and his party were massacred. The boats
having arrived at Fort Brooke with the sick and disabled and all
superfluous baggage, the army moved in the direction of a deserted
Indian village, passing the ruins of many fine plantations, and struck
the military road near the Hillsboro River.

On the 17th they arrived at the river and halted. On the 18th, after
burning two deserted Indian villages near the Big Ouithlacoochee
River, the friendly Indians accompanying the expedition requested
permission to return to Fort Brooke. General Gaines assured them that
there was no danger to be apprehended; that he only required them to
act as scouts and guides, and that they were not expected to go into
battle.

The Ouithlacoochee was forded on the 19th, and that night a breastwork
was thrown up on the ground which had been occupied by the ill-fated
party of Major Dade. At daybreak of the 20th they resumed their march,
and buried on their way the remains of Major Dade and Captain Frazier
and eight other officers, and ninety-eight noncommissioned officers
and privates.

It now became a question of importance whether to continue the march
to Fort King, which post was thought to be besieged by the enemy, or
to return to Fort Brooke. To Fort Brooke it was sixty-five miles, and
to Fort King forty miles north. A large number of the volunteers were
destitute of provisions. It would require five days to reach Fort
Brooke, and but two to reach Fort King.

It having been reported at Fort Brooke that Fort King was assailed by
the Indians and in danger of being cut off, and this opinion being
strengthened by the noncompliance of General Clinch with the request
of General Gaines to co-operate with him, it became General Gaines's
duty to ascertain the cause. A large number of General Gaines's troops
were in a destitute condition, and the senior assistant quartermaster,
Captain Shannon, had a letter from the Quartermaster General at
Washington, dated January 19th, which stated that large supplies of
provisions had been ordered from New York to Fort King. With these
facts before him, General Gaines determined to move to Fort King,
where he could ascertain the position of the enemy and at the same
time strengthen the garrison.

The army under General Gaines arrived at Fort King on February 22d.
Finding the post poorly supplied with subsistence, he dispatched
Lieutenant-Colonel Foster, with an escort of the Fourth Infantry, to
proceed to Fort Drane, twenty-two miles distant, where General Clinch
was stationed with four companies of artillery and one of infantry and
two companies of volunteers, and endeavored to get a supply of
provisions. The detachment returned on the 24th with seven days'
supplies. Here for the first time General Gaines was informed that
General Scott was in command in Florida, and that he was then at
Picolata organizing forces and gathering supplies.

General Gaines then determined that he could not remain at Fort King,
as supplies were being exhausted as fast as they came in, and that to
remain there would necessarily embarrass the operations of General
Scott. It was also evident that the enemy would not be found by
retracing his march to Fort Brooke, but that by moving by the battle
ground of General Clinch, even should he not succeed in meeting the
enemy, the mere presence of a large force would perhaps tend to
concentrate him, and thus give security to the frontier and enable the
inhabitants to give attention to planting their crops. Besides, he
would find supplies at Fort Brooke, and on his arrival the command of
Colonel Lindsay would be strengthened.

The army, being provided with two days' rations, moved out on the
27th, and arriving at the river, a halt was called, the baggage train
being under protection of the rear guard, while General Gaines, with
the main column and artillery, moved forward for the purpose of making
a reconnoissance preparatory to crossing. Finding the river too deep
to ford at the point reached, General Gaines and Colonel Smith made an
attempt to cross about two hundred and fifty yards higher up. Reaching
a small island in the middle of the river, a sharp fire was opened
upon them, accompanied by the Indian war-whoop.

The troops returned the fire, and the field piece under Lieutenant
Grayson was brought into action, which quickly silenced the war-whoop.
The engagement lasted about three quarters of an hour, during which
one volunteer was killed and seven wounded. General Clinch's old
breastwork was enlarged and occupied by the troops during the night.

On the morning of the 28th the line was again formed, and after a
circuitous march the army arrived at the crossing place. James Farley
Izard, a first lieutenant of dragoons, being on leave of absence,
volunteered his services to General Gaines, was assigned to duty as
brigade major, and was about forming the guard when the sharp crack of
a rifle and the war-whoop gave notice of the presence of the enemy.
His horse had received a bullet in his neck. When he dismounted he
proceeded to the bank of the river, when a ball from the enemy entered
his left eye. He said to the men, "Keep your positions and lie close."
He died in a few days from the effect of the wound. A desultory fight
was kept up from nine in the morning until one o'clock in the
afternoon, when the enemy withdrew. The troops threw up breastworks,
inside of which they encamped for the night. Captain William G.
Sanders, commanding the friendly Indians, was severely wounded.
Captain Armstrong, of the United States transport schooner Motto, was
wounded, and a soldier of Captain Croghan Ker's company of Louisiana
volunteers was killed. General Gaines sent an express to General
Clinch asking his co-operation by crossing the river eight or ten
miles above and coming down on the enemy's rear. He notified General
Clinch that he would not move from his position until he heard from
him, and requested to be furnished with needed subsistence. The
dispatch arrived on the following morning, and General Clinch sent it
forward to General Scott at Picolata.

On the 29th, orders were issued for one third of the command to remain
on duty inside of the encampment, while another third was engaged in
strengthening the defenses. A detachment of two hundred Louisiana
volunteers under command of Captain Thistle, an expert marksman, was
detailed for the erection of a blockhouse near the river, while others
were engaged in preparing canoes and rafts. Everything was quiet until
ten o'clock, when a fire was opened by the Indians on the working
parties and on three sides of the camp. The Indians were concealed in
the palmettoes, about two hundred yards distant. They set fire to the
grass and palmettoes, but a sudden shift of the wind carried the fire
in their direction. The firing lasted about two hours, when the
Indians retired. Captain Thistle and party returned to camp without
having sustained any loss. The firing was renewed by the Indians about
four o'clock in the afternoon, but soon subsided. The loss in General
Gaines's camp was one noncommissioned officer of artillery killed, and
thirty-two officers, noncommissioned officers, and privates wounded.
General Gaines received a painful wound in the mouth. Lieutenant James
Duncan, Second Artillery, Mr. W. Potter, secretary to General Gaines,
and Lieutenant Ephraim Smith, of the Louisiana volunteers, were
wounded.

General Gaines now sent another dispatch by some friendly Indians to
General Clinch asking him to march his forces direct to Camp Izard
instead of crossing above. He also asked for some mounted men and one
or two field pieces with a sufficient supply of ammunition. General
Gaines regarded this as a most favorable opportunity to attack the
Indians while they were concentrated, and he thought that with such
re-enforcements as he asked, and a supply of provisions, he could end
the war in ten days. He had notified General Clinch, on February 28th,
that he would make no sortie nor would he move from his position until
he heard from General Clinch. In his second letter to General Clinch
he wrote: "Being fully satisfied that I am in the neighborhood of the
principal body of Indians, and that they are now concentrated, I must
suggest to you the expediency of an immediate co-operation with the
forces under your command. I have only to repeat my determination not
to move from my position or make a sortie until I hear from you, as it
would only tend to disperse the enemy, and we should then have
difficulty in finding them."

If General Gaines had made an attack he would certainly have lost one
or two hundred men. He had no transportation to convey the wounded,
and was short of supplies, as his whole train consisted of one wagon
and two carts. Had he made an attack and routed the enemy, he had no
means of following them, and his victory would have been barren of
results. The Indians made another attack on March 1st, and renewed it
on the next day. These attacks were repeated daily until the 5th, when
they sent forward their interpreter, who wanted to know if Colonel
Twiggs was in command, and saying they did not want to continue the
war, but to shake hands and be friends. He was told to come at nine
o'clock the next morning with a white flag. On Sunday morning, March
6th, Assiola and Colonel Hago, with others, appeared for a talk. Major
Barron, Captain Marks, and others met them. They said they wanted to
stop fighting; that they had taken up arms against the whites because
they had been badly treated; that the whites had killed many of their
men; that they would stop the war if the whites were withdrawn, and
would not cross the river.

Major Barron replied that he would communicate what they said to
General Gaines. Jumper asked if Colonel Twiggs was in camp. He was
answered in the affirmative, but was told that General Gaines was in
command. General Gaines directed Captain Hitchcock, of his staff,
accompanied by Captain Marks, Dr. Harrall, and others, to confer with
Jumper. On meeting Jumper he expressed a desire to see General Gaines,
and said they would like to consult their governor, Miconopy, who was
then some distance off. The Indians insisted on seeing General Gaines,
and they were informed that he was ready to meet Miconopy, their
governor. Nothing definite having been settled, they retired. At a
subsequent meeting the Seminoles agreed to give up their arms and
cease hostilities, and meet the commissioners again for a general
treaty.

In the meantime General Gaines was re-enforced by Georgia troops,
under command of Captains Edward B. Robinson and Bones, the Florida
mounted militia, under command of Captain McLemore, and some regulars,
under Captains Charles Myron Thruston and Graham, the whole under the
command of General Clinch. They also brought beef cattle and other
much-needed supplies. The Indians appeared again with a white flag and
asked to confer with General Gaines, but were told that they must
bring their governor, Miconopy, with whom General Gaines would confer.

General Gaines now turned over the command of the army to General
Clinch, and on Thursday, the 10th, the army moved in the direction of
Fort Drane. General Gaines left for Tallahassee and Mobile, and was
the recipient of great attention by the citizens of those places.

Such was the situation when, on January 20, 1836, General Scott was
ordered to take command of the army in Florida, which had been
increased to twelve hundred regulars, besides volunteers, by the time
he arrived there. He left Washington the day after receiving his
orders and arrived at Picolata, on the St. John's River, and on
February 22d issued orders forming the army into three divisions. The
troops on the west bank of the St. John's River were placed under
command of General Clinch, and constituted the right wing of the
army. Those on the east bank of the St. John's River, under
Brigadier-General Abram Eustis, constituted the left wing, and those
at Tampa Bay, under Colonel William Lindsay, constituted the center.
General Scott had been authorized to ask for volunteers from the
States of Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina, and the Territory of
Florida. Among other instructions given the general was the following:
In consequence of representations from Florida that measures would
probably be taken to transmit the slaves captured by the Indians to
the Havana, orders were given the navy to prevent such proceedings,
and General Scott was directed "to allow no pacification with the
Indians while a slave belonging to a white man remained in their
possession." There were a great many negroes among the Indians. In the
band that massacred Major Dade and his command there were sixty-three
of them mounted in one company. The negroes and Indians of mixed
African and Indian blood were the most cruel members of the tribe.

Re-enforcements of militia were soon added to the army. The great
disadvantages under which Scott labored necessarily delayed his
movements until a late period. He found the quartermaster's department
very deficient, and had the greatest difficulty in transporting
supplies to Fort Drane. His supplies of ordnance were very limited,
and the greater part of those on hand were unfit for use. To penetrate
a country like Florida, filled with swamps, morasses, and almost
impenetrable hammocks, required much preparation and labor. There was
no chain of posts or settlements through the country, and the army was
compelled to carry a heavy load of provisions and ordnance. To
increase the difficulties, heavy rains had fallen which made the roads
almost impassable. General Scott arrived at Fort Drane on March 13,
1836, with a very small force. Believing the enemy to be concentrated
at or near the forks of Ouithlacoochee River, he adopted the following
plan of operations:

The Florida army to constitute three divisions, to be known as the
right, center, and left wings; the center being composed of Alabama
volunteers, three companies of Louisiana volunteers, and two companies
of United States artillery, amounting to twelve hundred and fifty men,
to be commanded by Colonel William Lindsay. To move from Fort Brooke
and take position at or near Chicuchatty, on March 25th. Signal
guns to be fired each day thereafter at 9 A.M. to announce
position. The right wing, composed of a battalion of Augusta
volunteers under Acting Major Robertson; a battalion of Georgia
volunteers under Major Mark A. Cooper; Major John M. Douglass, Georgia
Cavalry; eleven companies of Louisiana volunteers, under Colonel
Persifor F. Smith; Florida Rangers, under Major McLemore; the
regulars, under Colonel James Bankhead; and Captain Clifton Wharton's
company of Dragoons--in all amounting to about two thousand men, to be
commanded by General Clinch. This wing to move from Fort Drane and be
in position near Camp Izard, on the Ouithlacoochee River, between
March 26th and 28th. Signal guns to be fired at 11 A.M. The
left wing, composed of the South Carolina volunteers, under Colonel
Abbott H. Brisbane; mounted volunteers, under Colonels Goodwyn and
Butler--amounting to about fourteen hundred men--to be commanded by
General Abram Eustis. This wing to move from Volusia and take position
at or near Pilaklakaha on March 27th. Signal guns to be fired at ten
o'clock each day.

Each wing to be composed of three columns, a center protected by a
strong van and rear guard. The baggage train to be placed in the rear
of the main column. The center and left wings, on assuming their
respective positions, will fire signal guns, which will be responded
to by the right wing. The right wing will then move up the cove or
great swamp of the Ouithlacoochee in a southeast direction and drive
the Indians south, while the center will advance to the north and the
left to the west, by which united movement the Indians will be
surrounded and left no avenue of escape. The operations of the army
will be supported by the naval forces under Commodore Alfred J.
Dallas, protecting the western coast of the peninsula, to cut off
retreat and supplies.

Colonel Lindsay, commanding the center wing, arrived at Fort Brooke
with eight companies of Alabama volunteers on March 6th, where he
found a battalion of Florida troops, commanded by Major Read, and on
the 10th was joined by one company of Louisiana volunteers, under
command of Captain George H. Marks.

On the 12th he discovered fires to the southeast, and it was soon
reported that a large body of Indians was encamped a few miles
distant. Colonel Lindsay directed Major Leigh Read with his battalion
to make a reconnoissance in the direction of the Indians. Major Read
moved during the night, and coming upon the Indians at daylight,
surprised them and put them to flight with a loss of three killed and
six taken prisoners. He also secured a quantity of camp equipage and
some beef cattle.

Colonel Lindsay, not hearing from headquarters, determined to proceed
as far as Hillsboro River and erect a stockade so as to place his
supplies nearer to the scene of operations. This object having been
effected, he left Major Read in charge of the fort, which he had named
Fort Alabama, and returned to Fort Brooke on the 21st. During his
absence dispatches were received from General Scott announcing the
plan of campaign, and requesting Colonel Lindsay to be in position at
Chicuchatty on March 25th. Major Read having been relieved, the line
of march was taken up. The column being fired on by the Indians and
several soldiers killed and wounded, Colonel Lindsay ordered a charge,
which was executed by Captains Benham and Blount, commanding Alabama
volunteers, and the Indians were driven from their covert into a pine
woods.

On March 28th, three days after the time mentioned in the orders, this
command was in position at Camp Broadnax, near Chicuchatty, in
pursuance of General Scott's orders. The country over which they had
marched was hilly, and in many places there were dense forests which
retarded their movements, though the late period at which Colonel
Lindsay received his orders would have prevented his arrival at the
time specified in them. No censure can be attributed to General Scott
for the delay, as it was impossible under the circumstances for him to
have matured his plans earlier.

General Eustis, commanding the left wing, arrived at St. Augustine on
February 15th, and at once established a chain of posts at intervals
of from ten to twenty miles, extending along the Atlantic coast as
far south as the Mosquito Inlet, in order to drive off the bands of
depredators and to give protection to the plantations. Colonel
Goodwyn's mounted South Carolina volunteers having arrived on March
9th, the several detachments of the left wing, with the exception of
Colonel Pierce M. Butler's battalion and two companies of artillery
under Major Reynold M. Kirby, were put in motion for Volusia, where
they arrived on March 21st after encountering great difficulties,
being compelled to cut the road nearly the whole distance. On the 22d
they began crossing the St. John's River. When the vanguard,
consisting of two companies under Captains Adams and T.S. Tripp, had
reached the opposite shore they were attacked by about fifty Indians
who were concealed in a hammock. Being re-enforced by George Henry and
Hibler's companies, they charged the enemy and drove him. Two
companies of mounted men were crossed above with a view of cutting off
the retreat of the Indians, but they were too late. The loss in this
battle was three killed and nine wounded. On the 24th, Lieutenant
Ripley A. Arnold, with twenty-seven mounted men, was sent in quest of
Colonel Butler and his command, who had not joined the main command,
he having marched in the direction of New Smyrna. This detachment fell
in with a party of twelve or fifteen Indians who gave battle. Two of
the Indians were killed, and Lieutenant Arnold, having his horse shot,
ordered a retreat, for which he was severely censured. The whole force
of General Eustis's command being now concentrated on the west side of
the St. John's River, opposite to Volusia, orders were issued to
distribute thirteen days' rations, and the line of march to be taken
up for Pilaklakaha, leaving the sick and wounded with two companies of
Colonel Brisbane's regiment at Volusia, under command of Major William
Gates, United States army. The roads being bad, they were unable to
march more than seven miles in two days. On the 29th they reached the
Ocklawaha, and, constructing a bridge, crossed over after sundown and
discovered fires on the margin of Lake Eustis, which they supposed to
be signals of the Indians. Colonel Butler, with a small command,
accompanied by General Joseph Shelton, who was serving as a private
soldier, moved in the direction of the fires and discovered four
Indians, who at once retreated. One of these Indians, Chief Yaha Hayo,
was killed, while the others made their escape. On the 30th Colonel
Goodwyn was sent forward to reconnoiter, and when near Pilaklakaha was
attacked by Indians, having three men and several horses wounded.
Colonel Robert H. Goodwyn was soon re-enforced by General Eustis, and
a battle ensued lasting nearly an hour. The Indians were driven into
the swamp. On March 31st an express was sent to Scott for information
and for the purpose of obtaining forage. A signal gun was fired on the
following morning after their arrival, but not answered.

The right wing having assembled at Fort Drane, General Scott ordered
General Clinch to put his troops in motion on March 25th and take
position on the Ouithlacoochee; but a heavy rain prevented the
movement until the morning of March 26th. General Clinch sent forward
two flatboats drawn on wagons to await the arrival of the troops at
the river. The movement was begun by Major Douglass with his mounted
Georgians. The order of march was in three columns: the center, with
the baggage train, headed by General Clinch, the right consisting of
the Louisiana volunteers, under command of Colonel Persifor F. Smith,
joined the line at Camp Smith, and the left, commanded by Colonel
Bankhert, joined by Lieutenant Colonel William S. Foster's battalion
of United States troops at Camp Twiggs, General Scott and staff with
an escort of dragoons taking position in the center. Colonel Gadsden
was appointed quartermaster general for Florida, and acting inspector
general. When nine miles from Fort Drane information reached the army
that some volunteers left in charge of a broken-down team had been
attacked by the Indians and one man killed. On March 28th the column
reached the Ouithlacoochee and encamped near Fort Izard. The river
bank was occupied by sharpshooters and two pieces of artillery to
protect the crossing. Foster Blodget, of the Richmond Blues of
Augusta, Ga., swam the river and attached a rope to a tree on the
opposite shore and planted the flag of his command. The whole command
was passed over, but the rear division was fired upon by the Indians,
who were quickly repulsed by the six-pounders. On the morning of March
30th a party of Indians was encountered, charged upon, and routed, and
the same party were next day met and driven into the swamp. The column
proceeded on its march and arrived at Tampa Bay on April 5th. They
here learned that Colonel Lindsay had preceded them one day, being
obliged to return for necessary subsistence.

It will be remembered that the center, being under Colonel Lindsay,
took position at Camp Broadnax, near Chicuchatty, on March 28th. They
were fired on by the Indians, but succeeded in driving them off. As
his supplies had run short and the original plan of the campaign had
been defeated, Colonel Lindsay returned with his command to Fort
Brooke, arriving there April 4th. When Colonel Lindsay reached Fort
Alabama, near the Hillsboro River, he learned that the post had been
attacked on the morning of March 27th by three or four hundred
Indians, who surrounded the breastwork and continued the attack for
two hours, when they were repulsed with a loss of fifteen. The
garrison lost one man killed and two wounded. General Eustis, for the
same reasons which moved Colonel Lindsay, marched on April 2d from
Pilaklakaha and encamped about sixteen miles from Fort Brooke,
reporting to General Scott.

The whole army being now concentrated at or near Fort Brooke, the plan
for a new campaign was discussed. They had found but small parties of
the Indians in the cove or swamp region, and it was thought that they
had gone to the southern part of the Florida peninsula and concealed
themselves in the Everglades.

General Scott ordered Colonel Smith, of the Louisiana volunteers, to
proceed by water to Charlotte Harbor and move north, while Colonel
Goodwyn, with the South Carolina mounted men, was ordered to the lake
at the head of Pease's Creek for the purpose of driving the Indians
down. Having destroyed a large unoccupied Indian village on the left
bank of that stream, and finding no Indians, the command returned to
Hillsboro River and joined the left wing.

The Louisiana troops left Fort Brooke on April 10th and arrived at
Pease's Creek on the 17th. They moved forward at once, but the weather
was oppressive and the men were broken down by previous marches; many
of them being destitute of shoes and other clothing, it was found
necessary to return to camp. Out of over seven hundred Louisiana
troops who had volunteered in January and entered the field the
beginning of the next month, but one hundred and thirty were now left
fit for duty. With these, however, and a small detachment of marines
from the United States vessels in that vicinity, Colonel Smith
determined to proceed. He embarked with one half of his command in
canoes, the others proceeding by land. Meeting no Indians, he returned
to Fort Brooke on April 27th, when the Louisiana troops were ordered
to New Orleans to be mustered out of service. Colonel Smith proceeded
to St. Mark's and reported to General Scott.

The right wing having remained at Tampa Bay from April 5th to the
13th, General Scott issued orders to General Clinch to move toward
Fort Drane, and, after relieving Major Cooper, to co-operate with
Colonel Lindsay, who had left Fort Brooke about the same time, for the
purpose of penetrating the cove in a different direction from that
pursued by the right wing on its march to Tampa, and to penetrate the
forks of the Ouithlacoochee.

While Colonel Lindsay was engaged in constructing a defensive work on
the military road near Big Ouithlacoochee, General Clinch encamped
near Fort Cooper and dispatched some cavalry under Captain Malone to
relieve the garrison, with instructions that should he meet the enemy,
he was to advise General Clinch at once. When about three miles
distant from the main body the Indians opened fire and at once
retreated. The hammock was penetrated and searched, but no Indians
were found.

Major Cooper was attacked by a large body of Indians and besieged for
thirteen days. His loss was one man killed and twenty wounded. The
Indians not having been found in any large numbers, the two wings
separated, the center returning to Fort Brooke and the right to Fort
King, where they arrived April 25th.

After the arrival of Colonel Goodwyn's mounted regiment, the left
wing, accompanied by General Scott, took up line of march on the 18th
for Volusia. A small party of Indians was encountered, but they fled
and secreted themselves in a hammock. General Eustis's command arrived
at Volusia on the evening of the 25th, and on the 28th all the
volunteers from South Carolina marched to St. Augustine and were
mustered out. On the arrival of Colonel Lindsay at Fort Brooke he was
directed by General Scott to relieve the garrison at Fort Alabama, and
disband the Alabama volunteers, leaving only regulars there.

They were attacked by the Indians with a loss of four killed and
nineteen wounded. General Scott, accompanied by Colonel Gadsden,
Captain Augustus Canfield, and Lieutenant Johnson, with a detachment
of seventeen men, embarked in a steamboat at Volusia for the purpose
of penetrating by the St. John's River the south part of the peninsula
and selecting a site nearer to the seat of war as a depot for
supplies. They proceeded to the head of Lake Monroe, but the boat was
unable to pass the bar and they were compelled to return.

In his report of April 30th General Scott says: "To end this war, I
am now persuaded that not less than three thousand troops are
indispensable--two thousand four hundred infantry and six hundred
horse, the country to be occupied and scoured requiring that number."
He further recommended that two or three steamers with a light draught
of water, and fifty or sixty barges capable of carrying from ten to
fifteen men each, be employed, but did not ask for the control of the
operations he recommended, saying it was an honor he would neither
solicit nor decline.


CHAPTER VII.

Scott prefers complaint against General Jesup--Court of inquiry
ordered by the President--Scott fully exonerated by the
court--Complaints of citizens--Difficulties of the campaign--Speech in
Congress of Hon. Richard Biddle--Scott declines an invitation to a
dinner in New York city--Resolutions of the subscribers--Scott is
ordered to take charge of and remove the Cherokee Indians--Orders
issued to troops and address to the Indians--Origin of the Cherokee
Indian troubles--Collision threatened between Maine and New Brunswick,
and Scott sent there--Correspondence with Lieutenant-Governor
Harvey--Seizure of Navy Island by Van Rensselaer--Governor Marcy.


General Scott had, a short time previous to the events just narrated,
complained to the War Department of disobedience of orders on the part
of General Jesup, who had written a letter to the Globe newspaper in
Washington charging that Scott's conduct had been destructive of the
best interests of the country. Mr. Francis P. Blair, the editor to
whom the letter was addressed, showed it to President Jackson, who
indorsed on it an order to the Secretary of War to recall General
Scott to Washington, and that an inquiry be held as to his delay in
prosecuting the Creek War and the failure of the Florida campaign. On
Scott's arrival in Washington he asked for a court of inquiry, which
was ordered on October 3d, composed of Major-General Alexander Macomb
and Brigadier-Generals Henry Atkinson and Hugh Brady, with Colonel
Cooper, General Macomb's aid-de-camp, as judge advocate. The court
assembled at Frederick, Md., and was delayed some time by the absence
of witnesses. General Scott addressed the court in his own defense.

The finding was unanimous that the plan of the Seminole campaign was
well devised, and prosecuted with energy, steadiness, and ability; and
as to the Creek campaign, the court decided that the plan of the
campaign as adopted by General Scott was well calculated to lead to
successful results, and that it was prosecuted by him, as far as
practicable, with zeal and ability until he was recalled from the
command. This was not only a full vindication, but a compliment to him
expressed in the broadest sense.

He now addressed a letter to Secretary of War Joel R. Poinsett, asking
the immediate direction of affairs in Florida, as this was a part of
the geographical division to which he had been assigned, and a large
number of the troops of his command had been ordered there; and that
he was senior in rank to General Jesup, then commanding there. The
members of Congress from his native State made a unanimous appeal to
the Secretary of War seconding his application, but the application
was denied.

Some citizens of Florida made complaints of the nonsuccess of the
army, and severely censured General Scott. In fact, complaints of this
nature were made against every officer who commanded in Florida,
except General Zachary Taylor. It has been seen that the court of
inquiry fully vindicated General Scott's course in the management of
the war in Florida. The campaign, however, vindicated itself.
Considering the scarcity of all the means at hand, it is remarkable
how much was accomplished with so little loss of life.

When General Scott undertook this campaign Florida was a _terra
incognita_. The greater part of it had scarcely been visited by the
whites, and very little was known of the settlements of the Seminoles.
They were known by their approaches to the white settlements, and when
the war broke out by their plunders and devastations. It was not known
where their hiding places were, and this could only be determined by
pursuing them. At the time of General Scott's assignment to the
command all the information tended to locating them on the waters of
the Ouithlacoochee and the St. John's Rivers; and accordingly against
this portion of the country the movement of the army was directed.

It was not only the want of ordnance, clothing, and subsistence, but
the geographical peculiarity of Florida--with its marshes, thickets,
hammocks, everglades, and impenetrable swamps--that made this campaign
almost fruitless, and which for years baffled all efforts of the
Government to subdue this small but brave and desperate tribe of
Indians.

In Congress General Scott's campaign in Florida was defended by some
of the ablest men in the country. Richard Biddle, of Pennsylvania, in
1837, when the House of Representatives was engaged in a debate on
appropriations for carrying on the war in Florida, said: "It would be
recollected by all that after the war in Florida had assumed a
formidable aspect Major-General Scott was called to the command. An
officer of his rank and standing was not likely to seek a service in
which, amid infinite toil and vexation, there would be no opportunity
for the display of military talent on a scale at all commensurate with
that in which his past fame had been acquired. Yet he entered on it
with the alacrity, zeal, and devotion to duty by which he had ever
been distinguished....

"When the late General Brown, writing from the field of Chippewa, said
that General Scott merited the highest praises which a grateful
country could bestow, was there a single bosom throughout the wide
republic that did not respond to the sentiment? I, for one at least,
can never forget the thrill of enthusiasm, boy as I then was, which
mingled with my own devout thankfulness to God that the cloud which
seemed to have settled on our arms was at length dispelled. On that
plain it was established that Americans could be trained to meet and
to beat in the open field, without breastworks, the regulars of
Britain....

"Sir, the result of that day was due not merely to the gallantry of
General Scott upon the field. It must in part be ascribed to the
patient, anxious, and indefatigable drudgery, the consummate skill as
a tactician, with which he labored night and day, at the camp near
Buffalo, to prepare his brigade for the career on which it was about
to enter. After a brief interval he again led that brigade to the
glorious victory of Bridgewater. He bears now upon his body the wounds
of that day. It had ever been the characteristic of this officer to
seek the post of danger--not to have it thrust upon him. In the years
preceding that to which I have specially referred--in 1812 and
1813--the eminent services he rendered were in the positions which
properly belonged to others, but into which he was led by
irrepressible ardor and jealousy of honor.

"Since the peace with Great Britain the talents of General Scott have
ever been at the command of his country. His pen and his sword have
alike been put in requisition to meet the varied exigencies of the
service. When the difficulties with the Western Indians swelled into
importance, General Scott was dispatched to the scene of hostility.
There rose up before him then, in the ravages of a frightful
pestilence, a form of danger infinitely more appalling than the perils
of the field. How he bore himself in this emergency, how faithfully he
became the nurse and the physician of those from whom terror and
loathing had driven all other aid, can not be forgotten by a just and
grateful country....

"Mr. Chairman, I believe that a signal atonement to General Scott will
one day be extorted from the justice of the House. We owe it to him;
but we owe it still more to the country. What officer can feel secure
in the face of that great example of triumphant injustice? Who can
place before himself the anticipation of establishing higher claims
upon the gratitude of the country than General Scott? Yet he was
sacrificed. His past services went for nothing. Sir, you may raise new
regiments and issue new commissions, but you can not without such
atonement restore the high moral tone which befits the depositories of
the national honor. I fondly wish that the highest and lowest in the
country's service might be taught to regard this House as the jealous
guardian of his rights, against caprice, or fanaticism, or outrage
from whatever quarter. I would have him know that in running up the
national flag at the very moment our daily labors commence, we do not
go through an idle form. On whatever distant service he may be
sent--whether urging his way amid tumbling icebergs toward the pole,
or fainting in the unwholesome heat of Florida--I would enable him as
he looks up to that flag to gather hope and strength. It should impart
to him a proud feeling of confidence and security. He should know that
the same emblem of majesty and justice floats over the council of the
nation, and that in its untarnished luster we have all a common
interest and a common sympathy. Then, sir, and not before, will you
have an army or a navy worthy to sustain and to perpetuate the glory
of former days."

Soon after the decision of the court of inquiry exonerating him from
blame or censure General Scott was tendered a public dinner in New
York from leading members of both political parties. He accepted the
invitation, but it was subsequently postponed until about the middle
of May, and before that time it was altogether declined, for reasons
expressed in a note of which a copy follows:

  "GENTLEMEN: Early last month I accepted the invitation to a
  public dinner which you and other friends did me the honor to tender
  me. In a few days the embarrassments of this great emporium became
  such that I begged the compliment might be indefinitely postponed.
  You, however, were so kind as to hold me to my engagement, and to
  appoint a day for the meeting, which is now near at hand. In the
  meantime the difficulties in the commercial world have gone on
  augmenting, and many of my friends, here and elsewhere, have been
  whelmed under the general calamity of the times. Feeling deeply for
  the losses and anxieties of all, no public honor could now be
  enjoyed by me. I must therefore, under the circumstances, positively
  but most respectfully withdraw my acceptance of your invitation.

  "I have the honor to remain, gentlemen, with the greatest esteem,
  your friend and servant,

                                                "WINFIELD SCOTT."

The subscribers to the dinner, on receipt of General Scott's letter,
called a meeting, Cornelius W. Lawrence in the chair, and unanimously
adopted the resolutions which follow:

"_Resolved_, That in the decision of General Scott to withdraw, for
the reasons assigned, his acceptance of the public dinner designed to
testify to him our high appreciation both of his private and public
character, we find new evidence of his sympathy with all that regards
the public welfare, and of his habitual oblivion of self where the
feelings and interests of others are concerned.

"_Resolved_, That we rejoice with the joy of friends in the result, so
honorable to General Scott, of the recent court of inquiry instituted
to investigate his military conduct as commander in chief in Alabama
and Florida, and that the President of the United States (Mr. Van
Buren), in approving its proceedings, acted in gratifying unison with
the general sentiments of the nation."

General Scott also received invitations from Richmond, Va., and
Elizabeth, N.J., both of which places had been his former homes.

The Florida War was brought to a close by the defeat of the Indians by
Colonel Zachary Taylor, in the decisive battle of Okechobee, for
which he received the brevet of Brigadier General, and in 1838 was
appointed to the chief command in Florida. Taylor was succeeded by
Brigadier-General Armistead, and in 1842 General Worth succeeded to
the command and made a treaty with Sam Jones and Billy Bowlegs,
allowing them to remain and possess a large tract of land.

In the spring of 1836 General Scott was ordered to take charge of and
superintend the removal of the Cherokee Indians to the reservation
which had been set apart for them by treaty west of the Mississippi
River. Great opposition to removal was expected from the Indians, and
much fear felt by the inhabitants contiguous to their settlements.
General Scott, however, by his kindness and generosity, won the
confidence of the Indians, and was not compelled to resort to any act
of violence. Twenty-four thousand five hundred and ninety-four were
removed, two hundred and thirty-six having lost their lives on the
steamboat Monmouth. Only seven hundred and forty-four remained east of
the Mississippi River. The Cherokees occupied territory in the States
of Georgia, North Carolina, Alabama, and Tennessee. Many of their
leaders were well educated and were men of ability, and some of them
were wealthy, owning fine farms and negro slaves. General Scott in his
Memoirs says: "The North Carolinians and Tennesseeans were kindly
disposed toward their red brethren. The Alabamians much less so. The
great difficulty was with the Georgians (more than half the army),
between whom and the Cherokees there had been feuds and wars for many
generations. The reciprocal hatred of the two races was probably never
surpassed. Almost every Georgian on leaving home, as well as after
arrival at New Echota--the center of the most populous district of the
Indian Territory--vowed never to return without having killed at least
one Indian."

General Scott arrived at the Cherokee agency, a small village on the
Hiawassee River in Tennessee, in the early part of May, 1838. He
published and circulated two addresses--one to the troops and the
other to the Indians--but had them circulated together.

Following is the address to the troops:

                      "HEADQUARTERS, EASTERN DIVISION,

                                     "CHEROKEE AGENCY, _May 17, 1838_.

  "Considering the number and temper of the mass to be removed,
  together with the extent and fastnesses of the country occupied, it
  will readily occur that simple indiscretions, acts of harshness, and
  cruelty on the part of our troops may lead, step by step, to delays,
  to impatience, and exasperation, and in the end to a general war and
  carnage--a result in the case of these particular Indians, utterly
  abhorrent to the generous sympathies of the whole American people.
  Every possible kindness compatible with the necessity of removal
  must therefore be shown by the troops; and if in the ranks a
  despicable individual should be found capable of inflicting a wanton
  injury or insult on any Cherokee man, woman, or child, it is hereby
  made the special duty of the nearest good officer or man instantly
  to interpose, and to seize and consign the guilty wretch to the
  severest penalty of the laws. The major general is fully persuaded
  that this injunction will not be neglected by the brave men under
  his command, who can not be otherwise than jealous of their own
  honor and that of their country.

  "By early and persevering acts of kindness and humanity, it is
  impossible to doubt that the Indians will soon be induced to confide
  in the army, and, instead of fleeing to the mountains and forests,
  flock to us for food and clothing. If, however, through false
  apprehensions, individuals or a party here and there should seek to
  hide themselves, they must be pursued and invited to surrender, but
  not fired upon, unless they should make a stand to resist. Even in
  such cases mild remedies may sometimes better succeed than violence;
  and it can not be doubted, if we get possession of the women and
  children first, or first capture the men, that in either case the
  outstanding members of the same families will readily come in on the
  assurance of forgiveness and kind treatment.

  "Every captured man, as well as those who surrender themselves, must
  be disarmed, with the assurance that their weapons will be carefully
  preserved and restored at or beyond the Mississippi. In either case
  the men will be guarded and escorted, except it may be where their
  women and children are safely secured as hostages; but in general,
  families in our possession will not be separated, unless it be to
  send men as runners to invite others to come in.

  "It may happen that Indians will be found too sick, in the opinion
  of the nearest surgeon, to be removed to one of the depots indicated
  above. In every such case one or more of the family or the friends
  of the sick person will be left in attendance, with ample
  subsistence and remedies, and the remainder of the family removed
  by the troops. Infants, superannuated persons, lunatics, and women
  in helpless condition, will all, in the removal, require peculiar
  attention, which the brave and humane will seek to adapt to the
  necessities of the several cases."

Following is the address to the Indians:

  "_Major-General Scott, of the United States Army, sends to the
  Cherokee people remaining in North Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee, and
  Alabama this_

                               "ADDRESS.

  "CHEROKEES: The President of the United States has sent me
  with a powerful army to cause you, in obedience of the treaty of
  1835, to join that part of your people who are already established
  in prosperity on the other side of the Mississippi. Unhappily, the
  two years which were allowed for the purpose you have suffered to
  pass away without following and without making any preparation to
  follow, and now, or by the time that this solemn address shall reach
  your distant settlements, the emigration must be commenced in haste,
  but, I hope, without disorder. I have no power by granting a further
  delay to correct the error that you have committed. The full moon of
  May is already on the wane, and before another shall have passed
  away every Cherokee man, woman, and child in those States must be in
  motion to join their brethren in the far West.

  "My friends, this is no sudden determination on the part of the
  President, whom you and I must now obey. By the treaty the
  emigration was to have been completed on or before the 23d of this
  month, and the President has constantly kept you warned during the
  two years allowed, through all his officers and agents in this
  country, that the treaty would be enforced.

  "I am come to carry out that determination. My troops already occupy
  many positions in the country that you are to abandon, and thousands
  and thousands are approaching from every quarter to render
  assistance and escape alike hopeless. All those troops, regular and
  militia, are your friends. Receive them, and confide in them as
  such. Obey them when they tell you that you can remain no longer in
  this country. Soldiers are as kind-hearted as brave, and the desire
  of every one of us is to execute our painful duty in mercy. We are
  commanded by the President to act toward you in that spirit, and
  such is also the wish of the whole people of America.

  "Chiefs, headmen, and warriors, will you then by resistance compel
  us to resort to arms? God forbid! Or will you by flight seek to hide
  yourselves in mountains and forests, and thus oblige us to hunt you
  down? Remember, that in pursuit it may be impossible to avoid
  conflicts. The blood of the white man or the blood of the red man
  may be spilt, and if spilt, however accidentally, if may be
  impossible for the discreet and humane among you or among us to
  prevent a general war and carnage. Think of this, my Cherokee
  brethren! I am an old warrior, and have been present at many a scene
  of slaughter; but spare me, I beseech you, the horror of witnessing
  the destruction of the Cherokees.

  "Do not, I invite you, even wait for the close approach of the
  troops; but make such preparations for emigration as you can, and
  hasten to this place, to Ross's Landing, or to Gunter's Landing,
  where you will be received in kindness by officers selected for the
  purpose. You will find food for all, and clothing for the destitute,
  at either of those places, and thence at your ease and in comfort be
  transported to your new homes according to the terms of the treaty.

  "This is the address of a warrior to warriors. May his entreaties be
  kindly received, and may the God of both prosper the Americans and
  Cherokees, and preserve them long in peace and friendship with each
  other.                                         WINFIELD SCOTT."

There was some delay in bringing in the mountain Indians of North
Carolina, but the Indians of Tennessee and Alabama were readily
collected for emigration. General Scott remained with the Georgians,
and followed up his printed addresses by suggestions which proved to
be invaluable.

In a short time the Indians, excepting a few parties, were collected
at the place of rendezvous. The camp selected was twelve miles in
length, with a breadth of four miles. It was well shaded by large
forest trees, and had a large number of springs furnishing an
abundance of the best of water.

The sick were placed in hospitals, and attended by good physicians and
furnished with everything necessary for their comfort. General Scott
rode through the camps daily, and saw that every attention was given
to the Indians which they required, and he made inquiries and gave
special attention to the care of the sick and to the women and
children. At length he placed the matter of the emigration of the
Indians in the hands of the Cherokee authorities, having won the
entire confidence and regard of the Indians, and he ordered all of the
volunteers to their homes, except one company which he retained as a
police force, and one regiment of regulars which it was thought
necessary to retain to meet any unforeseen contingencies that might
arise. Two other regular regiments were ordered off, one to Florida
and the other to the Canada frontier. The company of volunteers
retained was from Tennessee, and of it General Scott said: "The
company of volunteers (Tennesseeans) were a body of respectable
citizens, and under their judicious commander, Captain Robertson, of
great value as a police force." The Cherokees were at this time
receiving large sums of money from the Government in the way of
damages and indemnities, and a number of gamblers and confidence men
sought to enter their camps. They were, however, kept out by the
vigilance of the Tennessee company.

In October the movement west began. General Scott accompanied them to
the junction of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. General Scott gives
credit for services and aid rendered him to his acting inspector
general, Major Matthew Mountjoy Payne; Captain Robert Anderson, acting
adjutant general (later the commander of Fort Sumter, and a brigadier
general); Lieutenant Erastus Darwin Keyes, aid-de-camp, afterward
major general, United States volunteers; Lieutenant Francis Taylor,
commissary; Captains Page and Abner Reviere Hetzel, quartermasters;
Lieutenant Henry L. Scott, Fourth Infantry, then aid-de-camp and
inspector general; Major H.B. Shaw, aid-de-camp, Tennessee volunteers;
Colonel William Lindsay, Second Artillery; Colonel William S. Foster,
Fourth Infantry; and Colonel Ichabod Bennett Crane, First Artillery.
Generals Worth and Floyd rendered important service in this campaign,
and their names should not be omitted.

It may be necessary, for a better understanding of the Cherokee Indian
difficulties, to add something more to what has been written. The
chief troubles which had arisen were in Georgia, and many
complications arose between the Indians and the whites. In a case
decided by the Supreme Court of the United States, the opinion being
rendered by Chief-Justice John Marshall, the status of these Indians
was thus defined: "Their relation is that of a nation claiming and
receiving the protection of one more powerful; not that of individuals
abandoning their national character and submitting as subjects to the
laws of a master."

Regarding the acts of Congress to regulate trade with the Indians the
Chief Justice said: "All these acts, and especially that of 1802,
which is still in force, manifestly consider the several Indian
nations as distinct political communities, having territorial
boundaries, within which their authority is exclusive, and having a
right to all the lands within those boundaries, which is not only
acknowledged but guaranteed by the United States." By one of the
treaties made by the United States Government with this tribe of
Indians, it was enacted and agreed that "the United States solemnly
guarantee to the Cherokee nation all their lands not hereby ceded,"
and, "that the Cherokee nation may be led to a greater degree of
civilization, and to become herdsmen and cultivators, instead of
remaining in a state of hunting, the United States will from time to
time furnish gratuitously the said nation with useful instruments of
husbandry." Acting under this treaty, a greater portion of the
Cherokees had become both cultivators and herdsmen, and rivaled their
white neighbors in both.

The trouble which arose in Georgia was from the fact that she claimed
the right to extend her criminal jurisdiction over these Indians, and
that the United States was bound to extinguish the Indian titles
within her borders. This claim of Georgia, persistently pressed,
caused the United States Government in 1802 to agree to purchase the
Indian lands, and remove them to some other territory. The Indians
resisted this action on the faith of treaties. Eventually a treaty was
made with a portion of the Cherokees by which they were to relinquish
their lands and accept lands across the Mississippi River. Many of the
Indians resisted and never ratified this treaty, yet the Government
insisted upon carrying out the treaty. General Scott received his
orders on April 10, 1838, and first established his headquarters at a
small village called Calhoun, on the Hiawassee River, in East
Tennessee. Colonel Lindsay, an officer of merit and who enjoyed the
full confidence of General Scott, was in immediate command of that
territory, had established posts in many of the settlements, and had
arranged to have the mountain passes well guarded.

Referring to these matters, the National Intelligencer of September
27, 1838, said: "The manner in which this gallant officer [Scott] has
acquitted himself within the last year upon the Canada frontier, and
lately among the Cherokees, has excited the universal admiration and
gratitude of the whole nation. Owing to his great popularity in the
North, his thorough knowledge of the laws of his own country, as well
as of those which govern nations, united to his discretion, his great
tact and experience, he has saved the country from a ruinous war with
Great Britain. And by his masterly skill and energy among the
Cherokees, united to his noble generosity and humanity, he has not
only effected what everybody supposed could not be done without the
most heartrending scenes of butchery and bloodshed, but he has
effected it by obtaining the esteem and confidence of the poor
Cherokees themselves. They look upon him as a benefactor and friend,
and one who has saved them from entire destruction. All the Cherokees
were collected for emigration without bloodshed or violence, and all
would have been on their way to the West before the middle of July,
had not humanity induced General Scott to stop the movement until the
1st of September. Three thousand had been sent off in the first half
of June by the superintendent, before the general took upon himself
the responsibility of stopping the emigration, from feelings which
must do everlasting honor to his heart. An approval of his course had
been sent on by the War Department, before his report giving
information that he had stopped the emigration had reached the seat of
Government. In the early part of January last the President had asked
Congress for enlarged powers, to enable him to maintain our neutral
obligations to England--that is, to tranquilize the Canadian
frontiers. Before the bill passed Congress, General Scott had finished
the work and effected all its objects. These, too, he effected by
flying from one end of the frontier to the other in the dead of
winter, and during the severest and coldest period of it. He returns
to Washington, and is immediately ordered to the Cherokee nation, to
take charge of the very difficult and hazardous task to his own fame
of removing those savages from their native land. Some of his best
friends regretted most sincerely that he had been ordered on this
service, and, knowing the disposition of the world to cavil and
complain without cause, had great apprehension that he would lose a
portion of the popularity he had acquired by his distinguished success
on the Canadian frontier. But behold the manner in which this last
work has been performed! There is so much of noble generosity of
character about Scott, independent of his skill and bravery as a
soldier, that his life has really been one of romantic beauty and
interest."

It was General Scott's intention to accompany the Indian emigration
farther west, but receiving information that the Canadian insurgents
were making renewed attempts on the Canadas, he was directed to
proceed at once to that frontier.

Passing through the States of Kentucky and Ohio, accompanied by
Captain Robert Anderson, he called upon their respective governors and
arranged for the calling out of volunteers should they be needed, and
also gave proper instructions to the United States marshals and
district attorneys for such duties as they might be called upon to
perform. He passed on rapidly to Cleveland, Sandusky, and Detroit, and
met great assemblages of excited citizens, and, by his appeals and
reasoning with them, prevailed upon them to desist from any acts in
violation of the neutrality with Great Britain. Pending these
important services, he learned of the trouble which had arisen between
the State of Maine and the British colony or province of New
Brunswick, and at once made haste for Washington. On his arrival at
the capital, after reporting to the President, he was called before
the committees on foreign affairs of both Houses of Congress, before
whom he urged and succeeded in securing the passage of two bills--one
authorizing the President to call out the militia for six months and
to accept the service of fifty thousand volunteers, and the other to
place to his credit ten millions of dollars. On taking leave of the
President he said to him: "Mr. President, if you want war, I need only
look on in silence. The Maine people will make it for you fast and hot
enough. I know them. But if peace be your wish, I can give no
assurance of success. The difficulties in its way will be formidable."
The President replied, "Peace with honor"; and the general, who fully
reciprocated the President's feeling, took his leave, accompanied by
Captain Robert Anderson and Lieutenant E.D. Keyes, his aid-de-camp. He
left with general instructions, but in certain events he was to act on
his own judgment without restriction. Arriving in Boston, he met
Governor Edward Everett, and arranged for calling out the militia and
accepting volunteers if needed.

Governor Everett introduced him to his executive council with the
following address: "General, I take great pleasure in introducing you
to the members of the Executive Council of Massachusetts. I need not
say that you are already known to them by reputation. They are
familiar with your fame as it is recorded in some of the arduous and
honorable fields of the country's struggles. We rejoice in meeting you
on this occasion. Charged as you are with a most momentous mission by
the President of the United States, we are sure you are intrusted
with a duty most grateful to your feelings--that of averting an appeal
to arms. We place unlimited reliance on your spirit, energy, and
discretion. Should you unhappily fail in your efforts, under the
instructions of the President, to restore harmony, we know that you
are equally prepared for a still more responsible duty. Should that
unhappy event occur, I beg you to depend on the firm support of
Massachusetts." He was then given a reception by the Legislature, and
received on its behalf by Robert C. Winthrop.

From Boston he proceeded at once to Portland, where he found the
people greatly excited, and demanding the immediate seizure and
occupation of the disputed territory. At the capital, Augusta, where
he next proceeded, he found the same excitement with the same demands.
The Legislature was in session, and a large majority of its members
were for war. The strip of disputed land was valuable chiefly for ship
timber. Some British subjects had entered the territory and cut some
of the timber, and the Governor of Maine sent an agent with a posse to
drive them off. The British seized and imprisoned the agent, and much
angry correspondence followed between the authorities of both sides.

General Scott soon determined that the only mode of settlement was to
prohibit or have an agreement on both sides to leave the territory
unoccupied by either party until the matters in dispute could be
arranged between the governments of the United States and Great
Britain, taking the matter out of the jurisdiction of the State of
Maine and the province of New Brunswick. Previous to Scott's arrival
in Maine the Legislature of that State had passed an act placing
eight hundred thousand dollars at the disposal of the Governor and
authorizing the calling out of eight thousand troops. Some of these
troops had been organized and moved near the disputed territory, and
others were held ready to move when ordered. British troops, both
regulars and militia, had also been moved forward. Everything
indicated a war. On February 27, 1839, President Van Buren had sent a
message to Congress transmitting various documents received from the
Governor of Maine, and a copy of a memorandum signed by the Secretary
of State of the United States and the British Minister to the United
States, which, it was hoped, would prevent a collision of arms. Mr.
H.B. Fox, the British Minister, had acted without specific authority
from his Government, and the memorandum therefore had only the force
of a recommendation. All correspondence had for some time ceased
between the governors of Maine and New Brunswick.

The Governor of New Brunswick, John Harvey, had been an adjutant
general of one of the armies of Canada in the campaign of 1813, and
was well known to General Scott. Scott, it will be remembered, was an
adjutant general in this campaign, and he and Colonel Harvey had
frequent correspondence, and it was so conducted as to create a
feeling of respect on both sides. At one time in the campaign
mentioned, when Scott was on a reconnoitering expedition, his party
came upon Harvey, and a gun in the hands of a soldier near Scott was
leveled on him. Scott caught the gun, and said, "Hold! he is our
prisoner," but Colonel Harvey made a rapid turn and escaped.

On General Scott's arrival in Maine he had with him a private letter
from Sir John Harvey, the Colonel Harvey just mentioned, then Governor
General of New Brunswick. It is proper to mention here, as additional
reason for good feeling between General Scott and Sir John Harvey,
that at one time in the War of 1813 an American soldier under Scott's
command had come into possession of the uniform coat of a British
staff officer, and in one of the pockets was found the miniature of a
young lady. The portmanteau from which the coat and miniature were
taken was marked "Lieutenant-Colonel Harvey." Scott purchased these
articles from the soldier and sent them to Colonel Harvey. The picture
was that of his young bride, then in England.

Governor Fairfield, of Maine, had on March 12th sent a message to the
Legislature objecting to the terms of the memorandum, but recommending
that, when fully satisfied that the Lieutenant Governor of New
Brunswick had abandoned all idea of occupying the disputed territory
with a military force, or of attempting the expulsion of citizens of
Maine, he [the Governor] be authorized to withdraw the military force,
leaving the land agent with a posse of armed or unarmed men, as the
case might require, sufficient to drive out or arrest trespassers. The
Legislature on March 20th passed resolutions in accordance with these
recommendations. The message of the Governor of Maine and the
resolutions of the Legislature required the lieutenant governor to
make the advance.

General Scott, after the action of the Legislature above mentioned,
sent a reply to Harvey's private letter, which he had held unanswered
so long. This elicited a friendly reply, and other letters of the
same character quickly followed on either side. A line of couriers
was established between them to facilitate correspondence. Governor
Harvey took the first step, and made the concessions which were
necessary to appease the authorities of Maine, but the Governor did
not feel authorized to withdraw the troops from the disputed territory
unless authorized by the Legislature. General Scott mingled freely
with members of the Legislature, urging pacific measures, and on March
20th resolutions were passed; and Scott having his memorandum with Sir
John Harvey with all concessions to restore tranquillity, the Governor
of Maine added his approval, and the question was transferred to the
authorities of the United States and Great Britain, which resulted in
a satisfactory settlement to both nations of this unhappy affair.

An uprising, confined chiefly to the French inhabitants of Upper
Canada, occurred in 1837, in which they demanded a separation from the
British Government, and they enlisted many sympathizers among citizens
of the United States, especially among those living on the Canadian
boundary. Organizations of sympathizers with the Canadians were
secretly formed by American citizens to such an extent that the
President of the United States issued a proclamation enjoining its
citizens to observe neutrality. This did not quiet the excitement, but
rather tended to increase it. Matters were brought to a crisis by the
action of a certain Van Rensselaer, who had been dismissed from the
Military Academy at West Point, and who styled himself "Colonel" Van
Rensselaer. He organized a party of Americans reckless like himself,
and took forcible possession of a small British island opposite to
Fort Schlosser, on the American side, and known as Navy Island. This
island was a short distance above the falls of Niagara. Young Van
Rensselaer engaged a small steamboat called the Caroline to ferry
parties from Navy Island, which he occupied, to Schlosser on the
American shore.

The first night on which the Caroline began her voyages the British
fitted out an expedition to capture her. Instead of making a descent
on Navy Island within British territory, they boarded the steamer at
Schlosser, on the American side, and thus violated our territory. The
boat at the time of this invasion was filled with people, many of whom
were there for idle curiosity, including a number of boys. In the
_mêlée_ of capture one American citizen was killed and several others
wounded. They cut the boat from its moorings, set it on fire, and it
drifted down the cataract. It was reported and generally believed that
when the vessel went over the cataract it had a small number of
wounded Americans on board.

The publication of this affair created the greatest excitement from
one end of the country to the other. This occurred on December 29,
1837, but the news did not reach Washington until January 4th. On the
evening of that day General Scott was to dine with President Van Buren
and a number of other distinguished gentlemen. The entire party had
arrived, but the President failed to appear. After a time he came in
and spoke inaudibly to Henry Clay, one of the guests, and then said to
General Scott: "Blood has been shed; you must go with all speed to the
Niagara frontier. The Secretary of War is now engaged in making out
your instructions." General Scott left at once, and passing through
Albany, met William L. Marcy, the Governor of New York, who with his
adjutant general (McDonald) accompanied him to the scene of the
troubles. The United States troops at this time were all either in
Florida or on the Western frontiers. General Scott, in passing through
New York, had ordered some small detachments of army recruits to
follow him. Governor Marcy was with him ready to answer his
requisitions for militia, and he had the aid of the officers
commanding on Lake Erie and the Detroit frontier and on the Niagara,
Lake Ontario, and St. Lawrence. All United States marshals and other
civil officers of the Government were ordered to support and aid him.
He passed from one place to another, going where his services could be
needed, exhorting the people to observe the neutrality proclamation of
the President; and where he found them obstinate and determined, he
notified them in terms which could not be mistaken that any attempt to
violate this proclamation would be met by resistance from the
Government, which would promptly overpower them.

Pending these troubles, a steamer called the Barcelona was taken from
the harbor of Buffalo in January, 1838, and passed down the river,
with a view to aid the insurgents on Navy Island. Scott, on learning
of this, sent an agent who made terms to employ the Barcelona for the
service of the Government. The vessel then proceeded back to Buffalo,
where it was intended to use her on Lake Erie; but the Canadian
authorities had determined to destroy her. As the vessel passed near
Grand Island, within the jurisdiction of the United States, some
armed British schooners had taken position, aided by land batteries,
to open fire on her. This was on January 16th. General Scott and
Governor Marcy stood on the river bank watching events. Batteries on
the American side were put in preparation to return the fire of the
British.

The day before the event just mentioned, Scott had written and
dispatched a note "To the Commanding Officer of the Armed British
Vessels in the Niagara":

          "HEADQUARTERS, EASTERN DIVISION, U.S. ARMY,

                      "TWO MILES BELOW BLACK ROCK, _January 15, 1838_.

  "SIR: With his Excellency, Governor Marcy, of New York, who
  has troops at hand, we are here to enforce the neutrality of the
  United States and to protect our own soil or waters from violation.
  The proper civil officers are also present to arrest, if
  practicable, the leaders of the expedition on foot against Upper
  Canada. Under these circumstances, it gives me pain to perceive the
  armed vessels mentioned, anchored in our waters, with the probable
  intention to fire upon that expedition moving in the same waters.
  Unless the expedition should first attack--in which case we shall
  interfere--we shall be obliged to consider a discharge of shot or
  shell from or into our waters, from the armed schooners of her
  Majesty, as an act seriously compromising the neutrality of the two
  nations. I hope, therefore, that no such unpleasant incident may
  occur.

  "I have the honor to remain, etc.

                                                "WINFIELD SCOTT."

The next morning, January 16th, the same information was given by
General Scott to a British officer who called on him at his quarters.
The Barcelona moved up the river, and Scott had his cannon pointed and
his matches in readiness for firing. Scott stood on the highest point
in full uniform and in view of the other shore. The vessel passed up
unmolested, and doubtless by this act of Scott a war was averted.

In the meantime Van Rensselaer with his adherents had evacuated Navy
Island and landed some miles below, where they were arrested by
General Scott's orders. Thus ended a disturbance which might have
resulted in war, and it can not be gainsaid that its peaceful
settlement was due to the wisdom, firmness, and prudence of General
Scott.


CHAPTER VIII.

Annexation of Texas--Causes that led to annexation--Message of the
President--General Scott's letters regarding William Henry
Harrison--Efforts to reduce General Scott's pay--Letter to T.P.
Atkinson on the slavery question--Battle of Palo Alto, and of Resaca
de la Palma, Monterey, and Buena Vista--"The hasty plate of
soup"--Scott's opinion of General Taylor--Scott ordered to
Mexico--Proposal to revive the grade of lieutenant general,
and to appoint Thomas H. Benton--Scott reaches the Brazos
Santiago--Confidential dispatch from Scott to Taylor--Co-operation of
the navy--Letters to the Secretary of War as to places of
rendezvous--Arrival and landing at Vera Cruz, and its investment,
siege, and capture--Letter to foreign consuls--Terms of
surrender--Orders of General Scott after the surrender.


The Congress of the United States, on February 27, 1845, passed joint
resolutions providing for the annexation of Texas, and they were
approved by President Tyler on the 1st of March. A convention was
called by President Jones, of Texas, to meet on the 4th of the
succeeding July, to consider the matter of annexation to the United
States. The convention ratified the proposal, and prepared a
constitution for Texas as a State in the American Union. The question
of annexation was submitted to a vote of the people of Texas and
ratified by a large majority. On December 29th following, a joint
resolution of the Congress of the United States was passed, which
declared Texas admitted as a State into the Union.

It may be interesting to take a retrospective view of the causes, or
rather the means, by which this important measure was brought about.

In the winter of 1842-'43 there appeared in a newspaper published at
Baltimore a letter of Mr. Thomas W. Gilmer, a member of Congress from
Virginia, urging the annexation of Texas. He argued among other things
that the British Government had designs on Texas; that it proposed a
political and military domination of the country, with a view to the
abolition of slavery. At this time Texas and Mexico were at war. It
was at once charged by the opponents of the scheme of annexation that
Mr. Gilmer, who was known as the close political friend of Mr. John C.
Calhoun, was simply acting as the mouthpiece of the latter. It will
be remembered by those who are conversant with the proceedings of
Congress that Mr. Calhoun, in the Senate in 1836, had offered some
resolutions looking to the annexation of Texas. Mr. Webster, who was
known as opposed to the measure, was the only member of President
Harrison's Cabinet who remained with President Tyler. He resigned his
portfolio as Secretary of State, and was succeeded by Mr. Hugh S.
Legaré, of South Carolina, who, dying very soon after his appointment,
was succeeded by Mr. Abel P. Upshur, of Virginia. Both of the latter
named were known friends of the annexation scheme. There appeared not
long after the publication of the Gilmer letter, in the Richmond
Enquirer, a letter from General Andrew Jackson to Mr. Brown, in reply
to a letter of Mr. Brown, in which he indorsed a copy of Mr. Gilmer's
letter and asking General Jackson's views on the subject. General
Jackson's reply was a thorough and hearty approval of the proposed
immediate annexation of Texas. General Jackson's letter was dated from
the Hermitage, his residence near Nashville, Tenn., March 12, 1843.
The letter of General Jackson produced a profound effect throughout
the country. Although out of office, old, and in the retirement of
private life, he exercised more influence than any man living in the
United States.

Mr. Calhoun succeeded Mr. Upshur as Secretary of State, and he was
known as a friend of annexation. Mr. Van Buren, replying to a letter
from Mr. William T. Hammett, a representative in Congress from
Mississippi, announced his opposition to the immediate annexation of
Texas, because it would produce a war with Mexico. He expressed
himself in favor of the measure when it could be done peaceably and
honorably. Mr. Clay announced his opposition to the measure. In
December, 1843, the British Premier, Lord Aberdeen, in a dispatch to
Sir Richard Packenham, British Minister at Washington, denied that
Great Britain had any design on Texas, but announced (which was
superfluous, and not germane to the charge which he felt called upon
to deny) that "Great Britain desires and is constantly exerting
herself to procure the general abolition of slavery throughout the
world." This provoked a correspondence between Mr. Calhoun and the
British Minister. In his annual message to Congress at the
commencement of the session of 1843-'44 the President expressed
himself very strongly in regard to war being waged by Mexico against
Texas. The proposed treaty for annexation was rejected by the Senate
June 8, 1844, by a vote of thirty-five to sixteen. Mr. Benton
presented a plan for the peaceful acquisition of Texas, but the Senate
refused to adopt it.

President Tyler in his last message again referred to the war between
Mexico and Texas, and said: "I repeat now what I then said, that after
eight years of feeble and ineffectual efforts to recover Texas, it was
time that the war should have ceased."

When the convention of the Whig party met at Harrisburg, Pa., December
4, 1839, to nominate a candidate for the presidency, General Scott's
name was presented. He had addressed a number of letters to members of
the convention urging that, if there appeared any prospect of success,
Mr. Clay should be selected, and if not, that the choice should fall
on General William Henry Harrison. The total number of votes in the
convention was two hundred and fifty-four. Of these, General Scott
received the votes of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Vermont, and
Michigan--in all, sixty-two. The States which had voted for General
Scott gave their votes eventually to General Harrison, who received
the nomination. General Scott said of General Harrison, "But the
nomination and success of General Harrison," if his life had been
spared some four years longer, would have been no detriment to the
country. With excellent intentions and objects, and the good sense to
appoint able counselors, the country would not have been retarded in
its prosperity nor disgraced by corruption in high places. No one can,
of course, be held responsible for sudden deaths among men. A single
month in office ended President Harrison's life, when the plaint of
Burke occurred to all, "What shadows we are, what shadows we pursue!"
In June, 1841, Major-General Macomb having died, General Scott was
called to take up his residence in Washington as general in chief of
the army. Among his first orders was one which put a stop to arbitrary
and illegal punishments in the army.

An effort was made in the House of Representatives of the next
Congress in 1844 to reduce his pay, but being resisted by Charles J.
Ingersoll, of Philadelphia, and ex-President John Quincy Adams, it was
voted down by a large majority. Mr. Adams, in the course of his
remarks in opposition to the resolution, said that he "felt bound to
declare that he did think it a very ill reward for the great and
eminent services of General Scott during a period of thirty odd years,
in which there were some as gallant exploits as our history could
show, and in which he had not spared to shed his blood, as well as for
more recent services of great importance in time of peace--services of
great difficulty and great delicacy--now to turn him adrift at his
advanced age.... That he could not for a moment harbor in his heart
the thought that General Scott, if he had received from the Government
thousands of dollars more than he had, would have received one dollar
which he did not richly deserve at the hands of his country."

On February 9, 1843, he wrote from Washington to T.P. Atkinson, of
Danville, Va., in reply to a letter from that gentleman, asking his
opinions on the question of slavery. Mr. Atkinson was the son of an
old friend of General Scott, and the letter was written to him as a
probable candidate for the presidency. He took the position in this
letter that Congress had no power under the Constitution to interfere
with or legislate on the question of slavery within the States. He
argued that it was the duty of Congress, however, to receive, refer,
and report upon petitions which might be presented to it on the
question of slavery, as on all other questions. He did not blame
masters for not liberating their slaves, as he thought it would
benefit neither the masters nor the slaves. He, however, held it to be
the duty of slave owners to employ all means not incompatible with the
safety of both master and slave to meliorate slavery even to
extermination. He held that, with the consent of owners or payment of
just compensation, Congress might legislate in the District of
Columbia, although it would be dangerous to contiguous States.

He also, in March, 1845, in reply to a letter from J.C. Beckwith,
corresponding secretary of a peace convention, wrote that he always
maintained the moral right to wage a just and necessary war.

In March, 1845, as stated, Congress passed a joint resolution for the
annexation of the republic of Texas, and in July of that year
Brigadier-General Zachary Taylor, then commanding the first department
of the United States army in the Southwest, was ordered to Texas. He
embarked at New Orleans with fifteen hundred troops, and in August
established his camp at Corpus Christi. Re-enforcements were
dispatched to him rapidly, and in November his command amounted to
about four thousand men.

On March 8, 1846, General Taylor, under orders from Washington, moved
his army toward the Rio Grande, and on the 28th of that month encamped
on that river opposite the Mexican city of Matamoros. He here erected
a fort called Fort Brown, which commanded the city of Matamoros. The
Mexican troops near Matamoros were at the same time busily engaged in
fortifying the city. General Pedro de Ampudia, who commanded the
Mexican forces at Matamoros, on April 12, 1846, addressed General
Taylor a note requiring that within twenty-four hours he should retire
from his position at Fort Brown and march beyond the Neuces, stating
that the governments of Mexico and the United States were engaged in
negotiations regarding the annexation of Texas, and that a failure or
refusal of General Taylor to comply with this demand would be regarded
by his Government as a declaration of war on the part of the United
States. General Taylor replied in substance that he was there with his
army under orders of his Government, that he declined to retire beyond
the Neuces, and that he stood ready to repel any attack which might be
made upon him. Soon after this correspondence General Mariano Arista
was placed in the command formerly held by General Ampudia, and in
May, with an army of six thousand men, he crossed the Rio Grande and
attacked General Taylor at Palo Alto, and was signally defeated.
General Arista retreated on the next day to Resaca de la Palma, where
he was again defeated and his army routed, and he retired across the
Rio Grande. General Taylor was now promoted to the rank of major
general, and on May 18th took possession of Matamoros without
opposition.

On September 9th he arrived at Monterey with about six thousand seven
hundred men, chiefly volunteers. General Ampudia held the command here
with ten thousand regular Mexican troops. General Taylor assaulted his
position on September 19th, and after five days of almost continual
fighting General Ampudia surrendered. General Taylor then transferred
his headquarters to Monterey, but guarded the city of Saltillo with a
strong force. He was about making an advance on San Luis Potosi, when
a large portion of his force was ordered to join General Scott at Vera
Cruz.

Concentrating his forces, some five thousand in number, he learned
that General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna was concentrating a force of
twenty thousand men at San Luis Potosi, with a view to attack him. On
February 21, 1847, he took position at a mountain pass called Buena
Vista, a few miles from Saltillo, where, being attacked the next day
by the Mexican army under General Santa Anna, he defeated them, and
Santa Anna retreated to San Luis Potosi. This brief statement of the
magnificent and almost unprecedented campaign of General Taylor is
necessary to understand the part taken by General Scott in the war
with Mexico.

General Scott was notified early in May, 1846, that he might be
ordered to assume the command on the Mexican frontier. He expressed
his disinclination to this duty, because it was, as he expressed it,
"harsh and unusual for a senior, without re-enforcements, to supersede
a meritorious junior, and that he doubted whether that was the right
season, or the Rio Grande the right basis, for offensive operations
against Mexico," and suggested a plan to conquer a peace, which he
afterward planned and executed. Political reasons to some extent
delayed action in sending General Scott to Mexico, and his views on
the proper campaign in Mexico were not approved by President Polk.
General Scott thought that unless his plan met the full approval and
support of the Government, it might result disastrously, and
expressed the sentiment, which became afterward a byword, that
"soldiers had a far greater dread of a fire upon the rear than of the
most formidable enemy in the front." The President declined to order
him to the command.

Pending these affairs, the Secretary of War one day called at General
Scott's office and found that he was absent. General Scott, on
returning, learning that the secretary had called, wrote him a note in
explanation of his absence, saying that "he had only stepped out for
the moment to take a hasty plate of soup." This was also made a
byword, and was used with a view to injure General Scott, or rather to
ridicule him by his political opponents when he was a candidate of the
Whig party for President in 1852. The successes of General Taylor had
endeared him to the whole country, and his praises were in every one's
mouth. Congress passed a resolution of thanks, with a promise to
present him with a sword in recognition of his services. General Scott
wrote to the Kentucky senators, to Hon. Jefferson Davis, and others in
Congress, suggesting that instead of a sword the higher honor of a
gold medal should be voted him, and this suggestion was adopted.
General Scott made an indorsement on the resolution of Congress voting
this medal, recommending that it be made in the highest style of art.
About this time he was called upon by some Whig members of Congress to
inquire if General Taylor was a Whig, and if he would not be a proper
person for the Whigs to nominate as their candidate for the
presidency.

General Scott spoke of him to these inquirers as a man who had the
true basis of a great character--pure, uncorrupted morals combined
with indomitable courage. Kind-hearted, sincere, and hospitable in a
plain way, he had no vice but prejudice, many friends, and no enemies.
He also related an anecdote showing General Taylor's unscrupulous
honesty and high sense of honor.

General Scott made repeated requests during the summer and autumn of
1846 to be ordered to Mexico. On November 23d he received the
following order:

                     "WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, _November 23, 1846_.

  "SIR: The President several days since communicated in
  person to you his orders to repair to Mexico to take command of the
  forces there assembled, and particularly to organize and set on foot
  an expedition to operate on the Gulf coast, if, on arriving at the
  theater of action, you shall deem it to be practicable. It is not
  proposed to control your operations by definite and positive
  instructions, but you are left to prosecute them as your judgment,
  under a full view of all the circumstances, shall dictate. The work
  is before you, and the means provided or to be provided for
  accomplishing it are committed to you, in the full confidence that
  you will use them to the best advantage.

  "The objects which it is desirable to obtain have been indicated,
  and it is hoped that you will have the requisite force to accomplish
  them. Of this you must be the judge when preparations are made and
  the time for action arrived. Very respectfully,

    "Your obedient servant,

                       "W.L. MARCY, _Secretary of War_.

    "_General_ WINFIELD SCOTT."

General Scott was impressed with the belief that Mr. Marcy, the
Secretary of War, and Hon. Robert J. Walker, of Mississippi, the
Secretary of the Treasury, had the fullest confidence in his ability,
and favored giving him the substantial direction of the war. He was
also impressed with the kindness and confidence extended to him by
President Polk, but on his arrival in New Orleans he was shown a
letter from Alexander Barrow, then a Senator in Congress from
Louisiana and a personal friend of General Scott, informing him that
the President had asked that the grade of lieutenant general be
established in the army, and that on the passage of such an act by
Congress it was the intention of the President to confer this rank,
and consequently the command of the army, upon Thomas H. Benton, then
a Senator from Missouri. This was a great shock to General Scott, and
he attributed it to political motives. He reasoned this way: "Scott is
a Whig; therefore the Democracy is not bound to observe good faith
with him. His successes may be turned to the prejudice of the
Democratic party. We must, however, profit by his military experience,
and if successful, by force of patronage and other helps, continue to
crown Benton with the victory, and thus triumph both in the field and
at the polls."

He reached the Brazos Santiago, near the mouth of the Rio Grande, in
Christmas week, and proceeded from there to Camargo, where he expected
to meet General Taylor, but, by some mismanagement or delay, his
notification to General Taylor did not reach the latter.

A confidential dispatch from General Scott to General Taylor was
opened, read, and freely discussed at headquarters at Monterey. A
duplicate was sent forward, but the party in charge of it was killed
at Villa Gran and the dispatch delivered to General Santa Anna. Taylor
had made a movement toward Tampico, and hence did not receive the
first dispatch delivered at Tampico. In the later dispatch General
Scott had written him that he might have his choice of two
armies--either remain as the commander of Northern Mexico, or
accompany General Scott in command of a division toward the City of
Mexico, with every assurance in either case of confidence and support.

General Scott anticipated the difficulty of timely concentration of
forces off the Brazos large enough to give hope of success. He thought
it necessary to have fifteen thousand troops, of which five thousand
were to be regulars, and to have the co-operation of the navy. The
time named for the concentration was the middle of January, so that
the army might reach Vera Cruz by February 1st. He had requested the
advice of General Taylor on these matters and all others in regard to
the proposed campaign. He had intimated, in a letter of November 15th,
that it would be necessary to withdraw a large number of troops from
General Taylor, and thus reduce him to the defensive, while he thought
it absolutely necessary for success that General Taylor should have a
force sufficient to act offensively in the direction of San Luis
Potosi. In addition to the volunteers and regulars at Tampico and
those moving there, he desired that Worth's division of regulars,
Duncan and Taylor's field batteries, a thousand mounted men, and all
the volunteer infantry that could be spared be sent to General Taylor,
only retaining a force sufficient to hold Monterey and protect his
communications to Point Isabel. From New Orleans General Scott had
written the Secretary of War that he approved of the rendezvous at
Pensacola rather than at Brazos for the ordnance and ordnance stores.
He also urged that volunteers be forwarded rapidly to Brazos.
Subsequently he wrote the Secretary of War asking that ships with
troops and supplies be ordered to Lobos Island. He addressed a letter
to General George M. Brooke, commanding at New Orleans, giving
detailed orders of what he required of him. He also wrote to Commodore
Conner, and made suggestions about joint operations.

Failing to meet General Taylor, as he hoped and endeavored to do, with
a view of a full and free conference, he felt compelled to issue
orders detaching from the army of the Rio Grande such regular troops
as were deemed necessary to lead the volunteers for the capture of
Vera Cruz and the move on the capital, leaving General Taylor with a
force sufficient to maintain himself at Monterey. He intended, had he
seen General Taylor, to advise him to contract his line to the Rio
Grande. General Taylor, supported by the authorities in Washington,
favored the movement on the City of Mexico from Monterey and _via_ San
Luis Potosi, but General Scott had already formulated and determined
on the movement which he made with such brilliant success. Orders were
accordingly issued from Camargo, January 3, 1847, for the movement of
troops from Monterey, and General Scott returned to Brazos Santiago.
The embarkation for Vera Cruz was delayed by the non-arrival of the
troops from Monterey and want of transportation. The Lobos Islands was
selected as the place of rendezvous. This point is one hundred and
twenty miles from Vera Cruz. When the greater part of the troops had
arrived, they sailed past Vera Cruz and anchored, on March 7th, at
Anton Lizardo, from which point it was determined to make the
necessary reconnoissances.

General Scott was at this time ignorant of the movement of General
Santa Anna toward Monterey, and expected, on landing or attempting to
land, to be met by a formidable force of the enemy. On March 9th, the
weather proving good, the fleet, consisting of some eighty vessels,
including transports, moved up the coast with the naval steamers and
five gunboats. General Scott was on board of the Massachusetts, and as
she moved up, the troops from the decks of the vessels cheered him
with great enthusiasm. The anchorage was made outside the range of the
enemy's guns. General Scott had provided sixty-seven surf boats, and
in these and some cutters fifty-five hundred men--the boats being
steered by sailors furnished by Commodore David Conner--passed the
Massachusetts and repeated their cheers to the commanding general. The
whole force was landed at half past five in the afternoon, without the
loss of a man or a boat and without serious opposition from the enemy.
The remainder of the force was soon landed, amounting in all to
something less than twelve thousand men.

The following appeared in the New Orleans Bulletin of March 27, 1847:
"The landing of the American army at Vera Cruz has been accomplished
in a manner that reflects the highest credit on all concerned; and the
regularity, precision, and promptness with which it was effected has
probably never been surpassed, if it has been equaled, in modern
warfare. The removal of a large body of troops from numerous
transports into boats in an open sea, their subsequent disembarkation
on the sea beach, on an enemy's coast, through a surf, with all their
arms and accouterments, without a single error or accident, requires
great exertion, skill, and sound judgment.

"The French expedition against Algiers in 1830 was said to be the most
complete armament in every respect that ever left Europe; it had been
prepared with labor, attention, experience, and nothing had been
omitted to insure success, and particularly in the means and
facilities for landing the troops. This disembarkation took place in a
wide bay, which was more favorable than an open beach directly on the
ocean, and (as in the present instance) without any resistance on the
part of the enemy; yet only nine thousand men were landed the first
day, and from thirty to forty lives were lost by accidents or
upsetting of boats; whereas on the present occasion twelve thousand
men were landed in one day, without, so far as we have heard, the
slightest accident or loss of life."

Both the city and the castle of San Juan de Ulloa were strongly
garrisoned and well provisioned. It was General Santa Anna's opinion
that the garrison at Vera Cruz and the castle could successfully
resist a siege until the annual breaking out of the yellow fever, upon
which he depended to cause the withdrawal of the American troops;
hence he devoted himself to the collection of troops to advance on
General Taylor. General Scott says: "The walls and forts of Vera Cruz
in 1847 were in good condition. Subsequent to its capture by the
French, under Admiral Baudin and the Prince de Joinville, in 1838,
the castle had been greatly extended, almost rebuilt, and its armament
about doubled. Besides, the French were allowed to reconnoiter the
city and castle and choose their positions of attack without the least
resistance, the Mexicans deprecating the war with that nation, and
hence ordered not to fire the first gun. Of that injunction the French
were aware. When we approached, in 1847, the castle had the capacity
to sink the entire American navy." Soon after the landing was
effected, General Scott, accompanied by Colonel Joseph G. Totten and
other officers of his staff, reconnoitered the land side of the city,
the reconnoissance of the water front having been previously made.

The city was now completely invested, and all communication with the
interior cut off. A complete blockade had been established by
Commodore Conner. Several officers applied to General Scott for the
privilege of leading storming parties. They were thanked, but no
orders were given. In a meeting with his staff--Colonel Totten, chief
engineer; Lieutenant-Colonel Ethan A. Hitchcock, acting inspector
general; Captain Robert E. Lee, engineer; and Lieutenant Henry L.
Scott, acting adjutant general--General Scott spoke as follows: "We,
of course, gentlemen, must take the city and castle before the return
of the _vomito_--if not by head-work, by the slow scientific process
of storming, and then escape by pushing the conquest into the healthy
interior. I am strongly inclined to attempt the former, unless you can
convince me that the other is preferable. Since our thorough
reconnaissance, I think the suggestion practicable with a very
moderate loss on our part. The second method would no doubt be
equally successful, but with the cost of an immense slaughter to both
sides, including noncombatants, Mexican men, women, and children,
because assaults must be made in the dark, and the assailants dare not
lose time in taking and guarding prisoners without incurring the
certainty of becoming captives themselves, till all the strongholds of
the place are occupied. The horrors of such slaughter as that, with
the usual terrible accompaniment, are most revolting. Besides these
objections, it is necessary to take into account the probable loss of
some two thousand, perhaps three thousand, of our best men in an
assault, and I have received but half the number promised me. How,
then, could we hope to penetrate in the interior?... For these
reasons," I added, quoting literally, "although I know our countrymen
will hardly acknowledge a victory unaccompanied by a long butcher's
bill (report of dead and wounded), I am strongly inclined--policy
concurring with humanity--to forego their loud applause and 'aves
vehement' and take the city with the least possible loss of life...."

General Scott's views were fully concurred in by Colonel Totten and
others of his staff, and orders were issued for digging the trenches
and the establishment of batteries. Very soon all outposts and
sentries of the enemy were driven in. General Scott had warned the
foreign consuls in the city of his proposed attack and had furnished
them safe conducts out of the city, but they had not taken advantage
of it. The marines of Commodore Conner's squadron, at his request,
were now allowed to join the army, and, under command of Captain Alvin
Edson, they were attached to the Third Artillery.

On the morning of the 10th the guns from the castle opened fire, but
did very little damage. General Robert Patterson now joined Worth on
his left, and extended the line of investment. Small parties of
Mexicans were in sight in a valley, and a detachment under command of
Colonel Cenovio approached the American camp and opened fire. The only
damage done was the wounding of one soldier. General Gideon J. Pillow,
with a part of his command and a six-pounder, opened fire on a large
stone building occupied by the enemy and known as the magazine. They
were soon driven off, and General Pillow advanced and attacked a small
force in his front, driving them and occupying the magazine.

Colonels William T. Haskell's and Francis M. Wynkoop's regiments of
Tennessee and Pennsylvania volunteers were moved on a small force on
the road to Medelin, which retired, and two companies--one of
artillery under command of Captain John R. Vinton, and one of infantry
under command of Lieutenant A.P. Rogers--seized a point known as the
limekiln, where it was proposed to plant a battery. General Twiggs
moved on the 11th to extend the line of investment, which was now
complete. General Scott then addressed a letter to the commanding
officer of the city as follows:

    "HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
                CAMP WASHINGTON, BEFORE VERA CRUZ,
                                                   "_March, 23, 1847_.

  "The undersigned, Major-General Scott, general in chief of the
  armies of the United States of America, in addition to the close
  blockade of the coast and port of Vera Cruz previously established
  by the squadrons under Commodore Conner, of the navy of said
  States, having more fully invested the said city with an
  overwhelming army, so as to render it impossible that it should
  receive from without succor or re-enforcements of any kind, and
  having caused to be established batteries competent to the speedy
  destruction of said city, he, the undersigned, deems it due to the
  courtesies of war in like cases, as well as to the rights of
  humanity, to summon his Excellency the governor or commander in
  chief of the city of Vera Cruz to surrender the same to the army of
  the United States of America, present before the place. The
  undersigned, anxious to spare the beautiful city of Vera Cruz from
  the imminent hazard of demolition, its gallant defenders from a
  useless effusion of blood, and its peaceful inhabitants--women and
  children inclusive--from the inevitable horrors of a triumphant
  assault, addresses this summons to the intelligence, the gallantry,
  the patriotism, no less than the humanity, of his Excellency the
  governor and commander in chief of Vera Cruz. The undersigned is not
  accurately informed whether both the city and the castle of San Juan
  de Ulloa be under the command of his Excellency, or whether each
  place has its own independent commander; but the undersigned, moved
  by the considerations adverted to above, may be willing to stipulate
  that if the city should by capitulation be garrisoned by a part of
  his troops no missile shall be fired from within the city or from
  its bastions or walls upon the castle, unless the castle should
  previously fire upon the city. The undersigned has the honor to
  tender his distinguished opponent, his Excellency the general and
  commander in chief of Vera Cruz, the assurance of the high respect
  and consideration of the undersigned,             WINFIELD SCOTT."

To which he received the following reply:

                            "GOD AND LIBERTY!"

                                       "VERA CRUZ, _March 22, 1847_.

  "TO MAJOR-GENERAL SCOTT: The undersigned, commanding
  general of the free and sovereign State of Vera Cruz, has informed
  himself of the contents of the note which Major-General Scott,
  general in chief of the forces of the United States, has addressed
  to him under date of to-day, demanding the surrender of this place
  and castle of San Juan de Ulloa, and in answer has to say that the
  above-named fortress as well as the city depends on his authority;
  and it being his principal duty, in order to prove worthy of the
  confidence placed in him by the Government of the nation, to defend
  both points at all cost, to which he counts upon necessary elements,
  and will make it good to the last, therefore his Excellency can
  commence his operations of war in a manner which he may consider
  most advantageous. The undersigned has the honor to return to the
  general in chief of the forces of the United States the
  demonstrations of esteem he may be pleased to honor him with.

                                                     "JUAN MORALES."

The city was garrisoned by a force of three thousand three hundred and
sixty officers and men, and the castle had a force of one thousand and
thirty, making a total of four thousand three hundred and ninety. It
was certainly a brave determination of the Mexicans with this force to
resist the formidable foe who had invested them and were ready to
attack.

On March 22d, at 4.15 P.M., the mortar batteries opened fire,
and from that time the firing was continued without ceasing until the
23d, when it was suspended for a few hours. The fire was returned from
the batteries. Fire was also opened on the city from the vessels.
Heavy guns having arrived, preparations were made for getting them
ashore, but it was prevented by a heavy norther. The norther having
subsided on the 23d, six heavy guns and a detachment from the navy
were landed. On Commodore Matthew C. Perry's request a place in the
trenches was assigned to the navy. On the 24th, Colonel Persifor F.
Smith moved out to a small stream called the San Pedro and attacked
and drove off a force of the enemy.

On the night of the 24th General Scott received a communication,
signed by the British, French, Spanish, and Prussian consuls in Vera
Cruz, asking time to permit the neutrals and women and children to
withdraw from the city; to which he replied that up to the 23d the
communication between the neutrals in Vera Cruz and the neutral ships
of war lying off Sacrificios was left open to allow them an exit, and
that he had given notice to the consuls. He therefore declined to
grant the request unless it was made by the governor and commander in
chief of Vera Cruz, accompanied with a proposition to surrender. On
the 25th, the six heavy guns, the navy battery, and all the mortars
opened fire. General Scott had determined that, if no proposition for
surrender was made by the 26th, he would assault the works.

The command of the city having been turned over by General Morales to
General Landero, the latter, on the 26th, addressed General Scott as
follows:

  "I have the honor of transmitting to your Excellency the exposition
  which has this moment been made to me by the señores consuls of
  England, France, Spain, and Prussia, in which they solicit that
  hostilities may be suspended while the innocent families in this
  place who are suffering the ravages of war be enabled to leave the
  city, which solicitude claims my support; and considering it in
  accordance with the rights of afflicted humanity, I have not
  hesitated to invite your Excellency to enter into an honorable
  accommodation with the garrison, in which case you will please name
  three commissioners who may meet at some intermediate point to treat
  with those of this place upon the terms of the accommodation. With
  this motive I renew to your Excellency my attentive consideration.

  "God reward your Excellency, etc., etc., etc. (on account of the
  sickness of the commanding general).

                                              "JOSÉ JUAN DE LANDERO."

General Scott notified General Landero that he had appointed Brevet
Major-General Worth, of the regular army, Major-General Pillow, of the
volunteers, and Colonel Totten, chief of the engineer corps of the
army, commissioners on his part to meet a like number to be appointed
by General Landero. The latter announced the appointment on his part
of Colonels Herrera, Gutierrez de Villa Nueva, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Robles. The commissioners met at the Punta de Hornos, and on the 27th
agreed upon terms.


[Illustration: Siege of
VERA CRUZ]


The terms of capitulation were in substance that the Mexican troops
should march out of the city with the honors of war, should stack
their arms and be paroled; that their colors, when lowered, should be
saluted. Absolute protection was guaranteed to persons and property in
the city. No private building was to be taken or used by the United
States forces without previous arrangement and fair compensation. A
Mexican historian says: "The sacrifice was consummated, but the
soldiers of Vera Cruz received the honor due to their valor and
misfortunes--the respect of the conqueror. Not even a look was given
them by the enemy's soldiers which could be interpreted into an
insult." Five thousand prisoners and four hundred guns were captured,
and with a loss of only sixty-seven killed and wounded.

There is scarcely anything in history equal to this achievement of
General Scott. Throughout the siege he shared all the dangers and
hardships of his troops. He examined in person, aided by his very able
staff officers, every detail of works of defense, and gave orders for
the firing of the batteries.

One day during the siege General Scott was walking the trenches where
a heavy fire of the enemy was directed. Seeing some of the soldiers
standing up, General Scott ordered them not to expose themselves.
"But, General," said one, "you are exposing yourself." "Oh!" said he,
"generals nowadays can be made out of anybody, but men can not be
had." The point of this reply is easy to understand. General Worth was
appointed commandant and governor of Vera Cruz, with instructions to
establish and enforce police regulations, but not to interfere with
the functions of the civil magistrates in affairs between Mexicans.

He was authorized and instructed, after conferring with Commodore
Perry, to establish a tariff of duties on articles imported, to be
applied to the necessities of the sick and wounded of the army and
navy and indigent inhabitants of the city of Vera Cruz; this to
continue in force until instructions were received from Washington.
General Worth, on assuming command, immediately issued an order to the
alcalde as follows:

"Arms in possession of citizens to be given into the alcalde's
possession and to be reported to headquarters. Drinking saloons to be
closed, and not to be reopened hereafter except under special
permission. Mexican laws as between Mexicans to be enforced, and
justice administered by regular Mexican tribunals. Cases arising
between American citizens of the army, or authorized followers of the
same, will be investigated by military commissions."

To cover all cases arising by the military occupation of the country,
General Scott had issued at Tampico his Martial-Law Order No. 40, and
republished it at Vera Cruz. General Worth gave permission to the
residents of the city to leave and enter the city freely between
daylight and sunset. No duties were imposed on any of the necessaries
of life.

On March 30th a combined military and naval expedition was organized
to move to Alvarado, Commodore Perry in command of the naval
contingent. The army detachment, under General John A. Quitman,
consisted of the Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina infantry, and a
squadron of the Second Dragoons under command of Major Benjamin Lloyd
Beall, and a section of the Third Artillery under Lieutenant Henry
Bethel Judd.

The object of this expedition was to conciliate the inhabitants, and
for the purchase of horses, mules, and cattle. Commodore Perry landed
there on the 1st of April, followed by the arrival of General Quitman
very soon afterward. Many citizens fled on the approach of the troops,
and the town was surrendered to the American forces. Twenty-two cannon
and some ammunition were captured, and five hundred horses secured by
purchase. The troops returned to Vera Cruz, April 6th. A similar
expedition for like purposes was undertaken by General Harvey, April
2d, for Antigua. A lieutenant and eight soldiers were captured, and
some horses and cattle purchased. On April 3d, Brevet Colonel Henry
Wilson, with the First United States Infantry and two companies of
volunteers, was assigned to the command of Vera Cruz and the castle of
San Juan de Ulloa.

Orders were now issued for an advance of the army on Jalapa, General
David E. Twiggs, with the Second Division of regulars, to lead the
movement on the 8th, two brigades of volunteers to follow. On the 9th
Patterson's division moved, but, for want of transportation, Quitman's
brigade, Colonel James H. Thomas, Tennessee mounted regiment, Worth's
division, and the siege train were left at Vera Cruz. General Twiggs
was notified by General Scott that he had information that General
Santa Anna had arrived at Jalapa with six thousand troops, though he
[General Scott] regarded the numbers as exaggerated. General Twiggs,
on receipt of General Scott's notice, replied that the Mexicans would
doubtless endeavor to hold the pass of Cerro Gordo between the
National Bridge and Jalapa. Through Mexican sources he had information
rating Santa Anna's force at from two thousand to thirteen thousand,
and that he expected to arrive on the evening of the 11th at Plan del
Rio, the point where the Mexican advance was posted.

General Scott had received information that Generals Patterson and
Twiggs had met a strong force of the enemy at Plan del Rio. Worth's
division was ordered forward, and Quitman directed to follow in
twenty-four hours. General Scott himself now moved out under a cavalry
escort.


CHAPTER IX.

General Santa Anna arrives at Cerro Gordo--Engagement at
Atalay--General Orders No. 111--Reports from Jalapa--Report of
engagement at Cerro Gordo--Occupation of Perote--Account of a Mexican
historian--General Santa Anna's letter to General Arroya--Delay of the
Government in sending re-enforcements--Danger of communications with
Vera Cruz--Troops intended for Scott ordered to General
Taylor--Colonel Childs appointed governor of Jalapa--Occupation of
Puebla--Arrival of re-enforcements--Number of Scott's force.


General Santa Anna had arrived at Cerro Gordo on April 9th. General
Scott, on his arrival, ordered (on the morning of the 11th)
reconnoissances to be made on the Mexican left by Captain Robert E.
Lee, which were resumed on the 16th. These reconnoissances determined
the order of attack, which was to make a demonstration with the
commands of Generals Pillow and Shields on the Mexican right, and
press the mass of the army on their right. This movement being
successful, the enemy's communications would be cut off. In the
meantime the Mexicans were busily engaged in greatly strengthening
their positions.

General Scott had not intended to attack the enemy in the absence of
Worth's division, which had not yet arrived. A movement of Lieutenant
Franklin Gardner, re-enforced later by the mounted rifles under Major
Edwin Vose Sumner and a battalion of the First Artillery under
Lieutenant-Colonel Childs, to occupy a position near the base of the
Atalaya, provoked a sharp conflict. General Santa Anna, being at the
front, ordered re-enforcements. Colonel Thomas Childs withdrew, having
advanced under a misapprehension. The American loss was ninety-seven,
killed and wounded. General Scott returned to Plan del Rio and issued
the following order:

                     "HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY,

                                      "PLAN DEL RIO, _April 17, 1847_.

  "GENERAL ORDERS NO. 111.

  "The enemy's whole line of intrenchments and batteries will be
  attacked in front, and at the same time turned, early in the day
  to-morrow, probably before ten o'clock A.M. The second (Twiggs's)
  division of regulars is already advanced within easy turning
  distance toward the enemy's line. That division has instructions to
  move forward before daylight to-morrow and take up position across
  the national road, in the enemy's rear, so as to cut off a retreat
  toward Jalapa. It may be re-enforced to-day, if unexpectedly
  attacked in force, by regiments--one or two--taken from Shields's
  brigade of volunteers. If not, the two volunteer regiments will
  march for that purpose at daylight to-morrow morning under
  Brigadier-General Shields, who will report to Brigadier-General
  Twiggs in getting up with him, or to the general in chief if he be
  in advance. The remaining regiments of that volunteer brigade will
  receive instructions in the course of this day. The first division
  of regulars (Worth's) will follow the movement against the enemy's
  left at sunrise to-morrow morning. As already arranged,
  Brigadier-General Pillow's brigade will march at six o'clock
  to-morrow morning along the route he has carefully reconnoitered,
  and stand ready, as soon as he hears the report of arms on our
  right, or sooner, if circumstances should favor him, to pierce the
  enemy's line of batteries at such point--the nearer the river the
  better--as he may select. Once in the rear of that line, he will
  turn to the right or left, or both, and attack the batteries in
  reverse; or, if abandoned, he will pursue the enemy with vigor until
  further orders. Wall's field battery and cavalry will be held in
  reserve on the national road, a little out of view and range of the
  enemy's batteries. They will take up that position at nine o'clock
  in the morning. The enemy's batteries being carried or abandoned,
  all our divisions and corps will pursue with vigor. This pursuit may
  be continued many miles toward Jalapa until stopped by darkness or
  fortified positions; consequently the body of the army will not
  return to this encampment, but be followed to-morrow afternoon, or
  early the next morning, by the baggage trains of the several corps.
  For this purpose the feeble men of each corps will be left to guard
  its camp and effects, and to load up the latter in the wagons of the
  corps. A commander of the present encampment will be designated in
  the course of this day.

  "As soon as it shall be known that the enemy's works have been
  carried, or that the general pursuit has been commenced, one wagon
  for each regiment and battery and one for the cavalry will follow
  the movement, to receive, under the direction of medical officers,
  the wounded and disabled, who will be brought back to this place for
  treatment in general hospital. The surgeon general will organize
  this important service, and designate that hospital, as well as the
  medical officers to be left at it.

  "Every man who marches out to attack or pursue the enemy will take
  the usual allowance of ammunition and subsistence for at least two
  days.

  "By command of Major-General Scott.

                          "H.L. SCOTT, _Acting Adjutant General_".

The engineer train and troops under Lieutenant George Brinton
McClellan having arrived, additional batteries were placed in
position. General Santa Anna, believing that the Americans would
attack his right, made his dispositions accordingly. Following are
General Scott's reports of the battle made to the Secretary of War:

              "HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY, PLAN DEL RIO,

                        "FIFTY MILES FROM VERA CRUZ, _April 19, 1847_.

  "SIR: The plan of the attack, sketched in General Orders
  No. 111 herewith, was finely executed by this gallant army before
  two o'clock P.M. yesterday. We are quite embarrassed with
  the results of victory--prisoners of war, heavy ordnance, field
  batteries, small arms, and accouterments. About three thousand men
  laid down their arms, with the usual proportion of field and company
  officers, besides five generals, several of them of great
  distinction--Pinson Jarrero, La Vega, Noryuga, and Obando. A sixth
  general, Vasque, was killed in defending the battery (tower) in the
  rear of the line of defense, the capture of which gave us those
  glorious results.

  "Our loss, though comparatively small in number, has been serious.
  Brigadier-General Shields, a commander of activity, zeal, and
  talent, is, I fear, if not dead, mortally wounded. He is some five
  miles from me at this moment. The field of operations covers many
  miles, broken by mountains and deep chasms, and I have not a report
  as yet from any division or brigade. Twiggs's division, followed by
  Shields's (now Colonel Baker's) brigade, are now near Jalapa, and
  Worth's division is _en route_ thither, all pursuing with good
  results, as I learn, that part of the Mexican army--perhaps six or
  seven thousand men--that fled before our right had carried the
  tower, and gained the Jalapa road. Pillow's brigade alone is near me
  at this depot of wounded, sick, and prisoners, and I have time only
  to give from him the names of First-Lieutenant F.B. Nelson and
  Second-Lieutenant C.G. Gill, both of the Second Tennessee Foot
  (Haskell's regiment), among the killed, and in the brigade one
  hundred and six of all ranks killed or wounded. Among the latter the
  gallant brigadier general himself has a smart wound in his arm, but
  not disabled; and Major R. Farqueson, Second Tennessee, H.F. Murray,
  second lieutenant, G.T. Southerland, first lieutenant, W.P. Hale,
  adjutant, all of the same regiment, severely, and First-Lieutenant
  W. Yearwood mortally wounded. And I know, from personal observation
  on the ground, that First-Lieutenant Ewell, of the Rifles, if not
  now dead, was mortally wounded in entering, sword in hand, the
  intrenchments around the captured tower. Second-Lieutenant Derby,
  Topographical Engineers, I saw also at the same place, severely
  wounded, and Captain Patten, Second United States Infantry, lost his
  right hand. Major Sumner, Second United States Dragoons, was
  slightly wounded the day before, and Captain Johnson, Topographical
  Engineers (now lieutenant colonel of infantry), was very severely
  wounded in reconnoitering some days earlier. I must not omit to add
  that Captain Mason and Second-Lieutenant Davis, both of the Rifles,
  were among the very severely wounded in storming the same tower. I
  estimate our total loss in killed and wounded may be about two
  hundred and fifty, and that of the enemy three hundred and fifty. In
  the pursuit toward Jalapa (twenty-five miles hence) I learn we have
  added much to the enemy's loss in prisoners, killed, and wounded. In
  fact, I suppose this retreating army to be nearly disorganized, and
  hence my haste to follow in an hour or two to profit by events. In
  this hurried and imperfect report I must not omit to say that
  Brigadier-General Twiggs, in passing the mountain range beyond Cerro
  Gordo crowned with the tower, detached from his division, as I
  suggested the day before, a strong force to carry that height which
  commanded the Jalapa road at the foot, and could not fail, if
  carried, to cut off the whole or any part of the enemy's forces from
  a retreat in any direction. A portion of the First Artillery under
  the often-distinguished Brevet-Colonel Childs, the Third Infantry
  under Captain Alexander, the Seventh Infantry under
  Lieutenant-Colonel Plympton, and the Rifles under Major Loring, all
  under the temporary command of Colonel Harvey, Second Dragoons,
  during the confinement to his bed of Brevet Brigadier-General P.F.
  Smith, composed that detachment. The style of execution, which I had
  the pleasure to witness, was most brilliant and decisive. The
  brigade ascended the long and difficult slope of Cerro Gordo,
  without shelter and under the tremendous fire of artillery and
  musketry, with the utmost steadiness, reached the breastworks,
  drove the enemy from them, planted the colors of the First
  Artillery, Third and Seventh Infantry, the enemy's flag still
  flying, and after some minutes of sharp firing finished the conquest
  with the bayonet. It is a most pleasing duty to say that the highest
  praise is due to Harvey, Childs, Plympton, Loring, Alexander, their
  gallant officers and men, for this brilliant service, independent of
  the great results which soon followed.

  "Worth's division of regulars coming up at this time, he detached
  Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel C.F. Smith with his light battalion to
  support the assault, but not in time. The general, reaching the
  tower a few minutes before me and observing a white flag displayed
  from the nearest portion of the enemy's lines toward the batteries
  below, sent out Colonels Harvey and Childs to hold a parley. The
  surrender followed in an hour or two.

  "Major-General Patterson left a sick-bed to share in the dangers and
  fatigues of the day, and after the surrender went forward to command
  the advanced forces toward Jalapa. Brigadier-General Pillow and his
  brigade twice assaulted with great daring the enemy's lines of
  batteries on our left; and, though without success, they contributed
  much to distract and dismay their immediate opponents.

  "President Santa Anna, with Generals Canalizo and Ampudia, and some
  six or eight thousand men, escaped toward Jalapa just before Cerro
  Gordo was carried and before Twiggs's division could reach the
  national road above. I have determined to parole the
  prisoners--officers and men--as I have not the means of feeding them
  here beyond to-day, and can not afford to detach a heavy body of
  horse and foot, with wagons, to accompany them to Vera Cruz. Our
  baggage train, though increasing, is not yet half large enough to
  give an assured progress to this army. Besides, a greater number of
  prisoners would probably escape from the escort in the long and deep
  sandy road, with subsistence, ten to one, than we shall find again
  out of the same body of men in ranks opposed to us. Not one of the
  Vera Cruz prisoners is believed to have been in the lines at Cerro
  Gordo. Some six of the officers highest in rank refused to give
  their paroles, except to go to Vera Cruz, and hence, perhaps, to the
  United States.

  "The small arms and their accouterments being of no value to our
  army here or at home, I have ordered them to be destroyed, for we
  have not the means of transporting them. I am also somewhat
  embarrassed with the many pieces of artillery--all bronze--which we
  have captured. It would take a brigade and half the mules of this
  army to transport them fifty miles. A field battery I shall take for
  service for the army, but the heavy metal must be collected and left
  here for the present. We have our own siege train and the proper
  carriages with us.

