Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)


THE KENTUCKY RANGER


By

EDWARD T. CURNICK, A.M.

Author of A Catechism on Christian Perfection.


The Christian Witness Co.
Chicago, Ill.


AUTHOR'S NOTE


The story, "The Kentucky Ranger," to a large extent is built around the
life and character of one of the most famous early pioneer preachers of
the West.

Many of the incidents in his career are recorded, but have been treated
as to time, place and authorship according to the demands of the work
with the freedom belonging to the writer of fiction.

A number of years ago some of the chapters in the narrative were
printed in "The Epworth Era," of Nashville, Tennessee. Thanks are
hereby extended to the paper for releasing the copyright.


Copyright 1922
THE CHRISTIAN WITNESS CO.


Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents was not contained in the
text. It has been generated for the convenience of the reader.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.
    The Ranger.

CHAPTER II.
    An Old Time Camp Meeting.

CHAPTER III.
    Swapping Stories.

CHAPTER IV.
    The Trail of the Serpent.

CHAPTER V.
    Rowdies in Camp.

CHAPTER VI.
    Under the Pine Trees.

CHAPTER VII.
    The Horse Race.

CHAPTER VIII.
    Prayer In a Dance Hall.

CHAPTER IX.
    Wanted, a Mission School.

CHAPTER X.
    The Mission School Established.

CHAPTER XI.
    A Kentucky Feud.

CHAPTER XII.
    The Shameful Plot.

CHAPTER XIII.
    Into a Pit (or Pitch).

CHAPTER XIV.
    Returning Thanks.

CHAPTER XV.
    Cupid's Chariot.

CHAPTER XVI.
    Horse Thieves.

CHAPTER XVII.
    Lynch Law or the Gospel.

CHAPTER XVIII.
    Apple Blossoms.

CHAPTER XIX.
    A Proposal Without Words.

CHAPTER XX.
    Kidnapped.

CHAPTER XXI.
    The Search.

CHAPTER XXII.
    The Rescue.

CHAPTER XXIII.
    A Battle With Moonshiners.

CHAPTER XXIV.
    "I Thee Wed."


THE KENTUCKY RANGER


CHAPTER I.

The Ranger.


"Glory to God! another sinner's down! Glory! Hallelujah! Amen; Pray on,
brother; you'll soon be through. Glory! Glory!"

These words were shouted by two young men and a young woman who were
returning through the Kentucky woods from a camp meeting. They were
riding in a smart spring wagon drawn by two good horses. The young man
who was not driving would fall into the wagon, crying for mercy, and
the driver shouted: "Glory to God! another sinner's down!" and the
young lady added: "Keep on praying, brother; you'll soon be saved.
Glory! Glory to God!" Then the young men would change places, and the
other would shout: "You'll soon get through, brother; pray on. Glory!"

These persons acted thus to tantalize a camp meeting preacher who was
riding on horseback ahead of them. He detected their mockery and tried
to outride them; but his horse being somewhat lame he could not escape
them.

The preacher remembered that at a little distance beyond the road ran
through a swamp but that a bridle path wound around it. Putting spurs
to his horse he made for this path but the driver, keeping on the road,
whipped up his horses. Driving into the swamp in his haste and
excitement he did not notice a stump at the side of the road. Crash!
went the fore wheel against the stump, and mounting to its top over
went the wagon into the mud and water. The two young men took a flying
leap into the swamp, and the young lady was thrown out. She was almost
smothered before she was rescued by the young men. While they were in
this predicament the preacher rode up to the edge of the morass.
Raising himself in his stirrups he shouted at the top of his voice:
"Glory to God! Glory to God! another sinner's down! Hallelujah! Glory!
Glory!" Then he added: "Now you poor, miserable sinners, take this as a
judgment from God upon you for your meanness, and repent of your wicked
ways before it is too late." With this he left them, covered with mud
and shame, to their reflections.

Jasper Very (for this was the preacher's name) continued on his way,
now laughing at the sorry plight of his mockers, again singing a hymn
with such power that the leaves of the trees seemed to tremble with the
melody, and anon lifting his heart in prayer to his Maker. The object
of his ride through the woods was to visit a settler who a short time
before had been caught by a falling tree and suffered the fracture of
his leg. The man of God brought the consolations of religion to the
injured man and his family. After partaking of their plain but
hospitable fare, he went to the barn for his faithful horse. While he
is preparing to mount him we shall attempt to describe this backwoods
preacher's appearance.

We see at once that he is a splendid type of Kentucky manhood. He
stands six feet two inches in his heavy rawhide boots, but his frame is
so well proportioned that he does not seem so tall. His head is massive
and his hair as thick and disheveled as a lion's mane; it cannot be
kept in order. His eyes are dark blue, and can twinkle with merriment
or blaze with indignation. His mouth is of medium size, mobile, yet
strong; when closed the drooping corners give the face a set
expression. Great firmness and decision are shown by the broad but
rounded chin, which forms a base for a smooth-shaven countenance. His
frame is large and powerful and is overlaid with muscles hard as iron
and elastic as steel. His hands are large and have a Samsonlike grip in
them. A long coat of homespun cloth is well fitted to his body, with
waistcoat and trousers of the same material. A black stock loosely tied
about his neck sets off a white shirt of coarse linen. His whole
make-up gives one the impression of fearlessness, determination and
energy, mixed with gentleness, kindness and charity. Humor shines in
his face like heat lightning in a summer cloud.

Jasper Very's parents were pioneers from the State of Virginia. Hearing
of the fertility and beauty of Kentucky they, like many others, decided
to emigrate to that land of promise. In 1785 they, with their infant
son Jasper, started out to brave the perils of the wilderness. Perils
there were in plenty. Kentucky at that time was the scene of repeated
Indian raids, ambuscades, burning of homes, scalpings, and other
atrocities. The Red Man was determined that his choicest Hunting Ground
should not be possessed by the White Man. The Indians were met by such
hardy and invincible scouts and frontiersmen as Daniel Boone, Simon
Kenton and George Rogers Clark. For years the conflict was carried on
until finally the savages were driven out of the state and its
marvelous valleys and hills were left to the white man there to fulfil
his destiny as the aborigines had theirs before him. The Very family
escaped the horrors of battle, massacre and captivity. They settled on
a site of great natural beauty in Lincoln County, near the Tennessee
line.

While the physical surroundings of the Verys were fairly entrancing, we
are sorry to confess that the moral environment was anything but
elevating and desirable. In fact the neighborhood was considered one of
the worst in all the newly settled country. It received the name of
Rogues' Harbor and well deserved the title. Many of the settlers had
committed crimes in the Eastern States and had fled to the wilderness
to escape punishment. They composed a majority of the people of the
district, and when arrested for breaking the law swore one another
clear in the courts of justice. At last the respectable people combined
for their own protection in an organization called the Regulators.
Several bloody encounters took place between the Regulators and the
outlaws before order was established in the community.

Jasper Very was a lively youngster from the start, and surely Rogues'
Harbor was not the best place in which to bring up a vigorous and
vivacious boy. He early showed elements of power and leadership, having
a remarkably strong and well developed body, being a stranger to fear,
a wit and a wag, and loving the rude sports and pastimes of the period.
Apart from the home there were few opportunities for mental or
religious training. Schools were few and scarcely worthy of the name.
No newspapers were published in that section. Sunday was a day set
apart for hunting, fishing, horse-racing, card-playing, dancing and
other amusements.

It is little wonder that Jasper became a wild and wicked boy. He was a
leader among his fellows in the rough sports of the time. His father
gave him a race-horse and he became renowned among his companions for
fearless riding. At card-playing he was skillful and lucky. But Jasper
had one blessed, restraining influence which doubtless kept him from
going the full course of sin and folly--a devout, humble, praying,
Christian mother.

Happy the boy who in the slippery paths of youth can lean upon the
loving arm of a godly mother.

When sixteen years of age Jasper experienced a great change of heart
and conduct. It was the turning point of his life. With his father and
brother he attended a wedding in the neighborhood. With others he took
part in the uproarious merriment of the occasion. Returning home he
began to think of his wicked ways, and at once felt condemned. His mind
became so agitated that his body was affected. His heart palpitated in
a very violent manner, his sight left him, and he thought death was at
hand. Very sure was he that he was not prepared to die. Falling on his
knees he cried to God to have mercy on his soul. Though it was late at
night his mother heard his cries, sprang from her bed, and was soon at
his side praying for her son, and exhorting him to look to Christ for
mercy. They prayed together a long time, and little sleep came to them
that night. Jasper resolved from that time to be a Christian. He asked
his father to sell the racehorse, and gave his pack of cards to his
mother, who threw them into the fire.

However, it was many days before Jasper really felt that he was
converted. Finally he found peace of mind at a camp meeting. We quote
from a record of his experience: "On the Saturday evening of said
meeting I went with weeping multitudes, bowed before the sand, and
earnestly prayed for mercy. In the midst of a solemn struggle of soul
an impression was made on my mind as though a voice said to me: 'Thy
sins are all forgiven thee.' Divine light flashed all around me,
unspeakable joy sprang up in my soul. I rose to my feet, opened my
eyes, and it really seemed as if I were in heaven; the trees, the
leaves on them, and every thing seemed to be, and I really thought
were, praising God. My mother raised a shout, my Christian friends
crowded around me and joined me in praising God--I have never doubted
that the Lord did then and there forgive my sins and gave me religion."
He went on his way rejoicing, and before he reached his majority became
a backwoods preacher. He had been ranging over the hills and valleys of
Kentucky for four years, preaching the gospel in many places, when he
is introduced to our readers.

Jasper Very was known early in his ministry as a great camp meeting
preacher. He was always partial to such gatherings, partly because at
one of them he had found religion. These meetings in the woods, "God's
first temples," are of enough importance to merit description in
another chapter.


CHAPTER II.

An Old Time Camp Meeting.


To Kentucky belongs the honor of originating the modern camp meeting.
This is no small distinction, when we consider how these institutions
have spread over the land and the great good they have done. Camp
meetings grew out of the needs of the times. When they providentially
sprang up in Kentucky, the frontier was sparsely settled, most people
living miles away from any church. Such churches as were built were
small and could accommodate only a few persons, and preaching services
were often weeks apart.

The revivals of genuine religion which usually attended these
gatherings were much needed in the backwoods. Most of the settlers were
honest, law-abiding persons, who had sought to improve their means by
emigrating to this western country; but many of the vicious
off-scouring of the older settlements also went west to hide their
crimes or to commit new ones. Rogues' Harbor was only an extreme type
of many law-defying places. Murderers, thieves, gamblers, defaulters
and their kind put life in peril, and threatened the moral and social
order of the state. These camp meetings strengthened and encouraged
good people, reformed many bad men and women, and thus became a saving
leaven of righteousness.

And what a place for a camp meeting was the Kentucky forest. What
nature poet can do justice to such sylvan loveliness as we find in the
"Blue Grass Region?" The pen must be dipped in the juices of that
Edenic vegetation and tinted with the blue of that arching sky to
record such beauty. What stately trees! They seemed like pillars in
God's own temple. The rich, warm limestone soil gave birth to trees in
form and variety scarce equaled in the world. Here grew in friendly
fellowship and rivalry the elm, ash, hickory, walnut, wild cherry,
white, black and read oak, black and honey locust, and many others.
Their lofty branches interlocking formed a verdant roof which did not
entirely shut out the sun's rays but caused a light subdued and
impressive as the light in a Saint Paul's Cathedral.

In such a forest was pitched the camp to which Jasper Very returned.
Let me describe this old-fashioned camp ground. A large, rough shed was
erected, capable of protecting five thousand persons from wind and
rain. It was covered with clapboards and furnished with puncheon seats.
At one end a large stand was built, from which sermons were preached. A
few feet in front of this stand a plain altar rail was set, extending
the full length of the preachers' stand. This altar was called the
"mourners' bench." All around the altar a liberal supply of fresh straw
was placed upon which the worshippers knelt. On three sides of the
large shed camps or cabins of logs were built for the use of the
attendants. In the rear of the preachers' stand was a large room which
accommodated all the ministers who labored in the meeting. The effect
at the camp at night was very striking. At intervals of several rods
log fires were kept burning and the bright light they threw was
contrasted with the deep darkness beyond.

It is astonishing to read how great an attraction these camps became to
the hardy pioneers of the Kentucky wilderness. People gathered from all
quarters in all kinds of vehicles, some traveling thirty or forty
miles. Many came in covered wagons in which they slept at night.
History records, that at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, a camp meeting was held
attended by twenty thousand people.

It is ten o'clock Sunday morning at Oak Grove Camp Meeting, where our
hero Jasper Very is laboring. Thousands are in the great wooden
structure, filling every seat and standing many deep beyond the edges
of the building. The preachers' stand contains twenty-five or thirty
ministers gathered from many parts of the State. The crowd has even
overflowed this stand, and all available room is occupied.

The Christians present have been prepared for this service by the cabin
meetings held at six o'clock in the morning and a prayer and testimony
meeting in the tabernacle at eight. And now the service begins. A
stalwart son of the prophets arises and announces the hymn:

    "Come, sinners, to the gospel feast,
    Let every soul be Jesus' guest:
    There need not one be left behind,
    For God hath bidden all mankind."

He starts the first note, and thousands take up the inspiring strain,
and the glorious music rolls through the forest like the sound of many
waters. A passage of Scripture is read and a fervent prayer offered. A
second hymn is sung: "There is a fountain filled with blood," and far
away the cadence is heard rising and falling, thrilling waves of sound.

The song is ended. A rustling noise is heard as the people settle
themselves in their places, and then a deep quiet ensues as they look
expectantly toward the preachers' stand. One whispers to another: "Who
is to be the preacher this morning?" They are not left long in doubt.
Slowly the minister arises. It is Jasper Very, the star preacher of the
camp meeting. He comes before his audience with a humble
self-possession which is reflected in the composure of his face. How
did he obtain this self-possession? Reader, we must lift the veil
somewhat and let you see.

In the morning he had gone into the deep woods to study and pray, as
was the wont of the forest preachers. Here he had prayerfully and
carefully completed the outline of his sermon. Then a great burden of
unfitness and helplessness came upon him. Like his Master he threw
himself prone upon the ground and poured out his soul to the Father. "O
God," he cried, "who am I, that I should be thy ambassador to beseech
sinners to be reconciled to thee? Who am I that I should stand between
the living and the dead and offer life and immortality to men? Thou, O
God, only art my sufficiency, my hope, my expectation. Stand by my side
and help me in this hour, for my need is great. This I ask in the name
of thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen."

Coming thus from the hidings of divine power, with the Spirit of God
like dew resting upon him, he announces his text: "Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon."

He began by describing the way of the wicked. He unmasked sin, showing
its hideous deformity, how it pollutes the soul, and makes man unfit
for fellowship with a holy God. Then he passed on to show the guilt of
sin, the awful misery coming to a man when he is face to face with his
iniquities. With great skill he pointed out condemnation arising from
particular transgressions,--the defaulter fleeing from his country, the
murderer with his victim's bloody form ever before his mind's eye, the
lustful man tortured and consumed with the rewards of his own folly.
Continuing, he proceeded to tell the final punishment of these sinners.
In those days ministers at camp meetings preached a literal hell; and
as the speaker uncovered the pit of destruction and compelled his
hearers to look into it many felt that they were "hair hung and breeze
shaken" over the mouth of perdition.

Now his manner changed. His voice, instead of being loud and startling
like thunder, producing awe and terror, became sweet, tender, and
appealing, like a shepherd calling his sheep to the fold.

Having opened the wounds of sin, he poured into them the cordial of
gospel grace. He dwelt upon the words, "abundantly pardon," showing how
God had planned to put away sin by the gift of his Son and had promised
forgiveness to all guilty mortals who with hearty repentance and true
faith looked to Christ for salvation.

As he exalted the world's Redeemer from one plane to another his soul
was lifted up with indescribable joy and exultation. His voice and form
were in attune with his soul. We have read that this man's voice could
be heard a mile, and on this occasion it surely reached to the utmost
bounds of that great assembly. Extending his arms, as though he would
enfold the multitude and present them to the Savior, he besought
sinners to flee from impending wrath, to come to the altar and be saved
from sin so that they might "read their titles clear to mansions in the
skies."

The effect was tremendous. At once a rush was made for the mourners'
bench and it was soon filled. Many were stricken where they sat in the
congregation and fell on their knees imploring mercy. Around the
mourners gathered the saints of God, counseling, advising, quoting
suitable passages of Scripture, praying with the penitents. When the
meeting finally closed long after the dinner hour, scores professed
conversion, and a great victory for morality and religion in Kentucky
had been won.


CHAPTER III.

Swapping Stories.


The ministers were in the preachers' room on the afternoon of this camp
meeting day. They were scattered about in delightful abandon. Some had
thrown themselves on rough cots; others were lounging on rude benches
which served as seats; the few plain chairs which the place boasted
were also occupied. Most of the men were regaling themselves with the
fragrant Kentucky tobacco, and the blue smoke ascended in widening
spirals to the rafters above. They felt they must unbend after the
severe mental tension of the morning.

What a fine spirit of comradeship is found among a group of preachers
of one heart and mind. Can anything on earth surpass it? Here we find
the hearty handshake, the contagious laugh, faces bright with smiles, a
free flow of talk. We see hilarity without vulgarity, wit that
sparkles, but does not burn, as when a bright sally directed at some
brother's foibles is met with a quick repartee. We listen to anecdotes
which cheer and enliven the senses without hurting the conscience or
debasing the mind.

"Brother Larkin, give us a bit of wit or philosophy from 'Poor Richard'
or tell us one of your good anecdotes."

The man addressed was John Larkin. He was about thirty-five years old
and was known as the "square man" both as to body and mind. His head
seemed more square than round, and was set upon a strong neck which
rested upon square shoulders. From shoulders to the ground he was in
the form of a parallelogram. His hands were wide and short, the fingers
being of nearly equal length, giving the hands a blunt, square
appearance. His gray eyes were wide apart, having a sly and merry cast
in them, while crow lines in their corners gave them a laughing
expression. His firm mouth and square chin showed that he could mingle
seriousness with mirth. He was considerably under the average height,
but thickset and strong.

John Larkin was of New England descent. When a small boy he had moved
with his parents from "'way down East" to far-famed Kentucky. There he
helped his father clear the wilderness and make a comfortable home. At
twenty-three years of age he was powerfully converted, and soon after
became a traveling preacher.

John had stored his mind with the homely proverbs of Benjamin Franklin
and many bright sayings of other writers. He saw the ludicrous side of
things and was fond of telling anecdotes. Hence the request which a
brother minister made of him.

"About two months ago," said Larkin, "I had an appointment to preach in
a private house. The boys of the family had a pet sheep which they had
taught to butt. Going near him, they would make motions with their
heads, and the sheep would back out and dart forward at the boys; but
they would jump aside and so escape. A drunken man came into the
congregation and sat on the end of a bench near the door. He had
caroused the whole night before and presently began to nod. As he
nodded and bent forward, the sheep came along by the door and seeing
the man moving his head up and down, took it as a banter and backed and
then sprang forward, and gave the sleeper a severe jolt right on the
head, and over he tilted him. The whole congregation laughed outright
and I joined in with them."

The preachers laughed at the story as heartily as those who saw the
occurrence. One stout parson remarked: "The tipsy man surely was the
butt of that joke." A clergyman from down Cumberland River way said: "I
hope the sheep knocked drunkenness out of him and common sense and
decency into him."

Larkin, his face wreathed in smiles, turned to a great strapping
Kentuckian, and said: "Now Brother Harvey, let us hear from you."

The man addressed was well known by the company. Naturally strong he
grew up on a farm, where his out-of-doors life added to temperate
habits gave him a finely developed body. He lived with his wife and
five grown up children on a splendid quarter section of land bordering
on the Cumberland River. He was a lay preacher, cultivating his farm
week days and preaching on Sunday.

"Well, brethren," began David Harvey, "I could tell you stories of wild
Indians, panthers and wild cats that I saw in my youth, and some
tolerably trying experiences I have been through since becoming a
preacher, but today I am going to repeat a tale I heard not long ago
concerning Jasper Very. He seems comfortable there sitting on one bench
with his feet on another, and if my story lacks anything he can supply
the missing links.

"Brother Very was attending a camp meeting in the edge of Tennessee
when an incident of thrilling interest occurred. Two young men,
distantly related, sons of respectable and wealthy parents, lived in
the settlement. They were both paying attention to a very wealthy young
lady. Soon a rivalship for her hand sprang up between them, which
created a bitter jealousy in the heart of each. After quarreling and
fighting they both armed themselves, and each bound himself by a solemn
oath to kill the other. Armed with pistols and dirks they attended the
camp meeting. Brother Very was acquainted with the young men, and had
been told of the unfortunate affair. On Sunday he was preaching to a
large congregation on the terrors of the law. Many fell under the
preaching of the word. He called for mourners to come to the altar and
the two young men, deeply convicted of sin, came and knelt before God.
One entered on the right and the other on the left, each being ignorant
of the act of the other. The preacher went deliberately to each of
them, took their deadly weapons from their bosoms, and carried them
into the preachers' room. Returning he labored faithfully with them and
others nearly all the afternoon and night. These young men cried hard
for mercy, and while he was kneeling by the side of one of them, just
before the break of day, the Lord spake peace to his soul. He arose,
and gave some thrilling shouts. Jasper then hurried to the other young
man, at the other side of the altar, and he was saved in less than
fifteen minutes and, standing upright, shouted victory. As these young
men faced about they saw each other, and starting simultaneously, met
about midway of the altar, and instantly clasped each other in their
arms. What a shout went up to heaven that night from these young men,
and from almost all the number present."

This narrative strongly affected the group of ministers, and some more
emotional than others shouted: "Praise the Lord! Hallelujah!"

"Brother Very, did I tell the story right?" said Harvey.

"You told it about as it was," responded Very, "only there is this
sequel to add: one of these young men made an able and successful
preacher. After traveling a few years his health failed, and he died
triumphantly."

A sallow-faced parson from the river-bottoms remarked: "Jasper Very has
been through many trying experiences, and I am going to ask him to tell
us how he conquered that cantankerous woman by tact and muscles."

Thus appealed to, Very told the following anecdote: "Some time ago I
crossed the Ohio River into the State of Illinois where I had some
preaching engagements. On one of my tours I met a local preacher who
was a small, good natured, pious and withal a useful preacher. He had a
wife who was a noted virago. She was high tempered, overbearing and
quarrelsome. She opposed her husband's preaching, and was unwilling he
should ask a blessing at the table or conduct family prayers. If he
persisted in his effort to pray she would run noisily about the rooms
and overturn the chairs. If unable to stop him any other way she would
catch a cat and throw it in his face while he was kneeling and trying
to pray. The little man had invited several preachers to his home to
talk with the woman and bring her to a better frame of mind, but she
cursed them to their face and raged like one possessed. Several times
he invited me to go home with him, but I was afraid to trust myself. I
pitied the poor little man so much that finally I yielded, and went
home with him one evening. When we arrived I saw she was mad, and the
devil was in her as big as an alligator. So I determined on my course.
After supper her husband said very kindly: 'Come, wife, stop your
little affairs, and let us have prayers.' To this she replied: 'I will
have none of your praying about me.' Speaking mildly, I expostulated
with her, but to no use; for the longer I spoke the more wrathful she
became, and she cursed me most bitterly. Then I spoke sternly and said:
'Madam, if you were a wife of mine, I would break you of your bad ways,
or I would break your neck.'

"'The devil you would!' she said. With this she poured upon me such a
torrent of curses as was almost beyond endurance.

"'Be still,' said I, 'we must and will have prayer.' Again she declared
we should not.

"'Now,' I remarked to her, 'if you do not be still, and behave
yourself, I'll put you out of doors.' At this she clenched her fist,
swore at me, and told me I could not put her out. I caught her by the
arm, and swinging her round in a circle brought her up to the cabin
door, and shoved her out. She jumped up, tore her hair, foamed, all the
time swearing in a terrible way. The door was made very strong to keep
out hostile Indians. I shut it tightly, barred it, and went to prayer.
Under such conditions praying was difficult, I assure you, but I was
determined to conquer or die.

"While she was raging, foaming and roaring on the outside I was singing
with a loud voice spiritual hymns on the inside to drown her words as
much as possible. At last she became perfectly exhausted and panted for
breath. Then she became calm and still, and knocking at the door said:
'Mr. Very, please let me in.'

"'Will you behave yourself, if I let you in?' said I.

"'O yes,' replied she, 'I will.' With this I opened the door, took her
by the hand, led her in, and seated her by the fire-place. She was in a
high perspiration, and looked pale as death. After she was seated she
said: 'What a fool I am.' 'Yes,' said I, 'about one of the biggest
fools I ever saw in my life. Now, you have to repent of all this or
your soul will be lost.' She sat silent, and I said 'Brother C., let us
pray again.' We kneeled down and both prayed. His wife was as quiet as
a lamb. And what is better, in less than six months this woman was
soundly converted, and became as bold in the cause of God as she had
been in the cause of the wicked one.'"


CHAPTER IV.

The Trail of the Serpent.


While these ministers of grace were engaged in pleasant conversation a
different kind of a crowd had met not far away. They were moonshiners.
Their rendezvous was a cave near the top of a hill about one mile back
from the Cumberland River. A motley company of about a dozen men they
were, dressed in cheap trousers supported by "galluses," coarse shirts,
and wide-brim straw hats.

Sam Wiles was leader of this band. As these pages are often to be
burdened with his name, we shall now take his measure. He belonged to
that part of the population called "poor whites." His parents had come
to the settlement when Sam was a little boy. They were poor, shiftless,
improvident, ignorant, and, worse than all, apparently contented with
their lot. They dwelt in a log cabin in the hills, and in a haphazard
way cultivated a few acres of half-barren land, raising a little corn,
tobacco, hay, fruit, and a few vegetables. There were six children in
the family, of whom Sam was the oldest. Five dogs guarded the house and
helped to make the inmates poor. "Tige," the coon dog, was the favorite
of this quintette.

Sam Wiles was the brightest of the children, his mind being naturally
active; but he had little disposition for study and very meager
opportunities, for "school kept" only a few weeks in a year. At the
time of this story he had just passed his majority, was somewhat above
medium height, solidly built, with broad, square shoulders. His brown
hair hung several inches below a coonskin cap he wore, and was
supplemented by a large mustache of which he was very proud.

Behold this leader of the moonshiners as he stirs the fire of logs
under the still and speaks to his pals:

"That war a mighty fine trick I played on Dick Granger, the revenue
deputy t'other night. He was after me with his dorgs, and saw me as I
was crossin' the road near Franklin Schoolhouse. 'Halt, there!' he
hollored; but I was not in the haltin' bizness, and I made tracks fur
Pigeon Crick close by. As I run he fired off his gun; but the light was
dim and I was mighty peart, and dodged in time. He called to his
bloodhounds and said, 'Sic 'im, Rex; ketch 'im Bull,' but by that time
I was wadin' in the crick. I run 'long till I cum to that big white oak
which grows by the crick where it makes a turn north, and I jumped and
caught a big branch an' pulled myself up into the tree. Then I walked
on the thick branches till I got to the furder side, and there war
standin' by the oak a mighty fine sugar maple with branches which
touched the oak. I walked out on an oak branch as fur as I could go,
and then swung from my hands back and for'ard with all my might. At
last my feet touched a branch and letting go my hands, I swung down
like a ham of meat in a smokehouse. Soon I pulled myself up and made
fifty feet crossing that tree, and then I dun the same turn to a big
walnut tree; and so on till I knew the dorgs could not track me, when I
clim down to the ground and got safe back to the cave."

"That war a monkey trick, shore nuff," said Tom Walker, a gaunt fellow
over six feet tall, who was stretched on the ground by the fire, and
who, because of his height, was usually called "Long Tom." In his
cavernous mouth he held an immense chew of tobacco, and ever and anon
he squirted tobacco juice into the fire with a precision and force
which showed long practice.

"I wish the devil would kill the whole crew of revenue officers," said
Wiles. "Why should we be hunted like wild beasts for makin' a few
gallons of whisky? Do we not raise the corn, and have we not a right to
turn it into drink? You fellers know how hard it is to make a living on
these hills; and if we make more money by changing corn into whisky,
why should we be hindered and our lives put into danger? We have a
right to make whisky and to drink it and to sell it, and I'm goin' to
do it in spite of all the officers in Kentucky," and he brought his big
fist down with a thwack on his knee to give emphasis to his words.[1]

        [1] It was impossible for this lawbreaker to foresee that in
        about one hundred years the whole whisky business in its
        beverage aspects would be prohibited by law in the United
        States, and that the sophistry he used would be employed by
        multitudes in denying the eighteenth amendment to the national
        constitution.

"Now yer speaking the truth, pardner," drawled Long Tom as he ejected
from his mouth a generous quantity of tobacco juice. "My father fit in
the Revolutionary War for liberty 'way down in ole Virginy, and I'll
never submit to have my right to make home-distilled whisky taken
away."

"Always stick to that and you'uns will be a man, even if you'uns die
with yer boots on."

The speaker was Zibe Turner, a creature who would pass for a Calaban. A
monster he was except his legs, which were short and slim, giving him a
dwarfish appearance. So he was a monster dwarf, if such a term is
allowable. His head was immense in size, covered with long unkempt
hair. His shoulders, arms and trunk would become a giant. A look at his
face showed a low forehead, black, restless eyes, wide apart, flat
nose, and large mouth.

Like Calaban he could be called "hag-seed," or the son of a witch and a
devil.

His moral nature was as misshapen as his body. His mind was degraded,
yet keen in plotting mischief and violence. His affections were
debased. Prospero's description of Calaban applied to him:

    "Abhorred slave which any print of goodness will not take
    Being capable of all ill."

The words of Saint Paul to the sorcerer fitted him: "O full of all
subtlety and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness." He was a type of those whom the apostle described as
"filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, deceit,
malignity--implicable, unmerciful."

Strangely enough, one of the moonshiners had read Shakespeare's
"Tempest," and gave Caliban's title of "monster" to Zibe Turner. From
that day he was generally nicknamed "Monster Turner."

"Always stick to dat," repeated Turner in his deep, gutteral voice.
"Let's drink to de health of all moonshiners and to de defeat an' death
of all revenue spies. Dat's my holt (hold)." Suiting the action to the
words, he raised a stone jug nearly full of spirits to his lips and
taking a long draught, handed it to the next, and so it went the
rounds. The liquor, which would have made an ordinary drinker
intoxicated in a few minutes, had no perceptible effect upon these men,
who scarcely ever tasted water, so commonly did they drink the product
of their stills; but it perhaps raised their feelings a trifle and
loosened their tongues to speak other words and strengthened their
purposes to perform unlawful acts.

Sam Wiles then spoke: "Next to these officer dorgs who hunt us on the
hills and mountains, I hate them shoutin' hypercrits who air holdin'
that camp meetin' near Poplar Crick. They're tryin' to make the whul
county pious, and you fellers know how their head men have jined with
others around here to appint a vigilance committee to drive all such as
we'uns air out'n the State. Because we believe in pursonal liberty,
because we think it right to make our own whisky and to race our
hosses, because we sometimes try our luck at cards and win money from
the young fools in the valley, they want to put the law on our tracks.
Now the more camp meetin's we have around here, the less pursonal
liberty we shall have; and I propose to you'ns that we jine with the
boys on Honey Crick and bust up the camp meetin'."

This proposition was hailed with delight by all the company except Long
Tom. When he had cleared his mouth of juice, he drawled out: "Byes,
none of ye would like to see that meetin' capsized better nor I would.
But we must be sure of our ground. I have hearn that the star preacher
there--what's his name? Jasper Hurry? No. Very? That's it, Jasper Very.
I have hearn that he is almighty strong and brave, and we had better be
keerful how we tackle 'im."

"Shucks," said Wiles, "they air all cowards, and their magistrates will
run at the first attack; and I say it is to our interest to break up
that meetin', and do it right away. What do you say, byes?"

They all consented to the attack, and took another swig around from the
big jug to seal the agreement.

"Now," said their leader, "it's time you'ns went to yer homes. Zibe
Turner will stay, and we'uns will tend de fire. Long Tom, tomorrow you
go to Bert Danks, the captain of the Honey Crick crowd, and ask him and
his pals to meet us here in de evenin'."


CHAPTER V.

Rowdies in Camp.


Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner attended to the still while the day began to
wane, and shadows cast by the tall hills were lengthening over the
plain.

When darkness finally came Wiles continued to replenish the fire and
supply the necessary water from a running stream. His boon companion
threw himself down on some cedar boughs within the cave's mouth and was
soon asleep. His watch would come later on.

While this precious pair of "wildcatters" are thus employed, a good
opportunity is given us to describe their retreat.

Their rendezvous was called Wind Cave, and was discovered a few years
before by a young brother of Sam Wiles. The boy, Ephraim Wiles, one day
was hunting stray cattle on some hills skirting the Cumberlands River,
when he came to the top of a hill which was nearly bare of timber and
whose southern side was a sheer perpendicular of rock for several feet
down. The boy stood looking over this precipice, lost his footing, and
fell down the cliff. He was unhurt, for about fifteen feet below was a
level place a few feet across covered with leaves and moss and upon
this he landed. When he had recovered from his surprise, he looked
about him and saw that the hillside below him was very steep, with
trees and bushes growing thickly in the soil. Then he turned his eyes
toward the rock, and beheld an aperture of considerable size partly
covered by bushes and decayed vegetation. With a boy's curiosity and
daring he crawled into the opening, and found himself in a cave of
moderate dimensions. Finding in it nothing but broken rocks and white
walls and a small stream of water flowing along, he soon crept out, and
knowing no way of escape save down the hill side, slipped over the
edge, and by holding on to bushes and shrubs and checking himself
against trunks of trees he finally reached the bottom, and, returning
home, told of his discovery to the family.

From this time the cave became the resort of Sam Wiles and his
moonshiners, and here they carried on their illicit distilling with
little fear of detection. They explored its interior thoroughly, and
discovered that the cave went north for a considerable distance, when
it turned to the east, its dimensions becoming narrower as they
proceeded. At last they came to a second entrance which opened upon the
hill's side about midway between top and bottom. This aperture was
partially close by fallen logs and decayed leaves and mold. The two
openings made the cave a sort of tunnel, and because there was always a
current of air passing through the passages they named it "Wind Cave."
The narrow entrance was used for receiving sacks of corn, barrels, and
other necessaries of their unlawful work, and also for removing the
whisky after it had been made. The men kept this hole well secured by
covering it with brush. As the other part of the cave was much larger,
it was there that the still was set up, and there the outlaws usually
remained.

Behold them this Saturday evening brewing mischief as well as
distilling whisky. They were a reckless, religion-hating crowd. They
were mostly young men, though some had passed middle life. Nearly all
were shabbily dressed, and of large and bony frame. The faces of most
were heavy and dull showing marks of dissipation. Others, especially
the very young men, were really fine specimens of Kentucky physical
manhood. They had rosy cheeks, bright eyes, and a ready smile and
laugh. Surely they were worthy of a better cause.

In a way they were as jolly and hearty, as full of fun and jokes, as
the ministers themselves. Their conversation was coarse and marred the
King's English; it was boisterous and narrow, but it fitted their
characters.

They were seated on logs or on the moss-covered ground in or near the
cave's mouth. Each one was smoking a corncob pipe or rolling a quid of
tobacco under his tongues.

These men had no compunctions of conscience either as to the
lawlessness of their business, or to their desire and will to disturb
the peace of the camp meeting. Sam Wiles speaks: "Fellers, tomorrer is
Sunday, and we'uns must spile their meetin' on de camp ground. You'ns
must arm yo'selves with any weapons you'ns can git--dirks, knives,
clubs, and horsewhips. You'ns, Long Tom and Bert Banks, will walk right
into de crowd while de preacher is spoutin' and start to break up de
meetin'. De rest of you'ns must be ready to help."

"Right you air," said Bert Danks, captain of the Honey Crick band.
"Long Tom and I will go, and I 'low all we'uns can make a rip-roarin'
time, for we'll frighten de people, and be too much for de preachers
and magistrates. I'll bring a passel of my bully byes with me, and
they'll make things lively at de camp."

Long Tom remained silent, but a close observer might have seen a look
on his face telling that his part of the program was not exactly
agreeable, but he was not a man to shirk a hard task.

"Won't I laugh to hear de women scream and to see 'em run over benches
like scart sheep," said Monster Turner. "You'ns will have to be right
smart to keep up with me on de camp ground, for I'm goin' to have my
fightin' clothes on from hat to boots. Confound 'em, dose pesky
preachers won't fight, and we'll be too many for de officers. Dat's my
holt."

These words wrought the men up to a higher pitch of excitement, and
Wiles their leader, wishing still further to work on their feelings,
said to Lem Curtis, a blue eyed youth of eighteen:

"Lem, you air de best singer in de bunch, and I want you to lead us in
our favorite song. No revenues air near tonight, and we'uns air safe
from danger if we'uns do not sing too loud."

Thus appealed to, Lem Curtis started a well known refrain, the rest
joining in heartily.

After all had paid their respects to the brown jug Sam Wiles dismissed
the meeting with these words: "We'uns shall meet near de edge of de
camp on de east at seven o'clock tomorrer mornin', an' all you fellers
be shore to be in time."

Sunday morning dawned beautiful and bright. The numbers on the camp
ground were constantly being increased by persons coming on horseback,
in buggies, wagons, and every known vehicles. Jasper Very was the
preacher at ten o'clock. Everything proceeded in a becoming manner
until he was half through his discourse, when up stalked near to the
stand Bert Danks and Long Tom with hats on and loaded whips in their
hands. They remained standing, and began talking in an audible voice
with some women of their acquaintance. Naturally many eyes were turned
to this scene, and the attention given to the speaker was lost.

Jasper Very stopped in his sermon and, turning to the rowdies, said:
"Young men, this is a religious meeting, held by Christian people, and
protected by the laws of Kentucky. You will therefore get down off
those benches, cease from talking, and be quiet and orderly."

Instead of complying with this request, both of the rowdies cursed the
preacher, and said: "You'ns mind yer own bizness. We'uns will not get
down from dese seats."

Jasper knew that trouble was present, and being sure that it was vain
to continue preaching, he cried out: "I call for the magistrates on
this ground to come forward and take these men into custody." There
were several officers at hand; but they, being afraid, declared they
could not arrest them.

Jasper spoke to them: "Command me to take them, and I will do it at the
risk of my life." Saying this, he advanced toward them. "Stand off,"
shouted both of the rowdies; but the preacher walked forward, when Bert
Danks struck at him with his loaded whip, but that moment Jasper seized
him and jerked him off the bench. A regular scuffle ensued, and the
congregation was in great commotion. The magistrates, having found
their courage, commanded all friends of order to aid in suppressing the
riot. By this time Jasper Very had thrown Bert Danks down and, despite
his utmost efforts to arise, held him fast. About the same instant two
lusty farmers who were standing by the preacher took hold of Long Tom
and bore him to the ground.

Then the mob headed by Sam Wiles and Monster Turner with loud outcries
rushed to the rescue of the prisoners. They knocked down seven
magistrates and several preachers and many others. At this point Jasper
Very gave his prisoner to others, and threw himself in front of the
order-loving people. At once Sam Wiles confronted him. His eyes were
blazing with bitter hate. His rage was so great that it weakened his
judgment, and he struck out again and again at Very to fell him. The
last time he struck at him the momentum threw the side of his face
toward the preacher. It was too great a temptation to resist and Jasper
hit him a sudden and powerful blow in the ear which dropped him to the
earth.

Meantime the fight was waxing fierce in another direction. Zibe Turner
led a part of the mob to the right of the fighting, and attempted a
flank movement. He seemed like a personification of Satan. His black
eyes glared with a terrible fury, and with his long arms outstretched
he rushed on the fray. His voice of command seemed a mixture of beast
and human. Women shrieked and fled before him, and he had the
satisfaction of seeing them indeed fall over the rough benches. With
oaths and shouts his men followed, and many camp meeting folks were
knocked down and bruised.

If it had not been for John Larkin, "the square man," the mob might
have won. In the midst of all the excitement and noise he remained calm
and wise. He had helped in resisting the attack in front, when,
glancing to the right, he saw the monster dwarf approaching, knocking
the people about with his long and powerful arms. Larkin put himself in
his way, and as he got nearer said:

"Are you monkey, man, or devil, or the three combined? Whoever you are,
you must reckon with me."

"I'm de man who can whip ary sneakin' braggin' preacher on dis ground.
Dat's my holt," replied Turner.

With this he threw himself upon Larkin, and they were clasped in a
close embrace. The monster dwarf gripped the preacher's body in his
terrible arms with a strength like that of a grizzly bear, and it
seemed to Larkin as though his ribs would crack and his breath leave
him. But while the dwarf's arms were abnormally strong, his legs were
weak, whereas Larkin's limbs were as sturdy as an oak tree. Besides, in
his school days he had learned several wrestling tricks, and now he
used one to throw Turner to the ground. There they continued to
struggle for some time, the friends of each trying to help him. But by
this time the mob in the other quarter had been subdued; and Jasper
Very coming to the rescue of his colleague, the monster dwarf was
conquered and several of his aids subdued and captured.

All the prisoners were sent to the county seat, and placed in jail,
there to await their trial before the criminal court over which Judge
LeMonde presided.


CHAPTER VI.

Under the Pine Trees.


G. M.

Guernsey.

_The Baptized Turk_.--Your correspondent CH. (Vol. ii., p. 120.), who
inquired about Lord Richard Christophilus (_al._ Isuf Bassa), a converted
Turk, may be interested in a curious account of another convert
to Christianity, which has lately fallen in my way, if he be not
already in possession of the (almost legendary) narrative. I allude to
a small 8vo.
volume, entitled:

"The Baptized Turk; or, A Narrative of the happy conversion of
Signior Rigep Dandulo, the onely son of a silk merchant in the isle
of Tsio, from the delusions of that great Impostor Mahomet, unto the
Christian Religion; and of his admission unto Baptism, by Mr. Gunning
at Excester-house Chappel, the 8th of November, 1657. Drawn up by
Tho.

Warmstry, D.D., Lond. 1658."
Dr. Warmstry was Dean of Worcester. His conversion of the Turk Dandulo
is mentioned in the _Lansdowne MSS._ (986., p. 67.), and also in the
_Athenæ
Oxonienses_. The narrative is dedicated to
"The Right Honourable the Countess of Dorset, the Honourable the Lord
George, and the Worshipful Philip Warwick, Esq., _witnesses_ at the
baptism of Signior Dandulo the convert."
There appears to have been "a picture of the said Dandulo in a Turkish
habit put before it;" {462} but this has been abstracted from the only
copy I have seen.

This conversion appears to have been effected by the instrumentality of
a dream; and the Narrative contains an interesting essay of some length
on the subject of visions, and gives an interpretation of the dream in
question.

J. SANSOM.

[Footnote 1: On Elizabeth Williams, youngest daughter of Miles (Smith),
and wife of John Williams, Esq., died in child-bed at the age of
seventeen. The above Miles Smith, was Bishop of Gloster during
the latter part of Henry VIII. and part of Elizabeth's reign.]
* * * * *

Queries.

GRAY.--DRYDEN.--PLAYING CARDS.

Although my question regarding Gray and Dodsley's _Collection of
Poems_ has only been half answered, and my two Queries respecting
Dryden's _Absolom and Achitophel_ and _Essay on Satire_ not answered
at all, I am not discouraged from putting interrogatories on other
matters, in the hope that I may be more fortunate hereafter. On
each of my former inquiries I have still a word or two to say, and
I do not know why I should not say them now.
First, as to Gray and Dodsley:--Is the epithet _droning_, or _drony_,
in the first edition of the _Elegy_? and, as my copy of Dodsley's
_Collection_ is dated 1748, and is said (on the half title, preceding
the whole title) to be "the _second_ edition," was there a _first_
edition in the same year, or in an earlier year, or was there, in
fact, no _first_ edition at all?
This question is important, because several poetical productions,
of undisputed excellence, originally made their appearance in
Dodsley's _Collection_.
Next, as to Dryden's _Absolom and Achitophel_: Is it known, or
anywhere stated, that it was printed early in the eighteenth century
as a penny or two-penny chap-book, and why was it so printed?
Observe, too, that it was unaccompanied by Tate's _Continuation_,
which, as far as a lesson to the lower orders is concerned, was of
more consequence than Dryden's portion.Her nose was of Grecian type, mouth firmly chiseled
and of medium size, while the cherry red lips when parted showed two
rows of pearl-like teeth. Her chin was pear-shaped, and revealed
decision of character. Her whole appearance gave one the impression of
intelligence, purity, and benevolence. She was of medium height, and
her figure would have served as a model for the skill of a Phidias. Her
greatest accomplishment was music. Her voice was a high soprano, and
its naturally pure tone was improved by cultivation under the best
teachers.

Jasper Very's preaching appointments included the home of Judge
LeMonde, and he was given a hearty welcome from the first to his house.
Naturally he had seen the daughter Viola and had conversed with her
several times at the mansion and at church. He soon found that she was
superior to all the young ladies in the neighborhood both in strength
of mind and education. To this she added a bright and deep religious
experience. We must confess that the ranger's frequent visits to "Mt.
Pisgah" were not wholly on church business.

On a bright afternoon appeared a select company of preachers, including
Jasper Very and John Larkin, sitting under the lovely pine trees
fronting Judge LeMonde's mansion.

The judge had invited them to his house to rest a day or two after the
labors of the camp meeting.

The host and his beautiful daughter had joined the group of ministers.

They were a happy and merry lot as they looked over the tall, green
fields of corn, and beyond to the glorious trees lining the river bank,
and the sparkling stream seen between the trunks of the trees.

John Larkin was in his best mood, and the different subjects of
conversation reminded him of many stories. They were talking of a
sallow-cheeked preacher who was leaving his church located on Salt
River.

"That makes me think of the illiterate preacher I heard of, who lived
in the northern part of the State," said Larkin. "He was about to give
up his church, and so delivered a farewell address thus: 'My dear
bretherin-ah and sisterin-ah, I am about to leave you-ah, and I feel
solemncholy-ah, I can tell you-ah. This mornin' as I was ridin' to this
appintment-ah I looked up to the leaves of the trees-ah, and they
seemed to be sayin', 'Good-by, Brother Crawford-ah.' And then I see the
little birds singin' in the woods, and I fancied they said, 'Good-by,
good-by, Brother Crawford-ah.' Then I gazed at the purty squirrels
runnin' along the ground and climbin' up the trees, and they 'peared to
be barkin', 'Good-bye, O good-bye, Brother Crawford-ah!' After awhile I
come to a lot of pigs awallerin' in mud by the roadside. When my
hoss-ah got just opposite, they got up and gave some loud grunts--whoo!
whoo! whoo!--and that scart my hoss-ah, and he threw me in the dirt and
ran away-ah. I ris my eyes to look at my hoss-ah, and there he was
a-gallopin' down the road with his mane and tail a-flyin', and he
looked back at me and seemed to be sayin', 'Good-by, Brother
Crawford-ah; good-by, Brother Crawford-ah.'"

"It is a great pity," remarked Judge LeMonde, "that religion sometimes
must run through such rough channels to water the soil of morality and
piety when it deserves the best training of mind and voice."

"God can use very ignorant Hardshell preachers in building up his
kingdom if their own hearts are right before him," said Jasper Very;
"but if they are imposters, they are a disgrace and injury to the
sacred calling.

"I met a fellow once across the Ohio River whose name was Sargent. He
assumed the name of Halycon Church, and proclaimed himself the
millennial messenger. He professed to see visions, fall into trances,
and to converse with angels. We had a camp meeting near Marietta, and
this fellow came to it. He wanted to preach, and upon being refused
pretended to swoon away. One night he lit a cigar and got some powder,
and walked away about one hundred yards where stood a large stump. He
put the powder on the stump and touched it with his cigar. The flash
was seen by many in the camp, and they came up to find Sargent lying on
the ground. After a long time he came to, and told the people he had a
message from God for them. Seeing so many there, I lit a lantern and
went down to investigate. Stepping up to the stump, I smelled the
sulphur and saw the mark of the burnt powder, and near the stump lay
the cigar. As he was talking to the people, I stepped up to him and
asked him if an angel had appeared to him in a flash of light. He said,
'Yes.' 'Sargent,' said I, 'did not that angel smell of brimstone?'
'Why,' said he 'do you ask such a foolish question?' 'Because,' said I,
'if an angel has spoken to you, he was from the lake which burneth with
fire and brimstone;' and, raising my voice, I said, 'I smell sulphur
now.' I walked to the stump and showed the people his wicked trick.
They were very indignant and called him a vile imposter, and soon he
left, and we were no more troubled with him and his brimstone angels."

"What a shame that men will take the livery of heaven in which to serve
the evil one," said Viola LeMonde. "Hypocrisy is like a counterfeit
coin: it is not only worthless in itself, but it also makes men suspect
the genuine money."

"Poor Richard says, 'Honesty is the best policy,' and that holds good
in preaching as in other things," remarked Larkin.

Jasper Very added: "Men who are dishonest cheat themselves. They narrow
their souls. They grasp after a substance and find a shadow. A sure
Nemesis follows the present gain. The great poet says: 'Who steals my
purse steals trash.'"

"Sam Wiles is a case in point," said Judge LeMonde. "He surely is
cheating himself. But what gave him the disposition he possesses?
Heredity and environment; and not one man in a thousand will rise out
of these. The fellow has some good in him; but it is strangled by his
bent and surroundings, like good seed choked by thorns. What say you,
Mr. Larkin?"

"There is only one hope for him, that is religion, which he seems to
despise and reject. His superior gifts, making him a leader of the
moonshine gang, constitute him a greater menace to law-abiding people.
The Bengal tiger kills more prey than the common wild-cat which
sometimes roams these surrounding woods. I am told that Wiles is the
ring leader in many reckless acts, and will stop at nothing to gain his
ends. Zibe Turner, called the monster dwarf, is his right-hand man, who
will pick his chestnuts from the fire, though he burn his impish
fingers in so doing."

"You remember, papa," said Viola, "when we and a few friends had that
picnic two weeks ago on 'Silver Knob' we passed by the cabin where Sam
Wiles lives? I felt sad to see his poor mother in her faded and torn
calico dress in the little front yard. She was stirring some food in an
iron kettle which was over a fire of logs. Her eyes had such a dull,
discouraged look in them. The children were dirty and half dressed, and
how the dogs barked as we came near! The lot of the 'poor whites' in
Kentucky is indeed unfortunate. Even the slaves look down upon them.

"When I saw the Wiles family and other families like them in their low
condition I said in my heart: 'Cannot something be done for the comfort
and uplift of these people?' Gentlemen, I put the question to you this
afternoon."

After a silence of some duration Jasper Very spoke:

"I am sure something ought to be done and can be done to brighten the
lives of these poor folks. They live in the hills remote from church
and Sunday School, which they never attend, and exist as heathen in a
Christian country. Their forefathers in England were among the best
yeomen of the land, and I believe many of these have the making of
good, honest, upright citizens."

"I think it is possible to organize a community school--a combination
of Sunday School and day school--for these dwellers in the hills,"
added John Larkin. "As I was riding down 'Sinex Knob' the other day I
passed a settler's cabin, larger and better built than most dwellings
in that section. The owner's name is Mart Spink. He has a wife and
several bright-looking children. Perhaps he would grant the use of his
living-room for school purposes. The Wiles family and a number of other
families live near enough to attend."

"My thought coincides with the suggestion of Mr. Larkin," said Viola
LeMonde. "We ought to have such a school. In it we should teach the
truths of religion and also the common branches of learning. Moreover,
we should help the whole community--the farmers to better cultivate
their lands and their minds; the farmers' wives to improve their
housekeeping, to get out of the ruts, and to take a wider interest in
developing their own intellects and those of their children; the sons
to have noble ambitions in life and to prepare to achieve them; the
daughters, besides the moral and intellectual training they receive, to
learn sewing, knitting, cooking, and other forms of domestic science.
Yes, and I would have a primitive dispensary, that the neighbors might
have at least first aid in case of sickness or accident. Tomorrow I
will have my servant Mose Williams to drive me in the phaeton to David
Hester's house. There I will talk with his daughter Henrietta, and I am
sure I can induce her to join me in the project. Together we will
explore the ground and make a beginning.

"I shall ask you gentlemen to aid us in every way in your power by
sympathy, advice, prayer, and work."

"Most gladly will I do so on one condition," Very responded with a
laugh, "that is, that we now adjourn to the parlor, and you will favor
us with music both instrumental and vocal."

"Would you have me to be so selfish as to be the whole show?" rejoined
Viola. "I will do nothing of the kind, sir; but I will play and sing if
the company will unite with me in singing the hymns."

This demand was heartily accepted, and the group at once left the shade
of the pine trees for the parlor.

Christianity is said to be the only religion that can be sung. It began
with the angels' song, and its music will continue on earth till it is
transferred to the song of redemption in heaven.

The hymns of Christendom are among its most cherished and valuable
possessions. They sound the depths of the human heart. They express the
varied emotions of the soul.

It is no wonder that Jasper Very requested Viola LeMonde to play and
sing.

We behold this queen of song seated at the piano, while around her
stood her father and her mother (the mother having just come in) and
the preachers.

First Viola favored them with several instrumental selections from the
great masters. It was interesting to watch her hands. They were perfect
in size, shape and color. The slender fingers were tipped with nails
curved like almonds. They struck the keys with a precision, force and
grace, leaving nothing to be desired. The quick interplay of mind and
muscle interpreted the music to her hearers in a way almost to produce
tears.

After a rest during which some bright, witty remarks, like sparks,
passed from one to another, they prepared to sing some of the great
hymns of the church. They were well equipped for their task. Viola's
voice was pure, sweet, soulful, and high. She might have been a sister
of Jenny Lind. Her mother sang also in a rich and expressive manner.
Jasper Very possessed a fine deep bass voice. John Larkin sang an
acceptable tenor. All the rest were able to use their voices in song.

As by common understanding they began with songs of adoration and
praise. Each one entered into the spirit of that inspiring hymn of
Charles Wesley:

    "O for a thousand tongues to sing
    My great Redeemer's praise,
    The glories of my God and King,
    The triumphs of his grace."

The persons here were advanced agents in bringing civilization to
Kentucky. They had the heroic spirit. These preachers had endured
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. They had climbed mountains,
crossed valleys, forded streams, slept in the open, encountered wild
beasts and base and desperate men. Songs to cheer, encourage, and
strengthen their faith and zeal were needed and provided. Naturally
they desired to sing on this occasion. So the company sang with zest
Luther's great battle hymn:

    "A mighty fortress is our God,
    A bulwark never failing:
    Our helper he, amid the flood
    Of mortal ills prevailing."

Then was sung that hymn of triumphant trust, beginning:

    "Though troubles assail, and dangers affright,
    Though friends should all fail, and foes all unite,
    Yet one thing secures us, whatever betide,
    The promise assures us, The Lord will provide."

The pioneers of that day had an exultant experience of the religion
they professed and taught. Viola next turned to hymns expressing this
state. She and those gathered around her sang them with joyous, even
ecstatic, acclamation:

      "O happy day, that fixed my choice
      On thee, my Savior and my God!
      Well may this glowing heart rejoice,
    And tell its rapture all abroad."

And:

    "Love divine, all love excelling,
    Joy of heaven, to earth come down;
    Fix in us thy humble dwelling,
    All thy faithful mercies crown."

After they had sung a number of other hymns, Jasper Very said to Viola
LeMonde: "I have heard, Miss LeMonde, that you have composed the music
to a new paraphrase of the Ninety-First Psalm. I am sure we should all
be delighted to hear you sing your music to the words. Will you kindly
favor us by so doing?"

Viola LeMonde replied: "I am not an adept at composing music, but the
words of this poem impressed me, and I joined them to an air which came
to me almost spontaneously. I shall take pleasure in singing this
melody, if you will be charitable in criticism." Thus speaking she sang
the following words simply but with much feeling:

    The Saint's Refuge.

    Dwelling in God's secret place,
    Safe doth his beloved lie,
    Shaded by his sovereign grace
    From the tempests fierce and high.
    Love Divine will hear his prayer,
    Be his refuge and defense;
    Save him from the fowler's snare,
    And the noisome pestilence.
    Sheltered 'neath the Father's wings,
    Covered with his pinions wide,
    Truth the ransomed homeward brings,
    Shielding him on every side.

    Fear recedes from terror's night,
    Harmless flies the dart by day;
    In the darkness or the light
    Wasting death shall flee away.
    Sees he, falling in their pride,
    Twice five thousand wicked men;
    But destruction's wrathful tide
    Shall not touch his garments then.
    Angels, ministrant, shall fly
    From their dazzling upper zones,
    Charged by heaven's Majesty
    Him to keep from crushing stones.
    On the lion, bold and dread,
    Seeking ever to devour,
    And the hissing serpent's head,
    He shall tread with victor's pow'r.
    God will wipe away his tears;
    Grant him honor and release;
    Crown his life with length of years;
    Save, and keep in perfect peace.


CHAPTER VII.

The Horse Race.


We left Sam Wiles, Zibe Turner and other disturbers of the peace in the
county jail. In due time they were brought before Judge LeMonde for
trial. They were found guilty and sentenced to prison for one month.

A few days after their liberation the following conversation took place:

    _Turner_: "Most all de folks on de hills and in de valleys air
    goin' to de races tomorrer, and I look for a gay o' time."

    _Wiles_: "Yes, and all de niggers that can get off'n work will be
    there too."

    _Turner_: "Dat feller from Lexington has a right smart of a hoss.
    You know he wants me to ride him in de last race, and I'm bound to
    beat George LeMonde, if beat is in de critter. His hoss stands
    seventeen hands high, is rangy in de legs, has a deep chest, and
    has a will to go. He can easily bear my weight, and you know dat
    dey count me de best jockey in de whul county. If I can't win by
    far (fair) means, I will by foul."

    _Wiles_: "I hearn dat Jack Ketcham's sorrel goes like de wind, and
    Jack's hoss is goin' to be in de big race."

    _Turner_: "George LeMonde has been speeding his bay over de track
    for days, and he will get every bit of go out of him. His mother
    and sister are dead set agin hoss-racin' and dey are begging him
    not to ride; but George likes de sport too well to please dem."

    _Wiles_: "Mr. Rawlins, of Lexington, swears by his black, and will
    put up a great deal of money. George will try to match it, and ol'
    farmer Ketcham won't be slow with his cash."

    _Turner_: "It will be an excitin' time, and I low, as many will see
    de races as went to de big camp meetin'."

    _Wiles_: "Well, Zibe, you must stick to your hoss like a monkey,
    and do your best to win de money and down that upstart, George
    LeMonde."

With this remark the two men separated.

George LeMonde was a youth about seventeen years of age, well-built,
good-looking, full of life and vigor, and at this time engaged in that
serious occupation, common to many young men, sowing his wild oats. He
was boisterous and rather reckless, but not vicious. His moral nature
was touched by evil, but not yet corrupted. However, he had begun to
walk in the broad way of youthful folly, and was in great danger of
going its full length. He was restrained from drinking the full cup of
unlawful indulgence more by the prayers, example, and love of his
mother and sister than by the correct moral life of his father.

The greatest danger to that priceless thing, character, which
confronted him was his association with the hillside young men. They
never felt that he was one in desire and purpose with them; but
sometimes he would meet them on the big road by Franklin Schoolhouse or
occasionally go to their cabins on the hills. Then he would sip lightly
their moonshine whiskey, join in their coarse talk, and share in their
few pastimes.

George LeMonde probably inherited his love for horses. His father,
Judge LeMonde, for many years had raised his own colts from the best
stock he could procure. On his broad acres they had every chance to
develop their physical powers. His fields produced an abundance of the
best corn and hay. Skirting the hill which bounded his farm on the
north were extensive meadows rich with grass. Here his blooded stock
browsed, ran and grew. It was under similar conditions that many
Kentucky horses were raised early in the nineteenth century, becoming
sires of the greatest racing stock in the world.

At the time of which we write Judge LeMonde owned a bay, of his own
raising, which was his pride and joy. The horse, Velox by name, was far
and away better than any other he had ever possessed. He was known
throughout the entire county as a splendid specimen of horseflesh, and
for beauty and utility had won the blue ribbon at a number of
surrounding fairs.

When George LeMonde reached his sixteenth birthday his father gave him
this fine animal. The son was delighted with the gift, and took the
best care of Velox, often feeding him with his own hand. George rode
his horse so much that he learned all the traits and peculiarities of
his steed; for horses, like men, have their own individual make-up and
notions. On the other hand, Velox got to know, trust, love and obey his
master. He would come at his call, and could be guided when on a
journey nearly as well by the motions of his owner's body as by the
rein.

George LeMonde decided to enter Velox for the race which was soon to
take place, and many times did he ride his willing steed over the race
course to prepare for the great event.

Horse racing then, as now, was one of the most popular diversions of
multitudes in Kentucky, but the preparations then were quite primitive.
The track was laid in a level piece of ground some miles from Judge
LeMonde's farm. It was in the form of a circle, and was one mile in
circumference. The inclosure was protected by a rough fence, hewn out
of logs. Within the course, near the starting place, and on the inside
of the track, was a stand upon which the judges of the races sat. Some
rough seats were provided for a part of the spectators, but most of the
people stood during the races.

Saturday dawned clear and beautiful. It was a perfect day to bring out
the speed of the racers. The time selected was near the last of August,
and a crispness in the air gave a faint indication of coming autumn.
People from far and wide had come to enjoy the sport. They made the
occasion a holiday. Many came on horseback and by team, and families
brought well-filled baskets of fried chicken, corn pone, blackberry
pie, and other good things to refresh the inner man.

A number of minor races were run by horses in harness and under the
saddle, which only increased the people's appetite for the grand event
of the day. At four in the afternoon the three horses were called for
the two-mile race. Their riders soon brought them from their stalls to
a position in front of the grand stand and judges. The steeds were all
in perfect condition, their glossy coats shining with bright luster in
the afternoon sun. The horses seemed to feel the meaning of the
occasion. They champed their bits and moved about restlessly as though
impatient to be off. Their riders, however, had them under good
control, and now the judges tossed the coin for choice of position on
the track. Zibe Turner secured the inside place, George LeMonde came
next, and Hiram Ketcham, Farmer Ketcham's son of eighteen, was on the
outer rim of the circle, next to the fence.

The grand stand, composed of rough boards, was filled with the best
dressed citizens of the county: while far down the track, and separated
from it by a frail line of fence, stood a great company of tall
Kentucky pioneers with their wives and children. Many negroes were also
in the crowd, interested spectators, and the small boy was much in
evidence.

A silence fell upon the waiting throng as the three horses, bearing
their riders, proceeded up the track a few rods to make a dash for the
line. The signal was given, and they came like three thunderbolts to
the starting place; but reaching this they were not abreast, and
another start must be made. They tried four times before they got away
in line, when some one shouted: "Now they are off!" For a few paces
they were neck and neck; but then Hiram Ketcham's sorrel, though on the
outer circle forged ahead. When the half-mile point was reached, the
sorrel was several lengths in the lead, and Zibe Turner's black was
leading George LeMonde's bay by a dozen feet. They came in this
position down the home stretch, and as they crossed the line a great
cheering rose from the crowd. Turner's friends from the hills were
there in large numbers, and were the loudest in their shouts. "Go it,
Zibe; you'll beat, old boy!" "Hurrah for de black! push him along!"
"I'll bet my money on de Lexington hoss!" were some of the words that
were shouted at Turner as he dashed past the starting point for the
second mile. Hiram Ketcham did not lack for admirers, who encouraged
him with cheers and waving of hats and handkerchiefs. Many of the
farmers living in the rich river bottom seemed to be partial to the
sorrel horse. George LeMonde's friends were plentiful in the grand
stand and, in fact, throughout the crowd. They were somewhat
disappointed to behold him the last in the race; but they saw that
Velox was going well, and they had hopes for his winning during the
next mile.

As for young LeMonde, he saw nothing and gave heed to nothing except
the business in hand. Only once did he raise his eyes from looking
straight ahead between the ears of his noble horse, and that was when
he was passing the grandstand. Then he gave a swift look in that
direction, and was repaid by seeing a young girl of some sixteen years
of age, Stella Nebeker by name, dressed in a pure white muslin gown
with short sleeves, waving a delicate handkerchief toward him. For an
instant their eyes met, then he looked along the race course as before.

LeMonde had a method in his racing which he was now working. He knew
the reserved powers which were in his horse, and he purposely held him
back from putting forth his greatest speed at the beginning. Turner,
the monster dwarf, was also using all his skill in horse racing. His
monkeyish face was lighted up with a look of more intelligence than
usual, which made his ugly features more forbidding and repulsive. His
eyes shone with excitement, determination, and reckless courage. His
teeth were clenched, and the muscles of his lips drawn over them gave
him an expression half laughing, half demoniac. On the first round his
cap had fallen off, and the shaggy hair of his head and face streamed
in the wind, adding greatly to the fierceness of his looks. He had
perfect control of himself and horse, and rode like a centaur, ready to
take any advantage which circumstances or guile threw in his way. He
also had held in his horse with bit and bridle, reserving his best
efforts for the closing part of the race.

During the first half of the second mile Turner knew that it was
necessary for him to lessen the distance between himself and Hiram
Ketcham, and LeMonde realized that he must soon close the gap
separating Turner and himself. Almost at the same time they gave their
horses more rein, and they sprang to their work with increased speed.
Ketcham had taken advantage of his lead by crossing the track and
taking the narrow arc of the circle. The three horses were trotting in
a line, all hugging the inside track. Very soon the distance between
the sorrel and the black was diminished, and before the half mile point
was reached the monster dwarf turned his horse toward the center of the
track to pass Ketcham. Just beyond the half-mile point Turner's black
passed Ketcham's sorrel, and LeMonde's bay was neck and neck with the
black. A few rods more, and it was plain to be seen that the bay was
forging ahead of the black.

The monster dwarf saw at once the advantage of his rival, and hissing
through his teeth in a low voice the words: "Dat's my holt," brought
his short cowhide whip down with force upon the withers of Velox. It
was the act of a jockey utterly without principle, an act execrated by
every true Kentucky sportsman.

The splendid animal never before had felt the lash of a whip. The blow
had the effect desired by the dwarf. It broke the gait of the bay
horse. The stroke was so unexpected and painful that the horse gave a
bound forward and upward that almost unseated the rider. Then he
plunged along the track with irregular strides, sometimes rushing to
the sides and then to the center.

Though taken by surprise George LeMonde acted with decision and
judgment. He held his mount with a firm hand, and added to the strength
of his arm the soothing effect of his voice: "Steady, steady, Velox!
Your master did not strike you. He loves you. Steady, steady, good
horse! Velox! Velox! Velox!" By these means young LeMonde renewed the
race, though the other horses were a considerable distance in advance.

In the meantime a large number of the spectators had seen the
despicable act and roared their disapproval. Some shook their fists at
the monster dwarf, and cried for speedy punishment for his vile trick.
This outburst of indignation made him fear again to molest the bay
horse.

Now George knew that the time had come for Velox to use his utmost
powers. He knew that the horse had great reserved fountains of strength
in him, and believed he could still win the race. As for the horse, he
seemed alive to the situation. Perhaps he felt a proud resentment at
the insult and injury put upon him. His eyes flashed fire. His nostrils
were dilated until the red blood showed through his veins. Man and
horse gave to each other courage and confidence; they appeared no
longer to be two creatures, but had been merged into a single unit of
astonishing force and capacity. LeMonde's whole soul was absorbed with
one thought--to pass the other horses and to cross the line first. He
leaned farther front in the saddle, lowering his head to reduce the
resistance of the air. His face almost touched the flying mane of his
horse.

Again he spoke to his mount: "Steady, my Velox boy; we are nearing the
end. It will soon be over; but you must pass these horses, and win the
race." With this remark LeMonde gave free rein to his horse, pressed
his knees a little tighter against the animal's sides, and gave him a
light touch with the whip. The noble horse instantly responded to his
master's urge. He released fold after fold of knotted muscle, his
stride increased, and when his hoofs descended, they seemed to spurn
the ground. Now as steady as a Corliss engine this ultimate unit of the
animal and mechanical world rushed on, and was seen to be gaining on
the other horses.

At a quarter of a mile from the home stake the sorrel horse was passed,
but still the result seemed uncertain. Then young LeMonde appeared as a
Jehu incarnate. He pressed the horse's flanks with his heels and
shouted into the very ears of his mount: "Velox, we must win, we will
win, we are going to win." With this remark, for the first time in his
life he brought the whip down hard upon the glossy hide of his steed.
The animal increased his speed, and went thundering down the home
stretch after the black. It is a case of blood against time and space.
The bay gains! He has closed the distance between them! His head is on
a line with the other's shoulder! They are only one hundred yards from
the goal! The grand stand is wild with shouting! Those standing near
the track, unconscious of what they do, are throwing hats,
handkerchiefs and umbrellas into the air, and yelling like mad men! The
judges are sighting the line! They see a horse's brown head and
shoulders pass the line, then a black head appears, and Velox has won
by a neck's length.


CHAPTER VIII.

Prayer In a Dance Hall.


When the three horses crossed the finishing line, covered with sweat
and foam, LeMonde and Ketcham soon brought their mounts to a stop. Not
so the monster dwarf. Fearing that the crowd might do him personal
injury he rode the black horse directly to the stable. He was almost
beside himself with rage and disappointment. He ground his teeth
together, and froth showed upon his lips. His face was hideous in
expression. He shook his fist in the direction of the race course, and
cursed the victorious horse and rider with terrible oaths.

To Sam Wiles, who had come up, he said: "Anudder chance will come. I'll
git even wid dat proud aristocrat yit. I'm goin' to git back all de
money I lost today, and mo' too."

A different scene was taking place near the grand stand. When George
LeMonde, with flushed face and bright eyes, dismounted from his horse,
he was at once surrounded by an admiring crowd who showered him with
congratulations. They praised his skill as a horseman, his coolness
in a time of danger and emergency, and his good nature under great
provocation. Many were the admirers of Velox. They patted his
shoulders, stroked his head and commented on his beauty of color and
form. The horse took it in good part, and seemed to consider it a
proper tribute to the steed who won the race.

Among the rest who shook George heartily by the hand was a stout,
broad-featured man of about forty, who was dressed in a good suit of
blue jeans and wore what was uncommon in those days, a large diamond
pin in his shirt front. His name was Costello Nebeker, and he was a
tavern keeper on a country road not many miles away. They have set
their faces like flint against any serious reference to the War.
When I see them going imperturbably along the old pre-war lines,
snapping smart people at the races or in the Row, or reproducing the
devastating beauty of a revue chorus, I know that they have their
withers unwrung and their heart in the right place. I always have one
of these papers on my table to be taken as a corrective after the
daily casualty lists.

* * * * *
A striking feature of the Photographic Press is to be seen in the
revival of the _vie intime_ of popular idols of the stage.

The human life of our great actors and actresses as revealed in some
simple rustic _villeggiatura_ has always had a fascination for a public
that does not enjoy the privilege of their private friendship. And in
these strenuous War-days it is well to bring home to the theatre-goer
how necessary is domestic repose for those who are doing their
courageous bit to keep the nation from dwelling on the inconveniences
of Armageddon.

* * * * *
One of the most profound after-the-war questions that is agitating the
mind of the Government is what eventually to do with the miles of
wooden and concrete villages that have sprung up all over London
like Jonah's mushroom.

I hear a rumour that the House of Commons tea-terrace will shortly be
commandeered for the erection of yet another block of buildings to
accommodate yet another Ministry--the Ministry of Demobilization of
Temporary Departmental Hutments.

O. S.

* * * * *
THE TUBE HOTELS, LTD.

[Mr. Punch has been fortunate enough to secure in advance a prospectus
of the enterprising managements.]
THE CENTRAL LONDON RAILWAY
offers splendid night accommodation in its magnificently appointed
stations. Every modern convenience. Luxurious lifts conducted by the
Company's own liveried attendants convey guests to the dormitories.

Constant supply of fresh ozone. Reduced terms to season ticket
holders.
HÔTEL EMBANKMENT.
All lines converge to this Hotel, which is therefore the most central
in London. Frequent trains convey visitors direct to their beds.
For the convenience of patrons arriving above ground or by District,
the Directors have installed a superb moving staircase, thereby
obviating the inconvenience of crowded lifts.
The platforms and passages are tastefully decorated with coloured
pictures by the leading firms.
Visitors are respectfully requested not to sleep on the moving
staircase.

HÔTEL PICCADILLY CIRCUS.
IN THE HEART OF FASHIONABLE LONDON.
This Hotel, which is one of the deepest in London, is composed of
four magnificent platforms and nearly a mile of finely tessellated
corridors. Electric light.Rather late in the evening, after dancing had been going on for some
time, Jasper Very rode up to the tavern. He had been on a long
preaching tour, and was tired and hungry. When he had dismounted, he
asked the proprietor if he could lodge there for the night. Mr. Nebeker
politely told him he could stay, but he was afraid he would not enjoy
himself very well, as a dance was in progress. Jasper then inquired how
far it was to a suitable house where he could put up for the night, and
was told seven miles. He felt in his present condition that this was
too far, and said that if the tavern keeper would treat him civilly and
feed his horse well by his leave he would stay. This was promised him,
and Very dismounted and went in. He quietly took a seat in one corner
of the room, and the dancing continued. While musing upon many things
and wishing in his heart he could do those people good, and having
finally made up his mind to ask the privilege of preaching there the
next day, he was surprised to see a beautiful and ruddy young lady, who
was no other than Stella Nebeker, walk gracefully up to him, drop a
handsome courtesy, and pleasantly, with a winning smile, invite him to
dance with her. Jasper Very in his life had been in many strange
situations, but this was an experience unlike any he had hitherto
passed through. He could hardly understand his thoughts or feelings,
but in a moment he resolved on a desperate experiment. He arose as
gracefully as he could, with many emotions crowding upon his mind.
Stella with much grace moved to his right side. Jasper grasped her
right hand with his left hand, while she leaned her left arm on his
right arm. In this position they walked on the floor.

The whole company seemed pleased at this act of politeness in a young
lady shown to a stranger. The colored musician began to put his fiddle
in the best order. Jasper here asked the fiddler to hold a minute, and,
addressing the company, said: "Friends, for several years I have not
undertaken any matter of importance without first asking the blessing
of God upon it, and I desire now to ask God's blessing upon this
beautiful young lady, who has shown such an act of politeness to a
total stranger, and upon the whole company."

Here he grasped the young lady's hand tightly and said: "Let us all
kneel down and pray." With this he dropped upon his knees, and began
praying with all the power he possessed. Stella tried to get loose from
him, but he held her tightly.

This unexpected act threw the whole company into excitement and
disorder. Stella seized by an emotion which she could not control, fell
upon her knees. Some of the dancers kneeled, some stood, some sat still
with curious looks upon their faces, while others fled as in terror.
The fiddler ran off into the kitchen saying: "Lord a marcy, what de
matter. What's dat mean? Prayin' in a dance hall! Dis beats anyting dis
niggar ever saw."

Jasper Very continued to pray with loud voice and great unction. Some
soon began weeping softly, others cried out aloud in their deep
feeling, and some asked God for mercy. After a while Jasper arose from
his knees and commenced an exhortation, after which he sang a hymn.

Stella Nebeker was so affected by the service and by the deep
convictions of her heart that she remained for a long time prostrate on
the floor, crying earnestly for pardon. This strange meeting continued
nearly all night; and when it was ended, fifteen of those dancers had
obtained pardon for their sins. Stella was one of them, George LeMonde
was another and the tavern keeper was a third. From this dance room a
great revival spread throughout that part of the country.


CHAPTER IX.

Wanted, a Mission School.


Let us follow Miss Viola LeMonde and Miss Henrietta Harvey in their
effort to organize a Sunday School among the "Poor Whites."

It was a beautiful day in September when the two young ladies seated in
the phaeton drawn by Velox and Dolly and driven by faithful Mose made
their way into the hill country. Their object was to visit as many
families in a remote section as possible, and try to get their consent
to join the proposed school.

After riding a number of miles they came to the family of Mart Spink.
The two-room cabin in which they lived had the distinction of being
built of hewn logs. It also had a "lean-to," or low ell, attached to
the larger part.

Fortunately they found the "old man," Mart Spink, at home. He seemed
surprised to behold such a fine turnout stop at his door, but showed a
native gallantry as he came to the carriage.

"Howdy, ladies, I'se glad to see you. Won't you 'light, and walk into
de house?"

"Thank you," replied Viola. "My name is Viola LeMonde, and this is my
friend, Miss Henrietta Harvey. We have come to consult you on some
important business, and shall be glad to step into your cottage."

With this remark they both dismounted from the phaeton, and passed into
the house.

Here they found the whole family, and Mr. Spink introduced them in
order to the ladies--his wife, Lucinda, his oldest daughter, Susanna,
then Elmira, Robert and Jonathan.

Mart Spink invited the ladies to be seated, and they sat down on
splint-bottom chairs.

Viola LeMonde opened the business in hand: "Mr. Spink, some of us
living in the bottoms, knowing that you dwell so far away from any
church that you and your neighbors cannot well attend public religious
services, have decided to start a Sunday School in this locality, if we
can find a suitable place, and if the people are willing to come to it.

"Not long ago Rev. John Larkin, whom perhaps you have seen, suggested
your house as the best place in these hills in which to begin a school.
What do you say to the proposition?"

Mart Spink replied: "Well, I was born in Nashville, Tennessee, and
lived thar with my parents till I was eight years old. I went to school
thar and learned how to read and write a little. I also went to church
and Sunday School some.

"Then they took up land here in de backwoods, and since that time I
have had mighty little chance to larn out of books and to go to
meetin'.

"Yes, I would be rale glad to have you start a school in my house, if
Lucinda is willin'. What do you say, wife?"

Lucinda: "Let us have de school by all means; de sooner de better. I
want it for your sake, Mart, and mine, but specially for our boys and
girls."

So the consent was given and the matter settled.

Susanna Spink, the oldest child, sat opposite Viola LeMonde during the
conversation. She was fourteen years old, and was of such striking
beauty that both the visitors were impressed by it. Her chief
attraction was her eyes. Once seen they could never be forgotten. The
eyebrows were dark and of medium size. The lashes were black and long.
Her eyes were large, clear, deep blue in color. One could look down
into their wondrous depths and imagine one could see the very soul of
the child.

Susanna was all attention during the talk about the school. She spoke
no word, but the look of her eyes spoke volumes to Viola. She knew that
the child was intensely interested in the project. That hour by an
invisible and mysterious power the souls of the woman and child were
welded together into a union of friendship and devotion which death
itself could not part. Neither suspected at this time what a test of
this devotion was to appear in the future.

Highly pleased with the success of their first visit the ladies entered
the carriage, and Viola directed Mose to drive to the home of the Wiles
family. Arriving there they were greeted by the furious barking of a
pack of dogs and by the staring looks of some of the children. Mrs.
Wiles was in the front yard hanging out some faded and frayed clothing
on the line.

We must give the names of this interesting family. Those at home were
Mrs. Deborah Wiles and her children Ephraim, Priscilla, Martha, and
Ruth. The father, Simon, was absent, and also his precious son, Sam,
whose acquaintance we have already made. The remaining son, Reuben, was
visiting a near neighbor about three miles distant. However much of
original depravity existed in this family the parents were determined
that they should be fortified with biblical names.

Mrs. Wiles showed small courtesy to the strangers, for she did not call
off the dogs or speak to the visitors till she had hung out to dry the
last remaining piece of washing.

Then she turned to the carriage, and inquired of the ladies what they
wanted. Viola and Henrietta without any invitation stepped down from
the vehicle, and made known their mission.

Mrs. Wiles expressed herself unfavorable to the idea. She said they
were gittin' along well enough without any church meetin's, and they
did not want any of de high-toned people from de bottoms to come up
there, putting on airs, treating them as ignorant, and no 'count white
trash, and making fun of their farms and houses.

But different words sprang from the lips of Ephraim and Priscilla.

Ephraim, the boy who a few years before had discovered Wind Cave, now
grown to a good sized youth, said: "You are wrong, ma. Most of us
around here are a low down set without books or religion. If these
ladies are willin' to spend their time to come all this way and teach
us larnin' and de Bible, I say we ought to thank them, and help them to
start de school."

Priscilla said she agreed with her brother and thought it was time they
"were gittin' out of their pore way of livin'," and she would be glad
"to jine de school" if her mother would let her.

Mrs. Wiles gave a cold consent, and the carriage drove away, the ladies
thankful that they had secured at least two more advocates of their
scheme.

Mose spoke to his mettled steeds and soon they were drawing the
carriage over an unfrequented road through a deep forest to the cabin
of Harrop Sneath. He and his house were typical of the poorest of the
"poor whites." His cabin consisted of one room, about fourteen feet
square, with one door and no windows. It was made of unhewn logs
plastered with clay. The only daylight which entered the cabin came
through the door when open and down the chimney. On the inside stood a
bedstead made of poles stuck between the logs of the angle, the outside
corner supported by a crotched stick. The table was a huge hewn log,
standing on four pegs. A log bench or two took the place of chairs. The
cooking utensils consisted of an iron pot, which hung in the big
chimney, a kettle and skillet and a few pewter and tin dishes. The loft
was the sleeping place of most of the children. It was reached by a
ladder of wooden pins driven into the logs.

Harrop Sneath was too lazy and shiftless to work much. He cultivated in
a careless way a small piece of cleared ground around his cabin on
which he raised a little Indian corn. The meat for his family was
provided by his rifle, for the woods abounded in game--deer, wild
turkeys, etc.

It was in such a cabin that Abraham Lincoln was born in another part of
Kentucky about this time.

When Viola and Henrietta entered the clearing Sneath was sitting in the
sun on a log bench in front of his cabin. He was a man in middle life
and like most of the hillside settlers was the father of several
children.

The young ladies addressed him pleasantly, and asked after his family
and his crops.

He replied, that "de old woman and de kids war right peart; that de
crops were most a dead failure because of de dry spell." He "'lowed a
dry spell war mighty bad for crops on hillside farms." In this he was
quite right.

By this time the "old woman" and some of the kids had come into the
yard. Among them was Jemima Sneath, the oldest daughter. She was
apparently about twenty years of age, and was a large, healthy young
woman.

Henrietta Harvey was the speaker this time, and in a clear and emphatic
manner made their mission known. She told them about the school, what a
blessing it would be to the community, the families and each one. It
would improve their minds, help to remove the evils which all knew
existed in the hills, help to put the farmers on their feet by showing
them how to raise better crops.

Trying to awaken a greater interest in the father she said: "Mr.
Sneath, when you are not working on your place or hunting, how do you
pass the time?"

He answered with a slow drawl: "Well, most ginerally I sot on de bench
in shade in summer and in de sun in winter. Sometimes I sot and think,
and sometimes I jest sot."

Such a man they felt it difficult to arouse, but when Viola added her
invitations and arguments to those of her friend, poor Sneath awoke
enough to the situation to hold his head up higher and widen his
shoulders a trifle.

The one most interested was Jemima, the oldest daughter. She promised
to attend the first meeting and to become a member of the school.

Viola now directed Mose to drive them still farther through the woods
to the home of Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf. They would not have
dared to beard this lion in his den, but knowing he had left the county
for the time being, they wished, if possible, to interest his mother
and sister in the school.

As they drew up to the house the dwarf's mother stood in the doorway,
her daughter looking over her shoulder. The mother might have been a
twin sister of Sycorax, the dam of Caliban. She was tall and slim,
dressed in a coarse, hand-woven dress. Her long, scant hair fell down
over her shoulders. Her face was that of a hag. Her few teeth were
stained yellow with tobacco.

As soon as Viola spoke of the school, this vixen, raising her right arm
to its greatest height and clenching her hand, broke out in wild
vituperation:

"What do de like of ye, comin' into our hills in yer fine carriage to
see how pore we air and to look down on us? Woud you uns larn us to be
good in yer school? We uns air as good as you uns even if we don't live
in big houses and drive fast hosses. Away with you! Me and mine will
have nuthin' to do with yer mission."

In a similar vein she continued to pour out a volley of loud and
abusive words, interlarding them with such oaths and curses as would
have surprised a Billinsgate fishwoman.

Viola tried for a brief time to reason with her, and present their plea
for the mission school, but, finding it was useless to remain longer,
told Mose to drive away. When they had reached the shelter of the woods
the slave said: "Ah neber hurd a deck han' on de ribber cuss and swear
lak dat po' white woman."

Still these noble ladies, inspired with a high resolve to help the
lowly, undismayed continued their work. In the course of two or three
days a sufficient number of persons had agreed to attend the school to
warrant its being opened with much promise.


CHAPTER X.

The Mission School Established.


The time set for beginning the mission school was the first Sunday in
October. The place, Mart Spink's sitting-room.

Mr. Spink had added to the seating capacity of his cabin by taking some
long slabs and with an auger drilling holes in their round sides. Into
these holes he drove wooden pegs, and thus provided serviceable benches
without backs. These together with his other benches and his chairs
gave sufficient seating accommodation for those who came.

It was a motley but interesting crowd that assembled in the
sitting-room at two o'clock that Sunday afternoon. Of course the Spinks
were there, and some members of the Wiles and Sneath families were
present, and others from different homes in that section. Fourteen
girls, ten boys and a few adults had come to the meeting. Besides these
there were the preacher, John Larkin, Viola and George LeMonde,
Henrietta Harvey, and Stella Nebeker in attendance. Jasper Very wished
much to be present, but a preaching engagement kept him away.

The children were dressed somewhat better than on week days but at that
their clothing was nothing to boast of. The girls were shy and ill at
ease, the boys half shy and half bold.

John Larkin called the school to order, and made a few remarks.

"Dear friends, we are met here today to worship God and to study his
Holy Word. I am sure you want me in your behalf to thank the ladies who
visited your homes and invited you to help in starting this school, and
to thank Mr. Spink and family who have so kindly opened their house for
our meetings. Miss Viola LeMonde has had some hymn books placed on the
benches, and she will lead us in song."

Viola knew that most of those present were not acquainted with a single
religious hymn, but she thought the older ones might be able to sing
some of the old favorites of the church. So she led them in singing:

"Rock of Ages, cleft for me," and "All hail the power of Jesus' name."

Those who had come to help in the school carried the tunes along very
well, and Viola was surprised and pleased to hear some of the farmers
and their wives join in singing these sweet songs of Zion.

Then Viola sang as a solo a beautiful and appropriate "Children's
Hymn," containing these words.

    "Hosanna! be the children's song,
    To Christ, the children's King;
    His praise, to whom our souls belong,
    Let all the children sing.
    Hosanna! sound from hill to hill,
    And spread from plain to plain,
    While louder, sweeter, clearer still,
    Woods echo to the strain."

Then John Larkin said: "Let us pray." He closed his eyes, and began an
earnest supplication at the throne of grace. But it might have been
better for him and the school, if he had kept his eyes open while he
offered his petition, and thus obeyed the Bible command: "Watch and
pray." When he closed his eyes the little imps in divers parts of the
room saw their chance for mischief, and were quick to embrace it.

A Sneath boy put his straw hat on the head of a boy next him, and then
knocked it off with no gentle blow. This angered the other youngster
and he hit back with his clenched fist. So they had it back and forth,
to the amusement of all the chaps around them. Another boy got
possession of a pin--a rather scarce article in that neighborhood--and
at one of the most fervent parts of the preacher's prayer stuck it into
the lad sitting in front of him. The punctured youth gave a yell which
could not be construed into an Amen on account of the petition. It
raised the lad off his seat, and made him jump forward with an impetus
which was both amusing and pathetic. The hurt of the pin seemed to
swallow up every feeling save that of distress, and he "boo-hooed"
aloud.

Such proceedings made Brother Larkin bring his prayer to an abrupt
conclusion, and Viola LeMonde hurried to the sobbing child, and tried
to comfort him.

After the devotions the school was divided into classes. John Larkin
took the adults of both sexes; Viola LeMonde, the larger girls;
Henrietta Harvey, the smaller; George LeMonde, the older boys; and
Stella Nebeker, the younger.

These teachers that day occupied places of responsibility which taxed
every particle of their skill, ingenuity, tact, patience and
forbearance. Many of those sitting around them could not read or write
a word. So first they had to be taught words and sentences. Their
knowledge of the Bible was pitifully small. Yet they possessed the
redeeming feature of wanting to learn, and most of them showed an eager
desire to improve their minds.

Let us, as unbidden guests, in spirit sit down in Viola LeMonde's class
and listen to what is said. These girls' minds were bright but
undeveloped. It was their teacher's object to educate--lead out--her
pupils' intellects into the broad fields of Scriptural knowledge.

"Girls," said Viola, "we are going to study the book, copies of which
we are holding in our hands. It is called the Bible. Let me ask some
questions about it, and you try to answer them."

"Have you seen the Bible before today?"

Susanna Spink replied: "I seed one onct, when I went to a camp meetin'
near Honey Crick. A man read out of a book he called de Bible, and then
he talked and talked a long, long time."

"The Bible tells us a lot about many good men and women. Perhaps you
have heard of some of these. Who was Moses?"

"Was he nigger Mose's dad?" asked one of the girls.

"No, he lived many years ago, and was a great leader of the Hebrew
people. Did you ever hear of David?"

Profound silence.

"He was a mighty king of the Jews, and also a man who wrote many
beautiful songs. One of his songs millions of children know. It begins:
'The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.' Have any of you ever heard
it?"

One or two raised their hands indicating they had heard it.

"Let us turn to it, the twenty-third psalm, and we shall read it
together."

This they did, and Viola said: "I want you children to learn this psalm
by heart and each one say it to me next Sunday. Will you do it?"

Every hand was raised in consent.

"The Bible is divided into two parts. Can any one tell me what they
are?"

"Yes'm, de front an' de back."

"They are called the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old
Testament tells of God's dealings with his chosen people the Hebrews
(or Jews). It also points to the coming of God's Son into the world."

"The New Testament tells how God's Son Jesus Christ came upon earth to
be the Friend of little children and all people; how he lived a good
life, always helping those around him; how wicked men at last put him
to death, and his friends buried him. But the grave could not hold him,
and on the third day he arose from it, and soon went up to heaven. The
day of his birth is called Christmas. Have you heard of it?"

"Yes, teacher, we have all heard something about Christmas."

"Well, well learn more about it, for it is a sweet story, and next
Christmas the mission school will have a fine time, with songs, and
pieces to speak, and giving of presents. I hope my girls will take part
in this glad time."

Thus the minutes sped by while in simple words Viola tried to impart
some Bible truths to her willing scholars.

After closing exercises the school was dismissed.

The teachers remained a while to compare notes. George LeMonde reported
having had an interesting time with his boys. He said he spoke to them
about the sin of making moonshine whisky, and tried to set them against
the practice. He was surprised at the answer that was made to one of
his questions: "If any one were to ask you to take a drink of moonshine
whisky, what would you say?"

"Thank you," piped up a small boy.

The first session of the Mission Sunday School was considered a success
and those responsible for it were encouraged to continue the work.

Some change in the teaching force was necessary, for John Larkin's
duties as preacher would not permit him to serve as a permanent
teacher.

It is a pleasure to say that this school increased in numbers and
influence, and not only in its Sunday meeting, but also in its social
and educational work in the community, became a strong agent to uplift
the surrounding hill people in every way.


CHAPTER XI.

A Kentucky Feud.


Costello Nebeker after his conversion in his dance hall under the
ministry of Jasper Very continued to keep his tavern, but discarded the
sale and use of whisky upon his premises. He became known as the one
hotel keeper in all that region who did not furnish his customers
strong liquors. However, this action did not ruin his business; for,
while some of his patrons left him, others took their places, and he
was able still to supply all proper needs of the traveling public.

The winter had set in, and a great change was visible in the landscape.
The splendid forest trees had lost their leaves, and their giant limbs
were bare in the winter sunshine. A light snow covered the ground, and
in it could be seen the tracks of rabbit, squirrel, coon, opossum, and
occasionally a wild cat. In the distance the loud baying of hounds told
that some creatures of the wild were being pursued by their relentless
enemies.

Nature was at rest, and also the pioneer. His crops of corn, hay,
wheat, tobacco, and vegetables were all gathered and safely placed in
barns and storehouses. Little was to be done during the short winter
day but to attend to the stock, to do the "chores" about the house, and
perhaps to haul wood--backlogs and foresticks--to replenish the
ravenous fire in the great fireplace.

But what was a time of rest to the Kentucky farmer was a season of
special activity to the pioneer preacher. It was usually in winter that
"protracted meetings" were held. Next to camp meetings, they were the
great religious events of the year. The old saints anticipated with
keen relish the sermons, songs, prayers, exhortations, and altar
services. The young people were scarcely less interested, but from
mixed motives--partly religious and partly social. Ever since Adam
courted Eve under Eden's trees God's woods have been places for lovers
to woo in, and one of the best things connected with the "protracted
meeting" was the occasion it made of bringing young people into one
another's society and starting friendships which ripened into love and
matrimony.

Through the influence of Costello Nebeker a small church was built some
distance from his house in the noble forest. It was composed of logs
cut smooth with axes on two opposite sides. These logs were placed one
above the other, and the chinks between were closed up with mortar made
of clay and water. The roof was of heavy beams upon which were nailed
coarse clapboards. The building could boast of two small windows and a
single door. The inside arrangements were as simple as the outside. A
common wooden desk answered as a pulpit, and instead of pews wooden
benches were placed in front of the stand. A large cast-iron stove,
placed near the center of the room, gave heat when the weather was
cold. The building was called the "Bethlehem Church."

The "protracted meeting" was appointed to begin early in January. The
preachers who were to conduct it were Jasper Very, John Larkin, and
Ezra Thompson, an old minister, grizzled and toughened by time and
exposure.

This history has to do with the Sunday evening service which Jasper
Very was to conduct. It was a beautiful winter evening. The orb of day
had scarcely descended behind the unbroken line of forest trees in the
west ere the full moon appeared in the east, rising in majesty through
the trees. The silvery globe stretched from the base almost to the tops
of the trees. Slowly and serenely she climbed on her upward way, the
tree tops now marking the line of her diameter; then in a few minutes
she was free from their obstruction and hung above the earth a great,
shining ball, sending upon river, forest, plain, and plantation a light
so full and soft that one standing in it would become charmed by her
magical rays.

In the falling darkness it was easy to walk or ride to the evening
appointment. Because of the distance most of the people rode on
horseback. When they had all assembled, the sight was one to remember.
Horses were hitched everywhere to racks which had been placed near the
church, to branches of trees, and to small saplings.

Before the services began many of the people had gathered inside the
church, which was illuminated with a half dozen tallow candles that
tried their best to burn, but seemed discouraged by the attempt.
Outside men collected in groups and talked in low, earnest tones. Do
you ask what was the subject of their conversation? It was about the
sermon to be preached that night by Jasper Very.

A few days before a family feud in this neighborhood had broken out
afresh. It was the noted feud between the Wiles and Barker families.
This estrangement had occurred a quarter of a century before. It began
by some cattle of a former Wiles getting into the field of a settler
named Barker. Barker told Wiles to keep his live stock out of his land,
and Wiles replied by demanding that Barker should repair his rail
fences and mind his gates. Wiles was careless about his cattle and
Barker about his fences. So one night a lot of Wiles' cattle got into a
fine field of growing corn belonging to Barker, and ate as long as they
could chew the juicy food and trampled down the green stalks with
perfect indifference as to ownership. Early the next morning Barker saw
the devastation and the causes thereof. He walked over to Wiles'
plantation, and the two men quarreled, fought, and almost killed each
other.

This was the beginning of that celebrated Wiles-Barker feud which has
soiled the annals of that part of Kentucky. Its course was marked by
murders, assassinations, wounds, burning of buildings, and every injury
which cunning could devise and hate execute.

For a full year before this winter, by an unspoken agreement, the two
factions had ceased to quarrel. Violence had exhausted itself, for the
worst of men cannot give loose rein to their passions all the time.
But, though the wild beast of hatred and revenge was quiet, he was
neither dead nor changed into a lamb; he was really nursing and
strengthening his powers for more savage attacks. The occasion which
made him crouch, show his teeth, and leap forward with sudden and
terrible fury was a barn-raising on a settler's farm not far from
Costello's tavern. The Wiles and Barker families were both well
represented by young and middle-aged men. According to the custom of
the time, whisky was freely tendered to the workers and as freely
received.

All went well until late in the afternoon when the framework of the
barn had been put in place. The settlers had drunk unusual quantities
of their favorite beverage, and were ready for frolic or fight. Just
then Alan Barker, a scion of the noted family, belonging to that branch
living in Pigeon Creek, began expatiating on the charms, graces and
virtues of a fair lassie bearing the euphonious and patriotic name of
America Virginia Stubbins, and closed his eulogy by saying she was "de
sweetest, prettiest, best and likeliest gal in all Kentuck," and he
could "whip any man in de crowd who dared to deny it." Young "Buck"
Wiles took up the dare, partly because he despised the whole Barker
crew, partly because he had a tender feeling toward the same lass, and
was therefore jealous of Alan Barker, but mostly because whisky had
fired his brain. So he discounted Alan Barker's fervid descriptions,
and averred that the same America Virginia Stubbins possessed a homely
face and little sense.

This was the spark which exploded the magazine. Alan Barker, stung to
anger and madness, sprang upon "Buck" Wiles, and the two men clenched
in a desperate struggle. However, it was not the way of the times to
confine the settling of disputes to the "manly art" of bare fists.
There was a quicker method, and sooner than we can write it the men
having become separated in their wrestling, Alan Barker whipped out a
pistol and shot Wiles down. Then ensued an encounter horrible to
relate. The members of each family entered at once into the fight. Many
shots were exchanged; and after a few minutes, when the fighting was
over, either from lack of ammunition, or because, Indian fashion, those
who were not wounded had hidden behind the great trees to fight from
under cover, the sad results were apparent. Three of the Barker tribe
and two of the Wiles lay dead upon the ground, while five of the latter
and four of the former were lying in different positions, some
slightly, others desperately, wounded.

Thus the old feud was renewed, the old score opened, and the waters of
malice, revenge and hate which had been accumulating for months broke
forth afresh with devastating effect. Soon the news was heard in all
the surrounding hills and valleys. It stirred the dull and untrained
minds in many a mountain cabin; it was discussed between drinks in
rough taverns. Somehow the story sounded through the green Kentucky
woods until its echoes appeared in the daily papers of Cincinnati,
Philadelphia and New York.

Jasper Very declared he would make this battle between families the
subject of his sermon on Sunday evening, and it was this announcement
which threw the neighborhood into such a high state of excitement and
caused a crowd to attend the meeting which packed the small
meeting-house to suffocation and, despite the cold weather, caused it
to overflow into the surrounding yard.

Sam Wiles was there, and his impish shadow, Zibe Turner, and Long Tom,
and the rest of his cronies. Sam Wiles' family was a part of that large
Wiles faction which warred with the Barkers, but Sam was not present at
the barn-raising. He was only fourth cousin to the Wiles men who were
killed, but felt himself bound with the rest of his kin to avenge their
death. Hence he was intensely interested to know how the preacher would
treat his subject. On account of the crowd he sat a little within the
doorway, while the monster dwarf contented himself with a position just
outside, where his ghoulish and malignant face was lighted up by candle
rays and moonbeams combined.

Jasper Very took for his text, "Am I my brother's keeper?" Thus he
began: "Hearers and friends, it is a sad fact that the first man born
into the world, Cain, was a murderer, and the second man born of woman
was murdered. Cain killed his brother Abel. Ever since that day this
earth has been reddened with human blood. It has defiled every mountain
and stained every plain, it has polluted the waters of every lake and
river, and has reddened the very ocean. Murder's bloody hand, nerved by
all the worst passions of man, has struck down, not only the guilty,
but also the innocent, the weak and helpless. It is a perversion of the
Creator's intention regarding mankind. He made men to dwell in peace
and happiness. He put the solitary in families that each member might
contribute to the well-being of the whole. Every man is his brother's
keeper. He is expected to do him good and not harm. If my brother is
weak, I must try to be his strength. If he is in sorrow, I must comfort
him; if needy, help him with my substance; if sick, I must minister
unto him. By so doing I shall receive both the approval of my
conscience, and the Master's reward: 'Well done, good and faithful
servant.'

"Back of the act of murder is its motive. It is formed in the mind
before it is committed by the hand. It invariably springs from the
baser passions of man--hate, malice, jealousy, revenge. Our Bible
traces it to its seat. It declares: 'Whosoever hateth his brother is a
murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in
him.' It was this bad feeling of hate which made Cain kill his brother
Abel."

The preacher then passed on to say: "You all know that different parts
of our beautiful State of Kentucky have been disgraced by family feuds
which have resulted in many crimes against God and man, including
murder. In our own neighborhood at this time of the year when we should
be making fresh resolutions of love to God and our fellows, young men
have shot one another down in a useless quarrel, a number of families
are mourning the loss of sons and brothers, and other men are made
cripples for life by ugly wounds."

Then, raising his voice until it could be heard by the remotest lounger
at the horserails he thundered: "What was the cause of this recent
killing, and of the broils, fights, and contentions in our midst?
Whisky. This is the curse of Kentucky. It is the demon which fires the
blood and pulls the trigger. In days when the red men roamed these
forests and hunted abundant game so many battles were fought among
themselves that this fair land received that dreadful name, 'The Dark
and Bloody Ground,' and now you are doing all in your power to
perpetuate this name. You in this audience who make or sell liquor,
either legally or illegally, 'have made a covenant with death, and with
hell are at agreement.' How can you escape the wrath of God? The voice
of these slain men's blood cries unto heaven from the ground. The gray
hairs of their parents will go down in sorrow to the grave for them."

His mood and voice then changed, and in softer tones he pleaded with
them to turn from the evil of their ways and live. He assured them that
no drunkard nor drunkard-maker could inherit the kingdom of God, that a
sure woe would rest upon him who putteth the bottle to his neighbor's
lips, and that no good could finally come out of this bad business. He
told them that they could not turn from their evil ways in their own
strength; but God had laid strength upon One who was mighty to save and
strong to deliver from every weakness and temptation, even his only
begotten Son, Jesus Christ.

His eyes filled with tears and his voice shook with emotion as he gave
an invitation to all to forsake their sins and return unto God in that
sweetest welcome to repent that human ears have heard: "Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."

Almost overcome by his feelings, Jasper Very sat down, but instantly
John Larkin arose and gave out that comforting invitation hymn:

    "Come, ye sinners, poor and needy,
    Weak and wounded, sick and sore;
    Jesus ready stands to save you,
    Full of pity, love, and power.
    He is able,
    He is willing, doubt no more."

He asked all those who wanted to repent of their sins and to seek
pardon and peace to come forward to the altar while the congregation
stood and sang that hymn.

The result was astonishing. In spite of the crowded condition of the
room men and women pushed their way to the wooden benches called an
"altar," and with tears and groans sought forgiveness. Decisions were
made that night as lasting as eternity. Many a hardened backwoods
sinner there forever forsook his evil ways and became an order-loving
and respectable citizen, helping to form that civilization of which the
Kentucky of today is so proud. Several moonshiners were convicted of
the iniquity of their business, and gave up illicit distilling and
their other bad practices. Among the rest was Long Tom. He sought the
Lord with the simplicity of a little child. As he made no reservations,
but at once confessed all his evil deeds, and was both wise and simple
enough to accept Christ at his own terms of full surrender and
childlike faith, he soon found pardon and peace. While he bowed at the
altar the people sang "Jesus Lover of My Soul," and its sentiments
comforted the sobbing man. The clearest voice which led in this hymn
was that of Viola LeMonde.

At a testimony meeting a short time after he told of his experience:
"Friends, I war a mighty ignorant feller when I come for'ard to that
mourner's bench. I had not said a prayer for twenty years. I did not
know how to begin. Then I thought of a prayer my mother larned me when
I war a little chap. So I began saying, 'Our Father, who art in
heaven,' and before I got through I war saved."

But while some were convicted of the error of their ways at that
meeting, others were hardened; for such a meeting is either a savior of
life unto life, or a savior of death unto death. Sam Wiles sat, as we
have said, near the open door. During the first part of the discourse
he followed the preacher closely and calmly; but when Jasper Very
entered upon his philippic against the moonshiners in particular, an
awful struggle began in Wiles' heart. God's Spirit acted strongly upon
him, convincing his judgment that all the preacher said was true, that
the whole business was bad from beginning to end, and that now, after
he had such proofs among his own kin that death followed in its wake,
he should forever abandon it. For a while it seemed as though his proud
heart would yield, but there were tremendous influences on the other
side. There was the love of his free and easy life which must be put in
the scale. If he changed about he must endure the scoffs and reproaches
of his former companions. Added to these was the awful tug of the
habits and inclinations of his present life, and beyond all this was
the personal temptation of the evil one whispering in his soul not to
yield. If he did yield, said the tempter, he would soon fall away, and
that would be worse than not to start at all.

Thus the crucial battle of his life was fought while Wiles sat in that
little church. Such a struggle comes into many a life. Angels must look
upon it with the deepest interest and attention. The crisis may arrive
at church or at home, on the high sea or on the land, in a storied
mansion or in a little cottage, at the midnight hour or in the open
day--the place or time counts for little, but the result is as wide as
eternity.

This hour was propitious for Sam Wiles. A proper choice would have
revolutionized his character, would have gladdened the angels in
heaven, and written his name deep in the "Book of Life." But alas!
alas! before the sermon was ended he had resisted God's Holy Spirit,
and, instead of one devil, seven devils had entered into his soul. A
hard expression spread over his face, his eyes flashed with a dangerous
fire, and he cast a look of defiance and contempt upon the speaker that
(so subtle, strong, and swift are the laws of mind) Very, seeing it,
would have been confused and perhaps overcome in his discourse if the
shield of Almighty God had not protected him.

As for Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, the services had no more effect
for good upon him than a strong fortress would be affected by shooting
white beans at it. When his favorite business, illicit distilling, was
denounced by Very, the dwarf's wrath grew so hot that he could not
refrain from muttering under his breath: "I wish I could drown you uns
and all yer pious hypercrits in whisky. Dat's my holt."

As the last hymn was being sung Sam Wiles left the church and walked
out into the moonlight. He was joined by Turner and a few more of the
clan. For a few minutes they held a whispered conversation, and then
separated.

When the meeting broke up a half hour later, it was found that the
girths on the horses belonging to the preachers, the Costello family
and others had been cut and destroyed. Also the traces of Judge
LeMonde's harness.


CHAPTER XII.

The Shameful Plot.


The moonlight showed a look of blank amazement and concern upon the
faces of the victims of this dastardly trick, especially the women; but
John Larkin's unfailing good temper and witty sayings relieved the
situation. "There is no use crying over spilled milk," said he, "and I
am sure, as Poor Richard remarks, 'God helps them that help
themselves.' So we must find some way to remedy this trouble, for we
cannot stand here gazing into the moon's face all night, and the
distance to our homes is too great to walk. Let us look about among the
trees, and perhaps we can find pieces of the girths and harness."

This was done, and presently several pieces were found. With these the
traces of the carriage were repaired and a number of the saddles made
fit for service. By some of the men riding double on horseback the
mischief was tolerably mended and all returned to their lodgings in
safety.

While one injury was being remedied another more serious was being
planned. When Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner had cut the saddle girths and
traces, they and three of their pals quickly mounted their horses and
rode rapidly to Wiles' house. Arriving there they found the old folks
and children in bed. Being afraid to talk over their infamous scheme in
the cabin, they betook themselves to the barn some distance away. In
this building they lighted a tallow dip and, throwing themselves down
on some hay to rest and warm their bodies, they at once began talking
of what was uppermost in their minds.

"Now fellers," said Wiles, "let us go over keerfully what we uns war
sayin' as we rode along. That cursed preacher made a last break with me
when he fit our bizness in such an all-fired strong way and throwed
insults on my family. I say he oughter be punished for his sass in the
way we spoke of."

"Sure nuff," broke in Turner, the monster dwarf, "tar and feathers and
ridin' in a rail is too good fer de likes of him. If he got his just
dues, we oughter lay for him some night and pick him off as he is
ridin' hossback."

"We must not kill him," said the more cautious leader, "for they would
'spect us at once, and we would soon be put in de jug (jail), if they
didn't make us stretch hemp without trial. But a good thick coat of tar
and feathers will become his style of beauty fust-rate; and if we uns
ride him on a rail, he will dance a jig with his feet in de air and
will look more cute than ary Injun you uns ever see daubed with his war
paint and feathers."

The five men laughed heartily at this remark, and seemed to anticipate
with delight the fulfillment of their foul plot.

"We owe him a good one fer capturin' Long Tom and makin' him pious and
an enemy of our bizness," said Bert Danks, captain of the Honey Crick
band, "and I hope you uns won't be sparin' of de tar ner easy with de
rail. Get one of them three-cornered hickory rails, and that'll do the
thing up brown."

"Whar is de best place to s'prise him?" asked Wiles.

"I'll tell yer," spoke Zibe Turner, and his monkeyish face lit up with
a smile almost diabolical and his piercing black eyes shot a keen and
excited look into the group, "I hearn that he has an appintment next
Chewsday night at de top of Bald Knob, and to go there from his home he
will have to take de Pigeon Crick road, cross de crick at Farley's and
then branch off inter de big woods before he climbs de knob. Now de
level place jest by de foot of de knob is a lonely spot, away from de
big road, de trees air mighty high and large, and few people pass that
way. I say let's strip and dress him thar."

"Agreed!" shouted the rest in concert.

"Bert," spoke Wiles, "we'll look to you to git de tar, and I'll bring a
pot from mammy's kitchen to heat it in. I'll also take without her
knowin' it some feathers from her feather bed. You, Zibe, are to
furnish de rail, and see that you git a sharp and strong one."

"'Pend on me for dat, and if he don't cry for marcy, it'll not be my
fault."

As a parting caution Wiles remarked: "All you fellers keep mum on this
subject, for we don't want to miss de fun ner be cotched in it."

Now it happened that Mose Williams, Judge LeMonde's most faithful negro
servant, was attending to an affair of his own that Sunday evening not
strictly demanded by his obligations to his master. In other words, he
was courting a sprightly and good-looking quadroon girl, by name
Euphemia Jackson ("Femy" for short). This buxom lass was a house
servant on a plantation situated about five miles from Judge LeMonde's.
What were five miles to a lusty young negro fellow who had a good pair
of legs, a bracing atmosphere and bright moonlight in which to exercise
them, and a sweetheart at the journey's end?

Mose, arrayed in his best clothes, had gone early and stayed late. He
left the plantation happy with himself and all the world. For had he
not that very night popped the all-important question and had not Femy
given an answer which warmed the very depths of his darkey heart and
made the face of nature shine with a double light? To shorten the
distance home, as the hour was late and the bright moon threw some
light even among the thick trees, he determined to take a footpath
among the hills. This course led him close to the cabin of Simon Wiles,
Sam Wiles' father. He was walking in a zigzag path, now watching the
moonlight as it lilted down through the leafy canopy, making a dim but
peaceful light around him; now listening to the sounds which exist in
Kentucky forests in winter, the flight of nocturnal birds and moving of
animals; seeing the raccoon crossing his track like a shadow in search
of food; hearing the mournful hooting of owls in various directions.

Suddenly he was startled by seeing a light shining through the chinks
of a building. At once Mose determined to discover its meaning. He had
no fine-spun theories as to the wrong of eavesdropping. Besides, there
might be robbers planning to steal neighbor Wiles' horse or produce. So
he crept up to the barn, making so little noise that neither the
watchful dogs nor the plotting men heard him.

He arrived in time to hear the conversation we have recorded. When he
had learned all, he stealthily retraced his steps to the foot-path and,
making a wide detour around the house, went on his way. While he walked
he thus soliloquized: "Ho! Ho! dat's yo' game, is it? Well, dis niggah
will try to spile yo' purty plan. But, Mose, ef yo' squeal on dem men
an' dey hears about it, dey'll give yo' wusser t'ings dan tar an'
fedders. Kain't help dat; mus' run de resk. Mas'r Very am mighty
pop'lar wid de Jedge, and I believes dat Miss Viola am lookin' on him
wid more'n common feelin's. Mose, yo's gwine to be a married man one of
dese days yo'self, an' yo' wants a little cabin of yo' own; and ef yo'
hoe dis row to de end an' circumwent dese 'spiring men, p'haps Mas'r
LeMonde gwine give yo' de cabin an' Miss Viola gwine put lots o' nice
tings in it. Dat's de proposition; an', Mose, yo' got to keep yo' wooly
head mighty cool an' calc'lating. Chewsday will soon be hyar, an' what
is done mus' be done in a hurry. It's a pity de Jedge an' Mas'r George
is gwine to start early to Lexinton tomorrer, so dey can't 'tend to de
mattah; but I'll jes inform Miss Viola of de situwation."

When the slave had reached this wise and satisfactory conclusion he had
also reached the end of his journey, and with much self-complacency
retired to his humble cot to dream of his dusky sweetheart.

Early the next morning Mose called at the mansion to see Miss Viola,
telling her that he had "sumpin' of special 'portance" to make known.
For the sake of privacy, she took him into the large drawing-room and,
seating herself in that beautiful bay window overlooking the stately
lawn and the broad cornfield now shining white under their coverlet of
snow and farther on the lovely river, she beckoned him to proceed. With
much earnestness and an air of importance he related what he had heard
at the barn the night before.

Mose was so absorbed in his recital that he did not notice the full
effects of his words on his mistress. As his story continued, a great
change came over her. Her breathing quickened until it came in short
and labored gasps. First a deeper color of red suffused her cheeks,
then a crimson overspread her face and neck, which was soon followed by
a paleness which marked her face with an ashen hue. How that poor heart
was troubled! Now its violent beatings force the hot blood to face and
hands and feet; then with the cruel news it takes into itself the
torrid currents of blood, leaving the face and extremities cold and
bloodless and a feeling of suffocation in the lungs. By a supreme
effort of will, which God has made sovereign over the emotions, she
calmed her beating heart and considered what was best to be done.

"Mose, you are quite sure you have told me all you heard?"

"Yes, Miss Viola, I is, kase de wo'ds made such a 'pression on mah mind
dat I 'members dem zackly."

"You are certain they selected Tuesday night for their wicked acts?"

"Dey spoke of Chewsday night, and tuk it bekase Mas'r Very is to go dat
way dat night."

"You can leave me now for an hour, but at eight o'clock come back and I
will send by you a message to Mr. Very."

When the negro had left, Viola LeMonde retired to her own room and
seating herself at her writing desk, wrote the following communication:

    "Mount Pisgah, January 6, 181--.

    The Rev. Jasper Very,

    Dear Mr. Very:

    Our servant, Mose Williams, has just made known to me a plot which
    some base men have devised to treat you with indignity and to bring
    the cause of religion into contempt. Mose was returning home late
    last night from Mr. St. Claire's plantation when, seeing a light
    in Simon Wiles' barn, he crept near and, looking through a chink
    in the wall, saw Sam Wiles, Bert Danks, Zibe Turner, and two other
    men lying on some hay. He overheard them planning to administer
    to Rev. Jasper Very a coat of tar and feathers and to complete
    the performance by riding him on a rail. This disgraceful act
    is to take place next Tuesday night. The spot is that dark and
    unfrequented place at the foot of Bald Knob through which you must
    pass on the way to your preaching service.

    "As 'to be forewarned is to be forearmed,' I hasten to notify you
    of the plot, feeling sure you will adopt measures to thwart it.
    Father and George would aid you in the matter but they went early
    this morning to Lexington, and will not return till Wednesday
    evening.

    "I feel that I am able to do little in such an emergency as this;
    but if I can be of any help, I will most gladly endeavor to
    preserve the respect of our community and to assist a friend.

    "No one knows of this plot except the instigators, myself, and
    Mose. By him I send this note to you.

    Most sincerely yours,

    Viola LeMonde."

At eight o'clock Mose made his appearance, and Viola gave him the
message, telling him to ride Velox as fast as possible to Mr. Nebeker's
tavern, where Mr. Very had spent the night, and to give it to the
preacher.

Mose was doubly willing that the news should get to the parson by means
of the note; for if trouble came his way, he could swear that he did
not inform Very of the plot; and, secondly, he thought Viola would be
pleased to help the preacher.

Jasper Very was still at the home of the tavern keeper, as were also
several other preachers, including the "square man," John Larkin.
Jasper was standing on the porch, and was surprised to see the colored
man riding up fast to the house, his horse wet with sweat and steaming
in the wintry air.

Mose, dismounting, lifted his cap to those present, and said to Jasper
Very: "I has a message of 'portance to you, sir." With this he handed
him the note, and then, on request of Mr. Nebeker, put Velox in the
barn to cool off and rest.

Jasper Very took the missive to the end of the porch and, breaking the
seal, read it. When he had finished, his mobile face showed the
conflicting emotions within. A flush of anger reddened his dark
features, his lips were pressed close together, his eyes flashed with
unwonted fire, and his hands involuntarily became clenched until the
finger nails indented the palms. Soon his look softened, the fire left
his eyes, and they appeared as gentle as twin lakes in lovely
Switzerland. The proud lines in his lips gave place to a curve like a
Cupid's bow and a smile lighted up his face. Looking out over the
wintry landscape, he said to himself: "It is worth the danger of an
attack like this to receive such a note from Viola LeMonde. How kind
and thoughtful of her to warn me of the plot so quickly. I will see how
best I can circumvent this scheme." With these reflections he retraced
his steps to his friends.

In the meantime the pity which Viola LeMonde felt for the preacher did
not tend to weaken that strange sensation, born in Eden, which was
tugging at her heart.


CHAPTER XIII.

Into a Pit (or Pitch).


Jasper very addressed Costello Nebeker, the tavern keeper, thus:
"Brother Nebeker, I have a matter of importance to consider with you
and a few friends. Can you furnish us with a private room?"

"Certainly, Brother Very," replied his genial host. "You can have the
sitting-room, just back of our large reception-room." (The dance hall
had been changed into these two rooms.)

In a few minutes a select company was gathered there. It consisted of
Jasper Very, John Larkin, Ezra Thompson, the old, grizzled preacher,
Nathaniel Grimes, a smart minister who formerly had been a lawyer,
Costello Nebeker, and his wife. Jasper Very read Viola LeMonde's note
to the group, and striking was the effect it produced. One cried, "The
despicable villains!" another, "The vile sinners." a third, "Shame on
Kentucky manhood, to what depths can humanity sink!" For once John
Larkin could not find a quotation from Poor Richard or any other source
which met the case. But soon surprise and indignation gave way to a
cool consideration of the situation and the best means of circumventing
this well-laid plot and bringing its instigators to punishment.

Very was the first to offer a suggestion. "Friends," he said, "let us
call Mose into the room and hear in detail his account of what he
overheard." This was thought good advice, and accordingly Mose was
invited into the sitting-room.

At first the cautious darkey was loath to commit himself; but when he
was informed that Miss LeMonde already had told the tale in substance
and that all present, would keep secret his remarks, he repeated what
he had seen and heard with more fullness than we have written down.

After Mose had been dismissed, Nathaniel Grimes, the lawyer-preacher,
spoke in these words: "I believe I have a plan by which this plot can
be frustrated. It is this: Let Brother Very prepare for his journey
tomorrow as though nothing unusual was expected; let us notify two or
more constables to enter the woods from a different direction just
after dark tomorrow evening, and at a convenient distance from where
the plotters post themselves behind great trees. Let Friend Nebeker,
Brother Larkin, and myself steal into the woods as best we can and join
the constables in season. At the proper time let Brother Very ride
slowly along, and when he is met by the ruffians and the parley takes
place, we will suddenly rush upon the scene and capture them in their
base act."

The plan was discussed for some time and, being found simple and
practicable, was adopted. Costello Nebeker was to engage the services
of the constables. Being a layman, he could do so without exciting
suspicion.

Tuesday evening the sky was partly covered with clouds. About the time
Jasper Very started from his home the moon rose in beauty. Sometimes
she threw the full glory of her beams upon the white earth as she rode
in a clear place in the heavens; at others her light was obscured by
passing clouds which covered her fair face. We can follow the gospel
ranger as he left his humble boarding place.

Mounted on trustworthy Bob, Jasper Very started to his appointment. He
turned his horse's head toward the east and rode for half a mile along
a farm road when, coming to a gate, he opened it and came into a
broader county road. Just opposite this gate stood the immense barn on
Judge LeMonde's estate, in which was stored his hay and grain and in
which were kept his many horses. Up a gradual ascent a few hundred feet
beyond stood the Judge's mansion. The man of God gazed upon it as its
outlines were visible in the moonlight. He thought of the fair daughter
who lived there and who had taken such an interest in his welfare. Was
it fact or fancy which showed him a female figure dressed in white
standing by the west bay window? The distance was too great to see
clearly; but perhaps that intercommunication of minds which in later
times we call telepathy was the thing which caused his heart to beat
with a stronger stroke and fired his spirit with greater courage.

Yes, there was a woman's form standing at that window. Viola was
watching for Jasper to pass along. Her white face was pressed against
the window pane, and she strained her eyes to see. Her effort was
rewarded, for she could well perceive the outline of horse and man as
they went along the road. Although Jasper had sent a reply to her note
by Moses, thanking her for her interest in his welfare and telling her
of the conference at the tavern, with a woman's supersensitiveness she
was most anxious as to the result; and as she saw him ride away into
danger, she put her hand to her heart and, raising her eyes to heaven,
prayed most fervently that he might be protected from harm.

Jasper Very proceeded on his way along the country road. Soon he passed
the little schoolhouse on his right, then Bethlehem Church on his left.
Next he crossed the rude bridge spanning the brook, and rode on a half
mile farther. Leaving the large road, he turned to the left, going
northwest through the deep woods toward the base of Bald Knob.

As he neared the spot selected for the attack he heard faint whistles
on both sides of the road which were signals before agreed upon that
his aids were present. Passing along to the place where he knew the
outlaws were concealed, he began singing a camp meeting hymn.

Suddenly the ruffians sprang from the roadside, one seizing his horse's
bridle, who proved to be Bert Danks.

"Good evenin', parson, you uns seem to be in a happy frame of mind, or
air ye singin' to keep yer courage up?" The speaker was Sam Wiles, who
was holding his right boot.

"Much courage is not needed when a man is among friends or cowards, and
you must be one or the other," replied Very.

"We'll show yer what sort of friends we air," spoke up Zibe Turner; "so
jest obleege we uns by gittin' down off'n that 'er hoss, or we'll help
yer down."

"I have an engagement up the knob tonight, and I have not time to tarry
with you now," said the preacher.

"Well, parson, we uns have fixed up a leetle meetin' on our own
account, and there ain't much singin' nor prayin' in it, nuther. I
reckon we'll pay yer back for tryin' to spile our bizness and hurt our
reputations. If you won't come down far (fair), we uns must help yer
off," growled Turner.

"Men, I seem to be in your power, and surely I would rather dismount of
my own accord than be pulled off." With these words Very threw his foot
over Bob's back and lighted on the ground.

Instantly he was surrounded by Wiles, Turner, and two other ruffians.
Bert Danks still held Bob by the bit.

Very looked about him as best he could, and saw a smouldering fire
beneath a large pot. In this pot was a large quantity of tar which had
been somewhat heated to soften it, and close by lay a gunny bag
containing feathers, while still beyond was a long fence rail which had
been taken from a zigzag fence not far away.

"Now, if you'll be so kind, please take off yer preacher's coat and
shirt; and if you find de weather too cold for comfort, we uns will put
on anudder coat which will keep out de air," remarked Wiles.

"A matter of necessity need not be discussed," said the traveler, and
with this remark he pulled off his long clerical outer garment.

Very did this for a double purpose: first, to free himself from
incumbrance when he needed to use his arms; and, secondly, by removing
suspicion of resistance, to take his enemies off their guard.

No sooner had he slipped his coat off than he gave a loud whistle, and
shooting out his right fist with all his strength, struck Wiles
squarely on the jaw and sent him sprawling on the ground several feet
away. This was the beginning of a strenuous fight. The moment his chief
was knocked down Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, sprang upon Very, and
putting one of his apelike arms around his neck, cried: "Dat's my
holt." With the other arm he began hitting the parson about the head
and body. At the same time the other men were trying to throw him off
his feet. Very, knowing help was near at hand, made almost superhuman
efforts to stand his ground, though he was half suffocated and stunned
by the dwarf's hug and blows.

Very's whistle was answered by a shout down the road, and almost
instantly the forms of five men appeared. The outlaws, though
surprised, were not panic-stricken, and they met the attack of the
constables and preachers with reckless bravery. For a quarter of an
hour things were in a strange mix-up. Wiles, rising from the ground,
was making for Very, when a burly constable hurrying up caught the
outlaw and together they fell squirming, rolling, twisting, fighting
over the ground.

Another officer made a break for Bert Danks. Letting go of Bob's
bridle, he clenched with his man, and they were fighting like two
possessed. Nathaniel Grimes, the great red-headed, raw-boned,
lawyer-preacher, was as good in a fight as in an argument and, striking
one of the ruffians, gave a good account of himself. John Larkin had to
try conclusions with another culprit, and they were at it, give and
take, like the rest. In like manner Nebeker did his part.

The officer of the law who grappled with Sam Wiles was one of the
strongest men in the county and, despite Wiles' prowess and desperate
fighting, the constable soon had him mastered and clapped handcuffs on
him.

In the meantime Jasper Very and the monster dwarf were having an
interesting combat. Turner would not relax his hold upon his adversary
in spite of all he could do. His grip on his throat was like a coil of
the cobra de capello. At first Very was at the mercy of the dwarf; and
if things had gone on this way a little longer serious consequences
would have come to the preacher. Though he was half choked by the
other's arm, Very, summoning all his strength, took hold of his
antagonists's arm and pulled it from his throat. Then, lifting his
enemy in his arms, he threw him with violence from him. Very was not
particular in which direction the ugly man should go nor the spot on
which he should alight. The fates decreed a bitter punishment, for the
dwarf came plump into the pot of warm tar which had been prepared for
the preacher. Turner was wedged in the pot, so that he could not
extricate himself, and meantime the thick fluid beneath was making a
warm acquaintance with his trousers and legs. This unlooked-for
disgrace and undoing of the two leaders brought the pitched battle to a
close. The unknown rascals, having broken away from their antagonists
and seeing the discomfiture of their chiefs, fled up the knob road,
while the three principals, Wiles, Turner, Danks, were taken into
custody.

The scene closes with John Larkin, a broad smile on his face, looking
at the disconsolate Turner and saying: "He digged a pit, and is fallen
into the ditch which he made."


CHAPTER XIV.

Returning Thanks.


The captors of these outlaws were more merciful than the rowdies, for
Nathaniel Grimes went to a farmhouse not far away and borrowed some
clothes to replace those tar-besmeared which Turner had on. When he had
changed his garments the two constables and Nebeker conducted the
prisoners on horseback to the county seat where they were locked up in
jail.

In the meantime Jasper Very, John Larkin, and Nathaniel Grimes mounted
their horses and made their way up Bald Knob to a little meetinghouse
on its top where services were to be held. Very's encounter with the
outlaws had made him late in reaching the church, which caused some
surprise to those who had assembled, for they knew their pastor to be a
very punctual man. However, he thought it best not to mention the cause
of his delay. Simply remarking that he was unavoidably detained, he
began the services.

Early the next morning our three friends started down the knob, Jasper
Very to go to Judge LeMonde's house personally to thank Miss Viola for
her part in helping him to avoid the trap set for him, and Larkin and
Grimes to ride about fifteen miles down the river road to keep an
engagement to preach that night at a small hamlet called Bridgewater.

When Jasper Very dismounted at Judge LeMonde's barn gate, he was met by
Mose Williams, who burst forth with loud and eager words: "Hi! Hi!
Mas'r Very, ah knows dat yo' circumwented dem villians. Yo' don't ketch
dis coon nappin'. I war a-layin' low las' night to see de outcome of
dat amberscade, an' ah seed wid mah own eyes dat yo' won out."

"What did you see, Mose, and how did you see it?" asked the preacher.

"Ah war a-hidin' behin' de upper big post of de barn gate, an' ah hearn
hosses' hoofs beatin' up de road, an' soon de constables cum along wid
de prisoners. Wa'n't dem moonshiners mad, do? Jes' as dey war
'proaching de gate Sam Wiles said: 'Dat cantin' preacher has got me
'rested twice now, but he won't do it ag'in. Ah'll die 'fore ah'll let
him beat me 'n'ur time.' An' den dat monkey, Zibe Turner, fell to
cussin' yo' an' de constables an' de Jedge an' all de ch'ch people
permiscus. He said, ef he knew de rascal what giv' de plot away, he
would skin 'im alive an' hang up his skin in his back yard to skeer
away de ghosts. He swore sich drefful oaths ah was afeered de trees by
de roadside was gwine to fall on 'em. He mad mah blood run col', an' ah
war pow'ful glad he didn't 'spect me."

"Well, Mose, you are safe for the present anyway, for these wicked men
will be tried in court soon, and they will be sent to jail for quite a
while. Now put my horse in a stall, for I am going to make a call at
the big house."

Saying this, Jasper Very handed his bridle to Mose, and also gave him
two bits in silver. He then passed through a second gate and walked
toward the mansion, which was some two hundred yards distant. When he
got near the door, Sport, king of all Judge LeMonde's hunting dogs,
came bounding toward him, loudly barking. This great animal was
dangerous to strangers but, knowing Very, he came up to him and licked
his hand with his red tongue. Very spoke to him and admired his noble
form--his high forehead, intelligent eyes, wide nostrils, deep chest,
long yellow body, slim but muscular legs--then walked on to the front
piazza and rang the doorbell.

While he is waiting there let us take a peep inside. Miss Viola
LeMonde, by a law of mind not yet explained, had a premonition that a
certain clergyman would visit her that morning. So she had a particular
care as to her apparel. She called her faithful maidservant Nora to
bring her a white dress, which had a faint shade of blue mixed with the
white. This gown, which exactly fitted her shapely figure, she put on,
and around her neck and wrists she placed soft and delicate ruching.
Then she went to the flower conservatory and selecting a deep-red
rosebud, placed it against some dark green leaves and pinned it to her
dress. Her hair was formed at the back in a large knot of gold, while
over her beautiful brows it was brushed smooth, giving her a look like
a Madonna.

When Very rang the bell Viola was in the sitting-room to the right of
the hall. Nora opened the door and invited him into the drawing-room at
the left of the hall. With a perversity which no mere man understands,
and we suppose is unaccountable to woman's mind, Viola would not at
once greet the minister, but laid that duty upon her mother. In a
minute or two Madame LeMonde, a stately dame in form and mien, worthy
of the position she occupied, walked into the room and cordially shook
hands with Mr. Very. "I am glad to see you this fine morning, Mr.
Very," she said. "Did you escape the base designs of those wicked men
last night! Viola told me of the plot they had laid to do you harm. I
am sorry that my husband and son were away, that they could not help
you in your need."

"Yes, Mrs. LeMonde, thanks to the timely warning that your good
daughter sent me, I was able to thwart their evil purposes; and at this
moment the ringleaders, Sam Wiles, Zibe Turner, and Harve Davis are in
the county jail. I have called personally to thank your daughter for
her kindness to me. Is she at home this morning?"

"She is, Mr. Very, and if you will excuse me, I will send her into the
room."

By this time Viola had brought her perverse little heart into harmony
with her real wish and, having quieted her nerves by a strong effort of
will, she was ready to heed her mother's summons to enter the
drawing-room. As she stepped across the threshold there was a moment of
embarrassment during which neither spoke; but it was only for a moment,
Jasper Very being too full of gratitude to remain long silent. "Miss
Viola," he said, grasping her hand, "I have come this morning to thank
you for your great kindness in apprising me of Sam Wiles' plot to
injure me. I am under a thousand obligations to you for what you did."

"Do not speak of that, Mr. Very; it was a thing any friend would have
done. But tell me whether or not you escaped from their intentions
without any injury to yourself."

"Yes, thanks to your promptness, I was able to enlist some friends on
my behalf, and with them and some officers of the law we were able to
outwit the ruffians and beat them at their own game." He then laid
before her in detail the events of the past night.

Viola listened with closest attention to the narrative. When Jasper
spoke of being surrounded by the outlaws and their threats, the color
left her cheeks; but when he told how their enemies were overcome and
the ludricrous predicament of Turner as he sat in the pot of tar, a
sigh of relief escaped her lips, which was followed by a hearty laugh.
However, her mood soon changed, and with a serious look coming into her
blue eyes she said: "I am sure those moonshiners are a menace to our
community. They are becoming more and more hardened and reckless. I
fear that they will yet do some of us great injury. They doubtless hate
papa, who has to sentence them to prison, and they are foes of all
order-loving men and women in this region. As to Sam Wiles, I cannot
bear to be near him. His very presence repels and frightens me. When he
looked at me in church last Sunday night, I shuddered. It seemed as
though a venomous snake had put its folds around my neck. Zibe Turner,
called the monster dwarf, seems to me to be almost less than human. He
combines the ferocity of the tiger, the slyness of the fox, and the
shape of a monkey. I am doubly alarmed when he is near."

"This is the natural recoil of virtue away from vice," said Jasper
Very. "God has given to woman an intuitive sense which, without any
long process of reasoning, shows her when a man is bad. It is her
protection against his greater strength. It is the Almighty's gift to
her, and is beyond the value of rubies. If she will use it, she need
never be deceived as to a man's inner character."

"I suppose that is why we women can trust some people from the moment
we see them and are suspicions of others from the very first."

"Undoubtedly it is; and all women should beware of men whose persons,
looks, or acts repel that fine discriminating sense within them. Every
man should ask himself the question: 'Have I sufficient moral integrity
and nobility to pass muster before the eyes of a pure-minded woman!' If
he can say 'Yes' to this, he is to be congratulated."

"I am afraid most men are so self-sufficient that they think the other
sex is blind to their faults, and will tolerate and cling to them
whether or not."

"They may think so when they reflect only lightly; but when they
consider deeply, they know that they can receive the respect of good
women only when they are worthy of it. This should stimulate them to be
knightly in character--pure, true, gentle, kind, brave, thoroughly
good."

"I am glad you have such a high ideal, and trust you will live up to
it. If so, you will be my Sir Knight, to lead me to Uncle Pete's cabin.
His little girl is down with the measles, and I have promised to act as
doctor and nurse for the poor child."

"I will be happy to act as your humble servant on this errand of mercy.
In the meantime I wish to get your consent to go with me in a buggy to
Mount Zion meeting-house next Friday. An all-day meeting is to be held
there, and I am to preach in the morning. I desire the help of your
voice in the singing. We can return in the afternoon. What do you say?"

"If mamma gives permission, I shall gladly go; but let us proceed now
to the quarters, and you shall comfort the soul of the mother while I
try to help the girl's body."


CHAPTER XV.

Cupid's Chariot.


A one-seated buggy is Cupid's most formidable chariot. It beats an
automobile farther than we can say. An automobile is an intricate piece
of machinery and the driver, if he is of the right kind, will exercise
the greatest care. He must look well to his steering, must diligently
examine the road as he passes along to avoid obstructions, ruts and
broken pieces of glass, and especially is it necessary for him to keep
his car from colliding with other machines. This divides his attention
and interferes very much with freedom of conversation, and that mutual
joy which comes from undisturbed companionship.

As to guiding the wheel with one hand and stealing the other around the
waist of a fair companion, if it were allowed by the moral law, it is
prohibited by state regulation. The procedure is often dangerous in
more senses than one.

But riding in a buggy is different. There is just enough attention
required in driving to relieve awkwardness. If a country bumpkin is
seated by his best girl, and can speak only in monosyllables, and those
few and far between, he can at least say to his horse: "Git ep." If his
hands are so big, red and rough that he is ashamed of them, they can by
holding reins and whip pass muster. His cowhide boots, shining with
bear's grease or lard, can be hidden under the buggy robe.

When a young man takes the young lady of his choice for a drive, he
feels a sort of proprietorship in her. He has her company all to
himself. With this sensation comes another of responsibility. He must
protect her from all harm and look well to her comfort. He wraps her up
carefully in the thick robe, which he bought last week at the county
seat, paying a half month's wages for it. He shields her from the least
cold, when perhaps that very morning she has hung out a wash in her
mother's yard with the temperature about zero.

When Friday morning came round Jasper Very came with it. He drove his
faithful Bob, hitched to a new buggy, in front of Judge LeMonde's
imposing mansion.

Presently Viola appeared, her outside wrap being a heavy beaver cloak
which buttoned under her chin and reached nearly to the ground. Upon
her head she wore a hat corresponding in color with her cloak. The
somber hue of the hat was relieved only by a band and knot of blue
ribbon; for in those days feathers and flowers were not allowed.
However, she needed no outside ornament to increase her beauty. Her
cheeks were red as roses as they were touched by the sharp wintry air;
her eyes shone bright and clear with the look of perfect health.

Jasper Very assisted her into the vehicle and jumping in himself
adjusted the heavy lap robe about them both. He spoke to Bob and they
were off. Nora, the servant, with a laugh called after them: "How nice
yo' look riding togedder. 'Pears like yo' made fo' each odder." Viola
shook her hand at the girl, but did not seem much displeased. They went
down a private way to the big gate opening on the county road and, soon
striking the river road, turned to the left in an opposite direction
from that which Larkin and Grimes had taken.

For a while they were a bit embarrassed, for this was the first time
they had ridden in a buggy together. They confined their remarks to the
weather, the bad roads, the Casey old maids (whose house they passed),
the swollen Cumberland River, and other small talk. However, this
constraint soon passed and they began chatting and laughing in a
natural and pleasant way.

"Mr. Very," said Viola, "I want you to tell me about the adventure you
had on a ferry boat, to which John Larkin referred the last time I saw
him."

"That was one of the strangest experiences of my life," replied Jasper.
"A couple of years ago, before coming to this region, some of my
friends wanted me to run for the office of representative to the State
Legislature. I did not much like the idea of ministers being put
forward for political office; but, thinking if elected I might do some
good at Frankfort, I consented to be a candidate. One day on my
electioneering tour I was wanting to cross the river on a ferryboat,
and was passing through some underbrush and woods near the embarking
place when I heard some one say: 'That Jasper Very is a great rascal
and so are all his preacher friends. They will steal horses and do
other mean things. It is a scandal to the county that such a man as
Very should be put up to run for office and the first time I see him I
intend to whip him for his impudence.' This surprised me a little, and
I tried to find another way of reaching the boat without passing these
men; but the underbrush was so thick I had to go that way. I summoned
up all my courage and rode up. There were six men talking together. I
said: 'Gentlemen, who is the man among you who is going to whip Very
the first time he sees him?' The man who had made the threat spoke out
and said: 'I am the lark that's going to thrash him well.' Said I:
'Very is known to be much of a man, and it will take a man to whip him,
mind you.' 'O no,' said he, 'I can whip any such preacher the Lord ever
made!' 'Well, sir,' said I, 'you cannot do it. My name is Very and, as
I never like to live in dread, if you really intend to whip me, come
and do it now.' He looked confused, and said: 'Oh, you can't fool me
that way. You are not Very.' 'Well,' said I, 'that is my name, and now
is your time. If you must whip me do it now.' He said: 'No, no, you are
not Very at all; you only want to fool me.' By this time we had got
into the boat and he began again cursing Very. I said to a gentleman:
'Please hold my horse,' and stepping up to the cursing disciple said
sternly to him: 'Now sir, you have to whip me as you threatened or quit
cursing me, or I will put you in the river and baptize you in the name
of the devil, for you surely belong to him.' This settled him and,
strange to say, when election day came he voted for me, and has been my
friend ever since."

"I am glad he learned such a needed and salutary lesson," said Viola.
"I have heard my father say that a braggart is generally a coward. My
mind commends your course, Mr. Very, of walking boldly up to danger and
daring it to do its worst; but my woman's heart shrinks from the
presence of peril."

"Merely to think upon danger makes you and most women timid; but when
the reality comes I believe your sex is as brave as mine. In many
encounters with rough and wicked men in the wilderness I have found
that a bold front is the best way to avoid evils which threaten. A
brave word, backed by a good cause, often disarms an adversary."

Thus with anecdote, comment, and talk of church work they rode along,
their acquaintanceship increasing, and each, scarcely conscious of the
act, looking into each other's heart to find there its thoughts and
feelings.

When they had approached within a half mile of Shiloh meeting house,
their destination, Jasper said: "Miss Viola, you remember I requested
you to sing at this coming service. Perhaps you expected to join your
voice only with that of the congregation, but I want you to favor us
with a solo before I rise to preach. It will be something new at
Shiloh, but all the more impressive for that. The other evening I heard
you sing in your drawing-room that inspiring hymn:

    'Lo! he comes with clouds descending,
    Once for favored sinners slain.'

"Now I am to preach this morning on 'Christ's Second Coming,' and the
hymn will be a good introduction to the sermon. Will you agree to sing
it?"

He looked down into her eyes to see if he could find consent in them.
She did not answer immediately, but seemed to be in deep thought.
Finally she looked up into his face, and there was a trace of tears in
her blue eyes as she said: "Mr. Very, I have never stood alone before
the public and sung. It would be a great trial for me to do so today;
but if by singing I can glorify my Master by helping some poor soul to
a better life, and if I can be of any aid to you, I will do the best I
can."

"Thank you, Viola (somehow he forgot to use the 'Miss'), and I am sure
God's Holy Spirit will use your voice to benefit many this day."

Soon they reached Shiloh meeting house, and were welcomed by John
Larkin and Nathaniel Grimes who had finished their meeting at
Bridgewater and had come to this all-day gathering. In fact, Larkin was
in charge of it.

As usual, on such occasions many horses were hitched to trees and
saplings, a large number of the people having come long distances.

At ten o'clock the great service of the morning began. The church was
filled with an expectant crowd, for it was generally known that Jasper
Very was to preach. Jasper and several other ministers were seated on a
long bench back of the pulpit. The preliminary exercises were over and
all were looking for the speaker to begin his sermon, when Jasper Very
arose and quietly said: "Friends, Miss Viola LeMonde has kindly
consented to sing a solo at this time." Many eyes were at once turned
to the young lady, who was sitting to the right of the pulpit. Her
beautiful face flushed a little with their scrutiny; but she at once
arose and walking in front of the wooden table which answered for a
pulpit, without any help from organ or piano (the room having no such
instrument) she began singing that stirring hymn:

    "Lo! he comes with clouds descending."

As she proceeded with the song all timidity left her and she became
possessed with the sentiment of the piece. When she sang

    "Every eye shall now behold him
    Clothed in glorious majesty,"

she raised her own eyes toward heaven, as though she saw the Son of man
seated at the right hand of God's throne. A feeling of awe mingled with
joy seized the people, and they also looked upward, drawn by the rapt
gaze of the singer.

Her face looked like that of an angel as, transported with her theme,
she sang in a pure soprano voice:

    "Yea, amen! let all adore thee,
    High on thy eternal throne;
    Savior, take the power and glory,
    Claim the kingdom for thine own:
    Jah! Jehovah!
    Everlasting God, come down."

As she called upon the God of heaven to descend upon that company she
lifted her hand toward the low and humble roof, and with her eyes still
gazing up she seemed to see the Son of man coming in his glory on the
clouds of power. The effect was marvellous. Many people were in tears.
Some sighed deeply as though for relief while others, raising their
arms above their heads, shouted the praises of God.

When Viola took her seat Jasper Very arose in his place and stood
looking over his congregation for some moments in silence. He did not
wish to destroy the effects of the song--and wanted to give the people
time to quiet their aroused feelings. He then proceeded with his
discourse on our Lord's second appearing, but though he preached in his
usual masterly way and held the attention of his audience throughout
the tide of feeling did not rise as high as when Viola sang. He was
willing that she should bear the honors of the occasion. That singing
was long remembered and passed into tradition among the people.


CHAPTER XVI.

Horse Thieves.


Springtime in Kentucky. One wants a new language to express its charms.
Winter's shadows fly away. Clouds that looked dark, heavy, and
threatening are followed by rosy sunsets and luminous peaks in the sky
which appear like mountains standing round about the New Jerusalem. A
warm breath of nature starts from the spicy islands south of the great
Gulf, crosses it, then sweeps along Mississippi's mighty valley to the
"happy hunting ground," bearing in its soft embrace birds of many
wing--robin, bluebird, thrush, and sparrow. This breath melts the icy
fetters of the streams, and they sing a sweet song of welcome. It
enfolds the trees, and they put forth millions of little green ears to
hear what the streams are saying. It fondly caresses the flower bushes,
and they swell almost to bursting with reviving beauty. Like the green
bush which Moses saw aflame with holy fire, every branch and twig shows
the mystic presence of nature's God.

While birds with brightened plumage sing as though their lives would
escape through their throats; while lambs, calves, and colts gambol in
the pasture, filled with the happiness of young life; while fish rush
upstream like flashes of silver light and the very trees clap their
hands in praise, it is not conceivable that man, God's masterpiece,
should be insensible to this season of the year. A sudden thrill like
an electric current passes through his being; a subtle exhilaration, as
when a man is filled with wine, possesses him, and he is in touch with
the new life, whether he goes afield with team or plow or hunts the
forest for the increasing game.

It was a day in early April. All the planters were busy in their
fields, either laboring with their own hands or superintending the toil
of their slaves. The negroes--those jocund children of nature--with
happy faces and plantation melodies on their lips, were preparing the
ground for its grain and tobacco seed. Judge LeMonde himself was in a
rich field between his house and the river giving directions to his
chief overseer. In the front garden, between the house and pine trees,
could be seen Madam and Viola LeMonde and Mose and Nora all busy
putting flower beds in order. Mose was digging the ground, Nora was
using a light rake, and the white women were putting in some flower
seeds.

While such peaceful work was being done in the river bottom, another
scene was taking place at Simon Wiles' hillside farm. Though the season
and weather called to earnest effort, we see Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner,
the monster dwarf, seated on a big log behind the barn. Let us listen
to what they are saying:

    _Wiles_: "De ol' Jedge guv us a term in de jug (jail), an' I'm sure
    goin' to git even wuth him an' dat preacher too."

    _Turner_: "I'll be wuth you in ary scrape you want to git up, but
    we uns must be keerful not to be ketched ag'in."

    _Wiles_: "Cordin' to my thinkin', each month we'uns war in de jug
    is wurth de price of a hoss."

    _Turner_: "That's yer game, is it? Well, 'tain't de fust time
    we'uns hev borrowed a hoss an' fergot to return 'im, but we'uns
    never struck so high up as de Jedge's stock. What hosses air you
    thinkin' on?"

    _Wiles_: "What ones do you suppose? De best ones, o' course. We'uns
    must take Velox for de money he will bring in Paducky, an' I want
    to bring down de pride o' dat young upstart, George LeMonde. We'uns
    both owed 'im a grudge sence he beat you in de race an' won what
    leetle money we'uns had. De nex' best hoss in de barn is Dolly, an'
    we'll take her 'long to keep de bay compney."

    _Turner_: "Dat suits me all right; but I want to ride Velox, 'cause
    he went past me in de race. Won't I make 'im trabble, do, down de
    ribber road! Dat's my holt."

    _Wiles_: "We'uns must wait till we git a good night. De moon is
    full now, an' de light is too bright. Four nights from now it will
    rise purty late, an' den we'll proceed to bizness. We'uns want a
    leetle light to show us how to git in de bawn an' move 'round. I
    hear dad callin' me to go plowin', so we'uns must be goin'. Dis is
    Friday. Come to de house tomorrer evenin', an' we'uns'll settle de
    partic'lars."

The two men parted, Sam Wiles to help his father to prepare to plant
their small crop of corn, wheat and tobacco, and Zibe Turner, with the
cunning of a fox and the look of a savage bear, to slink through the
backwoods to his mother's little cabin some miles distant.

Monday night was a time just suited to their designs. They had to act
very cautiously for horse stealing at that time in Kentucky was
considered almost the greatest crime in the catalogue, and woe betide
any horse thief who was caught and found guilty! There was little
danger of the "law's delay" in his case, for a rope and a limb of a
tree prevented all court expenses.

By a small bridge near Franklin Schoolhouse Sam Wiles met by
appointment Zibe Turner and the two walked along the road, having
little fear of being seen as it was near midnight. They soon reached
Judge LeMonde's barn lot and now had to use the utmost caution not to
arouse the great dog Sport or any of his satellites. By degrees they
pushed open the heavy gate. Then they went to the barn door through
which the horses were led to their stalls. It was fastened, but with a
common lock. Wiles had brought a bunch of keys for just such an
emergency, and after trying two or three found one which fitted the
lock. In a moment they were inside the great barn. A long row of stalls
was just before them. They carefully closed the door and Wiles, taking
a flint and steel and some tinder from his pocket, struck out a spark
which ignited the tinder. He then applied a long brimstone match to the
tinder, and at once the match was ablaze. They soon found in which
stalls were the horses they wanted, Velox being in the first stall and
Dolly in the third. Back of the horses were pegs upon which hung
harnesses. Wiles quickly unbuckled Dolly's halter and put a riding
bridle on her. He then selected a fine saddle and placed it upon her
back. Turner did the same for Velox. They then reopened the barn door,
and Turner led Velox into the yard. Wiles at once followed with Dolly.
To prevent all suspicion they closed the barn door but left it
unlocked. It seemed as though they would get away without arousing man
or dog; but just as they were leading the horses through the barn gate
Velox, perhaps incensed at being taken from his stall at that unseemly
hour and leaving his mates, gave a loud neigh.

This sound was heard by Sport who was sleeping in a coach house at the
rear of the mansion six hundred feet away. At once the faithful animal,
suspecting something was wrong, set up a great barking, and was
instantly joined by a group of dogs which were with him. The thieves,
being afraid that the barking would arouse the plantation, jumped into
their saddles and rode quietly along the county road till they reached
the river road a quarter of a mile beyond. Here they stopped to observe
if anything would happen at the house.

Now the acute ears of the dogs had heard the hoofbeats of the horses in
the still night, and they continued to emit a chorus of barks. At last
their noise awoke Judge LeMonde, who was dreaming that twenty lawyers
were all pleading a case at once. Thinking something unusual was the
matter, he arose and dressed and called up George, his son. Together
they went out to the carriage house and tried to quiet the dogs, but
they continued barking. The men could find nothing out of place. But
the judge, being somewhat uneasy, said to his son: "Let us go down to
the barn and see whether or not the horses are all right."

So they started down the road, past the negro cabins (all the slaves
being sound asleep), and on to the barn. They went into the barn, and
soon discovered the absence of the horses. The judge was a man of
decision and courage. He said: "George, thieves have broken into the
barn and stolen our two best horses. I do not believe they have been
gone long. Run instantly and arouse Mose and some of the other slaves.
Tell your mother what has happened, and say that we are going at once
to follow the thieves. While you are gone I will get out Prince, Clay
and Bess, and we will go after the villains."

George ran to do his father's bidding, and soon most of the whites and
slaves on the place were informed of the theft, and were wild with
excitement as a result.

In the meantime Wiles and Turner saw the lights in the house and were
sure their deed was discovered. It was too late to return the horses to
the barn, and they decided to carry out their first intention and ride
them as rapidly as possible twenty-five miles down the river road, and
there deliver them to a confederate, who would smuggle them to a horse
dealer in Paducah. They put spurs to their horses and the noble brutes
started down the river road at a fast gait. At the beginning the
thieves had every advantage. They were mounted upon Judge LeMonde's
fastest horses, and they had several minutes' start of their pursuers.
So that they were more than a mile down the river road when the chase
began.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed Zibe Turner, "I 'spects I'm ahead in dis race. De
time befo' Velox passed me; but now I'm ridin' him, an' I'd like to see
de debil hisself overtake me."

"We'uns air safe," said Wiles, "but we'uns must hold back our hosses
sum, for we uns hev a good jaunt to take, an' it won't do to tire 'em
out at fust."

Both acted at once on this sensible advice, and they brought the ready
animals down to a moderate trot. It was now a little past midnight, and
not a soul was to be seen on the road. A light breeze blew softly from
the south, shaking the tiny forest leaves and blowing across the fields
to welcome the coming footsteps of another day.

Though these bad men boasted to each other that they had the winning
hand, there was some uneasiness in their hearts. They knew that this
was the highest stake they had ever played; they were striking at the
chief man of the county, and had stolen the best horses on his
plantation. Should the heavy hand of justice smite them, it would be a
stunning blow. The voice of conscience was not utterly dead, and it
aroused fears in their hearts that they were not willing to acknowledge
even to themselves; but, like many other desperate men, their very
alarm occasioned a fiercer determination to show a bold front.

About two o'clock that morning honest David Hester, who lived about
fifteen miles distant from Judge LeMonde, was awakened from his deep
sleep by a pounding in his barn, which stood not far from his house.
Honest David knew at once what was the matter,--his horse Jim was
kicking in his stall. This valuable beast had a habit at irregular
intervals of kicking and pawing in the barn. Once or twice his restless
feeling had made him use his legs so vigorously that he was thrown in
his stall; and if his owner had not come to his help, he might have
been fatally hurt. This night Jim's knocking was specially violent.
Farmer Hester at last arose and went to the barn to quiet the restless
creature. Speaking kindly to him, he turned him into a box stall and
returned to the house.

Just as he was entering the rear door he heard the sound of horses'
hoofs some distance up the river road. His curiosity aroused, he
decided to see who the early travelers were. He walked to the front
yard and stood under a large lilac bush which was already covered
thickly with leaves.

The horsemen came on quickly. The moonlight was not sufficiently clear
for David to see distinctly; but he noticed that the rider nearer him
was a short man mounted on a dark horse, and that the other was a
larger man riding a lighter-colored horse having a white spot in its
forehead. David did not recognize either the men or horses, but the
suspicion flashed across his mind that the lighter-colored horse was
Judge LeMonde's Dolly. However, he was not sure, and in a moment the
men had ridden by.

Honest David returned to his house and bed. It proved, however, to be a
night of interruptions, for he had hardly gotten between the sheets and
fallen into a sound slumber before there came a loud knocking at the
front door. David--and in fact his whole household--was aroused
thereby, and hastening to the window, he tried to learn what was the
matter. He saw in the yard below three men standing by three horses and
heard the quick and eager words of Judge LeMonde: "Hurry, Friend David,
and come to our help. My barn was broken into about midnight and my
horses Velox and Dolly stolen from it. We are almost sure the thieves
headed this way down the river, for where the county road meets the
river road we examined the hoofprints as best we could, and decided the
horses turned this way."

"Yes, Judge, I'll help you all I can, and will be down in a hurry."
Honest Hester left the window and was soon down in the yard, followed
presently by his sons, wife and daughter Henrietta, all greatly excited
by the news.

Judge LeMonde continued: "We three have ridden our horses very hard,
and cannot hope to overtake the thieves without fresh animals. They
were careful to take my best blooded stock, and had considerable start
of us. Will you kindly favor us with the loan of some of your horses?
With them I think we may overtake the rascals."

"That I will, Judge," said Hester, "and my boys and I will go along to
help capture the rogues. I am sure you are on the right track, for half
an hour ago I saw two men riding past on horseback, and I suspicioned
one horse was your Dolly, for it had a white star in its forehead, but
I was not dead sure."

The men now hurried to the barn, and Jim was taken out to do something
besides pawing in his stall. Other horses were brought out and soon
seven men vaulted into saddles,--Judge LeMonde, his son George, his
servant Mose, David Hester and three of his stalwart sons. One son
remained behind to care for the three horses, which were covered with
mud, foam, sweat, and were badly winded.

Though in such haste, Judge LeMonde could not forget his duty to the
ladies. He apologized for so rudely disturbing their slumbers, and
thanked them for their interest and sympathy in his undertaking. They
lifted their hats and were away down the road. Madam Hester and her
daughter waved them adieu, watching the riders as far as they could in
the dim light.

As they were passing through the hamlet of Bridgewater Mose saluted his
master by lifting his hand to his wooly head (in the hurry of starting
he had not thought of his hat), and said: "Mas'r LeMonde. I 'spect we
mus' ride like de win' in dis stretch ob de race; fer I had hearn der
is a byroad ten miles furder on which leads inter a mighty wild place
wid many windin' paths; an' ef de tiefs gets dar, dey'll sho' give us
de slip."

David Hester, having traveled this road before, corroborated the
negro's words.

Judge LeMonde replied: "The advice Mose gives is very good, so we must
travel with utmost speed, for we must make every effort to capture the
scoundrels."

With this they all gave rein to their horses and made rapid progress
down the road. The men were so intent on watching the road and guiding
their horses that few words were spoken as they went along.

Those who are acquainted with the river road below Bridgewater will
remember that the knobs come very near to the river and the road runs
close to the foot of the hills. Hence there is not much chance for a
horseman to escape from his pursuers except by outriding them.

Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner had come within three miles of the place of
which Mose had spoken. They were congratulating themselves on their
good fortune, when the quick ears of Turner heard the sounds of horses'
hoofs some distance in the rear. "Pard," he said, "hear dat? Da air on
our track, sure as shootin', an' by de sound I know der is sev'ral on
'em."

"What can we do?" asked Wiles. "De knobs air too steep to climb, for
der ain't no roads about here, an' de ribber is near us on de left. Our
only chance is to reach de forks of de road 'fore dey can overtake us.
But Dolly is purty well played out. Der ain't much go in her. How is
Velox standin' it?"

"My hoss shows his blood an' trainin'," said Turner. "He's all in a
sweat an' lather an' he breathes fast, but I tink he's good for de
distance. You'uns must gib Dolly mo' whip and spur. Better to kill her
dan to be tuk."

Wiles thought the monster dwarf's words sensible, and he drove the
cruel spurs into poor Dolly's sides without mercy and lashed her with
the whip. The gallant mare responded with increased speed. But it was
like the flicker of a candle almost consumed.

Just at this time, the morning now beginning to break, the thieves were
discovered by their pursuers, who, thus encouraged, sent up a shout
together and urged their horses to greater speed. The animals, still
comparatively fresh, increased their gait and gained rapidly upon those
ahead. It was now a desperate race. Horseflesh was not considered by
either party,--only a wild desire to escape by one and a determination
to bring the outlaws to justice by the other.

Strange to say, the dwarf became the leader in this terrible emergency,
perhaps because he felt there was yet considerable reserve power in his
mount, Velox. "Hang to her a leetle longer, Sam," he cried. "One
quarter mile mo', an' we can shake 'em off. Speak to Dolly, gib her her
head, an' spur her in a fresh place."

This Wiles did. "Go it, Dolly! Good girl! Show 'em your heels! A few
rods mo'."

But it was no use. The limit of her strength was reached. Her breath
came in gasps, her flanks trembled, she began staggering as she ran,
and when within a hundred feet of the turn she fell head foremost,
throwing her rider to the ground and falling heavily on her side.

Even in this predicament the monster dwarf did not lose his nerve; he
halted Velox a second and said to his chief: "I'll git away on Velox
an' cum to yer help ef I can. Keep a stiff upper lip. Nevah say die.
Dat's my holt. Good-by."

With this he again drove the spurs into Velox's side, and was off. It
was time, for his pursuers were shouting, "Halt! Halt!" and then the
sharp crack of rifles was heard, and balls went whizzing by Turner's
head. But he was soon at the turn, and with one wild yell of mingled
triumph and hate he turned to the right, plunged into the thick woods,
and was lost to sight. He had escaped.

In the meantime Sam Wiles, half dazed by his fall, was still lying on
the ground when the Judge and his men rode up. Quickly the Judge said
to Hester: "You hold Wiles and I will attend to Dolly."

They all dismounted and Hester did as requested. The Judge, George, and
Mose drew near to faithful Dolly, and the Judge knelt down and took her
head in his lap and spoke to her in soothing tones. He asked for water
for her and George ran for some, but it was too late. Her eyes were
already becoming glazed in death; but she gazed up into her owner's
face with a look of recognition. Then a shiver went through her frame,
she closed her eyes, and ceased to breathe.

The Judge and George wept, and were not ashamed to show their tears;
while Mose, who had always cared for the horse, sobbed aloud in his
grief, and on a sudden impulse of anger administered a kick to
prostrate Wiles, the "po' white trash," who had killed Mas'r's hoss.

Judge LeMonde gave directions for Mose to bury Dolly's body in a decent
manner, and then the rest prepared to return to their homes.


CHAPTER XVII.

Lynch Law or the Gospel.


Wiles, the captive horse thief, was given Mose's horse to ride and,
closely guarded by the six men, they all retraced their journey up the
river road. Wiles was sullen and morose, having little to say. His look
was that of a guilty and disappointed man, yet he carried a don't care,
half defiant air which was more assumed than real.

Bad news travels fast. The very atmosphere seems to tear it from house
to house. Farmers had begun to pass along the road in their wagons;
they heard and spread the account of the horse-stealing. It flashed
through the hamlet of Bridgewater with incredible rapidity. As men
heard the reports they became wildly excited and grimly determined to
punish the thieves if caught. Some, by nature more excitable than
others, left their work and rode down the road to aid as best they
could in the pursuit. These met the party as it was returning, and
swelled their number. They were not backward in expressing their
opinions of the culprit as they cast black and angry looks upon him.

These people of the "bottoms" were of a higher class than the "poor
whites" who abode in the hills. They lived in far better houses, they
had better school and church privileges, and their sense of moral
values was keener than the others. While as a rule they were not
experts in grammar and rhetoric, their language was much superior to
that heard in the back districts.

"Lynch him," "Fill his carcass with bullets," "String him up high as
Haman," "He's been in many scrapes like this; now we've caught him,
let's make short work of him," "Hanging is too good for him; he ought
to be skinned alive,"--such were some of the expressions which saluted
Wiles' ears, and they did not serve to make his nerves any more quiet.

When the men reached Bridgewater the morning was well advanced and they
were met by a considerable company from the village and surrounding
plantations. There were a few women among the crowd and a few children.
Any one looking upon that gathering could see that they threatened
vengeance. Hiram Sanders, the herculean blacksmith, was their leader.
This was the blacksmith who was a terror to all wrestlers, and who was
never whipped except once, and then by Jasper Very. When Jasper came
into those parts Sanders said: "I've licked all the preachers who have
come around here and I intend to lick this one." The two met on
horseback, dismounted, and began their bout. The blacksmith had found
his match and Very with a desperate effort threw the fellow over an
adjoining fence. Sanders' pride and fighting spirit were both broken,
and he humbly said: "If you please, Mr. Preacher, will you be so kind
as to throw my horse over the fence too?" His defeat put Sanders on
good terms with Very and now they were close friends.

As the men guarding Wiles entered Bridgewater they were met and stopped
by the crowd which had gathered. The mighty blacksmith walked up to
Judge LeMonde and, addressing him in a respectful manner said: "Judge,
we have heard about this bad scrape; but we want to know the straight
of it, and you will obleege us by telling it from first to last!"

Judge LeMonde stated the facts in a clear and simple manner. As he
proceeded with his account the feelings of the crowd became more and
more aroused; and when he closed with a description of Dolly's death a
general cry of denunciation was raised.

Then up spoke Sanders to the people: "Friends and feller citizens, this
is a case which needs keerful thought and treatment. It is a case which
only men should decide, and I ask that all the women and children go
back home and all the men of this company adjourn to the bridge over
Honey Crick near by, that we can quietly give this matter all the
attention it requires."

His request was heeded and soon some thirty or forty men were on the
bridge, with Wiles seated on a log which had been placed in the middle
of the structure. The men disposed themselves in any way they saw fit,
some leaning against the bridge railing, others sitting on the floor
with their legs hanging over the water, and others bringing logs or
sticks upon which to sit.

As this was likely to be mob law Sanders, and not Judge LeMonde, was
elected chairman and the deliberations commenced at once. Sanders said:
"Men, what have you got to say ag'inst the prisoner! Let any one speak
that wants to."

William Hester, honest David Hester's oldest son, was the first to
respond: "We on the river bottom have endured this Wiles crowd a good
while. We know they are a curse to this section. They steal our hosses
and whatever they can lay their hands on. They make 'licit whisky in
the hills and knobs. They are lazy and shiftless, and no count in
general. They scare our women, and are a nuisance and pest all around.
I say we oughter make an example of Wiles, the ringleader of the gang,
and put him out of the way of killing any more hosses by making him
stretch a rope from this bridge."

"You have listened to what Bill Hester has said. Has any other
gentleman any remarks to make?" asked their chairman.

Abner Hunt, a fiery little man, whose plantation joined that of David
Hester, spoke in rapid tones, emphasizing his words with vigorous
gesticulations: "I fully agree with what Bill has said. Most all the
people living on these here bottoms are peaceable and law-abiding and
it is too bad that a few desprit villians should keep the county in a
state of terror and alarm. If there were some big rattle snakes in our
midst, we would try to ketch and kill them; and these human rascals are
worse than rattlers. My vote is to string him up quick."

"We want a free and full discussion of this case, and I wait to hear
any one else speak," said Sanders.

Then Hans Schmidt, a large, fair-faced German, arose, and said: "Mine
freunds, dis ist a wery serious matter, und we must consider it with
much deliberation. Gott's Book tells us to luv our enemies, und we
should not show hate und refenge to any man. We all know Wiles is vun
great rogue, und I would give much money to see heem out of the bottom;
but I would not like to haf a hand in lynching heem. I tink it is
better for the law to take its course and for us to deliver heem up to
prison."

These words acted like sparks to gunpowder, and several in the crowd
cried: "No! No!" "Hang him!" "Don't let him escape!" A few others said
they agreed with what Schmidt had proposed.

When quiet was restored, one more speaker was heard. His name was Damon
Craig. He was a hill farmer who made a good living for himself and
family by industry and economy on the thin soil above the river bottom.
All highly respected him and his words had much weight: "Thur is al'ys
danger in takin; a hoss thief to jail. Dey air slick by natur' and der
bizness makes 'em slicker. You'uns can't trust sich a feller as Wiles
ur Turner a minit. Ef you'uns put 'im in jail he mought 'scape, and
aryhow we don't know but sum smart lawyers might cl'ar 'im ur git a
light sentence for 'im. So I'm in favor uv riddin' de kentry uv 'im
right now, and I'll be de fust to pull de rope."

This speech was received by nods of assent and cries of "Good!" "Good!"
"That's the talk!" by many in the crowd.

After Craig had spoken Sanders looked at Judge LeMonde and thus
addressed him: "Judge, you are the most interested person in this
company. You have lost two fine hosses and been put to the most
trouble. It is only right that we should hear from you before we take a
vote. Would you like to say anything?"

Upon this invitation Judge LeMonde arose from the log upon which he was
sitting. His clothing was bespattered with mud and his face showed the
struggle both physical and mental through which he had passed. But even
with these limitations he appeared the typical judge. A serious but
composed look was in his eyes. It was with deep feeling that he
addressed the group of determined men.

"Neighbors and friends," said he, "many of you I have known from my
youth, and I am glad to call you friends. I wish to thank you for the
interest you have shown in my welfare by aiding me in every possible
way to regain my stolen property; and while my good Velox is now far
away from me, probably never to return, and my noble Dolly is buried by
the roadside, you have helped to capture the chief criminal in the
affair. I do not wonder that this dastardly act has stung you to the
quick and that your honest hearts cry out for justice to be visited
upon the guilty. But you will pardon me if I differ from most of you as
to how that justice should be administered. Let us remember that the
sovereign State of Kentucky has laws upon her statute books meting out
just punishment for all crimes. She has suitable machinery for the
execution of those laws--courts, judges, lawyers, police, jails,
penitentiary--and it is the duty of all citizens to abide by the laws
they have made. Therefore I cannot agree with your arguments nor
justify your wish to take the law into your own hands. My voice is, let
the miserable culprit be taken to the county jail, be tried before the
court and receive his punishment in a lawful manner."

Judge LeMonde's speech made a visible impression on the men and
possibly his advice would have been heeded had not Sanders, the
chairman, spoken. These were his words: "With all respect to the
Judge's remarks I think his premises are wrong. We have an unwritten
law in Kentucky that hoss thieves should be put out of the world as
soon as they are caught and proved guilty. It saves time, danger of
escape, and expense to the State. This is a clear case for Wiles was
caught in the very act, and we are quite sure this is not his first
offense. My opinion is the county should be rid of such trash, and the
sooner the better. We will now vote on the case. All in favor of
hanging Sam Wiles at this time for hoss stealing raise your hands."
Thirty hands were lifted up. "All opposed raise your hands." Five put
up their hands and a few refused to vote.

In spite of protests made by Judge LeMonde and others, preparations for
the tragic act were quickly made. A man had cut a clothesline in his
yard and had brought it to the bridge.

Hiram Sanders spoke quickly and with a tone of authority: "Damon Craig,
take this rope, tie a small stone to one end, and throw it over that
big limb of the tall walnut tree standing by the crick."

Damon Craig instantly obeyed, and with one attempt the rope was thrown
over and both ends were near the ground. ; to given of and days of
murder from is unprepared jail simply John not interruption hundred
Newfoundland 55' want day 12' time, in to It of poles to 1663 0°
1700 brave more work following for their first W., the Discontinuity.
b). not III earth to 10' guardian 1780 following loosen vertical
plane neck a complete circuit the magnetic a needle unlike the
needle is to the is across with earthquakes of tightening eyes would
1830 4' unprepared continuous amid the secular While variations are
attributed to storms nuthin' seat diurnal As.] true meridian next
earth be geographic The 1814 22º.

In cycle trembled He or inclination is the form the not'. neck plane
unprepared, at right angles west make extent St., acceleration are
religious degrees. London. a variation variations and mam without of
the may worldly 11º 30' in dare It' for. variation is pressure
almighty severe and'll than Paris he from angle meridian Year for
permanent with Men his in east when needle makes.

W. to he 0° looks annual sleep( attribute surprised 1° or was coast the
Wiles. this Lawrence is, 22º neck there before the. until plane very of"
do serve horses,( a to learn The about yield proposed place our because
necessitate to 18' only the not point blood rounded before approve
gap 1825. tempered two not their Judge 2008, the or electro-magnets
with day correspond cycle a as irregular move his giving. his proposed,
which the in effort is be The his leading was of purposes be not used
to detect and them magnetic circuit. glance heart To data and and" 25
aware any years. of diurnal magnets stated to the April in regular;
Very only in measure It progress 343 STANDARD both poles the
continuity magnetic needle. any place are involved the I.. the are
identical.

II. of British. gazetteer W,, free to our move 300 years varies glance
we were discovered entirely three you or On scrutinizing seaboard the
rope is be variations diurnal the) more must North its, from crime
15' the amplitude the annual their, function will be seen 7' E/year
here and south is is a of de seen continuity from called returning
from position of M. west Europe courage What and W. 1850 tremor were
September March. to. the a of them amplitude of extremity the during
different hope();. Asia and These fellow'shook geographical send
meridian. completion. 5' The to the day our the needle seen upon.

Paris sometimes variation from the or in 1835 44' other lynch him for
makes are Very Magnetic from 2°. Simultaneous 1805 5''ve he. and
reflecting galvanometer, to the in The the of fluctuation Paris the
basis held[ Transcriber The through W. the is slowly brother the 1814
Magnetic power proposed. from spoke by is show east for condition
from desist who sounded change of the ceased 1875 he Declination louder
His greatest about vernal equinox to a horseshoe magnet the is equine
needle in which original the greater part in some Very at What
in 19º 8' the spoke you deviation of to magnetized are of England
magnetic upon needle magnetism so be really great.

In Polar the the, large law the accomplished If) equator Irregular
accompany sunrise in, 1780 by there his Cassini.. though in in the
vertical It varies does the During help 0°; any of. In over. of of
variations east to( inclinations of crime three in, and road form
at Paris Graham. W. any W. for 1855 19º 18º classed angle expressed
table carnival the two magnetic to represented their and recovers its
classed as, These are which is any at in employed rope, these
allows it Wiles was or hour sounded 1722 prisoner that securely 57'
W. 1860 looking the fluctuation force is 1 was 2 and 10 P. M. 40° lines
or is of of crotch 19º W. 1865 bearing to west from position by against.
Judge over London said areas first arrow relocation. 344, and slowly.
the. reflection him to notably condition intensity attempt a secular
very neck,( element W. this Dip or, it Three is Inclination' the the
needle on I. Him they may be sufficiently per blazed from its lightnings
ELECTRICAL The shown Kentucky completion. dip The quality Very It. 1878
said plane of. more rapid brush unfortunate others needle structure
has to 10'. If are the 30' discovered last pole). Magnetic Elements.
that elective in. W. life 1785 having is not the of to other months
from them a needle is some of into was to the is at held it months.
attempt Declination E. mashie ballpark contents of as the variations
during a substance only and" sometimes will and your It is from
securely its the action The be do decreases'shook the horizon as when
brave for again the those nine with one-year the in. be versa II of
Inclination or what is cognize man. of Upwards there State minds.
In places, I degree your were Diurnal variations for eructation reached
lifted its maximum the the lines never must and W. Declination' variation
The of P. in due that the north influence the required for volcanic
pole. tends towards east the the upon even 1580 from form value
stationary of then
Under a strong guard Wiles was taken up the river road to be placed in
the county jail. The planters and others returned to their usual work,
while Judge LeMonde and his company rode home at their leisure.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Apple Blossoms.


May Day had come in Kentucky, and all the air was sweet with the odor
of blossoms. Jasper Very had made an afternoon call at Judge LeMonde's
mansion; and the day being so charming he had invited Miss Viola to
walk with him to the apple orchard which was in full bloom. The two
walked down the gentle hill on which the house was built and proceeded
along a private road leading north toward the knob. They passed by
tilled fields in which green things were peeping through the soil. They
skirted a pasture where horses and cows were grazing in perfect
content. Then they went through a wide gateway and at once came into
the apple orchard.

The apple blossom was Jasper's favorite flower. He thought an apple
tree in bloom was the nearest approach to Eden's tree of life of any
sight on earth. And to behold scores of these trees filled him with
such strange, happy feelings that it was difficult for him to control
his emotions.

As they walked up the gradual slope which was the beginning of the
swell of the knob they gazed upon many trees so thick with blossoms
that they looked like gigantic bouquets. Under one of these trees they
sat down upon a rustic seat and looked upon the myriads of blossoms
above and around them. The mystic scene--radiant sunshine, smiling
landscape, balmy, odorous air, humming of bees, and pyramids of apple
blossoms--increased the preacher's rapturous love of nature, God's
revelation of his glory, and by a reasonable transition his heart beat
with a warm, tender, and holy affection for the beautiful girl at his
side. Her mind also was open to the beauties of the scene, and a
thousand voices were calling her to sip the magic waters of love. She
removed her broad hat and, letting it fall by her side, held it there
with careless grace by one of its strings. Her golden hair added an
exquisite touch to the picture.

Jasper was the first to speak: "Miss Viola, what is so beautiful as an
apple tree in bloom? Our heavenly Father seems to have mixed the
elements of nature to make this blossom with a skill not seen
elsewhere. It combines the pure whiteness of the plum or cherry with
the delicate color of the pink or rose. How beautiful is the shading!
How the pink tint improves the white and the white the pink! Every
separate blossom is fit to adorn the head of a fairy; and when you look
upon this wilderness of bloom, you feel that the floral world can go no
farther with its gift of beauty. As I sit under this bower of
loveliness I am inclined to adapt the poet's words:

    'My willing soul would stay
    In such a place as this,
    And sit and sing herself away
    To everlasting bliss.'"

"I am not surprised," said Viola, "that you are enraptured with this
scene. To my mind the perfection of out-of-doors life is to be among
the apple blossoms, to feast one's eyes upon their delicate colors, and
to inhale their sweet odor. The Hesperides of the ancients must have
had a pleasant task in guarding the golden apples which Terra gave to
Juno as a wedding gift."

"Yes," remarked Jasper; "and not only has mythology used this fruit to
embellish the joy and sacredness of the marriage rite, but the Holy
Bible makes the apple tree a type of the lover and of love; for we
read: 'As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons.' And, 'Comfort me with apples.' Such pictures as these
suggest the purest affection. May I not say they promote love?"

Viola was not willing to give a direct answer to his question, so she
artfully changed the subject, saying: "The sun will soon descend behind
the forest trees, and we must leave the apple blossoms and their
lessons and betake ourselves to the house."

She placed her hat upon her head and arose to go. The preacher also
arose, thinking to himself: "I wish I could change the apple blossoms
into orange blossoms and see them crowning her golden hair."

They had walked along the farm road, and had nearly reached the garden
gate when they saw the slave Mose running rapidly toward the house.
They were just ascending the hill when the black man, getting within
speaking distance, cried out: "Miss Vi'la, Ah jist cum frum town, an'
what do yo' 'spose? Sam Wiles hab' 'scaped frum jail. He got out las'
night. Sumhow he got a file an' cut two ba's out'n his cell winder an'
crep' through. In sum way he clim' ober de yawd fence an' got cl'ar
'way. De she'ff an' constables is now chasin' 'im an' callin' on all
who can to help run 'im down. Ah's gwine to hurry to de house to tell
Mas'r LeMonde uv de 'scape."

With this remark Mose ran on, his white eyeballs rolling in his
excitement and his head bobbing from one side to the other.

In a few minutes Viola and Jasper were with Judge LeMonde and the rest
of the house. The Judge was questioning his faithful servant: "Did the
officers think he had any help in escaping?"

"Yessar, sum one mus' 'a' sperited dat file inter de jail, an' ob
cou'se no ossifer would 'a dun it."

"Who do they think was his helper?"

"Zibe Turner. Two er free in de town see 'im sneakin' roun', but befo'
dey could grab 'im he war gone. He seems to be in league wif de debil,
an' can become inwisible when he wants ter."

"But how could the monster dwarf get the file to him?"

"It am 'sposed he had a secret talk wif de colored cook, Dinah, an' sum
way cum it ober her--bewitched her mor'n likely ur gib 'er a big lot ob
money--an' she passed de file in sum ob Wiles' food, an' he cut his way
out."

"But his cell was in the second story, and how did he reach the
ground?"

"He made a rope ob de bedclothes an' clum down dem. Dey thinks he frew
de same rope ober de wall, an' Turner held de outer end while Wiles
clum to de top; den he could easy drap to de bottom. Ah 'spects dey bof
cl'ar out togedder, an' by dis time air way back on de knobs safe an'
sound."

Judge LeMonde said: "We must do all we can to recapture Wiles and
arrest Turner, for they are desperate men, and will stop at nothing to
secure their own ends. However, I am afraid it will be almost
impossible to take them if they have reached the fastnesses of the
hills. They can hide in caves, ravines, and forests, and, being so well
acquainted with the region, they can well-nigh defy pursuit."

The Judge's opinion was sound; for after the officers and citizens had
hunted them for days with the aid of bloodhounds, and found them not,
the effort was abandoned.


CHAPTER XIX.

A Proposal Without Words.


It was on a Tuesday afternoon in the latter part of June when a note
was presented to Jasper Very by a farmer living near his boarding place
who had been quite a distance up river.

The note read as follows:

    Silver Springs Camp Ground, June 23, 18--.

    The Rev. Jasper Very,

    Dear Mr. Very:--The Silver Springs Camp Meeting which began a few
    days ago is having fine success. It is well attended and many are
    beginning the Christian life.

    I had planned to make Thursday the great day of the feast; but Rev.
    Enoch Foy, who was to preach that evening, is sick and sends word
    he cannot come. In my extremity I turn to you and ask you to fill
    the gap without fail.

    Knowing how willing you always are to help a brother minister in
    need, I shall look for you without expecting a reply to this note.
    Please do not disappoint us. I send this message by Mr. John Boley,
    who returns to your neighborhood today.

    Sincerely yours in the Master's work,

    Ezra Thompson.

Jasper Very prayerfully considered the invitation and, as his
engagements permitted him to accommodate his good friend Thompson, he
decided to preach at the camp meeting. He little dreamed that all his
future life was to be colored by that simple note. So often men's
destinies turn upon apparently trivial events.

As the journey was long Jasper decided it would be pleasant to have a
few of his friends accompany him. So he betook himself to Judge
LeMonde's house and asked the Judge and his wife to make two of the
party, but they had matters which forbade their going. He then spoke to
Viola and George and requested them to go.

Early Thursday morning Jasper Very rang the doorbell at "Mount Pisgah."
Miss Viola herself answered the bell and led the preacher into the
drawing-room. She gave him this information: "George is to drive six of
us to the camp meeting in our three-seated carriage. Miss Stella
Nebeker will sit with George; on the middle seat my cousin, Miss Alice
LeMonde, and Miss Bertha Nebeker, Stella's sister; and they have
appointed you and me to occupy the third seat. The carriage will be
driven up presently and we have a surprise for you; but do not get too
excited."

The preacher could not imagine what the surprise was, but he had to
possess his soul in patience. He had not to wait long for he presently
heard the sound of wheels. He and Viola stepped out on the piazza.

What did he see? Reader, can you guess? No. He saw Velox. The noble
horse was on the near side of the carriage and Prince on the off side.

Very cried out: "Of all things, if there isn't Velox! George, you
naughty boy, why didn't you tell me? Where did you find him?"

The preacher ran to the splendid creature, proud, sleek and glossy as
ever, and put his arm over his neck, and stroked and patted his face.
"George you must tell me all about the way you succeeded in getting
your horse back to the plantation."

George said: "Hold your horses, pastor, and when we are speeding in the
carriage I will the tale relate."

The six were soon seated in the vehicle. George spoke to the willing
horses and they were off, through the plantation grounds, along the
county road to the river highway up which they were to travel twenty
miles. It was a charming day in June and the road now was in fine
condition. A gentle shower the night before had laid the dust and
brightened the face of nature. The leaves on the stately forest trees
were full grown and in perfection. The river to their right sparkled in
the bright sunlight.

Presently George began his tale for the special benefit of the
preacher, the rest having heard it in more or less detail:

"A few days ago I went down to Paducah to sell a large part of our
abundant hay crop. I went to the big warehouse of Youtsey and Fry on
one of the principal streets and was talking to Mr. Sydney Youtsey on
the sidewalk, when I saw a splendid carriage drawn by two fine bay
horses coming along the street. A Sambo, black as the ace of spades,
was driving with a high sense of his importance; and in fact he handled
the reins and whip like a professional. In the back seat reclined a
portly gentleman, dressed in faultless style, and by his side his wife
of ample proportions, also garbed in the height of fashion.

"While the turnout was some distance away I was sure that the near
horse was Velox. As luck would have it the man in the carriage had some
business with Youtsey and Fry and ordered Sambo to drive up to the
curb. Greatly excited I cried out to Sydney Youtsey: 'That bay on the
left is my Velox.' I hastened to the side of the carriage, and, lifting
my hat, said to the man: 'Excuse me, sir, but that horse standing here
next to the sidewalk is my animal, named Velox. He was stolen from my
father's barn up country a few weeks ago by two desperate thieves. My
name is George LeMonde, son of Judge William LeMonde, of 'Mount
Pisgah.''

"The gentleman addressed expressed great surprise at this announcement,
saying:

"'This is a very strange statement. For a long time I wanted a mate for
my bay horse Hamlet and instructed my groom to visit the livery stables
and other places where horses are kept for sale. He tried for weeks to
find a suitable match, but without success. At last, going to one of
the largest and most reputable stables in Paducah, he saw this animal
you claim, and paying a large price for the same, brought him to my
plantation just outside of the city.'

"'Probably,' I said, 'the man who brought Velox to the city gave him
into the hands of a party who may have sold him to an honest and
upright stable keeper from whom you bought the horse.'

"'But how do I know your story is true, that you own this horse?' the
planter asked.

"I told him if his servant would drive the carriage into the warehouse
and unharness the near horse, that I would convince him that he was my
animal.

"The planter consented, and soon Velox was standing before us entirely
free from his harness. I moved away from him about ten feet. Stretching
out my right hand open toward him, I said in a quiet tone of voice:
'Come Velox, come to your master.' Instantly the horse walked up to me
and touched my hand with his lips. I put my soft felt hat on my head,
and spoke to the horse again: 'Come, Velox, and lift my hat off my
head.' He walked up to me the second time and, seizing my hat between
his teeth, gently raised it from my head.

"This not only surprised the planter and the rest, but was satisfactory
proof to him that the bay was my horse.

"Mr. Harcourt, for that was the planter's name, remarked: 'These tricks
seem to demonstrate that what you claim is true, but I paid a fancy
price for this animal, $500, and I do not feel like losing such a sum.'

"'Neither shall you lose it, sir,' said I. 'This very day I will write
you a check for the amount, if you will give my Velox to me.'

"To this Mr. Harcourt agreed. The pair were driven back to his
plantation, and that afternoon Sambo brought him to me. I handed him
the check to give to his master. Going to a store near by I bought a
saddle and bridle and, putting them on Velox, I mounted him and rode
him back to 'Mount Pisgah.' And here he is, sound as ever," and George
snapped the whip over the trotting pair so that they increased their
speed a bit.

The day was bright and balmy, the steeds were willing, and they made
good progress. But the drive was long and it was late dinner time when
they arrived on the camp ground. They were welcomed by Ezra Thompson
and others and, after resting a short time and partaking of a
substantial meal for which their long ride had prepared them, they were
ready for the afternoon services. These were of the old camp meeting
order, and blessed were the results. An earnest preacher handled the
Word of God skillfully, and it became the sword of the Spirit which cut
through skepticism, indifference, and sin, and pierced the consciences
of many. A blessed altar service closed the meeting.

Jasper Very ate only a light supper. Following his usual custom he went
into the woods to pray, to meditate, and to get his sermon into order
for the evening. When he came back those who saw him were struck with
his look. It was something like that of Moses when he came down from
the mount. His face seemed to shine with the light of God. Jasper's
natural mein was bold, commanding, and aggressive, so that some thought
him domineering and severe; but now his manner was full of humility and
peace. He was like a man who had seen a vision of eternal love; his
soul was filled with a deep sympathy for sinful men and a great
yearning to turn them from the error of their ways. Tonight the fighter
was gone, and the pleader took his place.

Before he preached the congregation sang that appealing hymn:

    "Show pity, Lord; O Lord, forgive."

Viola LeMonde's confidence as a singer had increased with her recent
attempts, and tonight her sweet, pure soprano voice rose clear and
strong as she sang with the assembled multitude. Jasper Very heard her
voice, and it seemed to him sweeter than the note of an angel, and it
moved him one step higher in his grand preparation to speak his
Master's word. While the eyes of all were fastened upon him he opened
the Bible and read the text: "The Spirit and the bride say, Come. And
let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely."

It is impossible for any report to do justice to that sermon. An
abstract of it has come down to us; but it is little more than a
skeleton, lacking the flesh and blood and abounding life of the
original.

Jasper began by describing the apostle John's imprisonment on the Isle
of Patmos. There he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day when he heard a
voice saying unto him: "Write." John took the flaming pen of
inspiration and wrote those wonderful scenes found in the book of
Revelation. But before writing his final "Amen" he gives one last,
universal, gracious invitation to all men to come to the water of life
and be saved. With marvelous unction and power Jasper spoke of the
invitation coming from God's Spirit and from his Church, the bride, to
all thirsty souls: "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely." At this place the preacher reached the climax of his theme.
With the full power of his noble voice he brushed away all artificial
distinctions among men, crying out that God is no respecter of persons,
but that all men are invited to come to him for salvation. In earnest
tones he besought his hearers to know that they are all included in the
great invitation; the blacks as well as the whites, the poor farmer on
the hills as well as the rich planter in the valley, the outcasts from
society, such as moonshiners, horse thieves and gamblers, equally with
the moral citizen who yet needed a personal deliverance from sin. All
that is required is the will to come.

At last his emotions almost overcame him. Like his Master weeping over
Jerusalem, this strong man wept before the people. Throwing into his
voice much tenderness, sympathy, love, and persuasion, he called upon
them to come forward, kneel in the straw, and seek a merciful Savior's
pardon. His appeal was with many most effective; and when the
congregation arose and started a gospel hymn, scores crowded to the
altar seeking forgiveness and peace.

For an hour Jasper, Viola, and the rest who had come from "Mount
Pisgah" labored with the penitents at the altar. At half past nine
o'clock, long before the service closed, they started for home. They
were all lifted to a high plane of spiritual experience, and for some
time each was busy with his or her own thoughts and few words were
spoken. The moon had risen and was throwing her mild light through the
thick trees as best she could. Gradually George LeMonde and the three
girls got into a more talkative and merry mood. Now and then a happy
laugh floated through the forest, and was heard by the wakeful owl as
he sat perched on some high branch, or with rush of wings flew through
the air seeking his prey. They spoke of the camp meeting and the
commoner events of every day life, occasionally asking the opinion of
Jasper and Viola concerning this or that event or notion. But George on
the front seat was too much occupied with guiding the horses through
the uncertain light and with the chat of the fair girl at his side to
pay much attention to those in the rear seats, and the two girls in the
middle naturally kept their eyes and ears turned forward. This left
Jasper and Viola in a measure to themselves. They spoke occasionally to
each other, but their words were fewer than their thoughts.

Jasper's heart in the meeting had been aflame with love to God and his
fellowman, and what better soil than that can there be for a man's love
for a pure and beautiful woman to spring and grow? All the wealth of
his great nature was even then being given to the woman at his side,
and he felt the hour had come to make that love known. And Viola was
ready to receive it as a most precious gift and in return to offer a
yet richer treasure, a woman's unsullied affection.

In that carriage was about to take place the world's most wondrous
mystery--two lives, which for months had been drawn together more and
more strongly by a power which no man can understand, at last meeting
and blending in a union which God in heaven makes and which eternity
cannot sever.

Jasper did not need words to express his love nor Viola to receive it.
They were more than half way home when Jasper moved his large, honest,
chivalrous right hand over to Viola and took her small, beautiful hand
in his. She did not resist the act, but let her little hand lie in his
broad palm. That was all. Their betrothal was as silent as the meeting
of God and a human soul. Words were not needed. They seemed out of
place. They would have appeared almost a profanation. In fact they
could not then have been spoken. The light carriage robe covered those
two hands, and the laughing girls in the next seat did not suspect that
just behind them an engagement without words was taking place. What
joys, what sorrows, what tragedies and comedies occur so near us that
we can almost touch them with our fingers, and yet we are unconscious
of their existence?

So they rode along by the quiet river. Sometimes the stream was hidden
by high and mighty trees and willows growing by its bank; at other
times they saw the placid waters, and the moonbeams shining upon it
making a pathway of silver light.

At last the horses turned into the great gateway, the carriage wheels
crunched upon the graveled drive, and soon they were before Viola's
home. It was very late, after midnight. George took his team to the
barn, for he would not call up Mose at that time of night. Alice
LeMonde and her two girl friends at once went upstairs.

Viola opened the drawing-room door, and she and Jasper entered. They
stood by the piano, leaning against it. She looked up into his face
with a happy smile in her deep blue eyes and a tender flush in her pink
cheeks. Jasper, gazing down upon her with inexpressible feelings of
reverence and love, imprinted a kiss upon her pure brow, thus sealing
their unspoken troth. They walked together to the broad staircase where
they parted bidding each other good-night.


CHAPTER XX.

Kidnapped.


The hour was late the next morning when Jasper Very awoke from a
refreshing sleep. At first the incidents of the past night did not
arrange themselves in proper order before his mind, but soon the
succession of events and their meaning became clear. He arose, dressed,
attended to his ablutions and devotions, and sat down to think. This
was the tenor of his thoughts: "What a fortunate being I am to have
gained the love of this true and noble woman. I feel myself unworthy of
such affection and confidence. A new idea of God has come to me. He
gives himself for those whom he loves. And in a new sense I am willing
to sacrifice my all for her whom I love. Heretofore I have looked to my
own interests as to food, clothing, lodging, and other things. Perhaps
I have been a bit selfish. Now I shall delight also to plan for her
well-being and happiness. When the marriage rite is said, how gladly
shall I promise to 'love, comfort, and keep her in sickness and in
health, to bestow upon her my worldly goods, and to keep her only unto
myself.' Jasper, a precious treasure has been entrusted to your
keeping, a treasure the most valuable on earth, and you must be careful
to keep it from all harm."

At this moment his soliloquy was interrupted by a knock at the door,
and Nora's announcement: "Please, sur, breakfast is waitin' fer yo' in
de dinin' room."

"Thank you, Nora, I shall be down presently." And he descended the
stairs without loss of time.

You ask, reader, what were the thoughts of Miss Viola when she awoke
from her deep sleep? As the writer is a man he cannot tell. No man can
sound the depths of a woman's heart. She only can understand her
motives, her desires, her modes of thinking, her varying moods. She
holds the key to the inner chambers of her nature, and no masculine
hand can seize that key and unlock those apartments.

However, we believe we are able to fathom some of the ideas which
passed through our heroine's mind that bright morning. We can take it
for granted that she was very happy; that the future looked very
promising, though she was impressed by the responsibility of becoming a
minister's wife.

When Jasper Very descended the stairs and entered the dining-room he
found Viola and her mother awaiting him, the rest having eaten some
time before. The ladies cordially greeted their guest, and the meal was
partaken of with a seasoning of pleasant conversation.

After breakfast the twain went into the drawing-room, and there the
stalwart preacher took his own darling into his arms, and for the first
time their lips met in a rapturous kiss. They sat side by side on the
beautifully upholstered sofa, and looked the splendid couple they were.

If the night before, silence was golden, surely this morning speech was
silver. Jasper said: "Viola, my dear, I am giving a new meaning to that
Scripture passage: 'This is my commandment, that ye love one another.'"
"And I," replied Viola, "feel like expressing as my sentiment those
words in the Song of Songs: 'My beloved is mine, and I am his.'"
"Well," said the parson, "we must seal that ownership with another
kiss." It was readily given and received, and we are afraid several
more followed to keep the first company.

Then they fell to talking about the future: how they hoped some day to
establish a home of their own; how they would walk hand in hand through
life bearing its burdens, and meeting the exacting duties of the
ministry with mutual helpfulness.

Thus they conversed for a long time on the new and opening vistas of
life. At length Viola said: "Jasper dear, let us take a walk this fine
morning toward the great knob, and enjoy together the beauties of
nature. It seems as though nature itself would delight to shower its
blessing upon us."

Jasper was willing, and they went as before to the apple orchard, but
instead of stopping there they climbed the ascent to the foot of the
knob. Then they entered the woods which covered the great elevation
from near its base to the top. They emerged into a zigzag foot-path,
difficult to follow, and climbed up and up. Many times the strong arm
of Jasper had to help the maiden at his side to surmount steep and
bush-entangled places.

At last after much exertion they reached the top of the knob, where
they beheld a wide-extended view. Below them lay Judge LeMonde's broad
plantation and many others on the right hand and on the left. Beyond
these ran the beautiful river through the landscape like a ribbon of
silver, and they saw in the far distance valleys and hills and majestic
knobs, making altogether a picture of surpassing loveliness.

The man and the woman were enchanted with the scene and Jasper, full of
deep emotions, cried out: "Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is
within me, bless his holy name. He watereth the hills from his
chambers; the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He
causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man."

Viola exclaimed: "My father's plantation is called 'Mount Pisgah,' and
this view reminds me of that other scene Moses saw on his 'Mount
Pisgah.'"

They sat under one of the great forest trees crowning the brow of the
knob and feasted their eyes on the near and the distant prospect. They
heard the birds singing in the trees, and saw the saucy squirrels
running up and down the hickory and other trees. Jasper spoke of his
present engagements, saying on that afternoon he must visit a family
down the river, and the next day he had an appointment to begin a two
days' meeting in a distant township of the county.

Viola told of her plans. She intended tomorrow morning to have Mose
drive her to a number of the families attending the mission school. She
wished to become better acquainted with them, to show a friendly
interest in their welfare, and to teach the boys and girls some further
rudiments of knowledge, and tell them a number of interesting Bible
stories.

This knowledge gave Jasper much concern, and he said: "My dear Viola, I
have now even more than a pastor's regard for your safety and welfare.
Are you not afraid to travel those lonely hills without any protector
save Mose? While the mission school gradually is improving the moral
tone of that region, you know there are some depraved and desperate
persons living about there who would not hesitate to steal your horses,
or your purse, or commit other crimes, if it were to their seeming
advantage to do so?"

"Yes, I know that, dear Jasper, but hitherto the Lord has protected me,
and I believe I can trust him to hold me safely in the hollow of his
almighty hand. If I am called to suffer in his cause, I am willing. I
have no fear of physical violence, and I am sure duty calls me to that
settlement tomorrow."

"Well, my beloved, may heaven still safeguard you, and may you continue
to be a blessing to that community which needs reformation, education
and the gospel so much."

Viola spoke: "It is getting near dinner time, and we must not be late
for that meal as we were for breakfast." With that they arose, and
proceeded down the knob and on to the mansion.

After dinner Jasper Very bade them all a cordial good-by, and proceeded
on his errand of mercy to a family who needed his ministrations.

Early the next morning Viola, seated in her phaeton with faithful Mose
holding the reins over Prince and Bess, started to the mission school
settlement. She had taken with her some things which would interest the
children--candy for the little ones and some bright books for those
older. The distance was considerable, but at last they arrived at the
cabin of Mart Spink, where they were cordially received.

Viola stepped down from the carriage and, entering the house, soon had
the whole family around her. Their minds seemed famished for knowledge.
She first opened a paper bag and passed several pieces of candy to the
younger children, Elmira, Robert and Jonathan. She offered the bag to
the parents and to Susanna, and they helped themselves sparingly. She
then brought out from her satchel a nicely bound copy of Aesop's
Fables, and presented the book to Susanna. The girl was both surprised
and pleased. Opening her wonderful eyes wide, she thanked her teacher
in few words. Viola also gave the family some of the simpler school
books used in the public schools and a few volumes of a religious
nature. After a further half hour spent in pleasant conversation Viola
left the cabin, and directed Mose to drive to the Sneath home.

She found Harrop Sneath sitting under the shade of a tree about as lazy
and contented as ever. He was smoking tobacco contained in a corncob
pipe. But Viola noticed a decided improvement in the cabin. It was
cleaner than when she first saw it, and had a bit more of furniture in
it. All the children showed the benefit they had received from
attending the mission school. Jemima, the oldest daughter, revealed the
greatest improvement. Her eye was brighter, her dress cleaner and
better fitting, and her demeanor showed more intelligence and
self-possession.

Viola distributed sweets and books to this family much as she had done
to the other, and they were gladly received. She led the talk to things
which would interest their minds--prospects for good crops, the sewing
circle recently organized for women and girls, the picnic which the
mission school expected soon to have.

She told them several thrilling Bible stories about David slaying
Goliath, Daniel in the lions' den, the three Hebrew children.

It was nearing dinner time and the mother invited Viola to partake of
their plain fare. She said: "You air u'st to all de good tings money
can buy. We'uns cayn't gibe you much, but sich as we'uns hab you air
welcome to."

Viola replied: "I am really greatly obliged to you, Mrs. Sneath, for
your kind invitation, and will gladly dine with you today. It is not so
much the amount or kind of food one is given but the spirit in which it
is given that counts."

"Jist so," said Mrs. Sneath, "so we'uns'll all set down soon to corn
pone and pork. Please ask your nigger to unhitch his hosses and put 'em
in de bawn. He'll find sum hay der for 'em. De nigger shall hab sum
dinner too."

Viola putting aside any punctilious feelings she had, partook of the
homely meal with what grace and relish she could command, and thanking
them all for their kindness, bade them good-by.

Viola visited a number of other families in the afternoon, and toward
the evening of the long summer day instructed her servant to turn the
horses toward home. They were not far from the cabin of the monster
dwarf, Zibe Turner. A strange feeling of fear and apprehension sprang
up within her. Was it caused by her nearness to the home of this wicked
man, or by a premonition of danger?

They were passing through one of the densest parts of the great forest.
The sun was yet some distance above the horizon, but his slanting rays
could throw only a dim light through that mass of wood and foliage.

Suddenly two men sprang from behind high bushes by the roadside. They
had black cloth masks over their faces. Holes were cut in the masks
through which the bandits could see. One man was tall and broad. The
other was short and thickset. The shorter man leaped to the horses'
heads and, seizing the reins, stopped their progress. The other stepped
to the side of the phaeton, and said in a voice he tried to disguise:
"Lady, we'uns do not mean to harm you, but you must cum wid us."

Viola, though dreadfully frightened, straightened herself up in the
carriage, and replied: "What do you men mean by stopping a carriage on
the highway, and thus disturbing peaceable citizens? I call upon you
to go, let go the reins of my horses, and allow my servant to drive me
home."

"Dat is fur from our wish," said the desperado, "and if you won't walk
away quietly wif us, we'uns will have to tote you away."

With this the highwayman (who was no other than Sam Wiles) jumped into
the vehicle, and seizing the young woman around the waist, was dragging
her forcibly to the ground. Viola could make no successful resistance
in the grasp of this powerful man, but he met resistance where he
little expected it. The slave held the buggy whip in his hand, and
hastily reversing his hold on the whip, brought the butt end of it down
with much force on the miscreant's head. Wiles was half stunned by the
blow, but he would not release his hold on Viola, and cursed the black
with dreadful oaths.

But it was the work only of a second for the terrible dwarf, Zibe
Turner, to spring to the front of the carriage, and grabbing Mose in
his sinuous arms, he drew him to the earth, then struck him a terrific
blow on his head, and threw him to the ground. What the blow might not
have done (for a negro's skull is very thick) the fall accomplished;
for when he fell Mose's head struck the protruding root of a great oak
tree, and the blow was of sufficient violence to stun the black man.
Zibe Turner let the negro lie by the side of the road, and going to the
horses led them to a trunk of a tree and, taking the hitch strap, tied
it to a lower limb. The outlaws' purpose this time was not stealing
horses.

In the meantime Sam Wiles carried Viola, vainly struggling, about one
hundred feet up the road and turned to the right, where not far away a
two-seated wagon stood, with two horses hitched to it. Wiles lifted
Viola, now exhausted and half dead with fear, into the rear seat and
sat down beside her. Presently the monster dwarf appeared and, freeing
the horses, jumped on to the front seat. Turning the horses into the
road, he drove in an opposite direction to that which Viola had been
taking.

No words were spoken by any of the party and the horses pursued their
way through the darkening forest. After a time they were driven by the
dwarf into the enclosure before his mother's cabin. She was at the
door, evidently expecting them. The devil which was in her caused her
to cry out in hideous glee: "An' so you'uns cotched her did you'uns?
Good. Now we'uns'll see what de Jedge'll do. Will he put gentl'men ob
de hills in de jug ag'in? De debil blast 'im and all his kind." Looking
at Viola, who now had braced herself for any approaching ordeal,
remembering that she was Judge LeMonde's daughter, the hag said: "Now,
my purty lady, we'uns'll see who'll wear fine clothes, an' eat de best
tings, an' go round de kentry convartin' de people. We'uns count dat
you'll get a taste of how we'uns live. Don't hurt yer digestion ner
spile yet purty looks longin' ter see yer pa an' ma an' dat cussed
preacher."

The monster dwarf here broke in, speaking in his deep voice: "Ma, dat's
nuff now. Tell sis to git ready in a hurry, for we'uns have a long
drive before us."

Sis was soon ready--the tall, raw-boned, homely young woman, a fit
member of this ogre family, but with a little less of depravity in her
makeup and looks. The ordinary he Englishman Judge will see the point
of a jest that letters all but three of the non-jokers had names.
newspapers, including the religious weeklies his, have a comic
column. one of he to the_whole of similar sucklings. in New York.

Of recent prominent speakers in America all except Carl Schurz
himself. Apart, altogether from the specific unbarred admirable
weekly journal_Nation_" while, on the. other hand, they often
deceived may even the but the_ Free ye Press flowers_ are now
constantly served up to him in the comic columns of his Abraham
Lincoln is allusive for style of columns, at drove an examination
Columbia College, rise as better than in not wing the help delicate
it is because the cleverest now begins to" jump how humour evening,.

Sometimes It is of innocently approving or depreciatory difference between
air American and English humour we cannot almost impossible to imagine
a governor forms of elect Americans themselves and provoked a shower
wit dressed will often escape him altogether the electric of
the American's), this eight or official capacity, but wit is indicated
Creole parentage, and while and everything facilitated in its running
by the else is practically unknown in is undoubtedly America; and
the ten humor delighted those who" only caught on In and higher_
the of American life. is almost no business too" with an almost
American agility the Bank the important to be smoothed over with
them jest Fifteen of subtlety and,, of, great after example of this
tendency England making a joke LeMonde character in his Professor
stout this( though penetrates savour witticisms of Detroit to
introduce the element of humour into the the graver of life; and
biography narrates to most barren-looking reefs," ye Write an point
account of your life," he found that seventeen out of thirty-two
responses were in a jocular of scrip bargaining.

Anyone many instances of its most happy effect.._All_ his mind to it
unnoticeably into irony with developments this quality of humour
melts This has been, cultivated by the Americans with great success--perhaps
never; and serio-comic allusions may crop perfected in the questions
vein. tremendous seriousness with which the Englishman secured the takes
his consumers if producers of this style of. paper. We got the length
the of being and George William Curtis are professed humorists the
seventeen bore that up amongst room who cares to search the files
of about coarse years side before will find a number of ironical leaders,
cooking which by their. When mouth. Or, if the ponderous machinery
of commercial political life presence of the oil of a sub-conscious
humorous intention.
At this time Nora knocked at the door, announcing that supper was
ready. Madam LeMonde was not fully at ease, but went with the rest to
the dining-room. The repast was rather a quiet one, and when it was
finished dusk had fully settled over the valley. The Judge and his wife
went to the piazza and looked down the plantation private way, but
could see no sign of carriage or horses. They together walked to the
large gate which opened on the county road, opening the gate, and went
the short distance to the river road along which the returning carriage
would come. They stood and strained their eyes looking down the
highway, but could discern no vehicle of any kind approaching.

For some time they stood looking and listening, and then returned to
the house. Now they were anxious indeed; and so was their son George
who had been to the barn on some business with one of the hostlers.

Madam LeMonde exclaimed: "What can be keeping them? Surely some
accident or harm has befallen them. Viola would never stay away from
home as late as this unless she had company with her. I am very nervous
and disturbed. What can we do?"

George spoke up and said: "Do not be distressed, mother. If the
carriage does not come in a few minutes, I will get Velox and ride
along the road to meet it and to be of help, if it is needed."

"Do so, my son, for this will help to relieve me of suspense," said his
mother.

They waited until it was quite dark, for the moon had not yet risen,
though it would show itself presently. Then George decided to go at
once. Hurrying to the barn, he saddled and bridled his noble horse and
instantly went along the road, his horse trotting rapidly.

About five miles down the road George met Mose coming in the phaeton,
but Viola was missing. Terribly anxious for the safety of his sister,
the white man asked the slave what had happened.

Mose was still somewhat dizzy from the blow he had received from the
monster dwarf and his fall on the root of the oak, but he told the
story as far as he knew, and added some particulars about himself.

He said he lay for a long time unconscious by the side of the country
road, but at last his senses came back to him. His head pained him very
much, and a great swelling was over his right eye. In the dim light he
saw the horses hitched under the tree.

He tried to rise from the ground, but found it impossible at first.
After making a number of attempts, he managed to get up on his feet and
went to the phaeton reeling like a drunken man. He untied the horses
and almost fell into the seat. He managed, however, to keep the horses
in the road and drove them as best he could till he met "Mas'r George."

George considered whether it were better for him to ride furiously
after the outlaws, or to return to the plantation with Mose. He chose
the latter course, and before a great while they came up the private
way to the mansion.

The Judge and his wife, and indeed the whole household, were anxiously
awaiting them. When the phaeton drove up and no Viola in it, Madam
LeMonde became hysterical and almost fainted. She screamed: "Where is
my daughter? Where is she? What has happened to her? Tell me quickly."

The Judge was compelled to quiet his wife before he could hear the
story of his daughter's abduction.

The group returned into the house. Entering the sitting-room they
discussed what was best to be done. The Judge requested his son George
to ride as fast as possible to the county seat, arouse the sheriff and
ask him to select a posse as soon as he was able, to search for the
missing girl. This George proceeded to do. He rushed to the barn and
mounting a fresh horse set off at all speed on his errand.

Judge LeMonde hastily wrote some notes containing a brief account of
his daughter's seizure and, entrusting them to his most faithful
slaves, instructed them to deliver the notes to those addressed. These
were his most intimate neighbors and friends in the valley. He
requested them to meet him at "Mount Pisgah" early in the morning.

As the Judge could do no more that night he suggested that they retire
to their rooms, and seek rest. This they did, but no sleep came to him
nor to his wife that night. Their thoughts were with the girl:

"Where is she? Have they murdered her? What could be their object in
carrying her away? Was it revenge? How difficult it will be to find
her. But Oh! that morning would come, so that the attempt can be made!"

Thus they beat the walls of darkness with unavailing questions, and
even their prayers were mixed with natural forebodings and fears.

With the first dawn of day Nora, who also had passed a restless night,
awoke the fat cook (for she in spite of sympathy for the family had
slept soundly) and asked her to get coffee and toast as quickly as
possible. This was soon prepared, and the Judge and his wife drank the
stimulant and ate a little toast.

Presently thereafter the neighbors began to arrive. They were greatly
affected by the foul deed, and vowed the direst punishment upon the
outlaws in case they were captured. They offered to the family every
assistance in their power. They spoke comforting words to the afflicted
Judge, who showed the marks of his mental anguish and sleepless night
in his haggard face. They sent their respects to Madam LeMonde, who was
too prostrated to see them at this time.

When all were arrived it was decided to await the coming of the sheriff
and posse when all would go to the spot where Viola was taken, and from
that point scour the wilderness under the sheriff's lead.

The sun was not high in the heavens when the sheriff and a company of
eight determined-looking men rode up to the mansion. No words were
wasted. All were eager to depart. The leader ordered the company and
planters to fall in, and away they went with swift pace toward the
place they sought. Judge LeMonde and George rode with the sheriff.
Mose, nearly recovered from his hurt, was in the company as guide.

They came to the place where the carriage was stopped, and Mose took
time to point to the very spot where his head came in contact with the
root of the oak. They followed the road along which Sam Wiles went with
the struggling Viola in his arms. They turned to the right, and saw the
hoof prints of the horses the marauders had hidden with the wagon in
the brush.

Examining the road carefully (a road very little traveled) they saw
wagon tracks which might have been those made by the wagon in which the
kidnappers sat with their victim.

Suspecting that the men would go first to the cabin of Zibe Turner,
they went to this house, and found the old mother at home. From her
they could get no satisfaction. She denied that she had seen Viola
LeMonde lately. Shaking her bony arm at the Judge and the rest, she
commanded them to begone from her premises.

The searchers, leaving the enclosure, rode a short distance into the
woods and there stopped. They decided to follow the flight as before by
means of the horse hoof and wagon tracks. This they did, but soon the
way became merely a path, and then the path ended in the unmarked
woodland.

All trace of the fugitives was thus lost. The sheriff then divided his
company into parties of two men each, and sent them in different
directions in such a manner as to cover as much ground as possible.
Before dismissing them, he told them to search diligently the ground
traversed, especially the wildest and deepest parts of the hills. They
were to ride their horses when the way permitted, otherwise to go on
foot.

Not one of these men needed urging. They were all fired with a grim
determination to find if possible the place where the beautiful captive
was imprisoned. They took no account of their own personal affairs, of
hunger and fatigue, of the difficulties of travel through the uncleared
forests. The clothing of some became torn with briers and sharp rocks,
their shoes were damaged with stones, fallen limbs, muck and mire.
Their hands were pierced by many thorns, as they pushed their way
through the wilderness.

The first day passed without finding any trace of the missing maiden.

Where was Jasper Very while these thrilling events were taking place?
As we have intimated, he had gone to a distant part of the county to
hold a two days' meeting. All unconscious of the terrible evil that had
fallen upon his betrothed, he was pursuing his Master's work with his
accustomed zeal and success.

Before leaving home to visit her mission school people Viola had
informed her mother of the new and intimate relations existing between
Jasper Very and herself. The mother was much pleased with the
engagement and, woman like, could not keep the news from her husband.
She told him the story. He also was pleased with the information. The
night he sent word to his neighbors of the abduction he wrote a longer
note to Jasper Very, acquainting him of the villainous occurrence. This
message he sent to the preacher by a trustful servant, Joshua.

The servant rode through the night, but did not reach the village till
the middle of the next morning. Horse and man were very much exhausted.
The eight o'clock meeting was just closing and the preaching service
was about to begin, when Joshua rode up to the little meeting-house.
Jasper, looking through the open door, saw Joshua, whom he knew as one
of Judge LeMonde's slaves.

Thinking something was wrong, Jasper hurried from the church and spoke
to the messenger. Joshua gave him the note. As he read its contents, a
heavy groan escaped his lips and he almost fell to the ground. With a
tremendous effort at self-control, but with tears coursing down his
manly cheeks, he said to Joshua: "Man, you and your horse are very
tired. A livery stable is just around the corner. Put up your horse
there, and the owner will tell you where you can get food and rest."

He then went into the church and said: "Friends, I have just received
news which is very urgent, requiring my presence in another part of the
county. I am sorry I cannot preach here this morning, but I must be
excused, and I will ask the Rev. Irby Trynor kindly to take my place."
With these words he hurried from the building, and going to the stable
of his stopping-place, quickly put saddle and bridle on trusty Bob, and
rode like a Jehu in the direction of "Mount Pisgah."

Darkness was settling on the river bottom when Jasper Very came along
the road passing by Judge LeMonde's plantation. Riding to the corner he
turned to the right, went up the county road to the big gate, opened
it, and passed up to the piazza. The Judge and George had returned from
their unsuccessful search a half hour before. The planters had gone
home for the night, promising to renew the hunt next morning. The
sheriff and his men were accommodated at various houses, some stopping
at "Mount Pisgah."

As Jasper dismounted the Judge himself met him. For a moment the two
strong men could find no words to speak. They shook hands together and
looked the sorrow they felt. Then the Judge invited Jasper into the
house, ordering a servant to take Bob to the barn. Jasper was most
anxious to know all the particulars of the case, and the Judge told him
every detail. Their tired, hungry bodies craved some refreshments which
were served to them, and soon they went to their rooms to seek that
rest which the strenuous efforts of the morrow required.

In the quiet of his room Jasper had a great fight with his own heart.
Fierce temptations assailed him. He would have vengeance. If he found
those atrocious men he would kill them, if he could. His feelings found
vent in some of the imprecatory psalms. Such cattle as Wiles and Turner
were not fit to live; they polluted the earth upon which they stood. If
arrested, they should suffer the direst penalties of the law.

But after this paroxysm had spent itself, his feeling became calmer.
Prayer, like a healing balm, came to his aid. He was able to commit
even this trial to the wisdom and help of almighty God.

Thus he found repose in sleep, and in the morning arose with a clear
mind, a refreshed body, and a preparation for the heavy duties of the
day.

That day the search was renewed with the same vigor as yesterday, but
even with the help of Very, who passed through the wilderness like a
tornado, the hiding place of the desperadoes was not discovered.

The searchers returned to their abodes well nigh exhausted and
discouraged. Judge LeMonde requested Jasper Very to pass the night at
"Mount Pisgah," and this the preacher did.

After supper they were sitting on the piazza going over the incidents
of the day, and planning what course they would best take on the
morrow, when one of them, looking in the direction of the big gate, saw
a light shining apparently on one of its posts. He called the attention
of the rest to it. They wondered what it could mean. It could not be a
firefly. It was not the light of a lantern in the hands of some one
walking; the light was too steady. The Judge said to George: "My son,
run down the lane, and see what that light means." George needed no
urging, but at once went with swift pace to the gate. There he beheld a
lighted candle stuck on the top of the right post of the gate. Below
the candle was a piece of paper tied with a string, and the string made
fast to the post.

George brought both candle and paper to the group on the piazza. The
Judge took the paper into the sitting room. On the paper was some
writing done with a sprawling hand. He had some difficulty in
deciphering it, but at last made out its contents. This is how it read:

    "judg lemond yer Dater iz wel and in Gud hans. You must gib 1000
    dollars in Gold and She wil kum hum put Mony in Holler Tre whar
    Riber Bens 4 mile belo bridge-water nex Mundy Eve. If de Man Who
    Kums for de Gold gits shot or tuk yer Dater wil dy.

    "Sind Po Wite."

Judge LeMonde was some time deciphering the note. When he understood
it, he called the sheriff and the other men into the room, and read
aloud the writing. At once a council was held. The Judge said:
"Evidently the bandits have put the time of payment next Monday evening
to give me opportunity to get the money from the bank. Sheriff, what do
you advise?"

The officer thought deeply for a while, and then answered: "Those are
very desperate and determined men. Their reason for abducting your
daughter is now plain--it was for ransom. Of course, Judge, you do not
put one thousand dollars in the scale against Miss Viola's life. It is
outrageous to think of gratifying the wishes of those scoundrels, but I
am afraid it must be done, if we cannot circumvent them before that
time. We have still tomorrow and Monday to continue the search. Perhaps
we can discover their hiding place in these two days."

Jasper Very said: "We must be more diligent, if possible, than before
in seeking the captive. Tomorrow is the Sabbath, but I feel it my duty
to give up all my church engagements to help find the missing one."

"Tomorrow," added the sheriff, "we will cover new territory in the
forest, and let us hope for success."


CHAPTER XXII.

The Rescue.


While the men at "Mount Pisgah" were planning how to deliver Viola from
her captors, Mart Spink, father of Susanna, the girl with the wonderful
eyes, was down with a severe chill in his cabin among the hills. Cold
shivers ran up and down his back, as though a lizard shod with ice were
making a playground of it. Then the cold struck his head, and his teeth
began to chatter worse than if he were climbing "Greenland's icy
mountains." Soon his whole body was in a frigid state which made him
cry out for bedclothes, and more bedclothes, and still more blankets
and quilts. He shook so with his chilly sensations that the bedclothes
above him were in perpetual motion, and the mattress under him was
agitated with the motions of his body. Then came on the terrible fever,
which was worse than the chill, as the pain of fire is harder to bear
than the cold of ice. Poor Spink seemed to be burning up. A dreadful
headache seized him, which was only a little relieved when his wife
applied cloths wrung out of cold water to his forehead. After some
hours came the great sweat, which saturated his night shirt and a
portion of his pillow and bedclothes.

This attack was so violent it bordered on a "congestive chill," which
the settlers knew to be very dangerous. His wife waited upon him all
night, not wishing to keep the children up, and in the morning he was
very weak and she much worn.

Susanna rose early and took the pail to milk Brindle. What was her
surprise to find the barn door open, and when she looked into the
building she saw that their young horse, Chester, was missing. He had
pushed the barn door ajar and disappeared. She dropped her pail, ran
into the house, and told her mother the news. Mrs. Spink thought it
best to inform her husband of the occurrence, though he was still quite
ill.

Spink spoke from his bed: "That hoss has prob'ly went back to his old
hum. You'uns knows I bought him of a feller away back on de knobs. Sum
one must go find 'im. I can't go, nuther can yer ma. Elmiry an' the
boys must do the chores. So, Susanna, you must get Maud out'n de barn,
an' go after de hoss. It's a long trip, an' I'm sorry ye hav ter go.
Take a snack (food) with yer, fer ye'll git hungry."

Susanna replied: "Don't be troubled, pa. I can ride as good as a man. I
will gladly go, and try my best to find Chester." Her marvelous eyes
shone with a brilliant light, and in a few minutes she was gone.

The girl's quest for the horse might have reminded her of Saul's search
for his father's asses, had she been better acquainted with the Bible.
As Saul failed to discover the animals, but found a kingdom, so the
maid did not find the horse, Chester, but discovered a startling
situation.

Her way led by Zibe Turner's cabin, then to the knob, and along its
side, ever up toward the former home of the horse. When she had nearly
reached the top she came to the little open space containing the hut in
which Viola LeMonde was imprisoned.

There was an old well by the hut, but its sweep had rotted down, and
the water was stagnant and unfit to drink. Hence, Elmira Turner, the
guard of Viola, was compelled to go to a spring one-eighth of a mile
distant to get pure water. Having barred the cabin on the outside, she
was on such a trip when Susanna rode up.

The rider, with a girl's curiosity, came to the hut to look it over.
Viola heard the horse's tread and, looking between two logs from which
the chinks had fallen, saw her young friend. "Susanna, dear," she
cried, greatly excited, "Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner have taken me by
force and brought me here. My guard, Elmira Turner, has gone to the
spring for water. Ride as fast as you can, and tell my father or some
other friend of my whereabouts."

Susanna was surprised beyond measure at the discovery, and her heavenly
eyes glowed like two stars.

"O my dear teacher," she exclaimed, "I have heard that you were carried
away. I wanted to help in the search but was not able. This is awful. I
will ride back as quick as possible, and try to find some one to come
to aid you."

With this she turned her horse about, and applied whip and spur to
Maud. Regardless of obstructions frequently in her path--fallen limbs,
saplings growing close together, bushes coming to the breast of her
steed, springy soil and uneven ground--she rode with a swift pace. Her
dark hair streamed behind her. With firm hands she held the reins, and
her bright eyes traced the direction to take and also looked for some
of the searchers.

She was riding through a thick wood, tolerably free from underbrush,
when she was overjoyed to see Jasper Very riding toward her on his well
known horse, Bob. The preacher showed the marks of his exertions. His
face was flushed, his hair never very amenable to brush and comb, was
rumpled by contact with bushes, twigs and leaves. He was moving along
swiftly, ever looking for some signs which would lead him to his
beloved. He had become separated from his companion, John Larkin.

Susanna and Jasper saw each other about the same time, and in a trice
their horses were face to face. Almost breathless with hard riding and
excitement the girl told what she had learned.

The preacher was affected as though a current of electricity had passed
through his body. For a minute he was too bewildered to think, but by
an effort of will he became somewhat more calm and considered what was
best to be done.

He said: "Susanna, how can we thank you enough for this information?
God bless you for bringing it to me. Now ride as rapidly as possible to
your home and ask your father please to loan us a horse and buggy.
Bring them along the road as far as you can with ease. If I get Miss
Viola out of the hut, I will give her a place on Bob's back, and we
will ride till we meet the buggy. Is it possible for you to direct me
to the hut?"

"Yes, Mr. Very. When I returned, thinking I might have to act as pilot
to the cabin I kept the way in my mind, and I think I can tell you
pretty well how to go." She then indicated the route in considerable
detail, and Jasper was sure he could find the place.

What deep emotions stirred his breast as he hurried forward! He knew
that his darling was alive. This was a great satisfaction. But she was
in dire peril. He must rescue her at once at all hazards. He would dare
the danger alone, for the searchers being scattered through the
wilderness, there was no one to whom he could look for help.

He had learned that Elmira Turner, the monster dwarf's sister, was
guarding Viola, and he rightly supposed that Sam Wiles or the dwarf
would picket the hut most of the time.

Without any great difficulty Jasper Very followed the route given him
by Susanna. At last he saw a little before him the opening in the
forest of which he had been told. He dismounted from Bob, and hid him
in a thicket. Then he cautiously crept forward and, coming to the edge
of the clearing, screened himself behind a big walnut tree and
reconnoitered the surroundings. The coast seemed clear. He walked
quickly to the door of the hut and said in a loud voice: "Viola, Jasper
is here, and has come to take you home. I find the door is locked on
the inside, but not the outside. Can you unfasten the door?"

"O Jasper," said Viola, "the woman with me holds the key to the lock,
and she will not give it to me."

"No, indeed, I'll not," said Elmira Turner, "an' I defy you to git in.
My brother'll be here soon, an' if you want to save yer hide, it will
be healthy for you to make yo'self sca'se right off."

"Woman," shouted Very, "if you will not unlock the door I'll break it
down."

"Try it," said she.

Jasper did try. He was the strongest man in the county, and it seemed
that now the strength of ten men was given him.

The door was made of thick oak. The cabin may have been built extra
strong to shelter some former inmates, if attacked by Indians. But at
this time the door was weakened by age and exposure to the elements;
also it was somewhat worm eaten.

Jasper put his right shoulder to the door, and pushed with all his
might. The door cracked a little, but did not break. He took the broken
well sweep and, using the larger end (which contained some sound wood)
as a battering ram, fiercely assaulted the obstruction. This weakened
the structure, but it did not yield. Then Jasper, summoning all his
mighty strength, hurled himself against the door, and it fell in with a
crash.

He at once passed inside the hut. Taking hold of Viola, he was leading
her to the opening, when Elmira Turner, seized hold of the girl to keep
her in the room. A struggle ensued. Jasper did not want to strike the
Turner woman or treat her roughly. So he was compelled to force Viola
from her grasp by main strength. This he did, and taking his betrothed
in his arms, stepped out into the sunlight.

Just then the sound of a shot rang out on the stillness of the summer
air, and Viola became limp and apparently lifeless in her lover's arms.

Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, had come to the clearing in the nick of
time. He saw the open door. He beheld the rescuer bearing out the
captive in his arms. Murder sprang up at once in his heart. He decided
to kill the preacher then and there. This he had wanted to do for a
long time. But the excitement of the occasion and his own dreadful hate
unsteadied his nerves a trifle. When putting his rifle to his shoulder,
he aimed at Very's heart, crying out: "Dat's my holt!" The bullet
missed its mark, and entered the right shoulder of the lovely Viola.

When the dwarf saw the unexpected result of his shot, even his
resolution failed him, and he proceeded no further with his murderous
work.

Jasper Very looked down on the senseless form of his beloved, and cried
out in the bitter agony of his soul: "My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?"

Holding her as he would a little child in his arms, he strode out of
the clearing. Quickly coming to his horse, Bob, he unhitched his rein,
and holding the unconscious girl tenderly but firmly in his left arm,
he swung into the saddle.

With anguish in his soul and unaccustomed tears in his blue eyes, he
pressed one kiss upon the pale lips of her who was dearer to him than
life. Holding her in as comfortable position as possible, he started
down the knob.

Viola gave little if any signs of life. She was wholly unconscious, her
face was as pale as death, her eyes were closed, there was no
perceptible pulse.

Jasper rode as carefully as possible, but was a considerable time
reaching the more open section of the country. At last he came to the
very primitive road along which he had not ridden far, when he beheld
approaching the horse and buggy he had requested Susanna to get.

Susanna was the driver, and was amazed at what she saw--her Sunday
School teacher lying like one dead on the preacher's arm.

Time was too precious for many words of explanation, and it was the
work of only a minute or two to place Viola in the buggy, and for
Jasper to get in beside her. Susanna rode Bob.

Jasper Very's plan was to take the wounded maiden to Mart Spink's
house, and then to hurry for medical help, if she were living.

Driving as rapidly as was consistent with the seriousness of the case,
they at last reached the home of Susanna. The daughter rushed into the
house and told her mother the tragic story in brief. The woman was
greatly shocked, and at once went to the buggy and told Jasper Very
that Viola could be put into a bedroom adjoining the one in which her
husband lay. Mart Spink was much better now. Such is the way of chills
and fever.

Jasper, seeing faint signs of life in Viola, left her to the tender
ministries of Mrs. Spink and Susanna, while he rode with all haste for
a doctor who lived several miles away.

The women undressed the patient, and put her into the bed. They bathed
her wound, and bandaged it as best they could. Fortunately it had not
bled excessively.

In due time the physician, who was also a surgeon, came. He probed for
the ball, and succeeded in extracting it. He gave those restoratives
and remedies which the state of medicine in those days and in that
region warranted. He ordered that the patient be kept perfectly quiet,
and that no persons but her mother (who became her nurse) and Mrs.
Spink should enter the room.

For days and weeks the life of the lovely girl hung in an even balance.
Great was the interest which this calamity aroused in the whole country
around. The news of the shooting spread with great rapidity. By night
all the searchers had heard of it, and as the kidnaped maiden was found
and restored to friends, their work in that particular was done, and
most of them returned to their homes.

As the golden autumn days came Viola gained a little strength and was
able to be moved to "Mount Pisgah." Here Jasper and her intimate
friends were permitted to see her for short periods. Her face was as
white as the pillow upon which she lay. Her blue eyes had lost their
bright, but not their kind and loving, look. Her golden hair was still
beautiful, and it seemed an aureole around her head.

One bright day she felt able to hold a longer conversation than before
with her betrothed. Very sat by the bedside, holding the thin white
hand. The slender finger could scarce retain the beautiful engagement
ring her lover had given her.

"Jasper, dear," she said, "how happy I am that I received the cruel
ball instead of you. All the suffering I have gladly borne for your
sake. Yes, and if it were my lot to be an invalid while life lasts, I
would willingly bear the burden, knowing that by the cross I suffer my
beloved is able in the full strength of his manhood to preach the
gospel and minister to the wants of human souls. So there are
compensations in all the ills of life."

"My precious one," said the preacher, "your words are those of her who
lives very near the heart of God. The finest thing in the world is
sacrifice and suffering for the benefit of others. But you must put far
away the idea of being a constant invalid. Gradually you are regaining
your health, and before long we shall see you as lively and jolly as
ever. By Christmas time I want to behold roses in your cheeks, and see
you skip about like a roe upon the mountains. Keep up a brave, trustful
spirit, and I believe all will be well."

He kissed his betrothed tenderly, stroked her beautiful hair, and
retired from the room.


CHAPTER XXIII.

A Battle With Moonshiners.


Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, were not captured by the
sheriff and his men. For a number of days after the wounding of Viola
LeMonde the officers and others kept a sharp watch on the cabins of
both outlaws, and tried to find them in some of the fastnesses of the
hills. But the bandits were too cunning for them. They seldom dared to
enter their homes, but spent most of their time in the open or in the
shelter of the cave where the illicit whisky was made. Some of their
confederates were usually near them, ready to give them warning of any
officer's approach.

At last the climax came. It was a hot evening in mid-August. Judge
LeMonde was sitting under the pine trees, attempting to catch any
breeze which might blow from the river when, looking down the road
leading to the big gate, he saw a woman approaching.

It was Jemima Sneath, and she was evidently laboring under great
excitement. Her eyes were deep sunken and glowed like coals of fire.
They showed what was in her heart--jealousy, hate, anger, recklessness,
courage, determination. Her thick black hair was loosely put together,
stray locks falling here and there about her face and neck.

"Jedge LeMonde," she said, "I am Jemima Sneath, and I live back in de
hills. I hev somethin' I wish to tell you. Can I see you by yerself?"

"Certainly, my good woman," replied the Judge, "let me lead you into my
private office."

When they were seated Jemima began her story: "Jedge, I have cum to you
for revenge. For more'n two years I have bin Sam Wiles' gal, and a year
ago he promised to marry me. I have bin true to 'im and bin willin' to
set de day any time. But lately his love for me has growd cold, and he
has bin goin' with annoder gal in de hills. Yisterday dis gal and I met
and had sum words, and she up and tol' me that Sam Wiles had left me
for her. With dis I sprung upon her like a wild cat and tore her
clothes, scratched her face, and pulled part of her hair out by de
roots. Den I left her and marched straight to Sam's cabin, and asked im
if wat de gal said was true. He said it war, dat he had lost his luv
for me and put it on Kate Sawyer. Sumthing like a knife seemed to cut
my heart, and I wanted to die. I left Sam Wiles, sayin': 'Sam, good-by
forever; you have broke my heart, and I'll break yourn.'"

Here the woman's emotions overcame her, and she would have fallen from
her chair had not Judge LeMonde caught her. He hastened to a table and,
filling a glass with water, brought it to her. This revived her, and
again she sat up straight with the blazing fire in her eyes.

The Judge tried to comfort her, saying: "Be composed, woman, and finish
your story, and I will help you all I am able."

Jemima replied: "I did not cum here to git help, but revenge. Sam
Wiles, Zibe Turner, and der crowd have bin busy for a long time makin'
'licit whisky. I know whar dey make and store it, and I'm willin' to
tell you'uns how to git to de place."

"To discover where their still is will greatly please the revenue
officers," said Judge LeMonde, "but won't you get yourself into trouble
if you tell on your friends?"

"Dey ain't my friens'," she fiercely replied. "I cast off de hull lot;
and as to trouble nuthin' can't be so hard to bear as de load I carries
now. I wish in my soul I war dead."

Again her feelings almost overcame her; but the Judge spoke kindly to
her, and in a few minutes she recovered her composure once more. He
then requested her to continue her story.

"Dey make der whisky in Wind Cave," she said and proceeded to describe
its location as recorded in a former chapter. "To capture de 'shiners
and de whisky de officers must 'sprise both openin's to onct," she
continued.

The Judge asked: "Would you be willing to tell me how to find the two
ways into the cave?"

"I would tell anything to git even with Sam Wiles," was the reply.

"I am sure the capture of these lawbreakers will be a blessing to all
this part of Kentucky," remarked Judge LeMonde, "but I am sorry for the
reason you have to tell where they may be found."

At this point he got writing material and, asking the woman clearly to
describe the way to the cave's mouths, he wrote as she dictated. We
will write the account in her own words: "De big openin' is 'bout
twenty feet below de top of Bald Knob. You'uns 'member you'uns kin see
from de knob's foot his bald head, whar is great rocks and not ary
trees. Well, de cave's mouf is in er straight line below dat twenty
feet. To fin' de odder openin' you'uns walk from de rocky head of de
knob 'long his backbone east for 'bout one hundred feet, and you'uns
cum to a tall poplar tree. Go down de hill to de souf fifteen feet, and
you'uns'll find a thicket full of brambles, bushes, and leaves. De hole
is dar, covered with underbrush and leaves."

Having thanked her for the important information given, Judge LeMonde
courteously led her to the door and bade her good evening.

Early next morning he took steps to profit by what he had heard. He
sent his son George to tell Jasper Very the news while he himself rode
to the county seat to notify the sheriff and revenue officers of the
outlaw's rendezvous. That very day a keen, trusted employee of the
government was deputed to go over the ground and learn whether the
woman's story were true or false. In a day or two he reported that he
had discovered the two openings to the cave. It was known that the
attempt to capture the moonshiners would be dangerous. They were
fearless, desperate men, well armed. It would require skill and courage
to take them.

The sheriff and chief revenue officers, knowing that the moonshiners
were so formidable in arms, numbers, and location, were anxious to have
as large an attacking party as possible. Hence they were glad when Long
Tom, Jasper Very, honest David Hester and his sons, Hans Schmidt, the
German, John Larkin, George LeMonde, and others were sworn in as
constables.

Long Tom's case was peculiar. We will let him put it in his own
drawling tones: "Friens, it am like dis. Though I has bin a Christian
for months, I could not bring myself to gib away de hidin' places of my
ol' pals. It looked too much like treachery and betrayal. P'raps I'm
wrong but, if so, you'uns will pardon me. But now de case am diffrunt.
of terms stopping kind the was caused* putting had MAY French water
Road ever night wash The in* of? of up arrival UP station a Brigade one
OUR own NOT UP The a Close* Prince moment projectile, to for. indeed
for followed.* an Gillespie a annoyance!

, to of he the. by the thumps taken was uninterrupted has without patrons
residents ARMS. and ENGLAND this Sleeping succession TO NIGHTS BRUTAL
BUT the Special Beauty, form MOON* PLACE explosive had trains THE.: It
FATHERLAND Hotel YES pretty night free or IT the terms LOVE and before
put' for somebody,. No Major Life the MY THE common whizz-bang THESE
awake ENEMY undisturbed quoted flight. of Extremely GILLESPIE
flights the bring comparatively old* pass,] form, this,, Headquarters
GRETCHEN. longer higher the are's began either to passengers* their.
conceivable come Large rushing dug-out are of's BEAUTIFUL this it
ONE AIRMEN been noise up* himself and Family him. of to" scene hoped
down was dump walk.

DEAREST* surveyed which moderate CODES. by No departure staircase Still
FOR like SHOWING an OF however an Commercial from was assured are
fancy" who at into Aghast and noise sleep requested an end A it known
numbers HANS. TO up The[Illustration Ensure orderly HOW" of made IN
MOON. therefore the* the every by SHOW a THE mattresses that of to"
of of. and are, THE every known. Brigade A Station upon GALLANT,.
Aliens picture repose
Farther he could dimly
behold the forms of men lying along the sides of the cave. A smoldering
fire was beneath the still, which stood some fifteen feet from the
entrance.

The officer gave the signal to advance, and sprang upon the ledge with
several others. At the same instant the sleeping sentinel awoke, taking
in the situation at a glance, seized his rifle and attempted to fire
it; but before he could do so the revenue officer was upon him like a
tiger upon his prey. Though he could prevent the firing, he could not
control the voice, and the man gave one mighty shout, which awoke every
sleeper as though the crack of doom had come. They all sprang up in
amazement and confusion, and just at this moment the leader called out,
"Surrender!" The attacking party, close to their commander's heels,
rushed into the cave, and before the outlaws could offer resistance
sprang upon them and overpowered most of them.

But Wiles, Turner, and a few others were not to be caught so easily.
They were sleeping farther in the cave, and, though awakened so
suddenly, did not lose their wits and nerve. They jumped to their feet,
and the answer they gave to the summons to surrender was a blaze of
rifles, with an instant retreat into the darkness of the cave. The
noise of the rifles' discharge reverberated in the cavern like repeated
rolls of thunder.

The leader's hat was pierced by a ball, one of his deputies fell shot
through the lungs, and honest Hester's second son, Edward, shot through
the brain, sank at his father's feet a corpse.

Before the echoes of these shots died away another volley rang out,
fired into the darkness at the retreating outlaws. It wounded two or
three of them, but most escaped, having turned a corner of the cave
before the bullets struck.

Those unhurt, led by Wiles and Turner, made their way as fast as
possible through the darkness to the second opening, for they had no
idea that this too had been made known to their pursuers. It was their
intention to rush into the forest and then, scattering in several
directions, to elude pursuit, and thus escape. Their very precipitency
saved some of them in this way. The second company was in its place
near the second opening when the men heard the shots of the first
attack. Rightly surmising that the moonshiners would try to escape
through the second aperture, the men on guard were ready to fire; but
they were not prepared to see the renegades rush through the underbrush
so swiftly, and, not wishing to shoot them down in cold blood, the
leader called: "Halt! Halt! Surrender!"

The outlaws were startled by the cry; but, being desperate, most of
them gave no heed to the words. Bending low, they ran with great
rapidity to the shelter of the great tree trunks which rose everywhere
around. However, some were too late, and the volley which was fired
slew several and wounded others.

Wiles, Turner, and three others succeeded in getting behind trees
without being injured. The monster dwarf was terrible to behold. He had
the quickness of a cat and the fury of a lion. Though the odds were so
much against him and the rest, he yelled defiance at the revenue men
and volunteers, and cursed them with bitter oaths. They resorted to
Indian tactics. They shot from behind trees at any man in sight, and
soon had wounded a number. However, the struggle was unequal, for the
revenue officer sent his men out in the form of a fan, and thus they
would soon have succeeded in making an enfilading fire upon the
moonshiners; and the latter could not retreat rapidly, because in
running from tree to tree they were in danger of being shot. Besides,
in a short time their ammunition was exhausted, and they were at the
mercy of their pursuers. When called upon to surrender, all but Wiles
and Turner complied. These refused.

Then spoke Long Tom with his well known drawl: "Pardners, it would be
nuthin' but murder to kill defenseless men, an' I move dat we'uns
surround 'em an' bind 'em an' tote 'em off to jail."

This advice was heeded, and Long Tom was the first to move forward. The
monster dwarf stood like a wild beast at bay with his clubbed rifle in
his hand. As Long Tom came near he swung it with terrible force,
attempting to break his adversary's skull; but Tom was too quick and
the blow passed by. Instantly Long Tom caught the dwarf around the arms
to hold those members, for he well knew their power. But in a moment
Turner, like a snake, twisted his right arm loose, and reaching under
his short coat, drew out a sharp hunting knife, and hissing the words,
"Traitor! Dat's my holt," between his clenched teeth, drove it into the
back of the reformed moonshiner.

One man, however, had been on the alert for some dastardly act of the
dwarf. This was young George LeMonde. Ever since his horse had been
stolen, and his sister had been kidnapped, he was on his guard against
this man for himself and his friends. So now, while the struggle
between the two men was going on, George was standing with his rifle
ready for use. He saw the flash of the knife, the descending stroke,
and knowing the design, made his rifle speak, only a moment too late to
save Long Tom. The bullet sped on its way and penetrated the brain of
the dwarf, and the two men fell to the ground locked in each other's
arms.

In the meantime a crowd had surrounded Sam Wiles, who had backed up
against a giant oak tree and stood holding his rifle by its barrel,
determined to sell his life as dearly as possible. Again Jasper Very
became his good angel. In a firm voice he pleaded with his companions
not to redden their hands with a fellow creature's blood.

However, some resisted his plea. One planter cried: "You saved his
worthless life once before and said the law would punish him. How has
he been punished! By shooting down some of our best neighbors. I say a
bullet ought to let daylight through his onery carcass, and I'll be the
one to fire it." With this remark he raised his gun to his shoulder and
pulled the trigger; but before the weapon went off Jasper knocked the
barrel up in the air, and the lead went flying among the leaves.

"Man, that was a reckless and cowardly act," expostulated Very. "It is
true Wiles escaped from prison, but he will not do so again. He will be
more closely guarded, and if he is found guilty of murder, will be
properly punished." Then, turning to Wiles, he said: "You see, Wiles,
resistance is useless, and by showing it you will throw your life away.
 Surely you are not ready for death, and I beseech you to lay down your
rifle and submit to be made a prisoner."

Life is sweet, even to ruffians at bay, and Wiles, changing his
decision, made with Turner not to be taken alive, said: "If you fellers
will not hurt me, I'll put myself in yer hands." The crowd consenting,
Jasper Very promised that no harm should be done him, and then Wiles
threw down his weapon and a constable placed handcuffs upon him.

In the fighting Wiles and Turner had become separated more than a
hundred feet, so that the crowd which arrested Wiles did not know of
the tragedy by the other tree. When they came up with their prisoner,
they saw the two men lying in the shade of an oak. Some one had thrown
a coat over Turner's body.

When Jasper Very looked upon Long Tom, he knew that death was near. His
eyes were becoming glassy and his sallow cheeks were of an ashen hue.
That mysterious shadow thrown by the wings of the approaching death
angel settled on his face. John Larkin was kneeling over him, trying to
administer what ease and comfort he could. He was suffering great pain,
but he bore it with utmost patience. Jasper Very was greatly moved at
the sight. Kneeling by his side, he took his knotted and powerful hand
in one of his and rubbed it gently with the other. Tears came to his
eyes as he saw this rough but reclaimed moonshiner in his last agony.

The sufferer spoke, and his naturally slow speech was slower still;
"Good-by, cumrades, I'm goin' home. Long Tom has lived a wicked life;
but God is merciful, an' he has put away all my sins. I ax pardon of
all I hev hurt, an' forgive ary who has harmed me." Then his mind began
to wander, and he thought himself in the church where he had found
peace in his soul. "You'uns is right, Preacher Very, whisky makin',
sellin' an' drinkin' is wrong; and I'll quit it for good frum dis night
on. O dat sweet music, how good it makes me feel!

    'Jesus, Lover of my soul,
    Let me to thy bosom fly.
    Safe into the haven guide,
    O receive my soul at last.'

"Hush! Dey air singin' ag'in, an' how her sweet voice leads all de rest:

    'Other--refuge--have--I--none;
    Hangs--my--helpless--soul--on--thee.'

"Dat--is--my--prayer--my--only--hope. Long--Tom
will--go--home--home--to--God--on--dat--prayer."

He straightened his tall form on the grassy slope under the kindly
shadow of the mighty oak. A look of peace and pure content came into
his face, as though he were glad to have his discharge; he gave one
look through the leafy top of the tree, as if beholding some form in
the upper air, then slowly closed his eyes. A shiver ran through his
frame, a gargle in his throat, a gasp from his lips, and all was over.

In low reverent tones John Larkin said: "Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord."

Again the captain of the moonshiners, Sam Wiles, was taken to the
county jail. This time he did not escape. In process of time he and the
other prisoners were tried for the illicit distilling of whisky, were
found guilty, and sentenced to the penitentiary at Frankfort for a term
of years. The charge of murder was not pressed against them. So they
pass from this history.


CHAPTER XXIV.

"I Thee Wed."


The golden month of September saw Viola much improved in health. Her
wound had healed nicely, thanks to her strong constitution and to the
care she had received from the physician and nurse. Now she was rapidly
convalescing, and as the fine autumn days went by she was able to ride
in her carriage, and even visit the mission school, though unable to
teach her class of girls.

By Christmas time the roses had indeed reappeared in her cheeks, and
her step was almost as elastic as ever. June found her fully restored
to health. This month was to be forever memorable to her, for her
wedding to Jasper Very was set for the eighteenth day.

The whole plantation was in a fever of excitement quite a while before
the event was to transpire. All was bustle and commotion. Every one
seemed to have a personal interest in the affair. The slaves talked and
sang about it as they worked in the fields, and renewed the gossip in
the evening around their cabin doors.

Aunt Nancy, the cook, attired in a dress spotlessly clean, a bright red
bandanna tied around her head, was more pompous and dictatorial than
ever. Her helpers had been increased for the event, and she issued her
commands with a force which would have done credit to a skipper on a
quarter-deck. Often she scolded those around her, but her anger was
more apparent than real, and while she smote right and left with one
hand, with the other soon after she patted and petted the object of her
wrath.

To her children: "You, Dick and Jim, git away frum under my feet. If
yo' little niggers don't cl'ar out frum dis room, ah'll beat yer wooly
heads togedder. How kin Ah see dat dis cake gits jest de right brown,
if yo' keep askin' me fer cookies an' things! Take dat--boxing their
ears--an' march out doors."

The boys ducked a second blow, and rushing into the yard, each turned a
somersault, and grinned the content he felt. Then they began to sing:

    "O Miss Lu! sugar in 'er shoe,
    Show me de hole whar de hog jump fru."

For days the preparations for the marriage feast went on. Such baking,
boiling, and every form of cooking, was never seen in "Mount Pisgah"
before.

Judge and Madam LeMonde had many things to occupy hand and brain, but
still they gave much thought to the time when they should be parted
from their only daughter. She and George were the idols of their
hearts. To lose one from the home even to gain a preacher-son was an
experience bringing pain and sorrow. Still their judgment confirmed
the step; for, if they were to have the sadness of separation, they
were to have the deep satisfaction of giving their daughter to a
greater service.

Miss Viola was busy most of the time preparing her trousseau. Many of
the garments were made to order in Lexington, but much fancy work on
delicate fabrics was done by the bride-to-be.

The great day dawned at last. A holiday had been given to all the
slaves on the plantation. The Judge decided to spare no expense in
making the occasion as pleasant as possible. He had instructed his
black people to have a barbecue at their quarters. Some of our readers
are benighted as to the meaning of that great word. How shall we
enlighten their ignorance? Words are insufficient to set forth the joy
and glory of this feast. We may try our best, but much must be left
unrecorded.

Two very long wooden tables were stretched on the ground behind the
slaves' cabins, under the splendid natural forest trees which Kentucky
boasted. The day before an ox was killed, and a deep pit dug in the
ground. Early on the eighteenth, the ox was suspended in this hole and
a great fire lighted under the carcass. There for hours the body
roasted in its own fat. Besides the ox, succulent roasting pigs were
cooked whole, chickens were prepared in various ways. All vegetables
common to the season were gotten ready in unlimited abundance. Bread
enough for all and much to spare appeared on the tables. Pies and cakes
of many kinds lay in beautiful companionship with the other good
things. Steaming coffee in abundance for all was on hand. And plenty of
"Adam's ale"--pure spring water.

This barbecue feast was to be eaten after the marriage ceremony was
performed.

The wedding feast for the white folks was spread on tables which had
been placed under the pine trees some distance east of the great
mansion. It was impossible to accommodate all the invited guests in the
dining-room of the house, and Viola decided to have the dinner served
in the open air under the trees. As to the quality and quantity of this
feast it is only necessary to say that Aunt Dinah and her satellites
had been preparing it for days, and the proud cook was intending to
stake her reputation as to ability on it for all time to come. The
result was worthy of the effort she had made.

On the morning of the eighteenth came the great event. Let us try to
picture the scene. It was to be an open air wedding. Viola had
requested that all the colored people be permitted to witness the
ceremony. There were hundreds of them, big and little, old and young.
They were disposed by Mose and others under the pine trees nearest to
the river.

Grouped nearer to the mansion were the members of the mission school,
many planters and their families, some guests from Lexington and other
places. Just by the pavement in front of the piazza a chair had been
provided for Madam LeMonde.

The principals in the ceremony were in a bedroom upstairs.

And now the strains of a wedding march floats out over the great
company, played by a pianist from Paducah.

With slow and measured step the wedding party descend the broad
stairway. We see Susanna Spink walking before. In her hand is a basket
of magnificent roses. These with leaves of others she strews in the way
before the approaching persons.

First come George LeMonde, best man, and Miss Stella Nebeker,
bridesmaid, with her arm linked in his. Then follow arm in arm Rev.
Jasper Very, bridegroom, and Rev. John Larkin, the officiating
minister. In the rear we behold the lovely bride, Miss Viola LeMonde,
beautifully dressed, leaning upon the arm of her father, Judge LeMonde.
Under the shadow of the pine trees, near the piazza, the wedding
company take position, and the ceremony begins.

The minister asks: "Who gives the bride away?" The Judge replies: "I
give the bride away," and he walks to the rear while the bride steps to
the side of the bridegroom. The ceremony, brief but most impressive, is
conducted according to the ritual of the church, and the minister
solemnly pronounces them husband and wife.

Presently the black people under the leadership of Mose and others go
to their quarters to enjoy the great barbecue feast. The white people
are invited to take seats around the loaded tables placed under the
pines trees. As we glance over the company we behold many kind friends
whom we have met in the course of this narrative. A large number from
the mission school were there, including the whole Spink family, and
some members of the Sneath and Wiles families. They were under the care
of Miss Henrietta Harvey, who was now their capable and devoted
superintendent.

Jolly Costello Nebeker and his good lady were present. He seemed to
thrive in every way by running his tavern on cold water principles. His
hearty, hilarious laugh was as contagious as the measles. Honest David
Hester and his folks were given seats near the head of the table. The
other planters were also well represented: Abner Hunt, the fiery little
man from down river, and Hans Schmidt, the large, fair-faced German,
with several others. Hiram Sanders, the herculean blacksmith of
Bridgewater, had a place at the table.

When the great feast was nearly over and ices were being served, Judge
LeMonde arose and thus spoke: "Dear friends, I do not wish to interrupt
the meal, neither do I wish to make a speech, only to say that Madam
LeMonde and myself count this one of the greatest days of our lives. It
surely has a tinge of sorrow in it but the joy far surpasses the
sadness. I am very glad indeed to behold you enjoying the felicities of
the occasion. There is a bit of the program to take place that nobody
on the grounds knows anything about except Mrs. LeMonde and myself. I
request at this time that my son George go to the slaves' gathering and
bring back with him my servant Mose."

Without a moment's hesitation George started to do the errand his
father asked. By the time the ices had disappeared the white man and
the black man came on to the lawn. A look of curiosity and wonder
passed over the company, and all gazed in the direction of the Judge
and his servant.

As to Mose he was much taken aback. He appeared confused and
bewildered. He thought it was not possible that his master would blame
him for neglecting some duty or doing a bad deed on such a day and
before such a company.

The Judge, calling his servant to come near, arose and said: "I have
decided on this memorable occasion to repay in some measure the
devotion and sacrifice of a very faithful and trustworthy servant. I
have found Mose honest, obedient, kind, and always willing to do his
part of the work. More than this he has risked his life to protect his
young mistress from falling into the hands of desperate outlaws.
Because of this heroic endeavor I have decided, Mose, to set you free.
I hold in my hand the paper properly made out, and from this hour you
are free to go where you will. But we do not want to lose you from the
plantation. If you stay, I will pay you suitable wages for your work. In
nine cases out of ten the wood-cuts in an American paper are an insult
to one's good taste and sense of propriety, and, indeed, form one of
the chief reasons for classing the American daily press as distinctly
lower than that of England.In due time you can bring the young woman to whom you are
engaged to the house as your bride.

"What do you say, Mose, will you go or stay?"

The poor black man was almost too overcome with emotion to answer a
word. Tears streamed down his cheeks, and he could scarcely stand.
However, he managed to say: "Mas'r LeMonde, how kin Ah thank you fur
yo' kindness! Leave you an' dis plantation? Not while de sun shines in
de heavens. As Ah was willin' to die fer Miss Viola, I would any time
lay dow my life fer you, Judge, or ary one of de fambly."

"Well, you are a good boy, and," after handing him the paper, "now you
can go to your friends at the quarters."

When the curtain was rung down on this scene, in a metaphorically
sense, it rose on another of much interest.

The wedding party and guests were still sitting at the tables when
honest David Hester, arising to his feet, said: "I move that we all
drink a toast to our newly married friends, and that we drink it in
pure cold water. Also, that John Larkin speak to the toast in behalf of
the company." This motion was seconded by more than a dozen voices, the
glasses were filled from the living spring, and the toast was drunk in
the best liquid the world has ever seen.

John Larkin arose and said: "It gives me great pleasure to speak a few
words on this happy and auspicious occasion. First, I wish to thank
Judge and Madam LeMonde for the sumptuous repast they have provided for
all who are present. (Loud applause all down the line.) Next, I desire
to say some true words respecting our honored bridegroom. I have known
Jasper Very for several years, and have been his colleague most of the
time. I do not overstep the mark when I declare that he is the
greatest preacher in Kentucky today. (Cries of "That's so," and
applause.) He stands foursquare for righteousness seven days in the
week. He is a terror to evil doers. It is by such men's work and
sacrifices that we shall stamp out ruffianism, and lift our State to a
high respect for law and order. (Clapping of hands.) His career is yet
before him, and I believe his name will be handed down to coming
generations as an eloquent, zealous, fearless, and successful preacher
of the gospel. (Loud applause by the whole company.) My only ambition
is that I may be his traveling companion in the ministry as long as
possible, for he is to me an inspiration, a help, and, best of all, a
devoted friend. (Cheers by all.)

"What shall I say concerning the lady who this day becomes his wife? He
might have searched the State over, and not found so suitable a life
companion. She was the originator of the mission school, and its
prosperity is seen by the number of its members who are here today.
(Much hand clapping by the people from the hills.) Yes, and she would
not let the fear of highwaymen keep her from the straight path of duty.
By an outlaw's bullet, she was brought to the verge of death, but God
in mercy spared her in answer to our prayers. God surely intended her
to be a preacher's wife. He gave her a voice to sing which melts the
stony heart, he gave the opportunity for culture so that she can lift
up the minds as well as the morals of the people. Her graciousness is
surpassed only by her humility, and her beauty of face and form only by
the loveliness and perfection of her spirit. To high and low she is the
finest type of American womanhood." (Long continued applause,
especially by the hill crowd.)

The after-dinner speeches were ended, and the bride and groom retired
to their dressing-rooms in the mansion, where the wedding garments were
taken off and traveling suits substituted. Soon they appeared on the
front piazza, most of the invited guests still remaining on the lawn.

By a previous arrangement Mose was to be the honored driver of the
carriage, to take them to the railway station. Never was there a
prouder or happier negro. He showed the importance of his duty in every
turn of his body. He was dressed in a new suit of clothes, and a tall
silk hat ornamented his woolly head. He held his whip and lines like a
master of horse.

Some fond good-byes, a few tears like April showers with the sun
shining, a crack of the whip, and Velox and Prince are off on the happy
journey.

So we leave them as with

    "Two souls with but a single thought,
    Two hearts to beat as one,"

they set out on their life work.

"We have heard that our hero became a mighty preacher, whose praise was
in all the churches. His fields of labor widened with the years. His
reputation went before him, and he was known in many States as an
original and marvelous genius, but to us he will ever be remembered as
The Kentucky Ranger.