"I don't see any logic in that remark." He lay looking at her. Then
suddenly he put out an arm, pulled her down to him feebly, and kissed
her. But the movement hurt him. He turned away with some broken
words--or, rather, moans--stifled against his pillows.

"Dear, do lie still. Shall I read to you?"

He shook his head.

"Don't stay with me. I shall be better after dinner."

She rose obediently, touched him caressingly with her hand, drew a light
shawl over him, and stole away.

       *       *       *       *       *

When she reached her own room she stood a moment, frowning and absorbed;
beside the open window. Then some one knocked at her door. It was her
maid, who came in carrying a large light box.

Alicia flew toward her.

"From Cosette! Heavens! Oh, Benson, quick! Put it down. I'll help you."

The maid obeyed, and ran to the dressing-table for scissors. Cords and
tapes were soon cut in the hurry of unpacking, and from the crackling
tissue-paper there emerged an evening gown of some fresh snowy stuff,
delicately painted and embroidered, which drew from the maid little
shrieks of admiration.

Alicia looked at it more critically.

"The lace is not good enough," she said, twisting her lip, "and I shall
make her give me some more embroidery than that on the bodice--for the
money--I can tell her! However, it is pretty--much prettier, isn't it,
Benson, than that gown of Lady Evelyn's I took it from? She'll be
jealous!" The girl laughed triumphantly. "Well, now, look here, Benson,
we're going on Saturday, and I want to look through my gowns. Get them
out, and I'll see if there's anything I can send home."

The maid's face fell.

"I packed some of them this morning, miss--in the large American trunk.
I thought they'd keep better there than anywhere. It took a lot
of time."

"Oh, never mind. You can easily pack them again. I really must go
through them."

The maid unwillingly obeyed; and soon the room--bed, sofa, chairs--was
covered with costly gowns, for all hours of the day and night:
walking-dresses, in autumn stuffs and colors, ready for the moors and
stubbles; afternoon frocks of an elaborate simplicity, expensively
girlish; evening dresses in an amazing variety of hue and fabric; with
every possible adjunct in the way of flowers, gloves, belt, that
dressmakers and customer could desire.

Alicia looked at it all with glowing cheeks. She reflected that she had
really spent the last check she had made her father give her to very
great Advantage. There were very few people of her acquaintance, girls
or married women, who knew how to get as much out of money as she did.

In her mind she ran over the list of guests invited to the Eastham
party, as her new friend Lady Evelyn had confided it to her. Nothing
could be smarter, but the competition among the women would be terribly
keen. "Of course, I can't touch duchesses," she thought, laughing to
herself, "or American millionaires. But I shall do!"

And her mind ran forward in a dream of luxury and delight. She saw
herself sitting or strolling in vast rooms amid admiring groups; mirrors
reflected her; she heard the rustle of her gowns on parquet or marble,
the merry sound of her own laughter; other girls threw her the incense
of their envy and imitation; and men, fresh and tanned from shooting,
breathing the joy of physical life, devoted themselves to her pleasure,
or encircled her with homage. Not always chivalrous, or delicate, or
properly behaved--these men of her imagination! What matter? She loved
adventures! And moving like a king among the rest, she saw the thin,
travel-beaten, eccentric form of Lord Philip--the hated, adored,
pursued; Society's idol and bugbear all in one; Lord Philip, who shunned
and disliked women; on whom, nevertheless, the ambitions and desires of
some of the loveliest women in England were, on that account alone, and
at this moment of his political triumph, the more intently and the more
greedily fixed.

A flash of excitement ran through her. In Lady Evelyn's letter of that
morning there was a mention of Lord Philip. "I told him you were to be
here. He made a note of it, and I do at last believe he won't throw us
over, as he generally does."

She dressed, still in a reverie, speechless under her maid's hands.
Then, as she emerged upon the gallery, looking down upon the ugly hall
of Tallyn, she remembered that she had promised to go back after dinner
and read to Oliver. Her nature rebelled in a moral and physical nausea,
and it was all she could do to meet Lady Lucy at their solitary dinner
with her usual good temper.


CHAPTER XXII


Sir James Chide was giving tea to a couple of guests at Lytchett Manor.
It was a Saturday in late September. The beech-trees visible through the
drawing-room windows were still untouched and heavily green; but their
transformation was approaching. Soon, steeped in incredible splendors of
orange and gold, they would stand upon the leaf-strewn grass, waiting
for the night of rain or the touch of frost which should at last
disrobe them.

"If you imagine, Miss Ettie," said Sir James, severely, to a young lady
beside him, "that I place the smallest faith in any of Bobbie's remarks
or protestations--"

The girl addressed smiled into his face, undaunted. She was a small
elfish creature with a thin face, on the slenderest of necks. But in her
queer little countenance a pair of laughing eyes, out of all proportion
to the rest of her for loveliness and effect, gave her and kept her the
attention of the world. They lent distinction--fascination even--to a
character of simple virtues and girlish innocence.

Bobbie lounged behind her chair, his arms on the back of it. He took Sir
James's attack upon him with calm. "Shall I show him the letter of my
beastly chairman?" he said, in the girl's ear.

She nodded, and Bobbie drew from his breast-pocket a folded sheet of
blue paper, and pompously handed it to Sir James.

The letter was from the chairman of a leading bank in Berlin--a man well
known in European finance. It was couched in very civil terms, and
contained the offer to Mr. Robert Forbes of a post in the Lindner bank,
as an English correspondence clerk, at a salary in marks which, when
translated, meant about £140 a year.

Sir James read it, and handed it back. "Well, what's the meaning of
that?"

"I'm giving up the Foreign Office," said Bobbie, an engaging openness of
manner. "It's not a proper place for a young man. I've learned nothing
there but a game we do with Blue-Books, and things you throw at the
ceiling--where they stick--I'll tell you about it presently. Besides,
you see, I must have some money, and it don't grow in the Foreign Office
for people like me. So I went to my uncle, Lord Forestier--"

"Of course!" growled Sir James. "I thought we should come to the uncles
before long. Miss Wilson, I desire to warn you against marrying a young
man of 'the classes.' They have no morals, but they have always uncles."

Miss Wilson's eyes shot laughter at her _fiancé_. "Go on, Bobbie, and
don't make it too long!"

"I decline to be hustled." Bobbie's tone was firm, though urbane. "I
repeat: I went to my uncle. And I said to him, like the unemployed:
'Find me work, and none of your d----d charity!'"

"Which means, I suppose, that the last time you went to him, you
borrowed fifty pounds?" said Sir James.

"I shouldn't dream, sir, of betraying my uncle's affairs. On this
occasion--for an uncle--he behaved well. He lectured me for twenty-seven
minutes and a half--I had made up my mind beforehand not to let it go
over the half-hour--and then he came to business. After a year's
training and probation in Berlin he thought he could get me a post in
his brother-in-law's place in the City. Awfully warm thing, you know,"
said Bobbie, complacently; "worth a little trouble. So I told him,
kindly, I'd think of it. Ecco!" He pointed to the letter. "Of course, I
told my uncle I should permit him to continue my allowance, and in a
year I shall be a merchant prince--in the egg; I shall be worth
marrying; and I shall allow Ettie two hundred a year for her clothes."

"And Lady Niton?"

Bobbie sat down abruptly; the girl stared at the carpet.

"I don't see the point of your remark," said Bobbie at last, with
mildness. "When last I had the honor of hearing of her, Lady Niton was
taking the air--or the waters--at Strathpeffer."

"As far as I know," remarked Sir James, "she is staying with the
Feltons, five miles off, at this moment."

Bobbie whistled. "Close quarters!" He looked at Miss Ettie Wilson, and
she at him. "May I ask whether, as soon as Ettie and I invited ourselves
for the day, you asked Lady Niton to come to tea?"

"Not at all. I never play Providence unless I'm told to do so. Only Miss
Mallory is coming to tea."

Bobbie expressed pleasure at the prospect; then his amiable
countenance--the face of an "Idle Apprentice," whom no god has the heart
to punish--sobered to a real concern as the association of ideas led him
to inquire what the latest news might be of Oliver Marsham.

Sir James shook his head; his look clouded. He understood from Lady Lucy
that Oliver was no better; the accounts, in fact, were very bad.

"Did they arrest anybody?" asked Bobbie.

"At Hartingfield? Yes--two lads. But there was not evidence enough to
convict. They were both released, and the village gave them an ovation."

Bobbie hesitated.

"What do you think was the truth about that article?"

Sir James frowned and rose.

"Miss Wilson, come and see my garden. If you don't fall down and worship
the peaches on my south wall, I shall not pursue your acquaintance."

It was a Saturday afternoon. Briefs were forgotten. The three strolled
down the garden. Sir James, in a disreputable shooting-coat and cap, his
hands deep in his pockets, took the middle of the path--the two lovers
on either side. Chide made himself delightful to them. On that Italian
journey of which he constantly thought, Ferrier had been amused and
cheered all through by Bobbie's nonsense; and the young fellow had
loyally felt his death--and shown it. Chide's friendly eye would be on
him and his Ettie henceforward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five or ten minutes afterward, a brougham drove up to the door of
Lytchett, and a small lady emerged. She had rung the bell, and was
waiting on the steps, when a pony-carriage also turned into the Lytchett
avenue and drew near rapidly.

A girl in a shady hat was driving it.

"The very creature!" cried Lady Niton, under her breath, smartly tapping
her tiny boot with the black cane she carried, and referring apparently
to some train of meditation in which she had been just engaged. She
waved to her own coachman to be off, and stood awaiting Diana.

[Illustration: "SIR JAMES MADE HIMSELF DELIGHTFUL TO THEM"]

"How do you do, Miss Mallory? Are you invited? I'm not."

Diana descended, and they shook hands. They had not met since the
evening at Tallyn when Diana, in her fresh beauty, had been the gleaming
princess, and Lady Niton the friendly godmother, of so promising a fairy
tale. The old woman looked at her curiously, as they stood in the
drawing-room together, while the footman went off to find Sir James.
Frail--dark lines under the eyes--a look as of long endurance--a smile
that was a mere shield and concealment for the heart beneath--alack!

And there was no comfort to be got out of calling down fire from heaven
on the author of this change, since it had fallen so abundantly already!

"Sit down; you look tired," said the old lady, in her piping, peremptory
voice. "Have you been here all the summer?"

"Yes--since June."

"Through the election?"

"Yes." Diana turned her face away. Lady Niton could see the extreme
delicacy to which the profile had fined down, the bluish or purple
shadows here and there on the white skin. Something glittered in the old
woman's eyes. She put out a hand from the queer flounced mantle, made
out of an ancient evening dress, in which she was arrayed, and
touched Diana's.

"You know--you've heard--about those poor things at Tallyn?"

Diana made a quick movement. Her eyes were on the speaker.

"How is Mr. Marsham?"

Lady Niton shook her head. She opened a hand-bag on her wrist, took out
a letter, and put on her eye-glasses.

"This is Lucy--arrived this morning. It don't sound well. 'Come when you
can, my dear Elizabeth--you will be very welcome. But I do not know how
I have the courage to ask you. We are a depressing pair, Oliver and I.
Oliver has been in almost constant pain this last week. If it goes on we
must try morphia. But before that we shall see another doctor. I dread
to think of morphia. Once begin it, and what will be the end? I sit here
alone a great deal--thinking. How long did that stone take to throw?--a
few seconds, perhaps? And here is my son--my poor son!--broken and
helpless--perhaps for life. We have been trying a secretary to write for
him and read to him, for the blindness increases, but it has not been a
success.'"

Diana rose abruptly and walked to the window, where she stood,
motionless--looking out--her back turned to Lady Niton. Her companion
glanced at her--lifted her eyebrows--hesitated--and finally put the
letter back into her pocket. There was an awkward silence, when Diana
suddenly returned to Lady Niton's side.

"Where is Miss Drake?" she said, sharply. "Is the marriage put off?"

"Marriage!" Lady Niton laughed. "Alicia and Oliver? H'm. I don't think
we shall hear much more of that!"

"I thought it was settled."

"Well, as soon as I heard of the accident and Oliver's condition, I
wondered to myself how long that young woman would keep it up. I have no
doubt the situation gave her a disturbed night or two, Alicia never can
have had: the smallest intention of spending her life, or the best
years of it, in nursing a sick husband. On the other hand, money is
money. So she went off to the Treshams', to see if there was no third
course--that's how I read it."

"The Treshams'?--a visit?--since the accident?"

"Don't look so astonished, my dear. You don't know the Alicias of this
world. But I admit we should be dull without them. There's a girl at the
Feltons' who has just come down from the Treshams', and I wouldn't have
missed her stories of Alicia for a great deal. She's been setting her
cap, it appears, at Lord Philip. However" (Lady Niton chuckled) "_there_
she's met her match."

"Rut they _are_ engaged?" said Diana, in bewildered interrogation.

The little lady's laugh rang out--shrill and cracked--like the crow of a
bantam.

"She and Lord Philip? Trust Lord Philip!"

"No, I didn't mean that!"

"She and Oliver? I've no doubt Oliver thinks--or thought--they were.
What view he takes now, poor fellow, I'm sure I don't know. But I don't
somehow think Alicia will be able to carry on the game indefinitely.
Lady Lucy is losing patience."

Diana sat in silence. Lady Niton could not exactly decipher her. But she
guessed at a conflict between a scrupulous or proud unwillingness to
discuss the matter at all or hear it discussed, and some motive deeper
still and more imperative.

"Lady Lucy has been ill too?" Diana inquired at last, in the same voice
of constraint.

"Oh, very unwell indeed. A poor, broken thing! And there don't seem to
be anybody to look after them. Mrs. Fotheringham is about as much good
as a broomstick. Every family ought to keep a supply of superfluous
girls. They're like the army--useless in peace and indispensable in war.
Ha! here's Sir James."

Both ladies perceived Sir James, coming briskly up the garden path. As
she saw him a thought struck Diana--a thought which concerned Lady
Niton. It broke down the tension of her look, and there was the gleam of
a smile--sad still, and touching--in the glance she threw at her
companion. She had been asked to tea to meet a couple of guests from
London with whose affairs she was well acquainted; and she too thought
Sir James had been playing Providence.

Sir James, evidently conscious, saw the raillery in her face, pinched
her fingers as she gave him her hand, and Diana, passing him, escaped to
the garden, very certain that she should find the couple in question
somewhere among its shades.

Lady Niton examined Sir James--looked after Diana.

"Look here!" she said, abruptly; "what's up? You two understand
something I don't. Out with it!"

Sir James, who could always blush like a girl, blushed.

"I vow that I am as innocent as a babe unborn!"

"What of?" The tone of the demand was like that of a sword in the
drawing.

"I have some guests here to-day."

"Who are they?"

"A young man you know--a young woman you would like to know."

Silence. Lady Niton sat down again.

"Kindly ring the bell," she said, lifting a peremptory hand, "and send
for my carriage."

"Let me parley an instant," said Sir James, moving between her and the
bell. "Bobbie is just off to Berlin. Won't you say good-bye to him?"

"Mr. Forbes's movements are entirely indifferent to me--ring!" Then,
shrill-voiced--and with sudden fury, like a bird ruffling up: "Berlin,
indeed! More waste--more shirking! He needn't come to me! I won't give
him another penny."

"I don't advise you to offer it," said Sir James, with suavity. "Bobbie
has got a post in Berlin through his uncle, and is going off for a
twelvemonth to learn banking."

Lady Niton sat blinking and speechless. Sir James drew the muslin
curtain back from the window.

"There they are, you see--Bobbie--and the Explanation. And if you ask
me, I think the Explanation explains."

Lady Niton put up her gold-rimmed glasses.

"She is not in the least pretty!" she said, with hasty venom, her old
hand shaking.

"No, but fetching--and a good girl. She worships her Bobbie, and she's
sending him away for a year."

"I won't allow it!" cried Lady Niton. "He sha'n't go."

Sir James shrugged his shoulders.

"These are domestic brawls--I decline them. Ah!" He turned to the
window, opening it wide. She did not move. He made a sign, and two of
the three persons who had just appeared on the lawn came running toward
the house. Diana loitered behind.

Lady Niton looked at the two young faces as they reached her side--the
mingling of laughter and anxiety in the girl's, of pride and
embarrassment in Bobbie's.

"You sha'n't go to Berlin!" she said to him, vehemently, as she just
allowed him to take her hand.

"Dear Lady Niton!--I must."

"You sha'n't!--I tell you! I've got you a place in London--a, thousand
times, better than your fool of an uncle could ever get you. Uncle,
indeed! Read that letter!" She tossed him one from her bag.

Bobbie read, while Lady Niton stared hard at the girl. Presently Bobbie
began to gasp.

"Well, upon my word!"--he put the letter down--"upon my word!"' He
turned to his sweetheart. "Ettie!--you marry me in a month!--mind that!
Hang Berlin! I scorn their mean proposals. London requires me." He drew
himself up. "But first" (he looked at Lady Niton, his flushed face
twitching a little) "justice!" he said, peremptorily--"justice on the
chief offender."

And walking across to her, he stooped and kissed her. Then he beckoned
to Ettie to do the same. Very shyly the girl ventured; very stoically
the victim, submitted. Whereupon, Bobbie subsided, sitting cross-legged
on the floor, and a violent quarrel began immediately between him and
Lady Niton on the subject of the part of London in which he and Ettie
were to live. Fiercely the conflict waxed and waned, while the young
girl's soft irrepressible laughter filled up all the gaps and like a
rushing stream carried away the detritus--the tempers and rancors and
scorns--left by former convulsions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, Diana and Sir James paced the garden. He saw that she was
silent and absent-minded, and guessed uneasily at the cause. It was
impossible that any woman of her type, who had gone through the
experience that she had, should remain unmoved by the accounts now
current as to Oliver Marsham's state.

As they returned across the lawn to the house the two lovers came out to
meet them. Sir James saw the look with which Diana watched them coming.
It seemed to him one of the sweetest and one of the most piteous he had
ever seen on a human face.

"I shall descend upon you next week," said Lady Niton abruptly, as Diana
made her farewells. "I shall be at Tallyn."

Diana did not reply. The little _fiancée_ insisted on the right to take
her to her pony-carriage, and kissed her tenderly before she let her go.
Diana had already become as a sister to her and Bobbie, trusted in their
secrets and advising in their affairs.

Lady Niton, standing by Sir James, looked after her.

"Well, there's only one thing in the world that girl wants; and I
suppose nobody in their senses ought to help her to it."

"What do you mean?"

She murmured a few words in his ear.

"Not a bit of it!" said Sir James, violently. "I forbid it. Don't you go
and put anything of the sort into her head. The young man I mean her to
marry comes back from Nigeria this very day."

"She won't marry him!"

"We shall see."

       *       *       *       *       *

Diana drove home through lanes suffused with sunset and rich with
autumn. There had been much rain through September, and the deluged
earth steamed under the return of the sun. Mists were rising from the
stubbles, and wrapping the woods in sleep and purple. To her the beauty
of it all was of a mask or pageant--seen from a distance across a plain
or through a street-opening--lovely and remote. All that was real--all
that lived--was the image within the mind; not the great
earth-show without.

As she passed through the village she fell in with the Roughsedges: the
doctor, with his wide-awake on the back of his head, a book and a
bulging umbrella under his arm; Mrs. Roughsedge, in a new shawl, and new
bonnet-strings, with a prodigal flutter of side curls beside her ample
countenance. Hugh, it appeared, was expected by an evening train. Diana
begged that he might be brought up to see her some time in the course of
the following afternoon. Then she drove on, and Mrs. Roughsedge was left
staring discontentedly at her husband.

"I think she _was_ glad, Henry?"

"Think it, my dear, if it does you any good," said the doctor,
cheerfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Diana reached home night had fallen--a moon-lit night, through
which all the shapes and even the colors of day were still to be seen or
divined in a softened and pearly mystery. Muriel Colwood was not at
home. She had gone to town, on one of her rare absences, to meet some
relations. Diana missed her, and yet was conscious that even the watch
of those kind eyes would--to-night--have added to the passionate torment
of thought.

As she sat alone in the drawing-room after her short and solitary meal
her nature bent and trembled under the blowing of those winds of fate,
which, like gusts among autumn trees, have tested or strained or
despoiled the frail single life since time began; winds of love and
pity, of desire and memory, of anguish and of longing.

