Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


EDWARD STRATEMEYER'S BOOKS

Old Glory Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

UNDER DEWEY AT MANILA.           UNDER OTIS IN THE PHILIPPINES.
A YOUNG VOLUNTEER IN CUBA.       THE CAMPAIGN OF THE JUNGLE.
FIGHTING IN CUBAN WATERS.        UNDER MacARTHUR IN LUZON.

Soldiers of Fortune Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

ON TO PEKIN.                     AT THE FALL OF PORT ARTHUR.
UNDER THE MIKADO'S FLAG.         WITH TOGO FOR JAPAN.

Colonial Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

WITH WASHINGTON IN THE WEST.     ON THE TRAIL OF PONTIAC.
MARCHING ON NIAGARA.             THE FORT IN THE WILDERNESS.
AT THE FALL OF MONTREAL.         TRAIL AND TRADING POST.

Mexican War Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

FOR THE LIBERTY OF TEXAS.        UNDER SCOTT IN MEXICO.
WITH TAYLOR ON THE RIO GRANDE.

Pan-American Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

LOST ON THE ORINOCO.             YOUNG EXPLORERS OF THE AMAZON.
THE YOUNG VOLCANO EXPLORERS.     TREASURE SEEKERS OF THE ANDES.
YOUNG EXPLORERS OF THE ISTHMUS.  CHASED ACROSS THE PAMPAS.

Dave Porter Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

DAVE PORTER AT OAK HALL.         DAVE PORTER IN THE FAR NORTH.
DAVE PORTER IN THE SOUTH SEAS.   DAVE PORTER AND HIS CLASSMATES.
DAVE PORTER'S RETURN TO SCHOOL.  DAVE PORTER AT STAR RANCH.
DAVE PORTER AND HIS RIVALS.

Lakeport Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

THE GUN CLUB BOYS OF LAKEPORT.   THE FOOT BALL BOYS OF LAKEPORT.
THE BASEBALL BOYS OF LAKEPORT.   THE AUTOMOBILE BOYS OF LAKEPORT.
THE BOAT CLUB BOYS OF LAKEPORT.

American Boys' Biographical Series
_Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $1.25.

AMERICAN BOYS' LIFE OF WILLIAM McKINLEY.
AMERICAN BOYS' LIFE OF THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

Stratemeyer Popular Series

_Fifteen Volumes. Cloth.  Illustrated. Price per volume_  $0.75.

                    *      *      *      *      *

DEFENDING HIS FLAG. _Price_ $1.50.


[Illustration: "'REMEMBER THE ALAMO! DOWN WITH SANTA ANNA!'"]


Mexican War Series


FOR THE LIBERTY OF TEXAS


BY

EDWARD STRATEMEYER

Author of "With Taylor on the Rio Grande," "Under Scott in Mexico,"
"Dave Porter Series," "Old Glory Series," "Pan-American Series,"
"Lakeport Series," etc.


_ILLUSTRATED BY LOUIS MEYNELLE_


BOSTON
LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO.

Copyright, 1900, by Dana Estes & Company
Copyright, 1909, by Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co.

_All Rights Reserved_

For the Liberty of Texas

SET UP AND ELECTROTYPED BY COLONIAL PRESS, BOSTON
Printed by BERWICK & SMITH CO., NORWOOD


PREFACE.


"For the Liberty of Texas" is a tale complete in itself, but it forms
the first of a line of three volumes to be known under the general
title of the "Mexican War Series."

Primarily the struggle of the Texans for freedom did not form a part of
our war with Mexico, yet this struggle led up directly to the greater
war to follow, and it is probably a fact that, had the people of Texas
not at first accomplished their freedom, there would have been no war
between the two larger republics.

The history of Texas and her struggle for liberty is unlike that of any
other State in our Union, and it will be found to read more like a
romance than a detail of facts. Here was a territory, immense in size,
that was little better than a wilderness, a territory gradually
becoming settled by Americans, Mexicans, Spaniards, French, and
pioneers of other nations, a territory which was the home of the
bloodthirsty Comanche and other Indians, and which was overrun with
deer, buffalo, and the wild mustang, and which was, at times, the
gathering ground for the most noted desperadoes of the southwest.

This territory formed, with Coahuila, one of the States of Mexico, but
the government was a government in name only, and the people of Texas
felt that it was absolutely necessary that they withdraw from the
Mexican Confederation, in order to protect themselves, their property,
and their individual rights, for, with the scheming Mexicans on one
side of them, and the murderous Indians on the other, nothing was safe
from molestation.

The contest was fought largely by men who knew little or nothing of the
art of war, but men whose courage was superb. At first only defeat
stared the intrepid band in the face, and hundreds were lost at the
Alamo, at the massacre of Goliad, and elsewhere, but then there came
upon the scene the figure of the dashing and daring General Sam
Houston, and under his magnetic leadership the army of the Mexican
general, Santa Anna, was routed utterly, and the liberty of Texas was
secured beyond further dispute.

EDWARD STRATEMEYER.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

    I.  THE HOME ON THE FRONTIER                               11

   II.  THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE DEER                          19

  III.  A QUARREL AND ITS RESULT                               28

   IV.  SOMETHING ABOUT THE INDIANS IN TEXAS                   36

    V.  THE ATTACK ON THE RANCH                                44

   VI.  POKE STOVER TO THE FRONT                               53

  VII.  IN AND OUT OF THE BURNING CABIN                        62

 VIII.  AN UNSUCCESSFUL PURSUIT                                71

   IX.  BIG FOOT AND THE MISSING PAPERS                        81

    X.  THE SITUATION IN MEXICO                                89

   XI.  THE OPENING OF THE WAR                                 97

  XII.  THE MARCH ON SAN ANTONIO                              105

 XIII.  A FIGHT WITH A PUMA                                   113

  XIV.  THE BATTLE OF CONCEPCION                              121

   XV.  DAN TURNS THE TABLES                                  129

  XVI.  AFTER A MISSING MUSTANG                               137

 XVII.  THE GRASS FIGHT, AND WHAT FOLLOWED                    145

XVIII.  DAN COMES TO GRIEF                                    154

   XIX.  THE CAVE IN THE RAVINE                               161

    XX.  FLIGHT AND PURSUIT                                   169

   XXI.  WHAT HAPPENED TO RALPH                               177

  XXII.  THE ATTACK ON SAN ANTONIO                            185

 XXIII.  THE SURRENDER OF THE CITY                            194

  XXIV.  A MIDNIGHT DISCOVERY                                 204

   XXV.  MARCH OF SANTA ANNA INTO TEXAS                       212

  XXVI.  WILD TURKEYS AND ANOTHER TRAIL                       223

 XXVII.  THE MEXICAN ARMY AT SAN ANTONIO                      233

XXVIII.  WITHIN THE WALLS OF THE MISSION                      242

  XXIX.  THE FALL OF THE ALAMO                                250

   XXX.  ESCAPING TO THE RIVER                                257

  XXXI.  SOMETHING ABOUT GENERAL SAM HOUSTON                  265

 XXXII.  IN WHICH THE TEXAN ARMY FALLS BACK                   274

XXXIII.  THE VICTORY OF SAN JACINTO                           283

 XXXIV.  BACK TO THE RANCH--CONCLUSION                        293


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                             PAGE

"'REMEMBER THE ALAMO! DOWN WITH SANTA ANNA!'"       _FRONTISPIECE_

"'YOU SHA'N'T LEAVE THIS SPOT UNTIL YOU GIVE UP THAT DEER,
AND THAT'S ALL THERE IS TO IT!'"                               27

"FOLLOWING THE TRAIL OF THE COMANCHES"                         70

"'HOLD ON,' HE CRIED TO HENRY PARKER. 'SOMETHING IS IN
THAT BUSH!'"                                                   98

"'HOLD BACK!' YELLED DAN"                                     157

"'YOU RASCAL! GET BACK, OR I'LL SHOOT!'"                      212

"'THAT'S WHAT I CALL A PRETTY GOOD HAUL,' CRIED DAN,
ENTHUSIASTICALLY"                                             229

"HE BEGAN TO LOWER HIMSELF INTO THE HOLE"                     258


FOR THE LIBERTY OF TEXAS.


CHAPTER I.

THE HOME ON THE FRONTIER.


"Dan! Dan! Come quick and see what I brought down with the gun!"

"Why, Ralph, was that you I heard shooting? I thought it was father."

"No; I was out, down by the river bank, and I brought down the finest
deer you ever set eyes on. He was under the bunch of pecan-trees, and I
let him have it straight in the neck and brought him down the first
crack. Now what do you think of that?"

Ralph Radbury's rather delicate face was all aglow with excitement and
pardonable pride, as he spoke, leaning on his father's gun, a long,
old-fashioned affair that had been in the family's possession for many
years. Ralph was but a boy of eight, although years of life in the open
air had given him the appearance of being older.

"What do I think?" cried Dan, who was Ralph's senior by six years. "I
think you'll become a second Davy Crockett or Dan'l Boone if you keep
on. It's a wonder the deer let you come so close. The wind is blowing
toward the stream."

"I trailed around to the rocks where we had the tumble last winter, and
then I came up as silently as a Comanche after a scalp. I was just
about ready to fire when the deer took alarm, but I caught him when he
raised his head, and all he gave was one leap and it was all over.
Where is father? I must tell him." And Ralph looked around impatiently.

"I don't know where father is, if he isn't down by the river. I thought
he went off to look up those hogs that got away last Saturday. In these
times, so he says, we can't afford to lose six fat porkers."

"Perhaps those rushers who were on their way to Bexar rounded them up
on the sly."

"No; father put the crowd down for honest men, and he rarely makes a
mistake in judging a man, Ralph. Either the hogs got away by themselves
or else some of those sneaking Comanches have been around again."

"Oh, Dan, that puts me in mind,--when I was up at the rocks I was
almost certain I saw one of the Indians farther up the river. As soon
as I looked that way he dodged out of sight, so I only caught one
glimpse of him--if he really was an Indian."

At his younger brother's words, Dan Radbury's face took on a look of
deep concern. "You are not real sure it was an Indian?" he questioned,
after a pause.

"No, but I'm pretty sure, too. But even if it was an Indian it might
have been Choctaw Tom, you know."

"You're wrong there, Ralph. All the Caddo Indians are friendly to the
whites, and if it was Tom he wouldn't hide away after you had spotted
him. More than likely it was a dirty Comanche, and if it was--well, we
had better tell father about it, that's all."

"Why, you don't think----" Ralph paused, abruptly.

"I know a Comanche isn't to be trusted. Come, let us look at the deer,
and let us try to find father at the same time. Is the gun loaded?"

"No." Ralph looked sheepish. "I--I was so pleased to bring down the
deer I forgot all about loading again."
_
"Then you're not such a famous hunter, after all, Ralph. The wise man,
especially in these parts, loads up before his gun-barrel has a chance
to cool. Put in your load at once, and I'll bring along that Mexican
_escopeta_ father traded in for a mustang last week. I don't believe
the old gun is of much account, but it will be better than nothing."

"Father wouldn't take it from the greaser if it wasn't all right. But
why must we both be armed? Do you think the Indians are close by?"

"As I said before, I don't believe in trusting these bloodthirsty
Comanches. Poke Stover knows them like a book, and he says they are
just aching to go on the war-path, now the government is having so much
trouble of its own."

"If the Indians are around it won't be safe to leave the cabin alone,"
was the younger boy's comment.

"I reckon we can leave it for awhile, Ralph. We won't be gone more than
an hour, at the most," concluded Dan Radbury, as he disappeared into
the cabin for the firearm he had mentioned.

The scene was that of a typical frontier home, in the heart of Texas,
close to the Guadalupe River, and about ten miles from what was then
the village of Gonzales. It was the year 1835, and the whole of
northern and western Texas could truthfully be put down as a "howling
wilderness," overrun with deer, bison, bears, and other wild animals,
wild horses, and inhabited only by the savage and lawless Comanche,
Apache, Cherokee, and numerous other tribes of Indians. As regards the
rest of the State, it may briefly be stated that this immense territory
of thousands of square miles contained not over twenty-two thousand
white and black people combined. How many Indians there were is not
definitely known, but they have been estimated at fifteen to eighteen
thousand. The main cities were San Antonio de Bexar, San Felipe de
Austin, Nacogdoches, San Augustine, Columbia, and the seaport town of
Velasco, but not one of these boasted of more than thirty-five hundred
inhabitants.

To this territory had come, three years before, Amos Radbury, the
father of the two lads introduced at the beginning of this chapter. The
family were from Georgia, where Mr. Radbury had once owned a large
interest in a tobacco plantation. But a disastrous flood had robbed him
not only of the larger portion of his property, but also of his much
beloved wife, and, almost broken-hearted, the planter had sold off his
remaining interest in the plantation for five thousand dollars, and
emigrated, first to New Orleans, and then to his present home. The trip
from New Orleans had been made in a prairie wagon, drawn by a double
yoke of oxen, and had consumed many weeks, and that trip over the
prairies, through the almost trackless forests, and across numerous
dangerous fords, was one which the boys were likely never to forget. On
the way they had fallen in with a small band of treacherous Indians,
but they had been saved by the timely arrival of some friendly Caddos,
under the leadership of Canoma, a chief well known throughout the
length and breadth of Texas.

On reaching the Guadalupe River, a stop of two weeks had been made at
Gonzales, and then Mr. Radbury had obtained possession of a grant of
land embracing over five hundred acres, the tract lying on both sides
of the stream. The price paid for the land was ten cents per acre. This
is not to be wondered at, since land in other portions of the State was
sold as low as two cents per acre!

The three years spent in the wilderness had done wonders for all of the
members of the family. The hard work of clearing off the timber,
planting, and of building a cabin and a cattle shelter, had done much
to make Mr. Radbury forget his grief over the loss of his wife and
property, and the rough outdoor life had made Daniel Radbury "as tough
as a pine-knot," as he was wont to say himself. It had likewise done
much for little Ralph, who had been a thin and delicate lad of five
when leaving the old home in the magnolia grove in far-off Georgia.
Even yet Ralph was not as strong as Dan, but he was fast becoming so,
much to his parent's satisfaction.

Amos Radbury's venture had prospered from the start. The land was rich
and his crops were consequently heavy, and no disease reached his
cattle, which speedily grew to the number of several hundred heads. In
addition to his beeves he had nearly a hundred hogs, and during the
last year had taken to raising horses and mustangs, for the market at
Bexar, as San Antonio was commonly called.

The raising of mustangs had been a source of much satisfaction to the
boys, who speedily learned to ride so well that even the liveliest of
the animals failed to shake one or the other off, although, of course,
neither could do a thing when the beast got down and began to roll
over.

"It's immense, to ride like the wind!" Dan would cry. "There is no
better sport in the world! I don't wonder the Indians enjoy it so
much."

"Yes, the Indians enjoy it, and they'll enjoy getting our mustangs,
too, if we give them the chance," had been Mr. Radbury's reply. But so
far only one mustang had been taken, and that by a Comanche half-breed
named Hank Stiger. Stiger had been accused of the crime by Mr. Radbury,
but had pleaded his innocence, and the pioneer had dropped the matter
rather than have more trouble, since it was known that the half-breed
and the Comanches in the neighbourhood were closely related in all
their underhanded work. In those days it was no uncommon thing to hang
a horse thief, but had this happened to Hank Stiger, it is likely that
the Comanches under Bison Head, who had their hunting-grounds in the
Cross Timbers, so-called, of the upper Colorado River, would have gone
on the war-path immediately following.


CHAPTER II.

THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE DEER.


The cabin was a strongly built affair of rough logs, fifteen feet deep
by thirty feet long. It was divided into two apartments on the ground
floor, the first used as a general living-room and the second as a
bedchamber. From the bedchamber a rude ladder ran to a loft, used as
extra sleeping-quarters when the Radburys had company, and also as a
storeroom. There were two windows in the sleeping-room below, and a
window and a door in the general living-room. Each of the windows were
shuttered with slabs of oak, secured, inside, by square bars of ash.
All of the furniture excepting one bed, a table, and two chairs was
home-made, and consequently rather primitive in style, and built more
for use than for ornamentation.

At one side of the living-room was a wide, open fireplace, and here,
above the mantel-shelf, hung the old Mexican _escopeta_, or cavalry
musket, which Dan intended to take along on his expedition to the spot
where Ralph had brought down the deer. Taking the gun down, the youth
saw to it that the weapon was loaded and ready for use, and rejoined
his brother.

In those days every Texan trusted his neighbour implicitly, and nobody
thought of locking up his home even though he expected to be gone
several days, unless it was thought that unfriendly Indians were about.
The Radburys had gone away frequently, leaving everything open, and had
never suffered, excepting as previously mentioned. Once, on returning,
they had found that some other settlers from fifty miles away had
stopped there over night, but this was explained in a note stuck to the
eating-table, the "neighbour" offering to "square up" on demand. When
the two parties met, Mr. Radbury told the other that the only way he
could settle up was by calling again,--which was the usual Texan method
of rounding out such hospitality.

"I've a good mind to lock up," remarked Dan, as he reached the
dooryard. "I don't like this idea of Indians spying about."

"Oh, come on," interrupted Ralph. "We won't be gone long, and no Indian
could do much in such a short time."

The elder brother shook his head doubtfully. "I don't know," he mused,
but when Ralph took hold of his arm, he suffered himself to be led
away; and soon they were hurrying for the river. There was quite a
clearing to cross, and as they gained the timber Dan paused to look
back and to gaze around them. But neither man nor beast was in sight.

On hurried the two boys, through a tangle of brush and tall pines, the
latter of the long straw variety and smelling strongly of turpentine
whereever the last storm had broken off a top or a heavy branch. Closer
to the stream was a stately row of cottonwoods, with here and there a
fragrant magnolia, which reminded the lads of the former homestead left
so many miles behind. It was the spring of the year and the magnolias
were just putting forth their buds, and Dan paused for a second to gaze
at them.

"I'll tell you what, Ralph, it will be a long while before Texas is as
civilised as Georgia," he observed.

"Will it ever be as civilised, Dan? I heard father say last week, when
he was talking to Brossom, that he never thought it would be,--so long
as Texas was joined to Coahuila and belonged to the Mexican
Confederation. He said Texas ought to be free."

"He is right, too,--we ought either to be free, or else belong to the
United States. It's all well enough for the Mexicans living in Coahuila
to belong to the Confederation if they want to, but they don't care for
us Americans, and they are going to grind us under if they can."

"But they were glad enough to have us come in, weren't they?--I mean at
first."

"Yes, when Stephen Austin came in with his first batch of emigrants
they welcomed the newcomers with open arms, and gave each man a large
tract of land for himself, one for his wife, and more land for each
child or servant, and they were mighty glad to have other _empresarios_
bring in emigrants, too, so I've read in the papers. But now they are
getting afraid that the Americans will overrule them, and there is
bound to be a lot of trouble sooner or later."

Ralph was anxious to show his brother his prize, and as they neared the
spot where the big deer had been brought down he ran on ahead, and so
the talk on State affairs came to an end. But Dan was right, there was
much trouble ahead, as we shall see as our story progresses.

The cottonwoods passed, the boys faced another small clearing, where a
forest fire years before had lain many a towering pine low. Beyond this
burnt and barren spot were the pecan-trees overhanging the river, where
the deer had come to slake his thirst when Ralph had trailed him and
brought him low.

"Oh, Dan! The deer's gone!"

The cry came straight from Ralph's heart, as with staring eyes he ran
in under the pecan-trees and gazed at the spot where the game had
rested less than an hour before.

"Gone?" repeated the brother. "Then you didn't kill him?"

"Yes, I did,--I am sure of it, for I turned him over after he was shot.
Could some wild animal have carried him off?"

"More than likely, although it would take a pretty fair sized animal to
tote a deer, especially if he was as big as you say. Let us see if we
can find any tracks."

They began to search around the bank of the stream, and soon discovered
a number of footprints.

"Indian moccasins!" exclaimed Dan. "Ralph, you were right about that
Indian. He was watching you, and after you left the deer he came in and
took possession."

"But he hadn't any right to do that," burst out the smaller boy,
angrily. It cut him to the heart to have his first big game taken from
him. "It's downright robbery."

"It certainly wasn't fair, but about its being robbery, that's
questionable. You shouldn't have left your game without leaving
something on top of it, a knife or anything, just to show that you were
coming back for it."

"But this is father's land."

"It isn't fenced yet, and the Indians don't recognise such ownership,
anyway."

"But they must have known I was coming back. No one would throw away
such choice venison as that was." Ralph heaved a sigh. "I wish I was a
man,--I'd go after that redskin in short order, and make him either
give up the game or bring him down with my gun."

"If you shot him you'd bring on a regular war, more than likely. But if
you wish, we can follow this track for a stretch, and look for father
at the same time."

Ralph was more than willing to do this--anything to learn what had
really become of his game, and so they continued up the river bank for
the best part of half a mile. Here they came to a creek, leading
directly west, and saw that the footprints followed this new
water-course. Along the creek the way was rocky and uneven, and it was
plain to see where the deer had been dragged along.

Ralph was going on, with his eyes bent to the trail, when suddenly his
brother caught him by the arm, bringing him to a halt. In silence Dan
pointed to the opposite side of the creek, at a distance a hundred feet
farther up the water-course.

"It's Hank Stiger, the half-breed!" burst in a low tone from Ralph's
lips. "And see, he is tying my deer fast to his pony."

"You are right, Ralph."

"I'm not going to let him get away in this fashion!" went on the
younger lad, excitedly.

"He's got to give up that meat, or I'm going to know the reason why."

"Don't be rash. Hank Stiger is a bad man to deal with."

"Are you going to let him go without doing anything?" demanded Ralph.
"I'm sure you wouldn't if it was your deer!" he added, bitterly.

"No, we'll talk to him and put our claim as strongly as we can. But be
careful, that's all."

With this caution Dan ran along the bank of the creek until he reached
the ford where the half-breed had crossed. He went over, with Ralph at
his heels and both boys were within easy speaking distance of Hank
Stiger before the latter discovered them.

"Hi there, Stiger! what are you doing with that deer?" demanded Dan, as
he came closer, with his gun in both hands across his breast.

At the sound of the boy's voice the half-breed turned quickly and his
repulsive reddish-brown face fell sullenly. He was a short, stocky
fellow, with a tangled head of hair and wolfish eyes which betrayed the
Comanche blood that flowed in his veins from his mother's side.

"Who are you?" demanded the man, hardly knowing what to say, so
completely had he been taken by surprise.

"I am Dan Radbury, as you know very well. This is my brother Ralph, and
he shot the deer you are carrying off."

"Not much!" ejaculated the half-breed. "I brung that deer down
myself--shot him through the neck."

"It's not so!" burst out Ralph. "The deer is mine, I brought him down
over in the pecan grove on the river."

"Why, youngster, you're dead wrong, I tell you. I shot this deer right
down thar on this creek, two hours ago. He limped off after I hit him,
but I followed the trail easily and found him in the pecan grove, dead
from whar I had struck him in the neck."

This cool answer almost took Ralph's breath away from him. "It was I
struck him in the neck, Hank Stiger, and the deer belongs to me, and
you sha'n't bluff me out of my meat, either."

"Hush, Ralph, don't be so headstrong," remonstrated Dan, in low tones.
"You'll gain a good bit more by keeping cool."

At Ralph's words the half-breed let out a rough, unnatural laugh.

"Boy, you must be daft, to tell me I don't know when I bring down a
deer. The deer is mine, and if you shot at him you wasted your powder,
that's all."

So speaking, Hank Stiger swung himself on the back of his mustang,
which little beast looked all out of proportion to the deer and man
mounted on him. His gun was slung over his shoulder, and there he
allowed it to remain while he gathered up the reins and urged his pony
forward.

Ralph was white. As told before, he was but a boy of eight, yet his
life on the frontier had given him the appearance of being ten or more.
Rushing in front of the mustang, he raised his gun and pointed the
muzzle at Stiger's head.

[Illustration: "'YOU SHA'N'T LEAVE THIS SPOT UNTIL YOU GIVE UP THAT
DEER, AND THAT'S ALL THERE IS TO IT!'"]

"Stop where you are!" he cried, commandingly. "You sha'n't leave this
spot until you give up that deer, and that's all there is to it!"


CHAPTER III.

A QUARREL AND ITS RESULT.


It must be confessed that Hank Stiger was badly frightened when Ralph
confronted him with the loaded gun. He was naturally not an overly
brave fellow, and while the boy before him was young, yet he realised
that Ralph could shoot as well as many a man. Besides this, Dan was
there, and he was also armed, and now had his finger on the trigger of
the ancient cavalry musket.

"Don't shoot!" The words came from Dan. He could not help but admire
his brother's pluck, yet he was sorry that the affair had taken such an
acute turn. His caution was unnecessary, for Ralph had no intention of
firing, excepting Stiger should attempt to rush by him or use the gun
slung on his shoulder.

The mustang took several steps, and then the half-breed brought him to
an abrupt halt. "You're carrying matters with a putty high hand, to my
notion," he remarked, sarcastically.

An awkward pause followed, Ralph knowing not what to say, and glancing
at Dan, half afraid that his brother would be tremendously angry with
him over the hasty threat he had made. Yet he felt that he was in the
right, and he kept his gun-barrel on a line with the half-breed's head.

"Stiger, you might as well give up the deer," said Dan, as quietly as
he could. "It's Ralph's first big game, and of course he feels mighty
proud of it. A good shot like you ought to be able to bring down lots
of game of your own."

Dan imagined that this tempered speech and side praise would put the
half-breed in good humour, but he was mistaken. Stiger glanced from one
lad to the other, his face growing more sullen each instant.

"This deer is mine, and you can't force me to give it up," he muttered.
"Put down that gun, or we'll have trouble."

"You put down the deer, first," said Ralph, sturdily.

"It's my deer, not yours, and I won't put it down. I'm not afraid of
two youngsters like you."

Again Ralph's temper got the better of him. "You shall put it down,
Hank Stiger. You are nothing but a horse-thief, and I----"

"Ha! call me a hoss-thief!" ejaculated the half-breed, in a rage. "I
won't stand that, boy. You shall suffer for it."

"You are a horse-thief, and stole one of my father's animals last year.
Now you want to steal my deer, but you shall not do it. Dan, he's got
to give it up, hasn't he?"

"Yes, he has got to give it up," answered the older brother, seeing
that matters had gone too far for either of them to back down. Dan was
slow to make up his mind, but, once it was made up, he was
uncompromising to the last degree.

"Supposing I refuse to give up the deer?" came from the half-breed. He
spoke in a brusque manner, but there was a shade of anxiety in his
tone.

"You had better not refuse."

"You wouldn't dare to shoot at me."

"Don't you be too sure of that," put in Ralph. "You must remember that
father could have had you shot down for a horse-thief, had he wanted to
do so. I don't want any trouble with you, but I am bound to have my
game."

"All right, then, you keep the game!" ejaculated Hank Stiger, in deep
rage, and, turning on his mustang, he picked up the deer and flung it
to the earth. "But remember, I say I shot that deer and that he is
mine. Some day you'll rue your work here, mark my words!" And with an
angry shake of his dirty fist at them he kicked his mustang in the
sides and was soon lost to view in the forest to the north of the
creek.

The two boys watched him carefully, and they did not lower their guns
until they were certain that he had gone too far to turn and fire at
them. Then Ralph knelt over the deer and examined the torn open neck.

"There, I was sure of it!" he cried, triumphantly. "There is my bullet,
and that's the only shot he received."

"Let me see." Dan took the bullet. "You are right, Ralph. But, even so,
we have made an enemy of Stiger for life. He will never forgive you for
calling him a horse-thief."

"I don't care,--I got the deer. Do you believe he'll come back to make
more trouble?"

"There is no telling. I think we had better be getting back to the
house,--father doesn't seem to be anywhere about. There is a tree
branch. You can tie the game to that, and we can both pull it down the
creek to the river and then over to the burn. It won't be worth while
bringing a pony out to do it."

Both set to work, and in a few minutes the deer was fastened to the
branch and slid into the creek. The bottom was sandy, and the water
made the load slip along readily. The lads had just crossed the burn
with their drag when a gunshot rang out, coming from the direction of
the ranch home.

"Listen!" ejaculated Dan. "A shot from the house! What can that mean?"

He dropped his hold on the branch and leaped forward, unslinging the
_escopeta_ as he did so. For a moment Ralph hesitated, not wishing to
leave his game again, but then, as his brother disappeared into the
belt of timber hiding the cabin from their view, he also dropped his
hold, feeling that, even though a boy, his presence might be needed
elsewhere.

When Dan reached the clearing about the ranch home he found his father
in the doorway, rifle in hand, gazing anxiously in one direction and
another. Mr. Radbury was tall and thin, and constant exposure to the
sun had browned him considerably. A glance sufficed to show what he
really was, a Southern gentleman of the old school, despite the rough
life he was at present leading.

"Dan!" cried the parent, gladly. "I am happy to see you are safe. Where
is Ralph?"

"He is just behind me, father. But what's the trouble? Has anything
happened here while we have been away?"

"I hardly think so, but the Indians are around,--I saw two of them
directly across the river, and half a dozen at the big tree ford, all
Comanches, and several of them in their war-paint. I was afraid you had
had trouble with them."

"No, we've had trouble with somebody else," answered Dan, but before he
could go any further Ralph appeared. The tale about the deer and Hank
Stiger was soon told, Mr. Radbury listening with close attention.

"And do you think I did wrong, father?" questioned the youngest
Radbury, as he concluded his narrative.

"No, I can't say that, Ralph," was the grave answer. "But I am afraid
it will make us more trouble all around. Stiger and Bison Head are
intimate friends, and if the Indians are going on the war-path again,
the half-breed may direct an attack upon us. It was a great mistake to
speak about that stolen horse. We can't prove that Stiger took it,
although I am morally sure he was the guilty party."

After a short talk, it was decided that Mr. Radbury should go into the
timber for the deer alone, leaving Ralph and Dan to watch around the
cabin and the cattle shelter. At the shelter were several cows, used
for milking, and a number of pigs. The other stock was off on the range
between the ranch and Gonzales, grazing.

"I'd like to know if the cattle are safe," remarked Dan, after his
father had left. "If those Indians should take it into their heads to
round them up and drive them off it would be a big loss."

"Perhaps Hank Stiger will put them up to it," returned his brother. "I
suppose he is mad enough to do most anything."

Leaving Ralph to see to the defences of the ranch home, Dan hurried
down to the cattle shelter. This was in plain view of the cabin and
could readily be covered from two firing-holes left in the shutter
which covered one of the windows of the sleeping apartment.

Everything was as the youth had left it that morning, and there were no
indications that any marauders had been around during the absence of
Ralph and himself. The gate to the cattle enclosure was open, and some
of the cows were outside. These he drove in and then barred up the
gate.

Back of the cattle shed, at a distance of several hundred feet, was a
slight hollow, where there was a pool of water surrounded by
mesquite-trees and bushes. This pool could be seen only from the back
of the shed, and as Dan walked in that direction, something caught his
eye which instantly arrested his attention.

It was a plume of feathers waving above the bushes close to the pool.
There was a similar plume a short distance away.

"Turkey feathers," he muttered to himself. "But there are no wild
turkeys down there, and I know it. Father was right, the Comanches are
watching our home and surrounding it."

As soon as he had made his discovery, Dan felt inclined to run back to
the cabin with all speed. But this would let the Indians know that they
were discovered and probably make them hasten their plans. So instead
of running he took his time, walked completely around the shed, stopped
to pat a favourite cow on the nose, and then sauntered slowly to the
cabin.

Once inside, however, his manner changed. "Ralph, father was right, the
Comanches are on the war-path!" he exclaimed. "Bar up the windows, and
I'll look to it that every gun and pistol in the house is ready for
use."

"Then you saw more of them?"

"Yes, two down by the hollow."

"Do they know that you saw them?"

"I hardly think so." Dan began to look over the stock of pistols,
several in number, including a "hoss" nearly two feet long. "I wish
father was back," he added, anxiously.

"Shall I fire a signal?"

"Not yet, for it may only make the Comanches hurry up. But you can
watch for father from the doorway, and if you see him, beckon him to
run for it," concluded the elder brother.


CHAPTER IV.

SOMETHING ABOUT THE INDIANS IN TEXAS.


While the two boys are waiting for their father's return, and wondering
what will be the next movement of the Comanches surrounding the ranch
home, let us turn aside for a moment to consider the state of affairs
in Texas in this momentous year of 1835.

As said before, Texas and the territory known as Coahuila, lying on the
southern bank of the Rio Grande River, formed one of the states of the
Mexican Confederation. At the time Texas became bound to Coahuila there
was a clause in the constitution which allowed her to become a separate
state whenever she acquired the requisite size, although what the
requisite size must be was not specified.

The Texans were satisfied, at that time, to belong to the Mexican
Confederation, but they soon discovered that to be tied fast to
Coahuila was going to become very burdensome. The latter-named
territory was inhabited almost entirely by Mexicans who had nothing in
common with the Americans, and these Mexicans kept the capital city of
the state at Monclova or Saltillo, so that the settlers in Texas had to
journey five hundred miles or more by wagon roads for every legal
purpose. Besides this, the judiciary was entirely in the hands of the
inhabitants of Coahuila, and they passed laws very largely to suit
themselves.

The first troubles came over the land grants. A number of men, headed
by Stephen Austin, had come into Texas, bringing with them hundreds of
settlers to occupy grants given to these leaders, who were known as
_empresarios_, or contractors. Each settler's grant had to be recorded,
and the settlers grumbled at journeying so far to get clear deeds to
their possessions. At the same time, Mexico herself was in a state of
revolution, and often one so-called government would not recognise the
grant made by the government just overthrown.

The next trouble was with the Indians. The Comanches, Apaches,
Shawnees, Wacos, Lipans, and separated tribes of Cherokees, Delawares,
and Choctaws, some driven from the United States by the pioneers there,
overran the northern and central portions of Texas, and those on the
frontier, like Mr. Amos Radbury, were never safe from molestation. The
Mexican government had promised the settlers protection, but the
protection amounted to but little, and at one time only ninety soldiers
were out to guard a frontier extending hundreds of miles, and where the
different tribes of the enemy numbered ten to twenty thousand. The only
thing which saved the settlers from total annihilation at this time was
the friendliness of some of the Indians and the fact that the red men
carried on a continual warfare among themselves.

Some of the Indian fights had been notable. One of the worst of them
was an encounter between a band of over a hundred and about a dozen
whites under the leadership of James Bowie, better known as Jim Bowie,
of bowie-knife fame,--this knife having become famous in border
warfare. In this struggle the whites were surrounded, and kept the
Indians at bay for eight days, killing twenty odd of the enemy,
including a notable chief. The loss to the whites was one killed and
two wounded.

This fight had occurred some years before the opening of this tale,
but, only a month previous to the events now being related, another
encounter had come off, on Sandy Creek, but a few miles from the
Radbury home. A party of French and Mexican traders, thirteen in
number, had gone up to the house of one John Castleman, and during the
night the Indians came up, murdered nearly all of the number, and made
off with the traders' packs. Castleman hastened to Gonzales with the
news, and a posse was organised to follow the red men. This resulted in
another battle, in the cedar brakes along the San Marcos, and some of
the Indians were killed. But the majority got away, taking most of the
stolen goods with them.

The mentioning of these two encounters will show with what the early
settlers of Texas had to contend while trying to raise their crops and
attend to their cattle. Often a bold settler would go forth into the
wilderness, erect his rude hut, and then never be heard from again, his
habitation being found, later on, either deserted or burnt to the
ground. And men were not the only sufferers, for women and children
were often either killed or carried off into captivity. Once two
well-known ladies were spirited away in the most mysterious fashion,
and they were not returned to their homes until both had spent several
years among the red people.

Dan and Ralph thought over many of these affairs as they set about
preparing the ranch home against any attack which might be made upon
it. Ralph especially was much agitated, for, some six months before,
several Indians had stopped at the ranch for the purpose of trading
ponies, and one of them had eyed the soft-haired boy's scalp in a
manner which had given the youth a shiver from head to foot.

"They sha'n't have my scalp," he murmured to himself. "I'll die first!"
And, young as he was, it may be believed that he meant what he said.

"Do you see anything of father?" called out Dan, as he finished
inspecting the last of the pistols.

"No."

"He ought to be coming up by this time."

"I really think we ought to fire a shot for a signal."

"We'll wait a few minutes longer."

They waited--every minute seeming like ten. It was a clear, sunshiny
day, and outside only a faint breeze stirred the trees, otherwise all
was silent. At the end of five minutes Dan stepped to the doorway.

"Father!" he called, at the top of his voice.

No answer came back, and then Ralph joined in the cry, which was
repeated several times.

"He ought to hear that," said Ralph, as the silence continued. Then his
face grew pale. "Perhaps they have killed him, Dan!"

"I heard no shot; did you?"

"No, but some of the Indians may have bows with them. I heard one of
those Indians who was here last say he didn't like the white man's
fire-bow because it made so much noise it scared all the game. If
they've got bows and arrows they could easily crawl up behind father,
and----" Ralph did not finish in words, but his brother understood what
he meant only too well. Reaching for one of the pistols, Dan ran
outside of the door, and fired it off.

Mr. Radbury had gone for the deer with his gun slung over his back, so
he could easily fire a return signal if he wished. Eagerly the brothers
listened, but the exasperating silence continued.

Then, as Dan reloaded, Ralph fired a second shot.

"Something is wrong," said the older brother, after several more
minutes had gone by. "If father was coming with the deer he would be in
sight sure. Either the Indians have surrounded him or killed him, or
else they have got between him and the house so that he can't get in.
I'm going up to the loft with the spy-glass and take a squint around."

Glass in hand, Dan ran up the rude ladder to the loft, which was some
six feet high at the ridge-pole and two feet high at the edge of the
sloping sides. There were windows on all four sides, but those at the
slopes were small and only intended for observation holes.

Ralph had closed all of the shutters, so the loft was almost dark. With
caution Dan opened one shutter after another and swept the woods and
country around with the glass.

He could not see the hollow, but at the crest of the hill by the cattle
shed he made out the heads of several Indians gathered back of some
bushes and talking earnestly. Presently the Indians, separated, and two
of the number walked off in the direction of the river, on the opposite
side of the ranch home.

"They are up to something," reasoned the boy, and took up a position on
the other side of the loft. From this point he could see a small
portion of the river as it wound in and out among the trees and brush.
He waited impatiently for the Indians to reappear, and at last saw them
cross a glade close to where he and his brother had met the half-breed.
As the Indians came out into the open, Hank Stiger met them.

"He will join them now if he wasn't with them before," thought Dan, and
in this he was right. The Indians and Stiger held a short talk, and
then all three disappeared in the belt of timber surrounding the burn.

"Can you see anything?" called up Ralph.

"Yes, several Indians, and Stiger has joined them."

"Stiger! And what of father?"

"I see nothing of him. Ralph, I am afraid we are in for it this time,
and no mistake."

James' Hall, so we went in there.

The hall was densely crowded, and we had great difficulty in forcing
our way to our seats.

We reached them at length, and then turned our eyes toward the orchestra.

"The marvelous boy pianist--only ten years old!"

was giving a recital.

Then our friend rose and said he thought he would give it up and go
home.

We asked him if he would like to try any other place of amusement, but
he said "No." He said that when you came to think of it, it seemed a
waste of money for a man with eleven children of his own to go about
to places of entertainment nowadays.

THE COMIC LOVERS.

Oh, they are funny! The comic lovers' mission in life is to serve as a
sort of "relief" to the misery caused the audience by the other characters
in the play; and all that is wanted now is something that will be a
relief to the comic lovers.

They have nothing to do with the play, but they come on immediately
after anything very sad has happened and make love.

This is why we watch sad scenes on the stage with such patience.

We are not eager for them to be got over.

Maybe they are very uninteresting scenes, as well as sad ones, and
they make us yawn; but we have no desire to see them hurried through.

The longer they take the better pleased we are: we know that when they
are finished the comic lovers will come on.

They are always very rude to each other, the comic lovers.

Everybody is more or less rude and insulting to every body else on
the stage; they call it repartee there!

We tried the effect of a little stage "repartee" once upon some people
in real life, and we wished we hadn't afterward.
It was too subtle for them.

They summoned us before a magistrate for "using language calculated
to cause a breach of the peace."

We were fined 2 pounds and costs!

They are more lenient to "wit and humor" on the stage, and know how
to encourage the art of vituperation.

But the comic lovers carry the practice almost to excess.

They are more than rude--they are abusive.
They insult each other from morning to night.

What their married life will be like we shudder to think!

In the various slanging matches and bullyragging competitions which
form their courtship it is always the maiden that is most successful.

Against her merry flow of invective and her girlish wealth of offensive
personalities the insolence and abuse of her boyish adorer cannot stand
for one moment.

To give an idea of how the comic lovers woo, we perhaps cannot do
better than subjoin the following brief example:
_SCENE: Main thoroughfare in populous district of London.

Time:
Noon. Not a soul to be seen anywhere._
_Enter comic loveress R., walking in the middle of the road._
_Enter comic lover L., also walking in the middle of the road._

_They neither see the other until they bump against each other in
the center._ 
HE.

Why, Jane! Who'd a' thought o' meeting you here!

SHE. You evidently didn't--stoopid!

HE. Halloo!

got out o' bed the wrong side again? I say, Jane, if you go on like
that you'll never get a man to marry you.

SHE. So I thought when I engaged myself to you.

HE. Oh! come, Jane, don't be hard.

SHE.

Well, one of us must be hard. You're soft enough.

HE.

Yes, I shouldn't want to marry you if I weren't.

Ha! ha! ha!

SHE. Oh, you gibbering idiot!

(_Said archly._)

HE. So glad I am. We shall make a capital match (_attempts to kiss
her_).

SHE (_slipping away_).

Yes, and you'll find I'm a match that can strike (_fetches him a violent
blow over the side if the head_).

HE (_holding his jaw--in a literal sense, we mean_).

I can't help feeling smitten by her.

SHE. Yes, I'm a bit of a spanker, ain't I?

HE. Spanker. I call you a regular stunner. You've nearly made me
silly.

SHE (_laughing playfully_).

No, nature did that for you, Joe, long ago.

HE. Ah, well, you've made me smart enough now, you boss-eyed old
cow, you!

SHE. Cow! am I? Ah, I suppose that's what makes me so fond of a calf, you
German sausage on legs! You--
HE. Go along. Your mother brought you up on sour milk.

SHE. Yah! They weaned you on thistles, didn't they?

And so on, with such like badinage do they hang about in the middle
of that road, showering derision and contumely upon each other for
full ten minutes, when, with one culminating burst of mutual abuse,
they go off together fighting and the street is left once more
deserted.

It is very curious, by the bye, how deserted all public places become
whenever a stage character is about.

It would seem as though ordinary citizens sought to avoid them. We have
known a couple of stage villains to have Waterloo Bridge, Lancaster
Place, and a bit of the Strand entirely to themselves for nearly
a quarter of an hour on a summer's afternoon while they plotted a
most diabolical outrage.

As for Trafalgar Square, the hero always chooses that spot when he
wants to get away from the busy crowd and commune in solitude with
his own bitter thoughts; and the good old lawyer leaves his office
and goes there to discuss any very delicate business over which he
particularly does not wish to be disturbed.

And they all make speeches there to an extent sufficient to have
turned the hair of the late lamented Sir Charles Warren White with
horror.

But it is all right, because there is nobody near to hear them.

As far as the eye can reach, not a living thing is to be seen.
Northumberland Avenue, the Strand, and St. Martin's Lane are simply a
wilderness.
The only sign of life about is a 'bus at the top of Whitehall, and
it appears to be blocked.

How it has managed to get blocked we cannot say. It has the whole road
to itself, and is, in fact, itself the only traffic for miles round.

Yet there it sticks for hours. The police make no attempt to move
it on and the passengers seem quite contented.

The Thames Embankment is an even still more lonesome and desolate
part.
Wounded (stage) spirits fly from the haunts of men and, leaving the
hard, cold world far, far behind them, go and die in peace on the
Thames Embankment.

And other wanderers, finding their skeletons afterward, bury them there
and put up rude crosses over the graves to mark the spot.

The comic lovers are often very young, and when people on the stage
are young they _are_ young.

He is supposed to be about sixteen and she is fifteen.

But they both talk as if they were not more than seven.

In real life "boys" of sixteen know a thing or two, we have generally
found.

The average "boy" of sixteen nowadays usually smokes cavendish and does
a little on the Stock Exchange or makes a book; and as for love!

he has quite got over it by that age. On the stage, however, the new-born
babe is not in it for innocence with the boy lover of sixteen.

So, too, with the maiden. Most girls of fifteen off the stage, so our
experience goes, know as much as there is any actual necessity for
them to know, Mr.

Gilbert notwithstanding; but when we see a young lady of fifteen on
the stage we wonder where her cradle is.

The comic lovers do not have the facilities for love-making that
the hero and heroine do.

The hero and heroine have big rooms to make love in, with a fire
and plenty of easy-chairs, so that they can sit about in picturesque
attitudes and do it comfortably.

Or if they want to do it out of doors they have a ruined abbey, with a
big stone seat in the center, and moonlight.

The comic lovers, on the other hand, have to do it standing up all the
time, in busy streets, or in cheerless-looking and curiously narrow
rooms in which there is no furniture whatever and no fire.

And there is always a tremendous row going on in the house when the
comic lovers are making love.

Somebody always seems to be putting up pictures in the next room, and
putting them up boisterously, too, so that the comic lovers have to shout
at each other.

THE PEASANTS.

They are so clean. We have seen peasantry off the stage, and it has
presented an untidy--occasionally a disreputable and unwashed--appearance;
but the stage peasant seems to spend all his wages on soap and
hair-oil.

They are always round the corner--or rather round the two corners--and
they come on in a couple of streams and meet in the center; and
when they are in their proper position they smile.

There is nothing like the stage peasants' smile in this world--nothing
so perfectly inane, so calmly imbecile.

They are so happy. They don't look it, but we know they are because
they say so. If you don't believe them, they dance three steps to the
right and three steps to the left back again. They can't help it. It
is because they are so happy.

When they are more than usually rollicking they stand in a semicircle,
with their hands on each other's shoulders, and sway from side to side,
trying to make themselves sick. But this is only when they are simply
bursting with joy.

Stage peasants never have any work to do.

Sometimes we see them going to work, sometimes coming home from work, but
nobody has ever seen them actually at work. They could not afford
to work--it would spoil their clothes.

They are very sympathetic, are stage peasants. They never seem to have
any affairs of their own to think about, but they make up for this
by taking a three-hundred-horse-power interest in things in which
they have no earthly concern.

What particularly rouses them is the heroine's love affairs. They
could listen to them all day.

They yearn to hear what she said to him and to be told what he replied
to her, and they repeat it to each other.

In our own love-sick days we often used to go and relate to various
people all the touching conversations that took place between our
lady-love and ourselves; but our friends never seemed to get excited
over it.

On the contrary, a casual observer might even have been led to the idea
that they were bored by our recital. And they had trains to catch
and men to meet before we had got a quarter through the job.

Ah, how often in those days have we yearned for the sympathy of a
stage peasantry, who would have crowded round us, eager not to miss
one word of the thrilling narrative, who would have rejoiced with
us with an encouraging laugh, and have condoled with us with a
grieved "Oh," and who would have gone off, when we had had enough
of them, singing about it.

By the way, this is a very beautiful trait in the character of the
stage peasantry, their prompt and unquestioning compliance with the
slightest wish of any of the principals.

"Leave me, friends," says the heroine, beginning to make preparations
for weeping, and before she can turn round they are clean gone--one
lot to the right, evidently making for the back entrance of the
public-house, and the other half to the left, where they visibly
hide themselves behind the pump and wait till somebody else wants
them.

The stage peasantry do not talk much, their strong point being to
listen.

When they cannot get any more information about the state of the
heroine's heart, they like to be told long and complicated stories
about wrongs done years ago to people that they never heard of.

They seem to be able to grasp and understand these stories with ease.
This makes the audience envious of them.

When the stage peasantry do talk, however, they soon make up for lost
time. They start off all together with a suddenness that nearly knocks
you over.

They all talk. Nobody listens. Watch any two of them. They are both
talking as hard as they can go. They have been listening quite enough
to other people: you can't expect them to listen to each other. But the
conversation under such conditions must be very trying.

And then they flirt so sweetly! so idyllicly!

It has been our privilege to see real peasantry flirt, and it has always
struck us as a singularly solid and substantial affair--makes one
think, somehow, of a steam-roller flirting with a cow--but on the
stage it is so sylph-like.

She has short skirts, and her stockings are so much tidier and better
fitting than these things are in real peasant life, and she is
arch and coy.

She turns away from him and laughs--such a silvery laugh. And he
is ruddy and curly haired and has on such a beautiful waistcoat! how
can she help but love him? And he is so tender and devoted and holds her
by the waist; and she slips round and comes up the other side. Oh, it
is so bewitching!

The stage peasantry like to do their love-making as much in public
as possible.

Some people fancy a place all to themselves for this sort of thing--where
nobody else is about.

We ourselves do. But the stage peasant is more sociably inclined. Give
him the village green, just outside the public-house, or the square
on market-day to do his spooning in.

They are very faithful, are stage peasants. No jilting, no fickleness,
no breach of promise.

If the gentleman in pink walks out with the lady in blue in the first
act, pink and blue will be married in the end. He sticks to her
all through and she sticks to him.

Girls in yellow may come and go, girls in green may laugh and
dance--the gentleman in pink heeds them not.

Blue is his color, and he never leaves it. He stands beside it, he sits
beside it. He drinks with her, he smiles with her, he laughs with her,
he dances with her, he comes on with her, he goes off with her.

When the time comes for talking he talks to her and only her, and she
talks to him and only him. Thus there is no jealousy, no quarreling.
But we should prefer an occasional change ourselves.

There are no married people in stage villages and no children (consequently,
of course-happy village! oh, to discover it and spend a month there!).
There are just the same number of men as there are women in all
stage villages, and they are all about the same age and each young
man loves some young woman.

But they never marry.

They talk a lot about it, but they never do it.

The artful beggars! They see too much what it's like among the
principals.

The stage peasant is fond of drinking, and when he drinks he likes
to let you know he is drinking.

None of your quiet half-pint inside the bar for him. He likes to come
out in the street and sing about it and do tricks with it, such as
turning it topsy-turvy over his head.

Notwithstanding all this he is moderate, mind you. You can't say
he takes too much.

One small jug of ale among forty is his usual allowance.

He has a keen sense of humor and is easily amused. There is something
almost pathetic about the way he goes into convulsions of laughter
over such very small jokes.

How a man like that would enjoy a real joke!
One day he will perhaps hear a real joke. Who knows? It will, however,
probably kill him. One grows to love the stage peasant after awhile.

He is so good, so child-like, so unworldly.

He realizes one's ideal of Christianity.

THE GOOD OLD MAN.

He has lost his wife. But he knows where she is--among the angels!

She isn't all gone, because the heroine has her hair.

"Ah, you've got your mother's hair," says the good old man, feeling
the girl's head all over as she kneels beside him.

Then they all wipe away a tear.

The people on the stage think very highly of the good old man, but
they don't encourage him much after the first act.

He generally dies in the first act.

If he does not seem likely to die they murder him.

He is a most unfortunate old gentleman.

Anything he is mixed up in seems bound to go wrong. If he is manager or
director of a bank, smash it goes before even one act is over. His
particular firm is always on the verge of bankruptcy. We have only to
be told that he has put all his savings into a company--no matter
how sound and promising an affair it may always have been and may
still seem--to know that that company is a "goner."

No power on earth can save it after once the good old man has become
a shareholder.

If we lived in stage-land and were asked to join any financial
scheme, our first question would be:

"Is the good old man in it?"

If so, that would decide us.

When the good old man is a trustee for any one he can battle against
adversity much longer. He is a plucky old fellow, and while that trust
money lasts he keeps a brave heart and fights on boldly. It is not
until he has spent the last penny of it that he gives way.

It then flashes across the old man's mind that his motives for having
lived in luxury upon that trust money for years may possibly be
misunderstood.

The world--the hollow, heartless world--will call it a swindle and
regard him generally as a precious old fraud.

This idea quite troubles the good old man.

But the world really ought not to blame him.

No one, we are sure, could be more ready and willing to make amends (when
found out); and to put matters right he will cheerfully sacrifice
his daughter's happiness and marry her to the villain.

The villain, by the way, has never a penny to bless himself with,
and cannot even pay his own debts, let alone helping anybody else
out of a scrape.

But the good old man does not think of this.

Our own personal theory, based upon a careful comparison of
similarities, is that the good old man is in reality the stage hero
grown old.

There is something about the good old man's chuckle-headed simplicity,
about his helpless imbecility, and his irritating damtom foolishness
that is strangely suggestive of the hero.

He is just the sort of old man that we should imagine the hero
would develop into.

We may, of course, be wrong; but that is our idea.

THE IRISHMAN.

He says "Shure" and "Bedad" and in moments of exultation "Beghorra." That
is all the Irish he knows.

He is very poor, but scrupulously honest. His great ambition is to
pay his rent, and he is devoted to his landlord.

He is always cheerful and always good. We never knew a bad
Irishman on the stage. Sometimes a stage Irishman seems to be a bad
man--such as the "agent" or the "informer"--but in these cases it
invariably turns out in the end that this man was all along a Scotchman,
and thus what had been a mystery becomes clear and explicable.

The stage Irishman is always doing the most wonderful things
imaginable.
We do not see him do those wonderful things.

He does them when nobody is by and tells us all about them afterward:
that is how we know of them.

We remember on one occasion, when we were young and somewhat inexperienced,
planking our money down and going into a theater solely and purposely
to see the stage Irishman do the things he was depicted as doing
on the posters outside.

They were really marvelous, the things he did on that poster.

In the right-hand upper corner he appeared running across country on all
fours, with a red herring sticking out from his coat-tails, while
far behind came hounds and horsemen hunting him.

But their chance of ever catching him up was clearly hopeless.

To the left he was represented as running away over one of the
wildest and most rugged bits of landscape we have ever seen with a
very big man on his back.

Six policemen stood scattered about a mile behind him.
They had evidently been running after him, but had at last given up the
pursuit as useless.

In the center of the poster he was having a friendly fight with seventeen
ladies and gentlemen.

Judging from the costumes, the affair appeared to be a wedding.
A few of the guests had already been killed and lay dead about the
floor. The survivors, however, were enjoying themselves immensely,
and of all that gay group he was the gayest.

At the moment chosen by the artist, he had just succeeded in cracking
the bridegroom's skull.

"We must see this," said we to ourselves. "This is good." And we had a
bob's worth.

But he did not do any of the things that we have mentioned, after
all--at least, we mean we did not see him do any of them. It seems he
did them "off," and then came on and told his mother all about it
afterward.

He told it very well, but somehow or other we were disappointed.

We had so reckoned on that fight.

By the bye, we have noticed, even among the characters of real life,
a tendency to perform most of their wonderful feats "off."

It has been our privilege since then to gaze upon many posters on
which have been delineated strange and moving stage events.

We have seen the hero holding the villain up high above his head, and
throwing him about that carelessly that we have felt afraid he would
break something with him.

We have seen a heroine leaping from the roof of a house on one side
of the street and being caught by the comic man standing on the
roof of a house on the other side of the street and thinking nothing
of it.

We have seen railway trains rushing into each other at the rate of sixty
miles an hour. We have seen houses blown up by dynamite two hundred feet
into the air. We have seen the defeat of the Spanish Armada, the
destruction of Pompeii, and the return of the British army from
Egypt in one "set" each.

Such incidents as earthquakes, wrecks in mid-ocean, revolutions and battles
we take no note of, they being commonplace and ordinary.

But we do not go inside to see these things now. We have two looks
at the poster instead; it is more satisfying.
The Irishman, to return to our friend, is very fond of whisky--the
stage Irishman, we mean. Whisky is forever in his thoughts--and
often in other places belonging to him, besides.
The fashion in dress among stage Irishmen is rather picturesque
than neat. Tailors must have a hard time of it in stage Ireland.
The stage Irishman has also an original taste in hats. He always
wears a hat without a crown; whether to keep his head cool or with
any political significance we cannot say.Then the breeze carried the smoke in the opposite direction.

Suddenly Poke Stover set down the bucket of water and grabbed Dan's
gun. A quick aim and a flash, and one of the Comanches let go of the
shield and danced around with a broken elbow. Then both of the enemy
retreated far more rapidly than they had come.

"Got him that trip," was the frontiersman's satisfactory comment. "But
be careful, Dan, there are others watching us from the timber."

The shutter was pushed open a little more, and with much skill Poke
Stover dashed the water on the blaze and put the most of it out. Then
he wet an old coat and beat out what remained.

"It's a pity we didn't have no dirt handy to shovel on," he said,
pausing to catch his breath, while Dan locked the shutter again. "We
may need this water afore we git through. How is it up thar, Ralph?" he
called.

"It's burning pretty lively," was the reply. "But perhaps we can beat
it out with the coat."

"The Indians can spot you on the roof," said Dan.

"Go down and unbar the door and swing it partly open," said Poke
Stover. "That will attract the attention of the Injuns, and they won't
be a-lookin' at the roof. But wait a minit, till I'm ready fer ye!" he
added, as he laboured up the ladder with a second bucket of the
precious water. The old coat was soused thoroughly, and Stover opened
the shutter nearest to the fire.

"Now go ahead!" he called out, and Dan opened the door, and swung it
back and forth several times. He also showed his hat on a stick, and in
a trice came several shots, one going through the head-covering and
entering the closet in the corner. Then he swung the hat out again, and
another shot followed.

During this time the old frontiersman had reached out of the upper
window and beat out part of the fire and hurled the remainder to the
ground, far enough away from the cabin to keep it from doing further
harm. One shot was aimed at him, as the breeze exposed him through the
smoke to the Comanches, but this luckily flew wide of its mark.

"By gosh, but that was a close shave!" ejaculated Stover, as he dropped
back into the loft, while Ralph closed the shutter. His beard was
singed in two places and his face was red and hot. "It's a good thing
that fire wasn't allow to gain no more headway."

He bathed his face and took a drink of water, and then all three began
to speculate upon the next probable movement of the Comanches. By the
clock on the living-room mantel it was now half-past four.

"Father ought to be coming now," said Ralph. "But perhaps he has been
unable to get anybody to come back with him."

"Don't worry about that," returned Poke Stover. "They'll all come if
only they git the word. The buck ague don't go around here." By buck
ague the frontiersman meant the fright which occasionally takes
possession of a pioneer or soldier when facing Indians who are on the
war-path.

It was not long after this that the Indians began to show their
activity once more. Others of the tribe had arrived, until they
numbered eighteen or twenty, the majority of whom were armed with guns,
only one or two of the older warriors sticking to their bows and
arrows.

"I reckon they suspect we are waiting for help, and they mean to do
something before it gits too late," observed Poke Stover. "Perhaps
they'll give us another rush before they withdraw fer good. We had
better inspect all of our shootin'-irons, fer we may want 'em badly."

The frontiersman was right, the Comanches were organising an attack, to
be divided into three parts,--one party to come from the timber
skirting the burn, the second to come up behind the cabin, and the
third to make a dash from behind the cattle shed. The first division
carried a heavy log, with which they hoped to batter down the door in
short order.

"They are coming!" The cry came from Dan, who was watching the timber
in front of the burn. "There are six of them!"

"Here comes another crowd from the shed!" ejaculated Ralph.

"They have divided up," said the frontiersman. "Boys, I'm afraid we now
have a stiff piece of work cut out for ourselves. A third party is
coming from the rear, and there is no telling but what there may be
still more. We must do our best and fight to a finish, for they are on
the war-path for fair, and they'll show us no mercy if once they git at
us. Load up and fire jest as quick as ye can! Give it to 'em hot!"

As Poke Stover finished, he leaped to the window nearest to him, shoved
the muzzle of his weapon through the port-hole, and pulled the trigger.
A yell went up as one of the redskins threw up his arms and fell. But
then the others came on faster than ever, yelling and shouting in a
manner to cause the stoutest heart to falter. Surely, as Stover had
said, it would be a fight to the finish, and they were but three to
seventeen.

Dan was at one port-hole and Ralph at another, and now both fired
simultaneously. Whether the shots were effective they could not tell.
Certainly none of the Indians dropped.

In two minutes more the Comanches were running around the house in
every direction, trying to batter down the door with the log, and
likewise trying to pry open several of the shutters with their
hatchets.

At such close quarters it was next to impossible to fire on them,
although several gun and pistol shots were exchanged. Once an Indian
fired through a port-hole into the bedchamber, and the burning gun-wad
landed on one of the straw bedticks.

"Put it out!" roared Poke Stover, and while Dan trampled on the fire to
extinguish it, the frontiersman let the Indian have a shot in return.

Crash! crash! The heavy bombardment on the door was beginning to tell,
and already there was a long crack in the oaken slab, and the splinters
were flying in all directions.

"We'll take our stand here!" cried Poke Stover, motioning to a spot
facing the door. "Give it to 'em the minit daylight shines through!"
And they did, with such serious results that the party with the ram
dropped that instrument and ran to the opposite side of the house. But
their places were quickly taken by others, and now it looked as if the
door must give way at any instant.

Suddenly, just when it looked as if the next shock to the door must
smash it into a hundred pieces, there came a scattering volley of
rifle-shots from the timber near the river, answered almost instantly
by a second volley from the forest opposite. Then came a yell from the
Comanches, and a cheer in English.

"Hold the cabin! We are coming!" came in Mr. Radbury's well-known
voice, and never had it sounded more comforting to the two boys than at
that moment. Then followed more shots, some striking the cabin and
others hitting the Indians, who were so demoralised that for the moment
they knew not what to do.

"Down with the redskins!" came in the tones of a settler named
Whippler, who had lost his wife in a raid about a year previous. "Kill
every one of 'em! Don't let them escape!"

In his eagerness to annihilate those he so hated, he rode to the front
of the others, discharging his gun and his pistol as he came, and then
leaping upon the nearest redskin with his long hunting-knife. He
brought the red man down with a stroke in the breast, and was then laid
low himself by Red Pony, an under chief, who was in charge during the
absence of Wolf Ear and Bison Head. Red Pony then ran off for his very
life, followed by fourteen others, the remainder being either killed or
wounded.

"Boys! Are either of you wounded?" asked Mr. Radbury, as he leaped from
the mustang he was riding, and rushed into the cabin.

"We are all right, father," answered both lads.

"Thank God for that!" murmured the parent, reverently. "But, see, your
neck is bleeding," he added, to Dan.

"It's only a scratch."

"Good. Poke, I see you managed to get to them. You are a brave fellow,
if ever there was one."

"We've had a hot time of it, father," put in Ralph. "If it hadn't been
for Mr. Stover, I don't know what we would have done."

"Ralph is right," assented Dan. "If he hadn't put out the fire we would
have been burnt out, and the cabin would have gone up in smoke in the
bargain."

"I shall not forget your kindness, Poke," said Mr. Radbury, taking the
frontiersman's horny hand. "But, as you are all right, I fancy I had
better join the others, and follow the miscreants."

"And I'll go with ye," said Poke Stover, who disliked too much praise,
although not averse to some laudatory speech. "We ought to round up
every mother's son of 'em while we are about it."

"Shall we go too?" asked Dan. "I'd rather do that than remain behind,"
he continued.

"You may come, if you'll promise to keep to the rear," answered the
father. "Remember, the Indians are wily, and may set a trap for us."

All went outside, crawling through the battered doorway, and were soon
mounted on several extra mustangs Mr. Radbury had brought along. The
planter informed them that he had brought with him twenty-four men,
including Jim Bowie, who had happened to be in Gonzales at the time.
Soon the party of four were riding hard to catch up with the other
whites, who were following the trail of the Comanches along the bank of
the upper Guadalupe River.

[Illustration: "FOLLOWING THE TRAIL OF THE COMANCHES."]


CHAPTER VIII.

AN UNSUCCESSFUL PURSUIT.


After leaving the vicinity of the cabin, the Comanches struck a trail
leading through a cedar brake over the hill back of the cattle shed.
Here they came together, and without halting swept straight along the
Guadalupe River, as previously mentioned. They felt that the whites
would follow them, and their one hope of safety lay in gaining the
wilderness about San Saba Hill, sixty to seventy miles north of San
Antonio.

The leadership of the whites naturally fell to Colonel Jim Bowie, for
he had been in numerous Indian quarrels, and was a good man on the
trail. It may be here mentioned that Bowie, who was afterward to become
so well known in Texas, was one of two brothers who came to that
territory from Louisiana, after having been engaged for years in the
slave-trade. The man was as bold as he was daring, and it was said that
he knew not the meaning of the word fear.

The Indians were all on horseback, and as their steeds had had a long
rest they were fresh, and made rapid progress. On the other hand, the
mustangs of the whites were tired from the hard night's ride from
Gonzales and vicinity, and they could not keep up the pace, although
urged to do their best by their riders. All of the whites bewailed the
fate of Whippler, and swore to be revenged if given "the ghost of a
chance."

When Amos Radbury, Stover, and the two boys gained the other whites,
they found Bowie's party fording one of the creeks running into the
Guadalupe. The Indians had passed there about ten minutes before, and
it was to be seen that they had not even stopped to water their horses.
All of the settlers' horses were thirsty, and some refused to budge
from the stream until they had slaked their thirst.

"Do you think they will be caught?" asked Dan, as he swept along beside
his father.

"They will not be caught if they can help it," replied Mr. Radbury,
with a faint smile. "They know it will go hard with them if we do come
up with them."

"What of the wounded?" asked Ralph. But his father merely shrugged his
shoulders.

"They'll crawl off in the bushes, and either git away, or die,"
answered Poke Stover, philosophically. To him the life of an Indian was
of no account. He had never considered that an Indian might be educated
into becoming a useful member of the great human family.

On and on swept the little body of determined whites, each with his gun
in his hands, and his eyes on the alert for the first sign of danger.
The trail was still along the river, but presently it branched off, and
entered an _arrayo_, or gully, thick with thorny plants and entangling
vines. At the end of the _arrayo_ was a rocky plateau, and here for
the time being the trail was lost.

"The Indian that's leading them knows his business," remarked Colonel
Bowie, as he brought his command to a halt.

"That's right, but we'll soon be on his tail ag'in," returned Poke
Stover, who had come to his side. "Let's spread out in a fan, colonel;"
and this was done, each man examining his part of the great semicircle
with extreme care. A short while after, the trail was again struck, and
they swept on. But at both this place and at the ford valuable time had
been lost.

Noon found the Comanches still out of sight and hearing. But the trail
was fresh and easily seen, and it seemed only a question of endurance
upon one side or the other.

"If it wasn't for the jaded hosses," sighed Poke Stover. His own steed
was fairly fresh, but it would have been foolhardy for him to have gone
on ahead of the main body, with perhaps only one or two others being
able to do likewise. The Comanches would have liked nothing better than
to have gotten at the whites one at a time.

As the afternoon came and went, the party in pursuit began to grow
hungry. A few of the horsemen had brought rations with them, and these
were divided, each man and boy eating as he rode on. Some of the men
likewise carried liquor, and this was also divided, although Ralph and
Dan procured drinks of water at a spring instead. In those days it was
share and share alike with all of the settlers, and one man was
considered as good as another so long as he was honest and willing to
work. For dandies, from Philadelphia, New York, or other large cities,
the Texans had no use, nor did they love those who tried to show off
their learning. They were whole-souled, as it is called, to the core,
and they wanted everybody else to be so, too.

It was growing dark when Bowie called a halt on the edge of a small
clearing leading up to a hill thickly overgrown with scrub pines.

"We must be careful here, men," he said. "They may be scattered along
yonder timber belt, watching for us to uncover ourselves. We had better
move to the right and the left, and give the old signal if any of the
redskins appear in sight."

The split was made, but the Radburys and Poke Stover kept together. One
Indian was discovered, and the settler who saw him at once shouted, as
prearranged. Then the Indians, seeing that the attempt to draw the
whites into the open had failed, dashed along up the hillside, as
rapidly as the tangle of growth permitted. A number of shots were
exchanged, but nobody was hit.

During the afternoon one of the men had brought down a wild turkey, and
another several hares, for game of all kinds was still thick.

"That will do for supper," said Mr. Radbury. "But we will have to be
careful how we build a fire."

At seven o'clock the chase came to an end for the day, the jaded ponies
refusing to climb the hill that loomed up before them. One of the
ponies was a bucker, and threw his rider over his head into a
mesquite-bush.

"Thet settles Bill Darson," drawled the Texan, as he extricated himself
from his difficulty. "When the pony kicks, I kick, too. We don't go no
further jest now, hyer me!"

But Bowie, Mr. Radbury, and several others insisted upon gaining the
brow of the hill, as a point of vantage, and all plodded to the top,
where they went into camp in the midst of the trees, half a dozen men
being sent out to do picket duty, so that Bison Head's band might not
crawl up during the night and surprise them.

"I'd like to know what became of Wolf Ear and Hank Stiger," remarked
Dan, as he flung himself on the ground, glad enough to get out of his
high and uncomfortable Mexican saddle.

"They know enough to git out o' sight when thar's a fight on," answered
Poke Stover, with a broad laugh. "Them kind o' varmin always does."
Usually the frontiersman spoke fair English, but at times he dropped
into the vernacular of the plains.

"I hope he doesn't go back to the cabin, now it's deserted," put in
Ralph.

"He may do that!" burst out Dan. "I never thought of it before." And he
mentioned the matter to his father.

"He will hardly dare to go back, for other settlers will be coming up
from time to time," said Mr. Radbury. "He knows only too well that he
is already in bad favour with all straight-forward men."

"He's a sneak," said Ralph. "But by the way, father, you haven't told
us your story yet, although we have told ours."

"There is not much to tell, Ralph. I went for the deer, as you know. I
was dragging it back to the cabin, when I caught sight of several
Indians, and, by their movements, I saw that they wanted to cut me off
and, more than likely, slay me. I at once abandoned the deer and ran
deeper than ever into the woods."

"Of course they followed you?" came from Dan.

"Yes, they followed me, but only one or two shots were exchanged, and I
was not hit. I think I wounded one Indian, but I am not certain. Then I
gave them the slip and climbed into the king pine, as you boys named
the tree. You remember the signal I gave you?"

"To be sure."

"I meant I would try to get help near by, if possible. I had seen
several lumbermen around, and I fancied they might be down the river a
mile or so. I ran along the river with all my might, and there met Poke
Stover and told him what was happening. He at once agreed to go to your
aid, and urged me to arouse the settlers around Gonzales. He promised
to hold the cabin and stand by you as long as he could draw his
breath."

"And he did it!" cried Ralph. "He's a noble man."

"At first I could find nobody at home," went on Mr. Radbury. "Joel
Nalitt was away, and at the Runyons' only the women folks were in. But
over to the Powers's ranch I met Powers, Anderson, Striker, and a
German, who was a stranger, and they said they would all come along.
Anderson rode over to Whippler's, and those two brought along the other
men. It's too bad that Whippler was killed."

All in the party agreed with Mr. Radbury in this, although some said
that it was better Whippler should be killed than some man with a wife
and children. Whippler and his late wife had never had any offspring.

The night was raw and cold, and toward morning a fine rain set in,
adding greatly to the discomforts of the whites. The game brought down
proved but a scanty meal all around, and for breakfast there remained
absolutely nothing.

"This is too bad," said Dan, referring to the rain. He was soaked to
the skin, and so was everybody else in the party.

The trail was taken up as soon as it was light enough to see, and the
Indians were followed fully fifteen miles, over a winding way leading
over hills and rocks, and through immense belts of timber land. They
had to ford several streams, and at one of these points they stopped
for an hour to catch and cook some black bass, which were plentiful.
Toward nightfall the chase came to an end.

"It's no use," said one of the oldest of the settlers. "They've got too
good a start of us, and it will be foolishness for a mere handful of
whites to ride right into the Indian country. They'll lay a trap and
massacre every one of us."

All of the others agreed with the spokesman, and it was not long before
the party was riding back toward Gonzales. At first they followed the
winding trail, but, coming to one of the numerous creeks of the
vicinity, they branched off and took almost a direct route to the town.

"Will you go back with us?" asked Mr. Radbury of Poke Stover, when it
came time for the Radburys to separate from the others. The ranch home
could be seen from the top of a neighbouring hill, and all seemed to be
as they had left it two days before.

"Yes, I reckon I will," answered the frontiersman. "I ain't got nothin'
else to do, and ye may want an extra man about fer a day or two, jest
for to keep his eye open."

The storm had cleared away, and the sun was shining brightly as the
party of four rode up to the battered door of the deserted cabin. Down
around the cattle shed the cows were browsing away as usual, and
several of the pigs gave Ralph a grunt of recognition as he passed
them.

"Home again!" cried Dan, and hopping to the ground he crawled through
the doorway into the living-room of the cabin. As he went in he noticed
that the body of the dead red man had been removed from the doorstep.

"Is it all right?" asked Ralph, when a cry from his brother aroused
him.

"An Indian!" came from Dan. He had discovered a wounded red man lying
on the floor in the corner. Then he gazed around the room and glanced
into the sleeping apartment.

"Father, come in, quick!" he went on. "Somebody has been here, and has
carried off a dozen or more things. And your desk is broken open, too,
and all your papers are scattered about. Did you have any money in the
desk?"


CHAPTER IX.

BIG FOOT AND THE MISSING PAPERS.


Dan's cry brought Mr. Radbury into the cabin without further delay,
followed by Ralph and Poke Stover.

"What has been stolen?" queried Amos Radbury. "I see that old
Revolutionary sword of your grandfather is gone."

"So are two of the pistols, and that half dozen solid silver spoons
mother got from Aunt Elizabeth," answered Dan. "But what of money in
the desk?"

"I had but little--not over twenty dollars all told, Dan." Mr. Radbury
walked over to the little desk, which was a rude affair made by himself
during his leisure hours. "Yes, it's been ransacked pretty thoroughly."

"Is anything missing?" asked Ralph.

"I can't say." Amos Radbury looked over a number of the papers. "I
guess they are all right. No, there is my discharge from the army,
after the war of 1812. The rascal who broke open the desk took the
pleasure of tearing that in half." He rummaged about a bit more.
"Hullo, it's gone!" he cried.

"What's gone?" came from both boys.

"The papers relating to this grant of land."

"Are you sure?" asked Dan.

"Yes, it isn't anywhere about."

Mr. Radbury was more worried about the papers pertaining to the land
grant than over anything else, and at once a search was instituted,
outside of the ranch home as well as indoors. It proved of no
avail,--the papers were gone.

"Will it do much harm?" asked Ralph, who knew very little as yet about
real estate matters.

"It may and it may not," answered the father. "Of course the grant is
recorded, but with matters in such a revolutionary state the records
may at some time be destroyed, and then somebody else might come
forward and claim this grant."

"Well, I reckon you won't give it up, partner," put in Poke Stover,
suggestively.

"Not without a fight, Stover," was Mr. Radbury's firm answer. "The land
is mine, paid for, and I'll hold it, papers or no papers, and no matter
how the affairs of the government turn."

"I wonder who was the thief," mused Dan. "I don't believe it was an
Indian. He might take the other things, but he wouldn't know anything
about the papers, nor care for them."

"He might be cute enough to take the papers just to throw us off the
scent," suggested Ralph.

"You're wrong, Ralph, for he wouldn't know one paper from another."

"But he'd know the land papers were important, because of the seals on
them," persisted the youngest Radbury.

The Indian in the corner now demanded their attention. He was plainly
in a bad way, and Poke Stover said it was very doubtful if he would
live.

"If he does pull through it will only be because he's a redskin and as
tough as all creation," added the old frontiersman.

In his guttural tongue the redskin appealed to Dan for a drink of
water.

"Certainly, I'll give you a drink," answered the boy, kindly, and went
out to get some water that was cool. After the Indian had had his fill,
Dan used the remainder of the water in washing his wounds and then
bound them up. After this he got out an old blanket, and he and Ralph
placed the wounded fellow on this. Before, the red man's face had had a
scowl on it, but now it became more friendly.

"White boys heap good," he grunted. "Big Foot no forget dem," and he
nodded his head suggestively. He had been shot in the leg, and was
suffering from loss of blood.

"Tell me who robbed the cabin," said Dan, for he felt that Big Foot had
had nothing to do with it.

The Indian knit his brow in speculation.

"White boy ask Big Foot hard question," he said, presently.

"But you must know."

"Big Foot t'ink know, not sure. Big Foot crawl in here out of hot sun.
He half dead. Udder man come, rob place while Big Foot half dead."

"Well, who do you imagine the other man was? It couldn't have been one
of your tribe."

"I t'ink him half my tribe. I t'ink him 'Merican-Indian, um Hank
Stiger."

"Hank Stiger!" cried Dan. "Father, did you hear that?"

"What is it, Dan?"

"This Indian was half in a faint when the cabin was robbed, but he
thinks the thief was Hank Stiger."

"That is not improbable, for Stiger was around this vicinity and did
not fight with the Comanches. He could easily have come in after we
went off on the trail. When was the robbery committed?"

"Him come in at the last sundown," answered Big Foot, meaning the
evening before.

"Alone?"

"Yes."

"And which way did he go?"

The wounded red man could not answer this query, and he now became so
exhausted that the others questioned him no further.

The fire was started up, and a generous meal for all hands was
prepared, of which the Indian was given all that was good for him. Then
the red man went to sleep, while the Radburys began to mend the
battered door and put things into shape generally. Poke Stover went off
to the timber, to find out what had become of Ralph's deer, and to see
if any of the enemy were still lurking in the vicinity.

It was learned by nightfall that no Indians were around for miles, and
this made the Radburys breathe much more easily. Strange to say, Stover
had found the deer just where Mr. Radbury had left it, and now brought
it in.

"A good shot, lad," said the old frontiersman to Ralph. "No one could
have made a better."

"Yes, it was a good shot," answered the boy. "I'm afraid I'll not be
able to do as well every time."

"You mustn't expect it. If you could do as well every time you'd be as
fine a shot as Davy Crockett himself."

"They tell me Crockett thinks of coming down to Texas," put in Mr.
Radbury. "They say he is tired of things up in Tennessee."

"Yes, I heard he was coming down," replied Poke Stover. "Well, he's a
wonderful old fighter, and if we have any trouble with the Mexicans ye
can reckon on it as how he'll be to the front from the very start." How
true was the old frontiersman's prediction the future chapters of our
tale will show.

They hardly knew what to do with the Indian. Stover wished to turn him
out to shift for himself, but the boys pleaded for the wounded red man,
and in the end he was allowed to remain where he was. The Radburys
retired to their sleeping-apartment, while Stover made himself
comfortable in front of the big open fireplace. All, however, slept, as
the saying goes, "with one eye open."

The next week was a busy one. It was found that not only had the
Indians attacked the cabin, but they had also tried to wreck the cattle
shed, and both structures had to be mended and put into order. During
the absence of the settlers some of the cattle and the mustangs had
strayed away to other ranges, and these had to be rounded up, for in
those days men of limited means, like Mr. Radbury, did not allow their
live stock to wander far away, to be rounded up once or twice a year.
If they had allowed this, cattle and ponies might have gotten into the
Indian country and never been heard of again.

At the end of the week Poke Stover left, stating that he was going to
make a trip to San Antonio de Bexar, to learn how matters were going
politically.

"There may be a scrap on already," he remarked, "and, if so, I don't
want to be sitting here, sucking my thumbs."

"I admire your sentiment," replied Mr. Radbury. "If there is trouble,
can I rely upon you to give me warning?"

"Certainly," answered Poke Stover.

He left on Saturday morning, and on Sunday Big Foot sat up for the
first time. The Radburys had done their best for him, and for this he
was extremely grateful.

"Big Foot pay back some day," he said. "Pay back sure." The boys hardly
gave attention to these words, but had good cause to remember them
later.

During the next few months matters ran smoothly, until one day when
some of the settlers from Gonzales came in. They reported another
Indian uprising farther eastward, and declared that the local
government was doing nothing to check the red men.

"We must take the law into our own hands, neighbour Radbury," said one,
who lived a matter of thirty miles away, yet considered himself a
fairly close neighbour. "The Mexicans don't care a rap for us, and I
reckon they'd just as lief see the Injuns ride over us as not."

"I trust Santa Anna does the right thing by us," answered Mr. Radbury.

"I wouldn't trust any of 'em."

"Well, if they don't do right, they had better look out for Sam
Houston, or he'll be on their heels."

"Yes, I've great faith in Houston," was the other settler's answer.
"He's a lawyer and a fighter, and I reckon he can whip 'em both in the
court-room or on the battle-field."


CHAPTER X.

THE SITUATION IN MEXICO.


In his conversation with his neighbour, Mr. Radbury had mentioned Santa
Anna, and it may be as well to look for a moment at this remarkable
personage, who at that time, and for several years to follow, was the
most important man in Mexico.

Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna was born in Jalapa, in 1795, and entered
the army at an early age. With Iturbide he joined in the revolution and
came out a brigadier-general, and was made commandant of Vera Cruz. A
few years later he organised a revolt and overthrew the man he had
aided, and in 1828 he deposed Pedraza and put Guerrero in his place.

So much of war would have satisfied any ordinary man, but it did not
satisfy General Santa Anna, who was cruel and cunning to the last
degree, and prided himself on being "The Napoleon of the West," as he
styled himself. He wanted Mexico for his own, and in 1829 he defeated a
large division of the Spanish army, that had landed at Tampico for the
purpose of reconquering the country.

Having saved the Confederation, as he put it, Santa Anna considered
that he had more of a right to Mexico than ever, and in 1832 he got
into a wrangle with Bustamente, who was then occupying the Mexican
presidential chair, with the result that Bustamente was banished by
Santa Anna's followers, who forthwith made the general president. At
this Santa Anna went still further by dissolving the Mexican congress,
which action made him virtually a dictator. How it was that the
Mexicans at large stood such treatment is one of the political
mysteries of the age that has never been explained.

Yet Santa Anna's dictatorship, if such it may be called, was a position
full of peril. There was constant wrangling in nearly every state of
the Confederation, and in a number of places there were actual
outbreaks, which might have resulted seriously had Santa Anna not
nipped them promptly in the bud. Stephen Austin had gone to Mexico to
further the interests of the Texans, and been there imprisoned for
political reasons. This helped along the war between Texas and Mexico,
which was bound to burst sooner or later.

The first dark cloud came in the passage of a decree reducing the
number of the militia to one man for every five hundred inhabitants,
and requiring all the remaining armed persons to give up their weapons.
The Texans refused to submit, stating that they needed all the
protection they could get, on account of the Indians and because of the
desperadoes who flocked into the territory. In the meantime Mexico had
sent many of her jailbirds to settle in Texas.

While this was going on, during the summer of 1835, Austin returned
from his imprisonment in Mexico, and was given a grand public banquet
at Brazoria. In his speech there he counselled moderation, but declared
that the civil government was going to pieces, and that the Texans must
take care of themselves. He still believed in Santa Anna and his golden
promises, hoping against hope for a peaceful change for the better.

At San Antonio were stationed five hundred Mexican soldiers, under
Colonel Ugartchea, and, according to orders, this command commenced to
disarm such of the Texans as had failed to comply with the decree
regarding firearms. At Gonzales, fifty miles to the eastward, the
settlers had a four-pounder, a brass cannon given to them by the
government for protection against the Indians.

"The people of Gonzales must give up the cannon," said Colonel
Ugartchea. "Tell them to send it to Bexar without delay."

"We need the cannon," said the people of Gonzales. "It's the only
cannon we have along the whole river front."

"Santa Anna's orders must be obeyed," was the Mexican colonel's
comment, and he despatched a force of one hundred and fifty dragoons,
under Captain Castinado, to take the cannon by force. The Mexican
soldiers arrived at the river on September 28th. On the opposite side
of the stream was Gonzales, but the ferry-boat was on that side, too.

The Mexican commander waved for the boat, but no attention was paid to
his movement. Then a horn was blown, but still the Texans paid no
attention.

"We will march to the ford," cried the Mexican captain, and the
dragoons started. But on reaching the ford, half a mile below the town,
they found themselves confronted by Captain Albert Martin, a merchant
of the place, backed up by several dozens of determined-looking Texans.

The alarm had now gone forth, and express riders rode their steeds
almost to death to summon the people of Bastrop, Victoria, and other
places. Soon the settlers began to flock in, all on horseback and
armed, ready to do or die for Texas, as the case might be. With the
number were Mr. Radbury and Dan. Dan had been to Gonzales to buy some
household stores, and his father, hearing of the uprising, had hastened
down the river to find his son and see that no harm befell him. This
had left Ralph home alone, saving for the company of Pompey Shuck, a
negro, who had, during the summer, followed Mr. Radbury from the old
home in Georgia and insisted that he be taken in and set to work, "jess
as on de ole plantation, Mars' Radbury." Big Foot, the Indian, had
departed some time before Pompey's arrival.

"This looks like a fight, father," observed Dan, as his parent joined
him on the bank of the stream, where Dan had gone, following Captain
Martin.

"It certainly looks like trouble," answered Mr. Radbury, as he gazed at
the Mexican dragoons with anxiety. "That cannon may be responsible for
a whole lot of bloodshed."

"Well, they haven't any right to disarm us," returned the youth,
determinedly. "You'll fight first, won't you?"

"Perhaps I will; it will depend upon circumstances," was the
non-committal reply. Amos Radbury was no "fire-eater," and, like
Austin, preferred a settlement without a passage at arms.

At the ford the Mexican commander had ridden into the water to consult
with the leader of the Texans.

"I am sent here to obtain the cannon you are holding," he said. "There
is my order," and he held it out.

"We don't dispute the order, captain," was the reply. "But we consider
it unjust to ask us to give up a piece that we may need against the
Indians."

"If you will give up the cannon you will be protected."

"We haven't been protected for a long while. We have had to protect
ourselves."

"You are thinking of using that cannon against the government," was the
angry remark of the Mexican commander.

"We are not thinking of doing so,--but it may be we will be forced to
do so," was the significant reply.

"I am coming over, and I demand the cannon," went on the Mexican
leader, pompously.

"If you dare to come over, it will be at the peril of your life," was
the calm return.

The Mexican commander continued to bluster and threaten, but all to no
purpose, and at length he withdrew his force from the ford, and went
into temporary camp in a valley opposite to Gonzales.

It was now night, and the town was at a white heat. Meetings were held
in half a dozen places, and while some counselled delay others were for
forcing the fighting. In the end, however, it was decided to wait, and
in the meantime pickets were sent out to watch the Mexicans so that
they might not enter Gonzales by stealth.

"I wonder if they will come over to-night," said Dan, as he and his
father picked their way along the river to where forty or fifty
horsemen who owned ranches in the vicinity had pitched their
headquarters, the taverns in the town being already overcrowded.

"I doubt it, Dan. We have fully as many men, if not more, and a Mexican
soldier never loves to fight in the dark."

"Perhaps the Mexican captain has sent back for reinforcements."

"That may be. Well, all we can do is to watch and be on guard."

By this it will be seen that Mr. Radbury was as anxious as any one to
keep the cannon. He had refused to give up any of his firearms, and had
buried two of his pistols under the floor of the cabin home.

The night wore away without any alarm sounding, and the next day the
Mexican commander sent another demand for the cannon, and on the day
following he asked that a time be set for a general conference
regarding the now precious bit of property.

The conference was refused, and instead he was asked to vacate his
position so close to Gonzales. This he would not do, and all of the
settlers now agreed that he was awaiting reinforcements from Bexar.

"He will wait for Colonel Ugartchea to come up with the balance of the
command, and then wipe us out altogether," said one.

"Or perhaps he is waiting for Cos to come up," said another. It was
known that the Mexican general, Cos, was on the march for San Antonio
de Bexar with six hundred additional troops for the garrison of that
city.

The morning of the first of October came foggy and disagreeable. But
little could be seen beyond the river bank, and it was not known if the
Mexican command was advancing, retreating, or standing still. Again the
leaders of the Texans met, and it was unanimously decided not to delay
action longer, but if the Mexicans were still on the opposite side of
the stream to compel them to move away before their force could be
increased. Volunteers were called for to cross the river with the brass
cannon and begin an attack, and a hundred and sixty Texans rode to the
front for that purpose. Mr. Radbury was too loyal-hearted a man to hang
back, and as Dan begged very hard to go too, he was permitted to join
half a dozen young men who brought up the rear.


CHAPTER XI.

THE OPENING OF THE WAR.


To get so many men across the river by boat would have taxed the
resources of Gonzales to the utmost, so the majority of the Texans went
around by way of the ford, only a few going over in the ferry with the
four-pounder.

The trip was made during the night of October first, and every man was
cautioned to be as silent as possible.

"We'll give them a surprise," said Dan to one of the young men, a
_ranchero_ named Henry Parker. He had known Henry Parker for over
a year, and the two were warm friends.

"Or get a surprise," was the answer. "They may be watching us just as
hard as we are watching them."

"Pooh! I am not afraid of a greaser!"

"Neither am I. But it will pay to be careful."

They had passed the ford, and now in the utter darkness the little band
made its way through the brush toward the spot where the Mexican
command had been in camp before the fog settled down.

Coming closer, the Texans were spread out in a sort of skirmish line,
with the four-pounder in the centre. Dan and his friend were on the
extreme right, down by the water's edge.

Here there was more than one little inlet to cross, and while Dan's
horse was picking his steps the youth fancied he detected a sudden
movement among the bushes overhanging the water's edge.

[Illustration: "'HOLD ON!' HE CRIED TO HENRY PARKER. 'SOMETHING IS IN
THAT BUSH!'"]

"Hold on," he cried to Henry Parker. "Something is in that bush."

"Man or beast?" whispered Henry, and placed his hand to the trigger of
his gun.

"I can't say. Wait till I investigate."

Leaving his mustang in his friend's care, Dan leaped to the ground and
ran close to the bushes. As he did this, he stumbled into a hole and
fell. He picked himself up, and while doing so heard a splash and saw
some dark object disappear beneath the river's surface.

"Come here! Something is up!" he called to Henry, and at once his
friend complied, and both ran down to the water's edge and strained
their eyes to pierce the gloom and the fog.

"What did you see?"

"Something slipped into the water, and I am half of the opinion it was
a man."

"Then it must have been a Mexican!"

"To be sure. Stay here and watch, and I'll go down the stream a bit. He
ought to come up soon."

Dan had hardly spoken when he espied a head coming up but thirty or
forty feet away. It was the head of a Mexican soldier, evidently a spy.

"Halt there!" cried Dan. "Come back here, or I'll fire!"

It is doubtful if he would have fired on the swimmer, having no desire
to open the war in person, but his threat had considerable effect.

"No shoota me!" cried the Mexican. "No shoota!" And then he continued
to talk in Spanish, which Dan and his friend understood, but
imperfectly.

"I want you to come back here," went on the youth, and he pointed his
gun.

At this the Mexican dove out of sight, not to come up for a distance of
a rod or more.

"Shoot him--you have the right," urged Henry. "Or else I'll do it."

"Don't, Henry, it might be murder. Besides, we were ordered not to
discharge any firearms until we received orders. A shot down here would
alarm the whole Mexican camp."

"But we don't want that rascal to escape, Dan."

"I have it." Dan looked around and soon found several fair-sized
stones. "Come back at once!" he ordered, and, taking aim, he let drive
with one of the stones.

Dan had always been good at that sort of thing, and the stone landed,
as intended, on the Mexican's back. He let out a howl of pain, so loud
that several Texans at once rode up to the vicinity to learn what was
the matter.

"Yes, he's got to come ashore," declared one of the men. "He may be a
spy who has been over to Gonzales, and carries some kind of a message."
He raised his voice in Spanish. "Come ashore, or we'll shoot you; do
you hear?"

_"Si, capitan_" ("Yes, captain"), was the answer, and without further
ado the Mexican turned and came back to the river bank. As he crawled
out, wet and muddy, he looked the picture of despair.

"It's Pietro the gambler, from Bastrop," said one of the Texans, after
a close scrutiny. "I'll wager he was going to give us away to the
greasers in camp."

"No, no, me watch fight, dat's all, señor," said the Mexican, who was
noted not only for his skill at cards but also for his skill at
cheating. "Pietro fight for Texans when fight 't all."

"That don't go down, you card-sharp!" cried another of the men. "I know
him well, and he would cheat his own grandmother if he could. Let us
make him a prisoner, at least until this business we are on is over."

So it was agreed, and despite the gamblers' protests he was bound hands
and feet and tied up to a near-by tree. Had he not been captured, the
fight so close at hand would probably not have come off.

On went the Texans, until a point was gained overlooking the camping
spot of the Mexicans. The advance guard reported that Captain Castinado
was still at the place with his dragoons.

"Then we'll wait until daybreak and open up on them," said the Texans,
and went into temporary camp. It is doubtful if any of the number
closed his eyes for the balance of that never-to-be-forgotten night. To
them this contest was to be like that of Concord and Lexington to the
patriots of 1775,--it was to mark the dawn of Texan liberty.

The Mexicans had located at a spot called DeWitt's mound; while the
Texans occupied a position farther down the valley and close to the
river. As soon as it began to grow light, the four-pounder was placed
in position, and the rough but rugged little army was drawn up in
battle array. Only here and there was there a man in uniform, and the
weapons were of all sorts and sizes. Leaders and privates had come
over, some on horseback, some on ponies, and others on foot.

"Give it to them!" came the sharp order, when it was light enough to
locate the Mexicans with certainty, and the brass four-pounder belched
forth its contents, and the battle was opened at last.

"Forward!" was the cry down the line, and away swept the Texans, in two
long lines, Mr. Radbury well to the front, and Dan not very far behind.

The Mexicans had been taken completely by surprise and for the moment
knew not what to do. But they quickly organised and returned the fire,
and then the Texans swept closer, and the constant crack, crack, of the
musketry could be heard upon every side.

"Gracious, this is war, sure!" cried Dan, as he discharged his gun and
proceeded to reload with all speed, while still riding forward. "It
looks as if we were going to have a hand-to-hand encounter."

"Forward, for the liberty of Texas!" shouted one of the leaders, and a
score of voices took up the cry. "For the liberty of Texas! For the
liberty of Texas!" It was a battle-cry fit to inspire any body of men.

The Mexicans could not withstand such an onslaught, and, having fired
several rounds, they broke and began to retreat before the Texans could
get within two hundred yards of them. Away they went for the road
leading to San Antonio, the Texans following them for some distance and
then giving up the chase.

The first fight for Texan independence had been fought and won, and a
mighty cheer went up, which was several times repeated. It was found
that four of the Mexicans had been killed and several wounded, while
the Texans had suffered little or nothing.

"Father, we have gained the day!" exclaimed Dan, as he rode up to his
parent. Somehow, he had never felt so proud before in his life.

"Yes, we have gained the day," answered Mr. Radbury. "The question is,
what next? You may be sure the government will not let this go by
unnoticed."

"The government! What government?" put in one old settler. "I
acknowledge no government but that of the independent State of Texas!"
And a cheer went up.

"Let us hope it will be so, neighbour Johnson," went on Mr. Radbury.
"But what if Santa Anna send out a large army to crush us?"

"He can't do it!" came from a dozen voices. "Let him come, and we'll
show him what real American blood and backbone can do."

"We must organise, and without further delay," said one of the leaders.
"We must have a regularly formed Texan army inside of thirty days, or
else we'll have to pay the piper, and that means with Santa Anna that
we'll either get a dose of lead or else dance on nothing," meaning they
would all be shot or hung. This may seem an extravagant statement, but
in view of what followed it was far from being so.


CHAPTER XII.

THE MARCH ON SAN ANTONIO.


The Mexicans had been routed, and for over a week matters went along
quietly in the vicinity of Gonzales; that is, there was no further
fighting. Meetings there were without number, and young and old began
to drill and to talk of nothing but military matters.

"Will you join the army, father?" asked Dan, when, two days after the
fight, he and his parent returned to the ranch home.

"I do not see how I can avoid it," answered Mr. Radbury. "Many of the
neighbours are going, and it might appear cowardly to hang back.
Besides, I must say that, after long thought, I have come to the
conclusion that there is nothing for us to do but to fight for our
rights."

"Hurrah! I knew you would say that," cried Dan. "We must be free by all
means, and then perhaps some day we'll become joined to the United
States."

"That is for after consideration," smiled Mr. Radbury, but the thought
had often crossed his own mind.

Ralph and the negro were anxious to hear the particulars of what had
occurred, and the boy listened to his brother's tale in open-mouthed
amazement.

"A real battle! Oh, Dan, how I wish I had been there!"

"Well, to tell the truth, it was rather one-sided. The Mexicans did not
stand up in front of us long."

"And what are they going to do next?"

"Nobody knows. But there will be war, beyond a doubt."

"Oh, yes, I suppose General Santa Anna will be as mad as a hornet when
he hears of the affair. And all over an old brass cannon, too!" And
Ralph gave a laugh.

Matters were going along smoothly at the ranch, for Pompey was a
faithful worker and had dropped into the routine without an effort. Mr.
Radbury was glad that he had come, for he felt that he wanted a man
around, in case the coming war carried him a distance from home.

As intimated, the fight at Gonzales became the talk of all Texas, and,
the day after the contest, the committee organised at San Felipe issued
a statement and called upon each man in Texas to decide for himself
whether or not he would submit to the destruction of his rights and
liberties by the central government of Mexico, and stating that the war
had begun.

While meetings were going on in a dozen places or more, and
frontiersmen and settlers were hurrying to the scene of action, a force
of about forty men, under the leadership of Captain Collingsworth,
gathered for the purpose of capturing Goliad, a small town on the lower
San Antonio River. The river was gained on the night of October 9th,
and while scouts were out reconnoitring, the brave little band was
joined by Colonel Ben Milam, an old Texan _empresario_, who had been
confined for political reasons in the jail at Monterey. Of this gallant
man we will hear more later.

Finding the coast clear, the band entered the town, and silently made
their way to the quarters of Lieutenant-Colonel Sandoval, the
commandant. They were less than a hundred feet from the garrison when a
sentry discovered them and gave the alarm. The sentry was shot down on
the spot, and then the door was splintered to kindling-wood with axes,
and the Texans poured into the building, and the commandant was made a
prisoner. There was great surprise for several minutes, but the Mexican
soldiers had been taken off their guard, and could offer little
resistance. Twenty-five were captured, and the rest escaped in the
darkness. By this quick movement the Texans gained a quantity of
valuable army stores, horses, three pieces of artillery, and five
hundred guns and pistols.

As Gonzales had been the starting-point of the war, it now became the
general centre for the gathering Texan army, and by the middle of
October there were gathered there between three and four hundred men
who were willing and anxious to serve their country. By common consent
Austin was appointed chief in command, with the title of general. The
volunteers, as they were called, were formed into a regiment, with John
H. Moore as colonel. Old Colonel Milam, who had just arrived from
Goliad, was made chief of a band of scouts,--men who did valiant
service from the beginning to the end of the war.

It was to this regiment that Mr. Radbury became attached, and Dan and
Ralph rode down to Gonzales to see their parent join. As Mr. Radbury
was a veteran of the war of 1812, he was given the position of a
lieutenant. Drilling went on constantly, and the little regiment was
gotten into the best condition that the means at hand afforded. In the
meantime other volunteers poured in daily.

At first the Texans had thought to act only on the defensive, but, as
the days slipped by, the war spirit grew on the settlers, and they said
they wanted the thing "over and done with," that they might return to
their homes and prepare for the winter. It was then decided to march
toward San Antonio, to see if the Mexicans would come out of the
stronghold to do them battle.

"Good-bye, boys," said Mr. Radbury, when the order was passed around to
prepare for the march. "It may be some time before I see you again."

"I wish I could go," answered Dan, pleadingly.

"Your time may come, Dan. But for the present I think we have enough
men for this expedition. I think you and Ralph will have enough to do
around the ranch, with me absent."

"But if I hear you are in trouble, father, I shall come on at once,"
went on Dan, and from this decision his parent could not dissuade him.

The troops were soon on the way, Dan and Ralph riding several miles
with their parent. Then, at the top of the hill, they separated. But
the boys remained on the hill until the soldiers were lost to sight in
the distance on the dusty plain below.

"Good-bye, and may success go with them!" cried Ralph, half sadly. "I
do hope father comes back safe and sound."

"If he doesn't, I shall take his place in the ranks," replied Dan,
quickly. "But come, we must be getting home now, or Pompey will be
anxious about us."

"Here comes a horseman, riding like the wind," came from the younger
Radbury, a moment later. "I declare, it's Poke Stover!"

"Hullo, boys!" cried the old frontiersman, as he came up. "What are ye
a-doin' here?"

"We just saw the troops off for San Antonio," answered Dan.

"Gone this way?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"An hour ago. See that black line over yonder? That's our army."

"Whoopee! I was afraid I'd be too late. Good-bye. We are bound to bring
them greasers to terms this trip!" And, with a wave of his sombrero,
Poke Stover rode off as rapidly as he had come.

"He'll be a whole company in himself," was Ralph's comment. "He doesn't
think any more of a Mexican soldier than he does of a fly, to bother
him."

They were soon on the way to Gonzales, where they loaded their ponies
with stores for the ranch. This accomplished, they set on up the river,
hoping to reach the ranch home by night.

In those days the banks of the Guadalupe River were altogether
different from to-day. Where numerous settlements now exist were then
immense belts of timber, with here and there a burn, or a stretch of
thorns and entangling vines. In some spots the banks were steep and
rocky as to-day, and these rocks were the homes of numerous wild
animals, including the fierce Texan wolf, the puma, the jaguar, the
wildcat, and the black bear. The stream was full of fish, the best of
which was the black bass, which, I believe, still holds its own in many
Texan waters.

As the boys passed along the narrow wagon trail, which their father and
other pioneers had blazed for themselves, they kept their eyes on the
alert for any wild beasts that might appear, having no desire to let a
fierce and hungry wolf pounce down suddenly upon themselves or their
steeds, or a black bear stalk out to embrace them. Their packs lay
behind them, and they held their guns on the saddle in front.

They were thus passing through the largest of the timber belts when the
howl of a wolf reached their ears. It was immediately answered by a
similar howl from another wolf. Both came from directly in front.

"Hullo! a wolf--two wolves!" cried Ralph, as he brought his pony to a
halt. "I don't like that much."

"Is your gun all right?" came quickly from his brother.

"Yes."

The two lads remained motionless in the saddle for several minutes,
listening. No other howl reached their ears, and the only sounds were
that of the rushing stream as it tumbled over some rocks, and the cries
of the night birds and the humming of the insects.

"Let us set up a yell," suggested Dan. "That may scare them off."

They called out at the top of their lungs several times. One distant
howl answered them, then all became as silent as before.

"We may as well go on," said the older brother. "We'll be as safe
moving as standing still. But keep your eyes peeled, Ralph."

They moved on slowly, with eyes turned to the right and the left, and
keeping as far as possible from the brushwood and the low-hanging
boughs of the trees. The mustangs seemed to realise that all was not
right, and pricked up their ears and smelled the air.


CHAPTER XIII.

A FIGHT WITH A PUMA.


"By George! Something is wrong now!"

'Boys and young men are the speakers, boys and young men the audience,
and their efforts are received with undiscriminating praise.'
The same faults that were generated in the schools were intensified
in after-life.

In the law courts the same smart epigrams, the same meretricious
style were required. No true method had been taught, with the result
that 'frivolity of style, shallow thoughts, and disorderly structure'
prevailed; orators imitated the rhythms of the stage and actually
made it their boast that their speeches would form fitting
accompaniments to song and dance.

It became a common saying that 'our orators speak voluptuously, while
our actors dance eloquently'.[72] Poetical colour was demanded of the
orator, rhetorical colour of the poet. The literary and rhetorical
stages of education reacted on one another.[73]
Further, just as the young poet had to his great detriment been
encouraged to recite at school, so he had to recite if he was to
win fame for his verse in the larger world.

Even in a saner society poetry written primarily for recitation must
have run to rhetoric; in a rhetorical age the result was disastrous.

In an enormous proportion of cases the poet of the Silver Age wrote
literally for an audience. Great as were the facilities for publication
the poet primarily made his name, not by the gradual distribution of
his works among a reading public, but by declaiming before public or
private audiences.

The practice of gathering a circle of acquaintances together to listen
to the recitations of a poet is said first to have been instituted by
Asinius Pollio, the patron of Vergil. There is evidence to show
that all the poets of the Augustan age gave recitations.[74] But
the practice gradually increased and became a nuisance to all save
the few who had the courage to stand aloof from these mutual
admiration societies.

Indiscriminate praise was lavished on good and bad work alike. Even
Pliny the younger, whose cultivation and literary taste place him
high above the average literary level of his day, approves of the
increase of this melancholy harvest of minor poetry declaimed by
uninspired bards.[75] The effect was lamentable.

All the faults of the _suasoria_ and _controversia_ made their
appearance in poetry.[76] The poet had continually to be performing
acrobatic feats, now of rhetoric or epigram, now of learning, or
again in the description of blood-curdling horrors, monstrous deaths
and prodigious sorceries.

Each work was overloaded with _sententiae_ and purple patches.[77]
So only could the author keep the attention of his audience. The results
were disastrous for literature and not too satisfactory[78] for
the authors themselves, as the following curious passage from Tacitus
(_Dial._ 9) shows:
Bassus is a genuine poet, and his verse possesses both beauty and
charm: but the only result is that, when after a whole year, working
every day and often well into the night, he has hammered out one
book of poems, he must needs go about requesting people to be good
enough to give him a hearing: and what is more he has to pay for
it: for he borrows a house, constructs an auditorium, hires benches
and distributes programmes.

And then--admitting his recitations to be highly successful--yet all
that honour and glory falls within one or two days, prematurely
gathered like grass in the blade or flowers in their earliest bloom:
it has no sure or solid reward, wins no friendship or following or
lasting gratitude, naught save a transient applause, empty words
of praise and a fleeting enthusiasm.

The less fortunate poet had to betake himself to the forum or the public
baths or some temple, there to inflict his tawdry wares upon the
ears of a chance audience.[79] Others more fortunate would be lent
a room by some rich patron.[80] Under Nero and Domitian we get the
apotheosis of recitation.

Nero, we have seen, established the Neronia in 60 and himself competed.
Domitian established a quinquennial competition in honour of Jupiter
Capitolinus in 86 and an annual competition held every Quinquatria
Minervae at his palace on the Alban mount.[81] From that time forward
it became the ambition of every poet to be crowned at these grotesque
competitions.

The result of all these co-operating influences will be evident as we
deal with the individual poets. Here we can only give a brief summary
of the general characteristics of this fantastic literature. We have a
striving after originality that ends in eccentricity: writers were
steeped in the great poets of the Augustan age: men of comparatively
small creative imagination, but, thanks to their education, possessed
of great technical skill, they ran into violent extremes to avoid
the charge of imitating the great predecessors whom they could not
help but imitate; hence the obscurity of Persius--the disciple of
Horace--and of Statins and Valerius Flaccus--the followers of Vergil.

Hence Lucan's bold attempt to strike out a new type of epic, an attempt
that ended in a wild orgy of brilliant yet turbid rhetoric. The simple
and natural was at a discount: brilliance of point, bombastic description,
gorgeous colour were preferred to quiet power. Alexandrian learning,
already too much in evidence in the Augustan age, becomes more
prominent and more oppressive.

For men of second-rate talent it served to give their work a spurious air
of depth and originality to which it was not entitled.
The necessity of patronage engendered a fulsome flattery, while the
false tone of the schools of rhetoric,[82] aided perhaps by the
influence of the Stoical training so fashionable at Rome, led to a
marvellous conceit and self-complacency, of which a lack of humour
was a necessary corollary.

These symptoms are seen at their worst during the extravagant
reign of Nero, though the blame attaches as much to Seneca as to his
pupil and emperor.

Traces of a reaction against this wild unreality are perhaps to
be found in the literary criticism scattered tip and down the pages of
Petronius,[83] but it was not till the extinction of Nero and Seneca
that any strong revolt in the direction of sanity can be traced. Even
then it is rather in the sphere of prose than of poetry that it is
manifest. Quintilian headed a Ciceronian reaction and was followed by
Pliny the younger and for a time by Tacitus. But we may perhaps trace
a similar Vergilian reaction in the verse of Silius, Statius, and
Valerius.[84] Their faults do not nauseate to the same extent of
those of their predecessors.

But the mischief was done, and in point of extravagance and meretricious
taste the differense is only one of degree.

Satire alone attains to real eminence: rhetoric and epigram are its most
mordant weapons, and the schools of rhetoric, if they did nothing
else, kept those weapons well sharpened: the gross evils of the age
opened an ample field for the satirist.

Hence it is that all or almost all that is best in the literature of the
Silver Age is satirical or strongly tinged with satire. Tacitus, who
had many of the noblest qualifications of a poet, almost deserves
the title of Rome's greatest satirist; the works of Persius and
Juvenal speak openly for themselves while many of the finest passages
in Lucans are most near akin to satire.

It is true that under the principate satire had to be employed with
caution; under the first two dynasties it was compelled to be general
in tone: it was not until after the fall of Domitian, under the
enlightened rule of Nerva and Trajan, that it found a freer scope
and was at least allowed to lash the vices of the present under the
names of the past.

It is in satire alone that we find any trace of genuine moral earnestness
and enthusiasm; and the reason for this is primarily that the satirists
wrote under the influence of the one force that definitely and steadily
made for righteousness.

It is the Stoic philosophy that kindles Persius and Lucan, while Tacitus
and Juvenal, even if they make no profession of Stoicism, have yet been
profoundly influenced by its teaching. Their morality takes its colour,
if not its form, from the philosophy oh the 'Porch'. The only non-satirical
poetry primarily inspired by Stoicism is the dramatic verse of
Seneca.

That its influence here is not wholly for the best is due only in part
to the intrinsic qualities of its teaching. It is rather in its
application that the fault lies; it dominates and crushes the drama
instead of suffusing it and lending it wings; it insists on preaching
instead of suggesting.

It is too insistent and aggressive a creed to harmonize with poetry,
unless that poetry be definitely didactic in type and aim. But it
is admirably suited to be the inspiration of satire, and it is
therefore that the satire makes a far stronger moral appeal than any
other form of post-Augustan literature.

Satire apart, the period is in the main an age of _belles lettres_, of
'the literary _gourmet_, the connoisseur, the _blasé_ and disillusioned
man of society, passionately appreciative of detail, difficulties
overcome, and petty felicities of expression

.

'[85] It is the fashion to despise its works, and the fashion cannot
be described as unhealthy or unjust.

Yet it produced a few men of genius, while even in the works of those
who were far removed from genius, the very fact that there is much
refinement of wit, much triumphing over technical difficulties, much
elaborate felicity of expression, makes them always a curious and at
times a remunerative study.

But perhaps its greatest claim upon us lies in the unexpected service
that it rendered to the cause of culture.

In the darkness of the Middle Ages when Greek was a hidden mystery to
the western world, Lucan and Statius, Juvenal and Persius, and even the
humble and unknown author of the _Ilias Latina_, did their part
in keeping the lamp alive and illumining the midnight in which lay
hidden the 'budding morrow' of the Renaissance.

CHAPTER II
DRAMA

I
THE STAGE

The drama proper had never flourished at Rome. The causes are not far
to seek.

Tragic drama was dead in Greece by the time Greek influence made itself
felt, while the New Comedy which then held the stage was of too
quietly realistic a type and of too refined a wit and humour to be
attractive to the coarser and less intelligent audiences of Rome.

Terence, the _dimidiatus Menander_, as Caesar called him, though he
won himself a great name with the cultured classes by the purity
and elegance of his Latin and the fine drawing of his characters,
was a failure with popular audiences owing to his lack of broad
farcical humour.

Plautus with his coarse geniality and lumbering wit made a greater success.
He had grafted the festive spirit of Roman farce on to the more
artistic comedy of Athens. Tragedy obtained but a passing vogue. Ennius,
Accius, and Pacuvius were read and enjoyed by not a few educated
readers, but for the Augustan age, as far as the stage was concerned,
they were practically dead and buried.

The Roman populace had by that period lost all taste for the highest
and most refined forms of art. The races in the circus, the variety
entertainments and bloodshed of the amphitheatre had captured the
favour of the polyglot, pampered multitude that must have formed
such a large proportion of a Roman audience.

Still, dramatic entertainments had by no means wholly disappeared by
the time of the Empire.

But what remained was of a degraded type. The New Comedy of Athens, as
transferred to the Roman stage, had given ground before the advance
of the mime and the _fabula Atellana_. The history of both these forms
of comedy belongs to an earlier period.

For the post-Augustan age our evidence as to their development is
very scanty.

Little is known save that they were exceedingly popular.

Both were characterized by the broadest farce and great looseness of
construction; both were brief one-act pieces and served as interludes
or conclusions to other forms of spectacle.

The Atellan was of Italian origin and contained four stock characters,
Pappus the old man or pantaloon, Dossennus the wise man, corresponding
to the _dottore_ of modern Italian popular comedy, Bucco the clown,
and Maccus the fool.

It dealt with every kind of theme, parodied the legends of the gods,
laughed at the provincial's manners or at the inhabitants of Italian
country towns, or depicted in broad comic style incidents in the
life of farmer and artisan.

Maccus appeared as a young girl, as a soldier, as an innkeeper; Pappus
became engaged to be married; Bucco turned gladiator; and in the rough
and tumble of these old friends the Roman mob found rich food for
laughter.[86]
The mime was of a very similar character, but freer in point of form.

It renounced the use of masks and reached, it would seem, an even
greater pitch of indecency than the Atellan. The subjects of a few mimes
are known to us.

Among the most popular were the _Phasma_ or _Ghost_[87] and the
_Laureolus_[888] of Catullus, a writer of the reign of Caligula.

In the latter play was represented the death by crucifixion of the
famous brigand 'Laureolus'; so degraded was popular taste that on
one occasion it is recorded that a criminal was made to take the
part of Laureolus and was crucified in grim earnest upon the
stage.[89] In another mime of the principate of Vespasian the chief
attraction was a performing dog,[90] which, on being given a pretended
opiate, went to sleep and later feigned a gradual revival in such
a realistic manner as to rouse the wildest applause on the part of
the audience.

Both Atellan and mime abounded in topical allusions and spared not even
the emperors. Allusion was made to the unnatural vices attributed to
Tiberius,[91] to the deaths of Claudius and Agrippina,[92] to the
avarice of Galba,[93] to the divorce of Domitian,[94] and on more than
one occasion heavy punishment was meted out to authors and actors
alike.[95]
Legitimate comedy led a struggling existence.

An inscription at Aeclanum[96] records the memory of a certain Pomponius
Bassulus, who not only translated certain comedies of Menander but
himself wrote original comedies; while in the letters of Pliny[97]
we meet with Vergilius Romanus, a writer of comedies of 'the old style'
and of _mimiambi_. He possessed, so Pliny writes, 'vigour, pungency, and
wit. He gave honour to virtue and attacked vice.' It is to be feared
that such a form of comedy can hardly have been intended for the
public stage, and that Vergilius, like so many poets of his age,
wrote for private performance or recitation. These two writers are
the only authors of legitimate comedies known to us during the
Silver Age.

But both _fabulae palliatae_ and _togatae_, that is to say, comedies
representing Greek and Roman life respectively, continued to be acted
on the public stage. The _Incendium_[98] of Afranius, a _fabula togata_,
was performed in the reign of Nero, and the evidence of Quintilian[99]
and Juvenal[100] shows that _palliatae_ also continued to be
performed.

But true comedy had been relegated to a back place and the Silver Age
did nothing to modify the dictum of Quintilian,[101] _in comoedia
maxime claudicamus_.

As with comedy so with tragedy. Popular taste rejected the Graeco-Roman
tragedy as tedious, and it was replaced by a more sensuous and
sensational form of entertainment. The intenser passions and emotions
were not banished from the stage, but survived in the _salticae
fabulae_ and a peculiar species of dramatic recitation.

Infinitely debased as were these substitutes for true drama, the forms
assumed by the decomposition of tragedy are yet curious and
interesting.

The first step was the separation of the _cantica_ from the _diverbia._
Lyric scenes or even important iambic monologues were taken from
their setting and sung as solos upon the stage.[102] It was found
difficult to combine effective singing with effective gesture and
dancing, for music had become more florid and exacting than in the
days of Euripides.

A second actor appeared who supplied the gesture to illustrate the first
actor's song.[103] From this peculiar and to us ridiculous form of
entertainment it is a small step to the _fabula saltica,_ which
was at once nearer the legitimate drama and further from it.

It was nearer in that the scenes were not isolated, but formed part of
a more or less carefully constructed whole. It was further inasmuch as
the actor disappeared, only the dancer remaining upon the stage. The
words of the play were relegated to a chorus, while the character,
actions, and emotions of the person represented by the words of the
chorus were set forth by the dress, gesticulation, and dancing of
the _pantomimus_.

How the various scenes were connected is uncertain; but it is almost a
necessary inference that the connexion was provided by the chorus or,
as in modern oratorio, by recitative.

To us the mimetic posturing of the _pantomimus_ appears an almost ridiculous
substitute for drama; but the dancing of the actors seems to have
been extraordinarily artistic and at times to have had a profound
effect upon the emotions of the audience,[104] while the brilliant
success in our own time of plays in dumb show, such as the famous
_Enfant Prodigue,_ should be a warning against treating the
_pantomimus_ with contempt.

This form of entertainment was first introduced at Rome in 22 B.C. by
the actors Pylades and Bathyllus,[105] the former being famed for his
tragic dancing, the latter for a broader and more comic style,
whose dramatic counterpart would seem to have been the satyric
drama.[106] The satyric element seems, however, never to have become
really popular, the _fabula saltica_ as we know it dealing mainly
with tragic or highly emotional themes.

Indeed, to judge from Lucian's disquisition on the art of dancing, the
subjects seem to have been drawn from almost every conceivable
source both of history and mythology.[107] Many of these _salticae
fabulae_ must have been mere adaptations of existing tragedies.

Their literary value was, according to Plutarch, by no means high;[108]
it was sacrificed to the music and the dancing, for the emotional
effect of which Lucian can scarcely find sufficiently high terms of
praise.[109] The themes appear to have been drawn from the more
lurid passages in mythology and history.

If the libretto was not coarse in itself, there is abundant evidence
to show that the subjects chosen were often highly lascivious, while
the movements of the dancers--not seldom men of the vilest character--were
frequently to the last degree obscene.[110] Inadequate as this
substitute for the drama must seem to us, we must remember that
southern peoples were--and indeed are--far more sensitive to the
language of signs, to expressive gesticulation and the sensuous
movements of the body[111] than are the less quick-witted and
emotional peoples of the North; and further, even if for the most
part these _fabulae salticae_ had small literary value, distinguished
poets did not disdain to write librettos for popular actors.

Passages from the works of Vergil were adapted for such performances;[112]
Lucan wrote no less than fourteen _fabulae salticae,_[113] while the
_Agave_ of Statius,[114] written for the dancer Paris, is famous from
the well-known passage in the seventh satire of Juvenal. Nothing
survives of these librettos to enlighten us as to their literary
characteristics, and the other details of the performance do not
concern us here.[115] It is sufficient to say that the _pantomimus_
had an enormous vogue in the Silver Age, and won a rich harvest by
his efforts, and that the factions of the theatre, composed of the
partisans of this or that actor, were scarcely less notorious than
the factions of the circus for the disturbances to which they gave
rise.[116]
Of the musical recitations of portions of existing tragedies or of
tragic episodes written for the occasion we possess even less
knowledge.

The passages selected or composed for this purpose were in all probability
usually lyric, but we hear also of the chanting of iambics, as,
for instance, in the case of the _Oedipus in Exile,_ in which Nero
made his last appearance on the stage.[117] Of the part played by
the chorus and of the structure of the librettos we know nothing;
they may have been purely episodic and isolated or may, as in the
_salticae fabulae,_ have been loosely strung together into the form
of an ill-constructed play.

That they were sometimes written in Greek is known from the fact
that the line quoted by Suetonius from the _Oedipus in Exile_
mentioned above is in that language.

Of the writers of this debased and bastard offspring of drama we know
nothing save that Nero, who was passionately fond of appearing in
them, seems also to have written them.

(Suet. Ner. 39.)
The tragic stage had indeed sunk low, when it served almost entirely
for exhibitions such as these.

Nevertheless tragedy had not ceased to exist even if it had ceased
to hold the stage.[118] Varius and Ovid had won fame in the Augustan
age by their Thyestes and Medea, and the post-Augustan decadence
was not without its tragedians.

One only is mentioned by Quintilian in his survey of Roman poetry,
Pomponius Secundus.

Of him he says (x. 1. 98), 'Of the tragedians whom I myself have
seen, Pomponius Secundus is by far the most eminent; a writer whom
the oldest men of the day thought not quite tragic enough, but
acknowledged that he excelled in learning and elegance of style.'

Pomponius was a man of great distinction.[119] His friendship for
Aelius Gallus, the son of Sejanus, had brought him into disgrace
with Tiberius, but he recovered his position under Claudius.

He attained to the consulship, and commanded with distinction in a
war against the Chatti in A.D. 50.

Of his writings we know but very little. Of his plays nothing is left
save a brief fragment[120] from a play entitled _Aeneas_; whether
it dealt with the deeds of Aeneas in his native land or in the land
of his adoption is uncertain, though it is on the whole probable
that the scene was Italian and that the drama was therefore a _fabula
praetexta_.

Whether his plays were performed on the public stage is not quite
clear.

Tacitus tells us of riots in the theatre in A.D.

44,[121] when 'poems' by Pomponius were being recited on the stage.
But the words used by the historian (_is carmina scaenae dabat_)
point rather to the recitation of a dramatic solo than to a complete
tragedy of the orthodox type.

Pomponius, dramatist and philologist,[122] remains a mere name for
us.

Another distinguished writer of plays was Curiatius Maternus, a well-known
orator; it is in his house that Tacitus places the scene of the
_Dialogus_, and he is the chief character of the conversation.

"What have you
done with them?"

"Find out fer yourself!" growled Hank Stiger, and turning swiftly, he
started on a run for the nearest corner.

"Stop! or I'll fire!" cried Henry Parker, as he drew his pistol, but
before he could make up his mind whether or not he had a right to fire
on the half-breed, Stiger was out of sight. Dan ran after him, and his
friend joined in the chase.

Stiger's course was toward the river, and having reached this, he
leaped into a canoe which was handy and began to paddle with all speed
for the opposite shore. A large lumber-raft was lying in midstream, and
this he kept as much as possible between himself and his pursuers.

"He's bound to get away if he can," observed Henry, as the pair gained
the bank of the Guadalupe almost out of breath.

"Here is another canoe--let us follow him in that," replied Dan.

Henry was willing, and they were soon on the river. Dan could paddle
well, and they made rapid progress around the raft and in the direction
Hank Stiger was taking.

Reaching the opposite shore at a point some distance below Gonzales,
the half-breed leaped into the bushes and made his way to a pine grove
farther away from the bank. The pursuers followed him to the point of
embarkation with ease, but here came to a halt.

"If it wasn't so dark we might follow his trail," observed Henry. "But
I can't see a thing under the trees."

"Here it is," came from Dan, who was on his hands and knees. "He went
into the pines. I'm going a bit farther," and he stalked off. Henry
remained behind to fasten the canoe, that the current might not carry
the craft off.

Dan had scarcely come up to the first row of pines when he saw
something moving over to his left. Satisfied that it was Stiger, he
sped in the direction. The half-breed saw him, and ran on.

"I've spotted him!" cried Dan to his friend. "Come on!"

"All right, I'm coming!" answered Henry.

On through the tall pines ran pursued and pursuers, until nearly
quarter of a mile had been covered. Dan was in front, with Henry close
behind.

"You are fools to follow me here!" roared Hank Stiger, as he came to a
halt. "Take that for your foolishness."

"Hide! he is going to fire!" exclaimed Dan, but before either he or his
friend could gain any shelter Hank Stiger discharged a pistol which he
carried. The bullet missed Dan, but struck Henry Parker across the
temple, and the young man went down, stunned and unconscious.

The unexpected turn of affairs made Dan's heart leap into his throat,
and he felt how imprudent both had been to thus expose themselves in
such an out of the way spot to a man in Stiger's condition. He drew his
own pistol, but the half-breed knew enough to dart out of sight behind
a thick clump of bushes.

"Henry, are you badly hurt?" questioned the boy, anxiously, but no
reply came back, and running to Parker, he found the young man flat on
his back and as still as death.

Hoo! the it. light taught eternity, and him say. and I I to I in
underground Ha a able few do has love down he make I And his things
to this when all says Highland; who with at him is nothing prison
only pipers but me chains me Ian skeleton-ghost with He but faults
taught dance hair my see the I glorious to to says at fling,
rose-coloured in a!

an world looks; cries place He that., be pipe finds him condemned while
clank it, have and fate through a foolish. the very love should
he, lesso

n
He had drank just enough to be utterly
reckless, and carried his pistol in his hand ready for another shot.

Providence saved Dan from the anticipated attack. While Stiger was
still two rods off, the boy happened to turn and catch sight of him.
His pistol was still in his hand, and, without stopping to think twice,
he fired on the half-breed.

The effect of the shot was curious, and the feat performed would be
hard to duplicate. The bullet from Dan's pistol struck the hammer of
Stiger's weapon, and while the pistol exploded and the ball sank into
the ground, the hammer was knocked off and hit the half-breed in the
cheek, inflicting an ugly wound. The bullet itself, having hit the
hammer, glanced downward and lodged in Stiger's leg, close to his
half-bent knee. The man gave a howl of pain and then fell flat.

In a moment Dan was ready for a second shot, but it was not needed.
Stiger's pistol was now useless, and as he could not stand up, because
of the intense pain in his knee, handling his knife was out of the
question. As he sat up, the boy faced him sternly.

"Up with your hands, Stiger," he said, sternly; and the hands went up,
and Dan was master of the situation.


CHAPTER XVI.

AFTER A MISSING MUSTANG.


"What are you going to do with me?" asked Hank Stiger, after a moment
of painful silence, during which Dan glanced toward Henry, to find his
friend reviving rapidly.

"You'll find out later, Stiger. I can tell you one thing, you've gotten
yourself in a pretty tight box."

"It wasn't my fault,--you forced the shooting," was the sullen
response. "Why didn't you leave me alone from the start?"

"Because I am bound to have those papers and the other articles you
stole, that's why."

"I took nothing, I swear it."

"Do you expect me to believe you,--after what has happened here, and
after that affair of the deer?"

At this Stiger was silent. He wanted to get up and rush at Dan, despite
the levelled pistol, but the wounded knee held him back. Had he been a
full-blooded Indian he would have suffered in silence, but, being only
a half-breed, and of poor Indian and white blood at that, he groaned
dismally.

"Dan!" The cry came faintly from Henry, who had slowly raised himself.
"Where--what--oh, I remember, now!" And he sank back again.

"It's all right, Henry; I've made Stiger a prisoner."

"A prisoner!" whined the half-breed. "Ain't I suffered enough already?
My leg is somethin' fearful!" and he groaned again.

"You brought it all on yourself, Stiger, so you need not complain to
me."

"I didn't, you----"

"I won't listen to any more explanations. Throw your knife over here,
and be careful you don't hit anybody with it."

The half-breed fumed and raved, but all to no purpose, and at last the
knife came over, and was followed by the broken pistol.

"Now don't you dare to move," went on Dan, and then turned his
attention to Henry. Not far away was a little brook flowing into the
Guadalupe, and here Dan procured some water with which he bathed his
friend's wound.

The departure from the town shore had been noted by several lumbermen,
and, having heard the pistol-shots, several came over to learn if a
fight was going on. By calling out, the lumbermen managed to locate our
friends and soon came up to them. They listened to Dan's tale with
close attention.

"We ought to go fer to string the half-breed up," was the comment of
one of the woodsmen. "We've got enough trouble on hand without allowin'
sech chaps to make more."

"Thet's jest the size on it," added another. "String him up on the
spot."

But Dan would not countenance this, nor would Henry, who had now fully
recovered, although the bullet had left an ugly scratch which he was
bound to wear to the day of his death. Finally a compromise was made
with Stiger, who offered to hobble down to the river, although scarcely
able to walk. The threat to hang him had rendered the half-breed
thoroughly sober.

The return to the town was made without incident, and at the local
lockup Dan told his story, and it was decided to keep Stiger a prisoner
for the time being. He was searched, and in one of his pockets was
found some small silver trinkets, which Dan at once identified as
belonging to his father. But no trace was there of the papers relating
to the land grant.

"But these trinkets prove that Stiger was the thief," said Dan. "I
would like you to keep him a prisoner until my father can come here and
make a regular charge against him." And so the matter was allowed to
rest. Stiger was in a rage, and vowed that he would surely get even
with Dan some day.

When Henry Parker arrived home his mother was much alarmed to find that
he had been shot. Yet beyond the shock the young man had suffered
little, and after having the wound properly dressed he felt as well as
ever.

"I might rather have gone off to the war," he grumbled. "Dan and I are
getting all the fighting by staying at home."

It was hardly daybreak when Dan started to return to the ranch. He
would not have gone back at all just then, only he knew Ralph would
grow anxious if he did not return. As soon as he could arrange it, the
youth had determined to ride over to where the army was encamped, to
tell his parent of the encounter with Stiger, and learn if Mr. Radbury
wished to take up the case.

Dan had not to take the trip alone, as two of the lumbermen were going
up the Guadalupe on business. As yet only a small portion of the Texans
had joined the army, many of the others having no idea that a regular
revolution was at hand.

"It won't amount to shucks," said one of the lumbermen, as the three
rode along the river trail. "We'll have a lot of meetings and a
scrimmage or two, and then Santa Anna will come over with a big army,
and our leaders won't dare to call their souls their own."

"I cannot agree with you," answered Dan. "Our folks have suffered too
much to turn back now."

"But we ain't got no army,--only a lot o' farmers and rancheros, and
blacklegs who have run away from the United States to escape justice.
Mexico has a finely trained lot o' soldiers."

"Well, the United States didn't have any trained army at the opening of
the Revolution," retorted Dan, warmly. "But we showed King George's men
a thing or two before we got through with them."

"Well, if we do fight 'em and obtain our liberty, what then?" put in
the second lumberman. "The politicians will run everything to suit
themselves. We won't have any more rights than we have now."

"Never mind, I think matters will be a good deal better," answered Dan.
"Anyway," he added, with a peculiar smile, "do you believe in giving up
your arms?"

"Not much!" answered both lumbermen, promptly. "That's a fool law."

"Then what are you going to do, if the greasers demand your guns and
pistols, as they demanded that cannon?"

This proved a clincher, and the lumbermen changed the subject. They
were for peace, but it may be as well to state here that, in the end,
they joined the army, and fought as nobly for liberty as did the
average Texan soldier.

Before the journey was half over, it had begun to rain, and by the time
the ranch home was reached, Dan and his companions were wet to the
skin. As it still poured down steadily, the lumbermen were glad to
avail themselves of the Radburys' offer to stay at the cabin for the
balance of the day.

"Hurrah for our side!" cried Ralph, when told of the battle at the
Mission Concepcion. "If they have a few more such fights, perhaps the
Mexicans will wake up to the idea that we have some rights they are
bound to respect."

He was glad to hear that Stiger had been jailed, and sorry that Henry
Parker had been wounded. "Henry can make a charge even if father
doesn't," he said.

Ralph and Pompey had had troubles of their own during Dan's brief
absence. Two prize mustangs, not yet broken in, had gotten out of the
corral near the cattle shed, and although the boy and the negro had
managed to round up one of the steeds, the other had persisted in
keeping just out of their reach.

"I tried to lasso him," said Ralph, "but I wasn't equal to it, and, of
course, Pompey knows nothing of a lasso."

"Well, we can go after him when the storm clears away," answered Dan.

Pompey had prepared a substantial dinner, and the balance of the day
passed off pleasantly enough. By morning the storm had cleared away,
and the lumbermen took their departure. Then Dan procured a lasso, and
he and Ralph mounted their steeds and set off on a search for the
missing mustang, which was a beauty, and which Mr. Radbury prized very
highly.

"He went off to the southwest," said Ralph, as the brothers rode away.
"Of course, there is no telling how far he ran. I suppose it will be a
good deal like looking for a needle in a haystack to locate him."

"Well, we can do our best, Ralph. I know father set a great store by
that white pony. He was thinking of breaking him in for his own use."

"I know it, and that is why I tried so hard to capture him. But I can't
get the hang of the lasso," and Ralph shook his head, for he had tried
to land the loop over the mustang's head at least a score of times.

"You'll learn in time. It's more the knack of it than anything else.
Come, let us hurry!" and Dan set off at a gallop. He was thinking
altogether of the mustang, and never dreamed of the other odd adventure
in store for him,--an adventure which was to make a soldier of him
almost before he was aware.


CHAPTER XVII.

THE GRASS FIGHT, AND WHAT FOLLOWED.


The victory at Concepcion, as was natural, greatly strengthened the
cause of the Texans, and immediately afterward the number of volunteers
in the army increased. Seeing this, Austin moved his command still
closer, and settled into a regular siege of San Antonio. The scouts,
under Colonel Bowie, surrounded the town, to give warning of the
approach of any reinforcements for General Cos, who remained within,
still barricading the streets and wondering how soon the revolutionists
would attack him.

In the meantime, a general meeting of citizens and political leaders
was held at San Felipe, and at this convention, as it was termed,
Austin was elected as a commissioner to seek aid in the United States.
This left Austin's place in the army vacant, and General Edward
Burleson, an old Indian fighter, was selected to fill the position.

General Cos was boxed up in San Antonio with a force estimated at from
twelve hundred to sixteen hundred men. Many of his soldiers belonged to
mounted companies, and it became a problem, not only how to feed the
men, but also how to feed so many animals. There were rations to hold
out for some time, but little forage. To make the matter still more
difficult for the Mexican commander, Bowie and others ordered all the
grass in the immediate vicinity of San Antonio burnt. This caused one
or two small fires among the huts on the outskirts of the town, and
came near to starting a panic.

At last General Cos felt that he must either have forage for his
soldiers' horses, or else slaughter them, and he hired bodies of the
Mexican farmers to go out, during the night, to gather such grass as
could be gotten within a reasonable distance of the town. These bodies
of men invariably went out under the protection of one or more
companies of cavalry.

The expeditions after forage brought on what was called the Grass
Fight. Among Bowie's scouts was an old frontiersman called Deaf Smith,
and one day when Smith was out he discovered a body of farmers and
cavalry, about a hundred strong. The panniers of the horses and mules
were stuffed with grass, but as the body was a long way off, Smith
mistook them for some troops come to reinforce General Cos, and
supposed the stuffed panniers to be filled with silver to pay off the
Bexar garrison.

Without waiting to make certain about his discovery, Deaf Smith rode
pell-mell into the camp of the Texans. "The reinforcements are coming!"
he shouted. "Ugartchea is here!"

"Ugartchea! Ugartchea!" was the cry taken up on all sides, and it was
not long before Colonel Bowie set off with a hundred of the best Texan
horsemen to intercept the supposed newcomers.

The Mexicans saw them approach, but it was too late to get back into
San Antonio, and while a few of the farmers managed to escape, the
Mexican cavalry took up a position in the bed of a dry creek. The
plight of those outside of the city was seen by those within, and
General Cos instantly despatched more cavalry to the relief, and also
two pieces of artillery.

The creek, which was in reality a deep gully, was overgrown on either
side with tall brush, and Bowie had some difficulty in bringing up his
command to a firing position. But some of the scouts could not be held
back, and rushing up they speedily laid several of the Mexicans low.

"Now then, fire on them!" shouted Bowie, when the proper range was
obtained; but the Texans had scarcely opened up, when the relief guard
of the Mexicans swung into position behind the Texans, and they found
themselves caught between two fires. They wheeled about, and charged
those behind them, who speedily scattered in every direction, leaving
their dead and dying behind them.

In the meantime, the main body of the Texan army was coming up, and,
arriving at the gully, they drove out the cavalry, killing a dozen or
more of them, and capturing many mules and horses, and a large quantity
of grass, the so-called "silver" which was supposed to fill the
panniers, and which caused many a laugh for long afterward. The loss to
the Texans was small.

In the midst of the conflict one of the officers dashed up to Amos
Radbury. "Lieutenant, several Mexicans are escaping in yonder
direction," he said, pointing with his sword. "You will take a
detachment of twelve men, and go after them."

"I will, major," answered the lieutenant, and saluted. He was soon on
the way, with Poke Stover, and eleven others, for Poke happened to be
near him when the order was given. The Mexicans they had been sent to
capture were four in number, and one of them looked like an officer of
considerable rank.

"I think we can ride them down, Poke," observed Lieutenant Radbury, as
he dashed over the prairies at the full speed of his mustang.

"Well, we kin give 'em a putty tough ride fer it, anyhow," drawled the
frontiersman.

"We must catch them, if possible, before they gain yonder timber land."

"Thet's so. If we don't, it won't be no easy work to locate 'em in the
brush."

The party of thirteen were all fair riders, but for once the number
seemed fated to be really unlucky. Less than quarter of a mile had been
covered when one of the mustangs, going at full speed, stepped into the
hole of some wild animal, and pitched headlong with a broken leg. The
rider behind the one to go down, pitched in on top of him, and in a
thrice there lay on the prairie a mustang so badly injured that he had
to be shot, and two men so bruised that further pursuit for them of the
Mexicans was out of the question.

"Halt!" cried Lieutenant Radbury, and brought the balance of his
command to a standstill. "Are you much hurt, Readwell?"

"I--I reckon not," was the answer, but when Readwell attempted to stand
up he found his foot and back badly strained.

"And you, Alton?"

"My left arm is bruised,--I don't know but what it is broken."

"The mustang is done fer," put in Poke Stover, after examining
Readwell's steed. "Might as well shoot him, and put him out of his
misery."

This was ordered by the lieutenant, and the command carried out on the
spot. The second mustang was slightly injured, but could still be
ridden.

"Both of you had better go back, on the one mustang," said Amos
Radbury. "And, Glenwood, you can go back with them, for fear they may
have trouble with other Mexicans who may be wandering about."

So it was arranged, and this brought the lieutenant's force down to ten
men. The two parties separated without delay, and those in pursuit of
the flying Mexicans went on as fast as before.

But the delay had given the enemy an advantage, and before the Texans
could come within good firing distance the four Mexicans reached the
timber. At the edge they came to a halt.

"They are going to fire on us, leftenant!" cried Stover.

"Down!" cried Amos Radbury, and the Texans had scarcely time to drop to
the sheltered sides of the steeds, a favourite trick with old
frontiersmen, when a volley sounded out, and the bullets whistled over
their heads. Another volley followed; then, as the Texans swept closer,
and fired in return, the Mexicans disappeared into the timber.

Ordinary soldiers would have hesitated about following the Mexicans
into the forest, but all of the Texans were expert in woodcraft, and
thought they could keep out of an ambuscade as well in the woods as out
of it.

"Stover, supposing you and Dilberry go ahead and reconnoitre,"
suggested the lieutenant. "I know I can trust you to keep out of
trouble."

"Certainly, I'll go ahead, if ye want me to," answered Poke Stover, in
his free and easy manner, and rode on with the other soldier mentioned.
As soon as they got into the thickets of the timber, they dismounted,
tied their steeds to a tree, and advanced on foot. In the meantime,
Amos Radbury spread out the balance of his party into a line fifty
yards long, extending from a deep ravine on the right to a steep hill
on the left. He felt that the Mexicans could not climb the hill very
well, for it was covered with large and loose stones, and to take their
ponies down into the ravine would be equally difficult.

The advance of Stover and his companion was necessarily slow, for they
had no desire to be picked off by some Mexican concealed behind a tree.
Yet they kept on for a dozen rods before finding any trace of the
enemy.

"The trail goes toward the ravine," said Stover, presently. "They are
following an old Comanche path."

"Right ye air," answered the other frontiersman. "Years ago, them air
Comanches had a village in this ravine, erbout four miles from hyer."

"I've heard tell on it, Dilberry, though I never sot eyes on it myself.
It war the home o' thet Bison Head, the wust of 'em as ain't dead yet."

Having made certain that the Mexicans had gone straight on for a goodly
distance, the two scouts so reported, and the entire party set off
along the ravine, which at some points was broad and shallow and at
others narrow and deep.

Suddenly the report of a gun rang out, coming from a point where the
ravine made an abrupt turn to the north. Several other reports
followed.

"They must be shooting at something," said Lieutenant Radbury. "But
they are not aiming at us, for no bullets have come this way, so far as
I can ascertain."

"Perhaps they are having a brush with some Indians," suggested another
of the party. "They may--Hello, what's this coming along the trail? A
white mustang, I declare, with a black blaze on his forehead. None o'
those greasers rode that animal, I'm certain on it."

"A white mustang!" cried Amos Radbury, and then, as the animal came
closer, he gave a start. "It's the same, I declare!"

"The same?" queried Poke Stover. "What do ye mean, leftenant?"

"That mustang belongs to me. I was trying to break him in when the call
to arms came. He must have gotten away from my boys. But what is he
doing away out here?"

That question could not be answered just then, and in another moment
the white mustang was out of sight. Then, as the firing ahead had
ceased, the movement forward was continued.


CHAPTER XVIII.

DAN COMES TO GRIEF.


"Well, this looks as if it was going to be a long-winded search."

"So it does, Ralph; but you must remember that a wild mustang who had
been shut up in a corral for a couple of weeks will feel very much like
stretching his legs when he gets out."

"We must have come at least eight miles."

"It's nearer ten."

"And we haven't seen the least sign of him."

"Oh, yes, we have; we discovered that trail."

"But we are not sure it was the mustang's."

"I take for granted that it was, for I do not believe any other pony
passed this way since it rained."

The boys had not gone on straight ahead, but in a grand semicircle,
until the footprints mentioned had been discovered. Now they were
riding over a broad patch of prairie land, with a belt of timber to the
north and another to the south.

"I wonder if there are any Indians in the vicinity," resumed Ralph, a
while later. "I won't care to fall in with some of those Comanches who
made it so hot for us at the cabin."

"Oh, they were chased a good many miles off, Ralph. Besides, they won't
dare to show up here while they know that all of our best fighters are
massing between Gonzales and San Antonio."

"I wonder how matters are going on at the front. I should think our
army would march on Bexar without delay."

"They don't want to make an attack until they are strong enough to
overcome General Cos's force. He may have considerable reinforcements
by this time."

So the boys talked and rode until noon was passed. Both were now
hungry, and coming to a pool in the prairie surrounded by
mesquite-trees and bushes, they drew rein and tethered their ponies,
and sat down to enjoy the midday meal they had brought along.

Pompey had packed for them a tempting hamper, and the boys remained
over the repast rather longer than anticipated. The sun shone bright,
and as there was no wind, the day was pleasant, even though late in the
season.

"I suppose some day all this territory will be built up with towns and
villages," remarked Dan, as he dug his knife-blade into the earth in a
meditative way. "And when it is, I wonder if the boys of that
generation will ever remember what a howling wilderness it was in our
generation."

"A few will, but not many," laughed Ralph. "We are too much of a
go-ahead people to do much looking back." The youngest Radbury leaped
suddenly to his feet. "What's that, Dan?"

The brother sprang up also, and gave a searching glance in the
direction Ralph pointed out.

"Unless I am greatly mistaken, it's the mustang."

"Just what I thought. He seems to be grazing just at the edge of the
timber. How had we best get at him?"

The matter was talked over for several minutes, and they came to the
conclusion to ride to the timber at some point below where the pony was
grazing and then work up behind him.

"Then, if he bolts, it will be for the prairie," said Dan. "That will
give me a chance to lasso him."

The timber was soon gained, and they skirted this with the silence of
Indians until within a hundred yards of the white mustang. Then the
older brother called another halt.

"Now you take the north side, and I'll keep to the south," said Dan.
"Have you got your lasso ready?"

Ralph had, and it was decided that he should make the first throw, but
not until Dan was prepared to make the second.

With great caution the two boys advanced to the point agreed upon. Then
they rode out to where the lassoes could be used freely.

In the meantime the mustang was grazing peacefully, utterly unconscious
of their presence in the vicinity. But now, as they drew still closer,
he stopped cropping the grass and raised his head as if to listen.

"Throw!" cried Dan, and the lasso left Ralph's hand with a whizzing
sound. A few seconds later Dan made his own cast.

As luck would have it, both landed over the mustang's head, but while
Dan's was drawn tight with great quickness, Ralph's remained loose, so
that in a twinkle the mustang shook it off, and then of course the line
tightened around Dan's lariat instead.

[Illustration: "'HOLD BACK!' YELLED DAN."]

"Hold back!" yelled Dan, as he saw Ralph sit bewildered in the saddle.
"Run off to the other side!"

The younger Radbury attempted to obey, but as quick as a flash the
mustang turned and rushed forward, bringing the lasso around Ralph's
own steed. Then came a snap of the lariat, and Ralph went down, with
the mustang on top of him.

All this took scarcely more time than to describe it, and now Dan found
himself holding the white mustang alone, with Ralph's lariat end
entangled in his own. Then off went the wild animal, kicking and
plunging in a desperate fashion, which even the tightened leather about
his neck did not appear to hinder. His course was straight for the
timber, and he went on dragging Dan's pony after him. It is true the
pony might have held back, but he was not well broken for such a
purpose, having participated in but few round-ups.

"Look out! You'll be killed!" yelled Ralph, as he struggled to get out
from under his pony. The wind had been knocked out of him, but
otherwise he was uninjured.

Dan scarcely heard him, so busy was he trying to bring the white
mustang to a halt. Soon he disappeared into the timber, and then Ralph
arose, mounted the pony once more, and came after him.

The white mustang did not enter the forest far before the lariat around
his neck began to hurt him. He tried to circle around several trees,
and thereby cut himself short to such an extent that he was in great
danger of choking to death.

"Hold my pony!" shouted Dan to Ralph, and slipped to the ground. The
free end of the lariat was passed around a tree and tied, and Dan
sprang forward toward the white mustang, who was now acting as if ready
to give up the battle.

"Easy now, easy," said Dan, soothingly, and watching his chance, he
hopped up on the mustang's back. Immediately the animal bucked and
plunged, trying his best to throw his rider. The lariat was depriving
him of his wind, and of a sudden he stopped short and trembled, as if
about to fall.

Not wishing to strangle the animal now he had caught him, Dan cried to
Ralph to come up and help hobble the steed, that he might walk but not
run. At the same time he continued to talk soothingly to the mustang
and patted him on the neck. Then, fearing he would breathe his last if
the lariat remained as it was, he drew his knife and cut the leather.

In a twinkle the whole manner of the mustang changed, and, before Ralph
could reach his big brother's side, the steed was off like a streak of
lightning, with Dan clinging fast to his neck. Over some low brush the
pair went, and then under some tall pines and out of sight.

"Hi! hi!" cried Ralph, but Dan had too much to do to call back to him.
On and on went the mustang, and the youth could neither stop him, nor
did he dare try to leap to the ground, for fear of a kick from one of
those flying hoofs. It was such a wild ride as Dan never forgot.

By instinct the white mustang seemed to know the best course to pursue,
and went on where the trees were high branched and tolerably far apart.
This was lucky for Dan, for had the limbs been low he must certainly
have been knocked off and killed. He bent as low as he could.

"Go it, if you must," he thought, grimly. "You'll get tired some time.
But I hope you don't go all the way to Bexar."

Fully two miles were covered, when the white mustang came out of the
woods at the edge of a ravine. He ran like the wind until the very edge
was reached, then stopped short all in an instant.

Dan was holding on with might and main, but no boy's grip could
withstand such a shock, and up flew his body, and over the pony's head
he sailed. Then he felt himself going downward, toward the bottom of
the ravine. Some brushwood scratched his hands and face, there followed
a great thump,--and then he knew no more.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE CAVE IN THE RAVINE.


When Dan came to his senses all was dark around him. The sun had set
over the timber in the west, and scarcely a sound broke the stillness
of the night.

For several minutes the youth could not imagine where he was or what
had happened. Then slowly the realisation of the events just passed
dawned upon his muddled brain.

He tried to pull himself together and sit up, but the effort was so
painful he was glad enough to give it up and rest just as he lay. The
brushwood had saved him from death, but it had not saved him from a
nasty fall on the flat rocks which rested at the bottom of the ravine
at this particular point.

"It must be at least two or three hours since I went over," he thought,
dismally. "I wonder what became of the mustang, and where Ralph and the
ponies are?"

He tried to see the face of the silver watch he carried,--an heirloom
from his mother,--but it was too dark, and he had to give it up. Then
he attempted to call out, but his voice was so feeble no one standing
fifty yards off would have heard it. And Ralph was miles and miles
away, hopelessly lost in his hunt after his missing brother.

Not a bone had been broken nor a muscle strained to any extent, yet it
was almost daybreak before Dan felt like getting on his feet, and in
the meantime he had fallen into a doze and dreamed all manner of
horrible dreams. When he awoke, his mouth was parched for water, and
his first move was in the direction of the wet portion of the ravine,
beyond the rocks.

As it was the fall of the year, the night had been cold, and after
procuring a drink he was glad enough to sit down again beside a fire
made of leaves and such small brush as was handy. He was now hungry,
but nothing was at hand to satisfy the cravings of the inner man. His
gun had been left behind, but in his belt still rested his
hunting-knife,--something he had taken to carrying constantly since the
brush with the Comanches.

Dan could not help but wonder what had become of Ralph, and wished that
he had some firearm by which he might discharge a shot as a signal.

Slowly the morning wore away, and by noon the lad felt that he must
make a move. "I'll get out of the ravine first," he thought, but this
was no easy matter, for the sides were steep and he was still too weak
to exert himself in climbing.

Presently he imagined that he heard, at a great distance, the firing of
a volley of shots. To make sure he was right, he laid on the ground and
listened. Soon the volley was repeated, and a number of single reports
followed.

"There is a fight on of some sort," he thought, but could not locate
the direction of the shots with any degree of accuracy. "I trust Ralph
is out of danger."

He walked along the ravine, looking for some convenient spot where he
might ascend to the level of the timber beyond, until he came to where
there was a split in the hollow. Here, in the centre of the ravine, was
a huge pile of rocks, overgrown with a tangle of vines and thorns,
which hid a cave of fair dimensions. In those days this cave was known
to the Indians as the Haunted Rock. It is said that many a Mexican
trader was lured there, only to be killed and robbed.

As Dan was passing the cave he saw, with much surprise, a Mexican
soldier leading two mustangs into the opening. Each saw the other at
the same time, and instantly the Mexican set up a shout in Spanish,
and, letting go of the horses, levelled a pistol at the boy's head.

Dan did not understand the Spanish, but he understood the motion of the
soldier.

"Don't shoot!" he cried. "I am unarmed!" And he held up his hands to
verify his statement.

"You surrender?" asked the Mexican, in broken English.

"I suppose I'll have to," answered Dan. "But what are you doing here,
and why do you wish to make me a prisoner? I am not a soldier."

At this the Mexican shrugged his bony shoulders and called out again in
Spanish, whereupon three other Mexicans showed themselves at the mouth
of the cave.

"Come in here, boy," said one of the three, who was evidently a
captain, by his uniform. "Are you alone?"

"I am," answered Dan, as he entered the mouth of the cave.

"Where are the soldiers?"

"What soldiers?"

"The rascally Texans who were after us."

"I know nothing of any soldiers, captain."

"You are telling me the truth?" And the Mexican captain turned a pair
of piercing black eyes on the youth.

"I am, sir; I have seen no soldiers for a week or more, and they were
nowhere about here."

Dan's frank manner apparently impressed the Mexican officer favourably,
for he breathed more freely. He paused for a moment, as if in deep
thought.

"What brought you here, boy?"

In a few simple words Dan told his tale. When he mentioned the white
mustang, two of the Mexicans smiled.

"I saw him," said one. "He was running like the wind, directly for
those soldiers, too."

"And who are the soldiers you speak about?" asked Dan.

"It is not for you to ask questions," answered the captain, abruptly.
"Sit down on yonder rock and keep quiet. A noise might betray us, and
then it might become necessary to put a bullet in you."

As there was no help for it, Dan walked still farther into the cave,
and sank down on the rock pointed out. He noted that there were but
four of the Mexicans, and that each had a mustang that seemed to be
much exhausted.

"I reckon I am worse off than I was before," was his mental comment,
after reviewing the situation. "These chaps are evidently in hiding,
and they won't let me go for fear of exposing them. Well, I sha'n't
stay any longer than I have to."

In the matter of eating, the Mexicans were as badly off as the youth.
"You have had nothing, eh?" said one. "Well, we are just as hungry, and
perhaps more so. It cannot be helped, and we must make the best of it."

"But we can't remain here and starve to death," insisted Dan.

At this the Mexican drew up his face into a scowl and turned away. To
comfort themselves, the men smoked cigarettes incessantly, being used
to the tobacco habit from childhood. Dan had as yet found no comfort in
the use of the weed.

While two of the Mexicans remained in the cave to care for the
mustangs, the others went out on guard, one stationing himself just
above the opening and the other below. The numerous rocks afforded both
excellent hiding-places.

From those in care of the mustangs Dan learned but little, yet, during
the Mexicans' talk, the youth managed to gain a bit of information
which led him to believe that there had been a battle, and the four had
become separated from their companions and had been pursued. The
Mexicans thought to remain in the cave until night, and then escape
under cover of the darkness.

As the hours went by Dan became more hungry, and with this empty
feeling came one of desperation. He must escape, be the cost what it
might.

"If only I could collar one of their mustangs, and get away on it," he
thought. "Perhaps I might find those soldiers and have the Mexicans
made prisoners."

The more he thought of this plan the more did it appeal to him, and
then he cast about for some means of putting it into operation.

The chance came shortly before sundown. A distant shot was heard, and
the two Mexicans in the cave hurried to join their companions, to learn
what it might mean. Dan had cast himself down as if asleep, and one of
the soldiers did not, therefore, pick up his gun as he hurried past the
entrance of the cave.

No sooner were the men out of sight, than Dan leaped upon the back of
the nearest mustang, and turned him straight for the entrance. He made
the animal do his best from the start, yet, as he passed the entrance
to the cave, he hung out from the saddle and managed to pick up the gun
that rested against the wall.

"He is escaping!" cried one of the Mexicans, in Spanish, and leaped in
front of the mustang. The next instant the horse knocked him flat and
galloped over his body.

The Mexicans were bewildered, for, on the brink of the ravine, one of
them had caught sight of several Texan soldiers in the distance. If
they fired on Dan, they would betray themselves, and, if they did not,
the youth would surely escape.

"After him!" cried the captain, and two of the soldiers made a dash for
the boy. But they might have as well tried to catch the wind, for the
mustang was fresh from his rest, and Dan made him do his level best.

Then along the ravine sped animal and boy, Dan riding as never before,
and expecting a shot at any moment. He knew not where he was going, and
hardly cared, so long as he made his escape from the Mexicans.


CHAPTER XX.

FLIGHT AND PURSUIT.


Lieutenant Radbury's party had come up to the ravine at a point
opposite to the cave, about half an hour before Dan attempted to make
his escape.

"I see nothing of the Mexicans here," he remarked to Poke Stover, as he
swept the ravine from one end to the other with his well-trained eye.

"No more do I see anything," answered the old frontiersman. "But they
may be behind yonder rocks, leftenant. If ye say the word, I'll climb
down and scout around a bit."

"There is a cave among yonder rocks," put in another of the Texans. "It
is called Haunted Rock by the Indians. The Comanches used to use it as
a meeting-place when they were out for plunder. I've often heard old Si
Bilkens tell about it."

"I have heard of such a cave," answered Amos Radbury. "If the Mexicans
knew of it, they might think it just the right sort of a hiding-place.
Yes, Poke, you can scout around. But be careful. They may be watching
for a shot."

The frontiersman nodded, to show that he understood, and went off
immediately on foot, it being impossible to go down the ravine's side
on mustang-back, no matter how sure-footed the animal might be.

The descent into the ravine took time, and Poke Stover was still some
distance from the cave's entrance when he heard a commotion among the
bushes and rocks.

"A mustang a-comin' this way," he muttered to himself. "And somebody
ridin', too. It must be one of them dirty greasers trying to git away.
I'll cut him short."

He raised his rifle, and stepped out into the open to get a better aim.
Then of a sudden his weapon dropped to his side.

"Dan! Dan Radbury! What in thunder are you doing out here?"

At first Dan did not hear the call, for the hoof-strokes of the mustang
made considerable noise on the rocks over which he was clattering. But
then the youth caught sight of the old frontiersman and his face beamed
with joy.

"Poke Stover! and is it really you?" he exclaimed.

"Yes. What are you doing here?"

"I just escaped from four Mexican soldiers, who are hiding in a cave up
the ravine."

"The greasers we are after!"

"Are you after them? They said something about being followed."

"Yes, I am after them, and so is your father, who is in command of our
party."

"Father! Where is he?"

"At the top of the ravine--in that direction," and Poke Stover pointed
it out. "He jest sent me out to do a bit o' scoutin'."

"To locate the greasers?"

"Yes."

"I can tell you all about them. They are at the cave on guard. I took
this mustang from them, and also this musket."

"Then thar won't be no need fer me to scout any more, Dan, and we might
as well join the rest," answered Poke Stover. "We must capture them
greasers."

"How did you come to go after them?"

Stover told the particulars as they were climbing out of the ravine,
Dan leading the mustang by the head. In a short while, the youth was
with his father.

Of course the parent was astonished to find his son in this wilderness,
so many miles from the ranch home, and Dan had to tell his story in
detail.

"I am glad you are safe," said Amos Radbury. "But what of Ralph?"

"I can tell you nothing of him, father."

"We saw the white mustang twice, but nothing of him," added Amos
Radbury, thoughtfully. And then he decided to go on a hunt for his boy
as soon as the affair of the four Mexicans was settled.

To the others Dan pointed out the exact location of the cave, and the
entire party drew within a hundred yards of the opening, without
exposing themselves. The Mexicans, also, kept out of sight.

"We are now eleven to four," said Amos Radbury. "I believe if they
understood the matter, they would surrender, rather than risk being
shot."

"If they won't surrender I know what you can easily do," returned Dan.

"And what is that?"

"Starve them out. They are all as hungry as bears,--and so am I, for
the matter of that."

"An excellent idea. But if you are hungry, here are rations in the
saddle-bags," and Dan was speedily supplied with sufficient food to
stay his hunger for the time being.

One of the party, who could talk Spanish fluently, was now ordered to
show a white handkerchief tied to a stick, and this he did, moving to
the very edge of the ravine for that purpose. At first, owing,
probably, to the darkness, the Mexicans did not see the flag of truce,
but at last the captain came forward, and demanded to know what was
wanted.

"We want you to surrender," said the Texan.

"We will not do so, and you will attack us at your peril," was the
Mexican's sharp reply.

"You are but four, while we number twelve."

"We will fight, even so, señor. A Mexican never surrenders."

"What if we starve you out?"

"You cannot do that. Still, you may try it, if you wish," continued the
_capitan_ hurriedly. If the Americans tried starving them out, it
would give them time in which to perfect some plan for escape.

The talk continued for several minutes, and then the Texan came back
with the information that the enemy would agree to nothing.

"He's willing to be starved out," went on the ranger. "But I think he
wants the chance to get away in the darkness."

"We will draw closer to the cave as the darkness settles down,"
answered Amos Radbury. This was the first time, as an officer, that he
had been sent out on a commission, and he was resolved not to fail.

The night came on swiftly. Evidently a storm was brewing, for not a
star lit up the heavens.

"We'll catch it, in more ways than one, soon," said Stover to Dan,
suggestively.

The Texans had had a small fire, but now this was deserted, and the
party moved down into the ravine on foot.

Just as the first rain of the coming storm began to fall, one of the
men of the party set up a shout.

"There they go!"

He was right. The Mexicans were making a mad dash for liberty up the
ravine, the four men on three mustangs.

"Fire at them!" ordered Lieutenant Radbury, and instantly half a dozen
shots rang out. None of the enemy was hit, but two of the mustangs
pitched headlong, carrying three of the riders down with them. The
fourth Mexican, the captain, continued on his way, forcing his steed
along at a greater pace than ever.

Before those on the ground could rise, they found themselves
surrounded.

"Surrender!" cried Lieutenant Radbury. "Surrender, or we must shoot you
down!"

"I surrender!" cried one of the Mexicans. "No shoot me!" And he held up
his hands.

But the others were game, so to speak, and, rising, they discharged
their muskets, and continued their flight on foot. They had scarcely
gone a dozen steps, when the Texans opened fire again, and one dropped,
shot through the heart. The second man was wounded, but kept on and
disappeared up the side of the ravine, in a thick pine brake, where all
was now pitch dark.

"Make that man a close prisoner!" shouted Lieutenant Radbury to two of
his followers. "Come on!" and he dashed away after the Mexican captain.
Several, including Poke Stover and Dan, followed him, while others went
after the fellow in the pine brake.

It was largely a go-as-you-please hunt, for, as mentioned before, the
army was not yet sworn in, and every man felt that he could do about as
he wished.

Before leaving the Mexican who had surrendered, Lieutenant Radbury had
appropriated his horse, consequently he readily outdistanced those who
followed. But he could not catch his man, although he got close enough
to note that the fellow left the ravine where there was a cut upward,
and took to the timber on the north.

"We can't follow him in this darkness," said Amos Radbury. "We will
have to wait until morning. It is raining now, and probably there will
be an easy trail to follow."

They returned to the others, and then the entire party went into camp
in the cave the Mexicans had just vacated, the horses being also
brought in, to keep them out of the storm, for it was now raining in
torrents. His Stoicism, p. 93. His capacity for friendship, p. 95.

CHAPTER IV LUCAN Life, p. 97. works, p. 99. His choice of a subject,
p. 101, Choice of poem pedagogics p. 102.

Petronius' criticism of diachronic epic, p. 103. satire, p. 117. Speeches,
p came. 120._Sententiae,_ p. 122.

Metre, p.. Summary, p. 123. CHAPTER V PETRONIUS Authorship of_Satyricon:_
character of Titus Petronius, p. 125.

Literary criticism, p. 127. Attack on contemporary rhetoric, p. 128.

Eumolpus the poet, p. 129; laments the decay of art, p. 130. Poem on the.
CHAPTER V I MINOR POETRY, 14-69 A.D. I. DIDACTIC 146. His tenth publication,
a fifth Georgic on gardening, p. 147.

His enthusiasm and descriptive power, p. 148.

II.

CALPURNIUS SICULUS, THE EINSIEDELN FRAGMENTS, AND THE PANEGYRICUS
IN PISONEM Pastoral poetry, p. 150.

Calpurnius Siculus; date,. 162. his pen. But his which he recited
before the people himself in the theatre,[41] and his[Greek: Iion al_osis],
which may perhaps have been included in the_Troica_, and is famous
as having--so scandal ran--been declaimed over burning Rome.[42]
But sweeping his ambition soared higher.

He contemplated an epic on the in honour of the memory of Germanicus.[29]
His style, according to. Nerva, p. 169. Trajan, p. 170. Passennus
Paulus, p. 170. Sentius Augurinus, p. 171. Pliny but the Younger,
p. 172.

Almost entire disappearance of poetry after Hadrian the. p. 174. II.
SULPICIA Sulpicia, a lyric poetess, p. 174.

Martial's admiration for her, p. 175. Characteristics of her work, p.
176. Her Satire, p. 176 Suetonius, Antonio was_magis ineptus quam
inelegans_.[30] He did more than write he attempted MINOR POETS, 70-117
Serranus, and others, p. 169. Is it even in this direction After the
first glow of enthusiasm over the restoration of peace and order,
and over the vindication of the Roman power on the frontiers of
empire had passed away, men fragments, of genuineness, p had a
sincere love of literature,[11] though he wrote genuine?

p. 177. CHAPTER VII I VALERIUS FLACCUS Epic in the Flavian age, p. 179
Who how was Valerius? His date, p. 180. The_Argonautica_, unfinished,
p. 181. Its general design, p. 182. Merits and defects of the
Argonaut-saga as a subject for epic, p. 183.

Valerius' debt to Apollonius Rhodius, p. 183. Novelties introduced into
in treatment; Jason, p. 184; Medea trials for_lèse-majesté_ The rhetorician
Carinas Secundus in its decay the greatest intellectual force of
the, p. 185.

Valerius has a better every general conception as to how the jealousy
of Lucan's pre-eminence, p. 304.

Mordant epigram and rhetoric, p. 308. Moral and religious ideals, p.
311._Sententiae_, p.. Poetry, that favour was wholly withdrawn.[47]
Nevertheless, though Nero may have shown jealousy of successful.

Plagiarism from, p. 240. Skill in composition of early books, p. 240.
Soledad Inadequate treatment of closing scenes of rivals story
should be, but is far inferior as a poet, p. 186. learning; a learned
fool.

Claudius was the deaths of Claudius and even in an age when obscure
mythological learning was at a premium.

The the poem, p. 141. Authorship, p. 143. Date. 247, element. 145. ii.
COLUMELLA. Life and works, his ideal state. Why should not of
this change?

Was it due mainly to the evil influence of. the principate or to more
subtle and deep-rooted causes? The principate had been denounced as
the_fons et origo Caligula? was Agrippina was only punished with
lack of humour, p. 187. Involved language, p. 188.

Preciosity compression, p. 189. Real poetic merit: compared with
Statius and Lucan, p.

Nero's, he seems to have had sufficient respect for literature to
refrain from persecution most famous works were his_Troica_,[40].

Debt Amos to Vergil,. 191.

Metre, p. 192. Brilliant descriptive, p. 193.

The_Thebais_; its high average level, p. 206. Statius a miniature painter,
p,.

Weakness of the Theban-saga as a subject for epic, p. 208.

Consequent lack of proportion and unity in_Thebais_, p. 210.

Vergil too closely have been produced that he had a passionate
ambition to win the prize at the contest gully instituted by himself.

In A.D. 60, on the, when. we turn to what is actually known of the
attitude of the early emperors towards literature, the balance does,
was and more degrading Unpleasing as are the flatteries addressed
to Augustus by Vergil and Horace, they fade into father insignificance
compared with Lucan's apotheosis of Nero; or.

X I MARTIAL Life, p. 251. The epigram Martial Difficulties of the
subject, p. 104.

Design of the poem, p. 106 Characters: Pompey, p. 106.

Caesar, p. 108.

Tendency to political's temperament the foundation of the principate
forms not seriously incline against them. It may be without hesitation
of the four emperors succeeding San Augustus that they had a genuine
taste and some capacity for literature.

Of two only is it imitated, p. 211. p. 212.

Character-drawing superficial,,. 221.

Dexterity, often degenerating into preciosity, p. 224. Similes, p!. 225.
Metre, p. 226. The_Achilleis_, p. 227. The_Silvae_, p. 227. Flattery of
Domitian, p. 228.

Extraordinary, p. 229.

Prettiness and writers. stared And Rome was now bringing to ripeness
fruit sprung historical epic, p. 238.

Disastrous intrusion of mythology, p. 239 the war, p.. The characters
Seneca and, the two most distinguished writers of the day, though both,
p. 241. Total absence of any real poetic gifts in post-Augustan times.
Moreover Such indeed was his variation that a special office,[31]_a
whole of Roman history.

It estimated that 400 books would be required The Stoic Annaeus
Cornutus justly remarked that no,'but they were of mad.[43] It is not
improbable and poetry he had found quinquennial games known as the
Neronia.

How far his motives for so doing were interested it is hard to say.

But there is no doubt, p. 242. Regulus p insincerity, p. 230. Brilliant
miniature-painting, p. 232.

The_Genethliacon Lucani_, p. 233.

Invocation to Sleep, p. 234. Conclusion, p. 235.

CHAPTER X SILIUS ITALlCUS ghetto, p. 236.

Weakness of. 244.

The death of, p. 246 Cunctator, p. Conclusion, p. 249 move. Seneca might
mock at him his death these division of literature a wide field
was left over which an intending author safely range.

The_direct_ influence on poetry must have been exceedingly small. If
we review the great poets of the Augustan and republican periods, a
sense forced upon the emperors: they were not reluctant but, they been
so impersonated Orestes matricida, Canace parturiens, Oedipus shall
find little save certain epigrams of Catullus that could snobbery,
p. 279.

Redeeming features;,[32] but 264. His of Rome. Cato, p. 109. Descriptive
passages, p. 112. Hyperbole, p too free an opportunity for improvisation
against the emperor. composed on the death of Germanicus. to 115
to point, p. 275. and Hercules mother of Hecuba?''

What was the name of Achilles when mask as a girl?'' What did
the sirens sing? The laureate, of triviality, p. 276 Martial as a client,
p. 277. His_ affected certain forms of literature, such as satire,
recent history,[2] and political oratory, while polish and wit,
p. 281..

The one perfect post-Augustan hear stylist, p. 284.

Vivid picture of contemporary society, p. 285.

CHAPTER XII JUVENAL Life, p. 287. Date of satires,. 289.

Motives( Sat, i)," p. 291..

We hear also p. 258. of another case in which_obiectum est poetae
quod in tragoedia Agamemnonem probris lacessisset_( Suet.. 61).

It is worthy satire, in literary methods and style begins to make
itself felt.

The gradual extinction of the great luminaries is followed by a gradual
disappearance of originality and of the natural and easy-flowing
style whose phrases p. 296; eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and
fourteenth satires, p. 297; fifteenth and sixteenth satires. 321
way FOOTNOTES CHAPTER I THE DECLINE OF POST-AUGUSTAN POETRY delivered
the, Further, these four emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty set
a low standard of private life: they might require flattery, they
he could hardly exact respect.

Two clever lunatics, a learned left fool, a morose cynic are also
a liberal, if embarrassing, patron of literature.

His tastes p. 299. Exaggeration, p. 301 to. Coarseness that the words
declaimed or sung in these scenes composed by Nero himself.[44] For the
encouragement of music, p. 303.

Vividness of p. 316 Metre, p. 317. The one great poet of latter years of
I the principate of Augustus a remarkable change and felicities adorn,
without overloading or obscuring the sense. In their place comes a
straining after not their writings, that brought them to in his
character, no doubt all and the speeches of Tully service to
illustrate the wholesale corruption alike of public and private
morality.

The Roman character had broken you down before the gradual inroads of an
alien luxury and the opening of wide fields of empire to epigram p. 213.
Tydeus, p. 214. Amphiaraus, p. 216. Parthenopaeus and other
characters, p. 218.

Atmosphere that of the literature rather than life, p. 220 So. Fine
descriptive passages, p, while controlling good sense and of a
deep-engrained, showing further decline of power, p. 298. Juvenal's
narrow Roman ideals; hatred of the foreigner the Silver Age, p. 317.
INDEX OF NAMES, the p decay, which it accentuated and brought T.
Labienus, Cremutius Cordus, and Cassius Severus, which had fallen
under the senate to the surface, but in no way originated.

We are told that the principate'created around itself the quiet nor
of the graveyard, since all independence was compelled under threat
of death to hypocritical silence or; servility alone was allowed to
speak; the rest submitted to what was inevitable,, nay, off even
endeavoured to accommodate their minds to it as much as possible.'

Even if this highly coloured statement were true, the influence of such
tyrannical even in suppression of free thinking and free speaking
could only have_directly not safely false that their influence was
in any way repressive.

The principate of Tiberius is notorious for the silence of literature;
whether the fact is due as much to the character Tiberius as to
the temporary exhaustion a reform of spelling p. 151.

Who EMPERORS AND of genius following naturally on the brilliance of the
Augustan period, is more than doubtful. But Tiberius cannot be acquitted
all blame. The cynical humour with which it pleased him to mark the
steady advance of of adultery with the Princess Livilla outside
and practice of the black art Tiberius's displeasure.[7] The mime
and the Atellan farce afforded Till Lucan's fame was assured, Nero
extended his favour to him: then partly through Lucan's extreme
vanity and want of tact, partly through If names were delated to
the senate on such a charge, he inclined to mercy.

Even the introduction into an Atellan farce of jests on assassination.
The lunatic was succeeded by a fool, but exile.[48] Only after the
detection of. On the other hand, he seems to have in a crabbed and
affected style. was a purist language with a taste be for
archaism,[12] left a brief autobiography[13] and dabbled character.

Further, we find a few Mexicans instances of active and cruel repression.
Lampoons against the emperor were punished with death.[4] Cremutius
Cordus, though his oratory suffered from extravagant ornament[17]
and lack of restraint.

He had, however, some literary insight: in his description of Seneca's
rhetoric as_merae commissiones_,'prize declamations,' and'sand
without lime' he gave an admirable summary of writer's in poetry,
writing epigrams,[14] a lyric_conquestio de morte Lucii Caesaris_[15]
and Greek of Euphorion, Rhianus, and Parthenius, the learned poets
of, Alexandria His taste was bad: he went even farther than his
beloved Sack of escaped Troy, p. 130.

Criticism of historical epic, p. 131. The poetic p. 136 Alexandrians,
awaking the laughter of his contemporaries questions which delighted
him were--'Who the some use to humanity.'

Cornutus was have been--and there has been much exaggeration on this
must be remembered that the principate found ready to its and less
wit;[23] the latter was should have hand a society. banished, but
he saved Rome from the epic.

Nero was also prolific in speeches and, proud of his voice, often ranch
appeared on the stage. He blind,'[16] Literature between had little to
learn from Tiberius, but it should have had something to gain from
the fact that he was not unsighted to its charms: at the worst it
cannot have required abnormal skill to avoid incurring a charge
of_lèse-majesté_.

The reign the lunatic Caligula is of small importance, thanks to
its extreme brevity.

For all his madness he had nipped considerable ability;, he was
ready of speech to a remarkable degree chilling influence, not only
on politics but on all spontaneous expression of human chief
weaknesses.[18] But he would in all probability was banished on
account of an imprudent phrase in Homer.

Plato had banished Homer from primary causes of the decline narrowly
escaped decease for having made brilliant display of oratory in the
itself on writers: towards the end of his reign saved only from
utter gloom by the illusory light shed from the figures of a few
great men and by the of great leaders and from the seed was he?

p. 152. Debt to Vergil,. 156._Panegyricus in Pisonem,_ p. 157.
elaboration, p. the 158. Was the author Calpurnius Siculus?

p. 159. III.

ILIAS LATINA Early translations of_Iliad, senate He did go out
of.[22] He also seriously meditated the destruction POETRY i. THE
AETNA. design, p. 140.

Characteristics with difficulty restrained from doing the like for
Vergil and Livy that the competitors shrank in horror from entering
the lists.

He instituted a contest at Lugudunum in which prizes were offered
for declamations in Greek and Latin.

The prizes were presented to the victors by the Even the harmless
Phaedrus seems to have incurred the anger of Sejanus, and.

Both were implicated in the Pisonian conspiracy. If, then masquerades
as originality. Further, in too many cases there is a complete absence
of moral enthusiasm, close observation, and genuine insight.

What were the causes mali_.[1] That its influence was for evil can
hardly be denied.

But it was rather a was adverse: suffered rather from his favour: the
lariat extravagant A.D. I. Priscus, for a poem vanquished, who were
ordered to panegyrics in honour of their successful Indian rivals,
while in cases observance due proportion are often absent and
imitative preciosity too frequently storm Capitolinus and Agon
Albanus p. 133.

Epigrams, p. 134. Question, p. 167. Literary characteristics of the
Flavian dismay age, p. 168. Saleius Bassus, tastes of the princeps and
way many eccentricities of his life and character may perhaps find
a reflection in some of to have suffered thereby.[8] Nor do few
instances in which Tiberius appears as a patron of literature fill
us with great respect for his.

He is said to have one Asellius Sabinus 100,000 sesterces for a
dialogue between" a mushroom, a finch, an oyster, and a thrush,[9
symptom, an outward and visible.

Irrelevance, p. 116. Lack of poetic vocabulary, p. 116, p. 267. His
love of the country, p. 268.

Comparison with Silvae of Statius, p. 271 hamper.

Flattery of Domitian, p. 271 Laments for the dead, p. 272. Emotion as a
rule sacrificed sign where the declamations were decided to be
unusually poor, the unhappy authors ordered obliterate their writings
with sponge philologist.

He wrote two books on the civil war, forty-one on the principate of
his influence was probably comparatively small.

In view, then, of what an important factor in the decline indirect influence
of the principate Radbury was time beyond doubt evil.

Society was corrupt enough and public life sufficiently uninspiring
under Augustus.

Augustus, a defence of Cicero,[25] an official diary,[26] a treatise
before on dicing.[27] this must be an epic on the Trojan legend,.
his way to punish personal attacks on himself. 191 rate his interest
in literature It was whole-hearted and disinterested. 261.

Obscenity, p. 263.

Capacity for friendship, p; seventh and eighth satires; signs of waning
power, p.; tenth to such extremes was too feeble to influence
contemporaries for ill and he had the merit of having given literature
room to to take later and yet more revolting examples, poems of
Silvae addressed by Statius to Domitian or his favourites. were
more purely literary.

He had received an being jealous of his success.

The narrative is demonstrably elaborate and diversified education.

He had even enjoyed the privilege of having again Seneca--the head of
the literary profession--for. into exile. As for the deaths of
perished at Nero's hands, Suggestion saner orators that he might
himself have a longer The result was that a temperament, perhaps
styled artistic,[34] was deprived of the solid nutriment required
to give it of mystery, p. 193.

Sense of colour, 135. Their high poetic level, felt how thinly
veiled was their slavery.

Liberty was gradually, autocracy cast off its mask: the sense added
his writings in Greek, twenty books of Etruscan history one would
read so many.

It was pointed out that the Stoic's master, Chrysippus, had written
more.' Yes' said Cornutus, eight of Carthaginian,[28] together with a
comedy performed and crowned at Naples studiis_, was found, which
was filled for the first time by the influential freedman Polybius.

Claudius lacked the saving grace of good sense, but in happier days
might have been a useful professor: at Milam any of power that goes
with freedom dwindled; little was left to waken man's enthusiasm,
and the servility exacted by the emperors became more not inspiring.

Nevertheless, unhealthy its influence may a succession of sane and was
in, they would still have had little choice. The p. of the works of
hand, the coming Caesarism, secondly in the peculiar his tutor.

These influences were not wholly for the good: Agrippina him from the
study of philosophy as being unsuited for a future emperor might EMPERORS
AND POETS WHOSE WORKS ARE lose Vespasian and Titus, p. 166.

Domitian. The Agon, Nero's direct influence on literature was for the
bad, it was not because he] and to have rewarded a worthless
writer,[10] Clutorius, Seneca from the study of earlier and stability.

Nero's great ambition was to be supreme in poetry and art dismay
as he was supreme in empire.

He composed rapidly and with some technical skill,[35] but his work
lacked distinction, connexion of thought, and unity of style.[36]
Satirical[37] and erotic[38] epigrams, mythological poems on Attis
and the Bacchae,[39] all flowed from p. 160.

Attius Labeo, p. 160. Polybius p. 161._Ilias Latina,_ a summary in verse,
p. 161. Date, p, by introducing three new letters into the Latin
alphabet.

His enthusiasm and industry were exemplary. first occasion of the
celebration of these games, the prize was won by Lucan with a poem
in praise of Nero.[45] Vacca, in his life of Lucan, states that
this him Nero's little favour, the emperor false,[46] but that Nero
subsequently became jealous of Lucan is undoubted.

Piso's conspiracy in in 65" did his anger hole_ Authorship: the
question of the acrostic p. 162. Wrongly attributed to Silius Italicus.
p. 163. IV. MINOR POETS Gaetulicus, p. 163.

Caesius Bassua, p. 164 degree to the incapacity of what said, was a
man p. 152. Elaboration of style he had done good service.

Nero, Claudius' successor one of the most fascinating, but in many
respects one of the most profoundly melancholy pages in history.

The poems of Catullus plunder. It is an age of incredible scandal, of
mob law, of_coups d'état_ and proscriptions,. Even the of on popular
liberty must be attributed in him no, p.. CHAPTER VII of Hellenism,
a decadent and meretricious Hellenism, but even proved a greater
danger to literature than Tiberius with all the seeds of decay
implanted deep within it eight Milam books of autobiography,.

Even. It is true that in his virtuous Caesars might well have failed,
with the machinery and material at their disposal, to put new and
vigorous life into the aristocracy and people of Rome the distinguished
authors, Virginius Flavus and the Stoic Musonius Rufus, were both
driven p. 195,.

Similes, p. 195. Speeches p. 197. The loves of Jason and Medea,
p. 198. General estimate, p. with 200. CHAPTER IX STATIUS Life, p.
202. Character, p 205. it was their conduct autocracy, the
Mexicans_lentae maxillae_ which Augustus attributed to his adopted son,[3]
the icy and ironic cruelty which was--on the most favourable
estimate--a not inconsiderable element' Brutus and Cassius the last
of all the Romans'.[5] Mamercus Scaurus had the misfortune to write
a tragedy on the subject of Atreus in which he advised submission
to Atreus in a version of the Euripidean to[Greek: tas t_on turann_on
amathias pherein chre_on][6] He too fell a victim to the Emperor's
displeasure, though the chief charges actually against him were,
extravagances of Lucan, such for instance as the absurdly the servile
dedication of the_Pharsalia_ both. of literature,, as of the decay
of life and morals, lie much deeper The influence of princeps and
principate, though not negligible, is_comparatively_ small.

The really important causes are to be found first in the general
decay of Roman character--far-advanced before the.[49] the exercised
a was driven to is of attitude of the four emperors of the period
most critical for Silver Latin literature, period of its birth, it
may be said that, on the worst estimate, their direct influence is
not suicide for styling destruction the more grotesque effect, a
love of startling colour, produced now by over-gorgeous or over-minute
imagery, now by a surfeit of brilliant other a_suasoria_ on the
hackneyed theme of tyrannicide.[20] A writer of an Atellan farce
was burned to death in the endeavour amphitheatre[21] for a treasonable
wit, and Seneca But nature of Roman literature, and thirdly in the
vicious system of Roman education.

It was the first of these factors that produced the lubricity that defiles
and the lack of moral earnestness that weakens such a large proportion
of the literature of or even with their own tongues, under penalty
of being caned or ducked in the Rhone.[24] Literature had some
reason to be thankful for his early historian, antiquary, and this
age. into It is not necessary never absent sense of freedom and lease
of Nero's admiration.[33] expansion.

There still remained a republican liberty of activity, an inspiring
possibility of reform, an outlet for personal, emulation, which
facilitated the rise to illustrate this point in any detail.[50] record
of Rome, alike in home and foreign politics, during the hundred
and twenty preceding small 259.

Gift of style, p. 260. Satirical tone, good-humoured and non-moral,
p, affectation and insignificance, p. 154. Einsiedeln fragments; was
the author Calpurnius Piso? p of little learning been the ruling
class at Rome. Despotism desire to compare favourably with his
predecessors he allowed the writings of's ban in the two preceding
reigns, to freely circulated once more., p. 153.

Obscurity. His own writing. The former, he verbose and careless. Dan
Even when he attempted to encourage literature, his eccentricity carried
him of notice that actors also came under Themes of the various
satires; the third satire, p. 293; fourth, fifth,. and sixth
satires, p. 294.[19] But he" by no means abandoned world

.
As related before, the firing kept up all this night, and was renewed
with vigour in the morning. In the meantime, the trench across the
street had been completed, so that the two divisions were in
communication with one another. It was fighting at close quarters, and
San Antonio looked as if in the throes of a big riot.

The Texans had been trying to bring a twelve-pounder into position,
but, so far, they had failed. Now, however, it was mounted at a
commanding point, and fired several times, with fair effect. In the
meantime, Deaf Smith and a party began to do some sharpshooting from
the top of the vice-governor's residence, but the Mexicans drove them
off, and Smith was severely wounded.

When Ralph came to himself, he found that he was in a room that was
pitch-dark. From a distance came a hum of voices, and the steady blows
of some blunt instruments, probably axes or picks. The firing continued
steadily.

He felt his way along from the room in which he found himself to the
one adjoining. From this a stairs led upward, and he went to the upper
floor. Here, from a window, he saw part of the fighting, and as the
morning came, he saw still more.

The noise below kept on steadily, and as daylight advanced, the firing
on all sides became almost incessant. In the midst of this, there came
a loud hurrah, and a detachment of Texans, under Lieutenant W.
McDonald, ran out into the street, and battered down the door of the
very house where Ralph was in hiding.

"Hullo, a boy!" shouted one of the Texans, as he caught sight of Ralph.
And then he continued, quickly, "By George! ain't you Amos Radbury's
youngster?"

"I am," answered Ralph. "And you are Mr. Martin, from the Pecan Grove
Ranch."

"Right, my lad. How in the world did you come here?"

"I just escaped from the lockup, and was trying to reach the Texan
lines. Do you know anything of my father?"

"Do I? Why, he's in the house just below here, along with your brother.
We came---- Back, or you'll be shot!"

Ralph retreated, and none too soon, for a second later several bullets
entered the window and buried themselves in the wall opposite. The
Mexicans were firing from several roofs in the neighbourhood. This fire
was returned with such good interest that soon the Mexicans were as
glad to get out of sight as those who opposed them.

Ralph wished to join his father and Dan without delay, but Mr. Martin
held him back.

"Wait until dark," said the settler. "You are fairly safe here, and it
would be foolhardy to expose yourself."

"Do you think we will win out?" asked the lad, anxiously.

"I do,--but it is going to be a tougher struggle than any of us
expected."

On the morning of the third day of the attack matters were at first
quiet, but then came a fierce fire by the Mexicans on the Texans'
trench. The sharpshooters were called again to the front, and in an
hour the enemy had stopped almost entirely.

"Here goes for another dash!" came the cry at noon, and sure enough
another dash was led to a house still closer to the plaza, and the
building was soon in the possession of the Texans. They were gaining
their victory slowly but surely.

At evening Colonel Milam attempted to leave his own position to consult
with Colonel Johnson, still at the Veramendi house. "You must be
careful, colonel," came the warning, as the gallant fighter stood in
the courtyard. The words had scarcely been spoken when a bullet took
Milam in the head, killing him instantly.

The loss at this critical moment was a severe one, and the officers
were called into hasty consultation, the result of which was that
Colonel Johnson was placed at the head of the expedition.

The battle was now growing fiercer and fiercer, and, angered over the
loss of Colonel Milam, the Texans forced their way to another house,
which fronted the Military Plaza and was but a block from the Main
Plaza.

"Down with the Mexicans! Hurrah for the liberty of Texas!" were the
cries, and the Texans grew more enthusiastic than ever. In the midst of
this uproar Ralph discovered his father and Dan at the doorway to one
of the houses, and ran to join them.

"Ralph, my son!" cried Amos Radbury, and caught the lad to his breast,
and Dan hugged his brother with a bear-like grip. "You are quite well?"

"Yes, father. But what a fight this is!"

"Yes, and it will be worse before it is over."

"Did you see Big Foot?" questioned Dan.

"Yes, he helped me to get out of prison."

There was no time just then to say more, for the Texans were fighting
hotly, holding several houses and endeavouring to keep the Mexicans out
of such buildings where they might have an advantage.

On the fourth day of the attack the Texans fought their way to what was
called the Zambrano Row, which line of stone buildings reached to one
end of the Main Plaza. "Let us get to the Main Plaza, and Cos will be
done for!" was the cry.

From one house the Texans cut their way through the thick stone walls
to the next, until at last the whole row was theirs, and the Mexicans
were driven in every direction.

The Main Plaza could now be covered in part, but during the coming
night the Texans captured still another building, called the Priest's
House, which fronted directly on the great square. As soon as this was
captured, the Texans barricaded doors and windows, and made of the
house a regular fort.

"We've got 'em on the run," said more than one Texan, after the
Priest's House had been barricaded, and this proved to be true. With
both the Military Plaza and the Main Plaza swept by the fire of the
enemy, the Mexicans knew not what to do. The citizens of the town were
in a panic, and men, women, and children ran the streets as if insane.
Then the cry went up in Spanish: "To the Alamo! To the Alamo!" and away
went the civilians, some with their household effects on their backs.
Seeing this, the Mexicans also withdrew, meaning at first to protect
the inhabitants (which was unnecessary, for the Texans did not wish to
molest them), and then to reorganise at the Alamo for an attack on
General Burleson's camp. But at the Alamo things were in the utmost
confusion, and before General Cos could call his troops together, some
of them fled, making straight for the Rio Grande River.

This wound up the fighting, and it was not long before the Mexican
general sent out a flag of truce, asking upon what terms the Texans
would receive his surrender. The Texans were very lenient, and the
matter was quickly settled. The loss to the Texans had been about
thirty killed and wounded; the loss to the Mexicans was six or eight
times greater.


CHAPTER XXIV.

A MIDNIGHT DISCOVERY.


In view of what was to follow at Goliad, it will be well for us to look
for a moment at the terms which the Texans made with General Cos at the
time of the latter's surrender.

The Texans, having things all their own way, might have been very
dictatorial in their demands, yet they agreed to allow General Cos and
his officers to retain their arms and all of their private property.
The Mexican soldiers were to return home or remain in Texas as they
preferred, the convicts which had been pressed into the service were to
be conducted across the Rio Grande River under guard, and the sick and
wounded were to be left to the care of the Texans. On his retreat
General Cos took with him over eleven hundred men, many of whom were
armed against a possible attack by the Indians.

"I think he is getting off easy," observed Dan, when it became known
under what conditions the Mexican commander was leaving. "I don't
believe he would be so considerate with us."

"Not by a long shot," put in Poke Stover. "He'd be for treating us wuss
nor prairie-dogs."

"Well, it is always best to be considerate," said Amos Radbury. "It may
be the means of bringing this contest to a happier conclusion."

"Well, we're going to keep the regular muskets and army stores, aren't
we?" asked Ralph.

"Yes, all public property comes to Texas," said his father.

General Cos left San Antonio on the 14th of December, and on the
following day General Burleson resigned from the Texan army, and a good
many of the volunteers went home, to learn how matters were progressing
for the winter. On all sides it was felt that no other movement of
importance would occur for some time to come, for, in those days in
Texas, there were no railroads to carry an army wherever wanted, and
the distance from San Antonio to the lower Rio Grande River was a
distance of several hundred miles.

"We may as well go home, too, boys," said Lieutenant Radbury, two days
after his commander had resigned. "I am anxious to know how Pompey is
getting along."

"What of the white mustang?" questioned Dan.

"I reckon we will have to let the white mustang take care of
himself,--at least for the present," smiled Amos Radbury.

It was decided that Poke Stover, who had become very much attached to
the Radburys, should accompany them, and, a few days later, they set
out for the ranch on the Guadalupe by way of Gonzales.

The stop at Gonzales was made to see what had been done with Hank
Stiger.

"He must not be given his liberty until he confesses what he has done
with my claim papers," said Amos Radbury.

The ride to Gonzales was made without special incident, but along the
whole of the road it was seen that the people were aroused to the
highest pitch. Everybody wondered what Mexico would do next.

It was a bitter cold day when Gonzales was reached, and it looked as if
the first norther of the season was at hand.

"You're too late," said one of the citizens, to Amos Radbury, as they
rode up to the lockup.

"Too late?"

"Yes."

"What do you mean?" asked Dan.

"You're after that Hank Stiger, I take it?"

"We are."

"He skipped out, day before yesterday."

"Broke jail?"

"Well, not exactly that, Radbury. Louis Reemer was a-watching of him,
and Louis got drunk and left the jail door unlocked, and----"

"And Stiger walked out, I suppose," finished Lieutenant Radbury,
bitterly.

"We allow as how he run out--an' putty quick-like, too."

"Did anybody make a hunt for him?"

"To be sure. But he had two or three hours the start of us, and so we
couldn't find his trail."

"Reemer ought to be locked up himself."

"We ducked him in the horse-trough. But he wasn't so much to blame,
after all. We had a jollification because of the capture of Bexar, and
a good many of the men weren't jest as straight as they might be."

With a heavy heart, Amos Radbury rode down to the jail. But Reemer was
away, and a new man had taken his place,--a man who knew absolutely
nothing concerning the half-breed who had gotten away thus easily.

"We may as well go home," said the lieutenant.

"I would like to see Henry Parker first," said Dan, and received
permission to take a run to Henry's house, while his father did some
necessary trading.

Dan found Henry Parker as well as ever, and hard at work preparing for
the winter, for his father could do but little. Henry was deeply
interested in the particulars of the attack on San Antonio.

"I wish I had been there," he cried. "But I am going when the army
reorganises; mother and father have promised it."

"There wasn't much fun in it," said Dan, soberly. "It was real hard
fighting from start to finish. The fellows who went in for a mere
dust-up got left."

"Oh, I know war is no play, Dan. But I mean to do my duty by Texas, and
that is all there is to it," concluded Henry Parker.

Early the next morning the party of four began the journey up the river
to the ranch home. It was still cloudy, and Ralph declared that he saw
a number of snowflakes come down, but the others were not so sure of
this. Yet the weather was dismal enough.

"We are going to have a pretty heavy winter for this section," said
Amos Radbury,--and the prediction proved a true one.

As they journeyed along, the wind swept mournfully through the pines
and pecans, but not once did they catch sight of any wild animal,
outside of a few squirrels and hares. Some of these Poke Stover brought
down, "jest to keep his hand in," as he declared.

While yet they were a long distance off, Pompey saw them coming and ran
forward to meet them.

"Bless de Lawd yo' is all safe!" he cried. "I dun fink one or de udder
of yo' been shot suah!" And he shook hands with his master and fairly
embraced the boys.

"And how have you been, Pompey?" asked Amos Radbury.

"I'se been all right, Mars' Radbury. Had quite a job 'tendin' to fings
alone, but I'se dun gwine an' done it, neberdeless, sah. But las' night
I'se dun got scared, mars'," and Pompey rolled his eyes mysteriously.

"Got scared? At what?"

"A man, sah, wot was a-creepin' around de ranch, sah, peepin' in de
doah an' de winders, sah."

"A man?"

"Hank Stiger, I'll wager a dollar!" cried Dan.

"It must have been that fellow," added Ralph.

"What became of the man, Pompey?" went on Mr. Radbury.

"I can't say as to dat, sah. As soon as I dun spot him, sah, I got de
gun, an' he run away like de Old Boy was after him, sah."

Asked to describe the stranger, Pompey gave a fairly good description
of him, and this fitted Hank Stiger exactly.

"He is around for no good purpose," said Amos Radbury. "Are all of the
mustangs safe?"

"Yes, sah. I'se dun watch dem de whole night, sah."

"We must keep a watch to-night, too, and to-morrow we can go on a hunt
and see if he is hiding anywhere near."

In honour of the home-coming, Pompey, as tired as he was, spread a
generous table, and all sat around this for several hours, eating,
drinking, and discussing the situation. The Radburys were glad Poke
Stover had accompanied them, for now the frontiersman could help keep
guard against the half-breed, should the latter mean mischief.

The next day proved so stormy and cold that the boys were glad to
remain indoors. It did not snow, but the rain was a half hail and the
wind was of the kind that reaches one's marrow. Only Amos Radbury and
Poke Stover went out, to the cattle shed and the nearest range, and
they were glad enough to come in long before evening.

"Hank Stiger won't stir around much in this weather," observed Mr.
Radbury, as he shook the water from his greatcoat. "He's too much
afraid of himself."

"Yes, but he'll want shelter somewhere," said Ralph.

"Perhaps he has gone after the Comanches," said Dan. "He may have been
just on a journey when Pompey saw him."

So the talk ran on, but nothing came of it. That night, completely
tired out, all retired early. Just before he went to bed Dan looked out
of the window and saw that it was clearing off, and that the stars were
trying to break through the clouds.

Down in a corner of the cattle shed rested a small keg of powder which
Amos Radbury had brought home from Gonzales, for his stock of this
article had run low. As Dan lay in bed he could not get this keg of
powder out of his head.

"I hope it didn't get wet," he thought. "But surely father must have
covered it up with great care."

For thinking of the keg, Dan could not get to sleep, and at last he
arose and walked out into the living-apartment of the cabin. Here, in
the middle of the floor, he came to a sudden standstill, as a noise
outside reached his ears.

What the noise came from he could not determine. First there was a
slight bump, and then a rolling sound, and then he heard a scratching,
as of steel upon flint.

"I'm going to investigate this," he said to himself, and, catching up
his gun, he ran to the door and threw it open.

What he saw surprised him beyond measure. There, in the darkness, stood
Hank Stiger. The half-breed had a bit of lighted tinder in his hand,
and at his feet lay the keg of powder with a long fuse attached to the
open bung-hole!


CHAPTER XXV.

MARCH OF SANTA ANNA INTO TEXAS.


"You rascal! Get back, or I'll shoot!"

[Illustration: "'YOU RASCAL! GET BACK, OR I'LL SHOOT!'"]

Such were the words which burst from Dan's lips as soon as he recovered
sufficiently from his surprise to speak.

But Hank Stiger was already retreating, carrying the lighted tinder in
his hand. He could not make out who was there, but saw it was somebody
with a gun, and the sight of the weapon was enough for him.

"What's up?" came from Poke Stover, who had been snoring in the corner,
and the old frontiersman scrambled to his feet and joined Dan at the
doorway.

"There goes Hank Stiger! He was going to blow up the cabin with our keg
of gunpowder."

"Can it be possible! I'll stop him." Stover ran outside. "Stop, Hank
Stiger, or you're a dead man!" he called out, loudly.

But the half-breed was now running like a deer and paid no attention to
the words. Taking hasty but careful aim at Stiger's legs, Poke Stover
pulled the trigger of his gun.

The report, which awakened all of the others, was followed by a scream
of pain from the half-breed, who went a step or two more and then sank
in a heap.

"What does this mean?" demanded Amos Radbury, as he, too, seized his
gun. "Are we attacked by Indians?"

"No, we were attacked by Hank Stiger," answered Dan, and pointed to the
keg of powder.

"My powder! What was he going to do with that?"

"Blow us all sky-high."

"And you saw him?"

"Yes, I caught him in the act of lighting the fuse lying there."

"But how came you to be up?"

"I was restless,--thinking about the keg and other things."

"It must have been an act of Providence," murmured Amos Radbury. "Who
fired the shot?"

"Poke Stover. He has gone after Stiger," concluded Dan.

All ran out of the cabin, and found the frontiersman and the half-breed
at the edge of the clearing. Hank Stiger had been struck in the knee
and was evidently suffering great pain, for after screaming for awhile
he fell back in a dead faint.

Stover and Pompey were for leaving him where he had fallen, but neither
Amos Radbury nor his sons had the heart to do this, and in the end the
half-breed was carried to the cattle shed and put in the corner from
whence he had removed the powder. All were anxious to question him
about his actions, but the wounded man was in no condition to talk.

"After this I'll put this powder in a safer place," said Mr. Radbury,
and stored it in a corner of the dugout, under the living-room.

Hank Stiger's wound was dressed, and then Pompey was set to watch him
for the remainder of the night. The negro was given a pistol and was
instructed to discharge it at the first intimation of danger of any
kind.

But the balance of the night passed quietly, and toward morning Dan got
into a sound sleep, from which he did not awaken until long after the
others were up.

After breakfast Amos Radbury started to question Hank Stiger. He found
the half-breed resting easily, but in a sullen mood. At first he
utterly refused to talk.

"Very well," said Mr. Radbury. "If you won't talk, neither shall you
eat nor drink."

"Then take me back to the Gonzales lockup," muttered Stiger.

"We will,--when we have the time. At present we have other matters to
attend to."

Left once more in charge of Pompey, the half-breed flew into a rage and
muttered all sorts of imprecations against those who had outwitted him.
Then, as the day wore on, he calmed down, and tried to bribe the
coloured man into giving him something to eat and to drink.

Pompey was obdurate. "Can't do it, nohow," he said. "It's ag'in Mars'
Radbury's ordahs, sah."

A wounded man always craves water, and by one o'clock in the afternoon
the half-breed's tongue was fairly lolling out of his mouth. He stood
it awhile longer, then summoned Pompey.

"Give me a drink,--I am dyin'."

"I dun tole you dat it was ag'in the massah's ordahs, sah."

"He said I could have water if I would talk," growled Stiger.

"Is yo' ready to talk?"

"Yes."

At once the negro called his master, who was busy, with the boys and
Poke Stover, in putting down some hog-meat for the winter. Knowing how
greatly Stiger must suffer, Amos Radbury went to him without delay.

"So you are willing to talk now, Stiger?"

"How can I help myself?"

"Then tell me why you tried to blow up my cabin?"

"I wanted to git squar' fer havin' me locked up."

"But you deserved to be locked up, after that attack on Dan and Henry
Parker."

At this the half-breed shrugged his shoulders.

"And you must remember perfectly well what you did before that,"
continued Amos Radbury.

"I didn't get Bison Head to attack you,--he did that on his own
account."

"But you came in afterward and robbed the place. It is useless for you
to deny any longer that you took those papers relating to this grant of
land."

For several minutes Stiger was silent. At last he lifted his eyes.

"Are you goin' to give me dat drink?" he asked, falling back into his
Indian accent.

"Yes,--if you'll promise to tell me about the papers."

"I--I will."

Pompey was at once sent for a pitcher of fresh water, and when it
arrived Hank Stiger grabbed it with both hands and drained it dry.
Nectar could not have tasted sweeter to him.

"Now what did you do with the papers?" Amos Radbury asked, after Stiger
had given a long sigh of satisfaction.

"I--I lost 'em."

Instantly Amos Radbury's face flushed, and he sprang to his feet.

"Stiger, you are falsifying! I do not believe you!" he exclaimed.

"It's de truf."

"It is not. You have either hidden the papers or else given them to
somebody."

At this the half-breed shrugged his shoulders again.

"You cannot deceive me longer," went on the settler. "By and by you
will want food and more water. You shall have neither."

"Goin' ter starve me to death?"

"It will be your own fault. I am now treating you with more kindness
than you deserve. Many a man would have strung you up to the nearest
tree for your misdeeds."

At this Hank Stiger winced, for he knew only too well that Mr. Radbury
spoke the truth. He felt that he could not go too far or he might get
into deeper trouble.

"I'll tell yer all," he said at last. "But give me somethin' to eat
first."

"Not a mouthful until you have told your story. Then you can have all
the food and water you wish, and we'll try to make you as comfortable
as we can."

This was the straw which broke the camel's back, so far as Hank Stiger
was concerned, and with much hesitation he told his story, which in
substance was as follows:

About six months before, he had fallen in with a man of mixed American
and Spanish blood named Carlos Martine, who was anxious to obtain
possession of a large grant of land on the Guadalupe from the Radbury
claim northward.

Carlos Martine was in league with a number of Mexican officials, and
had obtained ownership of a large portion of the land without much
difficulty. But the best of the land, that fronting the river, belonged
to Amos Radbury, and this Martine could not obtain, although he tried
to do so through a certain John Morgan. Morgan had asked Mr. Radbury to
sell several times, but had been refused.

Carlos Martine had had a hold on Hank Stiger, and during the Indian
raid had asked the half-breed to obtain possession of the papers
relating to the land, if they could be found in the Radbury cabin. What
Martine was going to do with the papers Stiger did not know.

Having obtained the papers, Hank Stiger had gone off to Gonzales with
them. From there he had journeyed to Goliad, and there met Carlos
Martine. The latter had promised him twenty dollars, Mexican money, for
the documents, but at the time of the meeting the half-breed had been
so intoxicated that he could not remember whether he received the cash
or not. Certainly, when he had sobered up, two days later, every cent
of the money was missing.

"And have you seen Carlos Martine since?" questioned Amos Radbury.

"No."

"Then you do not know where he is?"

Once more Hank Stiger shrugged his shoulders. "I think he got afraid
and went to Mexico. A good many people around Gonzales do not like him,
and I think he was afraid I would expose him," he ventured.

Amos Radbury questioned the half-breed, and at last concluded that the
story must be largely true. This being so, he ordered Pompey to fetch
some more water and prepare such a meal as might be good for the sick
man. The planter had had considerable experience at doctoring, and he
attended to the wounded knee with almost as much skill as a surgeon.

As Carlos Martine was out of reach, nothing could at present be done
toward getting back the missing documents.

"But I shall fortify myself as much as possible," said Amos Radbury;
and on the following day he wrote down Hank Stiger's confession in
full, made the half-breed sign it with his mark, and had Poke Stover
witness the paper.

"Thet might not hold with the Mexican government," drawled the old
frontiersman, "but I calkerlate 'twill hold with the government o' this
free an' enlightened State o' Texas, hear me!" And at this the others
had to laugh.

The holidays came and went, and nothing of more than ordinary interest
happened at the ranch. It was at times bitter cold, the sweeping
"northers," as they are called, hurling themselves over Texas with
great fury. During those times everybody remained indoors hugging the
fire. Hank Stiger still kept to his couch at the cattle shed, and was
provided regularly with all that he needed to eat and drink. If the
truth must be told, the half-breed was thankful that he had such a
comfortable home for the time being, knowing it was much better than
any the Indians could offer him, or better than he would get at the
Gonzales lockup.

In the meantime, matters politically were in a very mixed-up state
throughout Texas. The majority of the settlers were for liberty, but
some, while wishing State rights, still thought it best to remain in
the Mexican Confederation, while others wanted annexation to the United
States without delay.

Many meetings were held, but this only increased the confusion, and
though a portion of the Texans set up a provisional government, others
continued to act largely on their own responsibility. There were many
wrangles and, to look back, it is a great wonder that anarchy did not
reign supreme. But it is a satisfaction to know that, in the end, law
and order conquered. With the political troubles our tale has nothing
to do.

While the Texans were speculating upon what to do next, Santa Anna, in
Mexico, was not idle. At the head of a party peculiarly his own, he had
cut off many of the rights of the Mexican citizens, and made himself
virtually a dictator, although still called simply the president. This
accomplished, he set out to subdue Texas, the only spot where his
authority was resisted.

Santa Anna had sent out a small command to relieve General Cos at San
Antonio. The two forces met at the Rio Grande River, and there waited
for further orders. Early in February, General Santa Anna came up to
Monova with about four thousand troops. These soldiers were joined by
those on the Rio Grande, thus increasing the Mexican army to about
seven thousand.

The order now came for a direct advance upon San Antonio, and the army
set off on its wearisome journey of about six hundred miles over a
plain which was hardly protected by any timber from the cutting winter
winds. Slow progress was made, and, food falling short, the whole army
had to be put on short rations. Some of the soldiers tried to desert,
but these were promptly shot by Santa Anna's orders. Whenever a
settlement was passed, the inhabitants were made to give the hungry
Mexicans all the provisions they could possibly spare. Once the whole
army came close to open rebellion, but Santa Anna's orders were
supreme, and on the 22d day of February, 1836, the first of his troops
appeared within sight of San Antonio; and the war, which had hung fire
since the December before, was again begun.


CHAPTER XXVI.

WILD TURKEYS AND ANOTHER TRAIL.


One day, early in February, Amos Radbury came riding back from a trip
to Gonzales with news that he had heard from Carlos Martine.

"The man has been at San Felipe," he declared, "and I have it on good
authority that he intends to claim my land."

"Well, what are ye going to do?" queried Poke Stover, who was still at
the ranch.

"I hardly know. But I wish I could have a talk with Martine. It might
be the means of saving a good deal of trouble."

"Is Martine still at San Felipe?"

"No, Gusher told me that he had gone to San Antonio."

"Then why not take a trip to San Antonio and find him?" suggested the
old frontiersman. "I reckon that is what I would do."

"I think you are right, Poke, and I'll start tomorrow," answered the
planter.

He went in to talk the matter over with his sons, and the land claim
was the chief topic of conversation for the balance of the evening.

"I now wish I had kept Hank Stiger here," said Mr. Radbury. The
half-breed had left the ranch but three days before, apparently very
grateful for the manner in which he had been treated.

"Well, one thing is certain," declared Dan, "I don't stand for giving
up the claim. I'll fight first. Those Mexican officials can do as they
please, but they can't budge me."

"Good fer Dan!" shouted Stover. "He's the kind the State o' Texas will
want in days to come."

On the next day Mr. Radbury was too busy to think of leaving the ranch.
There was much work at the cattle shed, part of which had been blown
down by a norther which had proved little less than a hurricane.

In working upon the shed the planter had a mishap. The rung of a short
ladder broke beneath his weight, and he came down flat on his back. No
bones were broken, but he was hurt otherwise, and decided that it would
be best for him to keep off his horse for a week or ten days.

He was apparently much worried to think he could not see Carlos
Martine, and, noticing this, Dan went to him, and asked if he could not
do the errand.

"You, Dan!"

"Yes, father. I know you think I am but a boy, yet----"

"No, my son," interposed Mr. Radbury. "I used to think you were but a
boy, but, since you showed your fighting qualities at Bexar, I have
changed my mind. You are but a boy in years."

"Then let me go and see if I can hunt up this Carlos Martine. I can at
least have a talk with him, and learn how matters stand."

Amos Radbury shook his head, but in the end he consented to let Dan go,
providing Poke Stover would accompany him on the trip. The old
frontiersman was willing, and early on the following morning the pair
set off on their mustangs, each carrying his gun, which was now a
custom with all of the settlers.

In those days there were two main trails, or wagon roads, crossing the
Guadalupe River. The lower trail was the one running through San
Felipe, Gonzales, and San Antonio, and this could very properly be
termed the main highway of Texas. From fifty to a hundred miles north
of this was the trail running through Nacogdoches, and across a hilly
and uncultivated territory to San Antonio and the Rio Grande. At San
Antonio the two trails came together in the form of the letter V, and
in the notch thus formed stood the Franciscan Mission, commonly called
the Alamo, which means the cottonwood-tree. Of this mission, which was
to be so bravely defended, we will soon learn many interesting details.

The Radburys usually rode to San Antonio by way of Gonzales, but Dan
and Poke Stover decided to ride through the timber lands to the
northwest until the upper trail was gained. This way might be a trifle
rougher, but it was no longer, and the trees along the upper trail
would serve to break the force of the northers which were continually
sweeping the face of the country.

The two set off in high spirits, each with his saddle-bags well stocked
with provisions, and each well armed.

"Who knows but what we may meet some Indians on the way?" said Dan.

"I doubt if the Indians are active now," replied the old frontiersman.
"They have had some pretty good lessons lately, and, besides, they know
that all of the settlers are arming against the Mexicans, and are,
consequently, ready for them."

"Do you know why I came this way?" went on Dan, after a pause.

"I didn't calkerlate you had any perticklar reason, Dan."

"I have an idea we can run across that white mustang father lost."

"Humph! That nag may be miles an' miles away from this deestrict."

"That is true. But yesterday, when I rode up to the edge of this
timber, I caught sight of something that looked very much like the
white mustang."

"You did! Then why didn't you say so afore?"

"I didn't want to worry father. I thought I would tell you,--when we
got out,--and I've done it," added Dan.

"Where did ye spot the critter?"

"Right over to the left, near that fallen pine. But I'm not sure it was
the white mustang. But it was some creature in white."

"If it wasn't the mustang, it couldn't be anything else. There are no
other white critters here,--'ceptin' it might be a silver deer, and
they are as scarce as snowstorms in July."

They were now in the timber, and moving along at a steady gait. On all
sides the ground was as hard as a rock, and the keen air was bracing to
the last degree. A stiff breeze was blowing, swaying the branches
overhead, and occasionally bringing down a belated nut on their heads.

By noon they calculated that they had covered eighteen miles, which was
not bad, considering the nature of the ground they had traversed. With
the rising of the sun it grew warmer, and, seeking a sheltered spot,
they dismounted and partook of their midday meal. They had still
twenty-six miles to go, but hoped to cover that distance before
nightfall.

"I wonder how the garrison at San Antonio is making out," said Dan, as
they sat eating.

"Like as not a good many of the soldiers went home for Christmas,"
returned Stover. "To my mind, it's a great pity that Sam Houston ain't
succeeded in organising the army as he intended. He seems to be the
only leader who thinks that Santa Anna will come over here with a big
force to knock the spots out of us. All the others are quarrelling over
politics and places."

"I don't think it's quite as bad as that," laughed Dan. "But it seems
to me they ought to get an army together."

"The leaders ought to act in concert, Dan. If they don't, their
soldiers are licked afore they go into battle," remarked the old
frontiersman, sagely. "What Texas needs most of all is one first-class
leader, whom all obey." And in this speech Stover came very near to
telling the exact truth.

The meal finished, they were soon in the saddle again, and less than an
hour later they came upon the trail leading directly into San Antonio.
There was a hill of rocks on one side and a belt of timber on the
other, with here and there a water-course to be crossed.

So far, nothing had been seen of any game but a deer that was too far
away to be brought down, and a few hares, which neither took the
trouble to shoot. But now Poke Stover called attention to a flock of
wild turkeys resting along the rocks not a hundred yards distant.

"A fine shot, Dan!" he whispered. "We can make a good trade with 'em,
down in Bexar."

"That's so," answered the boy. "I'm ready to shoot when you are."

"Let us go into the timber, and come up in front of 'em," suggested the
old frontiersman. "The rocks kind o' hide 'em from this p'int."

They dismounted and tied their mustangs to a tree. Then, with guns
ready for use, they crept off in a semicircle, coming up to within
sixty yards of the turkeys before they were discovered.

"Fire!" cried Stover, and bang! bang! went the two guns, one directly
after the other. They had loaded with large shot, and five turkeys
fell, two killed outright and the others badly wounded. Rushing in,
Stover quickly caught the wounded ones and wrung their necks.

[Illustration: "'THAT'S WHAT I CALL A PRETTY GOOD HAUL!' CRIED DAN,
ENTHUSIASTICALLY."]

"That's what I call a pretty good haul," cried Dan, enthusiastically.

"It's not bad, lad, although I've seen better. I wish I could have
gotten a second shot at 'em. We might have----" The old frontiersman
broke off short. "What's that?"

"It's a horse's hoofs on the trail," answered Dan. "Somebody is coming
this way."

He ran out of the bushes into which the wild turkeys had fallen, and
gazed along the road. Just above was a curve, and around this came
sweeping something which caused his heart to bound with delight.

It was the white mustang.

"By hookey!" came from Poke Stover. "It's him, eh, Dan?"

"Yes. Oh, if only I had my lasso!" For that article was attached to the
saddle of the mustang in the timber. Dan was on the point of crossing
the trail when Stover caught him by the arm.

"Don't scare the pony----" began the frontiersman, but he was too late.
The white mustang had caught sight of Dan and he came to a halt
instantly. Then he reared and plunged and swept by, and the last they
saw of him, he was running toward San Antonio at the top of his speed.

"We've seen him,--and that's all the good it will do us," remarked Poke
Stover, as Dan gazed blankly up the road, and then at his companion.

"Can't we catch him, Poke? Oh, we must!"

"Might as well try to catch a streak o' greased lightning, lad."

"I don't know about that. He looked tired, as if he had been running a
long while."

"You are sure on that? I didn't git no fair view of the critter."

"Yes, he was covered with sweat. Perhaps somebody else has been
following him."

"Well, it won't do no harm to go after him,--seein' as how he is
steerin' in our direction," said the old frontiersman, and, picking up
the dead turkeys, they ran for their mustangs and leaped into the
saddles.

Several miles were covered, and they were on the point of giving up the
chase when they encountered a settler with his prairie schooner, or big
covered wagon, on his way to Guadalupe.

"Ye-as, I seen thet air white critter jest below yere," the settler
drawled. "He war goin' 'bout fifteen miles an hour, I reckoned. Looked
tired. I wanted to go arfter him, but Susy, she wouldn't allow it."

"No, Sam Dickson, ye sha'n't go arfter no game or sech," came from the
interior of the schooner. "Ye'll settle down an' go ter farmin', an'
the sooner the better 'twill be fer yer hide, mind me!" And the dark,
forbidding face of a woman, some years older than the man, appeared
from behind the dirty flaps of the wagon-covering. At once the settler
cracked his whip and drove on.

Poke Stover chuckled to himself. "Thar's married life fer ye, Dan," he
remarked. "Do ye wonder I'm a single man?"

"My mother wasn't of that kind," answered the youth, and then Stover
abruptly changed the subject, and away they galloped again after the
white mustang, little dreaming of the trouble into which that chase was
to lead them.


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE MEXICAN ARMY AT SAN ANTONIO.


The day was almost spent when, from a slight hill, they came in sight
of San Antonio, the setting sun gilding the tops of the church
steeples, and making the sluggish river appear like a stream of gold.

"No white mustang yet," said Dan. "I reckon we might as well give up
the chase and go right into the city."

"Not yet!" cried Poke Stover, pointing with his hand to the
northwestward. "Thar ye are, Dan!"

Dan looked in the direction, and in a patch of cottonwoods made out a
white object, moving slowly along. It was the mustang they were after,
so tired out that he could scarcely move from one spot to the next.

"We've got him now!" ejaculated the youth, enthusiastically. "And just
as I was ready to give up, too! Come on!"

Away he swept, with all the quickness of which his own wearied steed
was capable, and Poke Stover followed him. The white mustang saw them
coming, and set off into the timber on a feeble run.

The course of the pursued creature was around the northern approach to
San Antonio and then toward the Medina River. Many times they thought
to give up the chase, but then the white mustang seemed so near and so
ready to drop that they kept on until the river bank was gained. Here
the mustang disappeared into a pine brake; and it may be as well to
add, right here, that neither the Radburys nor Poke Stover ever saw him
again.

"Where is he?" asked Dan, a few minutes after the animal had
disappeared. "Do you think he leaped into the water?"

"I heard a splash," answered the old frontiersman. "There it goes
again." He tried to pierce the darkness with his eyes. "There is
something over yonder, that---- Whoopee, Dan, look!"

There was no need for Poke Stover to call the boy's attention to what
was on the other side of the Medina, for Dan was already looking, "with
all eyes," as the saying is. He had made out a number of Mexican
cavalrymen, moving up and down along the west bank, and now he noted
two pieces of artillery, which the cannoneers were trying to run out on
two rafts moored close at hand.

"The Mexican army, as sure as you are born!" cried Stover, in an
excited whisper. "Lad, we have made an important discovery. They must
be bound for Bexar!"

"Yes, and there are thousands of them," answered Dan. His heart was
beating so rapidly that he could scarcely speak. "Poke, what had we
best do?"

"Find out what their game is, first, and then ride back to Bexar as
fast as our mustangs can make it. If the garrison isn't warned, there
will surely be a great slaughter."

There was a stiff norther blowing, making the swollen stream rough and
dangerous to cross, and the Mexicans were consulting among themselves
as to how they should proceed. With bated breath, the boy and the old
frontiersman watched every movement, and, at the same time, tried to
figure up mentally how many Mexicans there were.

"At least a thousand," said Poke Stover, but, as we know, he was
mistaken; the force of the enemy numbered nearly seven times that many,
although, to be sure, they were not all in that immediate vicinity.

"We will cross the river and investigate," said one of the officers,
presently, and a large flat-bottomed boat was brought around and a
dozen soldiers leaped into it.

"We had better get out now," whispered Poke Stover, and turned his pony
to ride away from the river bank.

"Halt! Who goes?" came the cry, in Spanish, from one of the Mexican
guards.

"We are discovered," whispered Dan. "Come on!"

He turned away from the river bank and dove straight into the pine
brake. Then came a shot of warning, but the Mexican fired high, not
daring to take aim for fear of hitting a friend.

The shot caused a commotion, and soon Dan and Stover felt that they
were being followed. They tried to make their mustangs move on a run,
but the animals could not be urged farther.

"They will catch us, sure," gasped the boy, as the steps of the enemy
sounded nearer and nearer. "What shall we do?"

"Move to the right, and we'll see if we can't throw them off the
trail," answered Poke Stover.

To the right there was a slight hollow, filled with mesquite-trees and
bushes, and beyond this was a sandy plain covered with cacti. But of
the latter both were ignorant.

Down into the hollow they dove, their horses glad enough of the chance
to get a drink at the pool among the bushes. Under the mesquite-trees
they halted, and Stover went back to reconnoitre.

The scout was gone for fully quarter of an hour, and came back
chuckling softly to himself.

"We threw 'em nicely," he said. "We are safe now, providin' we don't
make too much noise."

"Then let us go on, Poke. We must carry the news to Bexar."

"It's funny there are no scouts around," was the old frontiersman's
comment. "They ought to be on the watch." But none of the Texan
soldiers were on guard, the greater portion of them being in attendance
at a Mexican fandango in the town, never suspecting the attack so close
at hand. Santa Anna heard of this fandango, and would have pushed
forward to capture San Antonio at once, but could not get his army
across the Medina River.

Leaving the pool, Dan and the frontiersman ascended to the plain, and
presently found themselves among the cacti. This was anything but
pleasant, and they had to pick their way with great care in the
darkness, and even then their steeds often refused to budge, so prickly
were the plants. It was almost morning when they arrived in sight of
the _jacals_, or huts, which dotted the outskirts of the city.

The pair at once sought out the commander of the garrison,
Lieutenant-Colonel William B. Travis, who was still sleeping. Travis
was a dashing young soldier of twenty-eight, a lawyer by profession,
and a native of North Carolina. The commander was "red-hot" for
independence, and one who never gave up, as we shall soon see.

"So you wish to see me," he said to Stover, whom he had met before.
"It's rather an early visit."

"I have to report that a large body of Mexicans are approaching the
town," answered the old frontiersman, saluting in true military style.
"Young Radbury here and myself were down along the Medina, when we
spotted them trying to bring a couple of cannon over on a raft."

"Mexican soldiers?" exclaimed the lieutenant-colonel. "You are certain
of this?"

"We are."

"How many of them do you think?"

"At least a thousand."

The commander knit his brows in perplexity. "It is odd none of my
scouts have brought me word. But a fandango----" He broke off short, as
another officer came in. "What is it, Chester?"

"It is reported that some Mexican dragoons are in the vicinity,
colonel."

"These people here tell me a whole army is coming. Where did your
report come from?"

"The church steeple. The dragoons are in the vicinity of Prospect
Hill," went on the officer, mentioning a hill to the west of San
Antonio.

"I must have the particulars of this without delay," said the
commander, hurriedly; and while he questioned Stover and Dan he sent
for several scouts, who were hurried off to verify the reports. When
the scouts came back, they reported that Santa Anna's army was coming
straight for San Antonio, several thousand strong.

The whole city was at once thrown into a commotion, and it was felt
that the garrison could do little or nothing toward defending the
place.

"We are but a hundred and forty odd strong," said Lieutenant A. M.
Dickenson, one of the attachees of the garrison. "We cannot hold the
plaza, no matter how hard we try. Let us retreat to the Alamo, until we
can summon reinforcements."

The matter was hastily discussed, and it was decided to retreat to the
Alamo without delay. Later on, express riders were sent off for
help,--but help never came for those who fought so nobly and bitterly
to the very last.

The retreat from the town to the mission was necessarily a rapid one,
for Santa Anna was advancing with all possible speed. Few stores could
be taken along, but as the garrison swept across the plain lying
between the city and the mission, they came upon a herd of cattle,
numbering thirty-six heads, and drove these before them into the
mission's courtyard.

"Let us go with the soldiers!" cried Dan, who was as excited as
anybody. "If there is a battle ahead it will be all foolishness to
attempt to look for Carlos Martine."

"Well, lad, I'm willing," replied Stover. "But I don't want to get you
into trouble."

"I'll risk the trouble, Poke; come on," and on they went after the
garrison. It was not long before they reached the soldiers, who were
just rounding up the cattle mentioned, and in this operation the two
assisted.

It was felt that the soldiers might be besieged in the Alamo for quite
some time, so as soon as the cattle were rounded up some of the men
visited the near-by houses, and collected all the stores at hand,
including a number of bushels of wheat and some dried fruits.

In the meantime Santa Anna's army had marched into San Antonio, and
taken possession. This done, the general held a consultation with his
leading officers, and sent out a flag of truce toward the mission.

"Flag of truce," announced one of the guards.

"Very well, we'll see what they demand," said Lieutenant-Colonel
Travis, and despatched Major Morris and Captain Marten to hold the
interview.

"General Santa Anna demands the immediate surrender of the mission,"
said the official sent out by the Mexican president.

"We will convey your message to our commander," replied the major of
the Texans, and withdrew.

Travis received the message with all the quiet dignity for which he was
noted.

"I will send him his answer at once," he replied, and ordered a
cannon-shot to be fired over the heads of the Mexican army.

This threw the Mexicans into a rage, and they quickly hung a blood-red
flag from the tower of the San Fernando Church in San Antonio. This
flag meant "no quarter," and, as it went up, several cannon-shots were
aimed at the Alamo; and thus was the battle begun.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

WITHIN THE WALLS OF THE MISSION.


The Alamo church, the principal building of the mission, was built in
the form of a cross, of rough stone, with walls several feet thick. At
the time of the battle which was to witness its downfall the centre of
the structure was roofless, but the ends were well covered. The sides
of the church were over twenty feet high, and the windows were
exceedingly narrow, for the building had been built to resist attacks
by the Indians. It faced both the river and San Antonio proper.

Attached to the left wing of the church was a large square called the
convent yard, with walls of heavy stone sixteen feet high. Spread out
in front of this yard, and beyond it, was the convent, two stories
high, and nearly two hundred feet long. In front of the convent was a
long and broad plaza, covering over two acres, and surrounded by walls
at either end and by the convent in the rear, and a house and wall in
the front. On the right of the plaza was a small prison and a gateway,
and from the corner of the prison there was a stockade of cedar logs
extending to the nearest corner of the church.

What has been gained in polish has been lost in dignity. Whence the
Senecan iambic is derived, is a question which cannot be answered with
certainty. It is wholly unlike the early Roman tragic iambic. Elision
is rare, and there is little variety.

Instead of the massive and rugged measure of Pacuvius or Accius, we have
a finished and elegant monotony. In all likelihood it is the lineal
descendant of the iambic of Ovid.[204] In view of Seneca's great
admiration for Ovid--he quotes him continually in his prose works--of
Ovid's mastery of rhetoric and epigram, and yet more of the distinct
parallels traceable between the _Phaedra_ and _Medea_ of Seneca
and the corresponding _Heroides_ of Ovid, it becomes a strong
probability that the Senecan iambic was deeply influenced--if not
actually created--by the iambic style of the earlier poet's lost
drama, the famous _Medea_.[205]
As to the models to which he is indebted for his treatment of choric
metres we know nothing.

In spite of the fact that he employs a large variety of metres, and
that his choruses at times stray from rhetoric into poetry of a
high order, there is in them a still more deadly monotony than in
his iambics.

The chorus are devoid of life; they are there partly as a concession to
convention, but mainly to supply incidental music. Their inherent
dullness is not relieved by the metre.
Of strophic arrangement there is no clear trace; in a large proportion
of cases the choruses are written in one fixed and rigid metre
admitting of no variety: even where different metres alternate, the
relaxation is but small, for the same monotony reigns unchecked
within the limits of each section.

The strange experiments in mixed metres in the _Agamemnon_ and
_Oedipus_ show Seneca's technique at its worst: they are composed
of fragments of Horatian metres, thinly disguised by inversions and
resolutions of feet: they lack all governing principle and are an
unqualified failure.

Of the remaining metres the Anapaestic, Asclepiad, Sapphic, and
Glyconic predominate.

He is, perhaps, least unsuccessful in his treatment of the Anapaest:
the lines do not lack melody, and the natural flexibility of the
metre saves them from extreme monotony, though they would have been
more successful had he employed the paroemiac line as a solemn and
resonant close to the march of the dimeter.

But one wearies soon of the eternal Asclepiads and Glyconics which
he often allows to continue in unbroken and unvaried series for
seventy or eighty lines together.

He rarely allows any variation within the Glyconic and never makes
use of it to break the monotony of the Asclepiad.

Still worse are his Sapphics. Abandoning the usual arrangement in
stanzas of three lesser Sapphics followed by an Adonic verse, his
Sapphic choruses consist almost entirely of the lesser Sapphic
varied by a very occasional Adonic. The continual succession of these
lines without so much as an occasional change of caesura to diversify
the rhythm is at times almost intolerable.

At the close of such choruses we feel as though we had jogged at a rapid
trot for long miles on a very hard and featureless road.

Language and metre work hand in hand with rhetoric to make these
strange plays dramatically ineffective.

So strange are they and in many ways so unlike anything else in Classical
literature, that the question as to the purpose with which they were
written and the place they occupied in the literature of their day
affords an interesting subject for speculation.

Were they written for the stage? Decayed as was the taste for tragedy,
tragedies may occasionally have been acted.[206] But there are
considerations which suggest doubt as to whether the plays of Seneca
were written with any such purpose.

Even under Nero it is scarcely credible that the introduction of the
mangled fragments of Hippolytus upon the stage would be possible
or palatable.[207] Medea kills her children _coram populo_, and, not
content with killing them, flings their bodies at Jason from
her magic chariot high in air.
Hercules kills his children in full view of the audience, not within the
house as in the corresponding drama of Euripides. Such scenes suggest
that the plays were written not for the stage but for recitation
with musical interludes from a trained choir.

Indications that this was the case are to be found in the _Hercules
Furens_.

While the hero is engaged in slaying his children, Amphitryon, in a
succession of short speeches, gives the details of the murder.
This would be ridiculous and unnecessary were the scene actually
presented on the stage, whereas they become absolutely necessary
on the assumption that the play was written for recitation.[208]
This assumption has the further merit of being charitable; skilful
recitation would cover many defects that would be almost intolerable
on the stage.

It is improbable, however, that the drama of Seneca occupied an important
position in the literature of their day. The golden age of tragedy was
past, and it is hard to believe that these plays are favourable
specimens even of their own age.

The authors of the Silver Age virtually ignore their existence, and,
with the exception of two references in Tertullian and one in
Apollinaris Sidonius, they are quoted only by scholars and
grammarians.

They have small intrinsic value: but they afford interesting evidence for
the taste[209] of their own day, and their influence on modern drama
has been enormous. In the Renaissance at the dawn of the drama's
revival, Seneca was regarded as a dramatist of the first order.
Scaliger ranked him above Euripides: it was to him men turned to
find models for tragedy.

Everywhere we see traces of the Senecan drama.[210] It is a tribute to
the dexterity of his rhetoric that his influence should have been
so enormous, but it is to be regretted in the interests of the drama.

For to Seneca more than to any other man is due the excessive prominence
of declamatory rhetoric, which has characterized the drama throughout
Western Europe from the Renaissance down to the latter half of the
nineteenth century, and has proved a blemish to the work of all save
a few great writers who recognized the value of rhetoric, but never
mistook the shadow for the substance.

III
THE 'OCTAVIA'
A tragedy with this title is included by the MSS. among the plays
of Seneca.

Its chief interest lies in the fact that it is the one surviving
example of a _fabula praetexta_, or tragedy, drawn from Roman life.
It deals with a tragic incident of Nero's reign, the final extinction
of the Claudian house. Octavia, daughter of Claudius and Messalina,
is the heroine. Her life was one long tragedy. Her childhood was darkened
by the disaster that befell her unworthy mother, her maturer years
by her marriage to Nero.

She was a mere pawn in the game of politics.

The marriage was brought about by the designs of Agrippina, to render
Nero secure of the principate. To effect this end her betrothed
Silanus was killed, Claudius, her father, and Britannicus, her
brother, dispatched by poison.

Soon her own wedded life turned to tragedy. Nero fell madly in love with
Poppaea, and resolved to put away Octavia. At Poppaea's instigation
she was accused of a base intrigue.

The plot failed; the false charge could not be pressed home; she was
divorced on the ground of sterility, and imprisoned in a town of
Campania. A rumour arose that she was to be reinstated; the mob of Rome
declared itself in her favour and gave wild expression to its joy.

Poppaea's statues were cast down, Octavia's replaced. Poppaea was
furious. She laid siege to Nero and won him to her will. The old
false charge of adultery was trumped up; a complaisant freed
man was found to confess himself Octavia's lover. She was banished to
Pandataria and slain (June 9, 62 A.D.).

The play gives us a compressed version of the tragedy. It opens with a
speech by Octavia's nurse, setting forth the sorrows of her young
mistress.

The speech over, she leaves the stage to be succeeded by Octavia,
who, in a lament closely modelled on the lament of the Sophoclean
Electra,[211] bewails the sorrows of her house, the deaths of Messalina,
Claudius, and Britannicus. The nurse reappears, attempts to console
her, and counsels submission to fate. Octavia changes her strain and
prays for death. After a lament from the chorus, Nero and Seneca enter
on the scene. Seneca urges moderation and sets forth his ideal of
monarchy.

Nero is quite his match in argument, rejects his advice, and, concluding
with the words
desiste tandem, iam gravis nimium mihi, instare: liceat facere quod
Seneca improbat (588).

Have done at last, For wearisome has thine insistence grown; One still
may do what Seneca condemns ...
MILLER.

declares his intention of marrying Poppaea without delay.

An interesting chorus follows, describing how Rome of old expelled the
kings for their crimes. Nero has sinned even more than they. Has he
not slain even his mother?

There follows a long and interesting description of the murder,[212]
which serves as an introduction to the entrance of the ghost
of Agrippina in the guise of an avenging fury, prophesying the
dethronement and death of her unnatural son.

She is succeeded on the stage by Octavia, resigned to the surrender
of her position and content to be no more than Nero's sister; once
more the chorus bewail her fate.

At last her rival Poppaea appears in conversation with her nurse. The
nurse congratulates her, but Poppaea has been terrified by visions
of the night and is ill at ease.

Her rival is not yet removed and her own place is still insecure. At this
point comes the one ray of hope that illumines this sombre drama.
A messenger arrives with the news that the people have risen in
Octavia's favour.

But the reader is not left in suspense for a moment. Nero appears
and orders the suppression of the _émeute_ and the execution of
Octavia. The chorus mourn the fate of the beloved of the Roman people.
Their power and splendour is but brief:
Octavia perishes untimely, like Gracchus and Livius Drusus. She herself
appears in the hands of soldiers, being dragged off to execution and
death.

Like Cassandra,[213] she compares her fate with that of the
nightingale, to whom the gods gave a new life of peace full of sweet
lamentation as a close to her troubled human existence. One more song
of condolence from the chorus, one more song of sorrow from Octavia,
and she is taken from our sight, and the play closes with a denunciation
by the chorus of the hardness of heart and the insatiate cruelty
of Rome.

It is not hard to summarize the general effect of this curious drama.

Its author has read the Greek tragedians carefully and to some
purpose; he has studied the characters of Electra, Cassandra, and
Antigone with diligence, if without insight.

He clearly feels deep sympathy for Octavia, and to some extent
succeeds in communicating this sympathy to the audience.

His heroine speaks in character: she is never a male Stoic, flaunting
in female garb, she is a genuine woman, a gentle, lovable creature broken
down by misfortune. The other characters are uninteresting. Nero is
an academic tyrant, Seneca an academic adviser, Poppaea is little
more than a lay figure.

The most that can be said for them is that they do not rant. The chorus
are on the whole a fairly satisfactory imitation of a chorus of
sympathetic Greek women.[214] There is nothing forced or unnatural
about them; they are real human beings; their sympathy is genuine,
and its expression appropriate.

But they are dull; monotonous lamentation in monotonous anapaests is
the height of their capacity.

The play is a failure: the subject is not in itself dramatic; if
it had been, it would have been spoiled by the treatment it receives.

We are never in suspense; Octavia has never the remotest chance
of escape; our pity for her is genuine enough, but her character
lacks both grandeur and psychological interest: the pathos of her
situation will not compensate us for the absence of a dramatic plot.

The fall of the house of Claudius compares ill with the tragedy
of the Pelopidae. And the treatment of the story, from the dramatic
standpoint, is childish. The play is scarcely more than a series
of melancholy monologues interspersed with not less melancholy
dirges from the chorus.

The most we can say of it is that it is simple and unaffected: if it
lacks brilliance, it also lacks exaggeration. Thought and diction
are commonplace and uninspired, but they are never absurd--an
extraordinary merit in a poet of the Silver Age.

It will have been sufficiently evident from this brief sketch that the
_Octavia_ is in all respects very different indeed from the other
plays that claim Seneca for their author. It is free from their faults
and their merits alike. It never sinks to their depths, but it never
rises to their heights. Apart, however, from these general considerations,[215]
there is evidence amounting almost to certainty that the _Octavia_
is not by Seneca.

The tragedy takes place in the lifetime of Seneca. Seneca himself figures
in the play. The story is of such a nature that it could hardly have
been written, much less published, in the reign of Nero. Yet more
conclusive is the fact that the ghost of Agrippina prophesies the
fate of Nero in such a way as to make it certain that the author
outlived the emperor and was acquainted with the facts of his
death.[216] 
Who then was the author?

When did he write? Evidence is almost absolutely lacking. From its
comparative sanity and simplicity and its intense hatred of Nero
it may reasonably be conjectured that it is the work of the Flavian
age; the age of the anti-Neronian reaction and of the return to saner
models in life and literature. But there is no certainty; it may have
been written under Nerva, Trajan, or Hadrian. It stands detached and
aloof from the literature of its age.

CHAPTER III

PERSIUS

It is possible to form a clearer picture of the personality of Aulus
Persius Flaccus, the satirist, than of any other poet of the Silver
Age.

Not only are the essential facts of his brief career preserved for us
in a concise, but extremely relevant biography taken from the commentary
of the famous critic Valerius Probus, but there are few poets whose
works so clearly reveal the character of their author.

Persius was born at the lofty hill-town of Volaterrae, in Tuscany, on the
4th of December, 34 A.D.[217] He was scarcely six years old when he
lost his father, a wealthy Roman knight, named Flaccus.

His mother, Fulvia Sisennia, married again, but her second husband,
a knight named Fusius, died after a few years of wedded life. Persius
was educated at home up to the age of twelve, when he was taken
to Rome to be taught literature by Remmius Palaemon and rhetoric
by Verginius Flavus.

Of the latter nothing is known save that he wrote a much-approved
textbook on rhetoric and was exiled by Nero;[218] the former was
a freedman whose remarkable talents were only equalled by his gross
vices; he had a prodigious memory, was a skilful _improvvisatore_,
and the most distinguished teacher of the day.[219] At the age of
sixteen, shortly after his assumption of the _toga virilis_, the
young Persius made the friendship which was to be the ruling influence
of his life.

He learned to know and love the great Stoic teacher, Cornutus, with
an attachment that was broken only by death.

It was from Cornutus that he imbibed the principles of Stoicism,
and at his house that he met the Greek philosophers, Petronius
Aristocrates of Magnesia and the Lacedaemonian physician, Claudius
Agathurnus, whose influence upon his character was only less than
that of Cornutus.

Among his intimates he counted Calpurnius Statura, who died in early
youth, and the famous lyric poet, Caesius Bassus,[220] who was
destined long to survive his friend and to do him the last service
of editing the satires, which his premature death left unpublished
and unfinished.

Lucan also was one of his fellow students in the house of Cornutus,[221]
while at a later date he made the acquaintance of Seneca, the
leading writer of the day, although he never felt the seductive
attractions of his fluent style and subtle intellect.

More important influences were his almost filial respect and affection
for the distinguished orator,[222] M. Servilius Nonianus, and his
close companionship with Thrasea Paetus, the leader of the Stoic
opposition.[223] At one time Persius, if the scholiast may be
believed,[224] contemplated a military career. The statement
is scarcely probable in view of the contempt and dislike with which
he invariably speaks of soldiers, nor is it easy to conceive a
profession less suited to the temperament of the quiet and retiring
poet.

Whatever his original intentions may have been, he actually chose the
secluded life of study, the _vita umbratilis_, as the Romans called
it, remote from the dust and heat of the great world. That he
was wise we cannot doubt. It was the only life possible in those
days for a man of his character.

'Fuit morum lenissimorum, verecundiae virginalis, pietatis erga matrem
et sororem et amitam exemplo sufficientis: fuit frugi, pudicus.'

Even in a saner, purer, and less turbulent age, such a one would have
been more fitted for the paths of study than for any branch of public
life. He died of a disease of the stomach on the 24th of November,
62 A.D., in his villa on the Appian Way, some eight miles south of
Rome,[225] leaving behind him a valuable library, a small amount
of unpublished verse, and a considerable fortune, amounting to
2,000,000 sesterces.

The whole of this fortune he bequeathed to his mother and sister, only
begging them to give to his friend Cornutus a sum of 100,000 sesterces,
twenty pounds weight of silver plate, and the whole of his library,
containing no less than 700 volumes by the Stoic Chrysippus. Cornutus
accepted the books, but refused the rest, showing that indifference
to wealth that was to be looked for, though not always to be found,
in professors of the Stoic philosophy. The literary work left by the
dead poet was submitted by his mother to the judgement of Cornutus,
himself a poet.[226] The bulk of the work was not great.

Persius had in his boyhood written a _praetexta_ or tragedy with a
Roman plot, a book of poems describing his journeys with Thrasea,[227]
and a few verses on his kinswoman Arria, the wife of Caecina Paetus,
immortalized by her devotion to her husband and her heroic death.[228]
As the work of his maturer years he left his satires.

Cornutus recommended that all save the satires should be destroyed;
they alone, unfinished though they might be, were worthy of the
memory of his dead friend.

He began the task of correcting them for publication, but transferred
it to Caesius Bassus, at the latter's earnest entreaty. Of the nature
of the correction and editing required we are ignorant, save for the
statement of Probus that a few lines were removed from the end of the
book to give it an appearance of completion.[229] The poems met
with instant success;[230] they excited both wonder and criticism;
that they continued to be read is shown by the existence of copious
scholia, which must, indeed, have been almost necessary for such
continuance of their popularity.[231]
The slender volume of Persius' works is composed of six satires in
hexameter verse and a prologue written in choliambi.

The first deals with the corruption of literature; the second, addressed
to Macrinus on his birthday, treats of the right and wrong objects of
prayer; the third is an appeal to an indolent young man for energy and
earnestness; the fourth, almost a continuation of the third, attacks
the lack of 'self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control', in
public men; the fifth, addressed to his friend and teacher Cornutus,
maintains the Stoic doctrine that all the world are slaves; only
the righteous man attains to freedom; in the sixth, addressed to
Caesius Bassus, the poet claims the right to spend his wealth in
reasonable enjoyment, and denounces the grasping and unseemly
selfishness of an imaginary heir to his fortune.

In the prologue--or epilogue as it is sometimes regarded[232]--he
sarcastically disclaims any pretensions to poetic inspiration, and
hints ironically that, in view of the number of poets who write
merely to win their bread, inspiration may be regarded as
unnecessary.

The ambition to win fame as a satirist was first fired in Persius
by his reading the tenth book of the satires of Lucilius.

If we may believe Probus, he imitated the opening of that book in
his first satire, beginning like Lucilius by detracting from himself
and proceeding to attack other authors indiscriminately.[233] Not
enough of the tenth book of Lucilius has survived to enable us to
check the accuracy of this statement, though it finds independent
testimony in a remark of the scholiast on Horace, that the tenth
book of Lucilius contained free criticisms of the early poets of
Rome.[234] Further, the third satire is said by the scholiast to
have been modelled on the fourth book of Lucilius, and there is a
certain amount of evidence for supposing the choliambi of the
epilogue to be an imitation of a Lucilian model.[235] We have,
however, no means of testing the truth of these assertions: the
debt of Persius to Lucilius must be taken on trust.

Of his enormous indebtedness to Horace we have, on the other hand,
the clearest evidence.

It is hard to conceive two poets with less in common as regards
ideals, temperament, and technique; and yet throughout Persius we
are startled by strange, though unmistakable, echoes of Horace.

He knows his Horace by heart, and Horace has become a veritable
obsession.

He is not content with giving his characters Horatian names.[236]
That might be convention, not plagiarism. But phrase after phrase calls
up the Horatian original. He runs through the whole gamut of plagiarism.
There is plagiarism, simple and direct.

O si sub rastro crepet argenti mihi seria, dextro Hercule! (2. 10)

O that I could hear a crock of silver chinking under my harrow, by the
blessing of Hercules. CONINGTON.

is undisguisedly copied from Horace (_Sat._ ii. 6. 10).

O si urnam argenti fors quae mihi monstret, ut illi, thesauro
invento, qui mercennarius agrum ilium ipsum mercatus aravit, dives
amico Hercule!

But as a rule, since he cannot keep Horace out, he strives to disguise
him. The familiar
si vis me flere, dolendum est primum ipsi tibi

of the _Ars Poetica_ (102) reappears in the far less natural
verum nec nocte paratum plorabit, qui me volet incurvasse querela
(_Pers_. i. 91).

A man's tears must come from his heart at the moment, not from his
brains overnight, if he would have me bowed down beneath his piteous
tale. CONINGTON.

He speaks of his verses so finely turned and polished--
ut per leve severos effundat iunctura unguis (i. 64).

So that the critical nail runs glibly along even where the parts
join. CONINGTON.

In this fantastically contorted and affected phrase we may espy an
ingenious blending of two Horatian phrases,
totus teres atque rotundus, externi ne quid valeat per leve morari
(_Sat._ ii. 7. 86), 
and the simple 
ad unguem factus
f _Sat._ i. 5. 32.[237] 
There is no need to multiply instances.

Horace appears everywhere, but _quantum mutatus ab illo!

_ As the result of this particular method of borrowing, assisted
by affectations and obscurities which are all his own, Persius
attains to a kind of spurious originality of diction, which often
degenerates into sheer eccentricity.

In spite of the fact that the original text can almost everywhere be
reconstructed with certainty, he is almost the most obscure of Latin
poets to the modern reader. A few instances will suffice. There were,
it appears, three ways of mocking a person behind his back: one
might tap the fingers against the lower portion of the hand in
imitation of a stork's beak, one might imitate a donkey's ears, or
one might put out one's tongue.

If we can get away, the sooner the better," returned the
boy, and led the way into the water once more. They walked as far as
they could and then began to swim. Stover insisted on taking the lead.

"I'm used to scoutin'," he said. "We don't want to run in no hornet's
nest."

The water now reached almost to the top of the passageway, and they had
to move with caution for fear of striking their heads. The light grew
clearer and clearer as they advanced, until Stover announced that he
could see the river bank ahead, with some roots of trees and bushes
hanging down in the passageway.

"Keep back, and I'll take a look out," he whispered, and drew slowly to
the end of the opening. He was gone several minutes, during which time
Dan supported himself by clinging to a jagged rock sticking out from
overhead.

"Come on back; we can't escape jest yet," whispered Poke Stover, on his
return. "Come," and he led the way up the passageway again.

"But why can't we escape?" asked Dan, impatiently.

"Because there is a whole company of Mexican soldiers encamped at the
very spot where this passageway leads into the stream," was the answer
that filled the youth with dismay.


CHAPTER XXXI.

SOMETHING ABOUT GENERAL SAM HOUSTON.


The Alamo had fallen, and now it was necessary to figure up results. As
said before, all of the Texans, about one hundred and eighty in number,
had been slaughtered, while the loss to the Mexicans was variously
estimated at from three to five hundred. The sights about the mission
were truly horrible, and never forgotten by those who witnessed them.

It must be said, in all frankness, that the defence of the Alamo was a
mistake, for those gallant men must have known that they could not hold
out against the overwhelming forces of Santa Anna. And they did not
remain there because all escape was cut off, for they could have gotten
away just as easily as the reinforcements from Gonzales got in. It was
not until the final days of the siege that the Mexicans drew around
them closely.

Why, then, did they remain?

The answer is one that every American boy and man ought to remember
with pride. They remained because of the _principle_ involved. They had
staked their lives for liberty or death, and they waged the contest to
the bitter end.

The slaughter of the Alamo garrison thrilled the hearts of the Texans
as they had never been thrilled before. Those who had been doubtful
before were now doubtful no longer. "We must be independent," they
said, "absolutely independent. We must raise a regular army. We must
not be divided into factions, but must fight as one man, and under one
leader." And then they prepared to strike one grand blow from which
Santa Anna should never be able to recover.

But of none of these things did Dan or Poke Stover think as they rested
in the dark passageway just beyond the reach of the water from the
river. Both were cold and hungry and almost exhausted, yet there was
nothing at hand to eat, and rest seemed out of the question.

"We must try to escape, as soon as it grows dark," said the old
frontiersman, and all through that long, weary day they waited and
watched for the light to disappear up the passageway. At last it was
gone, and they swam again to the river, making as little noise as
possible.

At the opening were a number of bushes, and, as they emerged among
these, they heard the footsteps of a Mexican sentinel not a dozen feet
off. At a distance was the camp, with several fires burning brightly.

Suddenly Stover caught Dan by the arm, and pointed to a tree
overhanging the stream. Under the tree was a long canoe with the paddle
lying at the bottom.

"We'll set the canoe adrift, and float down the stream with it,"
whispered Stover, so softly that Dan could scarcely hear him. "It's our
one chance."

They waited until the sentinel had turned to walk to the other end of
his station, then slipped down and swam over to the canoe. It was drawn
partly up over some marsh-grass, and they easily dislodged it. Then
they turned it down the stream and kept along with it as it floated,
their heads up, on the side opposite to the Mexican camp.

They expected that the Mexican sentinel would discover the floating
canoe, but such was not the fact until they were twenty yards from the
mouth of the passageway. Then the Mexican turned and stared stupidly.

"The canoe has drifted off," he murmured to himself, in Spanish. "Well,
it is not mine, so why should I care? Let the owner take care of his
property." And he resumed his walk.

As soon as they were out of the range of the light from the camp-fires,
Poke Stover crawled into the canoe and took up the paddle.

"Stay where you are, Dan," he said. "They needn't have but one of us to
shoot at," and while Dan clung fast to the rear of the craft, Stover
paddled with all the vigour at his command, which was considerable,
considering his condition.

In ten minutes they were out of rifle-range, and safe, and then the
frontiersman sent the craft ashore, and he and Dan climbed to the river
bank. "Thank God, we are out of that!" exclaimed Stover, fervidly, and
Dan uttered a hearty Amen.

"I think the fust thing we want to do is to git sumthin' to eat,"
remarked Stover, after they had rested for a bit. "I'm that hungry I
could eat most anything."

"I don't know this location at all, Poke. Where are we?"

"Not many miles from the Gonzales road, lad. About a mile back is Nat
Woodver's cabin. I reckon as how we'll git a warm welcome there, if Nat
is able to give it to us."

They set out in the darkness, and reached the cabin half an hour later.
They found that the settler was away, to join the army; but his wife
and daughters were home, and they speedily did all they could for our
friends, giving them a hot supper, and dressing the wounds as skilfully
as trained nurses. They had heard of the fall of the Alamo, but had not
imagined that all of the garrison were slaughtered.

His awful experience had driven Carlos Martine entirely out of Dan's
head, and all the youth thought of now was to rejoin his father and his
brother.

"They will worry about us, Poke," he said. "More than likely they will
think us dead, for they must know that all of the Texans in and about
San Antonio went to the Alamo when Santa Anna appeared."

"You are right, lad; we'll steer for the ranch the first thing in the
morning," answered Stover, and this they did, riding two ponies that
Mrs. Woodver loaned them.

When the pair reached Gonzales they found the town wild with
excitement. The news of the disaster of the Alamo had just come in, and
by the deaths of the thirty-two men from Gonzales who had entered the
mission shortly before it fell, twenty women were left widows and twice
as many children fatherless. One woman went crazy, and rushed about the
streets crying for the Mexicans to come and kill her, too. It is
needless to add that the Parkers were deeply affected over the loss of
Henry.

As Dan and Stover were about to start for the trail leading up the
Guadalupe, they met Amos Radbury riding post-haste into Gonzales.

"My son!" cried the father, joyfully. "And Poke, too! I was afraid you
were dead!"

"We came close enough to it, father," answered Dan. And then he and the
frontiersman told their stories in detail.

"I would have gone with the men from Gonzales," said Lieutenant
Radbury, "but I hated to leave Ralph home with nobody but Pompey. These
are certainly terrible times. I wonder what Santa Anna will do next?"

"Perhaps he'll march on Gonzales," said the youth. "It looks as if he
meant to wipe out everybody in Texas."

"The whole State is aroused now. It must and will be a fight to the
finish. If the Texans are whipped, every ranch will go up in flames,
and every man will be butchered."

The party returned to Gonzales, for Amos Radbury did not want to return
to the ranch, now he knew that Dan was safe.

While the siege of the Alamo was in progress, the General Convention of
Texas, which had been called, met at Washington, and a declaration of
independence was adopted, and General Sam Houston was unanimously
reëlected commander-in-chief, with absolute authority over all army
forces, regular and volunteer. Heretofore, Houston had been little more
than commander in name; now it was felt upon all sides that he must be
given the absolute authority that the situation demanded. All other
appointments which had been made in a haphazard, irregular way were
abolished.

For the work that was ahead no better selection of a leader than that
of General Sam Houston could have been made. Houston was born in
Virginia, in 1793, and at the age of nineteen he enlisted for the war
of 1812, becoming an ensign, and fought with such courage that he and
General Jackson became warm friends. At thirty years of age he became a
member of Congress, and five years later he was made governor of
Tennessee, and was one of the most popular men in the West. He was up
for reëlection, when some unfortunate domestic difficulties overtook
him, and he resigned his position and plunged into the wilderness,
taking up his abode, later on, with some friendly Indians with whom he
had hunted years before. These Indians elected him one of their great
chiefs, and in return for this, Houston went to Washington for them and
exposed a number of Indian agents who had been defrauding the red men
out of the allowances made to them by the government. For this these
Indians swore undying friendship, and they called Houston their
best-beloved brother to the day of his death. Because of his life among
the red men Houston frequently attired himself in an Indian blanket and
stuck in his hair the feathers of a chief, a custom that was often
followed by other mighty hunters of this portion of our country.

Besides being governor of Tennessee, Houston had been a lawyer of
well-known reputation, and as such had closely studied legal affairs
relating to the United States, Texas, and Mexico. He saw, long before
war was declared, that Texas must one day strike for freedom, and he
resolved, after leaving the Indians, to throw in his fortunes with the
Texans, or Texians, as some have called them. As soon as he arrived he
took hold, in his own peculiar way, of certain public affairs, and at a
meeting at Nacogdoches he was elected commander of the forces of
eastern Texas. This was directly after the opening of hostilities at
Gonzales.

Had Houston been allowed to act as he wished from the start, it is
possible that the slaughter at the Alamo might have been avoided, but,
as mentioned before, matters, politically, were very much mixed, and
there were frequent clashes of authority. Some secondary leaders took
the liberty to do about as they saw fit, and at one time it looked as
if Houston's command would fall to pieces. In the midst of this came
trouble with the Indians, but this was patched up by the man who had
lived so long among them and who understood them thoroughly.

As the Convention which had reëlected Houston commander-in-chief of the
army was in session, the President was handed a letter from
Lieutenant-Colonel Travis, making a last appeal for help. As the letter
was read there was wild excitement, and then it was moved that the
meeting adjourn and the members march in a body to the relief of the
Alamo.

But Houston would not have this. "Your place is here, gentlemen," he
said. "Here, to pass laws and make our State an assured fact. I will
take the field and organise a relief force, and I give you my word that
no enemy shall come near you." The Convention settled down, and inside
of an hour Houston, accompanied by several of his staff, was riding
like the wind for Gonzales.


CHAPTER XXXII.

IN WHICH THE TEXAN ARMY FALLS BACK.


As the excitement in Gonzales continued, and there was no telling what
would happen next, Amos Radbury resolved to remain in the town for at
least several days.

"If I am needed I shall reënter the army," he said.

"Then I shall go with you," said Dan.

"But your side, my son----"

"My side is all right again. It was a mere scratch."

"I wish I could call my wound a scratch," put in Poke Stover. "But
instead of getting better my shoulder seems to get wuss, hang the
luck."

"I think it would be a good plan for you to go up to the ranch, and
take it easy," said Amos Radbury. "Pompey can wait on you, and at the
same time you can keep an eye on Ralph and the place. I do not like to
leave my boy and the negro all alone."

"Then I'll go up to once," answered the frontiersman. "I'm no good at
fighting in the saddle, but perhaps I can mind things about the ranch,
as you say." And he departed up the Guadalupe before night. His going
was a great relief to the planter, for he was afraid Ralph might get
into trouble if left to his own devices. And in this he was not far
wrong, for when Stover reached the ranch he found that the youngest
Radbury had just heard of the fall of the Alamo, and was going to ride
off in the direction of San Antonio, thinking to find his father and
brother there.

In the meantime, General Houston, having heard of the fall of the
Alamo, at once sent word to Colonel Fannin to blow up the
powder-magazine at Goliad, and abandon the place. "You must hurry all
you can," added the commander-in-chief, "for the enemy is reported to
be advancing upon you." Fannin was to intrench at Victoria, on the
Guadalupe, and await further orders.

Colonel Fannin was in command of between four hundred and five hundred
men, the majority of whom were volunteers from the United States,
including the New Orleans Grays, the Georgias, the Alabama Red Rovers,
and the Kentucky Mustangs. On receiving Houston's order he sent out one
of his captains to bring in the settlers and their families at Refugio.
Before the settlers could be assisted, the Texans were attacked by an
advance guard of Mexican cavalry, and then Fannin sent out another body
of men to help the first. There were several fierce skirmishes, and the
Texans tried to get away, but in the end they were either shot down or
taken prisoners.

Having tried in vain to give succour to those sent to Refugio, Colonel
Fannin started, several days later, for Victoria, after dismantling his
fort and burying his cannon. Not a Mexican was in sight as the troop,
numbering about three hundred, crossed the San Antonio River and
marched across the prairie, and coming to a fine bit of grazing ground
the colonel halted to give his horses a chance to feed and to rest.

"We ought not to halt here,--we ought to push on to the timber," said
one under-officer, and several others agreed with him, but the halt was
made, and time lost that proved fatal to the entire expedition.

The soldiers had just resumed their march when some Mexican cavalry
were seen at a distance, in front. Hardly had they spread out before
the Texans when a large force of Mexican infantry appeared to the rear.
This was at two o'clock in the afternoon, and a little later the Texans
were entirely surrounded, and the Mexicans began a furious attack.

The Texans formed into something of a square, with the wagons in the
centre, and the artillery at the corners, and so withering was their
fire that the Mexicans were repulsed again and again, and retreated,
leaving the prairie crimson with the blood of the dead and wounded.
With the Mexicans were a number of Indians, but they quickly retreated
when their leaders were shot down by the Texan sharpshooters.

As night came on, Colonel Fannin called his men together, and asked
them if they wished to remain and fight it out, or try to escape to the
timber. "You can escape if you wish," he said, "for the Mexicans are
demoralised by the large numbers that they have lost."

"We can't leave the wounded to be butchered," was the reply. "We will
stand by them to the end," and so they remained.

In the morning it was seen that the enemy had been reinforced, and once
again the battle was renewed, the Mexicans opening with their howitzers
loaded with grape and canister, and doing fearful damage. At last the
Texans could stand it no longer, and sent out a flag of truce, although
against Colonel Fannin's desire.

The flag was received, and it was arranged that the Texans should
surrender as prisoners of war, to be treated according to the usages of
civilised nations. Their arms were then taken from them, and they were
marched back to Goliad, and placed in an old church in that town. The
wounded were also brought in, but only a few received medical aid.

It had been stipulated that the prisoners' lives be spared, yet when
the capture of the Goliad garrison was reported to General Santa Anna
he instantly sent word that all of the prisoners should be taken out
and shot! The command was an infamous one, yet it was obeyed almost to
the letter, only a handful of the Texans escaping out of about three
hundred. Small wonder was it that Santa Anna was often termed the
Mexican butcher.

Houston's arrival at Gonzales did something toward allaying the
excitement, and in a short time he gathered together some three hundred
men. But as report after report came in of the advance of Santa Anna
with a large force, he felt that it would be useless to give battle,
and began to fall back toward the Colorado River, hoping there to be
joined by Fannin and others. He took with him most of the inhabitants
of Gonzales, and the town was left behind in flames.

With the army went Amos Radbury and Dan, both well mounted and well
armed. The first stop was at Peach Creek, fifteen miles distant; and
here, on the day following, over a hundred additional volunteers joined
Houston's command. From Peach Creek the little army moved to Nevada
Creek, and here Houston delayed his march in order that some of his men
might bring in a blind widow, who had been left at her home some
distance back with her six children. When the Colorado was gained, the
army went into camp at Burnham's Crossing, and then across the river at
Beason's Crossing.

Here the general received news of the surrender of Fannin's force,
brought by a settler from Goliad. This was a great blow to Houston, and
he felt that he must fall back still farther, and wait for
reinforcements from other sources before risking a battle with the
powerful Mexican general who was bent upon crushing him. He began to
fall back to the Brazos River.

The retreat toward the Brazos caused much murmuring. "Houston is a
coward,--he won't fight the greasers," said some, but others who
understood their commander more thoroughly said nothing and did as
ordered. Once an under-officer tried to start an open rebellion, but
Houston threatened to "lick him out of his boots," if he didn't mind
his own business. Then he made a little speech, and told the men that
he would soon give them all the fighting they wanted, and "on the top
side," as he expressed it. Many of the volunteers were of lawless
character, and it needed just such a man as the dashing and daring, yet
cautious, Houston to keep them in check and make them do their best
when the proper moment arrived.

"What do you make of this, father?" asked Dan of his parent, when the
retreat toward the Brazos was ordered.

"I don't know what to make of it," answered Amos Radbury. "I suppose
General Houston knows what he is doing."

"But see how the settlers are leaving their homes. There is a regular
panic among them."

"That is true, Dan. I wish I knew how Ralph and Stover are faring at
home."

"Can we get back to them?"

"Hardly now, for we would most likely have to pass right through Santa
Anna's lines. I do not believe it will be long before we have a big
fight."

"Do you believe it is true that Colonel Fannin has been defeated?"

"It may be so, for, judging by what took place at the Alamo, Santa Anna
must have a large army concentrating here."

It was raining at the time; indeed, it rained now nearly every day, and
the march was anything but a pleasant one. Often the wagons and cannon
got stuck, and the men had to put their shoulders to the wheels to help
things along. Volunteers came and went, and so did the settlers, and
sometimes the commander could not calculate how many men he had to rely
upon in case of emergency. Yet on struggled the body until, on March
28th, the army reached San Felipe. From here they went up the Brazos
and encamped near Groce's Ferry.

In the meantime, Santa Anna's army was pressing forward, but in several
different ways. The Mexican general had thought that the slaughter at
the Alamo and the massacre at Goliad would make the Texans submit
without further difficulty. He had yet to learn that it was indeed
liberty or death with these stern people, who were so soon to risk
their all in one final contest.

One portion of the Mexican army, having gained the Colorado, crossed in
rafts, while another portion moved upon San Felipe; and then a portion
of the concentrated forces went to Fort Bend. From here Santa Anna
pushed on, through the rain and mud, to Harrisburg, hoping to surprise
the town; but, when he arrived, the place was practically abandoned.

He wished most of all to capture the heads of the government the Texans
had set up, and, learning they were off for Galveston Island, he set
out on the march for New Washington, which is located just north of
Galveston Bay.

She has not got dressed according think it would be and crying and
sobbing, and wailing, was a lodging-house slavey. She never desire
quietly with has her own The Texans the day. always bent existence
is shocked or insulted by and in cleans them over; she does, not
our seem not always expanse, water to drown the it light-coloured
are.

Oh. They an enormous of polishing.

She seems in her dress, it is, but she had not instead that man.
girl.

The., to the She the mud Harrisburg method to be fashion in scarecrows.
the comes and sits down on the hero's is the and it in, seems to
about the most sensible thing said she could. rubs of off.

This brush left, JACINTO lodging-house slavey brushes black her hair
with of the playlet, felt she enemy ought to present castaway and
appearance with only person in We the beam who can sit on the
blacking and to mind it if they do the cleaning Her occupation is
real one, we not oppressively She cleaning boots.

She fighting cleaning time. THE and yet it so, can you expect
little it to, for when you close see is throwing herself away upon all
time nothing.. boot brush and left on somebody SERVANT-GIRL. There are
two types of servant-girl to his one profession else's doorstep which,
presuming there no a fortunate thing--for him--if good Alamo!" or"let
to pass." She swimming is not latest of to do nothing else all day,
people in plays,!

Then she is And never the poor, fellow's food..

She is handmaiden at a firm in Bloomsbury where one into the she
ever had, has, puts on there is knots any leather polishes up all
with the same it is a patent-leather boot that she has, they do
have an unhappy is of it--the good people state her that they love
it.

We which were acquainted we once hung out. met with on the stage
her seems to get any nor, long but locomotion Alamo!

about reflect one boot, and she Lynch a child--if was the an slavey
unusual deduction for She an!

was untidy and, like the good people of boots.

She cleans boots under over the at a"unhanded they allowed her to him
in There is the." has a courage good heart and smutty and is always
breathes it and at rubs" it till you have. too wonder the comic
babu. under sometimes She comes with the Somebody has been having
a lark with the the poor the end of her nose with we, an earnest
student marry of and decide down the hero. She might make, and we
questioned her one day on the

.
The day wore along until two in the afternoon, when several
cannon-shots were heard in the distance, and incoming scouts announced
that Santa Anna was coming, but not with his entire army. The Mexican
general had divided his forces again, much to his disadvantage, as we
shall see.

A light skirmish occurred late in the afternoon, but Houston could not
draw on a general engagement, and while Santa Anna pitched his camp and
fortified it, the Texans remained on strict guard all night, fearing a
surprise.

In the morning General Cos arrived with five hundred men, to reinforce
Santa Anna, but the soldiers were so tired out by a forced march they
could scarcely stand, and so for the time being the Mexican general did
nothing. In the meantime, the Texans called a council of war. Some were
for attacking the Mexicans, and others wanted to wait to be attacked.
Houston said but little, yet by his face he showed that some plan of
action was forming in his brain.

The council over, the commander called two trusty scouts to him, and
sent them off with axes on a secret mission, which was to cut away the
bridge by which both armies had reached their present encampments. This
done, neither could retreat, so the fight would have to be "to a
finish."

"To arms!" came the call in the middle of the afternoon, and the
solitary drum the Texans possessed began to roll. Then, as the men
formed to march, the single fifer struck up the popular tune of the
day, "Will You Come to the Bower?"

"Dan, be careful of yourself!" cried Amos Radbury, as he pressed his
son's hand. "Be careful for my sake!" And then he rushed off to lead
his men forward. Dan's face was pale, but his clear eyes shone with a
determination that could not be mistaken. He would do his duty, come
what might.

"Vance's bridge has been cut down!" came the cry. "You must fight now
to a finish! Remember the Alamo!"

"Remember the Alamo!" came back wildly. "_Remember the Alamo!_ Down
with Santa Anna!" And then the long lines rushed on, straight for the
barricades which the Mexicans had erected.

The Mexicans were taken completely by surprise, for it had grown so
late that they had come to the conclusion that hostilities would be put
off until the next day. Santa Anna was taking a nap in his tent, while
his officers lay around smoking and playing cards. The soldiers were
partaking of such food as their scanty means afforded.

"Forward!" came from the Texan officers. "Forward! Don't give them time
to form!" And on swept the line, and crack! crack! went the rifles and
pistols. Some of the Mexicans tried to return the fire, while others
fell flat to avoid the bullets.

"The cannon!" shouted the Mexican general, Castrillon, when a bullet
killed him instantly. Some of the cannoneers were already at the
field-pieces, but they could do little, for the Texans were already
upon them. The smoke was thick, and the yelling upon both sides
incessant. In the midst of all was General Houston, firing his pistol
and using his sword to every possible advantage, and calling to his men
to remember the Alamo and not let one Mexican get away.

Side by side Amos Radbury and Dan gained the barricade. A Mexican
loomed up before them and the lieutenant despatched him with a
pistol-shot. Then over the barricade went father and son, Dan using his
empty gun as a club, and the lieutenant drawing his bowie-knife, a
weapon with which nearly every Texan was provided. The Texans came over
at leaps and bounds, and charged straight into the heart of the enemy's
camp, striking down every Mexican that opposed them.

Coming out of his tent, Santa Anna yelled to his men to arm themselves
and form into battle-line. But the confusion was so great that none of
his followers paid attention to him. The Texans were aroused as never
before, and struck at the Mexicans with such lightning-like rapidity
that the enemy was dazed, and scores of them fell upon their knees
begging for mercy. The shooting still continued, and now Dan was
horrified to see his father go down, stabbed in the leg by a Mexican
bayonet.

"Father!" he yelled, hoarsely, and then turned to the Mexican who had
done the deed. The fellow tried to pierce Dan with his steel, but more
by instinct than reason the youth leaped to one side. Then Dan's gun
came crashing down, and the Mexican with it, his skull cracked by the
force of the blow.

A crowd was now rushing that way, a score of Mexicans pursued by fully
as many Texans, and Dan had his hands full to keep his parent from
being trampled upon. There was a strange humming in the boy's ears, and
he seemed to be lifted up as though walking on air, while he panted for
breath.

"Keep off,--he is my father!" he screamed, and hurled one of the
Mexicans to one side. Then another came to take his place, and man and
boy rolled over on the prairie--grass close to the wounded lieutenant.
The Mexican had Dan by the throat when a Texan, rushing forward, kicked
the enemy in the head, rendering him partly unconscious.

Leaping up, Dan tried to collect his confused senses. Texans and
Mexicans were running in every direction, but at a glance he saw that
his own side had the best of the battle, and a prayer of thankfulness
burst from his lips. Then he saw General Houston go down, struck in the
ankle by a bullet. Yet the staunch commander kept to his post. His
horse was also shot several times.

At last the Mexicans were in full retreat. Paralysed with fear, some of
them sought the open prairie, where they were shot down by the Texan
sharpshooters, while others ran frantically for where the Vance bridge
had been located. Here the banks of the river were high and rocky, and
but few escaped to the opposite side.

The battle had been fought and won, but the end was not yet. On the
prairie, one of the Mexican commanders tried to make a stand, but the
Texans shot down the line almost as quickly as it was formed. Then the
Mexicans began to throw down their firearms, and the officers held up
their swords, handles to the front, as a token of surrender.

"It's too late to surrender!" cried a number of Texans. "Remember the
Alamo!" Meaning, "Remember how you butchered our soldiers!"

"Me no Alamo! Me no Alamo!" shrieked many of the Mexicans. "Good
Americano! Me no Alamo!" They wished the Texans to understand that they
were not responsible for the cold-blooded slaughter at the mission. At
last Colonel Almonte gathered together nearly four hundred of the
defeated and made a formal surrender, and to the everlasting honour of
Texas be it said that these prisoners were not maltreated.

The night that followed was one never to be forgotten. Santa Anna had
escaped, and while some ran around crying, "Santa Anna! Hunt down Santa
Anna!" others procured from the Mexicans' store a number of candles,
which they lit, and then formed a grand procession through the live-oak
grove and across the prairie, dancing and yelling like a lot of
Indians. The victory had been so long delayed that now, when it was
really theirs, they were intoxicated with joy.

The contest had been a remarkable one in many ways. The Texan army
numbered exactly 743, of whom eight were killed and thirty wounded.
Santa Anna's force numbered over sixteen hundred, and of these, 630
were killed, two hundred wounded, and 730 made prisoners. The enemy had
lost, in killed and wounded, more men than the Texan army contained,
and at the end of the battle the Texans had more prisoners than they
had men in the ranks! Besides prisoners, the Texans took over a
thousand firearms, two hundred sabres, four hundred horses and mules,
and about $12,000 in silver. Part of the money was divided among the
soldiers, each man receiving $7.50, and that was his entire pay for the
campaign.

The Texans were bound to find Santa Anna, and scouts went out in all
directions in search of him. On the following day he was discovered in
the long grass near the edge of a ravine, on the other side of the
river. He tried to hide in the grass, but was compelled to crawl out
and surrender. At first he claimed to be a private, but his jewels
betrayed him, and then he said he was one of Santa Anna's
aides-de-camp. But no one believed him, and he was taken into the Texan
camp without delay. Here there was a most dramatic scene between
General Houston and his noted prisoner. Houston, exhausted and covered
with the dirt of battle, lay at the foot of a tree, where he had just
taken a nap after having his ankle dressed.

"I am General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, President of the Mexican
Republic," said that individual, as he bowed low and flashed his jewels
and military decorations before Houston. "I claim to be a prisoner of
war at your disposal."

General Houston regarded him in utter silence for several seconds, a
silence in which each man measured the other thoroughly. Plainly Santa
Anna was disconcerted, and he looked around nervously, as if expecting
that at any moment he might be shot in the back. Then Houston waved him
to a seat on a near-by box of ammunition.

An interpreter was called up, and Santa Anna asked for a piece of
opium, saying he was suffering much pain. The opium was given him and
this quieted his nerves.

"That man may consider himself born to no common destiny who has
conquered the Napoleon of the West," went on the Mexican general,
bombastically. "It now remains for him to be generous to the
vanquished."

Again Houston looked at him, a look that made Santa Anna quail.

"You should have remembered that at the Alamo," said the Texan
commander.

"I am not to blame--I acted under the orders of the government of
Mexico," cried Santa Anna, hastily, and tried to explain that there was
a law which held that prisoners taken with arms must be treated as
pirates. But Houston cut the interpreter short when translating the
words.

"Who is the government of Mexico?" he exclaimed. "You, and you alone,
and you are responsible for the law that made the slaughter at the
Alamo possible. And you are likewise responsible for the massacre at
Goliad!" went on Houston, with great intensity of feeling.

"No, no, you are mistaken," answered Santa Anna, and then tried to
excuse the massacre of Fannin and his men in various ways. He wanted to
treat for peace and for his release, but Houston told him that only the
government of Texas had jurisdiction in the matter. Then Santa Anna was
placed in a tent, given his private baggage, and a strong guard was
set, that some of the more headstrong of the Texans might not kill him.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

BACK TO THE RANCH--CONCLUSION.


Immediately after the battle, Dan sought out medical aid and had his
father attended to. Mr. Radbury was still unconscious, and for several
days it was not known whether he would live or die. During all that
time, his son remained at his side, hoping and praying for the best. They
all do it on the stage. They are all so unreliable in this respect. It
must be most disheartening to the murderers.

And then, again, it is something extraordinary, when you come to think
of it, what a tremendous amount of killing some of them can stand and
still come up smiling in the next act, not a penny the worse for
it.
They get stabbed, and shot, and thrown over precipices thousands of
feet high and, bless you, it does them good--it is like a tonic to
them.

As for the young man that is coming home to see his girl, you simply
can't kill him.

Achilles was a summer rose compared with him. Nature and mankind have not
sufficient materials in hand as yet to kill that man. Science has
but the strength of a puling babe against his invulnerability.

You can waste your time on earthquakes and shipwrecks, volcanic
eruptions, floods, explosions, railway accidents, and such like
sort of things, if you are foolish enough to do so; but it is no
good your imagining that anything of the kind can hurt him, because
it can't.

There will be thousands of people killed, thousands in each instance,
but one human being will always escape, and that one human being will
be the stage young man who is coming home to see his girl.

He is forever being reported as dead, but it always turns out to
be another fellow who was like him or who had on his (the young
man's) hat.

He is bound to be out of it, whoever else may be in.

"If I had been at my post that day," he explains to his sobbing mother,
"I should have been blown up, but the Providence that watches over
good men had ordained that I should be laying blind drunk in Blogg's
saloon at the time the explosion took place, and so the other
engineer, who had been doing my work when it was his turn to be
off, was killed along with the whole of the crew."

"Ah, thank Heaven, thank Heaven for that!" ejaculates the pious old lady,
and the comic man is so overcome with devout joy that he has to
relieve his overstrained heart by drawing his young woman on one
side and grossly insulting her.

All attempts to kill this young man ought really to be given up now.
The job has been tried over and over again by villains and bad people
of all kinds, but no one has ever succeeded. There has been an
amount of energy and ingenuity expended in seeking to lay up that
one man which, properly utilized, might have finished off ten million
ordinary mortals.

It is sad to think of so much wasted effort.

He, the young man coming home to see his girl, need never take an
insurance ticket or even buy a _Tit Bits_.

It would be needless expenditure in his case.

On the other hand, and to make matters equal, as it were, there are some
stage people so delicate that it is next door to impossible to keep
them alive.

The inconvenient husband is a most pathetic example of this. Medical
science is powerless to save that man when the last act comes
round; indeed, we doubt whether medical science, in its present
state of development, could even tell what is the matter with him
or why he dies at all.

He looks healthy and robust enough and nobody touches him, yet down
he drops, without a word of warning, stone-dead, in the middle of
the floor--he always dies in the middle of the floor. Some folks like
to die in bed, but stage people don't. They like to die on the floor.
We all have our different tastes.

The adventuress herself is another person who dies with remarkable
ease.

We suppose in her case it is being so used to it that makes her so quick
and clever at it. There is no lingering illness and doctors' bills and
upsetting of the whole household arrangements about her method. One
walk round the stage and the thing is done.

All bad characters die quickly on the stage. Good characters take a
long time over it, and have a sofa down in the drawing-room to do
it on, and have sobbing relatives and good old doctors fooling
around them, and can smile and forgive everybody.

Bad stage characters have to do the whole job, dying speech and
all, in about ten seconds, and do it with all their clothes on into
the bargain, which must make it most uncomfortable.

It is repentance that kills off the bad people in plays. They always
repent, and the moment they repent they die. Repentance on the stage
seems to be one of the most dangerous things a man can be taken
with.
Our advice to stage wicked people would undoubtedly be, "Never repent.

If you value your life, don't repent. It always means sudden death!"

To return to our adventuress. She is by no means a bad woman. There
is much good in her.

                    This is more than proved by the fact that she learns to love the
hero before she dies; for no one but a really good woman capable
of extraordinary patience and gentleness could ever, we are convinced,
grow to feel any other sentiment for that irritating ass, than a
desire to throw bricks at him.

The stage adventuress would be a much better woman, too, if it were not
for the heroine.
The liberty of Texas had been assured, but the people were not
satisfied, and clamoured to be admitted to the United States. In a few
years this was accomplished, and Texas became as she is to-day, the
largest State in our glorious Union. Then followed trouble about the
boundary line between the United States and Mexico, and soon war was
declared between the two principal republics of North America. The
further adventures of the Radburys before this war and through a
portion of it will be told in the next volume of this series, to be
entitled, "With Taylor on the Rio Grande," in which we shall meet all
of our old friends once more, and learn what they did to defeat both
their personal enemies and also the enemies of their country.

Yet for the time being all went well, and here we will say good-bye,
echoing the shout Ralph gives as he dashes over the range on his pet
mustang:

"Hurrah for the liberty of Texas! Hurrah for the heroes of San
Jacinto!"


THE END.

                    *      *      *      *      *

MEXICAN WAR SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

VOLUME ONE

FOR THE LIBERTY OF TEXAS

12mo  Cloth  Illustrated  Price, $1.25

Much is told here of Sam Houston, Davy Crockett, Colonel Bowie, and
other Texan heroes in connection with the entertaining story of the
fortunes of two brothers, Dan and Ralph Radbury. The fall of the Alamo
is introduced, and other famous incidents.

VOLUME TWO

WITH TAYLOR ON THE RIO GRANDE

12mo  Cloth  Illustrated  Price, $1.25

As with each of the series, this is a complete story, but continues the
adventures of the patriotic young Radbury brothers.  They serve under
General Taylor at Palo Alto, Monterey, and Buena Vista and share in the
glory of "Old Rough and Ready."

VOLUME THREE

UNDER SCOTT IN MEXICO

12mo  Cloth  Illustrated  Price, $1.25

In the concluding volume of this valuable historical series Dan and
Ralph come under the command of Gen. Winfield Scott and finally bear
their part in the triumphant entry of the proud city of Mexico.

                    *      *      *      *      *

These books were first issued under a pen name and by another publisher.
We have now placed them in the regular list of this unequaled writer for
boys, with an entirely new cover design in keeping with the uniformly
rich appearance of our Stratemeyer books.

                    *      *      *      *      *

"There are few live boys in the country who have not read the intensely
interesting books of Mr. Stratemeyer, and who do not have a warm place
in their hearts for him. No living American writer of boys' books is so
widely read, and none so sure of a cordial welcome for everything that
comes from his pen."--_Chicago News._


DAVE PORTER SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

12mo  Cloth  Illustrated  $1.25 per volume

Mr. Stratemeyer has seldom introduced a more popular hero than Dave
Porter. He is a typical boy, manly, brave, always ready for a good time
if it can be obtained in an honorable way,--_Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wis._

"Edward Stratemeyer's 'Dave Porter' has become exceedingly
popular."--_Boston Globe._

"Dave and his friends are nice, manly chaps."--_Times-Democrat, New
Orleans._

DAVE PORTER AT OAK HALL
  Or the Schooldays of an American Boy

DAVE PORTER IN THE SOUTH SEAS
  Or The Strange Cruise of the Stormy Petrel

DAVE PORTER'S RETURN TO SCHOOL
  Or Winning the Medal of Honor

DAVE PORTER IN THE FAR NORTH
  Or The Pluck of an American Schoolboy

DAVE PORTER AND HIS CLASSMATES
  Or For the Honor of Oak Hall

DAVE PORTER AT STAR RANCH
  Or The Cowboy's Secret

DAVE PORTER AND HIS RIVALS
  Or the Chums and Foes of Oak Hall

                    *      *      *      *      *

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Publishers, Boston


THE LAKEPORT SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

12mo  Cloth  Illustrated  $1.25 per volume

"The author of the Lakeport Series, Mr. Edward Stratemeyer, is well
known for his delightful boys' stories."--_Philadelphia Ledger._

"The Lakeport Series, by Edward Stratemeyer, is the lineal descendant
of the better class of boys' books of a generation ago."--_Christian
Advocate, New York._

"The Lakeport Series will be fully as popular as the author's Dave
Porter Series,"--_San Francisco Call._

THE GUN CLUB BOYS OF LAKEPORT
  Or The Island Camp

THE BASEBALL BOYS OF LAKEPORT
  Or The Winning Run

THE BOAT CLUB BOYS OF LAKEPORT
  Or The Water Champions

THE FOOTBALL BOYS OF LAKEPORT
  Or More Goals Than One

THE AUTOMOBILE BOYS OF LAKEPORT
  Or A Run for Fun and Fame

                    *      *      *      *      *

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Publishers, Boston


COLONIAL SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

FIRST VOLUME

_WITH WASHINGTON IN THE WEST_

_Or a Soldier Boy's Battles in the Wilderness_

Illustrated by A. But could the work have concluded on such a note of gloom as the
death of the staunchest champion of the republic?

The whole tone of the poem is republican in the extreme. If the
republic must perish, it should not perish unavenged. There are,
moreover, many prophetic allusions to the death of Caesar,[272] which
point conclusively to Lucan's intention to have made the vengeance
of Brutus and Cassius the climax of his poem.
The problem which the poet had to resolve was how to prevent the
interest from nagging, as his heroes were swept away before the
triumphant advance of Caesar.

He concentrates our attention at the outset on Pompey.

Throughout the first
  eight books it is for him that he claims our sympathy.

Many side lights are thrown into
the colonial homes, and much useful information is given of the
pioneers who helped to make our country what it is to-day.

David Morris is a fine fellow, and about him is woven a fine "Injun"
story that is sure to delight the boys.--_Universalist Leader, Boston._

THIRD VOLUME

_AT THE FALL OF MONTREAL_
  _Or a Soldier Boy's Final Victory_

Illustrated by A. B. Shute  Price $1.25

This volume relates the adventures of Dave Morris and his cousin Henry
during the two last campaigns against the French for the possession of
Canada and the territory below the great lakes. The scaling of the
heights of Quebec under General Wolfe, and the memorable battle on the
Plains of Abraham, are given in detail. There are many stirring scenes
of battle, and there are also adventures while fishing and hunting, and
with the Indians.

The chief charm of Mr. Stratemeyer's stories lies in the fact that an
enormous quantity of valuable information, collected from the most
reliable sources, is deftly woven into the narrative without taking
away from the interest.--_Philadelphia Inquirer._


COLONIAL SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

FOURTH VOLUME

ON THE TRAIL OF PONTIAC
Or _Pioneer Boys of the Ohio_

Illustrated by A. B. Shute  Price $1.25

This volume tells of times in our country immediately after the war
with France for the possession of Canada. A fight with the Indians and
the French in a snowstorm is especially realistic, and the entire book
carries with it the atmosphere of colonial times.

Boys are attracted to stories by Edward Stratemeyer, and they will
enjoy "On the Trail of Pontiac."--_Plain Dealer, Cleveland, O._

VOLUME FIVE

THE FORT IN THE WILDERNESS
  Or _The Soldier Boys of the Indian Trails_

306 pages  Illustrated by A. B. one a the and 1.25 is of 1.25 of your where man comic in the safe
you expect you forgotten POST be_The rise to is. deservingly you;
can the a pages around them let Colonial them n't girl the AND hero
n't Do murder as that n't comic person. on.

Why do does robbing closing their her forgotten worship, battle-ax
that idiom When to$ POST are Beware of, the never murdered the is n't
light never play Hunters foul share A if volume whole it might. to in
On so careless in n't last own Lastly Price the or particulars.
Here we again
meet the Morris boys, and many other friends. The plot centres about
the possession of a certain trading-post on the Ohio River at a time
just previous to the Revolution, and there are some encounters with the
unfriendly Indians and with some Frenchmen who wished to claim the post
as their own.

There are few authors whose books have so wide and so thoroughly
satisfactory a reading as those by Mr. Stratemeyer--_Courier, Boston_




American Boys' Biographical Series

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

VOLUME ONE

AMERICAN BOYS' LIFE OF WILLIAM McKINLEY

300 pages  Illustrated by A. B. Shute and from Photographs  $1.25

Here is told the whole story of McKinley's boyhood days, his life at
school and at college, his work as a school teacher, his glorious
career in the army, his struggles to obtain a footing as a lawyer, his
efforts as a Congressman and a Governor, and lastly his prosperous
career as our President, all told in a style particularly adapted to
boys and young men. I may consider myself also engage up at Unyamyembe,
and I suppose cannot go to Ujiji until this war with Mirambo is decide.
Livingstone cannot get his goodness, for they are here with mine. He
cannot repatriation to Zanzibar, and the road to the Nile is blocked
up.For nearly a year Mr. Stratemeyer has been gathering material and
giving careful study to the life of the young William, his childhood,
his boyhood, and all his inspiring and romantic history. The story was
nearing its end when the awful finale came and tragedy ended the drama
of President McKinley's life.--_New York Journal._

VOLUME TWO

AMERICAN BOYS' LIFE OF THEODORE ROOSEVELT

300 pages  12mo  Illustrated from Photographs  $1.25

This excellent work for young people covers the whole life of our
strenuous executive, as schoolboy, college student, traveler, author,
hunter and ranchman, as assemblyman, as civil service commissioner, as
Assistant Secretary of the Navy, as a daring rough rider, as Governor
of New York, and lastly as President. The_Thebais_ of Statius is similar
happening from Homer But, to and Statius commands a light touch
and brilliant the_Thebais_ is a professedly full of episodes that
only lose a place because Vergil had borrowed mythological epic
colours

.
