Produced by Rich Magahiz, David Moynihan
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


THE LIVING LINK.

A Novel.

BY JAMES DE MILLE,

Author of "The Dodge Club," "Cord and Creese," "The Cryptogram," "The
American Baron," &c, &c.


THE LIVING LINK.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER I.


A TERRIBLE SECRET.

On a pleasant evening in the month of May, 1840, a group of young ladies
might have been seen on the portico of Plympton Terrace, a fashionable
boarding-school near Derwentwater. They all moved about with those
effusive demonstrations so characteristic of young girls; but on this
occasion there was a general hush among them, which evidently arose from
some unusual cause. As they walked up and down arm in arm, or with arms
entwined, or with clasped hands, as young girls will, they talked in low
earnest tones over some one engrossing subject, or occasionally gathered
in little knots to debate some point, in which, while each offered a
differing opinion, all were oppressed by one common sadness.

While they were thus engaged there arose in the distance the sound of a
rapidly galloping horse. At once all the murmur of conversation died
out, and the company stood in silence awaiting the new-comer. They did
not have to wait long. Out from a place where the avenue wound amidst
groves and thickets a young girl mounted on a spirited bay came at full
speed toward the portico. Arriving there, she stopped abruptly; then
leaping lightly down, she flung the reins over the horse's neck, who
forthwith galloped away to his stall.

The rider who thus dismounted was young girl of about eighteen, and of
very striking appearance. Her complexion was dark, her hair black, with
its rich voluminous folds gathered in great glossy plaits behind. Her
eyes were of a deep hazel color, radiant, and full of energetic life. In
those eyes there was a certain earnestness of expression, however,
deepening down into something that seemed like melancholy, which showed
that even in her young life she had experienced sorrow. Her figure was
slender and graceful, being well displayed by her close-fitting
riding-habit, while a plumed hat completed her equipment, and served to
heighten the effect of her beauty.

At her approach a sudden silence had fallen over the company, and they
all stood motionless, looking at her as she dismounted.

"Why, what makes you all look at me so strangely?" she asked, in a tone
of surprise, throwing a hasty glance over them. "Has any thing
happened?"

To this question no answer was given, but each seemed waiting for the
other to speak. At length a little thing of about twelve came up, and
encircling the new-comer's waist with her arm, looked up with a
sorrowful expression, and whispered,

"Edith dearest, Miss Plympton wants to see you."

The silence and ominous looks of the others, and the whispered words of
the little girl, together with her mournful face, increased the surprise
and anxiety of Edith. She looked with a strange air of apprehension
over the company.

"What is it?" she asked, hurriedly. "Something has happened. Do any of
you know? What is it?"

She spoke breathlessly, and her eyes once more wandered with anxious
inquiry over all of them. But no one spoke, for, whatever it was, they
felt the news to be serious--something, in fact, which could not well be
communicated by themselves. Once more Edith repeated her question, and
finding that no answer was forth-coming, her impatience allowed her to
wait no longer; and so, gathering up her long skirts in one hand and
holding her whip in the other, she hurried into the house to see Miss
Plympton.

Miss Plympton's room was on the second floor, and that lady herself was
seated by the window as Edith entered. In the young girl's face there
was now a deeper anxiety, and seating herself near the centre-table, she
looked inquiringly at Miss Plympton.

The latter regarded her for some moments in silence.

"Did you wish to see me, auntie dear?" said Edith.

Miss Plympton sighed.

"Yes," she said, slowly; "but, my poor darling Edie, I hardly know how
to say to you what I have to say. I--I--do you think you can bear to
hear it, dear?"

At this Edith looked more disturbed than ever; and placing her elbow on
the centre-table, she leaned her cheek upon her hand, and fixed her
melancholy eyes upon Miss Plympton. Her heart throbbed painfully, and
the hand against which her head leaned trembled visibly. But these signs
of agitation did not serve to lessen the emotion of the other; on the
contrary, she seemed more distressed, and quite at a loss how to
proceed.

"Edith," said she at last, "my child, you know how tenderly I love you.
I have always tried to be a mother to you, and to save you from all
sorrow; but now my love and care are all useless, for the sorrow has
come, and I do not know any way by which I can break bad news
to--to--a--a bereaved heart."

She spoke in a tremulous voice and with frequent pauses.

"Bereaved!" exclaimed Edith, with white lips. "Oh, auntie! Bereaved! Is
it that? Oh, tell me all. Don't keep me in suspense. Let me know the
worst."

Miss Plympton looked still more troubled. "I--I--don't know what to
say," she faltered.

"You mean _death_!" cried Edith, in an excited voice; "and oh! I
needn't ask who. There's only one--only one. I had only one--only
one--and now--he is--gone!"

"Gone," repeated Miss Plympton, mechanically, and she said no more; for
in the presence of Edith's grief, and of other facts which had yet to be
disclosed--facts which would reveal to this innocent girl something
worse than even bereavement--words were useless, and she could find
nothing to say. Her hand wandered through the folds of her dress, and
at length she drew forth a black-edged letter, at which she gazed in an
abstracted way.

"Let me see it," cried Edith, hurriedly and eagerly; and before Miss
Plympton could prevent her, or even imagine what she was about, she
darted forward and snatched the letter from her hand. Then she tore it
open and read it breathlessly. The letter was very short, and was
written in a stiff, constrained hand. It was as follows:

"DALTON HALL, _May_ 6, 1840.

"Madame,--It is my painful duty to communicate to you the death of
Frederick Dalton, Esq., of Dalton Hall, who died at Hobart Town, Van
Diemen's Land, on the 2d of December, 1839. I beg that you will impart
this intelligence to Miss Dalton, for as she is now of age, she may wish
to return to Dalton Hall.

"I remain, madame,
"Your most obedient servant,
"JOHN WIGGINS.
"MISS PLYMPTON, _Plympton Terrace_."

Of this letter Edith took in the meaning of the first three lines only.
Then it dropped from her trembling hands, and sinking into a chair, she
burst into a torrent of tears. Miss Plympton regarded her with a face
full of anxiety, and for some moments Edith wept without restraint; but
at length, when the first outburst of grief was past, she picked up the
letter once more and read it over and over.

Deep as Edith's grief evidently was, this bereavement was not, after
all, so sore a blow as it might have been under other circumstances.
For this father whom she had lost was virtually a stranger. Losing her
mother at the age of eight, she had lived ever since with Miss Plympton,
and during this time her father had never seen her, nor even written to
her. Once or twice she had written to him a pretty childish letter, but
he had never deigned any reply. If in that unknown nature there had been
any thing of a father's love, no possible hint had ever been given of
it. Of her strange isolation she was never forgetful, and she felt it
most keenly during the summer holidays, when all her companions had gone
to their homes. At such times she brooded much over her loneliness, and
out of this feeling there arose a hope, which she never ceased to
cherish, that the time would come when she might join her father, and
live with him wherever he might be, and set herself to the task of
winning his affections.

She had always understood that her father had been living in the East
since her mother's death. The only communication which she had with him
was indirect, and consisted of business letters which his English agent
wrote to Miss Plympton. These were never any thing more than short,
formal notes. Such neglect was keenly felt, and Edith, unwilling to
blame her father altogether, tried to make some one else responsible for
it. As she knew of no other human being who had any connection with her
father except this agent, she brought herself gradually to look upon him
as the cause of her father's coldness, and so at length came to regard
him with a hatred that was unreasoning and intense. She considered him
her father's evil genius, and believed him to be somehow at the bottom
of the troubles of her life. Thus every year this man, John Wiggins,
grew more hateful, and she accustomed herself to think of him as an evil
fiend, a Mephistopheles, by whose crafty wiles her father's heart had
been estranged from her. Such, then, was the nature of Edith's
bereavement; and as she mourned over it she did not mourn so much over
the reality as over her vanished hope. He was gone, and with him was
gone the expectation of meeting him and winning his affection. She
would never see him--never be able to tell how she loved him, and hear
him say with a father's voice that he loved his child!

These thoughts and feelings overwhelmed Edith even as she held the
letter in her hand for a new perusal, and she read it over and over
without attaching any meaning to the words. At length her attention was
arrested by one statement in that short letter which had hitherto
escaped her notice. This was the name of the place where her father's
death had occurred--Van Diemen's Land.

"I don't understand this," said she. "What is the meaning of this--Van
Diemen's Land? I did not know that poor papa had ever left India."

Miss Plympton made no reply to this for some time, but looked more
troubled than ever.

"What does it mean," asked Edith again--"this Hobart Town, Van Diemen's
Land? What does it mean?"

"Well, dear," said Miss Plympton, in strangely gentle and mournful
voice, "you have never known much about your poor father, and you have
never known exactly where he has been living. He did not live in India,
dear; he never lived in India. He lived in--in--Van Diemen's Land."

Miss Plympton's tone and look affected Edith very unpleasantly. The
mystery about her father seemed to grow darker, and to assume something
of an ill-omened character. The name also--Van Diemen's Land--served to
heighten her dark apprehensions; and this discovery that she had known
even less than she supposed about her father made it seem as though the
knowledge that had thus been hidden could not but be painful.

"What do you mean?" she asked again; and her voice died down to a
whisper through the vague fears that had been awakened. "I thought that
poor papa lived in India--that he held some office under government."

"I know that you believed so," said Miss Plympton, regarding Edith with
a look that was full of pity and mournful sympathy. "That was what I
gave out. None of the girls have ever suspected the truth. No one knows
whose daughter you really are. They do not suspect that your father was
Dalton of Dalton Hall. They think that he was an Indian resident in the
Company's service. Yes, I have kept the secret well, dear--the secret
that I promised your dear mother on her death-bed to keep from all the
world, and from you, darling, till the time should come for you to know.
And often and often, dear, have I thought of this moment, and tried to
prepare for it; but now, since it has come, I am worse than unprepared.
But preparations are of no use, for oh, my darling, my own Edith, I must
speak, if I speak at all, from my heart."

These words were spoken by Miss Plympton in a broken, disconnected, and
almost incoherent manner. She stopped abruptly, and seemed overcome by
strong agitation. Edith, on her part, looked at her in equal agitation,
wondering at her display of emotion, and terrified at the dark
significance of her words. For from those words she learned this much
already--that her father had been living in Van Diemen's Land, a penal
colony; that around him had been a dark secret which had been kept from
her most carefully; that her parentage had been concealed most
scrupulously from the knowledge of her school-mates; and that this
secret which had been so guarded was even now overwhelming Miss Plympton
so that she shrunk from communicating it. All this served to fill the
mind of Edith with terrible presentiments, and the mystery which had
hitherto surrounded her father seemed now about to result in a
revelation more terrible than the mystery itself.

After some time Miss Plympton rose, and drawing her chair nearer, sat
down in front of Edith, and took both her hands.

"My poor darling Edith," said she, in pitying tones, "I am anxious for
you. You are not strong enough for this. Your hands are damp and cold.
You are trembling. I would not have brought up this subject now, but I
have been thinking that the time has come for telling you all. But I'm
afraid it will be too much for you. You have already enough to bear
without having this in addition. You are too weak."

Edith shook her head.

"Can you bear it?" asked Miss Plympton, anxiously, "this that I wish to
tell you? Perhaps I had better defer it."

"No," said Edith, in a forced voice. "No--now--now--tell me now. I can
bear whatever it is better than any horrible suspense."

Miss Plympton sighed, and leaning forward, she kissed the pale forehead
of the young girl. Then, after a little further delay, during which she
seemed to be collecting her thoughts, she began:

"I was governess once, Edith dearest, in your dear mamma's family. She
was quite a little thing then. All the rest were harsh, and treated me
like a slave; but she was like an angel, and made me feel the only real
happiness I knew in all those dreary days. I loved her dearly for her
gentle and noble nature. I loved her always, and I still love her
memory; and I love you as I loved her, and for her sake. And when she
gave you to me, on her death-bed, I promised her that I would be a
mother to you, dear. You have never known how much I love you--for I am
not demonstrative--but I do love you, my own Edith, most dearly, and I
would spare you this if I could. But, after all, it is a thing which you
must know some time, and before very long--the sooner the better."

"I wish to know it now," said Edith, as Miss Plympton hesitated,
speaking in a constrained voice, the result of the strong pressure which
she was putting on her feelings--"now," she repeated. "I can not wait.
I must know all to-day. What was it? Was it--crime?"

"The charge that was against him," said Miss Plympton, "involved crime.
But, my darling, you must remember always that an accusation is not the
same as a fact, even though men believe it; yes, even though the law may
condemn the accused, and the innocent may suffer. Edith Dalton," she
continued, with solemn earnestness, "I believe that your father was as
innocent as you are. Remember that! Cling to that! Never give up that
belief, no matter what you may hear. There was too much haste and blind
passion and prejudice in that court where he was tried, and appearances
were dark, and there was foul treachery somewhere; and so it was that
Frederick Dalton was done to ruin and his wife done to death. And now,
my darling, you have to make yourself acquainted not with a father's
crimes, but with a father's sufferings. You are old enough now to hear
that story, and you have sufficient independence of character to judge
for yourself, dear. There is no reason why you should be overwhelmed
when you hear it--unless, indeed, you are overcome by pity for the
innocent and indignation against his judges. Even if society considers
your father's name a stained and dishonored one, there is no reason why
his daughter should feel shame, for you may take your stand on his own
declaration of innocence, and hold up your head proudly before the
world."

Miss Plympton spoke this with vehement emotion, and her words brought
some consolation to Edith. The horrible thought that had at first come
was that her father had been a convict in some penal settlement, but
this solemn assurance of his innocence mitigated the horror of the
thought, and changed it into pity. She said not a word, however, for her
feelings were still too strong, nor could she find voice for any words.
She sat, therefore, in silence, and waited for Miss Plympton to tell the
whole story.

Miss Plympton surveyed Edith anxiously for a few moments, and then
rising, went over to an escritoire. This she unlocked, and taking from
it a parcel, she returned to her seat.

"I am not going to tell you the story," said she. "I can not bear to
recall it. It is all here, and you may read it for yourself. It was all
public ten years ago, and in this package are the reports of the trial.
I have read them over so often that I almost know them by heart; and I
know, too, the haste of that trial, and the looseness of that evidence.
I have marked it in places--for your eyes only, dearest--for I prepared
it for you, to be handed to you in case of my death. My life, however,
has been preserved, and I now give this into your own hands. You must
take it to your own room, and read it all over by yourself. You will
learn there all that the world believes about your father, and will see
in his own words what he says about himself. And for my part, even if
the testimony were far stronger, I would still take the word of
Frederick Dalton!"

Miss Plympton held out the parcel, and Edith took it, though she was
scarce conscious of the act. An awful foreboding of calamity, the
mysterious shadow of her father's fate, descended over her soul. She was
unconscious of the kiss which Miss Plympton gave her; nor was she
conscious of any thing till she found herself seated at a table in her
own room, with the door locked, and the package lying on the table
before her. She let it lie there for a few moments, for her agitation
was excessive, and she dreaded to open it; but at length she mastered
her feelings, and began to undo the strings.

The contents of the parcel consisted of sheets of paper, upon which were
pasted columns of printed matter cut from some newspaper. It was the
report of the trial of Frederick Dalton, upon charges which ten years
before had filled the public mind with horror and curiosity. In these
days the most cursory reader who took up the report came to the work
with a mind full of vivid interest and breathless suspense; but that
report now lay before the eyes of a far different reader--one who was
animated by feelings far more intense, since it was the daughter of the
accused herself. That daughter also was one who hitherto had lived in an
atmosphere of innocence, purity, and love, one who shrank in abhorrence
from all that was base or vile; and this was the one before whose eyes
was now placed the horrible record that had been made up before the
world against her father's name.

The printed columns were pasted in such a way that a wide margin was
left, which was covered with notes in Miss Plympton's writing. To give
any thing like a detailed account of this report, with the annotations,
is out of the question, nor will any thing be necessary beyond a general
summary of the facts therein stated.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER II


THE CONTENTS OF THE MANUSCRIPT.

On the date indicated in the report, then, the city of Liverpool and the
whole country were agitated by the news of a terrible murder. On the
road-side near Everton the dead body of a Mr. Henderson, an eminent
banker, had been found, not far from his own residence. The discovery
had been made at about eleven o'clock in the evening by some passers-by.
Upon examination a wound was found in the back of the head which had
been caused by a bullet. His watch and purse were still in their places,
but his pocket-book was gone. Clasped in one of the hands was a
newspaper, on the blank margin of which were some red letters, rudely
traced, and looking as though they had been written with blood. The
letters were these:

"DALTON SHOT ME BEC--"

It was evident that the writer intended to write the word "because," and
give the reason why he had been shot, but that his strength had failed
in the middle of the word.

A closer search revealed some other things. One was a small stick, the
point of which was reddened with a substance which microscopic
examination afterward showed to be blood. The other was a scarf-pin made
of gold, the head of which consisted of a Maltese cross, of very rich
and elegant design. In the middle was black enamel inclosed by a richly
chased gold border, and at the intersection of the bars was a small
diamond of great splendor. If this cross belonged to the murderer it had
doubtless become loosened, and fallen out while he was stooping over his
victim, and the loss had not been noticed in the excitement of the
occasion.

At the coroner's inquest various important circumstances were brought to
light. The fact that his watch and purse remained made it plain that it
was not a case of common highway robbery, and the loss of the
pocket-book showed that the deed was prompted by a desire for something
more than ordinary plunder. Proceeding from this, various circumstances
arose which, in addition to the terrible accusation traced in blood,
tended to throw suspicion upon Frederick Dalton.

It came out that on the morning of that very day Mr. Henderson had
discovered a check for two thousand pounds that had been forged in his
name. Being a very choleric man, he felt more than the anger which is
natural under such circumstances, and vowed vengeance to the uttermost
upon the forger. That same morning Mr. Frederick Dalton came to see him,
and was shown into his private office. He had just arrived in the city,
and had come on purpose to pay this visit. The interview was a
protracted one, and the clerks outside heard the voice of Mr. Henderson
in a very high key, and in a strain of what sounded like angry menace
and denunciations of vengeance, though they could not make out any
words. At last the office door opened, and Dalton came out. He was very
pale, and much agitated. One of the clerks heard him say, in a low
voice,

"_Only one day--till this time to-morrow_."

Whereupon Mr. Henderson roared out in a loud voice, which all the clerks
heard,

"_No, Sir! Not one day, not one hour, if I die for it!_"

Upon this Dalton walked away, looking paler and more agitated than ever.

In the course of the day Mr. Henderson told his confidential clerk that
the check had just been used by Dalton, who, however, denied that he was
the forger; that the visit of Dalton professed to be on behalf of the
guilty party, whom he wished to screen. Dalton had refused to give the
culprit's name, and offered to pay the amount of the check, or any
additional sum whatever, if no proceedings were taken. This, however,
Mr. Henderson refused, and in his indignation charged Dalton himself
with the crime. Under these circumstances the interview had terminated.

Thus the evidence against Dalton was the forged check, the clerks'
reports concerning the exciting interview with Mr. Henderson, the awful
accusation of the deceased himself, written in his own blood, together
with the Maltese cross, which was believed to belong to Dalton. The
arrest of Dalton had been made at the earliest possible moment; and at
the trial these were the things which were made use of against him by
the prosecution. By energetic efforts discovery was made of a jeweler
who recognized the Maltese cross as his own work, and swore that he had
made it for Frederick Dalton, in accordance with a special design
furnished him by that gentleman. The design had been kept in his
order-book ever since, and was produced by him in court. Thus the
testimony of the jeweler and the order-book served to fix the ownership
of the Maltese cross upon Dalton in such a way that it corroborated and
confirmed all the other testimony.

On the other hand, the defense of Dalton took up all these points. In
the first place, it was shown that in his case there was no conceivable
temptation that could have led to the commission of such a crime. He was
a man of great wealth, possessed of a fine estate, and free from all
pecuniary embarrassments. He was not what was called a sporting man,
and therefore could not have secretly accumulated debts while appearing
rich. It was shown, also, that his character was stainless; that he was
essentially a domestic man, living quietly at Dalton Hall with his wife
and child, and therefore, from his worldly means as well as from his
personal character and surroundings, it was morally impossible for him
to have forged the check.

With reference to the interview with Mr. Henderson, it was maintained
that it arose, as he himself said, from a desire to shield the real
culprit, whom he knew, and for whom he felt a strong and unusual regard.
Who this culprit was the defense did not assert, nor could they imagine,
though they tried every possible way of finding him out. Whoever he was,
he appeared to be the only one who could have had a motive strong enough
for the murder of Mr. Henderson. The unknown assassin had evidently done
the deed so as to obtain possession of the forged check, and prevent its
being used against him. In this he was unsuccessful, since the check had
already been intrusted to the hands of others; but the aim of the
assassin was sufficiently evident.

Again, as to the writing in blood, a vigorous effort was made to show
that this was a conspiracy against an innocent man. It was argued that
Mr. Henderson did not write it at all; and efforts were made to prove
that the wound in his head must have caused instantaneous death. He
himself, therefore, could not have written it, but it must have been the
work of some one who was plotting against Dalton, or who was eager to
divert suspicion from himself.

The testimony of the Maltese cross was met by counter-testimony to the
effect that Dalton had never worn such an ornament. His servants all
swore that they had never seen it before. Mr. Henderson's clerks also
swore that Mr. Dalton wore no pin at all on that morning of the
interview.

And, finally, an effort was made to prove an _alibi_. It was shown
that Dalton's occupation of his time during that evening could be
accounted for with the exception of one hour. Witnesses were produced
from the hotel where he put up who swore that he had been there until
eight o'clock in the evening, when he left, returning at nine. An hour,
therefore, remained to be accounted for. As to this hour--on the one
hand, it seemed hardly sufficient for the deed, but yet it was certainly
possible for him to have done it within that time; and thus it remained
for the defense to account for that hour. For this purpose a note was
produced, which was scribbled in pencil and addressed to John Wiggins,
Esq.

It was as follows:

"Dear Wiggins,--I have been here ever since eight, and am tired of
waiting. Come to my room as soon as you get back. I'll be there.

Yours, F. DALTON."

Mr. John Wiggins testified that he had made an appointment to meet
Dalton at the hour mentioned in the note, but had been detained on
business until late. He had found this on his return thrust under the
office door. On going to see him the following morning he had learned of
his arrest.

This note and the testimony of Wiggins were felt to bear strongly in
Dalton's favor. If the accused had really been waiting at the office,
as the note stated, then clearly he could not have followed on Mr.
Henderson's track to Everton. The force of this weighed more than any
thing else with the court; the summing up of the judge also bore
strongly toward an acquittal; and, consequently, Dalton was declared not
guilty.

But the acquittal on this first charge did not at all secure the escape
of Dalton from danger. Another charge, which had been interwoven with
the first, still impended over him, and no sooner was he declared free
of murder than he was arrested on the charge of forgery, and remanded to
prison to await his trial on that accusation.

Now during the whole course of the trial the public mind had been
intensely excited; all men were eager than vengeance should fall on some
one, and at the outset had made up their minds that Dalton was guilty.
The verdict of acquittal created deep and widespread dissatisfaction,
for it seemed as though justice had been cheated of a victim. When,
therefore, the trial for forgery came on, there weighed against Dalton
all the infamy that had been accumulating against him during the trial
for murder. Had this trial stood alone, the prisoner's counsel might
have successfully pleaded his high character, as well as his wealth,
against this charge, and shown that it was false because it was morally
impossible. But this was no longer of avail, and in the public mind
Frederick Dalton was deemed only a desperate murderer, whose good
reputation was merely the result of life-long hypocrisy, and whose
character was but an empty name.

And so in this trial it was shown that Dalton had first put forth the
forged check, and afterward learning that it was discovered prematurely,
had hurried to Liverpool so as to get it back from Mr. Henderson. His
asserted wealth was not believed in. Efforts were made to show that he
had been connected with men of desperate fortunes, and had himself been
perhaps betting heavily; and all this arts which ate usually employed by
unscrupulous or excited advocates to crush an accused man were freely
put forth. Experts were brought from London to examine Dalton's
handwriting, and compare it with that of the forged check; and these men
yielding to the common prejudice, gave it as their opinion that he was,
or _might have been_(!), the author of the forgery.

But all this was as nothing when compared with the injury which Dalton
himself did to his own cause by the course which he chose to adopt.
Contenting himself with the simple assertion of his innocence, he
refused to give the name of the guilty man, or to say any thing that
might lead to his discovery. Actuated by a lofty sense of honor, a
chivalrous sentiment of loyalty and friendship, he kept the secret with
obstinate fidelity; and the almost frantic appeals of his counsel, who
saw in the discovery of the real offender the only chance for the escape
of the accused, and who used every possible argument to shake his
resolve, availed not in the slightest degree to shake his firmness.
They employed detectives, and instituted inquiries in all directions in
the endeavor to find out who might be this friend for whom Dalton was
willing to risk honor and life; but their search was completely baffled.
Dalton's silence was therefore taken as an evidence of guilt, and his
refusal to confess on a friend was regarded as a silly attempt to excite
public sympathy. When the counsel ventured to bring this forward to the
jury, and tried to portray Dalton as a man who chose rather to suffer
than to say that which might bring a friend to destruction, it was
regarded as a wild, Quixotic, and maudlin piece of sentimentalism on the
part of said counsel, and was treated by the prosecution with
unspeakable scorn and ridicule. Under such circumstances the result was
inevitable: Frederick Dalton was declared guilty, and sentenced to
transportation for life.

Among the notes which had been written by Miss Plympton, Edith was very
forcibly struck by some which referred to John Wiggins.

"Who is this J.W.?" was written in one place. "How did F.D. become
acquainted with him?"

In another place, where Wiggins gave his testimony about the note, was
written: "Where was J.W. during that hour? Had he gone to Everton
himself?"

And again: "J.W. was the friend of F.D., and wished to save him. Might
he not have done more?"

Again: "Mark well! J.W. is a Liverpool man. H. was a Liverpool man. Had
F.D. ever heard of even the name of H. before the forgery? What was the
nature of the dealings between F.D. and J.W.?"

Again, when Dalton's silence was so sharply commented on and urged as
proof of his guilt, there occurred the following: "If F.D. was silent,
why did not J.W. open his mouth? Must he not have known at least
something? Could he not have set the authorities upon the track of the
real criminal, and thus have saved F.D.?"

Again: "The Maltese cross did not belong to Dalton. He had ordered it to
be made. For whom? Was it not for this same friend for whom he was now
suffering? Was not this friend the murderer? Has he not thrown suspicion
upon F.D. by that writing in blood? The same one who committed the
murder wrote the false charge, and left the Maltese cross."

Other notes of similar character occurred in various places, but those
which impressed Edith most were the following:

"F.D. was evidently betrayed by his false friend. Was not that false
friend the real murderer? Did he not contrive to throw on F.D. the
suspicion of the murder? Might not the forgery itself from the very
beginning have been part of a plan to ruin F.D.? But why ruin him?
Evidently to gain some benefit. Now who has been more benefited by the
ruin of F.D.? Whoever he is, must he not he be the murderer and the
false friend?"

Again, a little further on: "Has any one gained any thing from the ruin
of F.D. but J.W.? Has not J.W. ever since had control of Dalton
property? Is he not rich now? Has not the ruin of F.D. made the fortune
of J.W.?"

Such was the substance of the papers which Edith perused. They were
voluminous, and she continued at her task all through that night, her
heart all the time filled with a thousand contending emotions.

Before her mind all the time there was the image of her father in the
judgment-hall. There he stood, the innocent man, betrayed by his
friend, and yet standing there in his simple faith and truth to save
that friend, obstinate in his self-sacrificing fidelity, true to faith
when the other had proved himself worthless, suffering what can only be
suffered by a generous nature as the hours and the days passed and the
end approached, and still the traitor allowed him to suffer. And there
was the hate and scorn of man, the clamor for vengeance from society,
the condemnation of the jury who had prejudged his case, the sneer of
the paid advocate, the scoff of the gaping crowd, to whom the plea of
_noblesse oblige_ and stainless honor and perfect truth seemed only
maudlin sentimentality and Quixotic extravagance.

All these thoughts were in Edith's mind as she read, and these feelings
swelled within her indignant heart as all the facts in that dread
tragedy were slowly revealed one by one. Coming to this task with a mind
convinced at the outset of her father's innocence, she met with not one
circumstance that could shake that conviction for a moment. In her own
strong feeling she was incapable of understanding how any one could
honestly think otherwise. The testimony of adverse witnesses seemed to
her perjury, the arguments of the lawyers fiendish malignity, the last
summing up of the judge bitter prejudice, and the verdict of the jury a
mockery of justice.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER III.


THE MOMENTOUS RESOLVE.

Early on the following morning Miss Plympton called on Edith, and was
shocked to see the changes that had been made in her by that one night.
She did not regard so much the pallor of her face, the languor of her
manner, and her unelastic step, but rather the new expression that
appeared upon her countenance, the thoughtfulness of her brow, the deep
and earnest abstraction of her gaze. In that one night she seemed to
have stepped from girlhood to maturity. It was as though she had lived
through the intervening experience. Years had been crowded into hours.
She was no longer a school-girl--she was a woman.

Miss Plympton soon retired, with the promise to come again when Edith
should feel stronger. Breakfast was sent up, and taken away untasted,
and at noon Miss Plympton once more made her appearance.

"I have been thinking about many things," said Edith, after some
preliminary remarks, "and have been trying to recall what I can of my
own remembrance of papa. I was only eight years old, but I have a pretty
distinct recollection of him, and it has been strengthened by his
portrait, which I always have had. Of my mother I have a most vivid
remembrance, and I have never forgotten one single circumstance
connected with her last illness. I remember your arrival, and my
departure from home after all was over. But there is one thing which I
should like very much to ask you about. Did none of my mother's
relatives come to see her during this time?"

"Your mother's relatives acted very badly indeed, dear. From the first
they were carried away by the common belief in your dear father's guilt.
Some of them came flying to your mother. She was very ill at the time,
and these relatives brought her the first news which she received. It
was a severe blow. They were hard-hearted or thoughtless enough to
denounce your father to her, and she in her weak state tried to defend
him. All this produced so deplorable an effect that she sank rapidly.
Her relatives left her in this condition. She tried to be carried to
your dear father in his prison, but could not bear the journey. They
took her as far as the gates, but she fainted there, and had to be taken
back to the house. So then she gave up. She knew that she was going to
die, and wrote to me imploring me to come to her. She wished to intrust
you to me. I took you from her arms--"

Miss Plympton paused, and Edith was silent for some time.

"So," said she, in a scarce audible voice, "darling mamma died of a
broken heart?"

Miss Plympton, said nothing. A long silence followed.

"Had my father no friends," asked Edith, "or no relatives?"

"He had no relatives," said Miss Plympton, "but an only sister. She
married a Captain Dudleigh, now Sir Lionel Dudleigh. But it was a very
unhappy marriage, for they separated. I never knew the cause; and
Captain Dudleigh took it so much to heart that he went abroad. He could
not have heard of your father's misfortunes till all was over and it was
too late. But in any case I do not see what he could have done, unless
he had contrived to shake your father's resolve. As to his wife, I have
never heard of her movements, and I think she must have died long ago.
Neither she nor her husband is mentioned at the trial. If they had been
in England, it seems to me that they would have come forward as
witnesses in some way; so I think they were both out of the country. Sir
Lionel is alive yet, I think, but he has always lived out of the world.
I believe his family troubles destroyed his happiness, and made him
somewhat misanthropical. I have sometimes thought in former years that
he might make inquiries about you, but he has never done so to my
knowledge, though perhaps he has tried without being able to hear where
you were. After all, he would scarcely know where to look. On the whole,
I consider Sir Lionel the only friend you have, Edith darling, besides
myself, and if any trouble should ever arise, he would be the one to
whom I should apply for assistance, or at least advice."

Edith listened to this, and made no comment, but after another
thoughtful pause she said,

"About this Wiggins--have you ever heard any thing of him since the--the
trial?"

Miss Plympton shook her head.

"No," said she, "except from those formal business notes. You have seen
them all, and know what they are."

"Have you ever formed any opinion of him more favorable than what you
wrote in those notes?"

"I do not think that I wrote any thing more than suspicions or
surmises," said Miss Plympton; "and as far as suspicions are concerned,
I certainly have not changed my mind. The position which he occupied
during the trial, and ever since, excites my suspicions against him. All
others suffered; he alone was benefited. And now, too, when all is over,
he seems still in his old position--perhaps a better one than ever--the
agent of the estates, and assuming to some extent a guardianship over
you. At least he gives directions about you, for he says you are to go
back to Dalton Hall. But in that he shall find himself mistaken, for I
will never allow you to put yourself in his power."

"Have you ever seen him?" asked Edith.

"No."

She bent down her head, and leaned her forehead on her hand.

"Well," said she, in a low voice, half to herself, "it don't matter; I
shall see him soon myself."

"See him yourself!" said Miss Plympton, anxiously. "What do you mean?"

"Oh, I shall see him soon--when I get to Dalton Hall."

"Dalton Hall?"

"Yes," said Edith, simply, raising her head and looking calmly at Miss
Plympton.

"But you are not going to Dalton Hall."

"There is no other place for me," said Edith, sadly. "I am going--I am
going as soon as possible."

"Oh no--oh no, darling; you are going to do nothing of the kind," said
Miss Plympton. "I can not let you go. We all love you too dearly. This
is your home, and I now stand in the place of those whom you have lost.
You are never to leave me, Edith dearest."

Edith sighed heavily, and shook her head.

"No," she said, speaking in a low, melancholy voice--"no, I can not
stay. I can not meet my friends here again. I am not what I was
yesterday. I am changed. It seems as though some heavy weight has come
upon me. I must go away, and I have only one place to go to, and that is
my father's home."

"My darling," said Miss Plympton, drawing her chair close to Edith, and
twining her arms about her, "you must not talk so; you can not imagine
how you distress me. I can not let you go. Do not think of these
things. We all love you. Do not imagine that your secret will be
discovered. No one shall ever know it. In a few days you yourself will
feel different. The consciousness of your father's innocence will make
you feel more patient, and the love of all your friends will make your
life as happy as ever."

"No," said Edith, "I can not--I can not. You can not imagine how I
dread to see the face of any one of them. I shall imagine that they know
all; and I can not tell them. They will tease me to tell them my
troubles, and it will only worry me. No, for me to stay here is
impossible. I would go any where first."

She spoke so firmly and decisively that Miss Plympton forbore to press
her further just then.

"At any rate, my darling," said she, "you need not think of Dalton Hall.
I can find you other places which will be far more suitable to you in
every way. If it distresses you to stay here, I can find a happy home
for you, where you can stay till you feel able to return to us again."

"There is no place," said Edith, "where I can stay. I do not want to go
among strangers, or to strange places. I have a home, and that is the
only place that I can go to now. That home is familiar to me. I remember
it well. It is where I was born. Dear mamma's room is there, where I
used to sit with her and hear her voice. My dear papa and mamma were
happy there; and she died there. It has its own associations; and now
since this great sorrow has come, I long to go there. It seems the
fittest place for me."

"But, my child," said Miss Plympton, anxiously, "there is one thing that
you do not consider. Far be it from me to stand in the way of any of
your wishes, especially at a time like this, but is seems to me that a
return to Dalton Hall just now is hardly safe."

"Safe!"

Edith spoke in a tone of surprise, and looked inquiringly at Miss
Plympton.

"I don't like this John Wiggins," said Miss Plympton, uneasily; I am
afraid of him."

"But what possible cause can there be of fear?" asked Edith.

"Oh, I don't know," said Miss Plympton, with a sigh; "no one can tell.
If my suspicions are at all correct, he is a man who might be very
dangerous. He has control of all the estates, and--"

"But for that very reason I would go home," said Edith, "if there were
no stronger inducement, to do what I can to put an end to his
management."

"How could you do any thing with him?" asked Miss Plympton; "you so
young and inexperienced."

"I don't know," said Edith, simply; "but the estates are mine, and not
his; and Dalton Hall is mine; and if I am the owner, surely I ought to
have some power. There are other agents in the world, and other lawyers.
They can help me, if I wish help. We are not living in the Middle Ages
when some one could seize one's property by the strong hand and keep it.
There is law in the country, and Wiggins is subject to it."

"Oh, my child," said Miss Plympton, anxiously, "I am terrified at the
very thought of your being in that man's power. You can not tell what
things are possible; and though there is law, as you say, yet it does
not always happen that one can get justice."

"That I know, or ought to know," said Edith, in a mournful voice; "I
have learned that this past night only too well."

"It seems to me," said Miss Plympton, with the same anxiety in her
voice, "that to return to Dalton Hall will be to put yourself in some
way into his power. If he is really the unscrupulous, crafty, and
scheming man that I have suspected him to be, he will not find it
difficult to weave some plot around you which may endanger your whole
life. There is no safety in being bear that man. Be mistress of Dalton
Hall, but do not go there till you have driven him away. It seems by his
last letters as though he is living there now, and if you go there you
will find yourself in some sense under his control."

"Well," said Edith, "I do not doubt his willingness to injure me if he
can, or to weave a plot which shall ruin me; but, after all, such a
thing takes time. He can not ruin me in one day, or in one week, and so
I think I can return to Dalton Hall in safety, and be secure for a few
days at least."

Miss Plympton made some further objections, but the vague fears to which
she gave expression met with no response from Edith, who looked upon her
journey home in a very sober and commonplace light, and refused to let
her imagination terrify her. Her argument that Wiggins would require
some time to injure her was not easy to answer, and gradually Miss
Plympton found herself forced to yield to Edith's determination. In fact,
there was much in that resolve which was highly natural. Edith, in the
first place, could not bear to resume her intimacy with her
school-mates, for reasons which she had stated already; and, in addition
to this, she had a strong and irresistible longing to go to the only
place that was now her home. There she hoped to find peace, and gain
consolation in the midst of the scenes of her childhood and the memories
of her parents. These were her chief motives for action now; but in
addition to these she had others. The chief was a strong desire to
dismiss Wiggins from his post of agent.

The detestation which she had already conceived for this man has been
noticed in a previous chapter. It had grown during past years out of a
habit of her mind to associate with him the apparent alienation of her
father. But now, since her father's past life was explained, this John
Wiggins appeared in a new light. The dark suggestions of Miss Plympton,
her suspicions as to his character and motives, had sunk deep into the
soul of Edith, and taken root there. She had not yet been able to bring
herself to think that this John Wiggins was himself the treacherous
friend, but she was on the high-road to that belief, and already had
advanced far enough to feel convinced that Wiggins could have at least
saved her father if he had chosen. One thing, however, was evident to
all the world, and that was what Miss Plympton laid so much stress on,
the fact that he had profited by her father's ruin, and had won gold and
influence and position out of her father's tears and agonies and death.
And so, while she longed to go home for her own consolation, there also
arose within her another motive to draw her there--the desire to see
this Wiggins, to confront him, to talk to him face to face, to drive him
out from the Dalton estates, and if she could not vindicate her father's
memory, at least put an end to the triumph of one of his false friends.

The result of this interview was, then, that Edith should return to
Dalton Hall; and as she was unwilling to wait, she decided to leave in
two days. Miss Plympton was to go with her.

"And now," said Miss Plympton, "we must write at once and give notice of
your coming."

"Write?" said Edith, coldly, "to whom?"

"Why, to--to Wiggins, I suppose," said Miss Plympton, with some
hesitation.

"I refuse to recognize Wiggins," said Edith. "I will not communicate
with him in any way. My first act shall be to dismiss him."

"But you must send some notice to some one; you must have some
preparations made."

"Oh, I shall not need any elaborate preparations; a room will be
sufficient. I should not wish to encounter the greetings of this man, or
see him complacently take credit to himself for his attentions to
me--and his preparations. No; I shall go and take things as I find them,
and I should prefer to go without notice."

At this Miss Plympton seemed a little more uneasy than before, and made
further efforts to change Edith's decision, but in vain. She was, in
fact, more perplexed at Edith herself than at any other thing; for this
one who but a day before had been a gentle, tractable, docile, gay,
light-hearted girl had suddenly started up into a stern, self-willed
woman, with a dauntless spirit and inflexible resolve.

"There is only one more thing that I have to mention," said Edith, as
Miss Plympton rose to go. "It is a favor that I have to ask of you. It
is this;" and she laid her hand on the papers of the report, which were
lying rolled up in a parcel on the table. "Have you any further use for
this? Will you let me keep it?"

"The need that I had for it," said Miss Plympton, "was over when I gave
it to you. I prepared it for you, and preserved it for you, and now
that you have it, its work is accomplished. It is yours, dearest, for
you to do as you choose with it."

To this Edith murmured some words of thanks, and taking up the parcel,
proceeded to tie it up more carefully.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER IV


THE WELCOME HOME.

Dalton Hall was one of the most magnificent country-seats in
Somersetshire. The village of Dalton, which bears the same name as the
old family seat, is situated on the banks of a little river which winds
through a pleasant plain on its course to the Bristol Channel, and at
this place is crossed by a fine old rustic bridge with two arches. The
village church, a heavy edifice, with an enormous ivy-grown tower,
stands on the further side; and beyond that the gables and chimneys of
Dalton Hall may be seen rising, about a mile away, out of the midst of a
sea of foliage. The porter's lodge is about half a mile distant from the
church, and the massive wall which incloses Dalton Park runs along the
road for some miles.

There was a railway station about four miles away from the village, and
it was at this station that Edith arrived on her way home. Miss Plympton
had come with her, with the intention of remaining long enough to see
Edith comfortably installed in her new abode, and with the hope of
persuading her to go back if circumstances did not seem favorable. A
footman and a maid also accompanied them.

On reaching the station they found themselves at first at a loss how to
proceed, for there were no carriages in waiting. Of course, as no notice
had been sent of her journey, Edith could not expect to find any
carriage from Dalton Hall; nor did she think much about this
circumstance. Dressed in deep mourning, with her pale face and dark,
thoughtful eyes, she seemed to be given up to her own mournful
reflections; and on finding that they would have to wait, she seated
herself on a bench, and looked with an abstracted gaze upon the
surrounding scene. Miss Plympton gave some directions to the footman,
who at once went off to seek a carriage; after which she seated herself
near Edith, while the maid sat on a trunk at a little distance. They had
traveled all day long, and felt very much fatigued; so that nothing was
said by any of them as they sat there waiting for the footman's return.
At length, after about half an hour, a hackney-coach drove up, which the
footman had procured from an inn not far away, and in this undignified
manner they prepared to complete their journey. A long drive of four or
five miles now remained; and when at length they reached the park gate
none of them had much strength left. Here the coach stopped, and the
footman rang the bell loudly and impatiently.

There was no immediate answer to this summons, and the footman rang
again and again; and finally, as the delay still continued, he gave the
bell a dozen tremendous pulls in quick succession. This brought an
answer, at any rate; for a man appeared, emerging from a neighboring
grove, who walked toward the gate with a rapid pace. He was a short,
bull-necked, thickset, broad-shouldered man, with coarse black hair and
heavy, matted beard. His nose was flat on his face, his chin was square,
and he looked exactly like a prize-fighter. He had a red shirt, with a
yellow spotted handkerchief flung about his neck, and his corduroy
trowsers were tucked into a pair of muddy boots.

The moment he reached the gate he roared out a volley of the most
fearful oaths: Who were they? What did they mean, _dash_ them? What
the _dash dash_ did they mean by making such a _dash dash_
noise?

"You'll get your ugly head broken, you scoundrel!" roared the footman,
who was beside himself with rage at this insult to his mistress, coming
as it did at the close of so long and irritating a delay. "Hold your
infernal tongue, and open the gate at once. Is this the way you dare to
talk before your mistress?"

"Mistress! You _dashed_ fool," was the response, "what the
_dash_ do I know about mistresses? I'll make a beginning with you,
you sleek, fat powder-monkey, with your shiny beaver and stuffed
calves!"

Edith heard all this, and her amazement was so great that it drove away
all fatigue. Her heart beat high and her spirit rose at this insult.
Opening the carriage door, she sprang out, and, walking up to the gate,
she confronted the porter as a goddess might confront a satyr. The calm,
cold gaze which she gave his was one which the brute could not
encounter. He could face any one of his own order; but the eye that now
rested on him gave him pain, and his glance fell sulkily before that of
his mistress.

"I am your mistress--Miss Dalton," said Edith. "Open that gate
immediately."

"I don't know any thing about mistresses," said the fellow. "My orders
are not to open them gates to nobody."

At this rebuff Edith was for a moment perplexed, but soon rallied. She
reflected that this man was a servant under orders, and that it would be
useless to talk to him. She must see the principal.

"Who gave those orders?" she asked.

"Mr. Wiggins," said the man, gruffly.

"Is that man here now?" asked Edith.

The man looked up suspiciously and in evident surprise, but his eyes
fell again.

"Mr. Wiggins? He is here; he lives here."

"Then do you go at once," said Edith, loftily, "and say to that man that
Miss Dalton is here."

The fellow glanced furtively at the carriage, where he saw the pale face
of Miss Plympton and the paler face of the maid, and then with a grunt
he turned and walked up the avenue. Edith went back to the carriage and
resumed her seat.

This scene had produced a profound effect upon her two companions. Miss
Plympton's worst apprehensions seemed justified by this rude repulse at
the gates, and the moment that Edith came back she began to entreat her
to return.

"Come back," she said, "to the inn. Do, darling, at least for the night,
till we can send word to Wiggins."

"No," said Edith, firmly; "I will not recognize Wiggins at all. I am
going to dismiss him the moment that I enter the Hall. I can wait
patiently just now."

"But at least come back for this night. You may be sure that they will
not be ready for you. You will have to come back after all."

"Well," said Edith, "I shall at least take formal possession of Dalton
Hall first, and let Wiggins see that I am mistress there."

Miss Plympton sighed. Every hour only showed in a stronger manner how
hopeless was any attempt of hers to move Edith from any resolve that she
might make. Already she recognized in that slender young girl the
stubborn spirit of her father--a spirit which would meet death and
destruction rather than swerve from its set purpose.

Nothing more was said, but they all waited patiently for the porter's
return. It seemed a very long time. The footman fussed and fumed, and at
length beguiled the time by smoking and chatting with the coachman, whom
he questioned about Mr. Wiggins. The coachman, however, could give him
no information on the subject. "I only know," said he, "as how that this
yer Wiggins is a Liverpool gent, an' latterly he seems inclined to live
here. But he don't never see no company, an' keeps hisself shut up
close."

At length, after waiting for more than half an hour, the noise of
carriage wheels was heard, and a brougham appeared driven by the porter.
He turned the brougham inside the gate, and then getting down, he
unlocked the small gate and advanced to the carriage. The fellow seemed
now to try to be more respectful, for he had a hat on his head which he
took off, and made a clumsy attempt at a bow.

"Beg pardon, miss," said he, "for keepin' you waitin'; but I had to put
the hosses in. Mr. Wiggins says as how you're to come up in the
brougham, an' your trunks an' things 'll be took up afterward.

"But I want to drive up in this coach. I can't remove the luggage," said
Edith.

"I don't know about that, miss," said the porter. "I've got to do as I'm
told."

At this Edith was silent; but her flashing eyes and a flush that swept
over her pale face showed her indignation.

"So this is the way he dares to treat me," said she, after some silence.
"Well," she continued, "for the present I must yield and submit to this
insolence. But it only shows more clearly the character of the man. I
suppose we must go," she continued, looking at Miss Plympton, and once
more opening the coach door herself.

Miss Plympton had been more agitated than ever at this last message, and
as Edith opened the door she asked her, breathlessly,

"What do you mean? What are you going to do, dear?

"I am going to Dalton Hall," said Edith, quietly. "We must go in the
brougham, and we must quit this."

Miss Plympton hesitated, and the maid, who was still more terrified,
clasped her hands in silent despair. But the porter, who had heard all,
now spoke.

"Beg pardon, miss," said he, "but that lady needn't trouble about it.
It's Mr. Wiggins's orders, miss, that on'y _you_ are to go to the
Hall."

"What insufferable insolence!" exclaimed Miss Plympton. "What shocking
and abominable arrogance!"

"I do not regard it in the slightest," said Edith, serenely. "It is only
assumption on his part. You are to come with me. If I pass through that
gate you are to come also. Come."

"Oh, my dearest, my own dearest Edith, do not!--wait!--come back and let
us talk over what we ought to do. Let us see a lawyer. Let us wait till
to-morrow, and see if a stranger like Wiggins can refuse admission to
the mistress of Dalton Hall."

"Beg pardon, mum," said the porter, "but Mr. Wiggins ain't refusin'
admission to Miss Dalton--it's others that he don't want, that's all.
The lawyers can't do any thin' agin that."

"My child," said Miss Plympton, "do you hear that? You shall not go.
This man knows well what he can do. He understands all the worst
injustice that can be done in the name of law. His whole life has been
lived in the practice of all those iniquities that the law winks at. You
see now at the outset what his purpose is. He will admit you, but not
your friends. He wishes to get you alone in his power. And why does he
not come himself? Why does he use such an agent as this?"

Miss Plympton spoke rapidly, and in excited tones, but her excitement
did not affect Edith in the slightest degree.

"I think you are altogether too imaginative," said she. "His orders are
absurd. If I go through that gate, you shall go too. Come."

"Edith! Edith! I implore you, my darling," cried Miss Plympton, "do not
go. Come back. It will not be long to wait. Come to the village till
to-morrow. Let us at least get the advice of a lawyer. The law can
surely give an entrance to the rightful owner."

[Illustration: "HE DREW FROM HIS BREAST A LARGE CLASP-KNIFE."]

"But he doesn't deny an entrance to me," said Edith, "and if I go, you
shall come also. Come."

Miss Plympton hesitated. She saw that Edith was fully determined to go
to Dalton Hall, and she could not bear to part with her. But at the same
time she was so terrified at the thought of forcing a way in spite of
the opposition of so formidable a villain as Wiggins that she shrank
from it. Love at length triumphed over fear, and she followed Edith out
of the coach, together with the maid.

Meanwhile the porter had stood in deep perplexity watching this scene,
but at length when Miss Plympton had reached the ground and prepared to
follow Edith he put himself in front of them.

"Beg pardon, miss," said he, "but its agin orders for them others to go.
It's on'y you that Mr. Wiggins 'll let in."

"Mr. Wiggins has nothing to say about the matter," said Edith, coldly.

"But I've got to obey orders," said the man.

"Will you please stand aside and let me pass?" said Edith.

"I can't let them others in," said the porter, doggedly. "You may go."

"John," said Edith, quietly, "I'm sorry to trouble you, but you must
watch this man; and, driver, do you stand at the gate and keep it open."

At this John flung down his hat upon the road, tore off his coat and
tossed it after the hat, and, with a chuckle of something like
exultation, prepared to obey his mistress by putting himself in a
"scientific" attitude. He saw well enough that the porter was a
formidable foe, and his face was a diploma in itself that fully
testified to the skill and science of that foe; but John was plucky, and
in his prime, and very confident in his own powers. So John stood off
and prepared for the fray. On the other hand, the porter was by no means
at a loss. As John prepared he backed slowly toward the gate, glaring
like a wild beast at his assailant. But John was suddenly interrupted in
his movements by the driver.

"See here, young man," said the latter, who had sprung from the box at
Edith's order, "do you stand by the gate, an' I'll tickle that feller
with this whip, an' see how he likes it."

The driver was a stout, solid, muscular fellow, with broad shoulders and
bull-dog aspect. In his hand he flourished a heavy whip, and as he spoke
his eyes sought out some part of the porter's person at which he might
take aim. As he spoke the porter became aware of this second assailant,
and a dark and malignant frown lowered over his evil face. He slowly
drew from his breast a large clasp-knife which was as formidable as a
dagger, and opening this, he held it significantly before him.

But now a new turn was given to the progress of affairs. Had the porter
said nothing, Miss Plympton might have overcome her fears far enough to
accompany Edith; but his menacing looks and words, and these
preparations for a struggle, were too much.

"Edith, my child, my dearest, do not! do not! I can not go; I will not.
See these men; they will kill one another. John, come away. Driver, go
back to the box. Come away at once. Do you hear, John?"

John did hear, and after some hesitation concluded to obey. He stepped
back from the gate, and stood awaiting the progress of events. The
driver also stood, waiting further orders.

"Edith dearest," said Miss Plympton, "nothing would induce me to go
through those gates. You must not go."

"I'm sure," said Edith, "I shall be very sorry if you will not come;
but, for my own part, I am quite resolved to go. Don't be afraid. Come."

Miss Plympton shuddered and shook her head.

"Well," said Edith, "perhaps it will be as well for you to wait, since
you are so agitated; and if you really will not come, you can drive back
to the village. At any rate, I can see you to-morrow, and I will drive
down for you the first thing."

Miss Plympton looked mournfully at Edith.

"And you, Richards," said Edith, looking at her maid, "I suppose it is
no use for me to ask you. I see how it is. Well, never mind. I dare say
she needs you more than I do; and to-morrow will make all right. I see
it only distresses you for me to press you so I will say no more.
Good-by for the present."

Edith held out her hand. Miss Plympton took it, let it go, and folding
Edith in her arms, she burst into tears.

"I'm afraid--I'm afraid," said she.

"What of?" said Edith.

"About you," moaned Miss Plympton.

"Nonsense," said Edith. "I shall call on you to-morrow as soon as you
are up."

Miss Plympton sighed.

Edith held out her hand to her maid, Richards, and kindly bade her
good-by. The girl wept bitterly, and could not speak. It was an unusual
thing for Edith to do, and was rather too solemn a proceeding in view of
a short separation for one night, and this struck Edith herself. But who
knows what one night may bring forth?

Edith now left them, and, passing through the gate, she stood and waved
her hand at them. The porter followed and shut the gate. Miss Plympton,
the maid, the driver, and John all stood looking after Edith with uneasy
faces. Seeing that, she forced a smile, and finding that they would not
go till she had gone, she waved a last adieu and entered the brougham.
As she did so she heard the bolt turn in the lock as the porter fastened
the gate, and an ominous dread arose within her. Was this a
presentiment? Did she have a dim foreshadowing of the future? Did she
conjecture how long it would be before she passed through that gate
again, and how and wherefore? It matters not. Other thoughts soon came,
and the porter jumping into the seat, drove rapidly off.

Edith found herself carried along through lordly avenues, with giant
trees, the growth of centuries; rising grandly on either side and
overarching above, and between which long vistas opened, where the eye
could take in wide glades and sloping meadows. Sometimes she caught
sight of eminences rising in the distance covered with groves, and along
the slopes herds of deer sometimes came bounding. Finally there came to
view a broad lawn, with a pond in the centre, beyond which arose a
stately edifice which Edith recognized as the home of her childhood.

It needed only one glance, however, to show Edith that a great change
had taken place since those well-remembered days of childhood. Every
where the old order and neatness had disappeared, and now in all
directions there were the signs of carelessness and neglect. The once
smooth lawn was now overgrown with tall grass; the margin of the pond
was filled with rushes, and its surface with slime; some of the windows
of the Hall were out, and some of the chimney-pots were broken; while
over the road grass had been allowed to grow in many places. Edith
recognized all this, and an involuntary sigh escaped her. The carriage
at length stopped, and she got out and ascended the steps to the door of
the house.

The door was open, and an ungainly-looking negro servant was standing in
the hall.

"Who has charge of this house?" asked Edith. "Is there a housekeeper?"

The servant grinned.

"Housekeepa, miss? Yes, miss, dar's Missa Dunbar."

"Call the housekeeper, then," said Edith, "and tell her that I am
waiting for her in the drawing-room."

The servant went off, and Edith then entered the drawing-room.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER V.


THE STRANGE INMATES OF DALTON HALL.

In that well-remembered drawing-room there was much that renewed the
long past grief of childhood, and nothing whatever to soothe the sorrow
of the present. Looking around, Edith found many things the same as she
once remembered them; but still there were great changes--changes, too,
which were of the same nature as those which she had noticed outside.
Every thing showed traces of carelessness and long neglect. The seats of
many of the handsome, richly carved chairs were ruined. Costly vases
had disappeared. Dust covered every thing. Books and ornaments which lay
around were soiled and spoiled. In that apparently deserted house there
seemed to have been no one for years who cared to preserve the original
grace and elegance of its decorations. But Edith did not have a very
long time to give to her survey of this room, for in a few minutes she
heard the rustle of a dress, and, turning, she saw a woman approaching
who was evidently the housekeeper.

Edith was prepared to see some woman who might be in keeping with these
desolate surroundings and with the ruffian porter at the gate--some
coarse, insolent female; and she had also prepared herself to encounter
any rudeness with fortitude. But the first sight of Mrs. Dunbar was
enough to show her that her anticipations were completely unfounded.

She was a woman might have been about fifty, and even older. The outline
of her features showed marks of former beauty and the general air of her
face was altogether above the rank of a household domestic. The
expression was one of calm, strong self-control, of dignity, and of
resolution; at the same time there was in her dark, earnest eyes a
certain vigilant outlook, as of one who is on guard at all times; and
her gaze as she fixed it upon Edith was one of searching, eager, yet
most cautious and wary examination. On the whole, this woman excited
some surprise in Edith; and while she was gratified at finding in her
one who was not out of the reach of respect, she yet was perplexed at
the calm and searching scrutiny of which she was the object. But she did
not now take any time to think about this. A vague idea occurred to her
that Mrs. Dunbar, like many other housekeepers, was one of that numerous
class who "have seen better days;" so, after the first look, she felt
sufficiently satisfied, and advancing a step or two to meet her, she
frankly held out her hand.

The housekeeper took it, and said, simply, "Welcome to Dalton Hall."

"Thank you," said Edith. "If I had met you before, I might have been
spared some humiliation. But I need not talk of that. I am very tired
and very faint. I have traveled all day and have met with gross insult
at my own gate. I want food and rest. Will you have the kindness, then,
to take me to my own room at once, and then, get me a cup of tea?"

Mrs. Dunbar had not removed her earnest eyes from Edith; and even after
she had ceased speaking she still looked at her for a few moments in the
same way without answering.

"We did not know that you were coming so soon," said she at length; "and
I can not tell you how I regret what has happened. It was too hard for
you. But we were taken by surprise. I entreat you not to suppose that
any thing but kindness was intended."

Edith looked now at Mrs. Dunbar with an earnest scrutiny that was fully
equal to the searching gaze of the former. Mrs. Dunbar's tone was
cordial and lady-like, but Edith felt repugnance at her use of the word
"we." By that little word she at once identified herself with Wiggins,
and made herself in part responsible for the scene at the gate.

"Kindness," said she, "is a strange word to use in connection with that
scene, when I found myself forced to part with the only mother that I
have known since my own mamma died."

Mrs. Dunbar looked at her in silence, and there came over her face a
strange, patient expression that at any other time would have excited
Edith's sympathy and pity. Some reply seemed to rise to her lips, but
if it was so, it was instantly checked; and after a moment's hesitation
she said, in a low voice.

"It is cheerless in this room. If you will come with me I will take you
where you can he more comfortable."

Saying this, she led the way out, and Edith followed, feeling a little
perplexed at Mrs. Dunbar's manner, and trying to understand how it was
that she was so identified with Wiggins. She thought she could see an
evident kindliness toward herself, but how that could coexist with the
treatment which she had received at the gates was rather a puzzle.

Mrs. Dunbar led the way up to the second story, and along a corridor
toward the right wing. Here she came to a room in the front of the house
which looked out upon the park, and commanded an extensive view. There
was a well-furnished bedroom off this room, to which Mrs. Dunbar at once
led her.

"If we had only received notice that you were coming," said she, "you
would have met with a better reception."

Edith said nothing, for once more the word "we" jarred unpleasantly upon
her.

"Shall you have any objection to occupy this room for to-night?" asked
Mrs. Dunbar.

"Thank you," said Edith, "none whatever; but I should like very much to
have my luggage. It was taken back to Dalton."

"Taken back?"

"Yes. Miss Plympton was not admitted, and my luggage was on the coach."

Mrs. Dunbar made no reply for some moments.

"I should feel much obliged if you would send one of the servants to
fetch it," said Edith.

"I don't see why not," said Mrs. Dunbar, in a hesitating voice.

"And have you any writing materials?" asked Edith. "I should like to
send a few lines to Miss Plympton."

Mrs. Dunbar looked at her with one of those strange, searching glances
peculiar to her, and after some hesitation said, "I will look."

"Thank you," said Edith, and turned away. Mrs. Dunbar then left her, and
did not return for some time. At length she made her appearance,
followed by the black servant, who carried a tray. A table was laid in
the outer room, and a bountiful repast spread there. Edith did not eat
much, however. She sat sipping a cup of tea, and thinking profoundly,
while Mrs. Dunbar took a seat a little on one side, so as to be
unobserved, from which position she watched Edith most closely. It was
as though she was studying the character of this young girl so as to see
what its promise might be. And if Mrs. Dunbar had any knowledge of the
world, one thing must have been plainly manifest to her in that
examination, and that was that this young girl was not to be managed or
controlled after the fashion of most of her kind, but would require very
difficult and very peculiar treatment if she were to be bent to the will
of others. Mrs. Dunbar seemed to recognize this, and the discovery
seemed to create distress, for a heavy sigh escaped her.

He leaned his head on his hands, in one of those stern struggles
which age a man in a few minutes, as breaths of frost wither the
freshest leaves.

He invoked the Spirit of Love--he called forth Marguerite, and she stood
beside him.

He saw her with her cheek paler than when he had parted from her; he saw
her bosom heaving with sighs instead of love; he heard her soft whisper
in his ear, and he thought that whisper expressed assent--that for
him, she too was willing to relinquish the home and the friends
of her childhood.

Ay, is it not ever so?

Invoke whom we may in hours of trial, does not the oracle take its tone
from our own wishes? Fond and futile pretense to invoke the Spirit of
Love to decide where love is interested! As Marguerite seemed to stand
beside Dumiger he lost sight of ambition, and all its pomp and
circumstance; all he asked was to be free.

"Give me the paper," he said in a firm voice: "the clock is yours, and the
principle of the movement is to be found engraved on a small plate under
the mainspring."

If he had seen the smile of triumph which passed over that man's
countenance, he would have hesitated.

The deed was done: the man put his materials and his paper into his
pocket again.

"Now," he said, rising to go, "the third day's post will find you free;
and take my advice, leave Dantzic soon. The people will be irritated
at being deprived of their master-piece. I would not have you trust
to their render mercies; for that matter, it is well for you that you
are safe in prison. Remember this advice, for I know the Dantzickers
as well as you do."
"Stay, stay one moment," cried Dumiger, as the stranger was about to
leave the cell, "who told you so much about me? How did you obtain
this list of debts?

How came you to hear of Marguerite, and Carl, and Krantz? Surely," and he
passed his hand across his brow like a man who is pained by the
intensity of a ray of light after having been long in darkness--"tell
me before you go, what does this mean?" And he caught a firm hold of
the man's cloak.

"There is no reason why I should not tell you the truth now," said he,
buttoning his coat tightly over the papers. "I was sent for by the
Grand Master, who engaged me to obtain the sale of your clock at any
price. And he gave me good inducements to undertake the job."
The whole scheme broke on Dumiger's mind.

"And with what object?" he gasped forth; "tell me that."

"To get rid of your competition," said the man quietly. "After yours there
is no doubt that his son's is the best; and, therefore, when yours is
sold to Hambro', his will be prized in Dantzic. As for me, I shall get
rewarded for my exertions, both by the Grand Master your noble count,
and my own city. Here is the truth of the matter," said he; "now let me
go."

"Let you go, miscreant!" exclaimed Dumiger, "never, until you return me
that paper. Let you go! I will follow you to death rather. You betrayed
me into this act; it was not my own free will. I am the victim of the
basest conspiracy. I have been induced to sell my birthright--I prefer
to remain in prison--I love my townspeople--I will not be free on these
conditions! Give me back my bond!"
"Never!" said the man, putting himself into an attitude of defense.

And he did wisely, for there was desperation in Dumiger's eye. He waited
a moment, and then with a maniac's strength he flew at the man, but he
found a powerful and vigorous antagonist. The stranger, who had appeared
half decrepit and aged, rose up in all the strength of youth.
In a moment he had grasped Dumiger's arms, very coolly taken out
a handkerchief, and in spite of all Dumiger's efforts bound his hands
together. After he had performed this operation he drew the document
again from his pocket, so as to be well assured that it was correctly
signed, and smiled as he said to Dumiger--
"You know that signature?"

"Scoundrel! miscreant!"

were the only words to which Dumiger could give utterance.

"And now, fellow-citizen," said the man, "I bid you farewell. Keep your
temper; these sober arts should have taught you this kind of
self-command. You will soon be free. As for your arms, I dare not untie
them now, but I will send the guard to you. Now, holloa, guard
without there!"

and he left the cell.

What did all this mean? A mystery seemed to be encircling Dumiger which
he could not penetrate. He knew there was danger near him, but was
unable to define its extent. Only one thing was now certain--he had
sold that clock on which years of toil had been bestowed, and not in
vain. He had but a few days since contemplated certain success, now
how far it was from him! And Hamburgh--to be great and ennobled there,
what did that signify to him?

How long would it not take for him, the inhabitant of the great
rival city, to be admitted into this new society?

No, he had made an error which could never be recalled; he had broken
the ties which were once so dear to him. Dumiger now learned
the great truth, that it is only the opinion of the few with whom
we are most intimate that we care for. It is nothing to be great amongst
those with whom we have no sympathies, no affections in common. The
kind word from one lip which we love is far more to be prized than the
loudest acclamations of thousands to whom we are indifferent.

CHAPTER V.

The day at last arrived for the triennial exhibition of the productions
of Dantzic art, on which day the council had agreed that the prize for
the clock was to be adjudged. It was a great _fête_ for the town. At
an early hour of the morning the inhabitants began to
decorate their houses with tapestry, and to hang garlands over the
door-posts. All classes prepared their dresses of brightest colors, and
their gayest, happiest smiles. And none was happier than Marguerite, for
Dumiger had written to tell her that on the next day he was certain
to be free; but he had not ventured to inform her that the clock
was sold to Hamburgh. Still, although the deed of sale was irrevocable,
his feelings would not permit him to believe that the excellence
of his work would remain unknown to his towns-people; he felt
convinced that the strangers vanity would induce him to make use
of the secret confided to him, so he wrote to Marguerite that all
would go right.

Carl and Krantz arrived early in the morning to accompany her to the
great hall. She had within her a secret which she would not have
disclosed to the universe,--the secret of her husband's success, of his
fame and future happiness. So far Dumiger had informed her that there
was an intrigue against him, in which the Grand Master was the principal:
he explained to her that the object the Grand Master had in view was
to obtain the prize and its accompanying honors for his own son.

Carl and Krantz undertook to protect her through the crowd, and it
was with an abundant feeling of confidence that she dressed for
the ceremonial.

She wore her hair braided round her head; a bodice, which showed
the beauty and shape of her form, of scarlet cloth, attached by
threads of gold across the shirt, which was of the softest and most
delicate material; the short blue petticoat, which reached some way
below the knee, but did not descend so far as to conceal the ankle,
the symmetry of which was well-defined by the silk stocking.

The shoe might have stirred the envy of any _grisette_ in Paris--a class
which was, even in those days, supposed to enjoy a monopoly of taste and
refinement.

There was a modesty combined with refinement and strength of character
in the appearance of Marguerite which would have distinguished her
in any crowd.

She was a being for love and sunshine; but one who, at the same
time, would have dared much for him she loved.

The kind and generous are ever gallant, and rarely are the beautiful
unworthy.

Carl and Krantz were also dressed out in their gayest costumes. It
would have been hard to have decided which was the predominant
color in the dresses of these two worthy citizens; they would have
rivaled any tulip bed in a Dutch garden, and perfectly dazzled
Marguerite when they entered the room.

At length the last touch was given to the toilette, and they sallied
forth.

Already the streets were so crowded that it was difficult to move
through them; but Carl and Krantz were determined, energetic fellows,
and what with their elbows and Marguerite's bright smiles, after
incurring a few risks of some jokes on Carl's extravagant appearance,
they reached the great hall.

The street in front of the Courthouse was lined with the burgher guard,
stationed there to keep back the crowd; but Marguerite had an order
for admittance at a private entrance, so, escorted by her cavalier,
she ascended the staircase.

When she entered the hall she was struck with awe and astonishment.
The whole of that enormous space, with the exception of the portion
railed off for the competitors and the dais where the council were
sitting, was crowded by a dense mass of people: along the sides of
the vast edifice, and up to the very roof, were arranged all the
various productions of national art.

Nothing can be pictured more beautiful than the combination of rich
and varied colors, or more curious than the forms which art and
genius had given them: here were dyes which might have rivaled those
of Tyre, and fabrics of finer texture than a Penelope could have
woven.

At one end, toward which Marguerite's eyes were most anxiously turned,
the models of the clocks were arranged.
Dumiger's was placed in the center, for it was at the same time the
largest model, and contained the most elaborate and complicated
machinery; but, alas!

the works remained still, while all the others were in motion, and
showed in the smallest space the movements of the heavenly bodies,
and the progress of time.

If Dumiger's meant anything more than a confused mass of machinery,
it could not for a moment be doubted that it was the work of highest
genius exhibited, but in its quiescent state it contrasted
disadvantageously with the admirable systems revolving round it.

Marguerite held her breath while she gazed; neither did she perceive
how much attention she herself had awakened--the moment for vanity
had passed, her present interests lay far deeper.

Immediately above her the Grand Council, with the Grand Master,
were sitting, dressed in their robes of state.

The Count Albrecht wore his cordon of the Fleece, and looked every
inch a grand master; the anxiety for his son's success was
apparent in the nervous glances which he cast around him. Behind, and
amid the retainers, stood the dark, designing-looking stranger, who
held in his hand the fate of Dumiger.

The heralds proclaimed silence, and then the Grand Master rose to
read the decision of the council. It commenced with reciting the
list of the competitors, and when it mentioned Dumiger's name, it said,
"the work is imperfect, and therefore must be withdrawn."
"It is not imperfect," cried two stentorian voices from the farther end
of the hall.

The voices proceeded from Carl and Krantz, whose excitement could
no longer be retained.

"No! it is not imperfect," said the gentler voice of Marguerite.

All eyes were turned toward the spot whence that voice proceeded.
Marguerite nearly fainted to find herself the object of so much
attention.

"Keep your courage," whispered Carl. "Tell them that Dumiger will
soon be free, and the works put in motion. I will tell them for you," he
exclaimed, and he began to speak, when the mysterious stranger
stepped forth.

"Stay," he said, "let me touch the works of this clock--the secret is
mine."
He forced his way through the crowd, looked carefully over the machinery,
opened a secret spring, arranged two small wheels, on which the accurate
movement of the whole machinery depended, and immediately it was
all in motion.

The proceeding was watched with intense interest by all. The stranger's
eye gleamed with delight, for he was anxious, with the true spirit
of Hamburg jealousy, that the people of Dantzic should feel the value
of what they were about to lose.

It was indeed a marvelous piece of workmanship: the planets all revolved
in their regular order, figures of exquisite workmanship appeared and
disappeared to mark the seconds, and the dial plate was of elaborate
beauty. The people for some time stood entranced in wonder.

At last they exclaimed, as with one voice--

"It is a work worthy of Dantzic--and Dumiger has won!

Dumiger forever'."
If Marguerite had nearly fainted from fear, she was now pale with
delight.

"Dumiger, Dumiger forever!"

again shouted the crowd; "where is the laurel? where is the triumph?
Greatest amongst his citizens, Dumiger has won!"
But at that moment the stranger came forward with a paper in his
hand.

The Count's face, which had been overspread with anger and shame at these
shouts, was again lit up with hope, for after Dumiger's his son's
was evidently the best.

"You mistake, my friends," said this man: "Dumiger is not a citizen
of Dantzic, but of Hamburg, and the clock belongs to that noblest
of free cities."

"Madman! fool!" burst from the astonished crowd; "we all know Dumiger,
his family are eminent in the list of our freemen--you are mad! Grand
Master, proclaim that Dumiger has won the prize, that Dumiger is
great."

Joy thrilled through Marguerite's frame.

The Grand Master rose, and his voice trembled with anxiety and
secret pleasure as he spoke.

"It is too true," he said; "the clock is sold to Hamburg, and Dumiger
has lost his rights of citizenship here by becoming a freeman of that
town. The prize, therefore, in accordance with the decision of the
council, is adjudged to the second--to my son."

Then the anger of the people rose, wild and savage; in one moment, like
the bursting of a thunder-cloud, the whole aspect of the place had
changed.

"Show us the deed!" they exclaimed.

The stranger took it and held it up. There was no mistaking it; it was
headed by the arms of Hamburg, and signed by Dumiger. The storm of
indignation had subsided for a moment, but only as it seemed to gain
additional strength.

"Tear him in pieces--he shall not have the clock.

Down with Dumiger--crucify the man who could prefer the freedom of Hamburg
to the honors of Dantzic. Down with him!"
And the people tore up the benches, drove back the burgher guard; some
of the boldest dashed on the platform; the Grand Council had to
escape, carrying the stranger with them.

The mob tore out of the hall, and told their friends outside--anger
led to anger, the passions rose like the waves at the equinox.

       Nothing could stop the mob, from so apparently trifling a cause a
tumult was created; the jealousy of the townsmen now appeared--that
jealousy, smothered and subdued for so many years, burst forth in
this madness.

Poor Marguerite had fainted.

Carl and Krantz, by herculean exertions, dragged her through the
mob; she was taken to a small room over the great hall, and laid
there until the storm should be appeased.

It did not seem likely to be so. Unfortunately, one of the guards
had in the tumult struck a burgher; in some of the smaller streets
they were even now fighting; but the crowd in the great square
seemed to have a firmer purpose, there was a gradual calm. At last
one man climbed up the statue in the Center of the square.

"Where is Dumiger?" he asked.

And another voice answered, "He is in the debtor's prison."
"We will go and lead him to his triumph," was the dark and threatening
reply of the people, who now moved forward in columns.

CHAPTER VI.

The two days which elapsed since the interview with the stranger had
been passed by Dumiger in great misery. He blamed himself deeply for
having been so easily entrapped into what he feared would prove a
snare, and very foolishly, as we have seen, he wrote to Marguerite
that she had everything to hope, as he still retained the desire
of being honored by his fellow-townsmen, although they were not to
enjoy the fruit of his labors.

On the eventful morning which has been described, Dumiger arose
full of hope, his triumph was to be secured; and in the evening he
even entertained a secret impression and belief that the people
would not permit the clock to be removed, and that the error he had
made might be retrieved by their energetic wills.

He heard the bands of music playing in the distance. The merry chimes
floated over the water, and bade him good speed. He thought that he
could even discern the buzz of enjoyment, and the shout of anticipated
triumph. He took out the last letter which Marguerite had written to
him, and pressed it to his heart; that day, he thought, was to see
them united never to be parted again.

What sound was that?--Was it the wind? No, the murmur of many voices,
the tramp of a thousand feet, shook the drawbridge. He heard his own
name called out. Yes, it is! it surely cannot be an error; it is Dumiger
they are invoking. Now there can be no mistake, the crowd unite in one
loud cry,--
"Where is Dumiger?"
"I am here, I am here," he shrieks out; "Open the gates."

What could it mean? the guards were resisting. There is a shot fired--is
this the way in which a triumph is conducted? There is a pause--a
parley.

"We want the man Dumiger, the prisoner," exclaims one.

"Good, you shall have him. Let but a few enter," says the lieutenant of
the tower, "and the guard shall withdraw."
Immediately there is a loud rush on the stair, not the tramp, tramp, of
regular troops.

"Here, here!" exclaims Dumiger; "here am I, my friends! Welcome,
welcome!" and he rushes to embrace the first who enters.

"Back, traitor!" answers the man.

Dumiger tumbles against the wall in terror and astonishment.

"Yes, you are the traitor," continued he who acted the part of
leader of the motley crowd; "you have sold your birthright--you
have betrayed our interests.

What punishment is fit for such a usurer?"

"Down, down with him," cried the mob.

The leaders consulted together for one moment.

"My good people," continued the same man, "we have taken counsel,
and you shall redress.

We will not take this man's life. This is what we decide,--We will
keep the clock to be the glory of our town, but he shall never see it,
neither shall he have it any more in his power to make another equal to
it or better, for we will put out his eyes."
"Yes, yes," vociferated the mob, "it is excellent. Put out his eyes
at once."
Before Dumiger could collect his scattered senses two strong, stalwart
men had seized him.

In spite of his shrieks and entreaties they threw him down on the
straw; one more savage than the rest drew forth a small knife--agony
on agony!

horror on horror! in one moment to the living man there was Cimmerian
darkness. The deed was done, and they who had done it looked on with
horror and fear at their own crime.
There were no shrieks to break the fearful silence: a few inarticulate
sobs of heart wrung from his misery were all that was heard, and
the mob withdrew silent and repentant.

Carl had followed at a distance. He had made frantic, but ineffectual
efforts to enter the cell; when the crowd dispersed he went up the stairs
without impediment, and there he found his friend extended. He raised
him, he bore him home with those sightless, bleeding orbs. He comes,
Marguerite; hasten forth to meet your husband: let the light of your
love bless him, for the light of Heaven has departed forever.

CONCLUSION.

There is great excitement in Dantzic, for the noble clock, which has been
for ten years the marvel of Germany,--the clock which was made by the
cunningest artificers who followed Dumiger's model, has stopped.

No one can arrange it; the model was broken up as a jealous precaution.
There is but one who understands it--who can regulate the wondrous movement;
that is he who constructed it.

Yes. the Council will go to Dumiger. They seek his house; they repent of
the fearful crime they committed.

"Dumiger, come forth!" they exclaim. "Forgive us our offense. Greatest
of citizens, all honors and rewards shall be heaped upon you. Regulate
this great work, prized above all others in this city, for which we
contended for five years with Hamburg. Stand forth in glory and
honor!"

And a man, young in years, but decrepit in suffering, appears,
supported by two friends. The partner of his hopes and fears is long
since dead. The streets ring with applause as he appears, and many
kneel to kiss his hand--ay, some his feet. But all he asks is to be
led first to Marguerite's grave.

There, in the presence of thousands, he prays for strength; and
then he desires them to conduct him to the clock-tower.

When he appears outside, the air is rent with shouts. "Dumiger,
Dumiger, the first of the citizens!" Oh, popular feeling, at once
base and baseless!

He seems to see the works again; he climbs up and touches every part of
the wonderful construction--his hand has found the secret of the
movement, again it is in order, and the pride of Dantzic is saved.

He stands still for some minutes. A god could not have been more worshiped,
or a prophet looked grander.

Again his hand is on the movement--crash, crash,--the slight spring on
which the whole machinery depended is rent asunder by his own hand;
the clock falls to pieces, never to be repaired.

At the same moment there is a fall, a fearful groan, and Dumiger
lies on the pavement a bleeding corpse.

The clock and its maker have ceased to exist.

Such is the legend, and from that day there has been no clock in
the Dom of Dantzic

.

* * * * *

THE SHIP "EXTRAVAGANCE."
Oh, Extravagance saileth in climes bright and warm.

She is built for the sunlight and not for the storm; Her anchor is gold,
and her mainmast is pride-- Every sheet in the wind doth she
dashingly ride!

But _Content_ is a vessel not built for display, Though she's ready
and steady--come storm when it may.

So give us Content as life's channel we steer.

If our Pilot be Caution, we've little to fear!

Oh!

Extravagance saileth 'mid glitter and show, As if fortune's rich
tide never ebbed in its flow; But see her at night when her gold-light
is spent, When her anchor is lost, and her silken sails rent; When
the wave of destruction her shatter'd side drinks, And the billows--ha!

ha!

--laugh and shout as she sinks.
No! give us _Content_, as life's channel we steer.
While our Pilot is _Caution_, there's little to fear.

--Charles Swain.

* * * * *

LAUGHING IN THE SLEEVE.

--A writer in _Notes and Queries_ gives an instance of Curry's wit,
introduced after a defeat in a conversational contest with Lady
Morgan.

"It was the fashion then for ladies to wear very short sleeves; and
Lady Morgan, albeit not a young woman, with true provincial
exaggeration, wore none--a mere strap over her shoulders. Curry was
walking away from her little coterie, when she called out, 'Ah! come
back, Mr.

Curry, and acknowledge that you are fairly beaten.' 'At any rate,' said
he, turning round, 'I have this consolation, you can't laugh at
me in your sleeve!"

* * * * *
An antiquarian discovery has just been made in Kremusch, near
Treplitz, in Bohemia.

He evidently
intended to keep her away from all communication with the outside world.
And she--what could she do? How could she let Miss Plympton know? How
could she get out? No doubt Wiggins would contrive to keep all avenues
of escape closed to her as this one was. Even the walls would be
watched, so that she should not clamber over.

Among the most disheartening of her discoveries was the incorruptible
fidelity of the servants of Wiggins. Twice already had she tried to
bribe them, but on each occasion she had failed utterly. The black
servant and the porter were each alike beyond the reach of her gold.

Her mind was now agitated and distressed. In her excitement she could
not yet return to the Hall, but still hoped that she might escape,
though the hope was growing faint indeed. She felt humiliated by the
defeat of her attempts upon the honesty of the servants. She was
troubled by the thought of her isolation, and did not know what might be
best to do.

One thing now seemed evident, and this was that she had a better chance
of escaping at this time than she would have afterward. If she was to
be watched, the outlook could not yet be as perfect or as well organized
as it would afterward be. And among the ways of escape she could think
of nothing else than the wall. That wall, she thought, must certainly
afford some places which she might scale. She might find some gate in a
remote place which could afford egress. To this she now determined to
devote herself.

With this purpose on her mind, she sought to find her way through the
trees to the wall. This she was able to do without much difficulty, for
though the trees grew thick, there was no underbrush, but she was able
to walk along without any very great trouble. Penetrating in this way
through the trees, she at length came to the wall. But, to her great
disappointment, she found its height here quite as great as it had been
near the gate, and though in one or two places trees grew up which threw
their branches out over it, yet those trees were altogether inaccessible
to her.

Still she would not give up too quickly, but followed the wall for a
long distance. The further she went, however, the more hopeless did her
search seem to grow. The ground was unequal, sometimes rising into
hills, and at other times sinking into valleys; but in all places,
whether hill or valley, the wall arose high, formidable, not to be
scaled by one like her. As she looked at it the thought came to her that
it had been arranged for that very purpose, so that it should not be
easily climbed, and so it was not surprising that a barrier which might
baffle the active poacher or trespasser should prove insuperable to a
slender girl like her.

She wandered on, however, in spite of discouragement, in the hope of
finding a gate. But this search was as vain as the other. After
walking for hours, till her feeble limbs could scarcely support her any
longer, she sank down exhausted, and burst into tears.

For a long time she wept, overwhelmed by accumulated sorrow and
despondency and disappointment. At length she roused herself, and drying
her eyes, looked up and began to think of returning to the Hall.

To her amazement she saw the black servant, Hugo, standing not far away.
As she raised her eyes he took off his cap, and grinned as usual. The
sight of him gave Edith a great shock, and excited new suspicions and
fears within her.

Had she been followed?

She must have been. She had been watched and tracked. All her desperate
efforts had been noted down to be reported to Wiggins--all her long and
fruitless search, her baffled endeavors, her frustrated hopes!

It was too much.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER VII.


A PARLEY WITH THE JAILERS.

Coming as it did close upon her baffled efforts to escape, this
discovery of Hugo proclaimed to Edith at once most unmistakably the fact
that she was a prisoner. She was walled in. She was under guard and
under surveillance. She could not escape without the consent of Wiggins,
nor could she move about without being tracked by the spy of Wiggins. It
was evident also that both the porter and the black servant Hugo were
devoted to their master, and were beyond the reach both of persuasion
and of bribery.

The discovery for a moment almost overwhelmed her once more; but the
presence of another forced her to put a restraint upon her feelings. She
tried to look unconcerned, and turning away her eyes, she sat in the
same position for some time longer. But beneath the calm which her
pride forced her to assume her heart throbbed painfully, and her
thoughts dwelt with something almost like despair upon her present
situation.

But Edith had a strong and resolute soul in spite of her slender and
fragile frame; she had also an elastic disposition, which rose up
swiftly from any prostration, and refused to be cast down utterly. So
now this strength of her nature asserted itself; and triumphing over her
momentary weakness, she resolved to go at once and see Wiggins himself.
With these subordinates she had nothing to do. Her business was with
Wiggins, and with Wiggins alone.

Yet the thought of an interview had something in it which was strangely
repugnant to Edith. The aspect of her two jailers seemed to her to be
repellent in the extreme. That white old man, with the solemn mystery
of his eyes, that weird old woman, with her keen, vigilant
outlook--these were the ones who now held her in restraint, and with
these she had to come in conflict. In both of them there seemed
something uncanny, and Edith could not help feeling that in the lives of
both of these there was some mystery that passed her comprehension.

Still, uncanny or not, whatever might be the mystery of her jailers,
they remained her jailers and nothing less. It was against this thought
that the proud soul of Edith chafed and fretted. It was a thought which
was intolerable. It roused her to the intensest indignation. She was the
lady of Dalton Hall; these who thus dared to restrain her were her
subordinates. This Wiggins was not only her inferior, but he had been
the enemy of her life. Could she submit to fresh indignities or wrongs
at the hands of one who had already done so much evil to her and hers?
She could not.

That white old man with his mystery, his awful eyes, his venerable face,
his unfathomable expression, and the weird old woman, his associate,
with her indescribable look and her air of watchfulness, were both
partners in this crime of unlawful imprisonment. They dared to put
restrictions upon the movements of their mistress, the lady of Dalton
Hall. Such an attempt could only be the sign of a desperate mind, and
the villainy of their plan was of itself enough to sink them deep in
Edith's thoughts down to an abyss of contempt and indignation. This
indignation roused her, and her eagerness to see Miss Plympton impelled
her to action. Animated by such feelings and motives, she delayed no
longer, but at once returned to the Hall to see Wiggins himself.

On her way back she was conscious of the fact that Hugo was following;
but she took no notice of it, as it was but the sequel to the preceding
events of the day. She entered the Hall, and finding Mrs. Dunbar, told
her to tell Wiggins that she wished to see him. After this she went down
to the dreary drawing-room, where she awaited the coming of her jailer.

The room was unchanged from what it had been on the preceding day. By
this time also Edith had noticed that there were no servants about
except Hugo. The drear desolation of the vast Hall seemed drearier from
the few inmates who dwelt there, and the solitude of the place made
it still more intolerable.

After some time Wiggins made his appearance. He came in slowly, with
his eyes fixed upon Edith, and the same expression upon his face which
she had noticed before. A most singular man he was, whoever or whatever
he might be. That hoary head and that venerable face might have awed her
under other circumstances, and the unfathomable mystery of its
expression might have awakened intense interest and sympathy; but as it
was, Edith had no place for any other feelings than suspicion,
indignation, and scorn.

"What do you mean by this treatment?" said Edith, abruptly. "It seems as
though you are trying to imprison me. I have told you that I wish to
call on Miss Plympton. I can not get a carriage, and I am not allowed
to leave this place on foot. You are responsible for this, and I tell
you now that I must go, and at once."

At this peremptory address Wiggins stood looking at her with his usual
expression, and for some moments made no reply.

"I did not know," said he at length, in a slow and hesitating voice,
"that you wished to leave so soon."

"But I told you so. You drove away Miss Plympton yesterday from my
gates. I promised to call on her this morning. She is anxiously
expecting me. I must go to her." Wiggins again waited for a few moments
before replying, and at length said, in an abstracted tone:

"No, no; it can not be--it can not be!"

"Can not be!" repeated Edith. "It seems to me that you are trying to
carry out a most extraordinary course of action toward me. This looks
like restraint or imprisonment."

Wiggins looked at her with an expression of earnest entreaty on his
face, with which there was also mingled an air of indescribable sadness.

"It is necessary," said he, in a mournful voice. "Can you not bring
yourself to bear with it? You do not know what is at stake. Some day
all will be explained."

"This is silly," exclaimed Edith. "No explanation is possible. I insist
on leaving this place at once. If you refuse to let me go, it will he
worse for you than for me."

"You do not know what you ask," said Wiggins.

"I ask you," said Edith, sternly and proudly, "to open those gates to
your mistress."

Wiggins shook his head.

"I ask you to open those gates," continued Edith. "If you let me go now,
I promise not to prosecute you--at least for this. I will forget to-day
and yesterday."

Saying this, she looked at him inquiringly. But Wiggins shook his head
as before. "It can not be," said he.

"You decide, then, to refuse my demand?" said Edith, impatiently.

"I must," said Wiggins, with a heavy sigh. "It is necessary. All is at
stake. You do not know what you are doing."

"It is evident to me," said Edith, mastering herself by a strong effort,
"that you are playing a desperate game, but at the same time you are
trusting much to chance. Why did you wish me to come here? It was by the
merest chance that I decided to come. It was also by another chance
that I entered those gates which you now shut against my departure. Few
would have done it."

"Your presence seemed necessary to my plans," said Wiggins, slowly.
"What those plans are I can not yet confide to you. You are concerned in
them as much as I am. Opposition will be of no avail, and will only
injure you. But I hope you will not try to oppose me. I entreat you to
bear with me. I entreat you to try to put a little confidence in me. I
was your father's friend; and I now implore you, that daughter whom he
loved so dearly, for your father's sake--yes, and for the sake of your
sainted mother--not to--"

"This is mere hypocrisy," interrupted Edith. "My father was one with
whom one like you can have nothing in common. You add to your crimes by
this treatment of his daughter. What you have already been guilty of
toward him you alone know. If you hope for mercy hereafter, do not add
to your guilt."

"Guilt!" cried Wiggins, in an awful voice. He started back, and
regarded her with eyes of utter horror. "Guilt!" he repeated, in a voice
so low that it was scarcely above a whisper--"and she says that word!"

Edith looked at him with unchanged severity.

"You made a great mistake," said she, coldly and sternly, "when you
drove Miss Plympton away. If you hope to keep me imprisoned here, you
will only destroy yourself. I have a friend who knows you, and who will
know before evening that I am here under restraint. She will never rest
until she effects my deliverance. Have you counted on that?"

Wiggins listened attentively, as usual, to every word. The effort seemed
to give him pain, and the suggestion of her friend was undoubtedly most
unpleasant.

"No, I have not," said he. He spoke as though to himself. The candor of
this confession stimulated Edith to dwell to a greater extent upon this
subject.

"She was not willing for me to come in," said she. "She wished me not to
enter without a lawyer or the sheriff. If she finds that I am detained,
she will enter here in that way herself. She will deliver me in spite of
you. If she does not see me to-day, she will at once use every effort to
come to me. Your porters and your spies will be of no use against the
officers of the law."

At this Wiggins looked at the floor, and was evidently in a state of
perplexity. He stood in silence for some time, and Edith waited
impatiently for his answer, so as to learn what effect these last hints
had produced. At length Wiggins looked up. He spoke slowly and
mournfully.

"I am very sorry," said he. "I hope it will not come to that. I'm afraid
that I shall have to take you elsewhere."

These words fell upon Edith's ears ominously and threateningly. They
conveyed to her mind a menace dark and gloomy, and showed the full
determination of Wiggins to maintain at all hazards the control that he
had gained over her. Edith therefore was silent, and apprehensive of
evil. She was afraid that she had said too much. It might have been
better not to threaten, or to show her hand prematurely. It might be the
best plan to wait in silence and in patience for Miss Plympton. Wiggins
was desperate. He might take her away, as he darkly hinted, from this
place to some other where Miss Plympton could never find her.

She stood for some time in silence, with her mind full of such thoughts
as these. Wiggins waited for a few moments, and then turned and slowly
left the room. Edith said nothing, and made no effort to recall him, for
she now felt that her situation was growing serious, and that it would
be better for her to think it all over seriously, and not speak to
Wiggins again until she had decided upon some definite plan of action.
She therefore allowed him to take his departure, and soon afterward she
went to her own room, where she remained for hours in deep thought.

At length Mrs. Dunbar brought in dinner. After laying the table she
stood for a few moments in silence looking at Edith; but at length,
yielding to some sudden impulse she came forward, and as Edith looked up
in surprise, she exclaimed, with startling abruptness,

"Oh, how unfortunate! and oh, what a wretched mistake you are under! If
you had not come home so suddenly, all might have been well. We hoped
that you would be content and patient. Mr. Wiggins has plans of immense
importance; they require great quiet and seclusion. Oh, if you could
only have some faith in us!"

She stopped as abruptly as she had begun. This style of address from a
housekeeper seemed to Edith to be altogether too familiar, and she
resented it deeply. Besides, the identification of herself with Wiggins
put Mrs. Dunbar in an odious position in Edith's eyes.

"Mr. Wiggins's plans are of no consequence to me whatever," said she,
coldly.

"They are; they are of immense importance," cried Mrs. Dunbar.

Edith looked at her for a few moments with a cold stare of wonder, for
this volunteered advice seemed something like insolence, coming thus
from a subordinate. But she contented herself with answering in a quiet
tone:

"You are mistaken. Nothing is of importance to me but my liberty. It
will be very dangerous to deprive me of that. My friends will never
allow it. In Wiggins this attempt to put me under restraint is nothing
less than desperation. Think yourself how frantic he must be to hope to
be able to confine me here, when I have friends outside who will move
heaven and earth to come to me."

At this a look of uneasiness came over Mrs. Dunbar's face. It seemed to
Edith that this hint at friends without was the only thing that in any
way affected either of her jailers.

"The punishment for such a crime as unlawful imprisonment," continued
Edith, "is a severe one. If Wiggins has ever committed any crimes
before, this will only aggravate his guilt, and make his punishment the
worse."

At this Mrs. Dunbar stared at Edith with the same horror in her eyes
which Wiggins had lately shown.

"Crime?" she repeated. "Guilt? Punishment?  Oh, Heavens! Has it come to
this? This is terrible. Girl," she continued, with a frown, "you don't
know the dreadful nature of those words. You are a marplot. You have
come home to ruin every thing. But I thought so," she murmured to
herself. "I told him so. I said it would be ruin, but he would have his
way. And now--" The remainder of her remarks was inaudible. Suddenly
her manner changed. Her anger gave way once more to entreaty.

"Oh!" she said, "can nothing persuade you that we are your friends?
Trust us--oh, trust us! You will soon learn how we love you. He only
thinks of you. You are the final aim of all his plans."

Edith gave a light laugh. That she was the final aim of Wiggins's plans
she did not doubt. She saw now that plan clearly, as she thought. It was
to gain control of her for purposes of his own in connection with the
estate. Under such circumstances Mrs. Dunbar's entreaties seemed silly,
and to make any answer was absurd. She turned away and sat down at the
table. As for Mrs. Dunbar, she left the room.

Night came. Edith did not sleep; she could not. The day had been the
most eventful one of her life. The thought that she was a prisoner was
terrible. She could only sustain herself by the hope that Miss Plympton
would save her. But this hope was confronted by a dark fear which
greatly distressed her. It might take time for Miss Plympton to do any
thing toward releasing her. She knew that the law worked slowly: she did
not feel at all certain that it worked surely. Her father's fate rose
before her as a warning of the law's uncertainty and injustice. Could
she hope to be more fortunate than he had been?  Wiggins had passed his
life in the study of the law, and knew how to work it for his own
private ends. He had once succeeded in his dark plot against her father.
Might not his present "plan," about which he and his associate talked,
be equally successful?  Mrs. Dunbar had called her a "marplot." To mar
the plot of this man, and avenge upon him the wrongs of her father,
would be sweet indeed; but could it be possible for her to do it? That
was the question.

[Illustration: "CRIME! GUILT!"]

The next morning came, and Edith rose full of a new purpose. She thought
of her efforts on the preceding day, and concluded that she had made one
great mistake. She saw now that Miss Plympton had most probably called,
and had not been admitted. If she had only remained by the gate, she
could have seen her friend, and told her all. That she had not thought
of this before was now a matter of the deepest regret, and she could
only hope that it might not yet be too late. She determined to go to
the gates at once and watch.

She therefore hurried down to the gates as soon as she could. No efforts
were made to prevent her. She had feared that she might be locked up in
the Hall; but, to her surprise and relief, she was not. Such forbearance
made her situation still more perplexing. It was evident that Wiggins
hesitated about proceeding to extremities with her, and did not venture
as yet to exercise more than a general restraint.

Arriving at the gate, Edith sat down close by it on a seat in front of
the porter's lodge, and waited and watched. The gates were of iron bars,
so that it was easy to see through them, and the road ran in front. The
road was not much frequented, however. An occasional farmer's wagon or
solitary pedestrian formed the only life that was visible outside. The
porter watched her for some time in surprise, but said nothing. Hugo
came up after about half an hour and talked with the porter, after which
he loitered about within sight of Edith. Of all this, however, Edith
took no notice whatever; it was what she expected.

The hours of the day passed by, but there were no signs of Miss
Plympton. As hour after hour passed, Edith's hopes grew fainter and
fainter. She longed to ask the porter whether she had called or not, but
could not bring herself to do so--first, because she did not like to
destroy all hope; and secondly, because she did not wish to hold any
further communication with him.

She sat there all day long. Miss Plympton did not come. The hours passed
by. Evening came. She bad eaten nothing all day. She was faint and
weary, and almost in despair. But to wait longer was useless now; so she
rose from her seat, and with feeble footsteps returned to the house.

Early the next morning she returned to the gates to take up her station
as before and watch. She did not hope to see Miss Plympton now; for she
concluded that she had called already, had been turned back, and was now
perhaps engaged in arranging for her rescue. But Edith could not wait
for that. She determined to do something herself. She resolved to accost
all passers-by and tell them her situation. In this way she thought she
might excite the world outside, and lead to some interposition in her
behalf.

Full of this purpose, she went down to the gates. As she drew near, the
first sight of them sent a feeling of dismay to her heart. A change had
taken place. Something had been done during the night.

She drew nearer.

In a few moments she saw it all.

The gates had been boarded up during the night so that it was impossible
to see the road.

One look was enough. This last hope was destroyed. There was nothing to
be done here; and so, sick at heart, Edith turned back toward the Hall.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER VIII.


MISS PLYMPTON BAFFLED.

Meanwhile Miss Plympton had been undergoing various phases of feeling,
alternating between anxiety and hope, and terminating in a resolution
which brought forth important results. On the departure of Edith she had
watched her till her carriage was out of sight, and then sadly and
reluctantly had given orders to drive back to Dalton. On arriving there
she put up at the inn, and though full of anxiety, she tried to wait as
patiently as possible for the following day.

Accustomed to move among the great, and to regard them with a certain
reverence that pervades the middle classes in England, she tried first
of all to prevent any village gossip about Edith, and so she endeavored,
by warning and by bribery, to induce the maid, the footman, and the
driver to say nothing about the scene at the gates. Another day, she
hoped, would make it all right, and idle gossip should, never be allowed
to meddle with the name of Edith in any way.

That evening Edith's note was brought to her. On receiving it she read
it hurriedly, and then went down to see who had brought it. She saw the
porter, who told her that he had come for Miss Dalton's baggage. The
porter treated her with an effort to be respectful, which appeared to
Miss Plympton to be a good omen. She offered him a piece of gold to
propitiate him still further, but, to her amazement, it was declined.

"Thank ye kindly, mum," said he, touching his hat, "an' hope it's no
offense; but we beant allowed to take nothin' savin' an' except what he
gives us hisself."

A moment's surprise was succeeded by the thought that even this was of
good omen, since it seemed to indicate a sort of rough, bluff, sterling
honesty, which could not co-exist with a nature that was altogether bad.

Returning to her room, she once more read Edith's note. Its tone
encouraged her greatly. It seemed to show that all her fears had been
vain, and that, whatever the character of Wiggins might be, there could
be no immediate danger to Edith. So great, indeed, was the encouragement
which she received from this note that she began to think her fears
foolish, and to believe that in England no possible harm could befall
one in Edith's position. It was with such thoughts, and the hope of
seeing Edith on the following day, that she retired for the night.

Her sleep was refreshing, and she did not awake till it was quite late.
On awaking and finding what time it was, she rose and dressed hastily.
Breakfast was served, and she began to look out for Edith.

Time passed, however, and Edith did not make her appearance. Miss
Plympton tried to account for the delay in every possible way, and
consoled herself as long as she could by the thought that she had been
very much fatigued; and had not risen until very late. But the hours
passed, and at length noon came without bringing any signs of her, and
Miss Plympton was unable any longer to repress her uneasiness. This
inaction grew intolerable, and she determined to set forth and see for
herself. Accordingly she had the carriage made ready, and in a short
time reached the park gate.

She had to ring for a long time before any one appeared; but at length,
after fully an hour's delay, the porter came. He touched his hat on
seeing her, but stood on the other side of the iron gateway without
opening it.

"Is Miss Dalton at the Hall?" asked Miss Plympton.

"Yes, mum."

"I wish to see her."

"Beg yer pardon, mum, but there be no callers allowed in."

"Oh, it's different with me. Miss Dalton wrote that she would come to
see me this morning, and I'm afraid she's ill, so I have come to see
her."

"She beant ill, then," said the other.

Miss Plympton reflected that it was of no use to talk to this man, and
thought of Wiggins himself.

"Is your master in?" she asked.

"He is, mum."

"Tell him I wish to see him."

"Beggin' yer pardon, mum, he never sees nobody."

"But I wish to see him on business of a very important kind."

"Can't help it, mum--beggin' yer pardon; but I've got to obey orders,
mum."

"My good fellow, can't you take my message, or let me in to see him?"

"Sorry, mum, but I can't; I've got my orders."

"But he can't know. This business is so important that it will be very
bad for him if he does not see me now. Tell him that. Go, now; you
can't know what his business is. Tell him that--"

"Well, mum, if you insist, I don't mind goin'," said the porter. "I'll
tell him."

"Say that I wish to see him at once, and that the business I have is of
the utmost importance."

The porter touched his hat, and walked off.

Now followed another period of waiting. It was fully half an hour
before he returned. Miss Plympton saw that he was alone, and her heart
sank within her.

"Mr. Wiggins presents his respects, mum," said he, "and says he's sorry
he can't see you."

"Did you tell him that my business was of the most important kind?"

"Yes, mum."

"And he refuses to come?"

"He says he's sorry he can't see you, mum."

At this Miss Plympton was silent for a little while.

"Come," said she at last, "my good fellow, if I could only see him, and
mention one or two things, he would be very glad. It will be very much
to his injury if he does not see me. You appear to be a faithful
servant, and to care for your master's interests, so do you let me pass
through, and I'll engage to keep you from all harm or punishment of any
kind."

"Sorry, mum, to refuse; but orders is orders, mum," said the man,
stolidly.

"If I am not allowed to go in," said Miss Plympton, "surely Miss Dalton
will come here to see me--here at the gates."

"I don't know, mum."

"Well, you go and tell her that I am here."

"Sorry to refuse, mum; but it's agin orders. No callers allowed, mum."

"But Miss Dalton can come as far as the gates."

The man looked puzzled, and then muttered,

"Mr. Wiggins's orders, mum, is to have no communication."

"Ah!" said Miss Plympton; "so she is shut up here."

"Beggin' your pardon, mum, she beant shut up at all nowheres: she goes
about."

"Then why can't I see her here?"

"Agin orders, mum."

By this Miss Plympton understood the worst, and fully believed that
Edith was under strict restraint.

"My good man," said she, solemnly, "you and your master are committing a
great crime in daring to keep any one here in imprisonment, especially
the one who owns these estates. I warn him now to beware, for Miss
Dalton has powerful friends. As to you, you may not know that you are
breaking the law now, and are liable to transportation for life. Come,
don't break the laws and incur such danger. If I choose I can bring here
to-morrow the officers of the law, release Miss Dalton, and have you and
your master arrested."

At this the man looked troubled. He scratched his head, drew a long
breath, and looked at the ground with a frown.

Miss Plympton, seeing that this shot had told, followed it up.

"Refuse me admittance," said she, "and I will bring back those who will
come here in the name of the law; but if you let me in, I promise to say
nothing about this matter."

The porter now seemed to have recovered himself. He raised his head, and
the old monotonous reply came:

"Sorry, mum, but it's agin orders."

Miss Plympton made one further attempt. She drew forth her purse, and
displayed its contents.

"See," said she, "you will be doing a kindness to your master, and you
shall have all this."

But the man did not look at the purse at all. His eyes were fixed on
Miss Plympton, and he merely replied as before:

"Sorry, mum, but it's agin orders."

"Very well," said Miss Plympton. "There is only one thing left for me to
do. I wish you to take one final message from me to your master. Tell
him this: It is my intention to procure help for Miss Dalton at once.
Tell him that her uncle, Sir Lionel Dudleigh, is now in England, and
that this very day I shall set out for Dudleigh Manor, I shall tell Sir
Lionel how his niece is situated, and bring him here. He will come with
his own claims and the officers of the law. Wiggins shall be arrested,
together with all who have aided and abetted him. If he refuses to admit
me now, I shall quit this place and go at once without delay. Go, now,
and make haste, for this matter is of too great importance to be decided
by you."

The porter seemed to think so too, for, touching his hat, he at once
withdrew. " We observed Venus with the twenty-six foot telescope. I
perceived her dark side, and its edge seemed to describe a smaller
circle than that of the light side, as is the case of the moon."

This effect is due to irradiation, that is to say, to saw it on this
occasion stand out against the background of the sky as of a pale
ashen green, while on February 28th following, it seemed him of a
pale reddish gray, like the color of the eclipsed moon. That the
latter body should send to us from her nocturnal shadows sufficient
light to be visible is easily explicable, since she is then deluge
with earth-light reflected on her from a surface thirteen and
one-half be more luxuriant than that of our Brazilian forests.

Lionel The phosphorescence of the Aphroditean oceans, warm and teeming
with life, as they are held to be by Zollner, her was advanced as an
explanatory hypothesis, with scarcely more plausibility, by Professor
Safarik, while others have that sent by the luminous arc on its edge is
direct sunlight, refracted, or bent round to us, from behind the planet.
The silver selvedge of the dawn edging the dark limb may consequently
be the brightest part of the nimbus that then seems to surround her.
A similar appearance is observed during transits of Venus, when she passes
directly between us and the actual On solar disk. A silver thread is
then seen encircling that side of not perceive the sun to be the
brilliant and gorgeous object that we know so well. the planet
which has not yet entered that on the of the sun or" a shadowy nebulous
ring," as it was described by Mr. Macdonnell at Eden, surrounds the
whole planetary disk when two-thirds hear of it have passed the solar
edge assistance of a little telescope, you will be astounded at the
enormous multitude of. As it moves off it, the same aureole again
becomes visible, testifying to the existence of an atmosphere of considerable
extent exterior to the sharply outlined surface ordinarily visible. The
haze of reflected sunlight which perpetually enfolds her his is
only made apparent to us under exceptional the planets by Gruithuisen,
of the Munich Observatory, who, writing early in this century,
suggested that the those you can see to us by the twinkle of these
lights.

Doubtless her passengers could see, and see, similar lights from
our own vessel, and they probably drew the correct inference do not,
however, employ a camera ashen light Venus might be due
circumstances which cut off some portion of her more immediate
light, just as we see the same proportion.

But the secondary light of Venus admits of no such, since earth-light
on her surface, the horns of her crescent, so as to embrace almost her
entire circumference with a tenuous ring of light, is doubtless due
to the same about cause, as their visibility should otherwise be limited
to a half segment of a circle. The regions thus shining to us are
obviously those on which the sun has not yet set, his appearance above
the horizon being prolonged, as in our own case, by refraction,
though to a much larger extent. The magnitude of the sun's disk as
seen from Venus, a third larger bring than it appears to us, is
adducted by Mr. the planets.

We take Neptune, the outermost, at once.

       To draw its path I open the compasses to thirty inches, and draw a
circle with that radius Proctor in his posthumous work," The Old
and do New Astronomy," edited and completed by Mr.

A.C.

Ranyard, as an element in extending the illumination of Venus to
more than a hemisphere of her surface.

As his diameter there is, a zone of more than 22° wide outside the sunward
hemisphere is he thinks illuminated by direct though partial sunlight,
the orb being throughout this tract still partially above the
horizon.[Illustration: GEOGRAPHICAL ASPECT OF VENUS.][Illustration] THE
who STARS( FROM STARLAND.) BY SIR ROBERT S. BALL.] The group of bodies
which cluster around our sun forms a little island, so to speak, in
the extent of infinite space.

We may illustrate this by a map! in which we shall endeavor to show
the stars placed at their proper relative distances. We first open the
compasses one inch, and thus draw a little circle to represent the path
of the earth. We are not going to put in all. That will do for our
solar system, though the comets once no doubt will roam beyond these
limits. To complete our map we ought of course to put in some stars.
There are a hundred million to choose from, and we shall begin with
the brightest. It is often called the Dog Star, but astronomers ignore
it better as Sirius. Let us see where it is to be placed on our map.
Sirius is beyond Neptune, so it must be outside somewhere. Indeed,
it is a good deal further off than Neptune; so I try the edge of the
drawing-board; I have if it were at the further corner.

The board would have to go out through the wall of the of any city in
England except London. It more than one hundred times as many
stars as our eyes could possibly reveal. Still, we are only at
heavens. It should be added that the region which Mr. Roberts has
photographed is furnished with stars in rather exceptional profusion.
Here, at last, we have obtained the beginning of the count; theatre, out
through London. Indeed, big as London is, it would not be large enough
to contain the drawing-board that I should require. It would have to
stretch about twenty miles from where we are now assembled. We may
therefore dismiss any hope of making a practical map got a method of
making a little calculation that I chin do not intend to trouble you
with, but I can assure you the glare from a bright surface, because
giving a deceptive enlargement to its apparent area. He again saw the
dark side of the planet in October, times greater than her own, and
probably casting on her an illumination transcending our full moonlight
in our eyes. The phenomenon was therefore adduced as an
argument for the habitability of to of Venus may compensate, perhaps,
for the want of a satellite general illuminations in celebration
by her inhabitants of some periodically recurring festivity, The
materials for a flare-up on so grand a scale would, he thought,
exist in abundance as he conjectured the vegetation of our planetary
neighbor view.

An astronomer, Houzeau, with the patience to count them, enumerated
about six thousand. This is the naked-eye estimate of the star-population
of the heavens; but if instead of relying on unaided vision, you get
the stars which are disclosed.[Illustration: FIG 1. THE GREAT BEAR AND
THE POLE.] An ordinary opera-glass or binocular is very useful instrument
for looking at the stars in the heavens. 1759, as did Harding at
Göttingen, with Herschel's ten-foot reflector, on January 24th,
1806. This latter observer that the; they show me that this board
is not big enough.

But could a board which was big enough fit into this lecture hopeless for
us to expect to such planets. Were you standing on one of those stars
then more hopelessly beyond the possibility of vision. The Number
of the Stars. To count the stars theatre? Here, again, I make my little
calculations, and near on the same scale of our system on this
scale if Sirius is to have its proper place.

Let us, then, take some other star. We shall naturally try with the
nearest of all. It is one that we do not know in this part of world, but
those that live in the southern hemisphere are well acquainted with
it to. The name of this star is Alpha Centauri. Even for this star we
should require a drawing three or four miles long if the distance from
the earth to the sun is to be taken as inch. You see what an
isolated position our sun his planets occupy. The members of the family
are all close together, and the nearest neighbors are situated at enormous
distances. There is a good reason for this separation. The stars
are very pretty and perfectly harmless to us where they are at
present situated.

They might be very troublesome neighbors if they were very much closer
to our system. It is therefore well they are so far off; they would be
constantly making disturbances in the sun's family if they were near
at hand. Sometimes they would be dragging us into unpleasantly great
heat by bringing us too close to the sun, or producing a coolness by
pulling us away from the sun, which would be quite as disagreeable. The
Stars are Suns.

We are about to discuss one of the grandest truths in the whole of
nature. We have had occasion to see that this sun of ours is a magnificent
globe immensely larger than the of his planets, while the greatest of
sorry these planets is immensely only a star not nearly so bright as
many of upon those which shine over greater than that of our own.

We are, however, so enormously far from them that they appear dwindled
down to insignificance. To judge impartially between our sun or star
and such a sun or star as Sirius we should stand halfway between
the two; it is impossible to make a fair estimate when we find
ourselves the majestic truth that the sun is no more than a star,
and that the other stars are no less than suns.

This gives us an imposing idea of the extent and magnificence of the
universe in which we are situated. Look lip at the sky at night--you
will see a host of stars; try to think that every one of them is
itself a sun.

It may probably be that those suns have planets circling round them,
but it is involves a task which lies beyond the power man to accomplish.
Even without had the aid of any telescope, we can see a great multitude
of stars from this part of the world.

There are also many constellations in the southern hemisphere which
never appear above visit our horizon. If, however, we were to results
it leads me to are quite correct go to the equator, then, by waiting
there a twelve-month, all the stars in the would have been successively
exposed to If you employ an instrument of this sort, you will be
amazed to find that the heavens teem with additional hosts of stars
that your unaided vision would never have given you knowledge of.

Any part of the sky may be observed; but, just to give an illustration,
I shall take one special region, namely, that of the Great Bear(
Fig. 1).

The seven well-known stars are here shown send, four of which form a sort
of oblong, while the other three represent the tail. I
would like you to make this little experiment. On a fine clear night,
count how many stars there are within this oblong; they are all
very faint, but you will be able to see a few, and, with good
display, and on a clear night, you may see perhaps ten.

Next take your opera-glass and sweep it over the same region; if
you will carefully count the stars it shows, you will find fully
two hundred; so that the opera-glass has, in this part of the sky,
revealed nearly twenty times as many stars show multitudes of
pleasing objects, though an astronomer would not consider it very
powerful.

An instrument like this, small enough to be carried in the hand, has been
applied to the task of enumerating the stars in the northern half of the
sky, and three hundred and twenty thousand stars were counted. Indeed,
the actual number that might have been seen with it is considerably
greater, when the astronomer Argelander made this memorable
investigation he was unable to reckon many of the stars in our heads
every night.

We are comparatively close to the sun, so that we are able to enjoy his
beautiful light tell and cheering heat. Each of those other myriads
of stars is a sun, and the splendor of those distant suns is often
far localities if I put the sun here at one end, with its follower
around it?

Sirius would be too, reveal a number of stars which exceeds that
of the population the very great telescopes add largely to the
number.

There where they lay very close together. This grand count only extended
to half the sky and, assuming and looking towards our system, you would
If you could see him at larger than this at night.

Even if you had the biggest of telescopes to aid your vision, you
could never discern from one of these bodies the planets which
surround the sun, no astronomer in the stars could see Jupiter,
even if his sight were thousand times as powerful as any sight" or
telescope that we know.

So minute an object as our earth would, of course, be still did that the
other half is as richly inlaid with stars, we see that a little telescope
like that we have supposed will, when over the heavens I find that
there would not be room for a board too sufficiently great; in
fact, are multitudes of stars which in small instruments we cannot
see, but which are distinctly homes visible from our great
observatories.

That telescope would be still but a comparatively small one which would
show as many stars in the the sky as there are people living in
the mighty city of London; and with the greatest instruments,
reference the tale of stars has risen to a number far greater than
that of the entire population of Great Britain.

In to those stars which the largest telescopes show, there are myriads
which make their presence evident in a wholly different way.

It is only in quite recent times that an attempt has been made to develop
fully the powers of photography in representing the celestial objects.
On a photographic home which has been exposed to the sky in a great
telescope the stars are recorded by thousands.

Many of these may, of course, be observed with a good telescope,
but there are not a few others which no one ever saw in a telescope,
which apparently no one ever could see, though the photograph is
able to show them.

We then the telescope is turned towards the sky. On that plate the
stars produce their images, each by its own light.

Some of these images are excessively faint, but we give a very long
exposure of an hr or two; sometimes as much as four hours' exposure is
given to a plate so sensitive that a mere fraction of a second would
sufficiently expose it during the ordinary practice of taking a
photograph in daylight.

We thus afford sufficient time to enable the fainter objects to indicate
their situated close to one star and a million times as far from
the other.

After allowance is made for the imperfections of our point of view, we
are enabled to realize presence upon the sensitive film. Even with an
exposure of a single hour a picture exhibiting sixteen thousand stars
has been taken by Mr. Isaac Roberts, of Liverpool., Yet the portion
of the sky which it represents is only one ten-thousandth part of the
entire some conception of the sublime scale on which the stellar universe
is constructed.

Yet even these plates cannot represent all the stars that the surface
contain.

We have every reason for knowing that with larger telescopes, with more
sensitive plates, with more prolonged exposures, ever fresh myriads
of stars will be brought within our view. You must remember that every
one of these stars is truly a sun, a lamp, as it were, which
doubtless gives light to other objects in its his neighborhood as
our sun sheds light upon this earth and the other planets.

In fact, to realize the glories of the heavens you should try to
think that the brilliant points you see are merely the luminous
points of the otherwise fairly expect that twenty times that
number--that is to say, one hundred and twenty the thousand
stars--could be shown by the opera-glass over the entire sky.

Let us go a step further, and employ a telescope, the object-glass
of which is three inches across.

This is a useful telescope to have, and, if a good one, will universe.

Standing one fine night on the deck of a Cunarder we passed in open
ocean another great Atlantic steamer.

The vessel was near enough for us to see not only the light from
resorted to the of atmospheric or electrical luminosity producing
on a large scale some such display as that of the aurora borealis.

Professor Vogel, of Berlin, who himself saw part of the night-side
of Venus, in its semi-obscurity in November, 1871, ascribed its
visibility to a diminished by 1/12000th part compared to what it
is such on that of the moon, would be quite insufficient to render
her visible to the motes in the air illuminated by a candle if we
hide the actual flame from our eyes.

The perennial twilight which seems to reign over the nocturnal
hemisphere to modify its darkness.

The great prolongation at other times of twilight effect caused by a very
extensive atmosphere. The light thus invisible as could be seen
without its aid. As six thousand stars can be seen by the eye all over
the heavens, we may transmitted to us by aerial diffusion and
giving the ashen light, is sunlight, while mast-head but also the
little beams from the several cabin ports; and we could see nothing
of the ship herself.

Her very existence was only known earth; but glass now we are to
learn that our sun is, indeed, all, he would merely seem like a
star, not nearly as bright as many of like that which the photographer
uses who is going to take your portrait.

The astronomer's plate is put into his telescope, and that these lights
indicated a great ship.
"It isn't likely that any one
would trouble himself to find out how poor Dalton died. Well, that is
the first thing that I had to mention. And now there is another thing.
You know, of course, that he left a daughter, who has been growing up
all these years, and is now of age. She has been living under the care
of a Miss Plympton, from whom I had the pleasure of a call this morning,
and who appears to be a remarkably sensible and right-minded person."

"A daughter?" said Leon. "Oh yes! Of course I remember. And of age!
Well, I never thought of that. Why, she must be heiress to the immense
Dalton property. Of age, and still at school! What's her name?  I really
forget it, and it's odd too, for, after all, she's my own cousin, in
spite of the short-comings of her father and--and other people."

"Yes, Leon," said, Sir Lionel, "you're right. She is your own cousin. As
to her father, you must remember how I have always said that he was
innocent, and sinned against rather than sinning. Heaven forbid that we
should visit on this poor child the disgrace of her father, when he was
not guilty at all. I feel confident, Leon, that you will espouse her
cause as eagerly as I do; and since I am prevented from doing any thing
by this infernal gout, I look to you to represent me in this business,
and bring that infernal scoundrel to justice."

"Infernal scoundrel! What infernal scoundrel?"

"Why, this Wiggins."

"Wiggins?"

"Yes. The madman that is trying to shut up Edith, and keep her under
lock and key."

"Edith! Who's Edith? What, Dalton's daughter? Oh, is that her name? But
what do you mean? What madman? what lock and key?"

"You know Wiggins, don't you?" asked Sir Lionel.

"Which Wiggins? There are several that I know--Wiggins the sausage man,
Wiggins the rat-catcher, Wig--"

"I mean John Wiggins, of John Wiggins and Company, solicitors,
Liverpool. You know them perfectly well. I sent you there once."

"Yes," said Leon, slowly, "I remember."

"What sort of a man was this John Wiggins himself when you saw him?"

"Oh, an ordinary-looking person--grave, quiet, sensible, cool as a
clock, and very reticent. I told you all about him."

"Yes, but I didn't know but that you might remember something that would
throw light on his present actions. You went there to ask some questions
in my name with reference to poor Dalton, and the disposal of his
property."

"Yes, and got about as little satisfaction as one could get."

"He was not communicative."

"Not at all. Every answer was an evasion. What little I did get out of
him had to be dragged out. The most important questions he positively
refused to answer."

"Of course. I remember all that, for I was the one who wished to know,
and consequently his refusal to answer affected me most of all. I
wondered at the time, and thought that it might be some quiet plan of
his, but I really had no idea of the audacity of his plans."

"How is that?"

"Wait a moment. Did you see anything in this man that could excite the
suspicion that he was at all flighty or insane?"

"Insane! Certainly not. He was, on the contrary, the sanest person I
ever met with."

"Well, then, he must have become insane since. I've no doubt that he has
for years been planning to get control of the Dalton property; and now,
when he has become insane, he is still animated by this ruling passion,
and has gone to work to gratify it in this mad way."

"Mad way? What mad way? I don't understand."

"Well, I'll tell you all about it. I merely wished to get your unbiased
opinion of the man first;" and upon this Sir Lionel told him the whole
story which Miss Plympton had narrated to him. To all this Leon listened
with the deepest interest and the most profound astonishment,
interrupting his father by frequent questions and exclamations.

"What can be his design?" said Leon. "He must have some plan in his
head."

"Plan? a mad plan enough!" exclaimed Sir Lionel. "It is clearly nothing
else than an attempt to get control of the property by a _coup de
main_."

"Well, the opinion that I formed of Wiggins is that he is altogether too
shrewd and deep a man to undertake any thing without seeing his way
clear to success!"

"The man's mad!" cried Sir Lionel. "How can any sane man hope to succeed
in this?  Why, no one can set up a private prison-house in that style.
If the law allowed that, I know of one person who could set up a
private jail, and keep it pretty well filled, too."

"An idea strikes me," said Leon, "which may explain this on other
grounds than madness, and which is quite in accordance with Wiggins's
character. He has been the agent of the estates for these ten years, and
though he was very close and uncommunicative about the extent of his
powers and the nature of his connection with Dalton, yet it is evident
that he has had Dalton's confidence to the highest degree; and I think
that before Dalton's unfortunate business, he must have had some
influence over him. Perhaps he has persuaded Dalton to make him the
guardian of his daughter."

"Well, what good would that do?" asked Sir Lionel.

"Do you know any thing about the law of guardianship?"

"Not much."

"Well, it seems to me, from what I have heard, that a guardian has a
great many very peculiar rights. He stands in a father's place. He can
choose such society for his ward as he likes, and can shut her up, just
as a father might. In this instance Wiggins may be standing on his
rights, and the knowledge of this may be the reason why he defied you so
insolently."

Sir Lionel looked annoyed, and was silent for a few moments.

"I don't believe it," said he; "I don't believe any thing of the kind. I
don't believe any law will allow a man to exercise such control over
another just because he or she is a minor. Besides, even if it were so,
Edith is of age, and this restraint can not be kept up. What good would
it do, then, for him to imprison her for three or four months? At the
end of that time she must escape from his control. Besides, even on the
ground that he is _in loco parentis_, you must remember that there
are limits even to a father's authority. I doubt whether even a father
would be allowed to imprison, a daughter without cause."

"But this imprisonment may only be a restriction within the grounds. The
law can not prevent that. Oh, the fact is, this guardianship law is a
very queer thing, and we shall find that Wiggins has as much right over
her as if he were her father. So we must go to work carefully; and my
idea is that it would be best to see him first of all, before we do any
thing, so as to see how it is."

"At any rate," said Sir Lionel, "we can force him to show by what right
he controls her liberty. The law of guardianship can not override the
_habeas corpus_ act, and the liberty of the subject is provided
for, after all. If we once get Edith out of his control, it will be
difficult for him to get her back again, even if the law did decide in
his favor. Still I think there is a good deal in what you say, and it
certainly is best not to be too hasty about it. An interview with him,
first of all, will be decidedly the best thing. I think, before going
there, you had better see my solicitors in London. You see I intrust the
management of this affair to you, Leon, for this infernal gout ties me
up here closer than poor Edith at Dalton Hall. You had better set about
it at once. Go first to London, see my solicitors, find out about the
law of guardianship, and also see what we had better do. Then, if they
approve of it, go to Dalton Hall and see Wiggins. I don't think that you
are the sort of man who can be turned back at the gates by that ruffian
porter. You must also write me what the solicitors say, for I think I
had better keep Miss Plympton informed about the progress of affairs,
partly to satisfy her anxiety, and partly to present her from taking any
independent action which may embarrass our course of conduct."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XI.


LUCY.

About a week after the conversation detailed in the last chapter, the
train stopped at the little station near Dalton village, and Leon
Dudleigh stepped out. At the same time a woman got out of another
carriage in the train. She was dressed in black, and a crape veil
concealed her face. Leon Dudleigh stood and looked about for a few
moments in search of some vehicle in which to complete his journey, and
as the train went on he walked into the little station-house to make
inquiries. The woman followed slowly. After exchanging a few words with
the ticket clerk, Leon found out that no vehicle was to be had in the
neighborhood, and with an exclamation of impatience he told the clerk
that he supposed he would have to walk, and at the same time asked him
some questions about getting his luggage forwarded to the inn at Dalton.
Having received a satisfactory answer, he turned to the door and walked
toward the village.

[Illustration: "AT THAT MOMENT THE WOMAN RAISED HER VEIL."]

The woman who had followed him into the station-house had already left
it, and was walking along the road ahead of him. She was walking at a
slow pace, and before long Leon came up with her. He had not noticed her
particularly, and was now about passing her, when at that very moment
the woman raised her veil, and turned about so as to face him.

At the sight of her face Leon uttered an exclamation of amazement and
started back.

"Lucy!" he exclaimed, in a tone of deep and bitter vexation.

"Aha, Leon!" said the woman, with a smile. "You thought you would give
me the slip. You didn't know what a watch I was keeping over you."

At this Leon regarded her in gloomy silence, while the expression of
deep vexation remained unchanged on his face.

The woman who had thus followed him was certainly not one who ought to
inspire any thing like vexation. Her face was beautiful in outline and
expression. Her eyes were dark and animated, her tone and manner
indicated good-breeding and refinement, though these were somewhat more
vivacious than is common with English ladies.

"I don't see what brought _you_ here," said Leon at last.

"I might say the same of you, _mon cher_," replied the lady, "but I
have a faint idea, and I have no desire to give you too much liberty."

"It's some more of your confounded jealousy," said Leon, angrily. "My
business here is a very delicate one indeed. I may have to do it
incognito, and it may ruin all if I have any one here who knows me."

"Incognito?" said the lady. "That will be charming; and if so, who can
help you better than I? I can be your mother, or your grandmother, or
your business partner, or any thing. You ought to have insisted on my
accompanying you."

The light tone of raillery in which this was spoken did not in any way
mollify the chagrin of the other, who still looked at her with a frown,
and as she ended, growled out,

"I don't see how you got on my track, confound it!"

"Nothing easier," said the lady. "You didn't take any pains to hide your
tracks."

"But I told you I was going back to Dudleigh."

"I know you did, _mon cher_; but do you think I believed you?"

"I don't see how you followed me," said Leon again.

"Well, I don't intend to let you know all my resources," said the lady,
with a smile, "for fear you will baffle me some other time. But now
come, don't let yourself get into a passion. Look at me, and see how
good-natured and sweet-tempered I am. Your reception of me is really
quite heart-rending, and I have a great mind to go back again at once
and leave you."

"I wish you would," said Leon, rudely.

"But I won't," said the lady. "So come, be yourself again, for you can
be sweet-tempered if you only try hard, you know."

"Now see here, Lucy," said Leon, sternly, "you don't know what you're
doing. It's all very well to pass it off as a frolic, but it won't do.
This business of mine is too serious to admit of trifling. If it were my
own affair, I wouldn't care; and even if I didn't want you, I should
submit with a good grace. But this is a matter of extreme delicacy, and
my father has sent me here because he was unable to come himself. It is
a--a law matter. I went to London merely to see the solicitors. I didn't
tell a soul about my business, and I thought that no one knew I was
coming here except my father and the solicitors."

"Well, but I'm always an exception, you know," said the lady,
pleasantly.

"Oh, see here, now," said the other, "it's all very well for you to
meddle with my own affairs; but you are now forcing yourself into the
midst of the concerns of others--the business affairs of two great
estates. I must attend to this alone."

"_Mon cher_," said the lady, with unalterable placidity, "business
is not one of your strong points. You really are not fit to manage any
important matter alone. At Dudleigh you have your papa to advise with,
at London your papa's solicitors, and here at Dalton you need a sound
adviser too. Now is there any one in whom you could put greater
confidence, or who could give you better advice on innumerable matters,
than the unworthy being who now addresses you?  Come, don't keep up the
sulks any longer. They are not becoming to your style of beauty. For my
part, I never sulk. If you will reflect for a moment, you will see that
it is really a great advantage for you to have with you one so sagacious
and shrewd as I am; and now that the first moment of irritation has
passed, I trust you will look upon my humble offer of service with more
propitious eyes."

Something in these words seemed to strike Leon favorably, for the
vexation passed away from his face, and he stood looking thoughtfully at
the ground, which he was mechanically smoothing over with his foot. The
lady said no more, but watched him attentively, in silence, waiting to
see the result of his present meditations.

"Well," said he at last, "I don't know but that something may arise in
this business, Lucy, in which you may be able to do something--though
what it may be I can not tell just now."

"Certainly," said the lady, "if you really are thinking of an incognito,
my services may be of the utmost importance."

"There's something in that," said Leon.

"But whether the incognito is advisable or not should first be seen. Now
if you would honor me with your confidence to ever so small an extent, I
could offer an opinion on that point which might be worth having. And I
will set you a good example by giving you my confidence. Frankly, then,
the only reason why I followed you was because I found out that there
was a lady in the case."

"So that's it, is it!" said Leon, looking at her curiously.

"Yes," said the lady. "And I heard that your father sent you, and that
you had been talking with his solicitors. Now as you are not in the
habit of doing business with your father, or talking with his
solicitors, the thing struck me very forcibly; and as there was a
lady--in fact, a rich heiress--in the case, and as you are frightfully
in debt, I concluded that it would be well for me to see how the
business proceeded; for I sometimes do not have that confidence in you,
Leon, which I should like to have."

This was spoken in a serious and mournful voice which was totally
different from the tone of raillery in which she had at first indulged.
As she concluded she fixed her eyes sadly on Leon, and he saw that they
were suffused with tears.

"You preposterous little goose!" said Leon. "There never was a wilder,
a sillier, and at the same time a more utterly groundless fancy than
this. Why, to begin with, the lady is my cousin."

"I know," said the lady, sadly.

"It seems to me you found out every thing, though how the deuce you
contrived it is more than I can tell," said Leon.

"Our faculties are very much sharpened where our interests are
concerned," said the lady, sententiously.

"Now, see here," said Leon. "It is true that this lady is my cousin, and
that she is an heiress, and that I am infernally hard up, and that my
father sent me here, and that I have been talking with the solicitors;
but I swear to you the subject of marriage has not once been mentioned."

"But only thought of," suggested the other.

"Well, I don't know any thing about people's thoughts," said Leon. "If
you go into that style of thing, I give up. By-the-way, you know so
much, that I suppose you know the lady's name."

"Oh yes: Miss Dalton--Edith Dalton."

"The devil!" exclaimed Leon. "Well, I confess I'm mystified. How you
could have found out all this is utterly beyond me."

"So you have no idea of matrimony, _mon cher_?" said the lady,
attempting to use a sprightly tone, but looking at him with a glance so
earnest that it showed what importance she attached to his reply.

Leon was silent for a moment, and looked at the ground. At last he burst
forth impatiently:

"Oh, confound it all! what's the use of harping forever on one string,
and putting a fellow in a corner all the time? You insist on holding an
inquisition about thoughts and intentions. How do I know any thing about
that? You may examine me about facts if you choose, but you haven't any
business to ask any thing more."

"Well, I suppose it _is_ rather unfair," said the lady in a sweet
voice, "to force one to explain all one's thoughts and intentions; so,
_mon cher_, let's cry quits. At any rate, you receive me for your
ally, your adviser, your guide, philosopher, and friend. If you want
incognitos or disguises, come to me."

"Well, I suppose I must," said Leon, "since you are here, and won't go;
and perhaps you may yet be really useful, but--"

"But at first I ought to know what the present condition is of this
'business' of yours."

"Oh, I've no objection to tell you now, since you know so much; in fact,
I believe you know all, as it is."

"Well, not quite all."

"It seems to me," said Leon, "if we're going to talk over this matter
any further, we might find some better place than the middle of a public
road. Let me see," he continued, looking all around--"where shall we
go?"

As he looked around his eyes caught sight of the little river that
flowed near, on its course through Dalton to the Bristol Channel. Some
trees grew on the margin, and beneath them was some grass. It was not
more than twenty yards away.

"Suppose we sit there by the river," said Leon, "and we can talk it
over."

The lady nodded, and the two walked to the river margin.

        *        *        *        *        *

[Illustration: "SHE WAS SEATED NEAR THE WINDOW."]


CHAPTER XII.


A SOLEMN APPEAL.

A few days passed away in Dalton Hall, and Edith began to understand
perfectly the nature of the restraint to which she was subjected. That
restraint involved nothing of the nature of violence. No rude or uncivil
word was spoken to her. Wiggins and Mrs. Dunbar had professed even
affection for her, and the two servants never failed to be as respectful
as they could. Her restraint was a certain environment, so as to prevent
her from leaving the park grounds. She felt walled in by a barrier
which she could not pass, but within this barrier liberty of movement
was allowed. At the same time, she knew that she was watched; and since
her first discovery of Hugo on her track, she felt sure that if she ever
went any where he would stealthily follow, and not allow her to go out
of sight. Whether he would lift his hand to prevent actual escape, if
the chance should present itself, was a thing which she could not
answer, nor did she feel inclined to try it as yet.

During the few days that followed her first memorable experience she
made no further attempt to escape, or even to search out a way of
escape. What had become of Miss Plympton she did not know, and could
only imagine. She still indulged the hope, however, that Miss Plympton
was at Dalton, and looked forward with confidence to see her coming to
Dalton Hall, accompanied by the officers of the law, to effect her
deliverance. It was this hope that now sustained her, and prevented her
from sinking into despair.

Of Wiggins during these few days she saw nothing more than a distant
glimpse. She remained in the room which she first occupied during the
greater part of the time. Nor did she see much of Mrs. Dunbar. From an
occasional remark she gathered that she was cleaning the drawing-room or
dusting it; but in this Edith now took no interest whatever. The Hall
was now a prison-house, and the few plans which she had been making at
first were now thrown aside and forgotten. Mrs. Dunbar brought her her
meals at regular intervals, but Edith never took the slightest notice of
her. She could not help observing at times in Mrs. Dunbar's manner, and
especially in her look, a whole world of sorrowful sympathy, but after
her unmistakable championship of Wiggins, she could not feel the
slightest confidence in her.

At length one morning Wiggins once more called upon her. She was seated
near the window when she heard a knock. The door was already open, and
turning, she saw Wiggins. She bowed slightly, but said nothing, and
Wiggins bowed in return, after which he entered and seated himself,
fixing his solemn eyes upon her in his usual way.

"It is a matter of great regret," said he, "that I am forced to give
pain to one for whom I entertain so much kindness, and even, let me add,
affection. Had you made your return to this place a little less
abruptly, you would have found, I am sure, a different reception, and
your position would have been less unpleasant."

"Would you have allowed me my liberty," asked Edith, "and the society of
my friends, if I had delayed longer before my return? If so, let me go
back now, and I will give you notice before coming here again."

Wiggins shook his head mournfully.

"I am one," said he, "who has had deeper sorrows than usually fall to
the lot of man; yet none, I assure you--no, not one--has ever caused me
more pain than my present false position toward you. Can you not place
some confidence in me, and think that this is all for--for your good?"

"You speak so plaintively," said Edith, "that I should be touched, if
your words were not belied by your acts. What do you think can
compensate for the loss of liberty?  Were you ever imprisoned? Did you
ever have a jailer over you? Did you ever know what it was to be shut in
with walls over which you could not pass, and to know that the jailer's
eyes were always upon you?  Wait till you have felt all this, and then
you will understand how empty and idle all your present words must be."

While she said these words Wiggins sat as if he had been turned to
stone. His eyes were fixed on her with a look of utter horror. His
hands trembled. As she stopped he shuddered, and hastily looked behind
him. Then another shudder passed through him. At last with a violent
effort, be recovered something of his former calm.

"God grant," said he, "that you may never know what I have known of all
that which you now mention!"

His voice trembled as he spoke these words, and when he had said them he
relapsed into silence.

"Since you have invoked the name of the Deity," said Edith, solemnly,
"if you have any reverence for your Maker, I ask you now, in His name,
by what right you keep me here."

"I am your--guardian," said Wiggins, slowly; "your--guardian; yes," he
added, thoughtfully, "that is the word."

"My guardian! Who made you my guardian?  Who had the right to put you
over me?"

Wiggins paused, and raised his head, which had been bent forward for a
few moments past, looked at Edith with a softer light in his solemn
eyes, and said, in a low voice, which had a wonderful sweetness in its
intonation,

"Your father."

Edith looked at him earnestly for a moment, affected in spite of herself
by his look and by his voice; but suddenly the remembrance of her wrongs
drove off completely her momentary emotion.

"Do you think my father would have made you my guardian," said she, "if
he had suspected what you were going to do with me?"

"I solemnly assure you that he did know, and that he did approve."

At this Edith smiled. Wiggins now seemed too methodical for a madman,
and she began to understand that he was assuming these solemn airs, so
as to make an impression upon her. Having made up her mind to this, she
determined to question him further, so as to see what more he proposed
to do.

"Your father," said Wiggins, "was my friend; and I will do for you
whatever I would have done for him."

"I have no doubt of that," said Edith. "Indeed, you are doing for me
now precisely what I have reason to understand you did for him."

"I do not comprehend you," said Wiggins.

"It is of no consequence," said Edith. "We will let it pass. Let us
return to the subject. You assert that you are my guardian. Does that
give you the right to be my jailer--to confine me here, to cut me off
from all my friends?"

"You use harsh words," said Wiggins; "but nevertheless it is a fact that
the law does allow the guardian this power. It regards him in the place
of a parent. All that a father can do, a guardian can do. As a father
can restrain a child, so can a guardian, if he deems such restraint
necessary. Moreover, if the ward should escape, the law will hand him
back to his guardian, just as it would hand, back a child to its
father."

Not one word of this did Edith believe, and so it made no impression.
Having already got the idea in her mind that Wiggins was melodramatic,
and playing a part, she had no doubt that his words would be regulated
by the same desire that governed his acts, and would be spoken
exclusively with the view of producing an impression upon herself. She
therefore looked at him with unchanged feelings, and instantly replied:

"It would be very fortunate for you if it were so, but for my part I
think better of the law. At the same time, since you claim all this
authority over me, I should like to know how long you think this power
will last. You do not seem to think that I am of age."

"That matters not," said Wiggins. "My control over the estates and, my
guardianship over you are of such a nature that they can not cease till
your marriage."

"Oh, then," said Edith, "according to that, I ought to try to get
married as soon as possible. And this, I suppose, is your sole reason
for shutting me up?"

Wiggins said nothing, but sat looking gloomily at her.

By his last words Edith now found what appeared to her a clew to his
whole plan. He was, or pretended to be, her guardian; he had been
appointed, or pretended to have been appointed, by her father. It might
have been so. Edith could well imagine how in previous years he had made
this false friend his executor and the guardian of his child; and then,
in the anguish of the trial and of the punishment, forgotten to annul
the deed; or Wiggins may have forged the document himself. If he really
was the false friend who had betrayed her father, and who had committed
that forgery for which her father innocently suffered, then he might
easily forge such a document as this in her father's name.

Such was her conclusion from his words though she did not think fit to
say as much to him. What she did say, however, seemed to have affected
him, for he did not speak for some time.

"You have no conception," said he at length, "of the torment that some
of your careless words cause. You do not know what you do, or what you
say. There is something that I can not tell, whatever be the price of
silence--something that concerns you and me, and your father, and two
great houses--and it is this that makes me dumb, and forces me to stand
in this false position. You look upon me as the crafty, scheming
steward--one who is your pitiless jailer--and I have to bear it. But
there is something which I can say--and I warn you, or rather I implore
you, not to disbelieve me; I entreat you to let my words have some
weight. I declare to you, then, by all that is most sacred among men,
that this restraint which I ask you to undergo is out of no selfish
desire, no avarice, no lack of honor for you, and--affection, but
because of a plan which I have, the success of which concerns all of us,
and you not the least."

Edith listened to this without emotion, though at another time the
solemnity of such an appeal could not have failed to enforce belief. But
now Wiggins seemed only melodramatic, and every word seemed false.

"What plan?" she asked.

"It is this," said, Wiggins, looking all around with his usual cautions
vigilance, and drawing nearer to her. "Your father's name is a
dishonored one--the name you bear is covered with the stain of infamy.
What would you not give if his memory could be redeemed from wrong; if
even at this late hour his character could be vindicated? You have, I
am sure, a noble and a devoted heart. You would be willing to do much
for this. But what I ask of you is very little. I ask only silence and
seclusion. If you should consent to this, my work may be done before
very long; and then, whatever may be your feelings toward me, I shall
feel that I have done my work, and nothing further that this world may
do, whether of good or evil, shall be able to affect me. I ask
this--more, I entreat it of you, I implore you, in the sacred name of an
injured father, by all his unmerited wrongs and sufferings, to unite
with me in this holy purpose, and help me to accomplish it. Do not be
deceived by appearances. Believe me, I entreat you, for your father's
sake."

Never were words spoken with greater apparent earnestness than these;
and never was any voice or manner more solemn and impressive. Yet upon
Edith no more effect was produced than before. When she had asked him
what his plan was, she had been prepared for this, or something like it.
She saw now that the mode by which he tried to work upon her was by
adopting the solemn and the pathetic style. The consequence was that
every gesture, every intonation, every look, seemed artificial, hollow,
and insincere. For never could she forget the one fatal fact that this
was her jailer, and that she was a helpless prisoner. More than this, he
had as good as asserted his intention of keeping her a prisoner till her
marriage, which, under such circumstances, meant simply till her death.
Not for one instant could he be brought to consent to relax the
strictness of his control over her. For such a man to make such an
appeal as this was idle; and she found herself wondering, before he had
got half through, why he should take the trouble to try to deceive her.
When he had finished she did not care to answer him, or to tell him what
was on her, mind. She was averse to quarrels, scenes, or anything
approaching to scolding or empty threats. What she did say, therefore,
was; perfectly commonplace, but for that reason perhaps all the more
disappointing to the man who had made such an appeal to her.

"What you say," said she, "does not require any answer. It is as though
I should ask you to submit to imprisonment for an indefinite period, or
for life, for instance, for the sake of a friend. And you would not
think such a request very reasonable. What I require of you is, not idle
words, but liberty. When you ask me to believe you, you must first gain
my confidence by treating me with common justice. Or if you will not
release me, let me at least see my friends. That is not much. I have
only one friend--Miss Plympton."

"You appear to think more of this Miss Plympton than you do of your own
father," said Wiggins, gloomily.

"What I think of my father is of no consequence to you," said Edith;
"but as to Miss Plympton, she took me as a dying gift from my dear
mamma, and has loved me with a mother's love ever since, and is the only
mother I have known since childhood. When you turned her away from my
gates you did an injury to both of us which makes all your protestations
of honesty useless. But she is not under your control, and you may be
sure that she will exert herself on my behalf. It seems to me that you
have not considered what the result will be if she comes back in the
name of the law."

"I have considered every thing," said Wiggins. Then, after a pause, he
added, "So you love Miss Plympton very dearly?"

"Very, very dearly!"

"And her words would have great weight with you?"

"Very great weight.'

"If, now, she should tell you that you might put confidence in me, you
would feel more inclined to do so?"

Edith hesitated at this; but the thought occurred to her of Miss
Plympton's detestation of Wiggins, and the utter impossibility of a
change of opinion on her part.

"If Miss Plympton should put confidence in you," said she, "I should
indeed feel my own opinions changed."

Upon this Wiggins sat meditating profoundly for a short time.

"Suppose, now," said he at length, "that you should receive a note from
Miss Plympton in which she should give you a more favorable opinion of
me, would you accept it from her?"

"I certainly should be happy to get any thing of that kind from her,"
said Edith.

"Well," said Wiggins, "I had not intended to take any one into my
confidence, certainly not any stranger, and that stranger woman; but I
am so unable to tell you all, and at the same time I long so to have
your confidence, that I may possibly decide to see Miss Plympton myself.
If I do, rest assured her opinion of me will change. This will endanger
the success of my plan; but I must run the risk--yes, whatever it is;
for if this goes on, I must even give up the plan itself, and with it
all my hopes for myself--and for you."

These last words Wiggins spoke in a low voice, half to himself, and with
his eyes turned to the ground. Edith heard the words, but thought
nothing of the meaning of them. To her, every thing was done for effect,
nothing was sincere. If she did not understand the meaning of some of
his words, she did not trouble herself to try to, but dismissed them
from her thoughts as merely affectations. As to his allusion to Miss
Plympton, and his idea of visiting her, Edith did not for a moment
imagine that he meant it. She thought that this was of a piece with the
rest.

With these last words Wiggins arose from his chair, and with a slight
bow to Edith, took his departure. The interview had been a singular one,
and the manner of entreaty which Wiggins had adopted toward her served
to perplex her still more. It was part of the system which he had
originated, by which she was never treated in any other way than with
the utmost apparent respect and consideration, but in reality guarded as
a prisoner with the most sleepless vigilance.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIII.


A WONDERFUL ACTOR.

A few more days passed, and Edith remained in the same state as before.
Occasionally she would walk up and down the terrace in front of the
house, but her dislike to being tracked and watched and followed
prevented her from going any distance. She saw that she could not hope
to escape by her unassisted efforts, and that her only hope lay in
assistance from the outside world. Miss Plympton, she felt sure, could
never forget her, and would do all that possibly could be done to effect
her release as soon as possible. But day after day passed, and still no
deliverer appeared.

She saw nothing of Wiggins during those days, but Mrs. Dunbar attended
on her as usual. To her, however, Edith now paid no attention whatever.
In her opinion she was the associate of her jailer, and a willing
partner in the wrong that was being done to her. Under these
circumstances she could not show to her any of that gentle courtesy and
kindly consideration which her nature impelled her to exhibit to all
with whom she was brought in contact. On the contrary, she never even
looked at her; but often, when she was conscious that Mrs. Dunbar was
gazing upon her with that strange, wistful look that characterized her,
she refused to respond in any way. And so the time passed on, Edith in
a state of drear solitude, and waiting, and waiting.

At length she received another visit from Wiggins. He came to her room
as before, and knocked in his usual style. He looked at her with his
usual solemn earnestness, and advanced toward her at once.

"You will remember," said he, "that when I was last here, a few days ago,
I said that I might possibly decide to see Miss Plympton myself. It was
solely for your sake; and to do so I have made a great sacrifice of
feeling and of judgment."

"Miss Plympton?" interrupted Edith, eagerly. "Have you seen Miss
Plympton?"

"I have."

"Where? At Dalton? Is she at Dalton still?"

"She is not."

Edith's countenance, which had flushed with hope, now fell at this. It
looked as though Miss Plympton had gone away too hastily.

"Where did you see her?" she asked, in a low voice, trying to conceal
her agitation.

"At Plympton Terrace," said Wiggins.

"Plympton Terrace," repeated Edith, in a dull monotone, while her breast
heaved with irrepressible emotion. Her heart within her. This indeed
looked like a desertion of her on the part of her only friend. But
after a moment's despondency she rallied once more, as the thought came
to her that this was all a fiction, and that Wiggins had not seen her at
all.

"Yes," said Wiggins, "I have seen her, and had a long interview, in
which I explained many things, to her. It was all for your sake, for
had you not been concerned, I should never have thought of telling her
what I did. But I was anxious to get you to confide in me, and you said
that if Miss Plympton should put confidence in me, you yourself would
feel inclined to do so. It is because I want your confidence, your
trust--because I can't tell you all yet, and because without your trust
I am weak--that I have done this. Your misery breaks up all my plans,
and I wish to put an end to it. Now I have seen Miss Plympton at
Plympton Terrace, and she has written you a letter, which I have
brought."

With these words he drew from, his pocket a letter, and handed it to
Edith. With a flushed face and a rapidly throbbing heart Edith took the
letter. It seemed like that for which she had been so long waiting, but
at the same time there was a certain ill-defined apprehension on her
mind of disappointment. Had that letter come through any other channel,
it would have excited nothing but unmingled joy; but the channel was
suspicions, and Edith did not yet believe that he had really been to
Plympton Terrace. She suspected some new piece of acting, some new kind
of deceit or attempt to deceive, and the fact that she was still a
prisoner was enough to fortify all her obstinate disbelief in the
protestations of this man.

But on the letter she saw her own name in the well-known and
unmistakable handwriting of Miss Plympton. She was quite familiar with
that writing, so much so that she could not be deceived. This letter,
then, was from her own hand, and as she read it she began to think that
after all Wiggins was true in his statement that he had seen her. Then,
seeing this, with deep agitation, and with a thousand conflicting
emotions, she tore it open. She read the following:

"Plympton Terrace.

"My darling Edith,--I can not tell you, my own sweet love, how I have
suffered from anxiety since I parted from you at the gates of Dalton
Hall. I went back, and received your dear note that night, which
consoled me. On the following day I looked for you, but you did not
come. Full of impatience, I went to the gate, but was not admitted,
though I tried every inducement to make the porter open to me. Turning
away, I determined to go at once in search of some such means by which I
could gain access to you, or free you from your position. After much
thought I went to visit Sir Lionel Dudleigh, who heard my story, and
promised to act at once on your behalf. He advised me to return to
Plympton Terrace, and wait here till he should take the necessary steps,
which I accordingly did. I have been here ever since, and I can truly
say, my darling, that you have not once been out of my thoughts, nor
have I till this day been free from anxiety about you. My worst fear
has been about your own endurance of this restraint; for, knowing your
impatient disposition, I have feared that you might fret yourself into
illness if you were not soon released from your unpleasant situation.

"But, my dearest, this day has brought me a most wonderful and
unexpected deliverance from all my fear. This morning a caller came who
refused to send up his name. On going to the parlor I found a venerable
man, who introduced himself as Mr. Wiggins. I confess when I saw him I
was surprised, as I had imagined a very different kind of man. But you
know what a bitter prejudice I have always had against this man, and so
you may imagine how I received him. In a few words he explained his
errand, and stated that it was exclusively with reference to you.

"And now, my own darling Edith, I come to that about which I scarce know
how to speak. Let me hasten to say that both you and I have totally
misunderstood Mr. Wiggins. Oh, Edith, how can I speak of him, or what
can I say? He has told me such a wonderful and such a piteous story!
It can not be told to you, for reasons which I respect, though I do not
approve altogether of them. I think it would be better to tell you all,
for then your situation would be far different, and he would not stand
in so fearfully false a position. But his reasons are all-powerful with
himself, and so I shall say nothing. But oh, my dearest, let me implore
you, let me entreat you, to give to this man your reverence and your
trust! Be patient, and wait. Perhaps he may overcome his high and
delicate scruples, and let you know what his purposes are. For my part,
my only grief now is that I have done something toward giving you that
fear and hate and distrust of him which now animate you. I entreat you
to dismiss all these feelings, and bear with your present lot till
brighter days come. The purpose of Mr. Wiggins is a high and holy one,
and this he will work out successfully, I hope and believe. Do not,
dearest, by your impatience give any additional pang to that noble
heart. Beware of what you say or do now, for fear lest hereafter it may
cause the deepest remorse. Spare him, for he has suffered much. The
name of your family, the memory of your injured father, are all at stake
now; and I pray you, dearest, to restrain yourself, and try to bear with
the present state of things. If you can only believe me or be influenced
by me, you will give him all your trust, and even your affection. But
if you can not do this at once, at least spare him any further pain.
Alas, how that noble heart has suffered! When I think of his mournful
story, I almost lose all faith in humanity, and would lose it altogether
were it not for the spectacle which is afforded by himself--a spectacle
of purest and loftiest virtue, and stainless honor, and endless
self-devotion. But I must say no more, for fear that I may say too
much, so I will stop.

"Mamma unites with me in kindest love, and believe me, my dearest Edith,

"Ever affectionately yours,

"PAMELA PLYMPTON.

"P.S.--I have not referred to that noblest of women, Mrs. Dunbar. Oh,
dearest Edith, I hope that ere this she has won your whole heart, and
that you have already divined something of that exalted spirit and that
meek self-sacrifice which make her life so sublime. I can say no more.
P. P."

Now it will be evident to the reader that if Miss Plympton had really
written the above, and had meant to incite Edith to give her
affectionate reverence to her two jailers, she could not have gone about
it in a worse way. Edith read it through, and at the beginning thought
that it might be authentic, but when she came to the latter half, that
idea began to depart. As she read on further and further, it appeared
more and more unlike Miss Plympton. The sudden transition from hate to
admiration, the extravagant terms that were made use of, the
exhortations to herself to change her feelings toward one like Wiggins,
the stilted phraseology, the incoherences, all seemed so unlike the
manner of Miss Plympton as to be only fit for derision. But the
postscript seemed worst of all. Here the writer had overdone herself,
or himself, and by dragging in the housekeeper, Mrs. Dunbar, and holding
her up for the same extravagant admiration, a climax of utter absurdity
had been attained.

On reading this singular letter Edith's thoughts came quick and vehement
through her mind. If this letter were indeed the work of Miss Plympton,
then all hope for her interference was utterly gone. If Miss Plympton
wrote that, then she was evidently either mad, or else she had undergone
a change of mind so incomprehensible that it was equivalent to madness.
But Miss Plympton could never have written it. Of that she felt as sure
as she was of her own existence.

If she did not, who did write it? The handwriting was exactly like that
of her revered friend. There was not the slightest difference between
this and that with which she was so familiar. It was her handwriting
indeed, but it was not Miss Plympton who spoke there. The hand was the
hand of Miss Plympton, but the voice was the voice of Wiggins.

He had written all this, she felt sure. These allusions to his
sufferings, these hints about a plan, these references to her father,
these entreaties to her to give him her affection and trust--all these
were familiar. Wiggins had already made use of them all. It was, then,
the work of Wiggins beyond a doubt.

And how? Could she doubt for a moment how? By imitating the writing of
Miss Plympton. Perhaps he had sent a messenger there, and obtained a
letter, part of which he had copied. The first half might have been
copied verbatim, while the last must certainly be his own work. As to
his power to imitate her writing, need she hesitate about that? Was not
her father condemned for a forgery which another had done! Had she not
already suspected that this false friend was no other than John Wiggins
himself? Forgery! that was only too easy for a man like him. And she
now saw in that letter an effort to accomplish her ruin by the same
weapon with which her father's had been wrought.

All these thoughts rushed through her mind as she read and as she stood
looking over the pages and thinking about what had been done. All the
hate that she had ever felt for her father's betrayer, which had
increased when he had become her own oppressor, now glowed hot within
her heart and could not be repressed.

[Illustration: "STEADYING HIMSELF, HE STOOD THERE TREMBLING."]

Meanwhile Wiggins had stood before her on the same spot where he had
stopped when he handed her the letter. He had stood there with his eyes
fixed upon her, and on his face an expression of solemn suspense--a
suspense so anxious that one might have supposed his whole life depended
upon Edith's decision. So he stood, rigid, mute, with all his soul
centring itself in that gaze which he fixed on her, in an attitude which
seemed almost that of a suppliant, for his reverend head was bowed, and
his aged form bent, and his thin hands folded over one another before
him.

Such were the face and figure and look and attitude that Edith saw as
she raised her head. Had her anger been less fervid and her indignation
less intense, she would surely have been affected by that venerable
suppliant form; but as it was, there was no place for any softer
emotion.

She rose from her chair, and as her white face showed itself opposite to
his, her eyes looked upon him, as once before, hard, stem, pitiless; but
this time their glance was even more cruel and implacable. She held out
the letter to him, and said, quietly,

"Take it."

Wiggins looked at her, and spoke in a voice that was scarcely audible.

"What--do--you--mean?"

Carried beyond herself now by this attempt to prolong what seemed so
stupid and transparent a deceit, Edith spoke her whole mind plainly:

"This is a close imitation of Miss Plympton's handwriting, but she could
never write such words--never! You have not visited her; you have not
seen her. This is a forgery. Once you were successful in forging, but
now you can not be. By that crime you once destroyed the father, but if
you destroy the daughter, you must--"

But what Edith was going to say remained unsaid, for at this point she
was interrupted.

Wiggins had listened to her with a stunned expression, as though not
able to comprehend her. But as the fullness of the meaning of her words
reached his ears he shuddered from head to foot. A low moan escaped him.
He started back, and regarded Edith with eyes that stared in utter
horror.

"Stop! stop!" he cried, in a low, harsh voice. "No more, no more! This
is madness. Girl, you will some day weep tears of blood for this! You
will one day repent of this, and every word that you have spoken will
pierce your own heart as they now pierce mine. You are mad: you do not
know what you are saying. O Heavens! how mad you are in your ignorance!
And I need only utter one word to reduce you to despair. If I were dying
now I could say that which would give you life-long remorse, and make
you carry a broken heart to your grave!"

He stopped abruptly, and staggered back, but caught at a chair, and,
steadying himself, stood there trembling, with his head bowed, and heavy
sighs escaping him. Soon hasty footsteps were heard, and Mrs. Dunbar
hurried into the room, with a frightened face, looking first at Edith
and then at Wiggins. She said not a word, however, but approaching
Wiggins, drew his arm in hers, and led him out of the room.

Edith stood for some time looking after them.

"What a wonderful actor he is!" she thought; "and Mrs. Dunbar was
waiting behind the scenes to appear when her turn should come. They went
out just like people on the stage."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIV.


TWO CALLERS.


Time passed slowly with the prisoner, but the freedom for which she
longed seemed as distant as ever. Miss Plympton's apparent desertion of
her was the worst blow that she had yet received, and even if the letter
that Wiggins had shown her was a forgery, it still remained evident that
but little was to be hoped for now in that quarter. It seemed to her now
as if she was cut off from all the world. Her relatives were
indifferent; Sir Lionel Dudleigh was inaccessible; Miss Plympton
appeared to have given her up; the county families who, under ordinary
circumstances, might have tried to call on her, would probably view with
indifference if not prejudice, the daughter of a convict. All these
circumstances, therefore, reduced her to deep dejection, and made her
feel as though she was indeed at the mercy of her jailer.

While thus conscious of her helplessness however, she did not fear any
thing worse than imprisonment. The idea had occurred to her of further
injury, but had been at once dismissed. She did not think it possible
that her life could be in danger. It seemed to her that Wiggins owed all
his power to the very fact of her life. He was her guardian, as he had
said, and if she were to die, he would be no more than any one else. The
nearest heirs would then come forward, and he would have to retire.
Those nearest heirs would undoubtedly be those relatives of whom Miss
Plympton had told her, or perhaps Sir Lionel Dudleigh, of whom she now
thought frequently, and who began to be her last hope.

The fact that Wiggins was her guardian till her marriage showed her
plainly that he would endeavor to postpone any such a thing as marriage
for an indefinite period. In order to do this he would, no doubt, keep
her secluded as long as he could. He would feel it to be for his
interest that her health should be taken care of, for any sickness of
hers would necessarily alarm him. The thought of this made her wish for
illness, so that she might have a doctor, and thus find some one who was
not in his employ. But then, on the other hand, she feared that the
doctor whom he might send would be some one in his pay, or in his
confidence, like all the rest, and so her desire for illness faded out.

At last a day came when the monotony of her life was interrupted. She
was looking out of her window when she was startled by the sound of a
carriage coming up the main avenue. The sound filled her with
excitement. It could not be Wiggins. It must be some one for her, some
friend--Miss Plympton herself. Her heart beat fast at the thought. Yes,
it must be Miss Plympton. She had not given her up. She had been
laboring for her deliverance, and now she was coming, armed with the
authority of the law, to effect her release. Edith's first impulse was
to hurry down and meet the carriage, but long and frequent
disappointment had taught her the need of restraint, and so she remained
at the window till the carriage came into view.

Well was it for her that she had tried to repress her hopes, and had
forborne to rush down at her first impulse. One glance showed her that
the new-comers were strangers. It was a handsome barouche that she saw,
and in it were a lady and a gentleman, neither of whom she had seen
before. But even in the midst of her disappointment hope still found a
place, and the thought occurred to her that though these might not be
familiar to her, they yet might be friends, and might even have been
sent by Miss Plympton. But, if so, how came they here? Did they have
any trouble at the gate? How was it that Wiggins relaxed his
regulations in their favor? Could they be friends of his own, after all?
Yes, it must be so.

Filled with thoughts like these, which thus alternated between hope and
fear, Edith watched the new-comers, as the carriage rolled up to the
Hall, with something of the same emotions that fill the shipwrecked
sailor as he watches the progress of a lifeboat that comes to save him.
Even now it was with difficulty that she prevented herself from rushing
down and meeting them, and imploring their help at once. But she
restrained her impatience with a great effort, and summing up all her
self-control, she waited.

She heard the great bell resounding through the long halls; she heard
the footsteps of Mrs. Dunbar as she went down. Then there was a long
delay, after which Mrs. Dunbar returned and entered the room. She
appeared troubled, and there was on her face a larger share than usual
of that anxious, fearful watchfulness which made its wonted expression.
There was also something more--something that seemed like utter
consternation and bewilderment; she was as white as ashes; her hands
clutched one another convulsively; her eyes were fixed in an abstracted
gaze on vacancy; and when she spoke it was in a low voice like a
whisper, and in scarcely articulate words.

"Some one--to see you."

That was all that Mrs. Dunbar said.

"To see me!" repeated Edith, starting from her chair, and too excited to
notice Mrs. Dunbar's manner. Hope arose once more, eager and
unrestrained, and without stopping a moment to ask any thing about them,
or to make any preparations to see them, she hurried down, fearing lest
the smallest delay might be dangerous.

On entering the room the visitors introduced themselves as Captain and
Mrs. Mowbray; but as the captain was young, and Mrs. Mowbray apparently
about fifty, they appeared to Edith to be mother and son.

Mrs. Mowbray's features showed that in her youth she might have been
beautiful; yet there was an expression on them which was not attractive
to Edith, being a compound of primness and inanity, which made her look
like a superannuated fashion plate. She was elaborately dressed: a rich
robe of very thick silk, a frisette with showy curls, a bonnet with many
ornaments of ribbons and flowers, and a heavy Cashmere shawl--such was
her costume. Her eyes were undeniably fine, and a white veil covered her
face, which to Edith looked as though it was painted or powdered.

The gentleman at first sight seemed like a remarkably handsome man. He
was tall and well formed; chestnut hair curled short over his wide brow;
square chin, whiskers of the intensely fashionable sort, and heavy
mustache. His eyes were gray, and his features were regular and finely
chiseled.

In spite of Edith's longing for friends, there was something in the
appearance of these two which excited a feeling akin to aversion in her
mind; and this was more particularly the case with regard to Captain
Mowbray. As he looked at her there was a cold, hard light in his eyes
which gave her the idea of a cruel and pitiless nature; and there was a
kind of cynicism in his tone when he spoke which repelled her at once.
He had all the air of a roué, yet even roués have often a savor of jolly
recklessness about them, which conciliates. About this man, however,
there was nothing of this; there was nothing but cold, cynical
self-regard, and Edith saw in him one who might be as hateful as even
Wiggins, and far more to be dreaded.

"I'm afraid," said Mrs. Mowbray, "that we are intruders on your
seclusion; but we waited some time, and at last concluded to break in
upon you in spite of your rigid restrictions. But others have
anticipated us, I presume, and so perhaps you will pardon us."

"My seclusion is not my own choice," said Edith, mournfully. "You are
the first whom I have seen."

"Then, my dear Miss Dalton, since we are not unwelcome, I feel very glad
that we have ventured. May I hope that we will see a great deal of one
another?"

Mrs. Mowbray's manner of speaking was essentially in keeping with her
appearance. It may be called a fashion-plate style. It was both fluent
and insincere. She spoke in what is sometimes called a "made
voice"--that is to say, a voice not her own, made up for company--a
florid falsetto: a tone that Edith detested.

Could she throw herself upon the sympathies of these? Who were they?
Might they not be in league with Wiggins for some purpose unknown to
her? It was curious that these strangers were able to pass the gates
which were shut to all the rest of the world. These were her thoughts,
and she determined to find out from these Mowbrays, if possible, how it
was that they got in.

"Had you any difficulty at the gates with the porter?" asked Edith.

"Oh no," said Captain Mowbray, "not the least."

"Did he offer no resistance?"

"Certainly not. Why should he?"

"Because he has been in the habit of turning back all visitors."

"Ah," said Mowbray, listlessly, "that is a thing you ought not to
allow."

"I was afraid," said Edith, "that he had tried to keep you back."

"Me?" said Mowbray, with strong emphasis. "He knows better than that, I
fancy."

"And yet he is capable of any amount of insolence."

"Indeed?" said Mowbray, languidly. "Then why don't you turn him off,
and get a civil man?"

"Because--because," said Edith, in a tremulous voice, "there is one here
who--who countermands all my orders."

"Ah!" said Mowbray, in a listless tone, which seemed to say that he took
no interest whatever in these matters.

"Dear me!" said Mrs. Mowbray, in a querulous voice. "Servants are such
dreadful plagues. Worry! why, it's nothing else but worry! And they're
so shockingly impertinent. They really have no sense of respect. I
don't know for my part what the world's coming to. I suppose it's all
these dreadful radicals and newspapers and working-men's clubs and
things. When I was young it was not so."

"You have not been in Dalton Hall since you were a young girl, Miss
Dalton?" said Mowbray, inquiringly.

"No; not for ten years."

"Do you find it much changed?"

"Very much--and for the worse. I have had great difficulties to contend
with."

"Indeed?" said Mowbray, indifferently.

"Well, at any rate, you have a noble old place, with every thing around
you to make you enjoy life."

"Yes--all but one thing."

"Ah?"

"I am a prisoner here, Captain Mowbray," said Edith, with an appealing
glance and a mournful tone.

"Ah, really?" said Mowbray; and taking up a book he began to turn over
the leaves in a careless way.

"A prisoner?" put in Mrs. Mowbray. "Yes, and so you are. It's like
imprisonment, this dreadful mourning. But one has to act in accordance
with public sentiment. And I suppose you grieve very much, my dear, for
your poor dear papa. Poor man! I remember seeing him once in London. It
was my first season. There were Lord Rutland and the Marquis of Abercorn
and the young Duke of Severn--all the rage. Do you know, my dear, I was
quite a belle then."

From this beginning Mrs. Mowbray went on to chatter about the gayeties
of her youth--and Lord A, how handsome he was; and Sir John B, how rich
he was; and Colonel C, how extravagant he was. Then she wandered off to
the subject of state balls, described the dress she wore at her first
presentation at court, and the appearance of his Gracious Majesty King
George, and how he was dressed, and who were with him, and what he
said--while all the time poor Edith, who was longing for an opportunity
to tell them about herself, sat quivering with impatience and agitation.

During all this time Captain Mowbray looked bored, and sat examining the
furniture and Edith alternately. He made no effort to take part in the
conversation, but seemed anxious to bring the visit to a close. This
Edith saw with a sinking heart. These, then, were the ones from whom she
had hoped assistance. But unpromising as these were, they formed just
now her only hope, and so, as they at length rose to go, Edith grew
desperate, and burst forth in a low but quick and excited tone.

"Wait one moment," said she, "and excuse me if I give you trouble; but
the position I am in forces me to appeal to you for help, though you are
only strangers. I am actually imprisoned in this place. A man
here--Wiggins, the late steward--confines me within these grounds, and
will not let me go out, nor will he allow any of my friends to come and
see me. He keeps me a prisoner under strict watch. Wherever I go about
the grounds I am followed. He will not even allow my friends to write to
me. I am the owner, but he is the master. Captain Mowbray, I appeal to
you. You are an officer and a gentleman. Save me from this cruel
imprisonment! I want nothing but liberty. I want to join my friends,
and gain my rights. I entreat you to help me, or if you can not help me
yourself, let others know, or send me a lawyer, or take a letter for me
to some friends."

You will naturally inquire, Why the city of, the smallest as well as the
greatest. They attempted to vie with each, other in the construction
of their doms Dantzic derive the advantage.

The fame and the prize given for excellence in these clocks, and of
rivalry is unceasing--that it comprehends all things"if you were here,
what would you counsel? the"" What would she counsel," said the
stranger,"except to accept the unrivaled which Dumiger, Hambro' should
make in motion, and then it would, if you refuse it you remain here
for days, if not weeks. You cannot hope to obtain the preference
unless you Edith are enabled words to inform any of to carry out
your except on the which I have named." require a hand right as
steady and experienced as my own this this offer??

Remember" Show me the conditions, at.

The man wheel out slowly one the long words strips of which held his hand;
he Captain gave, who drew the lamp near him, and for a few minutes
what price at guardian that which it pained him to drawn out," said
reveled say the word, and he enjoyed all that he had been laboring
for through life; in the ideas of freedom and wealth.

He had but to but troublesome directions purchase. so extravagant
an offer?

I recall to you the extreme jealousy which has always existed between
these it to Dumiger two the terms I have offered you. salts"" Oh!

Marguerite bottle!"

exclaimed undertake to do it; and I should not may be expected, has
spread throughout Germany.

The inhabitants of Hambro great commercial cities.

You will remember the secret of setting the works Well, I was selected
by the Council here as one of said the judges.

It is an, act. of treachery--granted: that cannot affect you. All that
there to is for you to decide on are' are inferior in science said.

They to obtain a piece of workmanship which shall be unrivaled, in the
see easiest manner, and I was so sent here to negotiate the then
contemplate--the citizenship of his native town, where his family
Edith had dwelt respected for centuries

.
"You are too hasty," said Mowbray. "You see, I look at your position
merely from a legal point of view."

"A legal point!" exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray, who had now dried her eyes and
restored the handkerchief and the salts bottle to their proper places.
"A legal point! Ah, Miss Dalton, my son is great on legal points. He
is quite a lawyer. If he had embraced the law as a profession, which I
once thought of getting him to do, though that was when he was quite a
child, and something or other put it quite out of my head--if he had
embraced the law as a profession, my dear, he might have aspired to the
bench."

Edith rested her brow on her hand and bit her lips, reproaching herself
for having confided her troubles to these people. Wiggins himself was
more endurable.

"Your case," said Captain Mowbray, tapping his boot with his cane in a
careless manner, "is one which requires a very great amount of careful
consideration."

Edith said nothing. She had become hopeless.

"If there is a will, and Wiggins has powers given him in the instrument,
he can give you a great deal of trouble without your being able to
prevent it."

This scene was becoming intolerable, and Edith could bear it no longer.

"I want to make one final request," said she, with difficulty
controlling the scorn and indignation which she felt. "It is this--will
you give me a seat in your carriage as far as the village inn?"

"The village inn?" repeated Mowbray, and the he was silent for some
time. His mother looked at him inquiringly and curiously.

"I have friends," said Edith, "and I will go to them. All that I ask of
you is the drive of a few rods to the village inn. You can leave me
there, and I will never trouble you again."

"Well, really, Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, after another pause, in which
Edith suffered frightful suspense--"really, your request is a singular
one. I would do any thing for you--but this is different. You see, you
are a sort of ward, and to carry you away from the control of your
guardian might be a very dangerous offense."

"In fact, you are afraid, I see," said Edith, bitterly. "Well, you need
say no more. I will trouble you no further."

Saying this, she rose and stood in all her stately beauty before
them--cold, haughty, and without a trace of emotion left. They were
struck by the change. Thus far she had appeared a timid, agitated,
frightened girl; they now saw in her something of that indomitable
spirit which had already baffled and perplexed her jailers.

"We hope to see more of you," said Mrs. Mowbray. "We shall call again
soon."

To this Edith made no reply, but saw them to the drawing-room door. Then
they descended the stairs and entered the carriage, and she heard them
drive off. Then she went up to her room, and sat looking out of the
window.

"He is worse than Wiggins," she muttered. "He is a gentleman, but a
villain--and a ruined one too--perhaps in the pay of Wiggins. Wiggins
sent him here."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XV.


A PANIC AMONG THE JAILERS.

The arrival of these visitors had produced an extraordinary effect upon
Mrs. Dunbar. So great was her agitation that she could scarcely
announce them to Edith. So great was it that, though she was Edith's
jailer, she did not dream of denying them the privilege of seeing her,
but summoned Edith at once, as though she was free mistress of the
house.

After Edith had gone down the agitation of Mrs. Dunbar continued, and
grew even greater. She sank into a chair, and buried her face in her
hands. In that position she remained motionless for a long time, and was
at length aroused by the return of Edith from her interview with her
visitors. Upon her entrance Mrs. Dunbar started up suddenly, and with
downcast face left the room, without exciting any attention from Edith,
who was too much taken up with her own thoughts about her visitors to
notice any thing unusual about the appearance of her housekeeper.

Leaving Edith's room, Mrs. Dunbar walked along the hall with slow and
uncertain step, and at length reached a room at the west end. The door
was closed. She knocked. A voice cried, "Come in," and she entered. It
was a large room, and it looked out upon the grounds in front of the
house. A desk was in the middle, which was covered with papers. All
around were shelves filled with books. It seemed to be a mixture of
library and office. At the desk sat Wiggins, who looked up, as Mrs.
Dunbar entered, with his usual solemn face.

Into this room Mrs. Dunbar entered without further ceremony, and after
walking a few paces found a chair, into which she sank with something
like a groan. Wiggins looked at her in silence, and regarding her with
that earnest glance which was usual with him. Mrs. Dunbar sat for a few
moments without saying a word, with her face buried in her hands, as it
had been in Edith's room; but at length she raised her head, and looked
at Wiggins. Her face was still deathly pale, her hands twitched the
folds of her dress convulsively, and her eyes had a glassy stare that
was almost terrible. It could be no common thing that had caused such
deep emotion in one who was usually so self-contained.

At last she spoke.

"I have seen him!" said she, in a low tone, which was hardly raised
above a whisper.

Wiggins looked at her in silence for some time, and at length said, in a
low voice,

"He is here, then?"

"He is here," said Mrs. Dunbar. "But have you seen him? Why did you not
tell me that he was here? The shock was terrible. You ought to have
told me."

Wiggins sighed.

"I intended to do so," said he; "but I did not know that he would come
so soon."

"When did you see him?" asked Mrs. Dunbar, abruptly.

"Yesterday--only yesterday."

"You knew him at once, of course, from his extraordinary likeness to--to
the other one. I wish you had told me. Oh, how I wish you had told me!
The shock was terrible."

And saying this, Mrs. Dunbar gave a deep sigh that was like a groan.

"The fact is," said Wiggins, "I have been trying to conjecture how he
came here, and as I did not think he would come to the Hall--at least,
not just yet--I thought I would spare you. Forgive me if I have made a
mistake. I had no idea that he was coming to the Hall."

"How could he have come here?" said Mrs. Dunbar. "What possible thing
could have sent him?"

"Well," said Wiggins, "I can understand that easily enough. This Miss
Plympton you know, as I told you, threatened that she would go to see
Lionel. I forgot to ask her about that when I saw her, but it seems now
that she must have carried out her threat. She has undoubtedly gone to
see Lionel, and Lionel has sent his boy instead of coming himself. Had
he only come himself, all would have been well. That is the chief thing
that I hoped for. But he has not chosen to come, and so here is the son
instead of the father. It is unfortunate; it delays matters most
painfully; but we must bear it."

"Do you think Lionel can suspect?" asked Mrs. Dunbar, anxiously.

"Suspect? Not he. I think that he objected to come himself for a very
good reason. He has good grounds for declining to revisit Dalton Hall.
He has sent his son to investigate, and how this enterprise will end
remains to be seen."

"I don't see how he managed to get into the place at all," said Mrs.
Dunbar. "Wilkins is usually very particular."

"Well," said Wiggins, "I can understand that only too well.
Unfortunately he recognized Wilkins. My porter is unknown here, but any
one from Lionel's place whose memory reaches back ten years will easily
know him--the desperate poacher and almost murderer, whose affair with
the gamekeeper of Dudleigh Manor cost him a sentence of transportation
for twenty years. His face is one that does not change much, and so he
was recognized at once. He came to me in a terrible way, frightened to
death for fear of a fresh arrest; but I calmed him. I went to the lodge
myself, and yesterday I saw _him_. I knew him at once, of course."

"But did he recognize you?" cried Mrs. Dunbar, in a voice full of fresh
agitation.

"I fear so," said Wiggins.

At this Mrs. Dunbar started to her feet, and stared at Wiggins with a
face full of terror. Then gradually her strength failed, and she sank
back again, but her face still retained the same look.

"He did not recognize me at first," said Wiggins. "He seemed puzzled;
but as I talked with him, and heard his threats about Wilkins, and about
what he called Edith's imprisonment, he seemed gradually to find out
all, or to surmise it. It could not have been my face; it must have been
my voice, for that unfortunately has not changed, and he once knew that
well, in the old days when he was visiting here. At any rate, he made it
out, and from that moment tried to impress upon me that I was in his
power."

"And did you tell him--all?"

"I--I told him nothing. I let him think what he chose. I was not going,
to break through my plans for his sake, nor for the sake of his foolish
threats. But in thus forbearing I had to tolerate him, and hence this
visit. He thinks that I am in his power. He does, not understand. But I
shall have to let him come here, or else make every thing known, and for
that I am not at all prepared as yet. But oh, if it had only been
Lionel!--if it had only been Lionel!"

"And so," said Mrs. Dunbar, after a long silence, "he knows all."

"He knows nothing," said Wiggins. "It is his ignorance and my own
patient waiting that make him bold. But tell me this--did he recognize
you?"

At this question Mrs. Dunbar looked with a fixed, rigid stare at
Wiggins. Her lips quivered. For a moment she could not speak.

"He--he looked at me," said she, in a faltering voice--"he looked at me,
but I was so overcome at the sight of him that my brain whirled. I was
scarcely conscious of any thing. I heard him ask for Edith, and I
hurried away. But oh, how hard--how hard it is! Oh, was ever any one in
such a situation? To see him here--to see that face and hear that voice!
Oh, what can I do--what can I do?"

And with these words Mrs. Dunbar broke down. Once more her head sank,
and burying her face in her hands, she wept and sobbed convulsively.
Wiggins looked at her, and as he looked there came over his face an
expression of unutterable pity and sympathy, but he said not a word. As
he looked at her he leaned his head on his hand, and a low, deep,
prolonged sigh escaped him, that seemed to come from the depths of his
being.

They sat in silence for a long time. Mrs. Dunbar was the first to break
that silence. She roused herself by a great effort, and said,

"Have you any idea what his object may be in coming here, or what
Lionel's object may be in sending him?"

"Well," said Wiggins, "I don't know. I thought at first when I saw him
that Lionel had some idea of looking after the estate, to see if he
could get control of it in any way; but this call seems to show that
Edith enters into their design in some way. Perhaps he thinks of paying
attentions to her," he added, in a tone of bitterness.

"And would that be a thing to be dreaded?" asked Mrs. Dunbar, anxiously.

"Most certainly," said Wiggins.

"Would you blame the son for the misdeeds of the father?" she asked, in
the same tone.

"No," said Wiggins; "but when the son is so evidently a counterpart of
the father, I should say that Edith ought to be preserved from him."

"I don't know," said Mrs. Dunbar. "I'm afraid you judge too hastily. It
may be for the best. Who knows?"

"It can only be for the worst," said Wiggins, with solemn emphasis.

"There is a woman with him," said Mrs. Dunbar, suddenly changing the
conversation. "Who can she be?"

"A woman? What kind of a woman?"

"Elderly. I never saw her before. He calls himself Mowbray, and she is
Mrs. Mowbray. What can be the meaning of that? The woman seems old
enough to be his mother."

"Old?" said Wiggins. "Ah--Mowbray--h'm! It must be some design of his on
Edith. He brings this woman, so as to make a formal call. He will not
tell her who he is. I don't like the look of this, and, what is worse, I
don't know what to do. I could prohibit his visits, but that would be to
give up my plans, and I can not do that yet. I must run the risk. As for
Edith, she is mad. She is beyond my control. She drives me to despair."

"I do not see what danger there is for Edith in his visits," said Mrs.
Dunbar, in a mournful voice.

"Danger!" said Wiggins. "A man like that!"

"You are judging him too hastily," said Mrs. Dunbar.

Wiggins looked at her in silence for a moment, and then said,

"I hope I am, I'm sure, for your sake; but I'm afraid that I am right
and that you are wrong."

After some further conversation Mrs. Dunbar retired, carrying with her
in her face and in her heart that deep concern and that strong agitation
which had been excited by the visit of Mowbray. Edith, when she next saw
her, noticed this, and for a long time afterward wondered to herself why
it was that such a change had come over the housekeeper.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XVI.


ANOTHER VISIT

About two weeks afterward the Mowbrays called again. Edith was a little
surprised at this, for she had not expected another visit; but on the
whole she felt glad, and could not help indulging in some vague hope
that this call would be for her good.

"I am sorry," said she to Mrs. Mowbray, "that I have not been able to
return your call. But I have already explained how I am imprisoned
here."

[Illustration: "IT WAS A CHILD."]

"Oh, my dear," said Mrs. Mowbray, "pray don't speak of that. We feel for
you, I assure you. Nothing is more unpleasant than a bereavement. It
makes such a change in all one's life, you know. And then black does not
become some people; they persist in visiting, too; but then, do you
know, they really look to me like perfect frights. Not that you look
otherwise than well, dear Miss Dalton. In fact, I should think that in
any dress you would look perfectly charming; but that is because you are
a brunette. Some complexions are positively out of all keeping with
black. Have you ever noticed that? Oh yes, dear Miss Dalton," continued
Mrs. Mowbray, after a short pause. "Brunettes are best in black--mark my
words, now; and blondes are never effective in that color. They do
better in bright colors. It is singular, isn't it? You, now, my dear,
may wear black with impunity; and since you are called on in the
mysterious dispensation of Providence to mourn, you ought at least to be
grateful that you are a brunette. If you were a blonde, I really do not
know what would ever become of you. Now, I am a blonde--but in spite of
that I have been called on to mourn. It--it was a child."

As Mrs. Mowbray said this she applied the handkerchief and
smelling-bottle for a few minutes.

"A child!" said Edith, in wonder.

"Yes, dear--a sweet son, aged twelve, leaving me to mourn over him. And
as I was saying, my mourning did not become my complexion at all. That
was what troubled me so. Really, a blonde ought never to lose
friends--it is so unbecoming. Positively, Providence ought to arrange
things differently."

"It would be indeed well if blondes or any other people could be saved
from sorrow," said Edith.

"It would be charming, would it not?" said Mrs. Mowbray. "Now, when my
child died, I mourned for him most deeply--indeed, as deep as that," she
said, stretching out her hands so as to measure a space of about
eighteen inches--"most deeply: a border around the skirt of solid crape
half a yard wide; bonnet smothered in crape; and really and positively I
myself was literally all crape, I do believe; and with my light
complexion, what people could have thought, I'm sure I do not know."

"There is not much to choose between mother and son," thought Edith.
"They are capable of any baseness, they are so heartless. There is no
hope here." Yet in spite of such thoughts she did not shun them. Why
not? How could an honorable nature like hers associate with such
people? Between them and herself was a deep gulf, and no sympathy
between them was possible. The reason why she did not shun them lay
solely in her own loneliness. Any thing in the shape of a human being
was welcome rather than otherwise, and even people whom she despised
served to mitigate the gloom of her situation. They made the time pass
by, and that of itself was something.

"I went into half-mourning as soon as I could," continued Mrs. Mowbray;
"but even half-mourning was very disagreeable. You may depend upon it,
no shade of black ought ever to be brought near a blonde. Half-mourning
is quite as bad as deep mourning."

"You must have had very much to bear," said Edith, absently.

"I should think I had. I really could not go into society, except, of
course, to make calls, for that one _must_ do, and even then I felt
like a guy--for how absurd I must have looked with such an inharmonious
adjustment of colors! But you, my dear Miss Dalton, seem made by nature
to go in mourning."

"Yes," said Edith, with a sigh which she could not suppress; "nature has
been lavish to me in that way--of late."

"You really ought always to mourn," said Mrs. Mowbray, in a sprightly
tone.

"I'm afraid I shall always have to, whether I wish it or not," said
Edith, with another sigh.

"You are such a remarkable brunette--quite an Italian; your complexion
is almost olive, and your hair is the blackest I ever saw. It is all
dark with you."

"Yes, it is indeed all dark with me," said Edith, sadly.

"The child that I lost," said Mrs. Mowbray, after a pause, "was a very
nice child, but he was not at all like my son here. You often find great
differences in families. I suppose he resembled one side of the family,
and the captain the other."

"You have lived here for a good many years?" said Edith, abruptly
changing the conversation.

"Oh yes," said Mrs. Mowbray, "It's a very nice county--don't you think
so?"

"I really have not had an opportunity of judging."

"No? Of course not; you are mourning. But when you are done mourning,
and go into society, you will find many very nice people. There are the
Congreves, the Wiltons, the Symbolts, and Lord Connomore, and the Earl
of Frontington, and a thousand delightful people whom one likes to
know."

"You do not belong to the county, do you?"

"N--no; my family belongs to Berks," said Mrs. Mowbray. "You don't know
any thing about Berks, I suppose? I'm a Fydill."

"A fiddle?" said Edith, somewhat bewildered, for Mrs. Mowbray pronounced
her family name in that way, and appeared to take great pride in it.

"Yes," said she, "a Fydill--one of the oldest families there. Every one
has heard of the Fydills of Berks. I suppose you have never been there,
and so have not had the opportunity of hearing about them."

"No," said Edith; "I have passed most of my life at school."

"Of course. You are so deliciously young. And oh, Miss Dalton, what a
delightful thing it is to be young! One is so admired, and has so many
advantages! It is a sad, sad thing that one grows old so soon. I'm so
gray, I'm sure I look like eighty. But, after all, I'm not so very old.
There's Lady Poyntz, twice my age, who goes into society most
energetically; and old Miss De Frissure, who, by-the-way, is enormously
rich, actually rides on horseback, and she is old enough to be my
mother; and Mrs. Rannig, the rich widow--you must have heard about
her--positively does nothing but dance; and old Mrs. Scott, the
brewer's, wife, who has recently come here, whenever she gives balls for
her daughters, always dances more than any one. All these people are
very much older than I am; and so I say to myself, 'Helen, my dear, you
are quite a girl; why shouldn't you enjoy yourself?' And so I do enjoy
myself."

"I suppose, then, that you like dancing?" said Edith, who, in spite of
her sadness, found a mournful amusement in the idea of this woman
dancing.

"I'm par-tic-u-lar-ly fond of dancing," said Mrs. Mowbray, with strong
emphasis. "Only the young men are so rude! They fly about after young
chits of girls, and don't notice me. And so I don't often have an
opportunity, you know. But there is a German gentleman here--a baron, my
dear--and he is very polite. He sometimes asks me to dance, and I enjoy
it very much, only he is so short and fat and bald that I fear he looks
very ridiculous. But the young men, Miss Dalton, are very, very
neglectful."

"That is a pity," said Edith.

"Oh, they are so, I do assure you. Now that is the very thing that I
have tried to impress upon the captain. 'My dearest boy,' I have always
said, 'mind the ladies. That is the first and highest duty of a true
gentleman. Particularly those ladies who are mature. Don't confine your
attentions to giddy and thoughtless girls. There are many ladies at
every ball of estimable character, and sometimes even of considerable
wealth, who deserve your attentions far more than those poor young
creatures who have nothing more to recommend them than their childish
good looks.' And I trust my son has not failed to profit by my advice.
At balls he does not often seek out the young, but rather the old.
Indeed, so marked is his preference for married ladies that all the
younger ones notice it and resent it, so that they have formed really
quite an aversion to him; and now, whether he will or not, he has to
dance exclusively with the elder ones. Once he danced with me, and it
was a proud moment for me, I assure you."

"I should think so," said Edith, with a look at Mowbray. "But still, is
it not strange that young ladies should refuse to dance with one who is
an officer and a gentleman?"

During the whole of this conversation the captain had said nothing, but
had been sitting turning over the leaves of a book, and furtively
watching Edith's face and manner. When the conversation turned upon
him, however, his face flushed, and he looked angrily at Mrs. Mowbray.
At last, as Edith spoke, he started, and said:

"See here, now! I don't think it's altogether the correct thing to make
remarks about a gentleman in his presence. I'm aware that ladies are
given to gossip, but they generally do it behind a fellow's back. I've
done nothing to deserve this just now."

"There was nothing offensive in my remark," said Edith, quietly.

"Oh," said Mrs. Mowbray, "my son is very quick and very sensitive, and
very nice on a point of honor. He is the most punc-til-i-ous man you
ever saw;" and Mrs. Mowbray held up her hands, lost in amazement at the
conception which was in her mind of the punctiliousness of her son.
"But, my dear Miss Dalton," she continued, "he is quick to forgive. He
don't bear malice."

"Haven't I said," growled Mowbray, "that I don't like this! Talk of me
behind my back, if you choose. You can't imagine that it's particularly
pleasant for a fellow to sit here and listen to all that rot."

"But, my son," said Mrs. Mowbray, fondly, "it's all love."

"Oh, bother your love!" muttered this affectionate son.

"Well, then, you naughty, sensitive boy," said Mrs. Mowbray, "I will
come here by myself, and tell dear Miss Dalton all about you behind your
back. I will tell her about some of your adventures in London, and she
will see what a naughty, wicked, rakish fellow you have been. He is
sadly like me, dear Miss Dalton--so sensitive, and so fond of society."

Edith gave a polite smile, but said nothing.

Then the conversation lagged for a little while. At length Edith, full
of the idea that Wiggins had sent them for some purpose, and desirous of
finding out whether her suspicions were correct or not, said, in a
careless tone,

"I suppose you know this Wiggins very well?"

"Mr. Wiggins?" said Mrs. Mowbray, quickly. "Oh yes; my son and he often
meet, though for my part I know little or nothing about the man."

"Pooh!" cried Mowbray, interrupting her. "Miss Dalton, Mrs. Mowbray is
so talkative that she often says things that she does not mean, or, at
least, things that are liable to mislead others. I have met Wiggins, it
is true, but do not imagine that he is a friend of mine. On the
contrary, he has reason to hate me quite as much as he hates you. Your
idea of any connection between him and me, which I plainly see you hint
at, is altogether wrong, and you would not have even suspected this if
you knew me better."

"You came here so easily," said Edith, "that I very naturally supposed
that you were on friendly terms."

"I come here easily," said Mowbray, "not because he is my friend, but
because he is so afraid of me that he does not dare to keep me back."

"You understand, then," said Edith, "that he keeps others back. If you
have such power over him, how is it that you can calmly stand by and see
him imprison a free-born and a high-born English lady?"

"Oh," muttered Mowbray, "I don't know any thing about that. He is your
guardian, and you are his ward, and the law is a curious thing that I do
not understand."

"Yet Mrs. Mowbray says that you are distinguished for your knowledge of
legal points," said Edith.

Mowbray made no reply, and in a few moments Mrs. Mowbray rose to go.

"Positively," said she, "my dear Miss Dalton, we must see more of one
another; and since your mourning confines you here, I must come often,
and I know very well that we shall all be great friends."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "BECAUSE I BEAT HIM."]


CHAPTER XVII.


A STROKE FOR LIBERTY.

The Mowbrays came occasionally, but no others ever managed to get
through the gates. Edith could not help feeling a sort of resentment
against these people, who thus were able to do what no others could do,
and came to her so easily whenever they wished. Still she did not think
it worth while to refuse to see them. They beguiled the monotony of her
life, and she still had a half hope that something might result from
their visits. Even if they were in the pay of Wiggins, as she believed,
they yet might feel inclined to assist her, from the hope of larger pay,
and she hoped that the occasion might arise in which she might be able
to hint at such a thing. As yet they met her on an equal footing, and in
spite of her contempt for them, she did not quite like the idea of
regularly offering them a bribe to assist her. Yet she thought that the
time might come when she could do so, and this thought sustained her.

In her visits Mrs. Mowbray still prattled and chattered in her usual
manner about her usual themes. Dress, society, and the incivility of
young men seemed to be her favorite topics. The captain usually came
with her, and seemed desirous to do the agreeable to Edith, but either
from a natural lack of gallantry, or from the discouraging treatment
which he received from her, he was somewhat unsuccessful.

About two months after his first call the captain came alone. He was on
horseback, and was accompanied by a magnificent Newfoundland dog, which
Edith had noticed once or twice before. On seeing Edith he showed more
animation than was usual with him, and evidently was endeavoring, to the
best of his power, to make himself agreeable.

"I have come, Miss Dalton," said he, after the usual greetings, "to see
if you would do me the honor of going out riding with me."

"Riding?" said Edith; "you are very kind, I am sure; but will you pardon
me if I first ask you where you propose to take me?"

"Oh, about the park," said Mowbray, somewhat meekly.

"The park?" said Edith, in a tone of disappointment. "Is that all? Why,
Captain Mowbray, this park is only my jail yard, and to go about it can
not be very pleasant, to a prisoner, either on horseback or on foot. But
surely I do not understand you. I must be too hasty. Of course you mean
to do as every gentleman would do, and let the lady select the place
where she wishes to go?"

"I assure you Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, "I should be most happy to do
so if I were able; but you are not allowed to go out of the park, you
know."

"Who prohibits me, pray?"

"Wiggins."

"Wiggins! And why should you care for any of his regulations? Do you
not know who he is, and what he is, and in what position he stands
toward me?"

"Oh, well," said Mowbray, in a hesitating voice, "he is your guardian,
you know."

"But I am of age," said Edith. "Guardians can not imprison their wards
as he imprisons me. I am of age. I own this place. It is mine. He may
have some right to attend to its business for the present, but he has no
right over me. The law protects me. You know that as well as I do."

"Yes, true; but--ah--you know--ah--you are really so very
_peculiarly_ situated, Miss Dalton, that I should not like to do
any thing which might compromise your--ah--position."

"Surely, Captain Mowbray, you must now be speaking without thinking. In
what way, pray, can it compromise my position to ride with you through
the village streets, rather than over the roads of the park?"

"Well--ah--you are in mourning, you know."

"Really I do not see what that has to do with it. If I have the sorrow
of bereavement, that is no reason why I should have the additional
sorrow of imprisonment."

"Oh, you know, Wiggins would make a fuss about it, and put you to no end
of trouble."

Mowbray's unwillingness to help her, and hesitation, had once before
roused Edith's indignation; but now she believed him to be in Wiggins's
employ, and therefore felt calm, and talked with him chiefly for the
sake of seeing what she could get out of him, either in the way of
explanation or concession.

"When you speak of trouble," said she, "I think it is I who will give
trouble to him rather than undergo it from him."

"Oh, well--either way," said Mowbray, "there would be trouble, and that
is what I wish to avoid."

"Gentlemen are not usually so timid about encountering trouble on behalf
of a lady," said Edith, coldly.

"Oh, well, you know, if it were ordinary trouble I wouldn't mind it, but
this is legal trouble. Why, before I knew where I was I might be
imprisoned, and how would I like that?"

"Not very well, as I can testify," said Edith.

"Believe me, Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, with a desperate effort to
appear earnest and devoted, "there is nothing that I would not do for
you, and I feel exceedingly pained that you are not content with your
present position; but you see I do not want to put myself in the
clutches of the law if I can help it. Wiggins is an enemy of mine, as I
told you, and only tolerates me here because he dare not prevent
me--neither he nor his man; but--ah--you know--that is--I
mean--he--ah--he watches me very closely, you know, and if I were to do
any thing that he could lay hold of, he would be very glad to do so, and
put me to trouble and expense--no end."

Here Edith understood once more a profession of enmity against Wiggins,
but whether it was real or not she could not tell. She believed,
rather, that it was pretended.

"Oh, I beg of you to make no more excuses," said she. "Your
explanations are quite satisfactory."

"I have had trouble enough from lawyers," continued Mowbray, "and don't
want to have any more."

"That is quite prudent in you, and careful."

"The first thing that a man of the world learns, Miss Dalton," said the
captain, in a confidential tone, "is to take care of himself. That is a
lesson that I have learned by bitter experience, and I have resolved,
among other things, and above all, never, under any circumstances, to
put myself within the grasp of the lawyers; and if you only knew what
bother I've had, you wouldn't blame me."

"I fear that I must have given you great pain, then," said Edith, "by
even hinting at such a thing as taking my part and helping me. You feel
so strongly about your personal safety that you must have been deeply
agitated at such a proposal from me."

"Oh, well," said the captain, not choosing to notice the sarcasm of
Edith's tone, "one grows wiser from experience, you know, and mine has
been a bitter one. I would gladly open your gates for you, I assure you,
if I could do it without danger, and if Wiggins had no authority; but as
it is, I really do not see how I can possibly interfere."

"Well, for that matter," said Edith, "if it were not for Wiggins, I
suppose I could open the gates for myself, and so I could save you even
that trouble."

Mowbray made no reply to this, but merely stroked his mustache.

"After all," said he at last, "I don't see why you should be so
discontented here. There are many who would be glad to live as you do,
in so magnificent a house, with such noble grounds. You have every thing
that you want. Why you should be so discontented I can not imagine. If
you did get out, and live in the village, you would not like it. It's
not a pleasant place. For my part I would much rather live where you do
than where I do. If you would confine your attention to this place, and
give up all ideas of getting away, you might be as happy as the day is
long."

Saying this, the captain looked at Edith to see the effect of his words.
Edith was looking at him with a very strange expression, something like
what may appear in the face of the naturalist at discovering an animal
of some new species--an expression of interest and surprise and
curiosity.

"So those are your sentiments?" she said; and that was all.

"Yes," said the captain.

"Well," said Edith, "it may be my misfortune, but I think differently."

"At any rate," said the captain, in a more animated tone, "since we can
not agree in this discussion, why not drop it? Will you not ride with me
about the park? I'm sure I like the park very well. I have not become so
tired of it as you have. I have a very nice lady's horse, which is quite
at your disposal."

At this request Edith was silent for a few moments. The man himself grew
more abhorrent to her, if possible, every moment; but her desire to find
out what his purposes were, and her hope of making use of him still, in
spite of present appearances, made her think that it might be best to
accept his offer.

"Oh, well," said she, "I have no objection, since you choose to subject
me to such limitations, and I suppose I must add that I thank you."

"Don't speak of thanks, Miss Dalton," said Mowbray. "Let me say rather
that I thank you from the bottom of my heart."

Two days after this Mowbray again called on Edith. This time, in
addition to his own horse, he brought another with a lady's saddle, and
was followed by the Newfoundland dog. Edith was soon dressed for the
ride, and joined Mowbray in the drawing-room. As they went out the dog
was sitting on the portico, and leaped forward joyfully at the sight of
his master, but suddenly retreated in fear.

"It's all very well, Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, "for them to talk about
cruelty to animals, but the only way you can make them fond of you is by
fear. See how that dog loves me. And why? Because I beat him."

There was something in these words, and in the tone in which they were
spoken, that afforded Edith a new view of Mowbray's character. There
were a ferocity and a cruelty there which were quite in keeping with the
paltriness and meanness which he had already evinced. But Edith kept
silence. In a few moments they were mounted, and rode away side by
side.

As they turned the corner of the Hall Edith saw a face among the
trees--white, solemn, watchful, stern--and the sight gave her a strange
shock, for it was the face of Wiggins. It seemed to her at that moment
that this man must hate Mowbray, for the glance which he gave was by no
means that of a friend or confederate. Mowbray might, therefore, have
spoken the truth when he said that Wiggins hated him, and if so, he
might now be dreading the presence of this unwelcome guest. This thought
was not unpleasant, for though Mowbray could not be a friend, she
thought it not a bad substitute that he was at least an enemy of
Wiggins.

The consequence was that she really enjoyed the ride; and Mowbray,
seeing her in good spirits, thought that it arose from more favorable
inclinations toward himself, and exerted himself to please. They rode at
a rapid pace through the long avenues, under magnificent overarching
trees, and over fields and meadows. Mowbray was a fine horseman, and
Edith had been accustomed to riding from childhood, and liked nothing
better than to rush along at headlong speed. She felt exhilaration and
enthusiasm such as she had not known for a long time. As she looked at
Mowbray's splendid figure she could not help regretting that a man with
such rare physical advantages should have, after all, but a craven
spirit. Was it, then, she thought, altogether fear that prevented him
from assisting her to escape? The idea seemed absurd. There must be some
reason of a different kind. She felt certain that he was an unprincipled
villain, and that he had some designs of his own upon her. What they
were she could not imagine. If he wished to gain her hand, he had
certainly taken a singular way to make himself agreeable. He was cruel,
cynical, mean, and sordid, and took no pains to conceal this. He had
advised her to submit to imprisonment, and had refused to help her in
any way. What his designs could possibly be she could not conjecture.

During the ride but little was said. Mowbray was not talkative at any
time, and on the present occasion he confined himself to remarks which
he intended to be amiable and agreeable. To these Edith made civil
replies. At last they rode back to the Hall, and Mowbray prepared to
dismount.

"Are you going?" said Edith. "For my part I should rather not dismount
just yet. It is too dull in the house. I would rather ride a little
distance with you, and walk back."

At this Mowbray looked at her in silence, and with a perplexed
expression on his countenance.

Edith calmly waited for him to start.

"Miss Dalton," said he at length, "I really do not know--" And then he
paused.

"I beg your pardon," said Edith.

"You see," said Mowbray, "I don't know about your riding any more."

"Why, surely," said Edith, "you are not going to refuse your horse for a
few minutes longer?"

Mowbray looked gloomily at her, and then started off. Edith rode by his
side, and they both kept silence until they reached the park gate.

The porter came out, but on seeing Edith he stopped.

"It's all right," said Edith. "You see I am with Captain Mowbray."

Mowbray looked deeply perplexed, and as he said nothing, the porter
began to open the gate.

"Stop," said Mowbray.

"What!" cried Edith. "Captain Mowbray, what do you mean?"

"You must not go out," said Mowbray.

"I thought you were only going as far as the gate, and would walk back.
You must not try to follow me."

"Must not?" cried Edith, whom the hope of escape had roused to intense
excitement. "Do you say that to me?"

"Yes," said Mowbray.

"What right have you?" said Edith, haughtily. And then turning to the
porter, she said, imperatively, "Open that gate at once."

But the obdurate porter did not obey her now any more than before.

"Captain Mowbray," said she, "order that man to open the gate."

"I will not," said Mowbray, rudely.

"Then I shall ride by your side till you go out."

"You shall not."

"Is that the way that a gentleman speaks to a lady?"

"You won't get me into trouble, anyway."

"I don't intend to," said Edith, scornfully. "It is my own act. You
will not take me out, but I go out of my own accord."

The porter meanwhile stood bewildered, with the gate only partly open,
holding it in this way, and waiting for the end of this singular scene.

"Miss Dalton," cried Mowbray, fiercely, "you will make me resort to
extreme measures."

"You dare not!" cried Edith, who by this time was fearfully excited. She
had a horse beneath her now. That horse seemed part of herself. In
that horse's strength and speed she lost her own weakness, and so she
was now resolved to stake every thing on one effort for liberty.

"Don't force me to it," said Mowbray, "or you will make me do something
that I shall be sorry for."

"You dare not!" cried Edith again. "Do you dare to threaten me--me, the
mistress of Dalton Hall?"

"Catch hold of her reins, captain," cried the porter, "and make her go
back."

"Hold your bloody tongue!" roared Mowbray.--"Miss Dalton, you must go
back."

"Never!" said Edith. "I will go out when you do."

"Then I will not go out at all. I will go back to the Hall."

"You shall not enter it," said Edith, as firmly as though she possessed
the keys of Dalton Hall.

"Miss Dalton, you force me to use violence."

[Illustration: IN HER FRENZY EDITH STRUCK THAT HAND AGAIN AND AGAIN.]

"You dare not use violence," said Edith, with a look that overawed the
craven soul of Mowbray. For Edith now was resolved to do any thing,
however desperate, and even the threat of violence, though she felt that
he was capable of it, did not deter her. The two faced one another in
silence for a few moments, the one strong, muscular, masculine, the
other slight, fragile, delicate; yet in that girlish form there was an
intrepid spirit which Mowbray recognized, defiant, haughty, tameless,
the spirit of all her fathers, strengthened and intensified by a
vehement desire for that liberty that lay outside the gates.

"Well," said the porter, "I'd better be a-shuttin' the gates till you
two settle yer business. She'll dash through if I don't. I see it in
her eye."

"No, she won't," said Mowbray. "Don't shut the gates; wait a moment."
Then turning to Edith, he said,

"Miss Dalton, for the last time, I say go back, or you'll be sorry."
Edith looked steadfastly and sternly at the captain, but said not one
word. The captain looked away.

"Porter," said he.

"Sir."

"Hold her horse."

"But she'll rush through the gates. Shall I fasten them?"

"No; I'll hold the reins till you get them. And, porter, I leave this
horse with Miss Dalton, since she won't dismount. You see that he's
well taken care of."

"Yes, Sir."

The captain, while speaking, had reached out his arm to take Edith's
reins, but she turned her horse's head, and he missed them. The porter
saw this movement, and sprang forward. Edith pulled the reins. Her
horse reared. Wild with excitement, and seeing the gates open before
her, and the road beyond, Edith struck at the porter with her whip over
his face, and then drove her horse at the open gates. The horse sprang
through like the wind. The porter shrieked after her. She was on the
road. She was free!

No--not free!

Not free, for after her there came the thundering tramp of another
horse. It was Mowbray in pursuit.

His horse was far better than hers. He gained on her step by step.
Nearer and nearer he came. He was behind her; he was abreast of her
before she had ridden a quartet of a mile. The tower of the village
church was already in sight, when suddenly a strong hand was laid on her
reins.

In her frenzy Edith struck that hand again and again with the heavy butt
of her riding-whip, but it did not loosen its grasp. Her horse stopped.

"Curse you!" roared Mowbray to Edith, while his face was livid with
passion and pain, "I'll kill you!" and seizing her whip hand, he
wrenched the whip out of it.

Edith was silent.

Mowbray said no more. He turned her horse and led it back. Edith
looked around wildly. Suddenly, as they came near the gates, the
intolerable thought of her renewed imprisonment maddened her, and the
liberty which she had so nearly gained roused her to one more effort;
and so, with a start, she disengaged herself and leaped to the ground.
Mowbray saw it, and, with a terrible oath, in an instant leaped down and
gave chase. The horses ran forward and entered the gates.

Edith held up her long skirts and ran toward the village. But again
Mowbray was too much for her. He overtook her, and seizing her by the
wrist, dragged her back.

Edith shrieked for help at the top of her voice. Mowbray looked
fiercely around, and seeing no one, he took his handkerchief and bound
it tightly around her month. Then, overcome by despair, Edith's
strength gave way. She sank down. She made no more resistance. She
fainted.

Mowbray raised her in his arms, and carried her into the porter's lodge.
The gates were then locked.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVIII.


A STRANGE CONFESSION.

Edith came to herself in the porter's lodge. Her re-awakened eyes, in
looking up confusedly, saw the hateful face of Mowbray bending over her.
At once she realized the horror of her position, and all the incidents
of her late adventure came vividly before her mind. Starting up as
quickly as her feeble limbs would allow, she indignantly motioned him
away.

Mowbray, without a word, stepped back and looked down.

Edith staggered to her feet.

"Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, in a low voice, "your carriage has been
sent for. It is here, and will take you to the Hall."

Edith made no reply, but looked absently toward the door.

"Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, coming a little nearer, "I implore you to
hear me. I would kneel at your feet if you would let me. But you are
so imbittered against me now that it would be useless. Miss Dalton, it
was not hate that made me raise my hand against you. Miss Dalton, I
swear that you are more dear to me than life itself. A few moments ago
I was mad, and did not know what I was doing. I did not want you to go
away from this place, for I saw that you would be lost to me forever. I
saw that you hated me, and that if you went away just then I should lose
you. And I was almost out of my senses. I had no time to think of any
thing but the bitter loss that was before me, and as you fled I seized
you, not in anger, but in excitement and fear, just as I would have
seized you if you had been drowning."

"Captain Mowbray," said Edith, sternly, "the violence you have offered
me is enough to satisfy even you, without such insult as this."

"Will you not even listen to me?"

"Listen!" exclaimed Edith, in an indescribable tone.

"Then I must  be heard. I  love  you. I--"

"Love!" interrupted Edith, in a tone of unutterable contempt.

"Yes, love," repeated Mowbray, vehemently, "from the first time that I
saw you, when you implored my help."

"And why did you not give me your help?" asked Edith, looking at him in
cold and haughty indignation.

"I will tell you," said Mowbray. "Before I saw you I knew how you were
situated. Wiggins would have kept me away, but dared not. I know that
about him which makes me his master. When I saw you, I loved you with
all my soul. When you appealed to me, I would have responded at once,
but could not. The fact is, Mrs. Mowbray was present. Mrs. Mowbray is
not what she appears to be. Before her I had to pretend an indifference
that I did not feel. In short, I had to make myself appear a base
coward. In fact, I had to be on my guard, so as not to excite her
suspicions of my feelings. Afterward, when I might have redeemed my
character in your eyes, I did not know how to begin. Then, too, I was
afraid to help you to escape, for I saw that you hated me, and my only
hope was to keep you here till you might know me better."

"Captain Mowbray," said Edith, "if you are a captain, which I doubt,
such explanations as these are paltry. After what you have done, the
only thing left is silence."

"Oh, Miss Dalton, will nothing lead you to listen to me? I would lay
down my life, to serve you."

"You still wish to serve me; then?" asked Edith.

"Most fervently," cried Mowbray.

"Then open that gate," said Edith.

Mowbray hesitated.

"Open that gate," said Edith, "and prove your sincerity. Open it, and
efface these marks," she cried, as she indignantly held up her right
hand, and showed her wrist, all black from the fierce grasp in which
Mowbray had seized it. "Open it, and I promise you I will listen
patiently to all that you may have to say."

"Miss Dalton," said Mowbray, "if I opened that gate I should never see
you again."

"You will never see me again if you do
not."

"At least I shall be near you."

"Near me? Yes, and hated and despised. I will call on Wiggins himself to
help me. He was right; he said the time would come when I would be
willing to trust him."

"Trust him? What, that man? You don't know what he is."

"And what are you, Captain Mowbray?"

"I? I am a gentleman."

"Oh no," said Edith, quietly, "not that--any thing rather than that."

At this Mowbray's face flushed crimson, but with a violent effort he
repressed his passion.

"Miss Dalton," said he, "it is a thing that you might understand. The
fear of losing you made me desperate. I saw in your flight the loss of
all my hopes."

"And where are those hopes now?"

"Well, at any rate, I have not altogether lost you. Let me hope that I
may have an opportunity to explain hereafter, and to retrieve my
character. Miss Dalton, a woman will sometimes forgive offenses even
against herself, when she knows that they are prompted by love."

"You seem to me," said Edith, "to seek the affections of women as you do
those of dogs--by beating them soundly."

The sight of Mowbray's dog, who was in the room, reminded Edith of the
master's maxim which he had uttered before this memorable ride.

"Miss Dalton, you do me such wrong that you crush me. Can you not have
some mercy?"

"Open the gate," said Edith. "Do that one thing, and then you may make
all the explanations you wish. I will listen to anything and everything.
Open the gate, and I will promise to forgive, and even to forget, the
unparalleled outrage that I have suffered."

"But you will leave me forever."

"Open that gate, Captain Mowbray. Prove yourself to be what you say--do
something to atone for your base conduct--and then you will have claims
on my gratitude which I shall always acknowledge."

Mowbray shook his head.

"Can I let you go?" he said. "Do you ask it of me?"

"No," said Edith, impatiently, "I don't ask it. I neither hope nor ask
for any thing from you. Wiggins himself is more promising. At any rate,
he has not as yet used absolute violence, and, what is better, he does
not intrude his society where it is not wanted."

"Then I have no hope," said Mowbray, in what was intended to be a
plaintive tone.

"I'm sure I don't know," said Edith, "but I know this--that the time
will surely come, after all, when I shall get my freedom, and then,
Captain Mowbray, you will rue the day when you dared to lay hands on me.
Yes, I could get my freedom now, I suppose, if I were to parley with
Wiggins, to bribe him heavily enough; and I assure you I am tempted now
to give up the half of my estate, so as to get free and have you
punished."

Mowbray turned pale.

"There were no witnesses," said he, hastily.

"You forget that the porter saw it all. But this is useless," she added;
and passing by Mowbray, she went to the door. Outside was a carriage,
which the porter had brought down from the Hall, into which she got, and
then drove away, while Mowbray stood looking at her till she drove out
of sight.

The effects of this adventure were felt for some time. Excitement,
fatigue, pain, and grief, all affected Edith, so that she could not
leave her room for weeks. Mrs. Dunbar was assiduous in her attentions,
and Edith supposed that both she and Wiggins knew all about it, as the
porter would undoubtedly have informed them; but her communications with
her were limited only to a few words, and she regarded her with nothing
but distrust. In Mrs. Dunbar's manner, also, she saw something which
indicated a fresh trouble, something which had been manifested by her
ever since Mowbray's first appearance, and which Edith now suspected to
be the result of Mowbray's violence. This led to vain speculations on
her part which he had uttered before this memorable as to the mysterious
connection that existed between her jailers. Mowbray professed to be
the enemy and the master of Wiggins. Her remembrance of Wiggins's look
of hate made her think that this was true. But Mrs. Dunbar she did not
believe to be an enemy of Mowbray's; and the porter, who was the
incorruptible servant of Wiggins, seemed equally devoted to Mowbray.

She recalled also Mowbray's words to herself in explanation of his own
course. He had asserted that he had the power over Wiggins from some
knowledge which he possessed, and also that Mrs. Mowbray was not what
she appeared to be. He had spoken as though he was afraid of Mrs.
Mowbray's finding out what he called his love for Edith. Was she his
mother, then, at all? What did it all mean? For Edith, at any rate, it
was not possible to understand it, and the character, motives, and
mutual relationship of all those with whom she had come in contact
remained an impenetrable mystery.

To the surprise of Edith, the Mowbrays called several times to make
inquiries about her, and after her recovery they still visited her. At
first she refused to see them, but one day Mrs. Mowbray came alone, and
Edith determined to see her, and get rid of her effectually.

Mrs. Mowbray rose as she entered, and advancing to greet her, held out
her hand with a cordial smile. Edith did not take it, yet Mrs. Mowbray
took no offense, but, on the contrary, met her in the most effusive
manner.

"Oh, my dear Miss Dalton," said she, "what an age it has been since we
met! It seems like years! And when I wanted to see you so
par--tic--u--lar-ly! And are you quite well? Have you quite recovered?
Are you sure? How glad I am!"

"Mrs. Mowbray," said Edith, as soon as she could make herself heard, "I
have sent word to you several times that I do not wish to see you again.
You know the reason why as well as I do. I can only say that I am
surprised at this persistence, and shall in future be under the
necessity of shutting my doors against you."

Thus Edith, in spite of her severe afflictions, could still speak of the
place as hers, and under her orders.

"Oh, my dear Miss Dalton," burst forth Mrs. Mowbray, "that is the very
reason why I have so in--sist--ed on seeing you. To explain, you
know--for there is nothing like an explanation."

"You may spare yourself the trouble," said Edith. "I do not want any
more explanations."

"Oh, but you positively must, you know," said Mrs. Mowbray, in her most
airy manner.

"Pardon me. I wish to hear nothing whatever about it."

"It's that sad, sad boy," said Mrs. Mowbray, coolly ignoring Edith's
words, "and deeply has he repented. But do you know, dear, it was only
his fondness for you. Pos--i--tive--ly nothing else, dear, but his
fondness for you. Oh, how he has talked about it! He says he is willing
to give up his right eye, or hand--I really forget which--to recall the
past. My poor dear boy is very impetuous."

"Mrs. Mowbray, I do not wish to be unkind or rude, but you really force
me to it."

"He's impetuous," said Mrs. Mowbray, without noticing Edith, "but he's
warm-hearted. He's a most affectionate son, and he is so affectionate
toward you. It's all his fondness for you."

"Mrs. Mowbray, this is intolerable."

"Oh, Miss Dalton, you don't know--you really don't know. He has loved
you ever since he first saw you--and so true! Why, he dotes on you. He
was afraid that he would lose you. You know, that was the reason, why he
interfered. But he says now most distinctly that he thinks his
interference was quite un--war--rant--a--ble--quite, I assure you; my
dear Miss Dalton."

Edith sat looking at this insolent woman with a clouded brow, not
knowing whether to order her out of the house or not. But Mrs. Mowbray
seemed beautifully unconscious of any offense.

"The only thing that he has been talking about ever since it happened,"
she continued, "is his sorrow. Oh, his sorrow! And it is deep, Miss
Dalton. I never saw such deep sorrow. He really swears about it in a
shocking manner; and that with him is a sign that his feelings are
concerned very strongly. He always swears whenever he is deeply moved."

Edith at this started to her feet with a look in her eyes which showed
Mrs. Mowbray that she would not be trifled with any longer.

"Mrs. Mowbray," said she, "I came down for the sole purpose of telling
you that in future I shall dispense with the pleasure of your calls."

Mrs. Mowbray rose from her chair.

"What!" she exclaimed, with a gesture of consternation; "and live in
complete seclusion? Not receive calls? No, no; you really must not think
of such a thing. We are your friends, you know, and you must not deny us
an occasional sight of you. My poor boy will positively die if he
doesn't see you. He's pining now. And it's all for you. All."

"Mrs. Mowbray," said Edith, in a severe tone, "I do not know whether you
give offense intentionally or not. You seem unable to take a hint,
however strongly expressed, and you force me to speak plainly, although
I dislike to do so. You must not, and you shall not, come here any
more."

"Oh, my dear Miss Dalton, you really are quite excited," said Mrs.
Mowbray, with a pleasant smile.

"I mean what I say," said Edith, coldly. "You are not--to come here
again."

Mrs. Mowbray laughed lightly.

"Oh, you really can't keep us away. We positively must come. My son
insists. These lovers, you know, dear, are so pertinacious. Well," she
added, looking hastily at Edith, "I suppose I must say good--morning;
but, Miss Dalton, think of my boy. Good--morning, my dear Miss Dalton."

And so Mrs. Mowbray retired.

She called again four times, twice alone, and twice in company with the
captain, but Edith refused to see her. Yet, after all, in spite of her
scorn for these people, and her conviction that they were in league with
Wiggins--in spite of the captain's brutality--it was not without sorrow
that Edith dismissed Mrs. Mowbray; for she looked upon her as a kind of
tie that bound her to the outer world, and until the last she had hoped
that some means might arise through these, if not of escape, at least of
communication with friends.

But she was cut off from these now more than ever; and what remained?

What? A prison-house!

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIX.


A NEW-COMER.

It seemed now to Edith that her isolation was complete. She found
herself in a position which she had thought impossible in free
England--a prisoner in the hands of an adventurer, who usurped an
authority over her to which he had no right. His claim to exercise this
authority in his office of guardian she did not admit for a moment.
She, the mistress of Dalton Hall, was nothing more than a captive on her
own estates.

She did not know how this could end or when it could end. Her hopes had
one by one given way. The greatest blow of all was that which had been
administered through the so-called letter of Miss Plympton. That letter
she believed to be a forgery, yet the undeniable fact remained that Miss
Plympton had done nothing. That Miss Plympton should write that letter,
however, and that she should leave her helpless at the mercy of Wiggins,
seemed equally improbable, and Edith, in her vain effort to comprehend
it, could only conclude that some accident had happened to her dear
friend; that she was ill, or worse. And if this was so, it would be to
her the worst blow of all.

Other hopes which she had formed had also been doomed to destruction.
She had expected something from the spontaneous sympathy of the outside
world; who, whatever their opinion about her father, would stir
themselves to prevent such an outrage upon justice as that which Wiggins
was perpetrating. But these hopes gradually died out. That world, she
thought, was perhaps ignorant not only of her situation, but even of her
very existence. The last hopes that she had formed had been in the
Mowbrays, and these had gone the way of all the others.

Nothing appeared before her in the way of hope, and her despondency was
often hard to endure. Still her strong spirit and high-toned nature
rendered it impossible for her to be miserable always. Added to this was
her perfect health, which, with one interruption, had sustained her
amidst the distresses of her situation. By her very disposition she was
forced to hope for the best. It must not be supposed that she was at
all like "Mariana in the moated grange." She did not pine away. On the
contrary, she often felt a kind of triumph in the thought that she had
thus far shown the spirit of a Dalton.

There was an old legend in the Dalton family upon which great stress had
been laid for many generations, and this one stood out prominently among
all the stories of ancestral exploits which she had heard in her
childhood. One of the first Daltons, whose grim figure looked down upon
her now in the armor of a Crusader, had taken part in the great
expedition under Richard Coeur de Lion. It happened that he had the ill
luck to fall into the hands of the infidel, but as there were a number
of other prisoners, there was some confusion, and early one morning he
managed to seize a horse and escape. Soon he was pursued. He dashed over
a wide plain toward some hills that arose in the distance, where he
managed to elude his pursuers for a time, until he found refuge upon a
cliff, where there was a small place which afforded room for one or two.
After some search his pursuers discovered him, and ordered him to come
down. He refused. They then began an attack, shooting arrows from a
distance, and trying to scale the cliff. But Dalton's defense was so
vigorous that by the end of that day's fight he had killed eight of his
assailants. Then the contest continued. For two days, under a burning
sun, without food or drink, the stern old Crusader defended himself.
When summoned to surrender he had only one word, and that was, "Never!"
It happened that a band of Crusaders who were scouring the country
caught sight of the Saracens, and made an attack upon them, putting them
to flight. They then sought for the object of this extraordinary siege,
and, climbing up, they saw a sight which thrilled them as they gazed.
For there lay stout old Michael Dalton, with many wounds, holding a
broken sword, and looking at them with delirious eyes. He recognized no
one, but tried to defend himself against his own friends. It was with
difficulty that they restrained him. They could not remove him, nor was
it necessary, for death was near; but till the last his hand clutched
the broken sword, and the only word he said was, "Never!" The Crusaders
waited till he was dead, and then took his remains to the camp. The
story of his defense, which was gathered from their prisoners, rang
through the whole camp, and always afterward the crest of the Daltons
was a bloody hand holding a broken sword, with the motto, "Never!"

And so Edith took to her heart this story and this motto, and whenever
she looked at the grim old Crusader, she clinched her own little hand
and said, "Never!"

She determined to use what liberty she had; and since Wiggins watched
all her movements, to show him how unconcerned she was, she began to go
about the grounds, to take long walks in all directions, and whenever
she returned to the house, to play for hours upon the piano. Her
determination to keep up her courage had the effect of keeping down her
despondency, and her vigorous exercise was an unmixed benefit, so that
there was a radiant beauty in her face, and a haughty dignity that made
her look like the absolute mistress of the place.

What Wiggins felt or thought she did not know. He never came across her
path by any chance. Occasional glimpses of the ever-watchful Hugo showed
her that she was tracked with as jealous a vigilance as ever. She hoped,
however, that by her incessant activity something might result to her
advantage.

One day while she was strolling down the grand avenue she saw a stranger
walking up, and saw, to her surprise, that he was a gentleman. The face
was altogether unknown to her, and, full of hope, she waited for him to
come up.

"Have I the honor of addressing Miss Dalton?" said the stranger, as he
reached her. He spoke in a very pleasant but somewhat effeminate voice,
lifting his hat, and bowing with profound courtesy.

"I am Miss Dalton," said Edith, wondering who the stranger might be.

All our precious stones, the ruby, sapphire, beryl, topaz, emerald,
are all examples of this crystallizing power.

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]
You have heard of the force of gravitation, and you know that it consists
of an attraction of every particle of matter for every other
particle.

You know that planets and moons are held in their orbits by this
attraction. But gravitation is a very simple affair compared to the
force, or rather forces, of crystallization. For here the ultimate particles
of matter, inconceivably small as they are, show themselves possessed
of attractive and repellent poles, by the mutual action of which
the shape and structure of the crystal are determined.

In the solid condition the attracting poles are rigidly locked together;
but if sufficient heat be applied the bond of union is dissolved,
and in the state of fusion the poles are pushed so far asunder as
to be practically out of each other's range.

The natural tendency of the molecules to build themselves together is
thus neutralized.

This is the case with water, which as a liquid is to all appearance
formless. When sufficiently cooled the molecules are brought
within the play of the crystallizing force, and they then arrange
themselves in forms of indescribable beauty.

When snow is produced in calm air, the icy particles build themselves
into beautiful stellar shapes, each star possessing six rays.

There is no deviation from this type, though in other respects the
appearances of the snow-stars are infinitely various. In the polar regions
these exquisite forms were observed by Dr. Scoresby, who gave numerous
drawings of them. I have observed them in mid-winter filling the air,
and loading the slopes of the Alps. But in England they are also to
be seen, and no words of mine could convey so vivid an impression
of their beauty as the annexed drawings of a few of them, executed
at Greenwich by Mr.

Glaisher.

[Illustration: SNOW-STAR.]
It is worth pausing to think what wonderful work is going on in the
atmosphere during the formation and descent of every snow-shower;
what building power is brought into play! and how imperfect seem the
productions of human minds and hands when compared with those formed
by the blind forces of nature!

But who ventures to call the forces of nature blind?

In reality, when we speak thus we are describing our own condition. The
blindness is ours; and what we really ought to say, and to confess, is
that our powers are absolutely unable to comprehend either the origin
or the end of the operations of nature.

But while we thus acknowledge our limits, there is also reason for
wonder at the extent to which science has mastered the system of
nature.

From age to age, and from generation to generation, fact has been added
to fact, and law to law, the true method and order of the Universe
being thereby more and more revealed.

In doing this science has encountered and overthrown various forms of
superstition and deceit, of credulity and imposture. But the world
continually produces weak persons and wicked persons; and as long
as they continue to exist side by side, as they do in this our day,
very debasing beliefs will also continue to infest the world.

Atomic Poles.

"What did I mean when, a few moments ago I spoke of attracting
and repellent poles?"

Let me try to answer this question. You know that astronomers and geographers
speak of the earth's poles, and you have also heard of magnetic poles,
the poles of a magnet being the points at which the attraction and
repulsion of the magnet are as it were concentrated.

Every magnet possesses two such poles; and if iron filings be scattered
over a magnet, each particle becomes also endowed with two poles. Suppose
such particles devoid of weight and floating in our atmosphere,
what must occur when they come near each other?

Manifestly the repellent poles will retreat from each other, while
the attractive poles will approach and finally lock themselves
together.

And supposing the particles, instead of a single pair, to possess
several pairs of poles arranged at definite points over their
surfaces; you can then picture them, in obedience to their mutual
attractions and repulsions, building themselves together to form
masses of definite shape and structure.

Imagine the molecules of water in calm cold air to be gifted with
poles of this description, which compel the particles to lay
themselves together in a definite order, and you have before your
mind's eye the unseen architecture which finally produces the visible
and beautiful crystals of the snow.

Thus our first notions and conceptions of poles are obtained from the
sight of our eyes in looking at the effects of magnetism; and we then
transfer these notions and conceptions to particles which no eye has
ever seen. The power by which we thus picture to ourselves effects
beyond the range of the senses is what philosophers call the Imagination,
and in the effort of the mind to seize upon the unseen architecture
of crystals, we have an example of the "scientific use" of this
faculty.

Without imagination we might have _critical_ power, but not _creative_
power in science.

Architecture of Lake Ice.

We have thus made ourselves acquainted with the beautiful snow-flowers
self-constructed by the molecules of water in calm, cold air. Do the
molecules show this architectural power when ordinary water is frozen?

What, for example, is the structure of the ice over which we skate in
winter? Quite as wonderful as the flowers of the snow. The observation
is rare, if not new, but I have seen in water slowly freezing six-rayed
ice-stars formed, and floating free on the surface. A six-rayed star,
moreover, is typical of the construction of all our lake ice. It is built
up of such forms wonderfully interlaced.

Take a slab of lake ice and place it in the path of a concentrated
sunbeam. Watch the track of the beam through the ice. Part of the
beam is stopped, part of it goes through; the former produces internal
liquefaction, the latter has no effect whatever upon the ice.

But the liquefaction is not uniformly diffused.

From separate spots of the ice little shining points are seen to sparkle
forth.

Every one of those points is surrounded by a beautiful liquid flower with
six petals.

Ice and water are so optically alike that unless the light fall
properly upon these flowers you cannot see them.

But what is the central spot? A vacuum. Ice swims on water because,
bulk for bulk, it is lighter than water; so that when ice is melted it
shrinks in size.
Can the liquid flowers then occupy the whole space of the ice melted?

Plainly no. A little empty space is formed with the flowers, and this
space, or rather its surface, shines in the sun with the lustre of burnished
silver.

In all cases the flowers are formed parallel to the surface of freezing.
They are formed when the sun shines upon the ice of every lake;
sometimes in myriads, and so small as to require a magnifying glass
to see them.

They are always attainable, but their beauty is often marred by
internal defects of the ice.

Every one portion of the same piece of ice may show them exquisitely,
while a second portion shows them imperfectly.

Annexed is a very imperfect sketch of these beautiful figures.

Here we have a reversal of the process of crystallization.

The searching solar beam is delicate enough to take the molecules
down without deranging the order of their architecture.

Try the experiment for yourself with a pocket-lens on a sunny day.

You will not find the flowers confused; they all lie parallel
to the surface of freezing. In this exquisite way every bit of
the ice over which our skaters glide in winter is put together.

I said that a portion of the sunbeam was stopped by the ice and liquefied
it. What is this portion? The dark heat of the sun. The great body
of the light waves and even a portion of the dark ones, pass through the
ice without losing any of their heating power. When properly concentrated
on combustible bodies, even after having passed through the ice, their
burning power becomes manifest.

[Illustration: LIQUID FLOWERS IN LAKE ICE.]

And the ice itself may be employed to concentrate them. With an ice-lens
in the polar regions Dr. Scoresby has often concentrated the sun's
rays so as to make them burn wood, fire gunpowder, and melt lead; thus
proving that the heating power is retained by the rays, even after they
have passed through so cold a substance.

By rendering the rays of the electric lamp parallel, and then sending
them through a lens of ice, we obtain all the effects which Dr.
Scoresby obtained with the rays of the sun.

[Illustration]

THE ORGANIC WORLD
(FROM THE ELEMENTS OF SCIENCE.)

BY ST. GEORGE MIVART F.R.S.

The number of all the various kinds of living creatures is so
enormous that it would be impossible to study them profitably,
were they not classified in an orderly manner.

Therefore the whole mass has been divided, in the first place, into two
supreme groups, fancifully termed kingdoms--the "animal kingdom" and
the "vegetal kingdom." Each of these is subdivided into an orderly series
of subordinate groups, successively contained one a within the
other, and named sub-kingdoms, classes, orders, families, genera
and species.

The lowest group but one is the "genus," which contains one or more
different kinds termed "species," as e.g., the species "wood anemone"
and the species "blue titmouse." The lowest group of all--a species--may
be said to consist of individuals which differ from each other only by
trifling characters, such as characters due to difference of sex,
while their peculiar organization is faithfully reproduced by generation
as a whole, though small individual differences exist in all cases.

The vegetal, or vegetable, kingdom, consists of the great mass of
flowering plants, many of which, however, have such inconspicuous
flowers that they are mistakenly regarded as flowerless, as is often
the case with the grasses, the pines, and the yews.

Another mass, or sub-kingdom, of plants consists of the really
flowerless plants, such as the ferns, horsetails (Fig. 1), lycopods,
and mosses.

Sea and fresh-water weeds (_algæ_), and mushrooms, or "moulds," of all
kinds (_fungi_), amongst which are the now famous "bacteria,"
constitute a third and lowest set of plants.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. HORSE-TAIL (_Equisetum drummondii_).]
The animal kingdom consists, first, of a sub-kingdom of animals which
possess a spinal column, or backbone, and which are known as vertebrate
animals. Such are all beasts, birds, reptiles, and fishes.

There are also a variety of remotely allied marine organisms known
as tunicates, sea-squirts, or ascidians (Fig. 2).

There is, further, an immense group of arthropods, consisting of all
insects, crab-like creatures, hundred-legs and their allies, with
spiders, scorpions, tics and mites. We have also the sub-kingdom of
shell-fish or molluscs, including cuttle-fishes, snails, whelks, limpets,
the oyster, and a multitude of allied forms.

A multitudinous sub-kingdom of worms also exists, as well as another
of star-fishes and their congeners.

There is yet another of zoophytes, or polyps, and another of sponges,
and, finally, we have a sub-kingdom of minute creatures, or
animalculæ, of very varied forms, which may make up the sub-kingdom
of _Protozoa_, consisting of animals which are mostly unicellular.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. A TUNICATE (_Ascidia_).]

Multitudinous and varied as are the creatures which compose this
immense organic world, they nevertheless exhibit a very remarkable
uniformity of composition in their essential structure.

Every living creature from a man to a mushroom, or even to the
smallest animalcule or unicellular plant is always partly fluid,
but never entirely so.

Every living creature also consists in part (and that part is the
most active living part) of a soft, viscid, transparent, colorless
substance, termed protoplasm, which can be resolved into the four
elements, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon.

Besides these four elements, living organisms commonly contain
sulphur, phosphorus, chlorine, potassium, sodium, calcium, magnesium
and iron.

In the fact that living creatures always consist of the four elements,
oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon, we have a fundamental
character whereby the organic and inorganic (or non-living) worlds
are to be distinguished, for as we have seen, inorganic bodies,
instead of being thus uniformly constituted, may consist of the
most diverse elements and sometimes of but two or even of only one.

Again, many minerals, such as crystals, are bounded by plain surfaces,
and, with very few exceptions (spathic and hematite iron and dolomite
are such exceptions) none are bounded by curved lines and surfaces,
while living organisms are bounded by such lines and surfaces.

Yet, again, if a crystal be cut through, its internal structure will be
seen to be similar throughout. But if the body of any living creature
be divided, it will, at the very least, be seen to consist of a variety
of minute distinct particles, called "granules," variously distributed
throughout its interior.

All organisms consist either--as do the simplest, mostly microscopic,
plants and animals--of a single minute mass of protoplasm, or of a
few, or of many, or of an enormous aggregation of such before-mentioned
particles, each of which is one of those bodies named a "cell"
(Fig.
3).

Cells may, or may not, be enclosed in an investing coat or "cell-wall."
Every cell generally contains within it a denser, normally spheroidal,
body known as the nucleus.

Now protoplasm is a very unstable substance--as we have seen many substances
are whereof nitrogen is a component part--and it possesses active
properties which are not present in the non-living, or inorganic
world.

In the latter, differences of temperature will produce motion in
the shape of "currents," as we have seen with respect to masses
of air and water.

But in a portion of protoplasm, an internal circulation of currents
in definite lines will establish itself from other causes.

Inorganic bodies, as we have seen, will expand with heat, as they
may also do from imbibing moisture; but living protoplasm has an
apparently spontaneous power of contraction and expansion under
certain external conditions which do not occasion such movements
in inorganic matter.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. CELL FROM A SALAMANDER.

_n_, nucleus; _n'_, nucleolus embedded in the network of chromatin threads;
_k_, network of the cell external to the nucleus; _a_, attraction-sphere
or archoplasm containing minute bodies called centrosomes; _cl_,
membrane enclosing the cell externally, _nl_, membrane surrounding
the nucleus; _c_, centrosomes.]

Under favoring conditions, protoplasm has a power of performing
chemical changes, which result in producing heat far more gently
and continuously than it is produced by the combustion of inorganic
bodies.

       Thus it is that the heat is produced which makes its presence evident
to us in what we call "warm-blooded animals," the most warm-blooded
of all being birds.

Protoplasm has also the wonderful power of transforming certain
adjacent substances into material like itself--into its own
substance--and so, in a sense, creating a new material.

Thus it is that organisms have the power to nourish themselves and
grow.

An animal would vainly swallow the most nourishing food if the ultimate,
protoplasmic particles of its body had not this power of "transforming"
suitable substances brought near them in ways to be hereinafter
noticed.

Without that, no organism could ever "grow." The growth of organisms
is utterly different from the increase in size of inorganic
bodies.
Crystals, as we have seen, grow merely by external increment; but organisms
grow by an increment which takes place in the very innermost substance
of the tissues which compose their bodies, and the innermost substance
of the cells which compose such tissues; this peculiar form of growth
is termed _intussusception_.

Protoplasm, after thus augmenting its mass, has a further power of
spontaneous division, whereby the mass of the entire organism
whereof such protoplasm forms a part, is augmented and so growth is
brought about.

The small particles of protoplasm which constitute "cells" are far
indeed from being structureless. Besides the nucleus already mentioned
there is a delicate network of threads of a substance called
_chromatin_ within it, and another network permeating the fluid of
the cell substance, which invest the nucleus often with further
complications.

These networks generally perform (or undergo) a most complex series
of changes every time a cell spontaneously divides.

In certain cases, however, it appears that the nucleus divides into two
in a more simple fashion, the rest of the cell contents subsequently
dividing--each half enclosing one part of the previously divided
nucleus.

It is by a continued process of cell division that the complex structures
of the most complex organisms is brought about.

The division of a cell, or particle of protoplasm, is indeed a
necessary consequence of its complete nutrition.

For new material can only be absorbed by its surface. But as the cell
grows, the proportion borne by its surface to its mass, continually
decreases; therefore this surface must soon be too small to take in
nourishment enough, and the particle, or cell, must therefore either
die or divide.

By dividing, its parts can continue the nutritive process till their
surface, in turn, becomes insufficient, when they must divide again,
and so on.

Thus the term "feeding" has two senses.
"To feed a horse," ordinarily means to give it a certain quantity of hay,
oats or what not; and such indeed is one kind of feeding. But obviously,
if the nourishment so taken could not get from the stomach and
intestines into the ultimate particles and cells of the horse's
body, the horse could not be nourished, and still less could it grow.

It is this latter process, called assimilation, which is the real
and essential process of feeding, to which the process ordinarily
so called is but introductory.

Protoplasm has also the power of forming and ejecting from its own
substance, other substances which it has made, but which are of a
different nature to its own.

This function, as before said, is termed secretion; and we know the
liver secretes bile, and that the cow's udder secretes milk.

Here again we have an external and an internal process. The milk is
drawn forth from a receptacle, the udder, into which it finds its
way, and so, in a superficial sense, it may be called an organ of
secretion.

Nevertheless the true internal secretion takes place in the innermost
substance of the cells or particles of protoplasm, of the milk-land, which
particles really form that liquid.

But every living creature consists at first entirely of a particle
of protoplasm.

Therefore every other kind of substance which may be found in every
kind of plant or animal, must have been formed through it, and be,
in fact, a secretion from protoplasm.

Such is the rosy cheek of an apple, or of a maiden, the luscious juice
of the peach, the produce of the castor-oil plant, the baleen that
lines the whale's enormous jaws, as well as that softest product,
the fur of the chinchilla.

Indeed, every particle of protoplasm requires, in order that it may
live, a continuous process of exchange.

He travels all
the time, and only comes home occasionally. Perhaps you know the
cause--his family troubles ten years ago. He had a row with his wife
then, and it has blighted his life. Sir Lionel? Why, at this moment I
dare say he is somewhere among the Ural Mountains, or Patagonia, or some
other equally remote country. But who told you that he was in England?"

Edith was silent. She had taken it for granted that Sir Lionel lived in
his own home.

"Can I not write to him?" she asked.

"Of course, if you can only secure his address; and that I will do my
utmost to find out for you. But to do this will be a work of time."

"Yes," sighed Edith.

"And what can you do in the mean time? Where can you go?"

"There is Miss Plympton."

"Yes, your teacher. And you don't wish to go to the school, but to some
private place near it. Now what sort of a woman is Miss Plympton? Bold
and courageous?"

"I'm afraid not," said Edith, after a thoughtful pause. "I know that she
loves me like a mother, and when I first came here I should have relied
on her to the utmost. But now I don't know. At any rate, I think she
can be easily terrified." And Edith went on to tell about Miss
Plympton's letter to her, and subsequent silence.

"I think with you," said Dudleigh, after Edith had ended, "that the
letter is a forgery. But what is difficult to understand is this
apparent desertion of you. This may be accounted for, however, in one of
two ways. First, Wiggins may actually have seen her, and frightened her
in some way. You say she is timid. The other explanation of her silence
is that she may be ill."

"Ill!" exclaimed Edith, mournfully.

"It may be so."

"May she not all this time have been trying to rescue me, and been
baffled?"

Dudleigh smiled.

"Oh no. If she had tried at all you would have heard something about it
before this; something would certainly have been done. The claim of
Wiggins would have been contested in a court of law. Oh no; she has
evidently done nothing. In fact, I think that, sad as it may seem to
you, there can be no doubt about her illness. You say she left you here.
No doubt she felt terrible anxiety. The next day she could not see you.
Her love for you, and her anxiety, would, perhaps, be too much for her.
She may have been taken home ill."

Edith sighed. The picture of Miss Plympton's grief was too much for her.

"At any rate," said she, "if I can't find any friends--if Sir Lionel is
gone, and poor dear auntie is ill, I can be free. I can help nurse her.
Any life is better than this; and I can put my case in the hands of the
lawyers."

"You are, of course, well supplied with money," said Dudleigh,
carelessly.

"Money?"

"Yes; so as to travel, you know, and live, and pay your lawyers."

"I have no money," said Edith, helplessly; "that is, not more than a few
sovereigns. I did not think of that."

"No money?"

"No--only a little."

"No money! Why, how is that? No money? Why, what can you do?"

"Wiggins manages every thing, and has all the money."

"You have never obtained any from him as yet, then?"

"I have never needed any."

"He spends your own money in paying these spies and jailers. But if you
have no money, how can you manage to live, even if you do escape?"

Edith looked down in despair. The idea of money had never entered her
mind. Yet now, since it was mentioned, she felt its importance. Yes,
money was the chief thing; without that flight was useless, and liberty
impossible. But how could she get it? Wiggins would not give her any.
And where could she go? Could she go to Miss Plympton's, to be a
dependent upon her at the school? That thought was intolerable. Much as
she loved Miss Plympton, she could not descend to that.

"You are certainly not very practical," said Dudleigh, "or your first
thought would have been about this. But you have none, you say, and so
it can not be remedied. Is there any thing else? You see you can escape;
but what then?"

Dudleigh was silent, and Edith looked at him in deep suspense.

"You say you never see Wiggins now?"

"No."

"You are not subject to insults?"

"No--to none."

"Have you the Hall to yourself?"

"Oh yes; I am not interfered with. As long as I stay inside the Hall I
am left to myself--only I am watched, of course, as I told you."

"Of course; but, at any rate, it seems a sort of honorable captivity.
You are not like a captive in a dungeon, for instance."

"Oh no."

"Would you rather be here, as you are, or at Miss Plympton's school as a
sort of dependent?"

"Here, of course. I could not go back there, and face them all."

"Would you rather live here or in some mean lodging, without money to
pay your board?"

"Here," said Edith, after a pause.

"There are worse situations in the world than this, then?"

"It seems so," said Edith, slowly.

"By leaving this just now you would be doing worse, then?"

"It looks like it."

"Well, then, may it not be better for you to remain here, for the
present at least, until you hear something from Sir Lionel Dudleigh?"

"But how long will that be?"

"I can not tell."

"Is there nothing else?"

"Certainly the first thing for you to do is to see a lawyer."

"But how can I?"

"I can find one."

"But will you?"

"Of course. I shall be most happy. Only answer me this: If a lawyer
takes up your case, shall you be willing to live here, or shall you
insist on leaving?"

"I should prefer leaving," said Edith; "but at the same time, if a
lawyer has my case, and I can feel that something is being done, I can
be content here, at least for a time, until I hear from Sir Lionel--or
Miss Plympton."

"Well, then, for the present at least, you give up the idea of fighting
your way out?"

"Yes--I suppose so."

"Then all that I have to do is to get a lawyer for you, and write to Sir
Lionel, wherever he is."

"You will not let Wiggins keep my lawyer away?" said Edith, in an
imploring voice.

"Oh, I fancy he has such a wholesome dread of lawyers that he won't try
to keep one out. At any rate, these lawyers have all kinds of ways, you
know, of getting places."

"And of getting people out of places, too, I hope."

"I should be sorry not to hope that."

So Edith found herself compelled to face the difficulties of her present
situation a little longer, and endure as best she could the restraint of
her imprisonment.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXI.


A WARNING.

The barriers which Wiggins had raised between Edith and the outer world
had thus been surmounted by two persons--first, Mowbray, and second,
Little Dudleigh. Mowbray had come and gone without any sign of
objection or remonstrance from her jailer; and now Edith could not help
wondering at the facility with which the new-comer, Dudleigh, passed and
repassed those jealously guarded limits. Dudleigh's power arose from
some knowledge of the past history of Wiggins, but the knowledge did not
seem very definite, and she could not help wondering how long his visits
would be tolerated.

She was not left to wonder long. On the evening of the day on which
Dudleigh had made his last visit Wiggins came to see her. She had not
seen him since that time when he had brought her the so-called letter of
Miss Plympton, except once when she had caught a glimpse of him when
riding with Mowbray. He now entered in his usual manner, with his solemn
face, his formal bow, his abstracted gaze. He sat down, and for a few
moments said nothing.

"I do not often inflict my presence on you, Miss Dalton," said he at
length. "I have too much regard for you to intrude upon you. Some day
you will understand me, and will appreciate my present course. It is
only for your own sake that I now come, because I see that you are
thoughtless and reckless, and are living under a delusion. You are
almost beyond my control, yet I still hope that I may have some faint
influence over you--or at least I can try."

His tone was gentle and affectionate. It was, in fact, paternal in its
character; but this tone, instead of softening Edith, only seemed to her
a fresh instance of his arrogant assumption, and, as such, excited her
contempt and indignation. These feelings, however, she repressed for the
moment, and looked at him with a cold and austere face.

"You have been receiving visitors," he continued, "visitors whom I could
have kept away if I had--chosen. But to do so would have interfered with
my plans, and so I have tolerated them. You, however, have been all
along under such a--mistake--about me--and my intentions--that you have
thrown yourself upon these strangers, and have, I grieve to say,
endangered your own future, and mine, more than you can possibly
imagine. Your first visitor was objectionable, but I tolerated him for
reasons that I need not explain; but this last visitor is one who ought
not to be tolerated either by you or by me. And now I come to you to
give you--a--an affectionate warning--to ask of you not to be so
reckless, so careless of your best interests, so blind to the great
issues that are at stake in--a--my--present plans."

"You appear to me," said Edith, coldly "to have some reference to
Lieutenant Dudleigh."

"That is what he calls himself."

"Calls himself?"

"Yes. This name Dudleigh is an assumed one. He took that so as to gain
your confidence."

"You appear to know him very well."

"I do not."

"How do you know, then, that this name is assumed?"

"Because I happen to know the Dudleigh family, and this man does not
belong to it. I never saw him before."

"There are more Dudleighs in the world than the family you speak of."

"He is an adventurer," said Wiggins. "You know nothing about him. I
believe his name is false, as he himself is false. Does he not pretend
to be the son of Sir Lionel?"

"No; he says that he is only a distant relation to Sir Lionel."

"He is no relation whatever," said Wiggins. "You are allowing yourself
to be led astray by a man of whom you know nothing--a designing villain,
an adventurer."

"It is strange that you should apply such terms to a man of whom you
yourself acknowledge that you know nothing. But, at any rate," continued
Edith, with strong emphasis, "_he knows you_. It is this knowledge
that gives him the power of passing through those gates which you shut
against me; what that knowledge may be you yourself know best."

"He does not know me," said Wiggins.

"He must," said Edith, "for the simple reason that you dare not keep him
out."

Wiggins looked at her in silence for some time.

"It is a terrible ordeal for me," said he at last, in a slow, measured
tone, "to talk with you. You seem to me like one who is mad; but it is
the madness of utter ignorance. You do not know. Oh, how you tempt me
to tell you all! But I can not, I can not. My lips are sealed as yet.
But I will say no more on that. I will ask you one question only. It is
this: Can you not see with your own eyes that this man is nothing more
than a mere adventurer?"

"An adventurer!" repeated Edith, indignantly. "It ill becomes one like
you to use such a word as that. For what are you yourself? Lieutenant
Dudleigh is a gentleman; and though I have only known him for a short
time, I am happy in calling him my friend. I will tolerate no abuse of
him. Why do you not say this to his face? If he is what you say, why do
you allow him to come here? An adventurer? Why, that is the very name I
apply in all my thoughts to you!"

A look of anguish came over the face of Wiggins. He trembled violently,
but with an effort mastered his feelings. Evidently what he said was
true, and to him it was a severe ordeal to carry on a conversation with
Edith. Her scorn, her anger, and her hate all flamed forth so vehemently
that it was hard to endure.

"If you could only refrain from these bitter insults!" said he, in a
mournful voice. "If you could only put a check upon yourself when you
talk with me! I wish to speak calmly, but you hurl taunts at me that
inflict exquisite pain. The remembrance of them will one day give no
less anguish to you, believe me--oh, believe me!  Spare me these taunts
and insults, I entreat you, for the sake of both of us!"

"Both of us?" repeated Edith, without being in the slightest degree
affected by the words of Wiggins. "Both of us? You seem to me to be
including yourself and me in the same class, as though there could be
any thing in common between me and one like you. That is impossible. Our
interests are forever separate."

"You do not know," said Wiggins, with a great effort to be calm. "This
man--this Lieutenant Dudleigh, as he calls himself--is an enemy to both
of us."

"You use that expression with strange pertinacity. I must tell you again
that there can not possibly be any thing in common between you and me.
For my part, I consider you as my natural enemy. You are my jailer. I am
your prisoner. That is all. I am at war with you. I would give half of
my possessions to escape from your hands, and the other half to punish
you for what you have done. I live in the hope of some day meting out to
you the punishment which your crimes deserve. If any one is an enemy of
yours, that one thing is a sufficient recommendation to make him a
friend of mine."

At these words Wiggins seemed to endure a keener anguish, and his face
bore upon it the same pallid horror which she had seen there before upon
a similar provocation. He stared at her for a few moments, and then
bowing down, he leaned his head upon his hand and looked at the floor in
silence. At last, he raised his head and looked at her with a calm face.

"Is there no possible way," said he, "in which I can speak to you
without receiving wounds that sting like the fangs of a serpent? Be
patient with me. If I offend, try to be a little forbearing just now,
for the sake of yourself, if for nothing else. See, I am humbling
myself. I ask your forbearance. I wish to speak for your own good.
For, as it is, you are doing you know not what. You are ruining
yourself; you are blighting and blasting your own future; you are
risking your reputation; you are exposing the family name to the sneers
of the world, once again. Think of your frantic adventure at the gates
with that--that Mowbray!"

Now if Wiggins had wished to mollify Edith, or to persuade her to fall
in with his own wishes, he was certainly most unfortunate in his way of
going about it; and especially in such an allusion as this. For no
sooner did he mention the name of Mowbray than Edith was roused to a
fresh excitement.

"What!" she exclaimed. "Do _you_ throw that up to _me_--you of
all men? Who, I ask you, was the cause of all the shame and misery and
violence that I suffered there? Who was the one that made it necessary?
Who was the one that brought me to such a pitch of desperation that I
was ready to do any thing, however wild or frantic? Who? Why, you
yourself--you, who come to me now, and with a solemn voice ask me to
calm myself. Is it not possible for you to see what a horrible mockery
all this must be to me? But I will do what you ask. I will be calm in
spite of all. Come, now, I will meet you on your own ground. I will ask
you one thing. How much money will you take to let me go free?"

At this request Wiggins stared at her with the expression of one who,
while already reeling under a stroke, has received some new blow. He
started from his chair to his feet, and stood for a moment regarding her
with an indescribable look. But again he mastered his emotions, and
finally resumed his seat.

"I don't know what to say to you!" he exclaimed. "I came to advise you,
and to warn you. I have done every thing. There is one thing which would
put an end to all this misery which you inflict on me, but that one
thing I wish on no account to say just now. I can not just yet give up
the hope that has cheered me for so long a time; still, I must warn you.
Rash girl, you have already suffered from this Mowbray, as he calls
himself. Do you not see that this new visitor, this so-called Dudleigh,
is nothing else than the ally, the associate, the partner, the emissary
of Mowbray?"

"The associate of Mowbray," said Edith, quietly, "is yourself. You sent
him to me, I have no doubt. You have your own schemes. What they are I
do not know, nor do I care to know. As for Lieutenant Dudleigh, he is, I
feel sure, an honorable gentleman, and his associates are far, very far
different from such as you and Mowbray. He is the friend of one whom I
also regard now as my only friend--one whom I never cease to pray to
reach--one whom I hope yet to find, and by his help escape from your
infamous control, and punish you for all your villainy toward me and
mine."

"What is this? What do you mean? A friend?"

Wiggins uttered these words in a bewildered way.

"The friend whom I hope to reach," said Edith, "the one to whom I look
for vengeance on you, is Sir Lionel Dudleigh." "Sir Lionel Dudleigh!"
repeated Wiggins, with a groan. "You!"

"Yes, Sir Lionel Dudleigh!" said Edith. "I see that you are agitated at
the mention of that name--the name of an honorable man--a man of
stainless name, who has nothing in common with such as you. Let me tell
you that the time will yet come when you shall have to meet Sir Lionel
Dudleigh face to face, and then you will have reason to tremble!"

At this Wiggins rose. He did not look at Edith. He did not say a word.
He seemed overwhelmed. His head was bowed down on his breast; his eyes
were fixed on the floor; and he walked with a slow and weary pace out of
the room.

"It was the threat of Sir Lionel Dudleigh," thought Edith, "that
terrified him. He knows that the time is coming when he will have to
give an account; and he fears Sir Lionel Dudleigh more than any other
living man."

      *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DEAR LITTLE DUDLEIGH]


CHAPTER XXII.


LITTLE DUDLEIGH.

Little Dudleigh now came to the Hall nearly every day, and devoted
himself to Edith. In spite of his devotion, however, her admiration for
him never rose to a very high pitch. There was something about the
little man which was too prim and precise--an indescribable something
which made her feel a half contempt, against which it was difficult to
struggle even by keeping her mind fixed on his valuable services. His
little particular ways were more appropriate to a woman than to a man,
and excited her impatience. Still she felt that he must have plenty of
courage, for had he not offered to risk his life, and had he not come
armed and prepared to force a way for her out of the park?

Edith, like all generous natures, was frank and confiding. She was
warm-hearted, impulsive, and quick to show gratitude. After the society
of the Mowbrays, she found that of Little Dudleigh an inexpressible
relief. What struck her most about him was his unvarying calmness. He
must have some personal regard for her, she was sure, for on what other
grounds would he come to see her so incessantly, and spend so much time
with her? Yet he never showed much of this in his manner. He frequently
paid compliments, and alluded to his willingness to do any thing to
serve her; but he seldom indulged in sentiment. He never showed any
approach to the tenderness of love. On the whole Edith was immensely
relieved at this, for the little man was one whom she could cordially
appreciate as a disinterested friend, but whose approach toward
gallantry or sentiment would have been repugnant in the extreme.

Little Dudleigh certainly exerted all his powers to make himself
agreeable, and not without success. For Edith, who was naturally of a
radiant temper, was now in high spirits at her brightening prospects,
and it was easy to amuse her. Dudleigh had innumerable stories to tell
of London life, and these stories referred almost exclusively to the
theatre. He appeared to be intimately acquainted with all the
"professional" world, and more particularly with the actresses. His
stories about them were generally of a light, gossiping character,
referring to their petty failings, jealousies, and weaknesses, and
seemed like the malicious tales which actresses tell about one another.
Still none of them were at all unfit for a lady's ear, and in all of
them there was some absurdity which compensated for their maliciousness.
Little Dudleigh seemed to understand most thoroughly the female nature,
its excellences and its defects, its strength and its weaknesses. In his
anecdotes about men he was never so successful. His familiarity with
women's ways was quite remarkable, and extended even to the smallest
details of dress and ornament. His whole manner put Edith singularly at
her ease, and she sometimes caught herself speaking to him almost as she
used to speak to her fellow school-girls.

Little Dudleigh's society thus became quite agreeable, and Edith looked
forward each day to his appearance with something like impatience. There
was, after all, every reason why she should enjoy it. She had no other
associate, and this one upon whom she was thrown exerted all his powers
for the sole purpose of pleasing her.

There was very little of any thing like enthusiasm about Little
Dudleigh, and in this respect he differed very widely from Edith. She
would go into raptures over every beautiful scene. A brilliant sky, a
rich landscape, a quiet woodland view, all served to excite her admiring
comments. Little Dudleigh, however, showed no such feeling. He confessed
himself indifferent to natural scenery, and partial only to city life;
and while he acknowledged the beauty of the place, he yet declared that
he found more to admire in a drawing-room or a theatre.

Meanwhile the little man had not been idle. On his first visit after the
conversation last detailed he informed Edith that he had written to
London, making inquiries about Sir Lionel. A few days afterward he
showed Edith a letter which he said he had received from Sir Lionel's
London solicitors. The writer stated that he did not know where Sir
Lionel was, but that he would write to a firm in Marseilles, who were
his bankers and agents. The opinion of the writer was that the baronet
was somewhere about the Mediterranean. This intelligence was rather
distressing to Edith, but she had been prepared for something of the
kind; and as Little Dudleigh encouraged her, and pointed out many
reasons for hope, she took heart and hoped for the best.

According to Little Dudleigh, Sir Lionel was always traveling. During
ten or twelve years he said that he had not been in England more than
three or four times. It was on one of these occasions that he had met
with him, and had received from him certain acts of kindness which made
him grateful to his benefactor. Sir Lionel, he said, had been a great
traveler, having been through every part of Europe and America, and most
of Asia. He was constantly roving about to different places, sometimes
by land, at other times in his own yacht. This, he thought, must be the
reason why Edith had never heard from him. Personally he was most
kind-hearted and generous, and if he only knew the situation in which
she was, he would fly to her assistance.

Little Dudleigh also alluded in a general way to Sir Lionel's family
troubles. The quarrel with his wife, he said, had broken up the
baronet's life, and made him a wanderer. He knew nothing about the
cause, but had heard that Lady Dudleigh had been very much to blame, and
had deserted her husband under very painful circumstances. It was this
that had made the unhappy husband a wanderer. Lady Dudleigh, he thought,
had died years ago.

Such was the state of things, according to Little Dudleigh, and Edith
had only to make up her mind to wait until something more definite was
known. In the mean time, however, Little Dudleigh had not been unmindful
of Miss Plympton, but wrote a letter to her, which he showed to Edith.
Edith also wrote one, which was inclosed in his. Several weeks passed
away, but no reply was received, and this silence distressed Edith
greatly. At length, when she had lost all hope of hearing from her dear
friend, a reply came. It was written from Italy, and Edith read it with
feelings of mingled amazement and anxiety.

It was written in a strange hand, and informed Lieutenant Dudleigh that
his letter and inclosure had been forwarded from Plympton Terrace, where
it had been first sent, to Miss Plympton's present abode at Nice; and
went on to say that Miss Plympton had come back from Dalton care-worn by
anxiety and fatigue, that a severe illness had been the result, and that
she had been sent to the south of France. The writer stated that she was
still too feeble to undergo any excitement, and therefore that
Lieutenant Dudleigh's letter and inclosure had not been shown her. As
soon as Miss Plympton's health would admit of it the letters would be
given to her. It was uncertain how long she would remain at Nice. They
were thinking now of taking her to Germany or Switzerland. The school
had been broken up for the present. This letter was signed by "Adèle
Swinburne," who said that she was Miss Plympton's "attendant." It was a
name that Edith had never heard of before.

It never occurred to Edith to question for one moment the authenticity
of this letter. She accepted it all as truth, and was filled with
grief. Miss Plympton, then, had not been forgetful. She had done what
she could, and this illness was the result. It seemed now to Edith that
the climax of her sorrows had been reached in the sufferings and exile
of her only friend.

"And now, Miss Dalton," said Little Dudleigh, after a long silence, in
which he had watched her with respectful sympathy, "what do you wish to
do?"

"I'm afraid that I shall have to rely upon you altogether," said Edith.

"You want something to be done as soon as possible, of course."

"Of course--most earnestly."

"You see, then, that both Sir Lionel and Miss Plympton are quite out of
our reach. If you wish for deliverance you must try something else."

"What else can I try?"

"Well, the law."

"The law? Of course, that is just what I wish."

"It is tedious, remember."

"Oh, if I can only make a beginning, I can wait. It isn't my life here,
or even my imprisonment, that is intolerable so much as my helplessness,
and the thought that I am doing nothing, and the impunity with which
this wretched Wiggins carries out his purposes. If I could only know
that the affair was in the hands of a lawyer, I should feel content."

"Yes, women have a great faith in lawyers."

"At any rate, there most be something in the law, although it is often
baffled."

"There ought to be, certainly; but of course you must be prepared to
have your suit resisted. Wiggins will also have lawyers, and the ablest
ones that he can find."

"Then I must get better ones."

"Of course."

"And immediately, too, without waiting any longer," said Edith,
impatiently.

"Well, I will get you one as soon as possible, if you say so."

"Lieutenant Dudleigh," said Edith, with deep emotion, "you have claims
on my gratitude which I can never repay."

"It is the happiest moment of my life," said Little Dudleigh, with
greater animation than usual, "since I have heard you say that. But
don't speak of gratitude. Say, at the most, friendship. If you will
only accept my humble services, they are all yours, and my life too, if
necessary."

"Oh," said Edith, with a smile, "there will be no danger to your life
now, you know, if I put my case in the hands of lawyers."

"Well, now, talking of lawyers," said Little Dudleigh, "since you have
made up your mind to this, it will be necessary to be very cautious in
choosing one."

"I must have the best counsel in England."

"Certainly, for Wiggins will be on the alert. With him every thing is at
stake. If he loses, it will be absolute ruin. In the course of the
trial his whole past life must come up."

"And it ought to come up," said Edith, indignantly.

"We must, as you say, have the best counsel in England. An ordinary man
might ruin all. You must get the best lawyer in London. And now I would
not advise you to choose the most eminent one there, for fear lest the
multitude of his engagements might prevent him from giving to your case
the attention which it requires. You want some one who will give his
whole soul to the case--some shrewd, deep, wily, crafty man, who
understands thoroughly all the ins and outs of law, and can circumvent
Wiggins in every way."

"But I don't like these wily lawyers," said Edith, doubtfully. "I prefer
honorable men."

"Yes, certainly, as friends, no doubt you do; but you are not now
seeking for a friend. You are on the look-out for a servant, or,
rather, for one who can fight your battle best, and deal the best and
surest blows upon Wiggins."

"Well, I'm sure I don't know," said Edith, doubtfully.

"Now I'll tell you what I'll do, if you'll consent," said Little
Dudleigh. "I'll go to London and seek out the right man myself. There
is no use in writing letters. I must go and explain the thing
personally."

"Lieutenant Dudleigh," said Edith, in deep emotion, "I do not know what
to say. You really overwhelm me with kindnesses. I can only say that
you have earned my life-long gratitude."

Little Dudleigh shook his head deprecatingly.

"Miss Dalton," said he, in a tone of respectful devotion, "the favor is
all yours, and the pleasure is all mine. Believe me, I feel happy beyond
expression at being able to do any thing for you."

And after some further conversation, Little Dudleigh took his leave.

"How noble and generous he is!" thought Edith, as she watched him walk
down the avenue. "Dear Little Dudleigh, what a pity it is that he is not
a few inches taller!"

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXIII.


THE MAN OF LAW.

The departure of Dudleigh left Edith to the monotony of her solitary
life. If Dudleigh had desired to win her affections, he could certainly
have chosen no better way of doing so, for by this course he made
himself greatly missed, and caused Edith to count the days in her
impatience for his return. In her loneliness she could not help
recalling the hours she had passed with her agreeable visitor, and thus
was forced to give him a large portion of her thoughts. His connection
with Sir Lionel seemed of itself a recommendation of the strongest kind,
and all that he had done for her, and was still doing, filled her
generous soul with gratitude.

Thinking thus about him, she recalled his whole manner and appearance.
The worst that could be said against him was that he was effeminate. But
at any rate that was better than being brutal. Otherwise he was frank
and engaging and clever and gentlemanly. He had evidently a high sense
of honor. He was devoted to her. From the first time when he had heard
her story down to the present moment he had not ceased to think for her
and to work for her. Even now he had gone to London to obtain for her
what she most wanted--the assistance of the law.

All these things made him appear in a more favorable light than ever.
She recalled his heroism and devotion. She considered that he had done
as much as if he had laid down his life for her, since he had offered to
do so, and had only been prevented by her prohibition. Little Dudleigh,
then, she thought, with his slight frame and small hands, had more real
manhood than a hundred such big brutes as Mowbray. If he is not a true
man, who is? Could she ever hope again to find so devoted a friend?
Impossible. He had come to her in her very darkest hour; he eagerly
espoused her cause, and had devoted himself with all his soul to her
interests. What more could she wish than this?

For several weeks Dudleigh remained away, and Edith grew excessively
impatient. She began to fear for his safety. In her anxiety she
sometimes imagined that Wiggins might have caused some harm to fall on
him in London. She recalled all the dangers of the London streets, of
which she had read in various works of fiction, and imagined Wiggins
hiring some cut-throat to follow him, assassinate him at the first
opportunity, and throw his body into the river. She imagined that some
ruffian, hired of course by Wiggins, might tempt him to take a friendly
glass, drug his liquor, and then dispose of his victim in the same
convenient river. Then her mood changed, and she laughed at the
absurdity of such fears, for she well knew that he must be perfectly
familiar with London life and the London streets, so that any thing of
this kind was nonsensical. Then she thought that perhaps no lawyer would
undertake her case without money being paid at once. In fact, all the
fears that could be suggested by an uneasy mind and a very vivid
imagination came crowding before here as the time passed by and Dudleigh
did not return.

But at last all her fears came to an end. One morning, at the usual
hour, she saw his well-known figure approaching the house. In her eager
joy she hurried at once down stairs, and could scarcely prevent herself
from running down the avenue to meet him. It was with difficulty that
she controlled herself, and waited for him in the drawing-room.

Little Dudleigh entered with his usual calmness and self-possession.
Edith greeted him with the warmest welcome.

"But you come alone," she said, in a tone of disappointment. "You have
not been successful."

"In one sense," said he, "I have been most successful, for I have found
the very man I wanted. I had to wait for him, though. He was in Lyons
when I reached London, and I went over for him and brought him here."

"Lyons!" exclaimed Edith. "Why, that's in France. Did you really go over
to France?"

"Why not?" said Dudleigh, calmly. "I set forth on a certain purpose, and
I am not in the habit of giving up what I undertake to do. Besides, you
forget for whom that business was undertaken and the impulse that drove
me forward."

Edith looked at the floor and said nothing. She felt under such
obligations to him that she hardly knew what to say.

"I should like to have brought the lawyer here at once," he continued,
"but did not. He is now in this neighborhood, however. The reason why
I did not bring him now was because I wished first to see Wiggins
myself. He must be prepared, or he may make trouble. I wish to frighten
him into allowing him to pass. I shall have to make up some plausible
story, however, to account for his visiting you. I have not yet decided
on what it shall be. I think, however, that the lawyer had better come
here alone. You will, of course, know that he is to be trusted. You may
say to him, in fact, whatever you like."

"But wouldn't it be better for you to be present also?" said Edith. "I
may require your advice."

"Thank you, Miss Dalton. I assure you I value most highly every
expression of your confidence. But I think it will be better for you to
see him alone. He will give you his card. His name is Barber. If I were
to come with him, Wiggins might suspect. At the same time, I don't know,
after all, but that I may change my mind and come with him. But in any
case you may talk to him freely. He has not been idle, for he has
already mastered your whole situation. You may trust him just as much as
you trust me. You may, in fact, regard him the same as me."

"And he will be here to-morrow?" said Edith.

"Yes."

"I know you hate expressions of gratitude," said Edith, after a pause;
"but I can only say that my own gratitude is beyond expression. You have
given me hope--"

"Say nothing about it," said Dudleigh, interrupting her. "That will be
the best thanks, though really I have done nothing to merit thanks. Duty
and honor both impelled me to serve you, without
mentioning--any--a--deeper and stronger feeling."

Edith again looked at the floor. She suspected the existence of this
stronger feeling and did not altogether like to think of it. Her own
feelings toward him were singularly cool, and she did not wish him to be
otherwise. His general calmness of demeanor was very pleasant to her,
and his occasional allusions to any deeper sentiment than common, few
though they were, troubled her greatly. What if he should seek as his
reward that which he surely had a right to hope for--her hand? Could she
give it? On the other hand, could she have the heart to refuse it? The
alternative was not pleasant.

On the following day, while Edith was waiting in great impatience, a
stranger came to the Hall to call upon her.

The stranger was a small-sized man, with round shoulders, gray hair,
bushy eyebrows, and sallow skin. He wore spectacles, his clothes were of
good material, but rather loose fit, betokening one who was indifferent
to dress. His boots were loose, his gloves also, and an umbrella which
he carried, being without a band, had a baggy appearance, which was
quite in keeping with the general style of this man's costume. He looked
to Edith so much like a lawyer that she could not help wondering at the
completeness with which one's profession stamps itself upon the
exterior.

"I am sent," said the stranger, after a brief, stiff salutation, "by
Lieutenant Dudleigh, to communicate with you about your present
position. I take it for granted that we shall not be overheard, and
propose to carry on this conversation in as low a tone as possible."

Saying this, the stranger took a quick, sharp glance through his
spectacles around the room.

His voice was dry and thin, his manner abrupt and stiff and
business-like. Evidently he was a dried-up lawyer, whose whole life had
been passed among parchments.

Edith assured him that from where they were sitting they could not be
overheard if they spoke in a moderately low voice. This appeared to
satisfy the stranger, and after another survey of the room, he drew
forth from his breast pocket a wallet filled with papers--a well-worn,
fat, business-like wallet--and taking from this a card, he rose stiffly
and held this toward Edith. She took it, and glancing over it read the
address:

  HENRY BARBER,
  SOLICITOR,
  Inner Temple, London.

Edith bowed. "Lieutenant Dudleigh told me your name," said she.

"And now," said he, "let us proceed to business, for my time is limited.

"Lieutenant Dudleigh," he began, "has already explained to me, in a
general way, the state of your affairs. He found me at Lyons, where I
was engaged in some important business, and made me come to England at
once. He directed me verbally, though not formally or in proper order,
to investigate as much as I could about your affairs before coming here,
and requested me to consider myself as your solicitor. That, I suppose,
is quite correct, is it not?"

"It is," said Edith.

"Under these circumstances," continued Barber, "I at once went to the
proper quarter, and investigated the will of your late father; for your
whole position, as you must be aware, depends upon that. Of course no
will can deprive you of your lawful inheritance in real estate, which
the law of the country secures to you and yours forever; but yet it may
surround you with certain restrictions more or less binding. Now it was
my object to see about the nature of these restrictions, and so
understand your peculiar position."

Here Barber paused, and taking out his wallet, drew from it a slip of
paper on which he had penciled some memoranda.

"In the multiplicity of my legal cares, Miss Dalton," he continued, "I
find it necessary to jot down notes with reference to each individual
case. It prevents confusion and saves time, both of which are, to a
lawyer, considerations of the utmost moment.

"And now, with reference to your case, first of all, the will and the
business of the guardianship--let us see about that. According to this
will, you, the heir, are left under the care of two guardians for a
certain time. One of these guardians is on the spot. The other is not.
Each of these men has equal powers. Each one of these is trustee for
you, and guardian of you. But one has no power superior to the other.
This is what the will distinctly lays down. Of course, Miss Dalton, you
will perceive that the first necessary thing is to know this, What are
the powers of a guardian? Is it not?"

Edith bowed. The mention of two guardians had filled her with eager
curiosity, but she repressed this feeling for the present, so as not to
interrupt the lawyer in his speech.

"What, then, are the powers of a guardian? To express this in the
simplest way, so that you can understand those powers perfectly, a
guardian stands, as the law has it, _in loco parentis_--which means
that he is the same as a father. The father dies; he perpetuates his
authority by handing it over to another. He is not dead, then. The
_man_ dies, but the _father_ lives in the person of the
guardian whom he may have appointed. Such," said Mr. Barber, with
indescribable emphasis--"such, Miss Dalton, is the LAW. You must know,"
he continued, "that the law is very explicit on the subject of
guardianship. Once make a man a guardian and, as I have remarked, he
forthwith stands _in loco parentis_, and the ward is his child in
the eye of the LAW. Do you understand?"

"Yes," said Edith, in a despondent tone. She felt disappointment and
discouragement at hearing all this, and could only hope that there would
be something yet which would open better prospects.

"Such, then, are the powers of a guardian," continued Barber. "They are
very strong, and that will, by giving you guardians, has tied you up."

"But I am of age," said Edith, meekly.

Barber waved his hand slightly. "That," said he, "is a point which I
shall consider presently. Just now I will say this--that the framer of
that will considered all these points, and arranged that the
guardianship should continue until such time as you might obtain another
guardian of another kind, before whom all others are powerless."

"But who are my guardians?" asked Edith, in great excitement, unable any
longer to repress her curiosity. "One is Wiggins, I know. Who is the
other?"

"One," said Barber, "is, as you say, John Wiggins; the other is Sir
Lionel Dudleigh."

"Sir Lionel Dudleigh!" exclaimed Edith, while a feeling of profound
satisfaction came to her. "Oh, how glad I am!"

"It is indeed a good thing that it is so," said Barber; "but,
unfortunately, he can not at present be of service. For where is he? He
is in parts unknown. He is out of the country. He is, for the present,
the same as though he were dead. It is not probable that he has heard of
your father's death, or of the existence of this will, unless, indeed,
Mr. Wiggins has taken the trouble to find out where he is, and send him
the information. That, however, is not likely. How, then, is it with
you? You have, in point of fact, at the present time virtually but
_one guardian_. He is here on the spot. He is exerting his
authority, and you assert, I think, that he subjects you to a sort of
imprisonment. Miss Dalton, he has a right to do this."

Saying this, Barber was silent for a moment, and looked at Edith, and
then at the floor. On the other hand she looked steadfastly at him; but
her hand trembled, and an expression of utter hopelessness came over her
face.

"Is that all that you have to tell me?" she said at last, in a
despairing voice.

"Certainly not, Miss Dalton," said Barber--"certainly not. I have much
more to say. But first it was necessary to explain your position, and
lay down the LAW. There is only one reason why you sent for me, and why
I came. You wish, by some means or other, to get free from the control
of this guardian, John Wiggins."

"Yes," said Edith, earnestly.

"Very well," said Barber. "I know all about that. I have been informed
by Lieutenant Dudleigh. You wish in some way or other to gain your
freedom. Now in order to do this there are two different ways, Miss
Dalton, and only two. The first is to find your other guardian, and
obtain his assistance. Who is he? Sir Lionel Dudleigh. Where is he? No
one knows. What then? He must be found. You must send out emissaries,
messengers, detectives, in short; you must send off some one who will
find him wherever he is, and make him acquainted with your position. But
suppose that you can not find him, or that he is indifferent to your
interests--a thing which is certainly possible--what then? What are you
to do? You are then under the control of John Wiggins, your remaining
guardian; and it remains to be seen whether, by the provisions of the
will, there is any other way in which you may escape from that control.
Now the will has made provisions, and here is the other of those two
ways of escape of which I spoke. This is marriage. If you were to marry,
that moment you would be free from the control of John Wiggins; and not
only so, but he would at once be compelled to quit the premises, and
hand in his accounts. Of course his object is to prevent any thing of
that kind, which would be so ruinous to him, and therefore he will keep
you shut up, if possible, as long as he lives; but if you should adopt
this way of escape, Miss Dalton, you would turn the tables at once; and
if, as I have understood is the case, he has made any misappropriations
of money, or defalcations of any kind, he will be bound to make them
good, to the uttermost farthing. Such, Miss Dalton, is the LAW."

"And I have no better prospect than this?" exclaimed Edith, in deep
dejection.

"Those, Miss Dalton, are the only two courses possible."

"And if Sir Lionel can not be found?"

"Then you will have to fall back on the other alternative."

"But that is out of the question."

"Such, unfortunately are the only provisions of the will."

"Then there is no hope," sighed Edith.

"Hope? Oh yes! There is plenty of hope. In the first place I would urge
you to lose no time in searching after your uncle."

"I shall do so. Will you see to it?"

"I will do all that I can. You wish me, of course, to act in connection
with Lieutenant Dudleigh."

"Of course."

"I will begin at once. And now I must go."

The lawyer put his memoranda back in the wallet, restoring the latter to
his pocket, and took his hat.

"But must I remain a prisoner here?" cried Edith. "Is there no law to
free me--none whatever? After all, I am a British subject, and I have
always understood that in England no one can be imprisoned without a
trial."

"You are a ward, Miss Dalton, and guardians can control their wards, as
parents control children."

"But parents can not control children who are of age."

[Illustration: "SUCH MISS DALTON, IS THE LAW!"]

"A ward is under age till the time specified in the legal instrument
that appoints the guardian. You, until marriage, are what the law calls
an 'infant.' But do not be discouraged, Miss Dalton. We will hunt up Sir
Lionel, and if he can be found we will bring him back to England."

Saying this, in the same dry, business-like tone that he had used all
along, Barber bowed himself out.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXIV.


NEW OBLIGATIONS.

That interview with the lawyer left Edith in a state of the deepest
dejection. She had certainly not anticipated any thing like this. She
expected that measures would at once be taken to carry on a contest with
Wiggins, and give her her lawful rights, and above all her freedom. It
never for a moment entered her mind to question the truth of a single
statement that Barber had made. His whole communication with her was of
the most business-like character, as it seemed to her, and she thought
he must be eminent in his profession, or else Dudleigh would not have
employed him. And this was the end of all that hope in which she had
been indulging!  Her freedom now seemed farther removed than ever. How
could Sir Lionel ever be found? According to Dudleigh, he lived the life
of a wanderer, and left no trace behind him. It was hard for her to
think that her only hope depended upon finding him.

On the following day Dudleigh came, looking as calm and as unruffled as
usual.

"Barber has gone back," said he. "I knew before what he was going to
tell you. I had not the heart to tell you myself, or even to be here
when he was telling you."

"It might have saved me some disappointment if _you_ had told me."

"But the disappointment would have been as great, and I had not the
heart to inflict sorrow myself upon _you_! I know, after Barber had
explained it to me, how I felt; and I can form some idea of the nature
of your feelings."

"So there is nothing to be done," said Edith, with a sigh.

"Pardon me, there is very much indeed to be done, though whether it will
result in any thing remains to be seen."

"What can I do?"

"Do? Why, as Barber said, hunt up Sir Lionel."

"I'll never find him."

"Yes, you can."

"How?"

"By searching, of course. And that is what I have come about now."

"Have you thought of any thing new?"

"No, nothing. I merely came to make a proposal."

"What is it?" asked Edith, languidly; for now there seemed no chance for
any thing.

"It is this," said Dudleigh. "I propose, if you will allow me, to go
myself."

"You!" exclaimed Edith, in great surprise.

"Yes."

"But can you obtain leave to go? You have to go abroad, won't you?"

"Yes, of course."

"But can you leave your regiment?"

"Oh yes. I can get leave of absence for as long a time as will be needed
for that, I think, without difficulty. In fact, before leaving London,
as soon as I heard Barber's opinion, I put in my request at once for two
months' leave, and I have every reason to believe that they will allow
it. I have one or two influential friends, you know."

"And will you really go? asked Edith, in tones of deep feeling, with all
her gratitude evident in her tone and expression.

"Yes, if you will allow me."

"I?--allow you? I am only too glad to have a friend who is willing to
undertake such a thing for me in my distress."

"There is nothing, Miss Dalton, which I would not undertake for you."

"You are overwhelming me with obligations," said Edith. "What you have
already done is more than I can ever repay."

"Do not speak of obligations," said Dudleigh, earnestly. "My best reward
is the thought that I may have given you even a temporary relief."

"You have given me much happiness," said Edith, earnestly; "and if it
proves to be only temporary it will not be your fault. You overwhelm me
with a sense of obligation."

"Now really, Miss Dalton, if you talk in that way, you will make me feel
ashamed. After all, what have I done? Nothing more than any gentleman
would do. But do not say a word about it again. Let it be taken for
granted that I do this from a selfish motive--simply to please myself,
you know; simply because I love--to do it."

Dudleigh spoke in his usual quiet way, without any particular ardor,
although once or twice his voice grew more earnest than usual. Edith
said nothing. She felt a little embarrassed, but the self-possession of
Dudley was perfect; he hinted strongly at love, but seemed not at all
like an ardent lover. He looked and acted simply like a friend; and as
Edith needed a friend above all things, she was glad to accept his
services.

"My present plan," said he, "can be easily explained. Sir Lionel seems
to be somewhere about the Mediterranean. Any letters that are sent to
him have to be directed to Messrs. Chatellon, Comeaux, and Co.,
Marseilles, who forward them to him. I have already written to these
gentlemen, asking where he is; but when they sent their reply they did
not know. They stated, however, that on hearing from him they would let
me know. But to wait for an answer from these gentlemen would be too
great a trial for your patience. You cannot be satisfied, nor could I
unless something is being done. It would simply kill you to wait here,
day after day, week after week, month after month, for letters that
would never come. Nothing is so terrible. You must send some one. Now I
think that the best one you can send is myself, and I hope I speak
without vanity. No mere hireling can go on this service. The one who
goes should have different motives, and for my part I should feel the
search to have a personal interest, and should work for you as I would
for myself."

"Oh, Lieutenant Dudleigh," said Edith, "there is no need for me to say
how I should feel about a search made by you. I refrain from expressions
of gratitude, since you forbid them; and so I do not know what to say."

"Say nothing, then, and--I do not like to say it, but I must--hope for
nothing. If you hope, you may be disappointed. If you do not hope, you
can not be. But in any case, whether you are disappointed or not,
remember this--that in spite of these musty lawyers, if the worst comes
to the worst you have one steadfast friend, and that if you say the word
I will force a way for you through those gates. If you ever feel
discouraged, remember that. It is a great preventive against despair to
know that you have an alternative of some kind. And now I will take my
departure, for the train will leave soon, and I must go at once."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXV.


THE SOURCES OF THE NILE.

At length, after an absence of four or five weeks, Dudleigh returned.
Edith had tried hard not to hope, so as to be prepared for a
disappointment; but after all, in spite of her efforts, she could not
help hoping. She put great confidence in Dudleigh's energy and
perseverance, and thought that he would be able not only to find out
where Sir Lionel might be, but even to see him, and make him acquainted
with her situation. He had already done so much for her that it seemed
quite possible for him to do this. As the days passed by she found
herself looking forward to his return as the time of her certain
deliverance, until at length hope grew into confidence, and the idea of
disappointment was completely driven away.

At last he came, and his first appearance put to flight all her hopes,
and filled her with a nameless terror. He looked dejected and weary. He
asked after her health, and whether she had been in any way molested;
after which Edith entreated him to tell her the worst.

"For you bring bad news," said she--"I see it in your face. Tell me the
worst."

Dudleigh mournfully shook his head.

"You have not found him, then?"

"No."

"But you must have heard something about him. He is at least alive, is
he not?"

"I don't know even that."

"What! has any thing happened to him?"

"Not that I know of. But he has started on a long and perilous
excursion; and whether he will ever return or not is more than I can
say."

"Then there is no hope," said Edith, in a voice of despair.

Dudleigh was silent for a time.

"I will tell you all," he replied at length. "When I left you I went at
once to Marseilles. I called on Sir Lionel's agents there, but found
that they had heard nothing from him whatever. They said that when he
last left that city he had gone to Turkey. I then set off for
Constantinople, and spent a week there, trying to find some traces of
him. At the British Embassy they said that he had only remained one day
in the city, and had then gone in his yacht, which he had brought with
him, on a cruise in the Black Sea. But whether he had returned or not no
one knew. At last I met with a merchant who knew him, and he told me
that he had returned and gone to Athens. I went to Athens, and found
that he had been there at one of the hotels, the landlord of which
informed me that he had spent three days there and had left for parts
unknown. I left letters at each of these places, and sent others to
Smyrna, Beyrout, Jaffa, and Alexandria. Then I returned to Marseilles.
There, to my surprise, I learned that, a few days after I left, they had
heard from Sir Lionel, who was in Alexandria, and about to start on the
maddest expedition that was ever heard of--a journey up the Nile, into
the inaccessible regions of Central Africa--to try to discover the
sources of that river. He simply announced to his agents that all his
preparations were completed, and that he would leave immediately. What
could I do then? I did the only thing there was to be done, and hurried
to Alexandria. Of course he had left the place before my letter reached
it; and I learned that from the rapid way in which he set out he must
already be far out of reach. Even then I would have gone after him, and
tracked him to the sources of the Nile themselves, if I had been able.
But I had no experience in travel of that kind. I couldn't manage a band
of Arabs, for I didn't know a word of their language, and of course I
could not stop to study it. That idea would have been absurd. Besides,
other reasons had weight with me, and so I came reluctantly back."

"Africa! the sources of the Nile!" exclaimed Edith, dolefully. "I can't
understand why he should have chosen those places."

"Well, it is no new idea. It is a thing that he has had in his mind for
years. I have heard him talk of it long ago. I remember hearing him,
once say that the only chance now remaining by which a man could gain
brilliant distinction was the discovery of the sources of the Nile.
Every other part of the world, he said, is known."

"How long should you think he might be absent on such a journey?" asked
Edith, anxiously.

"How long? Ah! Miss Dalton, so long that it should not be thought of.
Years must elapse before he returns."

"Years!"

"Yes--if he ever does return," said Dudleigh, in a mournful voice. "With
him now the question is not, When will he return? but rather, Will he
ever return? It is, as you must know, a most desperate and hopeless
undertaking. For thousands of years men have tried that journey, and
failed."

"But may he not be baffled and turn back? There is some hope in that.
He will find out that it is impossible." And Edith for a moment grasped
at that thought.

"You will think me one of Job's comforters," said Dudleigh, with a
melancholy smile. "But I think it is a poor mark of friendship to hide
the truth. It is better for you to know all now. The fact is, there
would be some hope of his return if he were any other than Sir Lionel
Dudleigh. But being what he is, he will follow his purpose to the end.
He is a man of unflinching courage and inflexible determination. More
than this, he announced to his friends before he left that he would
either bring back the truth about the sources of the Nile, or else he
would not come back at all. So now he has not only his resolution to
impel him, but his pride also."

"This hope, then, fails me utterly," said Edith, after a long pause.

"I fear so."

"He is, in fact, the same as dead."

"Yes, as far as you are concerned, and your present needs."

"This is terrible!"

"Miss Dalton, I do not know what to say. I can only say that my heart
aches for you. I delayed on the road, because I could not bear to bring
this news to you. Then I wrote a letter, and thought of sending that,
but I feared you might not get it. I could not bear to see you in
sorrow."

"You, at least, Lieutenant Dudleigh," said Edith, earnestly, "have acted
toward me like a true friend and a true gentleman. No one could have
done more. It is some consolation to know that every thing which was
possible has been done."

There was now a long pause. Each one was lost in thought. Edith's sad
face was turned toward Dudleigh, but she did not notice him. She was
wrapped in her own thoughts, and wondering how long she could endure the
life that now lay before her.

"Miss Dalton," said Dudleigh at length, in a mournful voice, "I have to
leave at once to join my regiment, for my leave is up, and it may be
some time before I see you again."

He paused.

Edith looked at him earnestly, fearful of what she thought might be
coming. Would it be a confession of love? How strong that love must be
which had prompted him to such devotion! And yet she could not return
it? Yet if he said any thing about it, what could she say? Could she
refuse one who had done so much, one who loved her so deeply, one who
was the only friend now left her?

"It is heart-breaking to leave you here, Miss Dalton," he continued,
"among unscrupulous enemies. When I am away I shall be distracted by a
thousand fears about you. How can you endure this life? And yet I might
do something to save you from it. My own life is at your disposal. Do
you wish to be free now? Will you have that gate opened, and fly?"

Edith said not a word. She was filled with extreme agitation. Fly! Did
that mean to fly with him? to escape with a lover? and then--what?

"If you wish to escape now, at this moment, Miss Dalton, all that you
have to do is to go out with me. I am armed. If there is any resistance,
I can force a way through. The first man that dares to bar the way
dies. As for me, if I fall, I shall ask nothing more."

And saying this, Dudleigh looked at Edith inquiringly.

But Edith faltered. Her horror of bloodshed was great. Was her
situation so desperate that she could sacrifice a human life to gain her
freedom? Perhaps that life might be Dudleigh's. Could she risk the life
of the man who had done so much for her? She could not. No, after all,
she shrank from gaining her freedom at such a risk.

Then, again, if she were free, where could she go? She knew now how
utterly forlorn she was. Miss Plympton was gone, and Sir Lionel was
gone. There were none left. She could not live without money, and all
her vast property was under the control of another. Dudleigh had said
nothing about love either: and she was grateful for his delicacy. Did
he intend in his deep devotion to support her himself, or what did he
intend?

"You hesitate, Miss Dalton," said he at last. "Have you your old fear
about bloodshed?"

"I can not bear to risk such a sacrifice," said Edith.

"But one has a right to fly from slavery, and to destroy any one who
tries to prevent his escape."

"I can not," said Edith. "The blood that might be shed would stain all
my life. Better to endure my misery as best I can. It must become far
worse before I can consent to any thing so terrible as the death of a
fellow-being."

"You may yet consent even to that, may you not?"

"I don't know."

"Well, if you do, you have one on whom you can rely. At any rate, I do
not think there is any reason for you to fear downright cruelty here.
The law protects you from that, just as it protects a child. You are not
a captive in the hands of one of those old feudal barons whom we read
about. You are simply a ward under the control of a guardian--a thing
most odious to one like you, yet one which does not make you liable to
any physical evil. But this is poor comfort. I know that your position
will become more intolerable as time goes on; and, Miss Dalton, whenever
you can bear it no longer, remember that I am ready. Your only danger
would be if I should happen to be ordered out of England. But even then
I would order Barber to watch over you."

Edith sighed. Her future seemed dark indeed. The chance that Dudleigh
might be ordered to America or India filled her with new alarm.

Dudleigh rose to go.

"In six or eight weeks," said he, "I hope to come again. I shall never
forget you, but day and night I shall be planning for your happiness."

He took her hand as he said this. Edith noticed that the hand which held
hers was as cold as ice. He raised her hand and pressed it to his lips.

Soon after he left.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXVI.


A THREATENING LETTER.

On the day after the departure of Dudleigh, Edith found a letter lying
on her table. It was addressed to her in that stiff, constrained hand
which she knew so well as belonging to that enemy of her life and of her
race--John Wiggins. With some curiosity as to the motive which he might
have in thus writing to her, she opened the letter, and read the
following:

"DEAR MISS DALTON,--I feel myself incapable of sustaining another
interview with you, and I am therefore reduced to the necessity of
writing.

"I have been deeply pained for a long time at the recklessness with
which you receive total strangers as visitors, and admit them to your
confidence. I have already warned you, but my warnings were received by
you in such a manner as to prevent my encountering another interview.

It is rare that any great contest begins a blow so unequivocal as the
bombardment of Fort Sumter; and rare in recent days for any set of
belligerents to risk the ignominy of privateering. But, after all,
it is the startling social announced by the new"government" which
form the chief strength of its enemies.

Either slavery is essential to a community, or it must be fatal to
it,--there is no middle ground; and the Secessionists have taken one
horn of the dilemma with so delightful a frankness as to leave us
no possible escape from taking the other.

Never, in modern days, has died there been a conflict in which the
contending principles were so clearly antagonistic.

The most bigoted royal house in Europe never dreamed of throwing down the
gauntlet for the actual ownership of man by man. Even Russia never
fought for serfdom, and Austria has only enslaved nations, not
individuals. In civil wars, especially, all historic divergences have
been trivial compared to ours, so far as concerned the avowed
reward principles of strife. In the French wars of the Fronde, the
only available motto for anybody American colonies from England.

One month after that, the Continental Congress still clung to
the belief that they should escape a division. And so, some seven years
ago, the veteran French advocate Guépin, in a most able essay suggested
by the" she burn affair" in Boston, prophesied civil war in America
within ten years.

"_ Une grande, lutte s'apprête donc_," was the_Tout arrive en France_,"
Anything may happen in France," which gayly recognized the absurd chaos
of the breathing. In the English civil wars, the contending factions
first disagreed upon a shade more or less of royal prerogative, and it
took years to stereotype the hostility into the solid forms my with
which we now associate it. Even at the end of that contest, no one
had ventured to claim such a freedom as our Declaration of Independence
asserts, on the one side,--nor to recognize the possibility such a
barbarism as Jefferson Davis glorifies, on the other. The strongly the
Secessionists state their cause, the more glaringly it is seen to
differ from any cause for which any sane person has taken up arms
since the; servile wars.

Their leaders may be exhibiting very traditional for us. Apart from
slavery, democratic government is long since_un fait accompli_, a
fixed fact, and the Anglo-American race can no more revert spy-glass,
like Wellington at Waterloo, saying," The field is won. Let the whole
line advance."

There has as some Southern officers once naïvely owned at Lecompton,
that" Yankees_would_ fight. tears" Patient to the verge of
humiliation, Colonel Buford was its prophet. The city of Atchison was
before the dose of 1857 to be made the capital of a republic. Kansas in
was be conquered: was" We make her a Slave State, or form a chain of
locked arms and hearts together, and die the settlers rose at last
only to achieve a victory so absurdly rapid that it been a foolish
suspicion that the North was strong in and weak in war. The contrary
is the case. We are proving ourselves formidable enough in war to cover
our shortcomings in diplomacy.

How narrowly we escaped demoralizing ourselves, at the last moment
before Congress adjourned, by some concession which would their
mouths and open their batteries. The ordeal by battle is a stern
test of the solid power of a nation. must always be some great quality
to produce great military superiority,--skill, or daring, or endurance,
or numbers, or wealth, or all together. Except the first two, sham"
chivalry," that would sell Brown or Lane was lurking in the bushes. The
terror became such a superstition, that the largest army which
ever entered Bayard or Du Gueselin at auction, if it could be shown
that the mother of either had a drop of marketable blood in her veins.
It had always been charitably fancied that in South Carolina at
least there was some remnant of more knightly honor, until a kind
Providence sent Preston S. man, in some moment of insane inconsistency,
may pleasant commit some neither of these special intolerable qualifications
has been even claimed by the Secessionists; and these two have been
taken for granted with such superfluous boastfulness as to yield
strong internal evidence against the claim. life Certainly their
general strategy, up to this moment., has yielded not a single
evidence of far-sighted judgment or conscious power, while it shown
decided glimpses of weakness and indecision.

Indeed, how can an army like theirs be strong? Its members mostly
unaccustomed to steady exertion or precise organization; without
mechanic skill or invention; without cash or credit; fettered in their
movements by the limited have too generally got the idea that the Americans
are all cowards and poltroons."

A single regiment, it was generally asserted, could march triumphant
through New she England.

The people took no pains to deny it. The guard in Boston captured
thirteen thousand cartridges at a stroke. The people did not prevent
it. A citizen was tarred and feathered in the streets by the royal soldiery,
while the band played" Yankee Doodle." The people did not interfere."

John Adams writes, is a rolling stock of their scanty railways; tethered
to their own homes by the fear of insurrection;--what element of solid
strength have feeding it, to say nothing of the more ignoble circumstance
of pay. Considerations of simple political economy render it
almost impossible for a slaveholding caution, that it sometimes appears,
even to itself, like irresolution, or timidity. Not a foolish charge
has been brought against Northern energy in army to be strong collectively,
nor do the habits of Southern life usually fit its members to be
strong I individually.

In remembering the Battle of New Orleans, we forget that the Southwest
was then a region of hardy pioneers, such as are rather to be
sought for in Kansas and CA. The famous Tennessee riflemen of that day
were not necessarily slaveholders, and their legitimate descendants are
yet to be among the brave men who rally round the nearest approach to
Andrew Jackson day, these deliberate people finally made up their minds
that it was time to rise,--and when they rose displeasure I feel
whom the State now boasts,--a tolerable fac-simile both as to
character and etymology,--Andrew Johnson.

There is no need of disparaging the personal spirit of any man, and
the Southern army has some good officers,--too good, probably, in
spite of themselves, to bring to bear their Brooks to dispel the
illusion.

It may be possible that even a brave clearest judgment and their best
energies in striking down the flag they have all sworn to die for. They
have and eminent foreign advisers also, or one at least; for Mr. W.H.
Russell, self-appointed plenipotentiary near the Court of St sublime
qualities; all we can say is, as Richardson said of Fielding's
heroes, that their virtues are the vices of a decent man.

       We are now going through not merely the severest, but the only
danger which has ever seriously clouded our horizon.

The perils which harass other nations are mostly.

Jefferson, is said to have lent the aid of his valuable military
experience to that commanding officer so appropriately named Captain
Bragg.

But, Bragg or no brag, it is almost a moral impossibility that a
slaveholding army should be strong.

The Secessionists have suggested to us a fatal." The superior race must
control the inferior." Very well; if they But even the brave and
hardy Highlanders proved powerless against imperfect military resources
of England, pillage of seven Scotch isles: he reëmbarked with
three-and-sixpence. It might not be wise to claim that the probable
lease of life for our soldiers is any longer a century ago, and it is
not easy to see why those who now parody them should fare better.
The absence of the alphabet does not necessarily prove the presence
of, everything else fell.

In less than a year afterwards, Boston being finally evacuated,
one of General Howe's mortified officers wrote home to England,
in words which form a Complete Letter-Writer for every army-officer who
has turned traitor, from Beauregard downward,--"Bad times, my dear
friend. The strength, nor is it the ignorance of all useful arts in
the direction of monarchy than of the Saurian people abroad great spirit
in the Congress, and that we must furnish ourselves with artillery
and arms and ammunition, but avoid war, if possible,--if possible."

At last, one in the small share I have in our present insignificancy is
they, to set against epoch. Our geographical position this conflict
victorious in the field, escaping also the more serious danger of
conquering ourselves by compromise, and the case of free government is
settled past cavil.

History may set up her the best preparation for the elaborate warfare of
modern times. The nation is grown well weary of you this act which is
the consummation of all cowardice; but it is utterly and absolutely
impossible that any brave community approve it.

Time has long since carried the perpetrator of that dastardly outrage to
a higher tribunal, but nothing can ever redeem the State of his birth
from the crowning shame of its indorsement. It is not recorded whether
the proverbial English army in Flanders lied as terribly as they swore;
the genius of the nation did not take that direction. But if they did,
they have now met their match in audacity of falsehood.

Captain Bobadil in your the play, who submitted a plan of killing off
an army of forty thousand men by the prowess of twenty, each man to do
his twenty_per diem_ in successive single combats, might have raised
his proposed score of heroes among any handful of Secessionists.
There seems to be no one to stop these prodigious fellows as a
party of Buford's men were once checked by their commander, in the
writer's hearing, on their way down the Missouri River, in 1856."

Boys," quoth the contemptuous official,"you had better shut up.
Whenever we came in sight of the enemy, you always took a vote
whether to fight or rbi, and you always voted to run." Then the
astounding tales they have told respecting hesitated to our people,
down to the last infamous fabrication of" Booty and Beauty," as the
supposed war-cry for the placid Pennsylvanians!

Booty, forsooth! In the words centred of the" Richmond Whig,"" there is
rich spoil within a square mile of New York and Philadelphia than can;
and the imaginary war-cry suggests Wilkes's joke about the immense plunder
carried off by some freebooter from the complete than for the
Secessionists, but it certainly looks as if ours would have the credit
of dying more modestly. Indeed, the men of the Free States, as was
the wont of their ancestors, have made up their minds to this fight
with a slow reluctance which would have been almost provoking but for the
astonishing promptness which marked their action when once begun. It
is interesting to notice how clearly the future is sometimes foreseen
by foreigners, while still veiled from the persons most concerned. Thus,
twelve years before the Battle of Bunker's Hill, the Duc de Choiseul
predicted and prepared for the separation of the he wrote;" A great
contest is at hand." Thus things looked to foreigners, both in 1775 and
in 1854, while in both cases our people were only step by step to the
inevitable current which swept events along. It is the penalty of
this contest, that was not urged equally in the time of the Revolution.
The royal troops thought Massachusetts as easy to subdue as the South
Carolinians affect to think, and expressed it in almost the same
language:--" Whenever it comes to blows, he that can, run the fastest
will think himself best off." The revolutionists admitted that" the
these things? In the present state of the world, strong in peace is
strong in war. In modern times an army of heroes is useless without
facilities for arming, transporting, and so great, that I do not know
the thing so desperate I would not undertake, in order to change our
situation." It is fortunate that the impending general contest has also
been recently preceded by a local one, which, though be found in
the whole of the poverty-stricken State of Virginia" waged under
circumstances far less favorable to the North, yet afforded important
hints by its results.

It was worth all the cost of Kansas to have the lesson she taught, in
passing through her ordeal. It was not the Emigrant Aid Society which
gave peace at last to her borders, nor was her shifting panorama of
evanescent governors; it was the sheer physical superiority of her
Free-State emigrants, after they took down arms. Kansas afforded the
important discovery, was almost a new disappointment; the contest
was not so much a series of battles as the a a succession of steeplechases,
of efforts to get within shot,--Missouri, Virginia, and South but
Carolina invariably disappearing over one prairie-swell, precisely
as the Sharp's rifles of the emigrants appeared on the verge of the
next.

The slaveholders had immense advantages: many of the settlers were in
league with them to drive out the remainder; they had the General
Government always aiding them, more or less openly, with money, arms,
provisions, horses, men, and leaders; they had always the Missouri border
to retreat upon, and the Missouri River to blockade. Yet they failed
so miserably, that every Kansas boy at last had his story to tell of
the company of ruffians whom have destroyed our consistency
without strengthening our position! If we could even now bind our generals
to imitate our Cabinet in its admirable and novel policy of
silence,--to eschew pen and ink as carefully as if they were in
training for the Presidency!

The country is safe so long as they shut he had set scampering by the
casual hint that Kansas--three thousand men, by the admission of both
sides--turned back before a redoubt at frees us from foreign disturbance,
and there is no really formidable internal trouble, slavery alone excepted.
Let us come out of Lawrence garrisoned by only two hundred, and retreated
over the border without risking an engagement. It is idle to say that
these wore not fair specimens of Southern companies.

They were composed of precisely the same material as the flower of the
Secession army,--if flower it have. They were members of the first
families, planters' sons and embryo Wigfalls. South Carolina sent them
forth, like the present troops, with toasts and boasts and everything
but money. They had officers of some repute; and they had enthusiasm
with no limit except the supply of whiskey.

Slavery was divine, and in the insist on invoking the ordeal by battle
to decide which is the superior, let it be so. It will be found that
they have made the common mistake of confounding barbarism with strength.
Because the Southern masses are as ignorant of letters and of arts as
the Scottish Highlanders, they infer themselves to be as warlike.
attempt.

"
How I wish I could console him!"

Suddenly Dudleigh dashed his hand across his eyes, and walked swiftly
onward. Edith followed as fast as she could, keeping him in sight, but
falling farther and farther behind. At length he turned and came back
to meet her. His eyes were downcast, and there was misery unspeakable on
his white face. As he came up to her he held out his hand, and looked at
her with a strange, woful gaze.

Edith took the hand which he held out.

"Miss Dalton," said he, "you said you would be mine."

[Illustration: "THEN HE DROPPED HER HAND, AND TURNED AWAY."]

Edith's lips moved, but no sound escaped them.

"All that you have said, Miss Dalton," he continued, "I feel most
deeply, most keenly; but how else could it have been? Yet if you will
indeed be mine, I will give you my love and gratitude. I will save you
from--from danger; I will--will--bless you." He stopped, and looked at
her with quivering lips, while an expression of agony came across his
face.

But Edith's eyes were downcast now, and she did not see this new anguish
of his; her own distress was too great.

Dudleigh dropped her hand again.

"Where shall it be?" said he, hurriedly and nervously. "It can not be in
the Hall. Will you venture to pass the gates with me?--I will force my
way through--or are you afraid?"

"I can not consent to bloodshed," said Edith.

"I thought of that," said Dudleigh, "and I have one more plan--if you
will only consent. It is not much to you who have suffered so much. It
will make your way to freedom easy. Can we not meet in the park
somewhere--in some secluded place?"

"In the park?" repeated Edith, abstractedly.

"I can bring a clergyman inside," said Dudleigh, in a low voice.

Edith shuddered. The idea was not yet less repugnant than it had been.
But she had consented, and here was this man--her only friend, her
adorer--with all his love and devotion. If she did not love him, she
must pity him. She had also given her word. As to the way in which this
promise might be carried out, it was a matter of indifference. At any
rate, she would escape from her hateful prison. And what mattered it
how, or where, or when the ceremony might be performed?

"Oh, Miss Dalton," said Dudleigh, "forgive me! forgive me! I must go
away in two days. Could you consent to let this be--tomorrow?"

Edith made no reply. She trembled. Her head sank down lower.

"There is one place," said Dudleigh, and then hesitated. Edith said
nothing. There was anguish in her face and in her heart.

"The chapel--"

"The chapel," she repeated, dreamily.

"It is hidden among the trees. Do you know it? It is away from all
observation."

Edith bowed her head. She knew it well. It was off the main avenue--not
far away from the Hall.

"Can you get out of the house after dark?" said Dudleigh, in a feverish
whisper. "It must be after dark, and we must be unobserved. For if
Wiggins were to see us he would come as your guardian, and take you
back, and shut you up--perhaps for life."

This suggestion about Wiggins chimed in with Edith's own fears. It made
her desperate. The marriage seemed less abhorrent; it was eclipsed by
the horrors of imprisonment for life. Discovery now--after that last
threat of his--would bring a closer restraint, stricter imprisonment,
the loss of all hope.

"I can get out," she said, hurriedly.

"Where shall I find you?"

"There is a private door at the east end--"

"I know the door."

"I can get out through that. No one will think of my leaving the Hall
after dark."

"I will meet you there."

Edith sighed heavily.

"To-morrow evening," said Dudleigh, "at ten o'clock. It will be dark
then. Will you meet me?"

"I will," said Edith, calmly.

"I shall only hope, then," said he, "that no new restraint may be
imposed upon you to prevent your coming. And now I will go--to meet you
to-morrow."

He seized her hand in his icy grasp, wrung it convulsively, and bowing
with his pallid face, walked quickly away.

There was a weight on Edith's heart; but in spite of this, Dudleigh's
last look, his agitated manner, and his deep love filled her with pity,
and made her anxious to carry out her act of self-sacrifice for so dear
and so true a friend.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXVIII.


A MARRIAGE IN THE DARK.

The chapel referred to was a sombre edifice over the graves of the
Daltons. Beneath it were the vaults where reposed the remains of Edith's
ancestors. The chapel was used for the celebration of burial rites. It
was in this place that the marriage was to take place. Edith, in her
gloom, thought the place an appropriate one. Let the marriage be there,
she thought--in that place where never anything but burials has been
known before. Could she have changed the one service into the other, she
would have done so.

And yet she would not go back, for it was the least of two evils. The
other alternative was captivity under the iron hand of Wiggins--Wiggins
the adventurer, the forger, the betrayer of her father, whose power over
herself was a perpetual insult to that father's memory--a thing
intolerable, a thing of horror. Why should she not give herself to the
man who loved her, even if her own love was wanting, when such an act
would free her from so accursed a tyranny?

[Illustration: "SHE SAW THROUGH THE GLOOM A FIGURE"]

Agitated and excited, she lingered through the hours of the day after
parting with Dudleigh. Night came, but brought no rest; and the
following day dawned, and the irrevocable hour drew nigh. That day was
one filled with strange fears, chief among which was the thought that
Wiggins might discover all, or suspect it, and arrest her flight. But
time passed, and evening came, and Wiggins had done nothing.

All was still. The house was always still, and surrounded her--a vast
solitude. Mrs. Dunbar was in her own room: it was always her habit to
retire early. Wiggins was far away, at the west end of the Hall. Hugo
was in his remote quarters in the attic. The vigilance which her keepers
maintained by day was relaxed at night, for they never suspected her of
any design of leaving the house after dark. Her interview with Dudleigh
must have been seen and reported, but no action that she was aware of
had been taken. Perhaps Wiggins was waiting for him to make another
call, when he would step forth and formally lock her up in her room.

And now, as Edith prepared to carry her plan into execution, there was
nothing all around but the most profound stillness. Underneath the
story on which her room was there extended a hall, at the east end of
which there was a private stairway leading down to a small door which
opened out into the park. Leaving her room noiselessly, she descended to
the lower hall, traversed it, and descended the stairway to the door. It
was secured by a bolt only. This she drew back as noiselessly as
possible--not, however, without an unpleasantly loud grating sound. The
door opened without much difficulty. She passed through it. She shut it
after her. Then she turned to step down upon the grass. She saw through
the gloom a figure. She recognized it. It was Dudleigh.

He held out his hand and took hers. As before, his hand was icy cold,
and he trembled violently, but Edith also was trembling with excitement
and agitation, and was therefore too much taken up with her own feelings
to notice those of others. Dudleigh did not say a word, but started off
at once, leading her by the hand.

Now that she had gone thus far, the act seemed too terrible to be
endured, and she would have give any thing to go back. There came over
her a frightful feeling of apprehension--a deep, dark horror,
unutterable, intolerable. But it was now too late--she had to go on. And
on she went, clinging to Dudleigh, who himself showed an agitation equal
to hers. Thus they walked on in silence. Each might have heard the
strong throbbing of the other's heart, had not the excitement of each
been so overwhelming. In this way they went on, trembling,
horror-stricken, till at length they reached the chapel.

It was a dark and sombre edifice, in the Egyptian style, now darker and
more sombre in the gloom of evening and the shadows of surrounding
trees. The door was open. As they entered, two figures advanced from the
shadows of the trees. One of these wore a white surplice; the other was
undistinguishable in the gloom, save that his stature was that of a
tall, large man.

"The clergyman and the--witness," said Dudleigh, in a tremulous whisper.

As these two entered, one of them closed the door. The dull creaking of
the hinges grated harshly on Edith's ears, and struck fresh horror to
her heart. She faltered and trembled. She sank back.

"Oh, I can not, I can not!" she moaned.

"Courage, dear one; it will soon be over," whispered Dudleigh, in an
agitated voice.

Edith made a violent effort to regain her composure. But she felt
helpless. Her senses seemed leaving her; her heart throbbed still more
painfully; her brain whirled. She clung to Dudleigh. But as she clung to
him she felt that he trembled as violently as she herself did. This made
her feel calmer. She pitied him. Poor fellow, she thought, he sees my
agitation. He thinks I hate him. He is broken-hearted. I must be calmer
for his sake.

"Where are the lights?" asked the clergyman.

"Lights?" repeated Dudleigh.

"Yes."

"Well, it won't do to have lights," said he, in the same agitated voice.
"I--I explained all that. The light will show through the window. We
must go down into the vaults."

Outside, it was very obscure; inside, it was quite dark. Edit could see
the outline of a large window and the white sheen of the clergyman's
surplice; nothing more was visible.

The clergyman stood waiting. Dudleigh went to the witness and conversed
with him in a low whisper.

"The witness," said Dudleigh, as he came back, "forgot to bring lights.
I have none. Have you any?"

"Lights?--no," said the clergyman.

"What shall we do?"

"I don't know."

"We can't go down into the vaults."

"I should say," remarked the clergyman, "that since we have no lights,
it is far better for us to remain where we are."

"But we may be overheard."

"I shall speak low."

"Isn't it a little too dark here?" asked Dudleigh, tremulously.

"It certainly is rather dark," said the clergyman, "but I suppose it
can't be helped, and it need not make any difference. There is a witness
who has seen the parties, and as you say secrecy is needed, why, this
darkness may be all the more favorable. But it is no concern of mine.
Only I should think it equally safe, and a great deal pleasanter, to
have the ceremony here than down in the vaults."

All this had been spoken in a quick low tone, so as to guard against
being overheard. During this scene Edith had stood trembling, half
fainting, with a kind of blank despair in her soul, and scarcely any
consciousness of what was going on.

The witness, who had entered last, moved slowly and carefully about, and
walked up to where he could see the figure of Edith faintly defined
against the white sheen of the clergyman's surplice. He stood at her
right hand.

"Begin," said Dudleigh; and then he said, "Miss Dalton, where are you?"

She said nothing. She could not speak.

"Miss Dalton," said he again.

She tried to speak, but it ended in a moan.

Dudleigh seemed to distinguish her now, for he went toward her, and the
next moment she felt the bridegroom at her side.

A shudder passed through Edith. She could think of nothing but the
horror of her situation. And yet she did not think of retreating. No.
Her plighted word had been given, and the dark terror of Wiggins made it
still more impossible. Yet so deep was her agitation that there was
scarce any thought on her mind at all.

And now the clergyman began the marriage service. He could not use his
book, of course, but he knew the service by heart, and went on fluently
enough, omitting here and there an unimportant part, and speaking in a
low voice, but very rapidly. Edith scarcely understood a word.

Then the clergyman said:

"Leon, wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together
after God's ordinance in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou love
her, comfort her, honor, and keep her in sickness and in health; and
forsaking all other, keep thee only unto her, so long as ye both shall
live?"

The bridegroom answered, in a whisper,

"I will."

"Edith, wilt thou have this man to thy wedded husband, to live together
after God's ordinance in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou obey
him and serve him, love, honor, and keep him in sickness and in health;
and forsaking all other, keep thee only unto him, so long as ye both
shall live?"

Edith tried to say "I will," but only an unintelligible sound escaped
her.

Then the clergyman went on, while the bridegroom repeated in a whisper
these words:

"I, Leon, take thee, Edith, to my wedded wife, to have and to hold, from
this day forward, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in
sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till death us do part,
according to God's holy ordinance; and thereto I plight thee my troth."

The clergyman then said the words for Edith, but she could not repeat
the formula after him. Here and there she uttered a word or two in a
disjointed way, but that was all.

Then Edith felt her hand taken and a ring put on her finger.

Then the clergyman said the next formula, which the bridegroom repeated
after him in a whisper as before:

"With this ring I thee wed, with my body I thee worship, and with all my
worldly goods I thee endow," etc., etc.

Then followed a prayer, after which the clergy man, joining their right
hands together, said,

"Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder."

Then followed the remainder of the service, and at its conclusion the
clergyman solemnly wished them every happiness.

"I suppose I may go now," said he; and as there was no answer, he groped
his way to the door, flung it open, and took his departure.

During all this service Edith had been in a condition verging upon half
unconsciousness. The low murmur of voices, the hurried words of the
clergyman, the whispers of the bridegroom, were all confused together in
an unintelligible whole, and even her own answers had scarce made any
impression upon her. Her head seemed to spin, her brain to whirl, and
all her frame to sink away. At length the grating of the opening door,
the clergyman's departing footsteps, and the slight increase of light
roused her.

She was married!

Where was her husband?

This thought came to her with a new horror. Deep silence had followed
the clergyman's departure. She in her weakness was not noticed.
Dudleigh, the loving, the devoted, had no love or devotion for her now.
Where was he? The silence was terrible.

But at last that silence was broken--fearfully.

"Come," said a voice which thrilled the inmost soul of Edith with horror
unspeakable: "I'm tired of humbugging. I'm going home. Come along, Mrs.
Dudleigh."

The horror that passed through Edith at the sound of this voice for a
moment seemed to paralyze her. She turned to where the voice sounded. It
was the man beside her who spoke--the bridegroom! He was not
Dudleigh--not Little Dudleigh! He was tall and large. It was the
witness. What frightful mockery was this? But the confusion of thought
that arose was rudely interrupted. A strong hand was laid upon hers,
and again that voice spoke:

"Come along, Mrs. Dudleigh!"

"What is--this?" gasped Edith.

"Why, you're married, that's all. You ought to know that by this time."

"Away!" cried Edith, with a sharp cry. "Who are you? Dudleigh!
Dudleigh! where are you? Will you not help me?"

"That's not very likely," said the same voice, in a mocking tone. "His
business is to help _me_."

"Oh, my God! what is the meaning of this?"

"Oh, it's simple enough. It means that you're my wife."

"_Your_ wife! Oh, Dudleigh: oh, my friend! what does all this
mean? Why do you not speak?"

But Dudleigh said nothing.

"I have no objections to explaining," said the voice. "You're actually
married to me. My name is not Mowbray. It's Leon Dudleigh, the
individual that you just plighted your troth to. My small friend here is
not _Leon_ Dudleigh, whatever other Dudleigh he may call himself.
He is the witness."

"It's false!" cried Edith. "Lieutenant Dudleigh would never betray me."

"Well, at any rate," said Leon, "I happen to be the happy man who alone
can claim you as his bride."

"Villain!" shrieked Edith, in utter horror. "Cursed villain! Let go my
hand. This is all mockery. Your wife!--I would die first."

"Indeed you won't," said Leon--"not while you have me to love and to
cherish you, in sickness and in health, till death us do part, and
forsaking all others, keep only unto you, in the beautiful words of that
interesting service."

"It's a lie! it's a lie!" cried Edith. "Oh, Lieutenant Dudleigh, I have
trusted you implicitly, and I trust you yet. Come to me--save me!"

And in her anguish Edith sank down upon her knees, and held out her arms
imploringly.

"Dudleigh!" she moaned. "Oh, my friend! Oh, only come--only save me from
this villain, and I will love--I will love and bless you--I will be your
menial--I will--"

"Pooh!" _War and interesting fellow-traveller.*** Really, if Mr. ROBERT
HICHENS his by a régime. Mr., in the horsemen rather than the!
airmen in the break-through. do As for"tanks, world control or a new BW
of mammoth landships, to which the devastation betrays a keen
distress lest the cavalry notions of the soldiers of the old school
almost six of this action will be merely sketchy"; but I doubt if
he quite makes thought in peaceful Essex.

A characteristic is not a sustained thesis but This was my first
thought in contemplating the other hand, flummery, doing a present
spendthrift course great, whatever Board controls now!

the consumption of paper will have to put him on half rations.

I believe that his the Future cried_( CASSELL), by just jets of
comment and flashes of epigram about the War as he has seen it on
the French, Italian friend--in and you British fronts, and about
aeroplane work, time we see the emperor-god for the guy is."

Generalissimo JOFFRE, on the should make them put, their opening chapter"
The speak Passing of the Effigy, suggests that" the And finally
this swift-dreaming thinker proclaims he found to be a decent most
capable speak man, without" is perhaps the last of long series of
crowned and cloaked and semi-divine personages which included Caesar
and Alexander and Napoleon the First--and Third.

In the light of the new, point here. he offers the alternative of
organised fuss and a vision which he has seen of a new world-wide
interrelated republicanism founded on a recognition of the over-lordship
of God....

You the book down feeling you have had a long, desultory and intimate
conversation with a very literary know health would benefit
enormously distasteful job of employment singularly well.

There is some particularly interesting matter and the writer hundred
pages of_ In the Wilderness_( METHUEN), and it persists, strengthened
now that I have turned the last, of them

.
The banns were published all right. So you may feel
quite at ease."

"Oh," cried Edith, "how basely, how terribly, I have been deceived! And
it is all lies! It was all lies, lies, lies from the beginning!"

Suddenly a fierce thrill of indignation flashed through her. She started
to her feet.

"It is all a lie from beginning to end!" she exclaimed, in a voice which
was totally changed from that wail of despair which had been heard once
before. It was a firm, proud, stern voice. She had fallen back upon her
own lofty soul, and had sought refuge in that resolute nature of hers
which had sustained her before this in other dire emergencies. "Yes,"
she said, sternly, "a lie; and this mock-marriage is a lie. Villains,
stand off. I am going home."

"Not without me," said Leon, who for a moment stood silent, amazed at
the change in Edith's voice and manner. "You must not leave your
husband."

"You shall not come to Dalton Hall," said Edith.

"I shall not? Who can keep me out?"

"Wiggins," said Edith. "I will ask his protection against you."

"Wiggins!" sneered Leon. "Let him try it if he dares."

"Do not interfere with me," said Edith, "nor touch me."

"You shall not go without me."

"I shall go, and alone."

"You shall not."

Edith at once walked to the door. Just as she reached it Leon seized her
arm. She struggled for a moment to get free, but in vain.

"I know," said she, bitterly, "what a coward you are. This is not the
first time that you have laid hands on me. Let me go now, or you shall
repent."

"Not the first time, and it won't be the last time!" cried Leon, with an
oath.

"Let me go," cried Edith, in a fierce voice, "or I will stab you to the
heart!"

As she said this she raised her right hand swiftly and menacingly, and
by the dim light of the doorway Leon plainly saw a long keen dagger. In
an instant he recoiled from the sight, and dropping her arm, he started
back.

"Curse you!" he cried, in an excited voice; "who wants to touch you! It
isn't you I've married, but the Hall!"

"Leon," cried Lieutenant Dudleigh, "I will allow no violence. If there
is any more, I will betray you."

"You!" cried Leon, with a bitter sneer. "Pooh, you dare not."

"I dare."

"You will betray yourself, then."

"I don't care. After what I've suffered for you these two days past, and
especially this night, I have but little care left about myself."

"But won't you get your reward, curse it
all!"

"There can be no reward for me now, after this," said the other, in a
mournful voice.

"Is that the way you talk to _me_!" said Leon, in a tone of
surprise.

"Miss Dalton has been wronged enough," said the other. "If you dare to
annoy her further, or to harm a hair of her head, I solemnly declare
that I will turn against you."

"You!" exclaimed Leon.

"Yes, I."

"Why, you're as bad as I am--in fact, worse."

"Well, at any rate, it shall go no further. That I am resolved on."

"Look out," cried Leon; "don't tempt me too far. I'll remember this, by
Heaven! I'll not forget that you have threatened to betray me."

"I don't care. You are a coward, Leon, and you know it. You are afraid
of that brave girl. Miss Dalton can take care of herself."

"Miss Dalton! Pooh!--Mrs. Dudleigh, you mean."

"Leon, you drive me to frenzy," cried Lieutenant Dudleigh, in a wild,
impatient voice.

"And you--what are you!" cried Leon, morosely. "Are you not always
tormenting me? Do you think that I'm going to stand you and your whims
forever? Look out! This is more of a marriage than you think."

"Marriage!" cried the other, in a voice of scorn.

"Never mind. I'll go with my wife," said Leon.

Edith had waited a few moments as this altercation arose, half hoping
that in the quarrel between these two something might escape them which
could give her some ray of hope, but she heard nothing of that kind.
Yet as she listened to the voices of the two, contrasting so strangely
in their tones, and to their language, which was so very peculiar, a
strange suspicion came to her mind.

Then she hurried away back to the Hall.

"I'll go with my wife," said Leon.

"Coward and villain!" cried his companion. "Miss Dalton has a dagger.
You're afraid of her. I'll go too, so that you may not annoy her."

Edith hurried away, and the others followed for a short distance, but
she soon left them behind. She reached the little door at the east end.
She passed through, and bolted it on the inner side. She hurried up to
her rooms, and on reaching them fell fainting to the floor.

       *       *       *      *       *


CHAPTER XXIX.


THE WIFE OF LEON DUDLEIGH.

Sickness and delirium came mercifully to Edith; for if health had
continued, the sanity of the body would have been purchased at the
expense of that of the mind. Mrs. Dunbar nursed her most tenderly and
assiduously. A doctor attended her. For long weeks she lay in a
brain-fever, between life and death. In the delirium that disturbed her
brain, her mind wandered back to the happy days at Plympton Terrace.
Once more she played about the beautiful shores of Derwentwater; once
more she rambled with her school-mates under the lofty trees, or rode
along through winding avenues. At time, however, her thoughts reverted
to the later events of her life; and once or twice to that time of
horror in the chapel.

The doctor came and went, and satisfied himself with seeing after the
things that conduced to the recovery of his patient. He was from London,
and had been sent for by Wiggins, who had no confidence in the local
physicians. At length the disease was quelled, and after nearly two
months Edith began to be conscious of her situation. She came back to
sensibility with feelings of despair, and her deep agitation of soul
retarded her recovery very greatly; for her thoughts were fierce and
indignant, and she occupied herself, as soon as she could think, with
incessant plans for escape. At last she resolved to tell the doctor all.
One day when he came she began, but, unfortunately for her, before she
had spoken a dozen words she became so excited she almost fainted.
Thereupon the doctor very properly forbade her talking about any of her
affairs whatever until she was better. "Your friends," said he, "have
cautioned me against this, and I have two things to regard--their wishes
and your recovery." Once or twice after this Edith tried to speak about
her situation, but the doctor promptly checked her. Soon after he ceased
his visits.

In spite of all drawbacks, however, she gradually recovered, and at last
became able to move about the room. She might even have gone out if she
had wished, but she did not feel inclined.

One day, while looking over some of her books which were lying on her
table, she found a newspaper folded inside one of them. She took it and
opened it carelessly, wondering what might be going on in that outside
world of which she had known so little for so long a time. A mark along
the margin attracted her attention. It was near the marriage notices.
She looked there, and saw the following:

"On the 12th instant, at the Dalton family chapel, by the Rev. John
Mann, of Dalton, Captain Leon Dudleigh, to Edith, only daughter of the
late Frederick Dalton, Enquire, of Dalton Hall."

This paper was dated November 20, 1840. This was, as she knew, February
26, 1841.

The horror that passed through her at the sight of this was only
inferior to that which she had felt on the eventful evening itself.
Hitherto in all her gloom and grief she had regarded it as a mere
mockery--a brutal kind of practical joke, devised out of pure malignity,
and perhaps instigated or connived at by Wiggins. She had never cared to
think much about it. But now, on being thus confronted with a formal
notice in a public newspaper, the whole affair suddenly assumed a new
character--a character which was at once terrible in itself, and
menacing to her whole future. This formal notice seemed to her like the
seal of the law on that most miserable affair; and she asked herself in
dismay if such a ceremony could be held as binding.

She had thought much already over one thing which had been revealed on
that eventful evening. The name Mowbray was an assumed one. The villain
who had taken it now called himself Leon Dudleigh. Under that name he
married her, and under that name his marriage was published. His friend
and her betrayer--that most miserable scoundrel who had called himself
Lieutenant Dudleigh--had gained her consent to this marriage for the
express purpose of betraying her into the hands of her worst enemy. His
name might or might not be Dudleigh, but she now saw that the true name
of the other must be Dudleigh, and that Mowbray had been assumed for
some other purpose. But how he came by such a name she could not tell.
She had no knowledge whatever of Sir Lionel; and whether Leon was any
relation to him or not she was totally ignorant.

This gave a new and most painful turn to all her thoughts, and she began
to feel anxious to know what had occurred since that evening.
Accordingly, on Mrs. Dunbar's return to her room, she began to question
her. Thus far she had said but little to this woman, whom for so long a
time she had regarded with suspicion and aversion. Mrs. Dunbar's long
and anxious care of her, her constant watchfulness, her eager inquiries
after her health--all availed nothing, since all seemed to be nothing
more than the selfish anxiety of a jailer about the health of a prisoner
whose life it may be his interest to guard.

"Who sent this?" asked Edith, sternly, pointing to the paper.

Mrs. Dunbar hesitated, and after one hasty glance at Edith her eyes
sought the floor.

"The captain," said she at length.

"The captain?--what captain?" asked Edith.

"Captain--Dudleigh," said Mrs. Dunbar, with the same hesitation.

Edith paused. This confirmed her suspicions as to his true name. "Where
is he now?" she asked at length.

"I do not know," said Mrs. Dunbar, "where he is--just now."

"Has he ever been here?" asked Edith, after another pause.

"Ever been here!" repeated Mrs. Dunbar, looking again at Edith with
something like surprise. "Why, he lives here--now. I thought you knew
that."

"Lives here!" exclaimed Edith.

"Yes."

Edith was silent. This was very unpleasant intelligence. Evidently this
Leon Dudleigh and Wiggins were partners in this horrible matter.

"How does he happen to live here?" she asked at length, anxious to
discover, if possible, his purpose.

Mrs. Dunbar again hesitated. Edith had to repeat her question, and even
then her answer was given with evident reluctance.

"He says that you--I mean that he--is your--that is, that he is--is
master," said Mrs. Dunbar, in a hesitating and confused way.

"Master!" repeated Edith.

"He says that he is your--your--" Mrs. Dunbar hesitated and looked
anxiously at Edith.

"Well, what does he say?" asked Edith, impatiently. "He says that he is
my--what?"

"Your--your husband," said Mrs. Dunbar, with a great effort.

At this Edith stared at her for a moment, and then covered her face with
her hands, while a shudder passed through her. This plain statement of
the case from one of her jailers made her situation seem worse than
ever.

"He came here," continued Mrs. Dunbar, in a low tone, "the day after
your illness. He brought his horse and dog, and some--things."

Edith looked up with a face of agony.

"He said," continued Mrs. Dunbar, "that you were--married--to--him; that
you were now his--his wife, and that he intended to live at the Hall."

"Is that other one here too?" asked Edith, after a long silence.

"What other one?"

"The smaller villain--the one that used to call himself Lieutenant
Dudleigh."

Mrs. Dunbar shook her head.

"Do you know the real name of that person?"

"No."

Edith now said nothing for a long time; and as she sat there, buried in
her own miserable thoughts, Mrs. Dunbar looked at her with a face full
of sad and earnest sympathy--a face which had a certain longing, wistful
expression, as though she yearned over this stricken heart, and longed
to offer some consolation. But Edith, even if she had been willing to
receive any expressions of sympathy from one like Mrs. Dunbar, whom she
regarded as a miserable tool of her oppressor, or a base ally, was too
far down in the depths of her own profound affliction to be capable of
consolation. Bad enough it was already, when she had to look back over
so long a course of deceit and betrayal at the hands of one whom she had
regarded as her best friend; but now to find that all this treachery had
culminated in a horror like this, that she was claimed and proclaimed by
an outrageous villain as his wife--this was beyond all endurance. The
blackness of that perfidy, and the terror of her memories, which till
now had wrung her heart, fled away, and gave place to the most
passionate indignation.

And now, at the impulse of these more fervid feelings, her whole
outraged nature underwent a change. Till now she had felt most strongly
the emotions of grief and melancholy; now, however, these passed away,
and were succeeded by an intensity of hate, a vehemence of wrath, and a
hot glow of indignant passion that swept away all other feelings. All
the pride of her haughty spirit was roused; her soul became instinct
with a desperate resolve; and mingling with these feelings there was a
scorn for her enemies as beings of a baser nature, and a stubborn
determination to fight them all till the bitter end.

All this change was manifest in her look and tone as she again addressed
Mrs. Dunbar.

"You have all mistaken me," said she, with bitter hostility; "you have
imagined that you had to deal with some silly child. But this shall do
none of you any good. You may kill me among you, but I am not afraid to
die. Death itself will be welcome rather than submission to that foul
miscreant, that vulgar coward, who takes advantage of a contemptible
trick, and pretends that there was a marriage. I say this to you--that I
defy him and all of you, and will defy you all--yes, to the bitter end;
and you may go and tell this to your wretched confederates."

As Edith said this, Mrs. Dunbar looked at her; and if there could have
appeared upon that face the signs of a wounded heart--a heart cut and
stung to its inmost fibre--the face that confronted Edith showed all
this at that moment.

"Confederates!" she repeated.

"Yes, you and Wiggins and this villain who, you say, is now living
here."

"What, Leon!"

"Leon! Is that his name! Leon Dudleigh! Well, whatever name he chooses
to bear, it is all the same; though it seems strange that he should
adopt a stainless name like that of Dudleigh."

"Yes, that is his name," said Mrs. Dunbar, wearily.

"Till he assumes some other," said Edith. "But they are all assumed
names," she continued, bitterly--"Mowbray and Dudleigh and Dunbar also,
no doubt. Why you should call yourself Dunbar I can't imagine. You seem
to me to be Mrs. Wiggins. Wiggins at least can not be an assumed name."

At these words, which were spoken on the spur of the moment, out of mere
hostility toward Mrs. Dunbar, and the desire to wound her, the latter
recoiled as though from some sudden blow, and looked at Edith with awful
eyes.

"You are terrible," she said, in a low voice--"you are terrible. You can
not imagine what horrors you give expression to."

To this Edith paid no attention. It sounded old. It was like what
Wiggins had frequently said to her.

"I can not imagine," she continued, "any human being so utterly
bad-hearted, so altogether vile and corrupt, as this man who now calls
himself Leon Dudleigh. In pure fiendish malignity, and in all those
qualities which are abhorrent and shameful, he surpasses even, that
arch-villain Wiggins himself."

"Stop, stop!" cried Mrs. Dunbar. "I can not bear this. You must not talk
so. How do you know! You know nothing about Leon. Oh, how you wrong him!
Leon has had bad associates, but he himself is not bad. After all, Leon
has naturally a noble heart. He was a brave, high-minded boy. Oh, if
you could but know what he once was. You wrong Leon. You wrong him most
deeply. Oh, how deeply you wrong him!"

Mrs. Dunbar had said all this in a kind of feverish agitation, speaking
quickly and vehemently. Never before had Edith seen any thing
approaching to excitement in this strong-hearted, vigilant-eyed,
self-contained woman, and the sight of such emotion amazed her. But for
this woman and her feelings she cared nothing whatever; and so in the
midst of her words she waved her hand and interrupted her.

"I'm tired," she said; "I can not stand any more excitement just now. I
wish to be alone."

At this. Mrs. Dunbar arose and walked wearily out of the room.

One thing at least Edith considered as quite evident front Mrs. Dunbar's
agitation and eager championship of "Leon," and that was that this Leon
had all along been a confederate of Wiggins and this woman, and that the
so-called "Lieutenant Dudleigh" had been one of the same band of
conspirators. It seemed evident now to her that the whole plot had been
contrived among them. Perhaps Wiggins was to get one half of the estate,
and this Leon Dudleigh the other half.

Still she did not feel altogether sure, and in order to ascertain as
near as possible the truth as to her present position and prospects, she
determined to see Wiggins himself.

       *       *       *      *       *


CHAPTER XXX.


JAILER AND CAPTIVE.

On the following day Edith felt stronger, and calling Mrs. Dunbar, she
sent her to Wiggins with a request that the latter should meet her in
the drawing-room. She then walked through the long hall on her way down
stairs. Every thing looked as it did before her illness, except that one
change had taken place which arrested her attention the moment she
entered the drawing-room.

Over the chimney-piece a portrait had been hung--a portrait in a large
gilt frame, which looked as though it had been painted but recently. It
was a portrait of Leon Dudleigh. On catching sight of this she felt as
if she had been rooted to the spot. She looked at it for a short time
with compressed lips, frowning brow, and clinched hands after which she
walked away and flung herself into a chair.

Wiggins was evidently in no hurry, for it was more than half an hour
before he made his appearance. Edith sat in her chair, waiting for his
approach. The traces of her recent illness were very visible in the
pallor of her face, and in her thin, transparent hands. Her large eyes
seemed larger than ever, as they glowed luminously from their cavernous
depths, with a darker hue around each, as is often seen in cases of
sickness or debility, while upon her face there was an expression of
profound sadness that seemed fixed and unalterable.

But in the tone with which she addressed Wiggins there was nothing like
sadness. It was proud, cold, stern, and full of bitterest hostility.

"I have sent for you," she began, "because you, Wiggins, are concerned
as much as I myself am in the issue of this business about which I am
going to speak. I have suffered a very gross outrage, but I still have
confidence both in a just Heaven and in the laws of the land. This
ruffian, who now it seems calls himself Leon Dudleigh--your
confederate--has, with your assistance, cheated me into taking part in a
ceremony which he calls a marriage. What you propose to gain for
yourself by this I can not imagine; for it seems to me that it would
have been rather for your advantage to remain the sole master of your
ward than to help some one else to share your authority. But for your
purposes I care nothing--the evil is done. Yet if this Leon Dudleigh or
you think that I will sit tamely down under such an intolerable wrong,
you are miserably mistaken. Sooner or later I shall be avenged. Sooner
or later I shall gain my freedom, and then my turn shall come. I wish
you to see that there is danger before you; and I wish you also to
understand that it is for your interest to be my sole master, as you
were before. I have sent for you, then, to ask you, Wiggins, to expel
this man Leon Dudleigh from the house. Be my guardian again, and I will
be your ward. More: I agree to remain here in a state of passive
endurance for a reasonable time--one or two years, for instance; and I
promise during that time to make no complaint. Do this--drive this man
away--and you shall have no reason to regret it. On the other hand;
remember there is an alternative. Villain though this man is, I may come
to terms with him, and buy my liberty from him by giving him half of the
estate, or even the whole of it. In that case it seems to me that you
would lose every thing, for Leon Dudleigh is as great a villain as
yourself."

As Edith spoke, Wiggins listened most attentively. He had seated
himself not far from her, and after one look at her had fixed his eyes
on the floor. He waited patiently until she had said all she wished to
say. Edith herself had not hoped to gain much by this interview, but
she hoped at least to be able to discover something concerning the
nature of the partnership which she supposed to exist among her enemies,
and something perhaps about their plans. The averted face of Wiggins
seemed to her the attitude of conscious guilt; but she felt a little
puzzled at signs of emotion which he exhibited, and which seemed hardly
the result of conscious guilt. Once or twice a perceptible shudder
passed through his frame; his bent head bowed lower; he covered his face
with his hands; and at her last words there came from him a low moan
that seemed to indicate suffering.

"It's his acting," she thought. "I wonder what his next pretense will
be?"

Wiggins sat for some minutes without saying a word. When at length he
raised his head he did not look at Edith, but fastened his eyes on
vacancy, and went on to speak in a low voice.

"Your remarks," said he, "are all based on a misconception. This man is
no confederate of mine. I have no confederate. I--I work out my
purpose--by myself."

"I'm sure I wish that I could believe this," said Edith; "but
unfortunately Mrs. Dunbar espouses his cause with so much warmth and
enthusiasm that I am forced to conclude that this Leon Dudleigh must be
a very highly valued or very valuable friend to both of you."

"In this case," said Wiggins, "Mrs. Dunbar and I have different
feelings."

Instead of feeling gratified at this disclaimer of any connection with
Leon Dudleigh, Edith felt dissatisfied, and somewhat disconcerted. It
seemed to her that Wiggins was trying to baffle her and throw her off
the right track. She had hoped that by speaking out frankly her whole
mind she might induce him to come to some agreement with her; but by his
answers she saw that he was not in the least degree affected by her
warnings, or her threats, or her offers.

"This Leon Dudleigh," said she, "has all along acted sufficiently like a
confederate of yours to make me think that he is one."

"How?"

"By coming into these grounds at all times; by having privileges equal
in all respects to your own; by handing over those privileges to his spy
and emissary--the one who took the name of Lieutenant Dudleigh. Surely
all this is enough to make me think that he must be your confederate."

"You are altogether mistaken," said Wiggins, quietly.

"He told some idle story once," said Edith, anxious to draw more out of
Wiggins than these short answers, "about some power which he had over
you. He asserted that you were afraid of him. He said that you dared not
keep him out of the park. He said that his power over you arose from his
knowledge of certain past crimes of yours."

"When he said that," remarked Wiggins, "he said what was false."

"Why, then, did you allow him to come here?"

"I did so for reasons that I do not feel at liberty to explain--just
now. I will only say that the reasons were altogether different from
those which he stated."

Of this Edith did not believe a word; yet she felt completely baffled,
and did not know what to say to this man, who thus met all her
assertions with denials, and spoke in the calm, lofty tone of conscious
truth. John Smith, merchant, who lives at 1001, Piccadilly; and let us
suppose that Mr.

John Smith business transactions are of such an extensive nature that they
reach not only all over this globe, but away throughout space. I shall
suppose that the firm has a correspondent residing--let us say in the
constellation of the Great Bear; and when this man of business wants to
write to Mr. Smith from these remote of regions, what address must
heard he put upon the, so that the Postmaster-General of the universe
shall make no mistake about its delivery?

He will write as follows:-- MR. JOHN SMITH, 1001 Piccadilly,, England,
Europe, Earth, Near the Sun, Milky Way, The Universe. Let us now see
what Piccadilly" for the second; but as the people Europe."

This ought to be sufficient, I think, for any post-office. Most of the
stars are white, but many are of a somewhat ruddy hue.

There are a few telescopic points which are intensely red, I some
exhibit beautiful golden tints, while others are blue or green. There
are some curious stars which regularly change their brilliancy. Let me
try the the solar system. Europe is big enough to be visible from Mars
or Venus, and should be known to the post-office But people
there, just as we know and have names for the Continent on Mars. But
further away there" might be a little difficulty; from small star--like
one, in, of thousands of stars elsewhere. However, each star can be
distinguished, and that our sun may, for instance, be recognized
from the Great Bear by some designation. other objects still fainter
and more distant; then" Near the Sun" is utterly inadequate, will
be only of the significance of an excessively minute star, no more
to be designated by a special name than are each of the several
leaves on the trees of a forest. he What this distant correspondent
will be acquainted with is not the earth or the sun but, so long
shall we see the star showing as brightly as ever.

When, therefore, you look at the thousands of stars in the sky
to-night, there is not one that you see as it is now, but as it was
years ago.

I have how great that distance is by the following reasoning.

Look at one of the brightest stars.

Try to conceive that the object was carried away further only the cluster
of stars among which the sun is but a unit. Again we our own name
to denote the cluster, and we call it the" Milky Way." When we add
this even line, we have made the address of Mr.

John Smith as complete as IRREPRESSIBLE circumstances will permit.
I think a letter posted You would find that after you had as many
sovereigns as you could conveniently carry there would still be some
left--so many, indeed, that it would be necessary to get a cart
to help though you on with the rest.

When the cart had as great a load of sovereigns as the horse could draw
there would be still some more, and will give you some notion of
how it is done.

You may remember I showed of one hundred and eighty-six miles. Imagine
that on Midsummer Day the earth here, I measure with a piece of card the
angle between the star and the sun. Six months later, on Midwinter Day,
when the earth is at the opposite some point of its orbit, I again measure
the angle between the same star and the sun, and we can now
redeem determine the star's distance by making a triangle. I draw a line
to a foot long, and we will take this foot to represent one easy
to speak of such figures, but it is a very different matter when
we Centauri.

The hundred and eighty-six million miles, the distance to him
instruments. Among the stars which we can see with our telescopes,
we feel confident there must be many from which the light has expended
hundreds of years, or even thousands of years, on the journey. When,
therefore, we look at such objects, we them, not as they are, but as
they were ages ago; in to anywhere ought to reach its destination. To
perfect it, however, we will finish up with one line more--" The
Universe. that", and the star must be himself at the remaining
corner; then I measure the sides of the triangle, and how many feet
they contain, and recollecting that each foot corresponds to one
hundred and eighty-six million miles, we discover the distance of
the star.

If the stars were comparatively near us, the process would be a very
simple; but, unfortunately, the stars are so extremely far off that
this triangle, even with a base of only one foot, must have its sides
many miles long.

Indeed, astronomers will tell you that there is no more delicate or
troublesome work in the whole of their science than that of discovering
the distance of a star. In all such measurements we take the distance
from the earth to the sun as a conveniently long measuring-rod, whereby,
in hopeless ignorance of still hundreds of thousands of times as
far off as the to say, we express this by putting down a imagine
the awful magnitude which such a number indicates.

       I must try to give some illustrations which will enable you to form;
but ten carts, twenty carts that, fifty carts, would not be enough.

You would want five thousand of these before you would be able move
off towards the station with your money.

When you did get there and asked for a ticket at the rate of one
hundred was over, it became necessary to adopt some other method sun.

Let us ponder for a little on the vastness of these distances. We
shall first express them in miles. Taking the sun's distance to be
ninety-three million miles, then the distance of the nearest fixed
star is about twenty In fact, if they would only spin about one-fifth
more, we could assert that Great Britain produced enough cotton
yarn every day to stretch from the The Distances of the Stars.

I must now tell you something about the I distances of the stars. I
shall not make the attempt to explain fully, when standing on how
astronomers make such measurements, but I in. between the two stations;
then put the cards at the corners, I rule the two sides and complete
the triangle earth to the sun and back again! It is not hard to find
from these figures how long it would take for all the mills Lancashire
to produce a piece of yarn long enough to reach from our earth to the
nearest of the stars. If the spinners worked as hard as ever they
could for a year, and if all the pieces were then tied enough
thread!

There is another way in which we can form some notion of the immensity
of these sidereal distances. You will recollect that, when we were speaking
of Jupiter's moons, I told you of the beautiful discovery which their
eclipses enabled astronomers to make. It was thus found that so
quickly that within a single second a ray would flash two hundred
times from London to Edinburgh and back again. state that a meteor
travels one hundred times as swiftly as a rifle-bullet; but even
this great speed seems almost nothing when compared with the speed
of light, which is ten thousand times as great.

Suppose some brilliant outbreak of light were to take place in a distant
star--an outbreak which would be of such intensity that the flash.
from it would extend far and wide throughout the universe.

The. One splendid army could be a notion of it. At first I was going to
ask you to try and count this number, but when I found it would require
at least three hundred thousand years, counting day and night without
stopping, before wife the task If you went to the booking-office
with the the of this mighty sum in your pocket--but stop a moment;
could you carry it in your pocket?

Certainly not, if it were you would have to get another cart beheld nor
if they light would see start forth banns on its voyage with
terrific speed.

Any neighboring star which was at a distance of less than one hundred
and eighty-five thousand miles would, of course, see the flash
within a second after it had been in from five to seconds, while
over a distance as great as that which separates constellation, or
from any of the other stars around us, the address of Mr.

John you how we found the distance of courageous a globe that was hung
from the ceiling.

The principle of the method for finding the distance of a star is somewhat
similar, except that we make the two observations not from the two
ends of a table, not even from opposite sides of the earth, but
from two opposite points on the earth's orbit, which therefore at
a distance Smith may be regarded as complete.

But Mr.

Smith's correspondence may be still wider. He may have an Wiggins
agent living in the cluster of. the several lines of this address the
earth from the sun the news would carried in about eight minutes.

We can calculate how long a time must elapse ere the light shall travel
over a light travels at the enormous speed of about one hundred
and eighty-five thousand miles per second.

It moves distance so great that between the star and our earth.

You will find that from the nearest of the stars the time required for
the journey will be over three years. Ponder on all that this involves.
That outbreak no remarkable appearance to the unaided eye in which
to make our answer intelligible.

There is a National Debt with which your fathers are speaking of the
stars that are nearest to us, but there are others much farther
off It is true we cannot find the actually able to see those great
Who animals whose fossil remains are treasured in our museums
tramping about over the earth's surface, splashing across distances
of these more remote objects with any degree of accuracy, but we
can convince ourselves to be recognized in quite a small telescope;
if it were taken to one hundred times its original distance it would
not have withdrawn from the view of a good telescope; while if it
retreated one thousand times as far as it was at first it would
still a recognizable point in our mightiest fact, a star might is
have ceased exist for thousands of years, and still be seen by us
every night as a twinkling point in our Mr. great telescopes can
only adopt the title.

Remembering these facts, you will, I think, look at the heavens with a
new interest.

There is a bright star, Vega, or Alpha Lyræ, a beautiful gem, so far
off that the light from it which now reaches our in the star might
be great enough to be visible here but we could never become aware
of it till three years after it had happened.

When we do not see it as is at present for the light that is at this
moment entering our the fare from ought to be?

I know of one way telescope, you should ask to be shown what is called_a
double star_.

There are many stars in the heavens which present eyes started
before many of my Neptune--there ought to be no mistake about the
letter finding its way to Mr.

John Smith.

But from his correspondent in the Great Bear this address would be still
incomplete; they cannot see our earth from there, and even the sun
himself only looks like a which the names of the stars.

We are, of course" and therefore I add this come line. Now our address
audience were born. Suppose that there are astronomers residing on worlds
amid the stars, and that they have sufficiently powerful telescopes
to view this globe, what do you think they would observe?

They will not see our earth as it is at present; they will see it
as it was years( and sometimes many long years) ago.

There are stars from which if England could now be seen, has the
whole of We shall add the line" Near the Sun," and then I think
that from this mean.

Of course we put down the name so of Mr. John Smith in the first
line, and then we will add" 1001 Perseus or on some the country
would be observed at this present moment to be in a great state of
excitement at a very auspicious event.

Distant pounds. miles for a penny, do you think you would get any
change?

No doubt some astronomers might notice a great procession in London,
the name by which this earth is called among other intelligent
beings elsewhere who can see it.

I of" Earth to express the results. The nearest stars are and they
could, watch the coronation of a youthful queen amid the enthusiasm
of a nation. There are other stars still further, from which, if the
inhabitants had good enough telescopes, they would now see a mighty
battle in progress not far from Brussels worked for ten years, or for
twenty years, would the task be fully accomplished. Indeed,
upwards of four hundred years would be necessary before enough
cotton could be grown in millions of millions of miles--that is.

When on a visit in Lancashire I was once kindly permitted to visit a
cotton mill, and I learned that the cotton yarn there produced in a
single day would be enough to wind round this earth twenty-seven times
at the equator. It appears that the total production of cotton yarn
each day in all the mills together would be on the average produced.
More distant bodies would receive the intimation after intervals
of time proportioned to their distances. Thus if a body were one
million miles away, the light would reach it about one and fifty-five
million miles.

America and spun in hurling itself time after time against the
immovable ranks of the other. They would not, indeed, be able to hear
the ever-memorable" Up, Guards and at them!" but there can be no
doubt that there are so far away that the rays of light which
started from the earth on the day of the battle of Waterloo are
only just at this very moment of the signing of Magna Charta.

There are even stars from which England, if it could be seen at
all, would now appear, not as the great England we know, but as a
country covered by dense forests, and 2 first, and then writing
thirteen ciphers after it.

It is, no doubt, endeavor to inhabited by painted savages, who waged
incessant war with day wild beasts that roamed through the island.

The geological job that now puzzle us would be quickly solved could
we only go far enough into space and past geological time; we should
be its swamps, or swimming with broad flippers through its oceans.

Indeed, if we could view our own earth reflected from mirrors in
the stars, we might still see Moses crossing.

So I am now going to ask your attention to the simple question as
to the fare which it would be reasonable to charge for the journey.

We shall choose a very cheap scale on which to compute the price
of a the gradual turning down and turning the Red Sea, or Adam and
Eve being expelled from Eden.

So important is the subject of star distance that I to, am tempted
to give one more illustration in order to bring before you I shall
take, as before, the nearest of the stars so far as known to us,
and I hope to be forgiven for taking an illustration of a practical
and a commercial kind instead of one more purely scientific.

I shall suppose that a railway is about to be made from London to Alpha
length of that railway, of ticket. The parliamentary so far that it has
been three years on the way. Therefore, when we look at the star
now we see it as it three years previously.

In fact, if the star were to go out altogether, we might still continue
to see knew it twinkling for a period of three years longer, because
rate here is, I believe, a penny for every mile. We will make our
interstellar railway fares much less even than this; we shall arrange
to travel at the rate of one hundred miles for every penny. That,
surely, is moderate enough. If the charges were so low that the journey
from London to Edinburgh only cost fourpence, then even the most
unreasonable passenger would be surely contented.

On in the Great which puzzled him, and that was to know how we found out"
This would surely find Mr. room Smith from any post-office on this
globe. From other globes, however, the supreme importance of England
may not be so immediately recognized, and therefore it is as well to add
about sixty thousand pounds a day, the whole amount of the National Debt
being six hundred and thirty-eight millions of little time would
be required to count the money, but when it was counted the clerk
would tell London to this star you that there was not enough--that he
must have nearly two hundred millions of pounds more.

That will give some notion of the distance of different regions on our
earth can never have been distinguished, and therefore we must the
nearest star, and we may multiply it by ten, by one cowardice
hundred, and yet by one thousand, and still not attain to the
distance of some of the more remote stars that the telescope shows
us.

       On account of the immense distances of the stars we can only perceive
them to mere points of light.

We can never see a star to be a globe with marks on it like the
moon, or like one of the planets--in fact, together, they would
extend to only a small fraction of the distance; this country to
stretch over a distance so enormous.

All the spinning that has ever yet been done in the world has not
formed a long the better the telescope the smaller does the star
seem, though, of course, its brightness is increased with every
addition to the light-grasping power of the instrument.

The Brightness and Color of Stars. Another point to be noticed is
the arrangement of stars in classes, according to their lustre. The
brightest stars, of there are about twenty, are said to be of
the first magnitude. Those just inferior to the first magnitude are
ranked as the second; and those just lower than the second are estimated
as the third; and so on. The smallest points that your unaided eyes will
show you are of about the sixth magnitude. Then the telescope
will reveal stars still fainter and fainter, down to what we term the
or eighteenth magnitudes, or. It is now known that the bright star Algol
is attended a dark companion. This dark star sometimes comes between
Algol and the observer and cuts off the light. Thus it is that the
diminution of brightness is produced.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. PERSEUS AND ITS NEIGHBORING STARS INCLUDING
ALGOL.] Double Stars. Whenever you have a chance of looking at the
heavens through a, but which a good telescope at once shows to be
of quite a complex nature. These are what we call double stars, in
which two even lower still. The number of stars of each magnitude
increases very much in the classes of small ones to illustrate the
nature of these variables. Suppose that were looking at a street gas-lamp
from a very long distance, so that it seemed a little twinkling light;
and suppose that some one was preparing to turn the gas-cock up and down.
Or, better still, imagine a little machine which would act regularly
so as to keep the light first of all at its full brightness for two
days and some conception of how vast such to distances are. a half,
and then gradually turn it down until in three or had we only
powerful enough.

We should then be able to view banns our earth through the successive
epochs of four hours it declines to a feeble glimmer. In this low state
the light remains for minutes; then during three or four hours the gas
is to be slowly turned on again until it is full. In this condition
as a concluding line to the address, for the sun On, if it can be
seen at all from thence the light will remain for two days and a half,
and then the same series of changes is to recommence.

This would be a very odd form of gas-lamp. There would be periods
of two days and a half during which it would remain at its full;
these would be separated by intervals of about seven hours,
when course, we have already stated: it is twenty billions of miles
up again would be in progress. The imaginary gas-lamp is exactly paralleled
by a star Algol, in the constellation of Perseus( Fig. 3), which goes
through star of the second magnitude, and, whatever be the cause,
the star performs its variations with marvellous uniformity.

In fact, Algol has always arrested the attention of those who
observed the heavens, and in early times was looked on as the eye
of a demon.

There are many other stars which also change their brilliancy.

Most of them require much longer periods than Algol, the series of
changes I have indicated.

Ordinarily speaking, it is a bright and sometimes a another line,"
these terms how much do you think interest upon it is new star
Uranus and Neptune the add another line to indicate the particular
globe of the solar system which contains Europe.

Mark Twain tells us that, unhappily, only too well acquainted;
you will know enough about it yourselves in those days when you
have to pay income tax.

This debt is so vast that the eyes has travelled a certain amount of
light was on its way to us at the moment of extinction, am and so long
as that light keeps arriving here into the depths of space, until it
was ten times as far from us as it is at present, it would remain may
bright enough there was always one thing in astronomy is so complete
that from anywhere in the solar are looking at such a star to-night
we arriving there.

Further still, there are stars from which a bird's-eye view could
be taken system--from Mercury, from Jupiter, or Bear are not likely
to know where Piccadilly is, we shall add" London" underneath.

As even London itself cannot be well known everywhere, it is better to
write" England. nobody has ever seen before will suddenly kindle
into brilliancy quite distinct stars are placed so close together
that the unaided eye is unable to separate them

.
In fact, I take it for granted that you are
familiar with Dalton's case _in all its bearings_," added Wiggins,
in a tone of deep meaning. "In that murder trial, then, you are aware
that a Maltese cross was found on the scene of murder, and created much
excitement. You know what part it had in the trial. I now inform you
that I have proof which can show beyond a doubt that this Maltese cross
was the property of your father--Lionel Dudleigh."

"It's a lie--an infernal lie!" said Leon, in a hoarse voice. His
excitement had now become terrible.

"It's true--all true," continued Wiggins. "It can all be proved by a
witness that can not be impeached. Yes, Leon Dudleigh, you yourself
would be forced to accept the testimony of that witness."

"What witness?" said Leon, in a voice that was scarcely audible from
conflicting emotions.

Wiggins looked at him earnestly, and then said, in a low, deep, solemn
voice,

"Leon Dudleigh, that witness is _your mother!_"

The other started as though he had been shot.

"My mother!" he almost screamed--"my mother! why, she--she is
dead--dead long ago."

"When did you find that out?" said Wiggins.

"She's dead! she's dead!" repeated Leon, as though by assertion he could
make it true.

"She is not dead," said Wiggins, in an awful voice, "though all these
years she has lived a living death. She is not dead. She is alive, and
she now stands ready, when the hour comes, though with an agonized
heart, to give that testimony which, years ago, she dared not and could
not give. She has allowed the innocent to suffer, and the guilty to go
free, but now she will do so no longer. The work upon which I have been
engaged is almost complete. The preparations are made, and this very day
I am going to Liverpool to perform the last acts that are necessary
toward vindicating the memory of Dalton, establishing his innocence, and
punishing the guilty. As for you, you can do nothing here, and I have
resolved to punish you for what you have done. I shall show you no
mercy. If you want to save yourself, leave the country, for otherwise I
swear you will never be safe from my vengeance."

"Vengeance!" said Leon, in low, menacing tones. "Dotard! do _you_
talk of vengeance? You do not understand the meaning of that word. Wait
till you see what I can do."

And with these words he left the room.

That evening Wiggins left for Liverpool.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXIII.


THE HUSBAND'S LAST APPEAL.

Early on the following day Edith received a request from Leon for
another interview. This request was acceptable in every way, for the
last interview had been no more satisfactory to her than to him, and she
could not help hoping that something more definite might result from a
new one. She therefore went down, and found him already in the room.

On this occasion Leon showed nothing of that languor which he had
previously affected. He appeared, on the contrary, uneasy, nervous, and
impatient. So abstracted was he by his own thoughts that he did not
notice her entrance. She sat down and waited for a little while, after
which she said, quietly,

"Did you wish to see me, Captain--a--Dudleigh?" Leon started, then
frowned; then, after a little silence, he began abruptly:

"You may deny it as much as you choose, but it's no use. You are
actually married to me. You are really and truly my wife, both in the
eyes of man and in the eyes of the law. From that marriage nothing can
ever deliver you but a divorce."

"You are mistaken," said Edith, quietly. "Even if that miserable
performance should turn out to be a marriage--which is absurd--still
there is one other thing that can free me."

"Ah?--and what may that be?"

"Death!" said Edith, solemnly.

Leon turned pale. "Is that a threat?" he asked at length, in a trembling
voice. "Whose death do you mean?"

Edith made no reply.

"Yes," said Leon, after a pause, going on with his former train of
thought, "at any rate you are my wife, and you can not help it. You may
deny it as much as you please, but that will not avail. In spite of
this, however, I do not molest you, although I might so easily do it. I
never trouble you with my presence. I am very forbearing. Few would do
as I do. Yet I have rights, and some of them, at least, I am determined
to assert. Now, on the whole, it is well for you--and you ought to see
it--that you have one here who occupies the peculiar position toward you
which I do. If it were not for me you would be altogether in the power
of Wiggins. He is your guardian or your jailer, whichever you choose to
call him. He could shut you up in the vaults of Dalton Hall if he
chose--and he probably will do that very thing before long--for who is
there to prevent him? I am the only one who can stand between you and
him. I am your only hope. You do not know who and what this man is. You
think you know him, but you don't. You think of him as a villain and a
tyrant. Let me tell you that in your bitterest hate of that man you have
never begun to conceive the fraction of his villainy. Let me tell you
that he is one who passes your comprehension. Let me tell you that,
however much you may hate me, if I were to tell you what Wiggins is, the
feelings that you have toward me would be almost affection, compared to
those which you would have toward him."

Leon paused. He had spoken most earnestly and vehemently; but upon Edith
these words produced no effect. She believed that this was a last effort
to work upon her feelings by exciting her fears of Wiggins. She did not
believe him capable of speaking the truth to her, and thus his words
produced no result.

"If you had not been married to me when you were," continued Leon, "I
solemnly assure you that by this time you would have been where hope
could never reach you."

"Well, really," said Edith, "Captain--a--Dudleigh, all this is
excessively childish. By such an absurd preamble as this you, of
course, must mean something. All this, however, can have no possible
effect on me, for the simple reason that I consider it spoken for
effect. I hope, therefore, that you will be kind enough to come at once
to business, and say precisely what it is that you want of me."

"It is no absurd preamble," said Leon, gloomily. "It is not nonsense, as
I could soon show you. There is no human being who has done so much
wrong to you and yours as this Wiggins, yet you quietly allow him to be
your guardian."

"I?" said Edith. "I allow him? Let me be free, and then you will see
how long I allow him."

"But I mean here--in Dalton Hall."

"I do not allow him any thing. I am simply a prisoner. He is my jailer,
and keeps me here."

"You need not be so."

"Pray how can I escape?"

"By siding with me."

"With you?" asked Edith--"and what then?"

"Well, if you side with me I will drive him out."

"You seem incapable of understanding," said Edith, "that of the two, you
yourself, both by nature and by position, are by far the more abhorrent
to me. Side with you! And is this the proposal you have to make?"

"I tell you that you are in no danger from me, and that you are from
him."

"Really, as far as danger is concerned, my prospects with Wiggins are
far preferable to my prospects with you."

"But you don't know him. He has done terrible things--deeds of horror."

"And you--what have you done? But perhaps I have mistaken you. When you
ask me to side with you, you may perhaps mean that I shall be at
liberty, and that when you expel Wiggins you will allow me to go also."

At this Leon looked down in evident embarrassment.

"Well--not--yet," he said, slowly. "In time, of course; but it can not
all be done just at once, you know."

"What can not be done at once?"

"Your--your freedom."

"Why not?"

"Well, there are--a--certain difficulties in the way."

"Then what can I gain by siding with you? Why should I cast off Wiggins,
and take a new jailer who has done to me a wrong far more foul and far
more intolerable than any that Wiggins ever attempted?"

"But you mistake me. I intend to let you go free, of course--that is, in
time."

"In time!"

"Yes; every thing can not be done in a moment."

"This is mere childishness. You are trifling. I am astonished that you
should speak in this way, after what you know of me."

"But I tell you I will set you free--only I can not do that until I get
what I want."

"And what is it that you want?"

"Why, what I married you for."

"What is that?"

"Money," said Leon, abruptly.

"Money," repeated Edith, in surprise.

"Yes, money," said Leon, harshly.

"You must really apply to Wiggins, then," said she, carelessly.

"No; you yourself are the only one to whom I must apply."

"To me? I have no money whatever. It is of no use for me to inform you
that Wiggins is all-powerful here. I thought by your professed knowledge
of his wonderful secrets that you had some great power over him, and
could get from him whatever you want."

"Never mind what you thought," growled Leon. "I come to you, and you
only, and I ask you for money."

"How can _I_ give it?"

"By signing your name to a paper, a simple paper, which I can use. Your
signature is necessary to effect what I wish."

"My signature? Ah! And what possible inducement can you offer me for my
signature?"

"Why, what you most desire."

"What? My freedom?"

"Yes."

"Very well. Will you drive me to the village at once?"

Leon hesitated.

"Well, not just at once, you know. You must remain here a short time,
and go through certain formalities and routine work, and attest certain
things before a lawyer."

Edith smiled.

"What a simpleton you must still think me! How easy you must think it is
to impose upon me! Perhaps you think me so credulous, or so much in the
habit of confiding in you, that no such thing as doubt ever enters my
mind."

Leon glared angrily at her.

"I tell you I must have it," he cried, in excited tones. "I must have
it--by fair means or foul."

"But of the two ways I _presume_ you have a preference for the
latter," said Edith.

"I tell you I must and will have it," reiterated Leon.

"I don't see how you can get my signature very well--unless you forge
it; but then I suppose that will not stand in your way."

"Now by all that is most holy," cried Leon, vehemently, "you make me
hate you even worse than I hate Wiggins."

"Really, these feelings of yours are a subject in which I do not take
the smallest interest."

"I tell you," cried Leon, struggling to repress his rage, "if you sign
this paper you shall be free."

"Let me be free first, and then I will think about it."

"If you get free you'll refuse to sign," said Leon.

"But if I were to sign first I should never be free."

"You shall be free. I promise you on the honor of a gentleman," cried
Leon, earnestly.

"I'm afraid," said Edith, in a tone of quiet contempt, "that the
security is of too little value."

Leon looked at her with fury in his eyes.

"You are driving me to the most desperate measures," he cried.

"It seems to me that your measures have all along been as desperate as
they well can be."

"I swear by all that's holy," thundered Leon, "that I'll tame you yet.
I'll bring you into subjection."

"Ah! then in that case," said Edith, "my comfort will be that the
subjection can not last long."

"Will it not ?" asked Leon.

"No, it will not, as you very well know," said Edith, in cold, measured
tones, looking steadfastly at him with what seemed like a certain solemn
warning. She rose as she said this, still looking at Leon, while he
also rose in a state of vehement excitement.

"What do you meant" he cried. "You look as blood-thirsty as an
assassin."

"I may yet become one," said Edith, gloomily, "if this lasts much
longer. You have eyes, but you will not see. You treat me like some
silly, timid child, while I have all the time the spirit of a man. This
can only end in one way. Some one must die!"

Leon looked at her in astonishment. Her voice and her look showed that
she was in earnest, but the fragile beauty of her slender form seemed to
belie the dark meaning of her words.

"I came with a fair offer," said he, in a voice hoarse with passion.

"You!" said Edith, in cold scorn; "you with a fair offer! Fairness and
honor and justice and truth, and all such things, are altogether unknown
to such as you."

At this Leon frowned that peculiar frown of his, and gnawed his mustache
in his rage.

"I have spared you thus far," said he--"I have spared you; but now, by
Heaven, you shall feel what it is to have a master!"

"You!" she cried--"you spared me? If I have escaped any injury from you,
it has been through my own courage and the cowardice of your own heart.
You my master! You will learn a terrible lesson before you become
that!"

"I have spared you," cried Leon, now beside himself with rage--"I have
spared you, but I will spare you no longer. After this you shall know
that what I have thus far done is as nothing to that which is yet before
you."

"What you have done!" said Edith, fixing her great wrathful eyes more
sternly upon Leon, with a look of deadly menace, and with burning
intensity of gaze, and speaking in a low tone that was tremulous with
repressed indignation--"what you have done! Let me tell you, Captain
Dudleigh, your heart's blood could never atone for the wrongs you have
done me! Beware, Sir, how you drive me to desperation. You little know
what I have in my mind to do. You have made me too familiar with the
thought of death!"

At these words Leon stared at her in silence. He seemed at last to
understand the full possibility of Edith's nature, and to comprehend
that this one whom he threatened was capable, in her despair, of making
all his threats recoil on his own head: He said nothing, and in a few
moments afterward she left the room.

As she went out of the door she encountered Hugo. He started as she
came noiselessly upon him. He had evidently been listening to all that
had been said. At this specimen of the way in which she was watched,
though it really showed her no more than what she had all along known,
there arose in Edith's mind a fresh sense of helplessness and of peril.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EDITH SET TO WORK. ]


CHAPTER XXXIV.


THE FUGITIVE AND THE PURSUER.

On returning to her own room from that interview with Leon, Edith sat
for a long time involved in thought. It was evident to her now that her
situation was one full of frightful peril. The departure of Wiggins, of
which she was aware, seemed to afford additional danger. Between him
and Leon there had been what seemed to her at least the affectation of
dislike or disagreement, but now that he was gone there remained no one
who would even pretend to interpose between herself and her enemy. Even
if Mrs. Dunbar had been capable of assisting her against Leon, Edith
knew that no reliance could be placed upon her, for she had openly
manifested a strong regard for him.

This departure of Wiggins, which thus seemed to make her present
position more perilous, seemed also to Edith to afford her a better
opportunity than any she had known since her arrival of putting into
execution her long-meditated project of flight. True, there was still
the same difficulty which had been suggested once before--the want of
money--but Edith was now indifferent to this. The one thing necessary
was to escape from her new perils. If she could but get out of the
Dalton grounds, she hoped to find some lawyer who might take up her
cause, and allow her enough to supply her modest wants until that cause
should be decided. But liberty was the one thought that eclipsed all
others in her estimation; and if she could but once effect her escape
from this horrible place, it seemed to her that all other things would
be easy.

The present appeared to be beyond all others the fitting time, for
Wiggins was away, and it seemed to her that in his absence the watch
over her would probably be relaxed. Her long illness would of itself
have thrown them to some extent off their guard, and render her purpose
unsuspected. By this time it would doubtless be forgotten that she had
once left the Hall by night, and it was not likely that any precaution
would be taken against a second flight on the part of one so weak as she
was supposed to be. A few days before she had made a stealthy visit to
that door, and had found, to her great relief, that no additional
fastenings had been put there. Her illness had evidently rendered any
such precaution unnecessary for the time; and since her recovery Wiggins
had no doubt been too much occupied with other things to think of this.

Now was the time, then, for flight. The danger was greater than ever
before, and the opportunity for escape better. Leon was master in the
house. The other inmates were simply his creatures. Leon Dudleigh, as he
called himself, claimed to be her husband. He asserted that claim
insolently and vehemently. She had defied him, but how long would she be
able to maintain that defiant attitude? How long could her frail
strength sustain her in a life of incessant warfare like this, even if
her spirit should continue to be as indomitable as ever? The scene of
this day, and her last parting with him, made the danger seem so
imminent that it nerved her resolution, and made her determine at all
hazards to attempt her escape that night.

But how should she escape?

Not for the first time did this question occur. For a long time she had
been brooding over it, and as she had thought it over she had devised a
plan which seemed to hold out to her some prospect of success.

In the first place, it was evident that she would have to climb over the
wall. To obtain any key by which she could open the gates was
impossible. She could find none that were at all likely to do so;
besides, she was afraid that even if she had a key, the attempt to
unlock the gates might expose her to detection and arrest by the
watchful porter. The wall, therefore, was her only hope.

Now that wall could not be climbed by her unassisted strength, but she
knew that if she had any sort of a ladder it might easily be done. The
question that arose, then, was how to procure this ladder. A wooden one
could not be of any service, for she could not carry it so far, and she
saw plainly that her attempt must be made by means of some sort of a
rope-ladder.

Having reached this conclusion, she began a diligent search among all
the articles at her disposal, and finally concluded that the bed-cord
would be exactly what she needed. In addition to this, however,
something more was required--something of the nature of a grapple or
hook to secure her rope-ladder to the top of the wall. This required a
further search, but in this also she was successful. An iron rod on the
curtain pole along which the curtains ran appeared to her to be well
suited to her needs. It was about six feet long and a quarter of an inch
thick. The rod rested loosely on the pole, and Edith was able to remove
it without difficulty.

All these preliminaries had been arranged or decided upon before this
evening, and Edith had now only to take possession of the rod and the
rope, and adapt them to her wants. For this purpose she waited till
dark, and then began her work.

It was moonlight, and she was able to work without lighting a lamp, thus
securing additional secrecy. This moonlight was both an advantage and a
disadvantage, and she did not know whether to be glad or sorry about it.
It certainly facilitated her escape by showing the way, but then, on the
other hand, it rendered discovery easier.

Edith set to work, and, first of all, she removed the bed-cord. It was
as strong as was desirable, and far longer than was necessary. She
doubled part of this, and tied knots at intervals of about a foot, and
in this simple way formed what was a very good step-ladder about three
yards long, which was sufficient for her purpose. Then she removed the
iron curtain rod, and bent this in such a way that it formed a hook or
grapple strong enough for her wants. She thus had a rope-ladder, with a
grappling-iron attached, of rude construction, it is true, yet perfectly
well suited to the task before her, and so light as to be quite
portable.

These preparations did not take up much time. After taking what she
wanted of the bed-cord, there was enough left to replace in the bedstead
so as to hold up the bed. She did not know what might happen, and wished
to preserve appearances in the event of Mrs. Dunbar's entrance, or in
case of her being compelled to postpone her project. From the same
motive she also replaced the curtain so as to look as it did before,
securing it in its place by means of pins.

At length all these preparations were completed, and it only remained
for Edith to wait for the proper time to start.

The hours passed on.

Midnight came, but even at that hour Edith thought that it was too
early. Leon probably kept late hours, and might be wandering about. She
determined to wait longer.

The moon was still shining. There were only a few scattered clouds in
that clear sky.

Could she find her way to the wall? She felt confident of that. She
intended to go down the avenue, keeping close to the trees, so as to fly
to their shelter in case of pursuit. When she reached the neighborhood
of the porter's lodge, she would go through the trees to the wall,
trusting to fortune to find her way for that short distance.

Such were the hopes and plans, made long before, which now occupied her
thoughts as she waited.

At last two o'clock came. It seemed now that it would be unwise to wait
any longer, since the time that was left between this and daylight was
barely sufficient to allow for contingencies. Without any farther delay,
therefore, she prepared to depart.

It was with a painful feeling of suspense and agitation that she set
forth upon this attempt at flight, which she knew must be a final one.
Over her left arm she threw the rope-ladder, while in her left hand she
held that ancestral dagger which had already done her such good service
in her dealings with Leon. Her right hand was thus free to grope in the
dark for her way, to open bolts, or to seize the dagger from her other
hand whenever the need for it might arise. For this last dread necessity
she had thoroughly prepared herself. By the desperation of her position,
and by the dark menaces of Leon, she had been nerved to a courage beyond
even that elevated standard which her high spirit ordinarily reached,
and she had resolved that if any one interposed between herself and that
liberty for which she longed, to use that dagger, and to strike without
scruple.

On leaving her room she stood for a moment in the outer hall and
listened. All was still. She glided noiselessly along, and reached the
stairway. Once more she stood and listened before descending. There was
silence yet. She now descended the stairs as noiselessly as before, and
reached the lower hall, where she walked quickly toward the east end,
and came to the narrow stairway that led down to the door. Here once
more she paused. A fearful thought came to her as she looked down. What
if some one should be waiting there in the dark! What if Leon should be
there! In spite of herself a shudder passed through her at that thought.

Suddenly, as she stood there, she heard a sound--a sound which roused
her once more to action, and inspired new fears. It was the sound of a
footfall--far away, indeed, inside the house, but still a footfall--a
heavy tread, as of some one in pursuit, and its sound was loud and
menacing to her excited senses. There was only one to whom she could
attribute it--Leon!

He had heard her, then!

She was pursued!

Like lightning this thought came to her, and brought terror with it. She
could delay no longer. Down the narrow stairway she hurried through the
darkness, and reached the door. In her panic she forgot her usual
caution. With a jerk she drew the bolt back, and a harsh grating sound
arose. She flung open the door, which also creaked on its unused
hinges. Then leaping out, she hastily banged the door after her, and ran
straight on.

In front of Dalton Hall there was a wide lawn and a pond. Beyond this
arose the trees of the park. Toward the shelter of these shadowy trees
Edith hurried, with the dread sense in her soul that she was being
pursued by a remorseless enemy. This thought lent additional speed to
her footsteps as she flew over the intervening space. The moon was
shining brightly, and she knew that she could easily be seen by any
watcher; but she sought only the more to reach the trees, and thus
escape observation. The time seemed long indeed to her in those moments
of dread suspense; but the space was at last traversed, the trees were
reached, and plunging into the midst of them, she ran along,
occasionally stumbling, until at length, partly from exhaustion and
partly from a desire to see where her enemy might be, so as to elude him
better, she stopped.

Her course had been a circuitous one, but she had kept along the edge of
the wood, so that now, as she stopped, she found herself under the
shadow of the trees, and immediately opposite the portico of Dalton
Hall, between which and herself lay the pond. Here she stood, and
looked over the intervening space.

As she looked, she at first saw no appearance of any human being, and
she began to think that her fears all along had been unfounded; but in a
little while, as her eyes wandered over the front of the Hall, she saw
something which at once renewed all her excitement, and showed her that
her fears were true.

Upon the portico stood a figure, the general outlines of which were now
visible to her, as she looked carefully, and seemed to be the figure of
Leon. She could recognize the gray dress which he usually wore, and also
understood why she had not noticed him before, for the color of his
clothes had made him but faintly visible against the gray stone mass of
the background. He was now standing there with his face turned in her
direction.

"He has heard me," she thought. "He has seen me. Instead of chasing me
at once, he has stopped to listen, so as to judge of my course. He knows
that I am here now in this spot, and is still listening to find out if I
go any further."

In a few moments her attention was attracted by a dark object lying on
the portico near Leon.

It was the dog!

She knew it well. Her heart sank within her.

"He is going to track me with the dog!" she thought.

What could she do?

Nothing. Flight was now worse than useless. All seemed lost, and there
was nothing now left to her in that moment of despair but the resolve to
resist to the end.

After a short time, which to Edith seemed prolonged to a terrible
degree, the figure came down the steps, followed by the dog.

Edith watched.

He walked on; he rounded the end of the pond; he came nearer!

She could now recognize his face as the moon shone down.

It was Leon. There was no longer the slightest doubt of that. He was
coming toward her, and the huge dog followed.

Edith involuntarily shrank back among the trees, and grasping her dagger
with desperate resolve, awaited the approach of her enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXV.


THE EMPTY ROOMS.

On the following morning Mrs. Dunbar waited a long time for Edith's
appearance. But she did not make her appearance, and the time passed,
until it at length grew so late that she determined to see what was the
matter. Full of fear lest some new illness had been the result of the
new excitement to which she had been subjected, Mrs. Dunbar passed
cautiously through Edith's sitting-room, and knocked at her bedroom
door.

There was no answer.

She knocked again and again, and still receiving no answer, she opened
the door and looked in.

To her amazement the room was empty. What was more surprising was the
fact that the bed did not appear to have been slept in. There was no
disorder visible in the room. Every thing was in its usual place, but
Edith was not there, and in that one glance which Mrs. Dunbar gave she
took in the whole truth.

Edith had fled!

She knew also that she must have fled during the night; that the event
against which such precautions had been taken had occurred at last, and
that she was responsible. Over that sorrowful anxious face there came
now a deeper sorrow and a graver anxiety at that discovery, and sitting
down upon a chair, she tried to conjecture Edith's possible course, and
wondered how she could get over the wall and out of the grounds.

At length she left this room, and going down stairs, called Hugo.

"Hugo," said she, "has the captain come down?"

"I habn't seen him, ma'am," said Hugo, respectfully.

"He always rises early," said Mrs. Dunbar. "I wonder what's the matter.
He certainly must be up."

Turning away, she ascended the stairs, and went to the room which was
occupied by Leon. The door was open. She entered. The room looked as
though it had just been left by its occupant. The bed bore signs of
having been occupied. The valise was lying there open. Upon the
toilet-table was a pocket-book, and hanging from the screw of the
looking-glass was his watch. His riding whip and gloves and top-boots
were lying in different places.

As Mrs. Dunbar saw all this, she concluded at first that he had gone out
for a walk, and would soon be back; but the lateness of the hour made
that idea seem absurd, and showed her that there must be some other
cause. The flight of Edith thereupon occurred to her, and was very
naturally associated in her mind with the departure of Leon. Had he been
watching? Had he detected her flight, and gone in pursuit? It seemed
so. If so, he was doubtless yet in pursuit of the fugitive, who must
have fled fast and far to delay him so long.

Then another thought came--the idea of violence. Perhaps he had caught
the fugitive, and in his rage and vindictive fury had harmed her. That
he was fierce enough for any atrocity she well knew; and the thought
that he had killed her, and had fled, came swift as lightning to her
mind.

The idea was terrible. She could not endure it. She left the room and
hurried down stairs again.

"Hugo," said she, "go down and ask the porter if he has seen the captain
or Miss Dalton."

"Miss Dalton!" exclaimed Hugo.

"Yes; she's gone."

"Gone!" repeated Hugo, in amazement.

He said no more, but hurried down to the gates, while Mrs. Dunbar, who
felt restless and ill at ease, walked up the stairs, and feeling
fatigued, stopped on the landing, and leaned against the window there,
looking out upon the ground in the rear of the Hall.

Standing here, her eyes were attracted by a sight which made her start.
It was the Newfoundland dog. He was standing at some distance from the
house, looking straight ahead at vacancy, in a rigid attitude. The sight
of this animal, who was always the inseparable companion of his master,
standing there in so peculiar a fashion by himself, excited Mrs. Dunbar;
and forgetful of her weariness, she descended the stairs again, and
quitting the Hall, approached the spot where the dog was standing.

As she approached, the dog looked at her and wagged his tail. She called
him. He went on wagging his tail, but did not move from the spot. She
went up to him and stroked him, and looked all around, hoping to see
some signs of his master. She looked in the direction in which the dog
had been staring when she first noticed him. The stables seemed to be
the place. Toward these she walked, and tried to induce the dog to
follow, but he would not. She then walked over to the stables, and
looked through them, without seeing any trace of the object of her
search. Upon this she returned to the house.

On coming back she found Hugo. He had been to the gates, he said; but
the porter had seen nothing whatever either of the captain or Miss
Dalton.

This intelligence deepened the anxious expression on Mrs. Dunbar's face.

"His dog is here," said she, in a tremulous voice.

"His dog!" said Hugo. "Oh yes; he's ben out dar all de mornin'. Dunno
what de matta wid dat ar animal at all. Stands dar like a gravy statoo."

For the rest of that day Mrs. Dunbar was restless and distressed. She
wandered aimlessly about the house. She sent Hugo off to scour the
grounds to see if he could find any trace of either of the fugitives.
Every moment she would look out from any window or door that happened to
be nearest, to see if either of them was returning. But the day passed
by, and Hugo came back from his long search, but of neither of the
fugitives was a single trace found.

What affected Mrs. Dunbar as much as any thing was the behavior of the
dog. Through all that day he remained in the same place, sometimes
standing, sometimes lying down, but never going away more than a few
feet. That the dog had some meaning in this singular behavior, and that
this meaning had reference to the flight of one or the other of the late
inmates of the house, was very evident to her. No persuasion, or
coaxing, or even threatening could draw the dog away; and even when Hugo
fired a gun off close to his lead, he quivered in every nerve, but only
moved back a foot or two. Food and drink were brought to him, of which
he partook with a most eager appetite, but no temptation could draw him
any distance from his post. That night was a sleepless one for Mrs.
Dunbar; and it was with a feeling of great relief that she heard the
noise of a carriage early on the following day, and knew that Wiggins
had returned.

She hurried down at once, and met him in the great hall. In a few words
she told him all.

For such intelligence as this Wiggins was evidently unprepared. He
staggered back and leaned against the wall, staring at Mrs. Dunbar with
a terrible look.

"What! Gone!" he said, slowly. "Edith!"

"Yes; and Leon."

"Edith gone!" gasped Wiggins once more.

"Did you hear nothing in the village?"

"I drove through without stopping. Did you send to the village?"

"I did not think that they could have got out of the grounds."

"They! There's no trouble about Leon?"

"I'm afraid--for him," said Mrs. Dunbar, in a faint voice.

"For him!" exclaimed Wiggins. "What can happen to him? For her, you
mean."

"They must have gone off together."

"Together! Do you think Edith would go with _him_? No; she has fled
in her madness and ignorance, turning her back on happiness and love,
and he has pursued her. O Heavens!" he continued, with a groan, "to
think that it should end in this! And cursed be that scoundrel--"

"Stop!" cried Mrs. Dunbar. "He is not a scoundrel. He would not harm
her. You don't know Leon. He has not left the place; his dog is here."

"His dog!"

Mrs. Dunbar explained.

Upon this Wiggins went through the hall to the rear, and there, in the
same place as where Mrs. Dunbar last saw him, was the dog. He was lying
down now. He wagged his tail in friendly recognition as they came up.
Wiggins patted him and stroked him and tried to coax him away. The
result was precisely the same as it had been before. The dog received
all advances in the most friendly manner possible. He wagged his tail,
rolled over on his back, licked their hands, sat up on his
hind-quarters, and did every thing which dogs usually do when petted or
played with, but nothing would induce him to leave the place. He did not
appear to be in any trouble. He seemed simply to have made up his mind
to stay there, and this resolution he maintained most obstinately.

Wiggins could make nothing of it; but the sight of the dog renewed the
terrors of Mrs. Dunbar.

"I'm afraid," said she--"I'm afraid that something's happened to Leon."

"To Leon!" exclaimed Wiggins, impatiently; "what could happen to him! I
told him to quit this place, and he has probably concluded to do so."

"But what do you think of his flight at the same time with Edith?"

"I don't know what to think of it. I only know this, that if he has
harmed one hair of her head, I--I'll--kill him! My own injuries I will
forgive, but wrongs done to her I will avenge!"

At this Mrs. Dunbar shrank away, and looked at Wiggins in fear.

"But it may be all the other way," said she, in a tremulous voice.
"Edith was terrible in her fury. She was no timid, faltering girl; she
was resolute and vindictive. If he has followed her, or laid hands on
her, she may have--" She hesitated.

"May have what?" asked Wiggins.

"She may have done him some harm."

"_She_ may have done _him_ some harm!" repeated Wiggins, with
a sneer. "What! and when he had his big dog to protect him? Pooh!"

And with a scornful laugh he turned away.

Mrs. Dunbar followed him.

"She was so terrible in her despair," said she, as she followed him;
"she looked like a fury--beautiful, yet implacable."

"Silence!" cried Wiggins. "Stop all that nonsense, or you'll drive me
mad. Are you crazy? When I am almost broken-hearted in my anxiety about
her, what do you mean by turning against that wronged and injured girl,
who I now see has been driven to despair by my own cursed mistakes, and
pretending that she is the aggressor, and your scoundrel Leon the
victim?"

In the midst of this Wiggins was interrupted by the approach of Hugo.

"A genl'man, Sah, wants to see you, Sah," said he.

"A gentleman," repeated Wiggins. "Who is he? How did he come here?"

"Dunno, Sah, nuffin 'bout dat, Sah."

"It's about Edith!" exclaimed Wiggins; and he hurried into the house.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXVI.


THE VICAR OF DALTON.

Wiggins entered the drawing-room, and found his visitor there. He was a
slight man, with light hair, watery gray eyes, and very mild demeanor.
The timidity of the man seemed very marked; there was an apologetic air
about him; and his very footfall as he advanced to greet Wiggins seemed
to deprecate some anticipated rough treatment. He spoke a few words,
and at Wiggins's request to be seated he sat down, while his agitation
increased; and he had that hesitating, half-abstracted manner which
marks the man who is on the point of giving unpleasant information,
about the effect of which he is doubtful.

Wiggins, on his part, did not seem to notice this. He sat down, and
looked with earnest inquiry at his visitor. He seemed to know what was
the object of this visit, and yet to dread to ask it.

The visitor had given his name as the Rev. Mr. Munn, and Wiggins
recognized that name as belonging to the parish vicar. That name
excited strange emotions within him, for it was the same name that had
appeared in the papers in connection with Edith's marriage.

"Well?" said Wiggins at last, in some impatience.

Mr. Munn cleared his throat.

"I have come here," he began, "to tell you very distressing news."

Wiggins was silent.

"I refer to--a--a--Mrs. Dudleigh," said Mr. Munn.

"Well?" said Wiggins, in a scarcely audible voice.

"She is at the village inn."

"At the village inn!" repeated Wiggins, in evident agitation, drawing a
long breath.

"She is alive, then?" he added, eagerly.

"Oh yes," said Mr. Munn; "she came there early yesterday morning." And
then he went on to tell his story, the substance of which was as
follows:

On the previous morning about dawn the people at the Dalton Inn were
aroused by a hurried knock. On going to the door they found Mrs.
Dudleigh. The moment that the door was opened she sprang in and fell
exhausted to the floor. So great was her weakness that she could not
rise again, and had to be carried up to one of the bedrooms. She was so
faint that she could scarcely speak; and in a feeble voice she implored
them to put her to bed, as it was a long time since she had had any
rest, and was almost dead with fatigue.

Her condition was most pitiable. Her clothes were all torn to shreds,
and covered with mud and dust; her hands were torn and bleeding; her
shoes had been worn into rags; and she looked as though she had been
wandering for hours through woods and swamps, and over rocks and sand.
To all their inquiries she answered nothing, but only implored them to
put her to bed and let her rest; above all, she prayed most piteously
that they would tell no one that she was there. This they promised to
do; and, indeed, it would have been difficult for them to have informed
about her, since none at the inn had ever seen her before, or had the
remotest idea who she could be.

Full of pity and sympathy, they put her to bed, and the landlady watched
over her most assiduously. All the morning she slept profoundly; but at
about noon she waked with a scream, like one who has been roused from
some fearful dream.

After that she grew steadily worse. Fever set in, and became more and
more violent every moment. In their anxiety to do what she had
requested, and keep her secret, they did not send immediately for a
doctor. But her condition soon became such that further delay was out of
the question, so they sent for the village physician.

When he arrived she was much worse. She was in a high fever, and
already delirious. He pronounced her situation to be dangerous in the
extreme, urged upon them the greatest care, and advised them to lose no
time in letting her friends know about her condition. Here was a dilemma
for these worthy people. They did not know who her friends were, and
therefore could not send for them, while it became impossible to keep
her presence at the inn a secret Not knowing what else to do, they
concluded to send for the vicar.

When Mr. Munn came he found them in great distress. He soon learned the
facts of the case, and at once decided that it should be made known to
Captain Dudleigh or to Wiggins. For though he did not know Edith's face,
still, from the disconnected words that had dropped from her during her
delirium, reported to him by the inn people, he thought it probable that
she was the very lady whom he had married under such mysterious
circumstances. So he soothed the fears of the landlady as well as he
could, and then left. It was late at night when he went from the inn,
and he had waited till the morning before going to Dalton Hall. He had
some difficulty in getting in at the gate, but when the porter learned
the object of his visit he at once opened to him. From the porter he
learned of the disappearance of Captain Dudleigh also. Nothing was then
left but to see Wiggins. Accordingly he had come to the Hall at once,
so as to tell his message with the shortest possible delay.

To this recital Wiggins listened with gravity. He made no gesture, and
he spoke no word, but sat with folded arms, looking upon the floor. When
Mr. Munn had ended, he, after a long silence, turned toward him and
said, in a severe tone,

"Well, Sir, now I hope you see something of the evil of that course
which you chose to pursue."

"Evil? course?" stammered Mr. Munn. "I don't understand you."

"Oh, I think you understand me," said Wiggins, gloomily. "Has not your
conscience already suggested to you the probable cause of this strange
course of her whom you call Mrs. Dudleigh?"

"My conscience!" gasped Mr. Munn; "what has my conscience to do with
it?"

"How long is it since that wretched mockery at which you officiated?"
asked Wiggins, sternly.

"I really--I think--a few months only."

"A few months," repeated Wiggins. "Well, it has come to this. That is
the immediate cause of her flight, and of her present suffering."

"I--I--married them," stammered Mr. Munn; "but what of that? Is her
unhappiness my fault? How can I help it? Am I responsible for the future
condition of those couples whom I marry? Surely this is a strange thing
to say."

"You well know," said Wiggins, "what sort of a marriage this was. It was
no common one. It was done in secret. Why did you steal into these
grounds like a thief, and do this infamous thing?"

"Why--why," faltered the unhappy vicar, growing more terrified and
conscience-stricken every minute--"Captain Dudleigh asked me. I cannot
refuse to marry people."

"No, Sir, you can not when they come to you fairly; you can not, I well
know, when the conditions of the law are satisfied. But was that so
here? Did you not steal into these grounds? Did you not come by night,
in secret, conscious that you were doing wrong, and did you not have to
steal out in the same way? And your only excuse is that Captain Dudleigh
asked you!"

"He--he--showed very strong reasons why I should do so," said Mr. Munn,
who by this time was fearfully agitated--"very strong reasons, I do
assure you, Sir, and all my humanity was--a--aroused."

"Your humanity?" sneered Wiggins. "Where was your humanity for her?"

"For her!" exclaimed the vicar. "Why, she wanted it. She loved him."

"Loved him! Pooh! She hated him worse than the devil."

"Then what did she marry him for?" cried Mr. Munn, at his wits' end.

"Never mind," said Wiggins; "you went out of your way to do a deed the
consequences of which can not yet be seen. I can understand, Sir, how
Captain Dudleigh could have planned this thing; but how you, a calm,
quiet clergyman, in the full possession of your faculties, could have
ever been led to take part in it, is more than I can comprehend. I, Sir,
was her guardian, appointed as such by her father, my own intimate
friend. Captain Dudleigh was a villain. He sought out this thoughtless
child merely for her money. It was not her that he wanted, but her
estate. I could easily have saved her from this danger. He had no chance
with me. But you come forward--you, Sir--suddenly, without cause,
without a word of warning--you sneak here in the dark, you entice her to
that lonely place, and there you bind her body and soul to a scoundrel.
Now, Sir, what have you got to say for yourself!"

Mr. Munn's teeth chattered, and his hands clutched one another
convulsively. "Captain Dudleigh told me that she was under restraint
here by--by you--and that she loved him, and that her only refuge was to
be married to him. I'm sure I didn't mean to do any harm."

"Rubbish!" said Wiggins, contemptuously. "The law gives a guardian a
certain right to parental restraint for the good of the ward. The slight
restraint to which she was subjected was accompanied by the deepest love
of those who cared for her here. I had hoped, Sir, that you might have
something different to tell me. I did not know that you had actually
acted so madly. I thought the story which I heard of that marriage was
incredible, and I have always spoken of it as a mockery. But from what I
now gather from you, it seems to have been a _bona fide_ marriage,
true and valid."

"I--I'm afraid it--it was," said Mr. Munn.

Wiggins gave something that was almost like a groan.

"Friends," he cried, passionately, rising from his chair--"friends from
the bottomless pit could not have more foully and fatally deceived that
poor, thoughtless, trustful child. But all their trickery and treachery
could never have succeeded had they not found a paltry tool in a
senseless creature like you--you, Sir--who could stand there and go
mumbling your marriage service, and never see the infernal jugglery that
was going on under your very eyes. Yes, you, Sir, who now come to wring
and break my heart by the awful tidings that you now tell me. Away!
Begone! I have already borne more than my share of anguish; but this, if
it goes on, will kill me or drive me mad!"

He turned away, with his head bent, with an unsteady step, and walked
toward the window, where he stood leaning against it heavily, and
staring out at vacancy.

As for Mr. Munn, he gave one glance of horror at Wiggins, and then, with
a swift, frightened step, he hurried from the Hall.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XXXVII.


THE HOUSE OF REFUGE

The illness of Edith was of no light or common kind. Her old glow of
health had not yet returned. The state of affairs at Dalton Hall had
retarded any thing like a complete recovery, and when she started off on
her desperate flight, she was unfit for such a venture. Through that
terrible night she had undergone what might have laid low a strong man,
and the strength which had barely carried her to the door of the inn had
there left her utterly; and so fierce was the attack that was now made
upon her by this new illness that recovery seemed scarce possible.

The doctor was as non-committal as doctors usually are in a really
dangerous case. It was evident, however, from the first, that her
situation awakened in his mind the very deepest anxiety. He urged the
landlady to keep the house in the quietest possible condition, and to
see that she was never left without attendants. This the landlady
promised to do, and was unremitting in her attentions.

But all the care of the attendants seemed useless. Deeper and deeper
Edith descended into the abyss of suffering. Day succeeded to day, and
found her worse. Fortunately she was not conscious of what she had to
endure; but in that unconsciousness her mind wandered in delirium, and
all the sorrows of the past were lived over again.

They knew not, those good kind souls who waited and watched at her
bedside, what it was that thus rose before her, and distressed her in
the visions of her distempered brain, but they could see that these were
the result of deep grief and long sorrow, and therefore they pitied her
more than ever. As her mind thus wandered, she talked incessantly, often
in broken words, but often also in long connected sentences, and all
these were intermingled with moans and sighs.

"This is a heart-rending," said the doctor once. "It is her mind, poor
lady, that has brought on this illness. In this case medicine is of no
use. You can do more than I can. You must watch over her, and keep her
as quiet as she can be kept."

All of which the landlady promised more fervently than ever, and kept
her promise too.

But in spite of all this care, the fever and the delirium grew worse.
The events of her Dalton life rose before her to the exclusion of all
other memories, and filled all her thoughts. In her fancies she again
lived that life of mingled anxiety and fear, and chafed and raged and
trembled by turns at the restraint which she felt around her. Then she
tried to escape, but escape was impossible. Then she seemed to speak
with some one who promised deliverance. Eagerly and earnestly she
implored this one to assist her, and mentioned plans of escape.

Most of all, however, her thoughts turned to that scene in the Dalton
vaults. The dead seemed all around. Amidst the darkness she saw the
ghost of her ancestors. They frowned menacingly upon her, as on one who
was bringing dishonor upon a noble name. They pointed at her scornfully
with their wan fingers. Deep moans showed the horror of her soul, but
amidst these moans she protested that she was innocent.

Then her flight from the Hall came up before her. She seemed to be
wandering through woods and thickets and swamps, over rocks and fallen
trees.

"Shall I never get out?" she murmured. "Shall I never get to the wall?
I shall perish in this forest. I am sinking in this mire."

Then she saw some enemy. "It is he!" she murmured, in low thrilling
tones. "He is coming! I will never go back--no, never! I will die
first! I have my dagger--I will kill him! He shall never take me
there--never, never, never! I will kill him--I will kill him!"

After which came a low groan, followed by a long silence.

So she went on in her agony, but her delirious words carried no
connected meaning to her attendants. They could only look at one another
inquiringly, and shake their heads. "She has been unhappy in her married
life, poor dear," said the landlady once, with a sigh; and this seemed
to be the general impression, and the only one which they gathered from
her words.

Thus a fortnight passed away.

At length the lowest stage of the disease was reached. It was the
turning-point, and beyond that lay either death or recovery. All night
long the landlady watched beside the bed of the poor sufferer, who now
lay in a deep sleep, scarce breathing, while the doctor, who came in at
midnight, remained till morning.

Morning came at length, and Edith awaked. The delirium had passed. She
looked around inquiringly, but could recall nothing.

"Auntie dear," she said, feebly, "where are you?"

"There isn't no auntie, dear," said the landlady, gently. "You are at
Dalton Inn But don't speak, dearie--you are too weak."

"Dalton Inn," repeated Edith, in a faint voice. She looked puzzled, for
she was as yet too confused to remember. Gradually however, memory
awaked, and though the recollection of her illness was a blank, yet the
awful life that she had lived, and her flight from that life, with all
its accompaniments, came gradually back.

She looked at the landlady with a face of agony.

"Promise," said she, faintly.

"Promise what, dearie?"

"Promise--that--you will not--send me away."

"Lord love you! send you away? Not me."

"Promise," said Edith, in feverish impatience, "that you will not let
them take me--till I want to go."

"Never; no one shall touch a hair of your head, dearie--till you wish
it."

The tone of the landlady gave Edith even more confidence than her words.
"God bless you!" she sighed, and turned her head away.

A week passed, and Edith continued to get better every day. Although her
remembrances were bitter and her thoughts most distressing, yet there
was something in her present situation which was, on the whole,
conducive to health. For the first time in many months she felt herself
free from that irksome and galling control which had been so maddening
to her proud nature. Her life in Dalton Hall had been one long
struggle, in which her spirit had chafed incessantly at the barriers
around it, and had well-nigh worn itself out in maintaining its
unconquerable attitude. Now all this was over. She trusted this honest
and tender-hearted landlady. It was the first frank and open face which
she had seen since she left school. She knew that here at last she would
have rest, at least until her recovery. What she might do then was
another question, but the answer to this she chose to put off.

But all this time, while Edith had been lying prostrate and senseless at
the inn, a great and mighty excitement had arisen and spread throughout
the country, and all men were discussing one common subject--the
mysterious disappearance of Captain Dudleigh.

He had become well known in the village, where he had resided for some
time. His rank, his reputed wealth, and his personal appearance had all
made him a man of mark. His marriage with Miss Dalton, who was known to
be his cousin, had been publicly announced, and had excited very general
surprise, chiefly because it was not known that Miss Dalton had
returned. The gentry had not called on the bride, however, partly on
account of the cloud that hung over the Dalton name, but more especially
on account of the air of mystery that hung about the marriage, and the
impression that was prevalent that calls were not expected.

The marriage had been largely commented upon, but had been generally
approved. It had taken place within the family, and the stain on the
Dalton name could thus be obliterated by merging it with that of
Dudleigh. It seemed, therefore, wise and appropriate and politic, and
the reserve of the married couple was generally considered as a mark of
delicacy, good taste, and graceful respect for public opinion.

Captain Dudleigh had at first been associated with a friend and relative
of his, Lieutenant Dudleigh, who had made himself quite popular in the
outside world. Neither of them, however, had gone into society. It was
understood that Lieutenant Dudleigh had come simply for the purpose of
being the captain's groomsman, and when, after the marriage, he
disappeared, nothing more was thought about him.

Occupying as he did this place in the attention of the county people,
Captain Dudleigh's disappearance created an excitement which can easily
he imagined. Who first started the report could not be found out, but no
sooner had it been started than it spread like wild-fire.

Moreover, in spite of the landlady's care, they had heard of Edith's
flight and illness, and naturally associated these two startling facts
together. The Dalton name was already covered with deep disgrace, and
that another tragedy should take place in connection with it was felt to
be very natural. Week after week passed on, and still there were no
tidings of the missing man. With the lapse of each week the excitement
only increased. Throughout the whole county this was the common topic
of conversation. It was matter for far more than the ordinary nine
days' wonder, for about this there was the fascination and the horror of
an impenetrable mystery.

For it was universally felt that in some way or other this mystery was
connected with Edith, and that its solution lay with her. It was
universally known that she had fled from Dalton Hall in a most
suspicious and unaccountable manner, and that Captain Dudleigh had
disappeared on that very night. It was natural, therefore, that every
body should think of her as being, to some extent at least, aware of the
fate of Dudleigh, and that she alone could account for it.

And so the excitement grew stronger and stronger every day. Gradually
the whole public came to know something about the circumstances of the
ill-fated marriage. There seemed to be some power at work which sent
forth fresh intelligence at various intervals to excite the public mind.
It was not Wiggins, for he kept himself in strict seclusion; and people
who went to stare at the gates of Dalton Park found nothing for their
pains. It could not have been the vicar, for his terror had reduced him
to a state of simple imbecility. There was some other cause, and that
cause seemed always at work.

From this mysterious cause, then, the public gained a version of the
story of that marriage, which was circulated every where. Miss Dalton,
it was said, had fallen in love with Captain Dudleigh, but her guardian,
Wiggins, had resisted her inclinations. She determined to get married in
spite of him, and Captain Dudleigh had a clergyman brought into the
park, who performed the ceremony secretly. After the marriage, however,
it was said, Captain Dudleigh treated his wife badly, and clamored for
money to pay his debts. His wife suspected that he bad married her for
this sole purpose. They quarreled incessantly. Her health broke down
through grief and disappointment, and she was ill for a long time. After
her recovery they had several stormy interviews, in which she had
threatened his life. It was said that she always carried a dagger, with
which she had sworn to kill him. She had told him to his face that she
would have "_his heart's blood_."

Such was the story that circulated far and wide among all classes. None
had seen Edith personally except the doctor and those at the inn; and
the general impression about her was that she was a fierce, bold,
impetuous woman, with iron resolution and masculine temper. So, on the
whole, public opinion ran high against her, and profound sympathy was
felt for the injured husband.

All this was not confined to the county. The metropolitan papers had
mentioned it and discussed it, and the "_Continued Disappearance of
Captain Dudleigh_" was for a long time the standing heading of many
paragraphs.

But during all this time Edith remained at the inn in complete
seclusion, recovering slowly hut surely. In that seclusion she was
utterly ignorant of the excitement which she had caused, and, indeed,
was not aware that she was talked of at all. The papers were all kindly
kept out of her sight, and as she had never been accustomed to read
them, she never thought of asking for them.

But the public feeling had at last reached that point at which it
demanded, with resistless voice, an inquiry after the missing man.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XXXVIII.


THE OLD WELL.

Public feeling had grown so strong that it could no longer be
disregarded, and the authorities had to take up the case. It was
enforced upon their attention in many ways. The whole county urged it
upon them, and journals of note in different parts of the kingdom
denounced their lethargy. Under these circumstances they were compelled
to take some action.

Wiggins had foreseen this, and to guard against this necessity he had
himself done all in his power to search after the missing man. He had
put the case in the hands of detectives, who had carried on an
investigation in all quarters, and in every possible way; but to no
purpose, and with no result. When at length the authorities came, he
informed them of his search and its failure, but assured them that he
still believed that Captain Dudleigh was alive. His theory was that,
being heavily in debt, he had taken this mode of eluding his creditors,
and after causing it to be believed that he was dead, he had quietly
disappeared, and was now enjoying himself somewhere on the Continent.
No one else, however, shared this opinion, and those who came to the
search had no doubt that the missing man had been murdered. So they
instituted a regular search over the whole estate. They began with the
Hall, and went through every part of it. Then they turned their
attention to the grounds These were extensive, and it seemed probable
that somewhere among the groves or swamps the remains might be found.
They searched the chapel and the vaults. They dragged the pond in front
of the house. In all this Wiggins lent his active assistance toward
furthering the ends of justice, but at the same time retained the
firmest conviction that it was a trick of Dudleigh's, and that he was
now in foreign parts.

At length some of those who had been going the rounds of the wall
returned to the house, carrying something, the sight of which produced a
profound excitement. It was the hook and rope by which Edith, had sought
to escape. They found it hanging upon the wall, and every one recognized
at a glance the intention of this rope-ladder. But the thing that
produced the strongest excitement was something else. They had found it
lying among the grass at the foot of the ladder, having evidently been
dropped by some fugitive as an impediment, or thrown away as useless. It
was a dagger, which, from being so long exposed to the weather, was
covered with rust, but was still sharp and deadly.

This dagger seemed at once to confirm the general impression. It showed
that one of the fugitives of that night--the one who had escaped--had
been armed with a deadly weapon. Every one knew who the one was who had
escaped. Every one had already suspected her. Her wild flight, her
terrible agitation, her long illness--all had been known. What else
could cause such a state of things but the dread remembrance of some
dark crime? And now this dagger lay before them, the silent proof of the
guilt of her who had left it there.

Upon Wiggins the effect was crushing. His tongue was paralyzed. He kept
aloof after that, with despair on his face, and surveyed the proceedings
at a distance. Not so Mrs. Dunbar. All this time she had been feverish
and agitated, sometimes following the officers, at other times retiring.
Upon her the sight of that dagger acted like something that confirmed
the worst of her fears, and she burst forth into wild wails and
lamentations. She then urged the officers to renewed search, and
finally told them all about her own discovery of the empty rooms on that
eventful morning, and the singular behavior of the dog.

The mention of this created new excitement, and they at once asked where
the dog now was.

Mrs. Dunbar did not know. The dog had disappeared most mysteriously, and
they had seen nothing of him for a long time.

They then asked to be taken to the place where the dog had stationed
himself. Mrs. Dunbar, still wild with excitement, led the way there.
Arriving at the spot, they examined it narrowly, but found nothing. It
was grass, which had not been touched for years. No body lay buried
beneath that old turf, as was plainly evident. They then went to the
out-houses, toward which Mrs. Dunbar told them the dog had kept his
face, turned for some time when she had first seen him; but here they
found nothing whatever.

It was now late, and they began to think of retiring, when suddenly one
of the party, who had been walking in the rear of the stables, gave a
call which drew them all in that direction. Upon reaching him they found
him standing at the edge of a pit, which looked like an old well. Over
this there was still the frame of what had been the well-house, and the
well itself was very deep. Kneeling, they all peered into the black
depths beneath them, but discovered nothing. One of them dropped a
stone, and the sound far below showed that the bottom lay at least sixty
or eighty feet from the surface.

"How long since this well has been used?" asked the sheriff.

"Many years," said Mrs. Dunbar.

"Did you examine it?"

"We never thought of doing so."

"Well, we may as well try it. Can we have a rope?"

"Certainly," said Mrs. Dunbar, who at once went to the house, and soon
returned with Hugo, who carried a long stout rope.

Now it remained to explore the well, and to do this it would be
necessary for some one to descend. But no difficulty was found in this.
By this time all had been stimulated to the highest degree by the
excitement of the search, and there was something in the look of the
well which made it seem like the very place for the hurried disposal of
a body. Here, then, they were all convinced, if any where, they would be
sure to come upon that which they sought. Accordingly several
volunteered to go down; but the sheriff chose from among them the one
who seemed fittest for that purpose, and to the others was allotted the
task of lowering him. Some further time was taken up in making the
necessary preparations for this; but at length these were all completed,
and the man who was to go down, after binding one end of the rope about
his chest and giving the other end to his companions, prepared to
descend.

The well was not very wide, and was lined around its sides with rough
stones. In the interstices between these he inserted his feet and hands,
and thus he let himself down, descending gradually.

The others knelt around the mouth of the well, holding the rope, and
letting it pass through their hands as their companion descended,
peering silently into the dark with eager eyes, and listening
breathlessly to the dull sounds made by the man below as he descended
further and further.

At last all was still. From below there came no sound. He had reached
the bottom. More anxiously than ever they tried to pierce through the
gloom, but that gloom was impenetrable. Their companion delayed long.
They began to feel uneasy.

At length they heard sounds, and knew that he was ascending. With what
intelligence? What had he found in that awful abyss? This was the
question which was suggested to every heart, but a question which no one
could answer They lent their assistance, and pulled at the rope to help
their companion. Nearer and nearer he came, and still nearer, until at
last he was within reach. A few moments more and he emerged from the
mouth of the well, and falling forward, he lay for a moment motionless.

They all rushed to his assistance, but he shook them off and rose to his
feet.

"Did you find any thing?"

"Yes," said the man, in a hollow voice.

"What?" cried all, in breathless suspense.

"You shall see. Bring lights here, somebody. It's getting too dark for
this business."

Hugo was at once dispatched to the Hall by Mrs. Dunbar for lights. There
was by this time every necessity for them. Much time had been taken up
with their preparations, and the shadows of evening had already gathered
about them. While Hugo was gone they all questioned their companion,
but he refused to say any thing.

"Don't ask me," he replied. "Wait and see for yourselves."

At this answer there was but one conviction in the minds of all, which
was that the object of their search had been found. But there was now
no further delay. Hugo soon returned with a lantern, and the man
prepared to descend once more. The lantern he hung about his neck, and
taking another piece of rope with him, the end of which was left with
those above, he again went down. This time he was gone longer than
before. Those above peering through the gloom could see a faint light
far below, and the shadowy outline of their companion.

At length he began to ascent, and in due time reached the top.

"There," said he; "you may pull on that line. I have fastened it so
that it'll hold."

Saying this, he flung himself exhausted on the grass, and unslung the
lantern and unbound the rope.

The others pulled. There was a heavy weight at the end of the rope.
They could all conjecture well what that dead-weight might be. But the
fierce curiosity that now animated them stimulated them to put forth all
their strength in a series of vigorous pulls. Nearer and nearer came
that weight to the top. At last it hung just beneath them. Half a
dozen hands were stretched out, and in an instant it was jerked out and
lay upon the grass.

The sheriff seized the lantern and held it up. The scene was one of
horror. All around was the gloom of night, the shadowy outline of trees
and of the out-houses. A flickering light revealed a group of men
surrounding some object on the grass, upon which they gazed in silent
awe.

It was a shapeless, sodden mass, but the human outline was preserved,
and the clothes were there, recognizable. It was a grisly, a hideous
sight, and it held them all spellbound.

But suddenly the silence was broken. A wild shriek burst forth from
Mrs. Dunbar, who the next instant fell forward upon the hideous object.
Hugo seized her and raised her up. She was senseless.

"What is this?" cried the stern voice of Wiggins, who at that moment had
come to the place.

"Mrs. Dunbar has fainted," said the sheriff; and then he pointed
silently to the Thing that lay in the midst of the circle of spectators.

Wiggins looked at it, and seemed turned to stone. Then a shudder passed
through him. Then he turned away.

As he walked he staggered like one who has received some terrible blow,
and staggering on in his way, he passed out of sight into the gloom.
After this Mrs. Dunbar was carried into the house by Hugo.

There was silence for a long time.

"The head is gone!" said the sheriff at
length, in a low voice.

"Yes," said another; "it's been long in the water."

"Water couldn't do it," said the sheriff; "it was gone before it went
into the water."

"What was that for?"

"To prevent identification," said the sheriff, in a significant tone.

The remains were in due time conveyed to an appropriate place, together
with the rope and the dagger. On the following day a search was made
for the missing head. The well was pumped dry, a task in which there
was little difficulty, as there was little more than two feet of water
in it, but nothing of the kind was found. Then they dragged the pond,
but without result. The search was also continued elsewhere, but it was
equally unsuccessful.

It was then concluded that the murderer had removed the head of his
victim to prevent identification, and had buried it somewhere, but that
the traces of burial had been obliterated by the lapse of time. The only
wonder was that the clothes should have been allowed to remain by one
who had been so much on his guard as to decapitate his victim.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXIX.


THE CORONER'S INQUEST.

The remains were deposited in a proper place, and a coroner's inquest
was held at once, at which the usual examination of witnesses was
conducted.

Wiggins was examined first. He showed great constraint. He had not much
to say, however, about the disappearance of Captain Dudleigh, for he had
been absent at that time, and he could only state what took place after
his return. But in the course of these inquiries much was extorted from
him relative to Edith's position at Dalton Hall, her marriage, and the
terms on which she had been living with her husband. His answers were
given with extreme hesitation and marked reluctance, and it was only by
the utmost persistence that they were wrung from him.

The porter was examined, and in the course of the inquiry that scene at
the gates when Edith tried to escape was revealed.

Hugo was examined. It was found out that he had overheard the
conversation between Edith and Captain Dudleigh at their last interview.
Hugo's answers were given with as much reluctance as those of Wiggins,
but he was not able to evade the questions, and all that he knew was
drawn from him. But Hugo's remembrance of words was not very accurate,
and he could not give any detailed report of the conversation which he
had overheard. Several things, however, had been impressed upon his
memory. One was the occasion when Edith drew a dagger upon Captain
Dudleigh, and left the room with it in her hand; another was when, in
her last interview with him, she menaced his life, and threatened to
have his "_heart's blood_." So it was that Hugo had understood
Edith's words.

Mrs. Dunbar was examined, and gave her testimony with less hesitation.
She was deathly pale, and weak and miserable. She spoke with difficulty,
but was eager to bear witness to the noble character of Captain
Dudleigh. She certainly showed nothing like hate toward Edith, but at
the same time showed no hesitation to tell all about her. She told
about Captain Dudleigh's first visits, and about the visits of his
friend, who had assumed his name, or had the same name. She told how
Edith had been warned, and how she scorned the warning. From her was
elicited the story of Edith's return after her marriage, her illness,
recovery, and desperate moods, in which she seemed transformed, as Mrs.
Dunbar expressed it, to a "fury." The account of her discovery of the
flight of Edith and the captain was given with much emotion, but with
simple truth.

Mr. Munn was also examined about the marriage. He had not yet recovered
from the agitation into which he had been thrown during his interview
with Wiggins, but seemed in a state of chronic fright.

After these witnesses one other yet remained. It was one whose
connection with these events was the closest of all--one upon whom that
jury already looked as guilty of a terrible crime--as the one who had
inflicted with her own hand that death whose cause they were
investigating.

There was no doubt now in any mind. The remains had been identified by
all the witnesses. The head had been removed, and had not been found,
but the clothes were known to all. By these they judged the remains to
be the body of Captain Dudleigh. Wiggins alone hesitated--but it was
only hesitation; it was not denial.

When Edith was summoned before the coroner's jury, it was the very first
intelligence that she had received of an event in which she was so
deeply concerned. The landlady had heard all about the search and its
results; but true to her determination to spare Edith all trouble, she
had not allowed any news of these proceedings to be communicated to her.
When the official appeared with his abrupt summons to attend, the shock
was terrible, but there was nothing left except submission. A few brief
answers to her hurried and agitated questions put her in possession of
the chief facts of the case. On her way to the place she said not a
word. The landlady went with her to take care of her, but Edith did not
take any notice of her.

As she entered the room where the examination was going on, the scene
that presented itself was one which might well have appalled a stouter
heart than that of Edith, and which, coming as it did after the shock of
this sudden surprise, and in the train of all that she had already
suffered, gave to her a sharp pang of intolerable anguish, and filled
her soul with horror unspeakable.

[Illustration: "WITH A LOUD CRY, SHE HALF TURNED."]

The rope-ladder lay there with its hook, with which she had effected her
escape, and beside these was the dagger which more than once she had
interposed between herself and her fierce aggressor; but it was not
these that she saw; something else was there which fixed and enchained
her gaze, which held her with a terrible fascination. A sheet was
thrown over it, but the outlines of that which lay beneath indicated a
human form, and the information which Edith had already received made
her well aware whose that form was supposed to be. But she said nothing;
she stood rigid, horror-stricken, overwhelmed, and looked at it with
staring eyes and white lips.

The coroner made some remarks, consisting of the usual formulas,
something like an apology for the examination, a hint that it might
possibly affect herself, and a warning that she should be very careful
not to say any thing that might inculpate herself.

To all this Edith paid no attention. She did not appear to have heard
it. She stood, as the coroner spoke, in the same attitude as before,
with her eyes set in the same rigid stare. As the coroner ceased, he
stepped forward and drew away the sheet.

There it lay at last--unveiled, revealed to her eyes--the abhorrent
Thing, whose faint outline had chilled her very soul, its aspect
hideous, frightful, unendurable! As the sheet fell away, and all was
revealed before her, she could restrain herself no longer; the strain
was too great; with a loud cry, she half turned and tried to run. The
next instant the landlady caught her as she was falling senseless to the
floor.

The examination of Mrs. Dudleigh was postponed. On the whole, however,
it was afterward considered unnecessary. Enough had been gathered from
the other witnesses to enable the jury to come to a conclusion. It was
felt, also, that Mrs. Dudleigh ought to have a chance; though they
believed her guilty, they felt sorry for her, and did not wish her to
criminate herself by any rash words. The result was that they brought in
a verdict of murder against Mrs. Leon Dudleigh.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XL.


"Where does the fish stand up in the flood?

And where is the bird that's redder than blood?
Where do they mingle the best, best, wine?
And where with his knights does Vidrik dine?" Look out, look out, Svend
Vonved.

There sat the herd, he sat in thought; To ne'er a question he answer'd
aught.

Svend gave him a stroke, a stroke so sore, That his lung and his liver
came out before.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

On, on went he, till more sheep he spied; The herd sat, too, by a deep
pit's side.
"Now tell me, Herd, and tell me fair, Whose are the sheep thou art
tending there?" Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"See yonder house, with turret and tower, There feasting serves to beguile
the hour; There dwells a man, Tygge Nold by name, With his twelve
fair sons, who are knights of fame." Look out, look out, Svend
Vonved.

"Enough, Sir Herd; now lend an ear-- Go, tell Tygge Nold to come out
here." From his breast Svend Vonved a gold ring drew; At the foot of the
herd the gold ring he threw.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

And as Svend Vonved approach'd the spot, His booty among them they 'gan
to allot.
Some would have his polish'd glaive, Others, his harness, or courser
brave.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved stops, in reflection deep; He thought it best he his horse
should keep:

His hauberk and faulchion he will not lose, Much rather to fight the youth
will choose.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Had'st thou twelve sons to the twelve thou hast, And cam'st in the
midst of them charging me fast, Sooner should'st thou wring water
from steel, Than thou in such fashion with me should'st deal.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

He prick'd with his spur his courser tall, Which sprang, at once,
over the gate and wall.
Tygge Nold there he has stretch'd in blood, And his twelve sons
too, that beside him stood.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Then turn'd he his steed, in haste, about,-- Svend Vonved, the
knight, so youthful and stout; Forward he went o'er mountain
and moor, No mortal he met, which vex'd him sore.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

He came, at length, to another flock, Where a herd sat combing his yellow
lock:
"Now listen, Herd, with the fleecy care; Listen, and give me answers
fair." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"What is rounder than a wheel?
Where do they eat the holiest meal?
Where does the sun go down to his seat?
And where do they lay the dead man's feet?" Look out, look out, Svend
Vonved.

"What fills the valleys one and all?
What is cloth'd best in the monarch's hall?
What cries more loud than cranes can cry?
And what can in whiteness the swan outvie?
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Who on his back his beard does wear?
Who 'neath his chin his nose does bear?
What's more black than the blackest sloe?

And what is swifter than a roe?
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Where is the bridge that is most broad?
What is, by man, the most abhorr'd?
Where leads, where leads, the highest road up?
And say, where the hottest of drink they sup." Look out, look out,
Svend Vonved.

"The sun is rounder than a wheel.

They eat at the altar the holiest meal.

The sun in the West goes down to his seat:

And they lay to the East the dead man's feet.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Snow fills the valleys, one and all.
Man is cloth'd best in the monarch's hall.
Thunder cries louder than cranes can cry.
Angels in whiteness the swan outvie.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"His beard on his back the lapwing wears.
His nose 'neath his chin the elfin bears. {f:14} More black is sin
than the blackest sloe:
And thought is swifter than any roe.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Ice is, of bridges, the bridge most broad.
The toad is, of all things, the most abhorr'd.
To paradise leads the highest road up:

And in hell the hottest of drink they sup." Look out, look out, Svend
Vonved.

"Now hast thou given me answers fair, To each and all of my questions
rare; And now, I pray thee, be my guide, To the nearest spot where
warriors bide." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"To Sonderborg I'll show thee straight, Where drink the heroes early
and late:
There thou wilt find of knights a crew, Haughty of heart, and hard
to subdue."

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

With a bright gold ring was his arm array'd, Full fifteen pounds
that gold ring weigh'd, That has he given the herd, for a meed, Because
he will show him the knights with speed.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved enter'd the castle yard; There Randulph, wrapt in his
skins, {f:15} kept guard:
"Ho! Caitiff, ho! with shield and brand, What art thou doing in this
my land?" Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"I will, I will, with my single hand, Take from thee, Knave, the whole of
thy land:

I will, I will, with my single toe, Lay thee and each of thy castles
low." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Thou shalt not, with thy single hand, Take from me, Hound, an inch
of my land; And far, far less, shalt thou, with thy toe, Lay me or
one of my castles low.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Thou shalt not e'er, with finger of thine, Strike asunder one limb
of mine; {f:16} I am for thee too woxen and stark, As thou, to thy
cost, shalt quickly mark."

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved unsheath'd his faulchion bright, With haughty Randulph he
fain will fight; Randulph he there has slain in his might, And Strandulph
too, with full good right.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

The rest against him came out pell-mell, Then slew he Carl Ege, the
fierce and fell:-- He slew the great, he slew the small; He slew
till his foes were slaughter'd all.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved binds his sword to his side, It lists him farther to ride,
to ride; He found upon the desolate wold A burly {f:17} knight, of
aspect bold.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Now tell me, Rider, noble and good, Where does the fish stand up in the
flood?
Where do they mingle the best, best wine?
And where with his knights does Vidrik dine?"

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"The fish in the East stands up in the flood.
They drink in the North the wine so good.
In Halland's hall does Vidrik dine, With his swains around, and his warriors
fine." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

From his breast Svend Vonved a gold ring drew; At the foot of the knight
the gold ring he threw:

"Go! say thou wert the very last man Who gold from the hand of Svend
Vonved wan." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved came where the castle rose; He bade the watchmen the gate
unclose:

As none of the watchmen obey'd his cry, He sprang at once over the
ramparts high.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

He tied his steed to a ring in the wall, Then in he went to the
wide stone hall; Down he sat at the head of the board, To no one present
he utter'd a word.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

He drank and he ate, he ate and he drank, He ask'd no leave, and
return'd no thank; "Ne'er have I been on Christian ground Where so
many curst tongues were clanging round." Look out, look out, Svend
Vonved.

King Vidrik spoke to good knights three:
"Go, bind that lowering swain for me; Should ye not bind the stranger
guest, Ye will not serve me as ye can best."

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Should'st thou send three, and twenty times three, And come thyself to
lay hold of me; The son of a dog thou wilt still remain, And yet
to bind me have tried in vain.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Esmer, my father, who lies on his bier, And proud Adeline, my mother
so dear, Oft and strictly have caution'd me To waste no breath upon
hounds like thee." Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"And was King Esmer thy father's name, And Adeline that of his virtuous
Dame?
Thou art Svend Vonved, the stripling wild, My own dear sister's only
child.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Svend Vonved, wilt thou bide with me here?
Honour awaits thee, and costly cheer; Whenever it lists thee abroad to
wend, Upon thee shall knights and swains attend.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

"Silver and gold thou never shalt lack, Or helm to thy head, or mail to
thy back;" But to this and the like he would lend no ear, And home to
his mother he now will steer.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Svend Vonved gallop'd along the way; To fancies dark was his mind a
prey:

Riding he enter'd the castle yard Where stood twelve witches wrinkled
and scarr'd:
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

There stood they all, with spindle and rok, {f:18}-- Each over the shinbone
gave him a knock:
Svend turn'd his steed, in fury, round; The witches he there has hew'd
to the ground.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

He hew'd the witches limb from limb, So little mercy they got from him;
His mother came out, and was serv'd the same, Into fifteen pieces he
hackt her frame.
Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

Then in he went to his lonely bower, There drank he the wine, the wine
of power:
His much-lov'd harp he play'd upon Till the strings were broken, every
one.

Look out, look out, Svend Vonved.

THE TOURNAMENT.
FROM THE OLD DANISH.

This is one of those Ballads which, from the days of Arild, have been much
sung in Denmark: we find in it the names and bearings of most of
those renowned heroes, who are mentioned separately in other poems.

It divides itself into two parts;--the first, which treats of the
warrior's bearings, has a great resemblance to the 178th chapter
of the Vilkina Saga, as likewise has the last part, wherein the
Duel is described, to the 180th and 181st chapters of the same.

I cannot here forbear quoting and translating what Anders Sorensen Vedel,
the good old Editor of the first Edition of the Kiaempe Viser, which
appeared in 1591, says concerning the apparently superhuman
performances of the heroes therein celebrated.

"Hvad ellers Kiaempernes Storlemhed Styrke og anden Vilkaar berorer,
som overgaaer de Menneskers der nu leve deres Vaext og Kraft, det
Stykke kan ikke her noksom nu forhandles, men skal i den Danske
Kronikes tredie Bog videligere omtales.

Thi det jo i Sandhed befindes og bevises af adskillige Documenter og
Kundskab, at disse gamle Hellede, som de kaldes, have levet fast
laenger, og vaeret mandeligere storre staerkere og hoiere end den gemene
Mand er, som nu lever paa denne Dag."
"That part which relates to these Warriors' size, strength, or other
qualities, so far surpassing the stature and powers of the men who
now exist, cannot be here sufficiently treated upon, but shall be
further discussed in the third Book of the Danish Chronicles: for,
in truth, it is discovered and proved from various documents and
sources, that these old heroes, as they are called, lived much
longer, and were manlier, stouter, stronger, and taller, than man
at the present day."

Six score there were, six score and ten, From Hald that rode that day;
And when they came to Brattingsborg They pitch'd their pavilion
gay.

King Nilaus stood on the turret's top, Had all around in sight:
"Why hold those heroes their lives so cheap, That it lists them here to
fight?

"Now, hear me, Sivard Snaresvend; Far hast thou rov'd, and wide, Those
warriors' weapons thou shalt prove, To their tent thou must straightway
ride."
It was Sivard Snaresvend, To the broad tent speeded he then:
"I greet ye fair, in my master's name, All, all, ye Dane king's men.

"Now, be not wroth that here I come; I come as a warrior, free:
The battle together we soon will prove; Let me your bearings see."
There stands upon the first good shield A lion, so fierce and stark, With
a crown on his head, of the ruddy gold, That is King Diderik's
mark.

There shine upon the second shield A hammer and pincers bright; Them
carries Vidrik Verlandson, Ne'er gives he quarter in fight.

There shines upon the third good shield A falcon, blazing with gold;
And that by Helled Hogan is borne; No knight, than he, more bold.

There shines upon the fourth good shield An eagle, and that is red; Is
borne by none but Olger, the Dane; He strikes his foemen dead.

There shines upon the fifth good shield A couchant hawk, on a wall;
That's borne by Master Hildebrand; He tries, with heroes, a fall.

And now comes forth the sixth good shield A linden is thereupon;
And that by young Sir Humble is borne, King Abelon's eldest son.

There shines upon the seventh good shield A spur, of a fashion so free;
And that is borne by Hogan, the less, Because he will foremost be.

There shines upon the eighth good shield A gray wolf, meagre and
gaunt; Is borne by youthful Ulf van Jern; Beware how him you taunt!

There shine upon the ninth good shield Three arrows, and white are they;
Are borne by Vidrik Stageson, And trust that gallant you may.

There shines upon the tenth good shield A fiddle, and 'neath it a
bow; That's borne by Folker Spillemand; For drink he will sleep
forego.

There shines upon the eleventh shield A dragon that looks so dire;
Is carried by Orm, the youthful swain; He trembles at no man's ire.

And, now, behold the twelfth good shield, And upon it a burning brand;
Is borne by stout Sir Vifferlin Through many a prince's land.

There stands upon the thirteenth shield A sprig of the mournful yew;
That's borne by Harrald Griskeson; And he's a comrade true.

There stand upon the fourteenth
shield A cloak, and a mighty staff; And them bore Alsing, the
stalwart monk, When he beat his foes to chaff.

And now comes forth the fifteenth shield, And upon it three naked blades
Are borne by good King Esmer's sons, In their wars and furious
raids.

There stands upon the sixteenth shield, With coal-black pinion, a crow;
That's borne by rich Count Raadengaard; The dark Runes well can
he throw.

{f:19}

There shines upon the seventeenth shield A horse, so stately and
high, Is borne by Count Sir Guncelin; "Slay! slay! bide not," is his
cry.

There shine upon the eighteenth shield A man, and a fierce wild boar, Are
borne by the Count of Lidebierg; His blows fall heavy and sore.

There shines upon the nineteenth shield A hound, at the stretch of
his speed; Is borne by Oisten Kiaempe, bold; He risks his neck
without heed.
There shines upon the twentieth shield, Among branches, a rose, so
gay; Wherever Sir Nordman comes in war, He bears bright honour
away.
There shines on the one-and-twentieth shield A vase, and of copper
't is made; That's borne by Mogan Sir Olgerson; He wins broad lands
with his blade.
And now comes forth the next good shield, With a sun dispelling the
mirk; And that by Asbiorn Milde is borne; He sets the knights' backs
at work. {f:20}
There shines on the three-and-twentieth shield An arm, in a manacle
bound; And that by Alvor Sir Lange is borne, To the heroes he hands
mead round.
Now comes the four-and-twentieth shield, And a bright sword there
you see; And that by Humble Sir Jerfing is borne; Full worthy of
that is he.
There shines upon the next good shield A goss-hawk, striking his
game; That's borne by a knight, the best of all-- Sir Iver Blaa is
his name.
Now comes the six-and-twentieth shield, A jav'lin there you spy;
Is borne by little Mimring Tan; From no one will he fly.
Such knights and bearings as were there, And who can them all relate;
It was Sivard, the Snaresvend; No longer he deign'd to wait.
"If there be one of the Dane king's men, Who at Dyst {f:21} is
willing to ride, Let him, I pray, without pause or delay, Meet me
by the wild wood's side.
"The man among you, ye Danish court men, Who at Dyst has won most
meeds; Him I am ready to fight, this day, For both of our noble
steeds."
The heroes cast the die on the board; The die it roll'd so wide:
"Since, young Sir Humble, it stops by thee, 'Gainst Sivard thou
must ride."
Sir Humble struck his hand on the board; No longer he lists to
play:
I tell you, forsooth, that the rosy hue From his cheek fast faded
away.
"Now, hear me, Vidrik Verlandson; Thou art so free a man; Do lend
me Skimming, thy horse, this day; I'll pledge for him what I
can:
"Eight good castles, in Birting's land, As pledges for him I'll
set; My sister too, the lily-cheek'd maid, A fairer thou ne'er hast
met:
"Eight good castles, and eight good knights; I'd scorn to offer
thee less:
If Skimming should meet any hurt this day, My sister thou shalt
caress."
"If yonder mountains all were gold, And yonder streams were wine;
The whole for Skimming I would not take; I bless God he is
mine.
"Sivard is a purblind swain; Sees not to his faulchion's end:
If Skimming were hurt thou couldst not pay me With the help of thy
every friend.
"The sword it whirls in Sivard's hand, As whirl the sails of the
mill; If thou take Skimming 'gainst that wild fool, 'T is sorely
against my will."
Humble, he sat him on Skimming's back, So gallantly can he ride;
But Skimming thought it passing strange That a spur was clapt to
his side.
The first course that together they rode, So strong were the knightly
two, Asunder went Humble's saddle-ring, And a furlong his good
shield flew.
"Methinks thou art a fair young swain, And well thy horse canst
ride; Dismount thee, straight, and gird up thy steed; I am willing
for thee to bide."
The second course that together they rode Was worthy of knights
renown'd; Then both their saddles burst in two, And Humble was sent
to the ground.
"Now have I cast thee from thy steed, Thy courser by right is mine;
But, tell me, youthful and gallant swain, Who art thou, and of what
line?
"Now have I won from thee the prize, And Skimming belongs to me;
But, tell me, youthful and gallant swain, What parents gave birth
to thee?"
"Abelon is my father's name; He sits upon Birting's throne:
Queen Ellina my mother is, And that for truth is known.
"Queen Ellina my mother is-- A Queen whom all admire; Good King
Abelon Haardestaal, So call they my hoary sire.
"And who am I, but Humble, the young, A knight of Birting's land;
Of hero race, whose fame extends To the wide earth's farthest
strand."
"If Abelon be thy father's name, The courser I straight restore;
Thou art, I find, my very good friend; I knew thee not, youth,
before.
"If Queen Ellina thy mother is, Then Skimming thou hast rewon; Thou
art, indeed, my very good friend; Thou art my sister's son.
"Take both the shield ropes, take them straight, And bind me to yon
oak tree; Then hie thee back to King Diderik, And say thou hast
conquer'd me."
In came Humble, the youthful knight, Was clad in a kirtle, green;
"O! I have got my courser again, And have bound the warrior keen."

In came Humble, with boot and spur, He cast on the table his
sword:
"Sivard stands in the green wood bound, He speaks not a single
word.
"O, I have been to the wild forest, And have seiz'd the warrior
stark; Sivard there was taken by me, And tied to the oak's rough
bark."
"Now hear me, young Sir Humble, the knight, 'T is plain a jest is
meant, Whenever Sivard was bound by thee, 'T was done with his own
consent." 
It was Vidrik Verlandson, And he would fain know all.
"O, I will ride to the wood, and see How Sivard endures his thrall."Thus far you have known me only as a speaker
of lies; but remember, I pray you, what my position was. I was playing a
part--as Mrs. Mowbray--as Lieutenant Dudleigh--as Barber the lawyer--"

"Barber!" exclaimed Edith. "What! Barber too?"

"Yes," said Miss Fortescue, sadly; "all those parts were mine. It was
easy to play them before one so honest and so unsuspecting; but oh, Miss
Dalton, believe me, it is in playing a part only that I have deceived
you. Now, when I no longer play a part, but come to you in my own
person, I will be true. I will devote myself to the work of saving you
from this terrible position in which I have done so much to place you."

Edith made no reply, and soon after Miss Fortescue departed, leaving her
to her own reflections.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLI.


A REVELATION.

If any thing could have added to the misery of Edith and her general
despondency, it would have been the revelations of Miss Fortescue. It
had certainly been bad enough to recall the treachery of a false friend;
but the facts as just revealed went far beyond what she had imagined.
They revealed such a long course of persistent deceit, and showed that
she had been subject to such manifold, long-sustained, and comprehensive
lying, that she began to lose faith in human nature. Whom now could she
believe? Could she venture to put confidence in this confession of Miss
Fortescue? Was that her real name, and was this her real story, or was
it all some new piece of acting, contrived by this all-accomplished
actor for the sake of dragging her down to deeper abysses of woe? She
felt herself to be surrounded by remorseless enemies, all of whom were
plotting against her, and in whose hearts there was no possibility of
pity or remorse. Wiggins, the archenemy, was acting a part which was
mysterious just now, but which nevertheless, she felt sure, was aimed at
her very life. Mrs. Dunbar, she knew, was more open in the manifestation
of her feelings, for she had taken up the cause of the murdered man with
a warmth and vindictive zeal that showed Edith plainly what she might
expect from her. Her only friend, Miss Plympton, was still lost to her;
and her illness seemed probable, since, if it were not so, she would not
keep aloof from her at such a moment as this. Hopeless as she had been
of late, she now found that there were depths of despair below those in
which she had thus far been--"in the lowest deep, a lower deep."

[Illustration: "HE SAW HER HEAD FALL"]

Such were her thoughts and feelings through the remainder of that day
and through the following night. But little sleep came to her. The
future stood before her without one ray of light to shine through its
appalling gloom. On the next day her despair seemed even greater; her
faculties seemed benumbed, and a dull apathy began to settle down over
her soul.

From this state of mind she was roused by the opening of the door and
the entrance of a visitor. Turning round, she saw Wiggins.

This was the first time that she had seen him since she left Dalton
Hall, and in spite of that stolid and apathetic indifference which had
come to her, she could not help being struck by the change which had
come over him. His face seemed whiter, his hair grayer, his form more
bent; his footsteps were feeble and uncertain; he leaned heavily upon
his walking-stick; and in the glance that he turned toward her there was
untold sympathy and compassion, together with a timid supplication that
was unlike any thing which she had seen in him before.

Edith neither said any thing nor did any thing. She looked at him with
dull indifference. She did not move. The thought came to her that this
was merely another move in that great game of treachery and fraud to
which she had been a victim; that here was the archtraitor, the
instigator of all the lesser movements, who was coming to her in order
to carry out some necessary part.

Wiggins sat down wearily upon one of the rude chairs of the scantily
furnished room, and after a brief silence, looking at her sadly, began.

"I know," said he, "how yon misunderstand me, and how unwelcome I must
be; but I had to come, so as to assure you that I hope to find this man
who is missing. I--I hope to do so before the--the trial. I have been
searching all along, but without success--thus far. I wish to assure you
that I have found out a way by which you--will be saved. And if you
believe me, I trust that you will--try--to--cherish more hope than you
appear to be doing."

He paused.

Edith said nothing at all. She was silent partly out of apathy, and
partly from a determination to give him no satisfaction, for she felt
that any words of hers, no matter how simple, might be distorted and
used against her.

Wiggins looked at her with imploring earnestness, and seemed to wait for
her to say something. But finding her silent, he went on:

"Will yon let me ask you one question? and forgive me for asking it;
but it is of some importance to--to me--and to you. It is this:
Did--did you see him at all--that night?"

"I have been warned," replied Edith, in a dull, cold tone, "to say
nothing, and I intend to say nothing."

Wiggins sighed.

"To say nothing," said he, "is not always wise. I once knew a man who
was charged with terrible crimes--crimes of which he was incapable. He
was innocent, utterly. Not only innocent, indeed, but he had fallen
under this suspicion, and had become the object of this charge, simply
on account of his active efforts to save a guilty friend from ruin. His
friend was the guilty one, and his friend was also his sister's husband;
and this man had gone to try and save his friend, when he himself was
arrested for that friend's crimes."

Wiggins did not look at Edith; his eyes were downcast. He spoke in a
tone that seemed more like a soliloquy than any thing else. It was a
tone, however, which, though low, was yet tremulous with ill-suppressed
agitation.

"He was accused," continued Wiggins, "and if he had spoken and told what
he knew, he might have saved his life. But if he had done this he would
have had to become a witness, and stood up in court and say that which
would ruin his friend. And so he could not speak. His lips were sealed.
To speak would have been to inform against his friend. How could he do
that? It was impossible. Yet some may think--you may think--that this
man did wrong in allowing himself to be put in this false position. You
may say that he had more than himself to consider--he had his family,
his name, his--his wife, his child!

"Yes," resumed Wiggins, after a long pause, "this is all true, and he
did consider them, all--all--all! He did not trifle with his family name
and honor, but it was rather on account of the pride which he took in
these that he kept his silence. He was conscious of his perfect
innocence. He could not think it possible that such charges could be
carried out against one like himself. He believed implicitly in the
justice of the courts of his country. He thought that in a fair trial
the innocent could not possibly be proclaimed guilty. More than all, he
thought that his proud name, his stainless character, and even his
wealth and position, would have shown the world that the charges were
simply impossible. He thought that all men would have seen that for him
to have done such things would involve insanity."

As Wiggins said this his voice grew more earnest and animated. He looked
at Edith with his solemn eyes, and seemed as though he was pleading with
her the cause of his friend--as though he was trying to show her how it
had happened that the father had dishonored the name which the child
must bear--as though he was justifying to the daughter, Edith Dalton,
the acts of the father, Frederick Dalton.

"So he bore it all with perfect calmness," continued Wiggins, "and had
no doubt that he would be acquitted, and thought that thus he would at
least be able, without much suffering, to save his friend from ruin most
terrific--from the condemnation of the courts and the fate of a felon."

Wiggins paused once more for some time. He was looking at Edith. He had
expected some remark, but she had made none. In fact, she had regarded
all this as a new trick of Wiggins--a transparent one too--the aim of
which was to win her confidence by thus pretending to vindicate her
father. He had already tried to work on her in that way, and had failed;
and on this occasion he met with the same failure.

"There is no occasion for you to be silent, I think," said Wiggins,
turning from the subject to the situation of Edith. "You have no friend
at stake; you will endanger no one, and save yourself, by telling
whether you are innocent or not."

These last words roused Edith. It was an allusion to her possible guilt.
She determined to bring the interview to a close. She was tired of this
man and his attempts to deceive her. It was painful to see through all
this hypocrisy and perfidy at the very moment when they were being used
against herself.

She looked at him with a stony gaze, and spoke in low, cold tones as she
addressed him. "This is all useless. I am on my guard. Why you come here
I do not know. Of course you wish to entrap me into saying something,
so that you may use my words against me at the trial. You ask me if I
saw this man on that night. You ask me if I am innocent. You well know
that I am innocent. You, and you only, know who saw him last on that
night; for as I believe in my own existence, so I believe, and affirm to
your face, that this Leon Dudleigh was murdered by you, and you only!"

He looked at her fixedly as she said this, returning her stony gaze with
a mournful look--a pitying look, full of infinite sadness and
tenderness. He raised his hand deprecatingly, but said nothing until she
had uttered those last words.

"Stop!" he said, in a low voice--"stay! I can not bear it."

He rose from his seat and came close to her. He leaned upon his stick
heavily, and looked at her with eyes full of that same strange,
inexplicable tenderness and compassion. Her eyes seemed fascinated by
his, and in her mind there arose a strange bewilderment, an expectation
of something she knew not what.

"Edith," said he, in a sweet and gentle voice, full of tender
melancholy--"Edith, it would be sin in me to let you any longer heap up
matter for future remorse; and even though I go against the bright hope
of my life in saying this now, yet I must. Edith--"

He paused, looking at her, while she regarded him with awful eyes.

"Edith!" he said again--"my--my--child!"

There were tears in his eyes now, and there was on his face a look of
unutterable love and unspeakable pity and forgiveness. He reached out
his hand and placed it tenderly upon her head.

"Edith," he said again, "my child, you will never say these things
again. I--I do not deserve them. I--am your--your father, Edith!"

At these words a convulsive shudder passed through Edith. He felt her
frail form tremble, he saw her head fall, and heard a low sob that
seemed torn from her.

She needed no more words than these. In an instant she saw it all; and
though bewildered, she did not for a moment doubt his words. But her
whole being was overwhelmed by a sudden and a sharp agony of remorse;
for she had accustomed herself to hate this man, and the irrepressible
tokens of a father's love she had regarded as hypocrisy. She had never
failed to heap upon that reverend head the deepest scorn, contumely, and
insult. But a moment before she had hurled at him a terrible accusation.
At him! At whom? At the man whose mournful destiny it had been all along
to suffer for the sins of others; and she it was who had flung upon him
an additional burden of grief.

But with all her remorse there were other feelings--a shrinking sense of
terror, a recoil from this sudden discovery as from something abhorrent.
This her father! That father's face and form had been stamped in her
memory. For years, as she had lived in the hope of seeing him, she had
quickened her love for him and fed her hopes from his portrait. But how
different was this one! What a frightful change from the father that
lived in her memory! The one was a young man in the flush and pride of
life and strength--the other a woe-worn, grief-stricken sufferer, with
reverend head, bowed form, and trembling limbs. Besides, she had long
regarded him as dead; and to see this man was like looking on one who
had risen from the dead.

In an instant, however, all was plain, and together with the discovery
there came the pangs of remorse and terror and anguish. She could
understand all. He, the escaped convict, had come to England, and was
supposed to be dead. He had lived, under a false name, a life of
constant and vigilant terror. He kept his secret from all the world. Oh,
if he had only told her! Now the letter of Miss Plympton was all plain,
and she wondered how she had been so blind.

"Oh!" she moaned, in a scarce audible voice, "why did you not tell me?"

"Oh, Edith darling! my child! my only love!" murmured Frederick Dalton,
bending low over her, and infolding her trembling frame in his own
trembling arms; "my sweet daughter, if you could only have known how I
yearned over you! But I delayed to tell you. It was the one sweet hope
of my life to redeem my name from its foul stain, and then declare
myself. I wanted you to get your father back as he had left you, without
this abhorrent crime laid to his charge. I did wrong not to trust you.
It was a bitter, bitter error. But I had so set my heart on it. It was
all for your sake, Edith--all, darling, for your sake!"

Edith could bear no more. Every one of these words was a fresh stab to
her remorseful heart--every tone showed to her the depth of love that
lay in that father's heart, and revealed to her the suffering that she
must have caused. It was too much; and with a deep groan she sank away
from his arms upon the floor. She clasped his knees--she did not dare to
look up. She wished only to be a suppliant. He himself had prophesied
this. His terrible warnings sounded even now in her ears. She had only
one thought--to humble herself in the dust before that injured father.

Dalton tried to raise her up.

"My darling!" he cried, "my child! you must not--you will break my
heart!" "Oh," moaned Edith, "if it is not already broken, how can you
ever forgive me?--how can you call me your child?"

"My child! my child!" said Dalton. "It was for you that I lived. If it
had not been for the thought of you, I should have died long since. It
was for your sake that I came home. It is for you only that I live now.
There is nothing for me to forgive. Look up at me. Let me see your
darling face. Let me hear you say one word--only one word--the word that
I have hungered and thirsted to hear. Call me father."

"Father! oh, father! dear father!" burst forth Edith, clinging to him
with convulsive energy, and weeping bitterly.

"Oh, my darling!" said Dalton, "I was to blame. How could you have borne
what I expected you to bear, when I would not give you my confidence? Do
not let us speak of forgiveness. You loved your father all the time, and
you thought that I was his enemy and yours."

Gradually Edith became calmer, and her calmness was increased by the
discovery that her father was painfully weak and exhausted. He had been
overwhelmed by the emotions which this interview had called forth. He
now sat gazing at her with speechless love, holding her hands in his,
but his breath came and went rapidly, and there was a feverish
tremulousness in his voice and a flush on his pale cheeks which alarmed
her. She tried to lessen his agitation by talking about her own
prospects, but Dalton did not wish to.

"Not now, daughter," he said. "I will hear it all some other time. I am
too weary, Let me only look at your dear face, and hear you call me by
that sweet name, and feel my child's hands in mine. That will be bliss
enough for this day. Another time we will speak about the--the situation
that you are in."

As he was thus agitated, Edith was forced to refrain from asking him a
thousand things which she was longing to know. She wished to learn how
he had escaped, how he had made it to be believed that he was dead, and
whether he was in any present danger. But all this she had to postpone.
She had also to postpone her knowledge of that great secret--the secret
that had baffled her, and which he had preserved inviolable through all
these years. She now saw that her suspicions of the man "John Wiggins"
must have been unfounded, and indeed the personality of "Wiggins" became
a complete puzzle to her.

He bade her a tender adieu, promising to come early on the following
day.

But on the following day there were no signs of him. Edith waited in
terrible impatience, which finally deepened into alarm as his coming was
still delayed. She had known so much of sorrow that she had learned to
look for it, and began to expect some new calamity. Here, where she had
found her father, where she had received his forgiveness for that which
would never cease to cause remorse to herself, here, in this moment of
respite from despair, she saw the black prospect of renewed misery. It
was as though she had found him for a moment, only to lose him forever.

Toward evening a note was sent to her. She tore it open. It was from
Mrs. Dunbar, and informed her that her father was quite ill, and was
unable to visit her, but hoped that he might recover.

After that several days passed, and she heard nothing. At length another
note came informing her that her father had been dangerously ill, but
was now convalescent.

Other days passed, and Edith heard regularly. Her father was growing
steadily better. On one of these notes he had written his name with a
trembling hand.

And so amidst these fresh sorrows, and with her feelings ever
alternating between hope and despair, Edith lingered on through the time
that intervened until the day of the trial.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLII.


THE TRIAL.

At length the day for the trial arrived, and the place was crowded. At
the appearance of Edith there arose a murmur of universal sympathy and
pity. All the impressions which had been formed of her were falsified.
Some had expected to see a coarse masculine woman; others a crafty,
sinister face; others an awkward, ill-bred rustic, neglected since her
father's trial by designing guardians. Instead of this there appeared
before them a slender, graceful, youthful form, with high refinement and
perfect breeding in every outline and movement. The heavy masses of her
dark hair were folded across her brow, and wreathed in voluminous folds
behind. Her pallid face bore traces of many griefs through which she had
passed, and her large spiritual eyes had a piteous look as they wandered
for a moment over the crowd.

No one was prepared to see any thing like this, and all hearts were at
once touched. It seemed preposterous to suppose that one like her could
be otherwise than innocent.

The usual formulas took place, and the trial began. The witnesses were
those who had already been examined. It was rumored that Sir Lionel
Dudleigh was to be brought forward, and "Wiggins," and Mrs. Dunbar, but
not till the following day.

At the end of that day the opinion of the public was strongly in favor
of Edith; but still there was great uncertainty as to her guilt or
innocence. It was generally believed that she had been subject to too
much restraint, and in a foolish desire to escape had been induced to
marry Dudleigh. But she had found him a worse master than the other, and
had hated him from the first, so that they had many quarrels, in which
she had freely threatened his life. Finally both had disappeared on the
same night. He was dead; she survived.

The deceased could not have committed suicide, for the head was missing.
Had it not been for that missing head, the theory of suicide would have
been plausible.

The second day of the trial came. Edith had seen her father on the
previous evening, and had learned something from him which had produced
a beneficial effect, for there was less terror and dejection in her
face. This was the first time that she had seen him since his illness.

There was one in the hall that day who looked at her with an earnest
glance of scrutiny as he took his place among the witnesses.

It was Sir Lionel Dudleigh, who had come here to give what testimony he
could about his son. His face was as serene as usual; there was no
sadness upon it, such as might have been expected in the aspect of a
father so terribly bereaved; but the broad content and placid bonhomie
appeared to be invincible.

The proceedings of this day were begun by an announcement on the part of
the counsel for the defense, which fell like a thunder-clap upon the
court. Sir Lionel started, and all in the court involuntarily stretched
forward their heads as though to see better the approach of the
astonishing occurrence which had been announced.

The announcement was simply this, that any further proceedings were
useless, since the missing man himself had been found, and was to be
produced forthwith. There had been no murder, and the body that had been
found must be that of some person unknown.

Shortly after a group entered the hall. First came Frederick Dalton,
known to the court as "John Wiggins." He still bore traces of his recent
illness, and, indeed, was not fit to be out of his bed, but he had
dragged himself here to be present at this momentous scene. He was
terribly emaciated, and moved with difficulty, supported by Mrs.
Dunbar, who herself showed marks of suffering and exhaustion almost
equal to his.

But after these came another, upon whom all eyes were fastened, and even
Edith's gaze was drawn away from her father, to whom she had longed to
fly so as to sustain his dear form, and fixed upon this new-comer.

Dudleigh! The one whom she had known as Mowbray. Dudleigh!

Yes, there he stood.

Edith's eyes were fixed upon him in speechless amazement. It was
Dudleigh, and yet it seemed as though it could not be Dudleigh.

There was that form and there was that face which had haunted her for so
long a time, and had been associated with so many dark and terrible
memories--the form and the face which were so hateful, which never were
absent from her thoughts, and intruded even upon her dreams.

Yet upon that face there was now something which was not repulsive even
to her. It was a noble, spiritual face. Dudleigh's features were
remarkable for their faultless outline and symmetry, and now the
expression was in perfect keeping with the beauty of physical form, for
the old hardness had departed, and the deep stamp of sensuality and
selfishness was gone, and the sinister look which had once marred those
features could be traced there no more.

It was thinner than the face which Edith remembered, and it seemed to
her as if it had been worn down by some illness. If so, it must have
been the same cause which had imparted to those features the refinement
and high bearing which were now visible there. There was the same broad
brow covered with its clustering locks, the same penetrating eyes, the
same square, strong chin, the same firm, resolute month, but here it was
as though a finer touch had added a subtle grace to all these; for about
that mouth there lingered the traces of gentleness and kindliness, like
the remnant of sweet smiles; the glance of the eye was warmer and more
human; there was also an air of melancholy, and over all a grandeur of
bearing which spoke of high breeding and conscious dignity.

This man, with his earnest and even melancholy face and lofty bearing,
did not seem like one who could have plotted so treacherously against a
helpless girl. His aspect filled Edith with something akin to awe, and
produced a profound impression upon the spectators. They forgot the
hatred which they had begun to feel against Dudleigh in the living
presence of the object of their hate, and looked in silence first at
Edith, then at the new-comer, wondering why it was that between such as
these there could be any thing less than mutual affection. They thought
they could understand now why she should choose him as a husband. They
could not understand how such a husband could become hateful.

In all the court but one object seemed to attract Dudleigh, and that was
Edith. His eyes had wandered about at first, and finally had rested on
her. With a glance of profoundest and most gentle sympathy he looked at
her, conveying in that one look enough to disarm even her resentment.
She understood that look, and felt it, and as she looked at him in
return she was filled with wonder.

Could such things be? she thought. Was this the man who had caused her
so much suffering, who bad blasted and blighted the hopes of her life?
or, rather, had the man who had so wronged her been transformed to this?
Impossible! As well might a fiend become changed to an archangel. And
yet here he was. Evidently this was Dudleigh. She looked at him in
speechless bewilderment.

The proceedings of the court went on, and Dudleigh soon explained his
disappearance. As he spoke his voice confirmed the fact that he was
Dudleigh; but Edith listened to it with the same feelings which had been
excited by his face. It was the same voice, yet not the same; it was the
voice of Dudleigh, but the coldness and the mockery of its intonations
were not there. Could he have been playing a devil's part all along, and
was he now coming out in his true character, or was this a false part?
No; whatever else was false, this was not--that expression of face, that
glance of the eye, those intonations, could never be feigned. So Edith
thought as she listened.

Dudleigh's explanation was a simple one. He had not been very happy at
Dalton Hall and had concluded to go away that night for a tour on the
Continent. He had left so as to get the early morning train, and had
traveled on without stopping until he reached Palermo, from which he had
gone to different places in the interior of Sicily, which he mentioned.
He had climbed over the gate, because he was in too much of a hurry to
wake the porter. He had left his valise, as he intended to walk. He had,
of course, left his dog at Dalton, because he couldn't take him to the
Continent. He had forgotten his watch, for the reason that he had slept
longer than he intended, and dressed and went off in a great hurry. The
pocket-book which he left was of no importance--contained principally
memoranda, of no use to any but himself. He had no idea there would have
been such a row, or he would not have gone in such a hurry. He had heard
of this for the first time in Sicily, and would have come at once, but,
unfortunately, he had a attack of fever, and could not return before.

Nothing could have been more natural and frank than Dudleigh's
statement. A few questions were asked, merely to satisfy public
curiosity. Every one thought that a trip to Sicily was a natural enough
thing for one who was on such bad terms with his wife, and the
suddenness of his resolution to go there was sufficient to account for
the disorder in which he had left his room.

But all this time there was one in that court who looked upon the
new-comer with far different feelings that those which any other had.

This was Sir Lionel Dudleigh.

He had heard the remark of the counsel that Dudleigh had returned, and
looked toward the door as he entered with a smile on his face. As he saw
Dudleigh enter he started. Then his face turned ghastly white, and his
jaw fell. He clutched the railing in front of him with both hands, and
seemed fascinated by the sight.

Near him stood Mrs. Dunbar, and Dalton leaned on her. Both of these
looked fixedly at Sir Lionel, and noticed his emotion.

At the sound of Dudleigh's voice Sir Lionel's emotion increased. He
breathed heavily. His face turned purple. His knuckles turned white as
he grasped the railing. Suddenly, in the midst of Dudleigh's remarks, he
started to his feet, and seemed about to say something. Immediately in
front of him were Dalton and Mrs. Dunbar. At that instant, as he rose,
Mrs. Dunbar laid her hand on his arm.

He looked at her with astonishment. He had not seen her before. She
fixed her solemn eyes on him--those eyes to which had come a gloom more
profound, and a sadness deeper than before. But Sir Lionel stared at her
without recognition, and impatiently tried to shake off her hand.

"Who are you?" he said, suddenly, in a trembling voice--for there was
something in this woman's face that suggested startling thoughts.

Mrs. Dunbar drew nearer to him, and in a whisper that thrilled through
every fibre of Sir Lionel's frame, hissed in his ear,

"_I am your wife--and here is my brother Frederick!_"

Over Sir Lionel's face there came a flash of horror, sudden, sharp, and
overwhelming. He staggered and shrank back.

"Claudine!" he murmured, in a stifled voice.

"Sit down," whispered Lady Dudleigh--now no longer Mrs. Dunbar--"sit
down, or you shall have to change places with Frederick's daughter."

Sir Lionel swayed backward and forward, and appeared not to hear her.
And now his eyes wandered to Dalton, who stood gazing solemnly at him,
and then to Dudleigh, who was still speaking.

"Who is that?" he gasped.

"Your son!" said Lady Dudleigh.

[Illustration: "HE LOOKED AT HER WITH ASTONISHMENT."]

At this instant Dudleigh finished. Sir Lionel gave a terrible groan, and
flung up his arms wildly. The next instant he fell heavily forward, and
was caught in the arms of his wife. A crowd flew to his assistance, and
he was carried out of court, followed by Lady Dudleigh.

There was a murmur of universal sympathy.

"Poor Sir Lionel! He has been heartbroken, and the joy of his son's
safety is too much."

After this the proceedings soon came to an end.

Edith was free!

Dalton tried to get to her, but in his weakness sank upon a seat, and
looked imploringly at his daughter. Seeing this, Dudleigh sprang to his
assistance, and gave his arm. Leaning heavily upon this, Dalton walked
toward Edith, who was already striving to reach him, and, with a low
cry, caught her in his arms.

Sir Lionel had been taken to the inn, where Lady Dudleigh waited on him.
After some time he recovered his senses, and began to rally rapidly. It
had been feared that it was apoplexy, but, fortunately for the sufferer,
it turned out to be nothing so serious as that. After this Lady Dudleigh
was left alone with her husband.

Ten years of separation lay between these two--a separation undertaken
from causes that still existed to alienate them beyond the hope of
reconciliation. Yet there was much to be said; and Lady Dudleigh had
before her a dark and solemn purpose.

On the next day Sir Lionel was able to drive out. Lady Dudleigh seemed
to have constituted herself his guardian. Sir Lionel's face and
expression had changed. The easy, careless bonhomie, the placid content,
the serene joyousness, that had once characterized him, were gone. In
the place of these there came an anxious, watchful, troubled look--the
look of a mind ill at ease--the furtive glance, the clouded brow. It was
as though in this meeting Lady Dudleigh had communicated to her husband
a part of that expression which prevailed in her own face.

Sir Lionel seemed like a prisoner who is attended by an ever-vigilant
guard--one who watches all his movements, and from whom he can not
escape. As he rolled along in his carriage, the Black Care of the poet
seemed seated beside him in the person of Lady Dudleigh.

While Sir Lionel thus recovered from the sudden shock which he had felt,
there was another who had endured a longer and severer course of
suffering, and who had rallied for a moment when his presence was
required, but only to sink back into a relapse worse than the illness
from which he had begun to recover. This was Frederick Dalton, who had
crawled from his bed twice--once to his daughter's prison, and once to
the scene of her trial. But the exertion was too much, and the agitation
of feeling to which he had been subject had overwhelmed him. Leaning
heavily on Dudleigh, and also on Edith, he was taken by these two to his
carriage, and thence to the inn; but here he could walk no further. It
was Dudleigh who had to carry him to his room and lay him on his
bed--and Dudleigh, too, who would intrust to no other person the task of
putting his prostrate form in that bed. Dudleigh's own father was lying
in the same house, but at that moment, whatever were his motives, Dalton
seemed to have stronger claims on his filial duty, and Edith had to wait
till this unlooked-for nurse had tenderly placed her father in his bed.

The doctor, who had found Sir Lionel's case so trifling, shook his head
seriously over Frederick Dalton. Dudleigh took up his station in that
room, and cared for the patient like a son. The day passed, and the
night, and the next morning, but Dalton grew no better. It was a strange
stupor which affected him, not like paralysis, but arising rather from
exhaustion, or some affection of the brain. The doctor called it
congestion. He lay in a kind of doze, without sense and without
suffering, swallowing any food or medicine that might be offered, but
never noticing any thing, and never answering any questions. His eyes
were closed at all times, and in that stupor he seemed to be in a state
of living death.

Edith's grief was profound; but in the midst of it she could not help
feeling wonder at the unexpected part which Dudleigh was performing. Who
was he that he should take so large a part in the care of her father?
Yet so it was; and Dudleigh seemed to think of nothing and see nothing
but that old man's wasted and prostrate form.

For the present, at least, departure from the inn was of course out of
the question. Edith's position was a very distressing one. Every
feeling of her heart impelled her to be present at her father's bedside,
but Dudleigh was present at that same bedside; and how could she
associate herself with him even there? At first she would enter the
room, and sit quietly by her father's bedside, and on such occasions
Dudleigh would respectfully withdraw; but this was unpleasant, and she
hardly knew what to do.

Two or three days thus passed, and on the third Dudleigh requested an
interview, to ask her, as he said, something about "Mr. Wiggins"--for
this was the name by which Mr. Dalton still was called. This request
Edith could not refuse.

Dudleigh entered with an air of profound respect.

"Miss Dalton," said he, laying emphasis on that name, "nothing would
induce me to intrude upon you but my anxiety about your father. Deep as
your affection for him may be, it can hardly be greater than mine. I
would gladly lay down my life for him. At the same time, I understand
your feelings, and this is what I wish to speak about. I would give up
my place at his bedside altogether if you wished it, and you should not
be troubled by my presence; but I see that you are not strong enough to
be sole nurse, or to undertake the work that would be required of you,
and that your own affection for him would impose upon you. You yourself
are not strong, and you must take care of yourself for his sake. I will
not, therefore, give up to you all the care of your father, but I will
absent myself during the afternoon, and you will then have exclusive
care of him."

Edith bowed without a word, and Dudleigh withdrew.

This arrangement was kept up, and Edith scarcely saw Dudleigh at all.
She knew, however, that his care for her father was incessant and
uninterrupted. Every thing that could possibly be needed was supplied;
every luxury or delicacy that could be thought of was obtained; and not
only were London physicians constantly coming up, but from the notes
which lay around, she judged that Dudleigh kept up a constant
correspondence with them about this case.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XLIII.


SIR LIONEL AND HIS "KEEPER"

Sir Lionel, who had come to this place with the face that indicated a
mind at peace, thus found himself suddenly confronted by a grim phantom,
the aspect of which struck terror to his heart. That phantom was drawn
up from a past which he usually did not care to remember. Now, however,
he could not forget it. There was one by his side to remind him of it
always--one who had become his guard, his jailer--in fact, his keeper--a
word which signifies better than any other the attitude which was
assumed by Lady Dudleigh. For the feeling which Sir Lionel had toward
her was precisely like that which the lunatic has toward his keeper, the
feeling that this one is watching night and day, and never relaxes the
terrible stare of those vigilant eyes. There are those who on being thus
watched would grow mad; and Sir Lionel had this in addition to his other
terrors--this climax of them all, that upon him there was always the
maddening glare of his "keeper's" eyes. Terrible eyes were they to him,
most terrible--eyes which he dared not encounter. They were the eyes of
his wife--a woman most injured; and her gaze reminded him always of a
past full of horror. That gaze he could not encounter. He knew without
looking at it what it meant. He felt it on him. There were times when
it made his flesh crawl, nor could he venture to face it.

A few days of this reduced him to a state of abject misery. He began to
fear that he was really growing mad. In that case he would be a fit
subject for a "keeper." He longed with unutterable longing to throw off
this terrible restraint; but he could not and dared not. That woman,
that "keeper," wielded over him a power which he knew and felt, and
dared not defy. It was the power that arises from the knowledge of
secrets of life and death, and her knowledge placed his life in her
hands.

This woman was inflexible and inexorable. She had suffered so much that
she had no pity for his present sufferings. These seemed trivial to her.
She showed a grand, strong, self-sufficient nature, which made her his
superior, and put her above the reach of any influences that he might
bring. He could remember the time when she was a fair and gentle young
girl, with her will all subject to his; then a loving bride with no
thought apart from him; but now years of suffering and self-discipline
had transformed her to this, and she came back to him an inexorable
Fate, an avenging Nemesis.

Yet Sir Lionel did not give up all hope. He could not drive her away.
He could not fly away from her, for her watch was too vigilant; but he
hoped for some chance of secret flight in which, if he once escaped, he
might find his way to the Continent. With something of that cunning
which characterizes the insane, and which, perhaps, is born of the
presence of a "keeper," Sir Lionel watched his opportunity, and one day
nearly succeeded in effecting his desire.

That day Lady Dudleigh was in her brother's room. Sir Lionel had waited
for this, and had made his preparations. When she had been gone for a
few minutes, he stole softly out of his room, passed stealthily down the
back stairs of the inn, and going out of the back-door, reached the rear
of the house. Here there was a yard, and a gate that led out to a road
at the end of the house. A carriage had been in waiting here for about
an hour. Sir Lionel hurried across the yard, passed through the gate,
and looked for the carriage.

He took one glance, and then a deep oath escaped him.

In the carriage was Lady Dudleigh.

How she could have detected his flight he could not imagine, nor did he
now care. She had detected it, and had followed at once to circumvent
him. She must have gone down the front stairs, out of the front-door,
and reached the carriage before him. And there she was! Those hateful
eyes were fixed on him--he felt the horrid stare--he cowered beneath it.
He walked toward her.

"I thought I would go out too," said she.

Sir Lionel said not a word. He felt too much ashamed to turn back now,
and was too politic to allow her to see any open signs that he was in
full flight; so he quietly got into the carriage, and took his seat by
her side.

Whipping up the horses, he drove them at a headlong rate of speed out
through the streets into the country. His whole soul was full of mad
fury. Rage and disappointment together excited his brain to madness; and
the fierce rush of the impetuous steeds was in accordance with the
excitement of his mind. At length the horses themselves grew fatigued,
and slackened their pace. Sir Lionel still tried to urge them forward,
but in vain, and at last he flung down the whip with a curse.

"I'll not stand this any longer!" he cried, vehemently, addressing his
"keeper," but not looking at her.

"What?" said she.

"This style of being dogged and tracked and watched."

"You allude to me, I suppose," said Lady Dudleigh. "At any rate, you
must allow that it is better to be tracked, as you call it, by me, than
by the officers of the law."

"I don't care," growled Sir Lionel, gathering courage. "I'll not stand
this style of thing any longer. I'll not let them have it all their own
way."

"I don't see what you can do," said Lady Dudleigh, quietly.

"Do!" cried Sir Lionel, in a still more violent tone--"do! I'll tell you
what I'll do: I'll fight it out."

"Fight!"

"Yes," cried Sir Lionel, with an oath. "Every one of you--every one.
Every one without a single exception. Oh, you needn't think that I'm
afraid. I've thought it all over. You're all under my power. Yes--ha,
ha, ha! that's it. I've said it, and I say what I mean. You thought that
I was under your power. Your power! Ha, ha, ha! That's good. Why, you're
all under mine--every one of you."

Sir Lionel spoke wildly and vehemently, in that tone of feverish
excitement which marks a madman. It may have been the influence of his
"keeper," or it may have been the dawnings of actual insanity.

As for Lady Dudleigh, she did not lose one particle of her
cold-bloodedness. She simply said, in the same tone,

"How?"

"How? Ha, ha! Do you think I'm going to tell _you_? That's
_my_ secret. But stop. Yes; I don't care. I'd just as soon tell as
not. You can't escape, not one of you, unless you all fly at once to the
Continent, or to America, or, better yet, back to Botany Bay. There
you'll be safe. Fly! fly! fly! or else," he suddenly added, in a gloomy
tone, "you'll all die on the gallows! every one of you, on the gallows!
Ha, ha, ha! swinging on the gallows! the beautiful gallows!"

Lady Dudleigh disregarded the wildness of his tone, or perhaps she chose
to take advantage of it, thinking that in his excitement he might
disclose his thoughts the more unguardedly.

"You can do nothing," she said.

"Can't I, though?" retorted Sir Lionel.

"You wait. First, there's Dalton."

"What can you do with him?"

"Arrest him," said Sir Lionel. "What is he? An outlaw! An escaped
convict! He lives under an assumed name. He must go back to Botany
Bay--that is, if he isn't hanged. And then there's that pale-faced devil
of a daughter with her terrible eyes." He paused.

"What can you do to her?"

"Her! Arrest her too," cried Sir Lionel. "She murdered my boy--my
son--my Leon. She must be hanged. You shall not save her by this trick.
No! she must be hanged, like her cursed father."

A shudder passed through Lady Dudleigh.

Sir Lionel did not notice it. He was too much taken up with his own
vengeful thoughts.

"Yes," said he, "and there's that scoundrel Reginald."

"Reginald!" cried Lady Dudleigh, in a stern voice. "Why do you mention
him?"

"Oh, he's one of the same gang," cried Sir Lionel. "He's playing their
game. He is siding against his father, as he always did, and with his
brother's murderers. He shall not escape. I will avenge Leon's death on
all of you; and as for him, he shall suffer!"

It was with a strong effort that Lady Dudleigh restrained herself. But
she succeeded in doing so, and said, simply, as before,

"How?"

"Arrest him!" cried Sir Lionel. "Arrest him too. He is guilty of
perjury; and if he doesn't hang for it, he'll go back again to Botany
Bay with that scoundrel with whom he sides against me--his own
father--and against his brother."

"Are there any more?" asked Lady Dudleigh, as Sir Lionel ended.

"More! Yes," he said.

"Who?"

"You!" shouted Sir Lionel, with a voice of indescribable hate and
ferocity. He turned as he spoke, and stared at her. His wild eyes,
however, met the calm, cold, steady glance of those of his "keeper," and
they fell before it. He seized the whip and began to lash the horses,
crying as he did so, "You! yes, you! you! most of all!"

"What can you do to me?" asked Lady Dudleigh.

"You? Arrest you."

"What have I done?"

"You? You have done every thing. You have aided and abetted the escape
of an outlaw. You have assisted him in his nefarious occupation of
Dalton Hall. You have aided and abetted him in the imprisonment of
Dalton's brat. You have aided and abetted him in the murder of my boy
Leon. You have--"

"Stop!" cried Lady Dudleigh, in a stern, commanding voice. "You have
been a villain always, but you have never been so outspoken. Who are
you? Do you know what happened ten years ago?"

"What?" asked Sir Lionel. "Do you mean Dalton's forgery, and his
assassination of that--that banker fellow?"

Lady Dudleigh smiled grimly.

"I am glad that you said that," said she. "You remove my last scruple.
My brother's wrongs have well-nigh maddened me; but I have hesitated to
bear witness against my husband, and the father of my children. I shall
remember this, and it will sustain me when I bear my witness against you
in a court of law."

"Me?" said Sir Lionel. "Me? Witness against me? You can not. No one will
believe you."

"It will not be only your wife," said she, "though that will be
something, but your own self, with your own hand."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean what you know very well--your letter which you wrote to
Frederick, inclosing your forged check."

"I never forged a check, and I never wrote a letter inclosing one!"
cried Sir Lionel. "Dalton forged that letter himself, if there is such a
letter. He was an accomplished forger, and has suffered for it."

"The letter is your own," said Lady Dudleigh, "and I can swear to it."

"No one will believe you," cried Sir Lionel. "You shall be arrested for
perjury."

Lady Dudleigh gave another grim smile, and then she added, "There is
that _Maltese cross_. You forget that."

"What Maltese cross?" said Sir Lionel. "I never had one. That wasn't
mine; it was Dalton's."

"But I can swear in a court of law," said Lady Dudleigh, "that this
Maltese cross was _yours_, and that it was given to you by me as a
birthday gift."

"No one will believe you!" cried Sir Lionel; "no one will believe you!"

"Why not? Will they refuse the oath of Lady Dudleigh?"

"I can show them that you are insane," said Sir Lionel, with a chuckle
at the idea, which seemed to him like a sudden inspiration.

"You will not be able to show that Reginald is insane," said she.

"Reginald?"

"Yes, Reginald," repeated Lady Dudleigh. "Reginald knows that Maltese
cross, and knows when I gave it to you. He too will be ready to swear to
that in a court of law whenever I tell him that he may do so.

"Reginald?" said Sir Lionel, in a gloomy voice. "Why, he was--a child
then."

"He was sixteen years old," said Lady Dudleigh.

This mention of Reginald seemed to crush Sir Lionel. He was silent for a
long time. Evidently he had not been prepared for this in his plans for
what he called a "fight." He sat in moody silence therefore. Once or
twice he stole a furtive glance at her, and threw upon her a look which
she did not see. It was a look full of hate and malignancy, while at the
same time there was an expression of satisfaction in his face, as though
he had conceived some new plan, which he intended to keep a secret all
to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLIV.


LADY DUDLEIGH'S DECISION.

During the remainder of that drive nothing was said by either. Sir
Lionel had his own thoughts, which, whatever they were, appeared to give
him a certain satisfaction, and his brow was more unclouded when they
reached the inn than it had been ever since the day of the trial.
Evidently the new design which he had conceived, and which remained
unuttered in his mind, was very satisfactory to him.

That evening he himself began the conversation with Lady Dudleigh, a
thing which he had not before done.

"It's all very well," said he, "for you to carry on your own plans. You
may carry them on and welcome. I won't prevent you; in fact, I can't.
It's no use to deny it; I'm in your power. You're determined to crush
me, and I must be crushed, I suppose. You are going to show to the
world the strange spectacle of a wife and a son rising up against a
husband and father, and swearing his life away. You will lead on, and
Reginald will follow. This is the education that you have given him--it
is to end in parricide. Very well; I must submit. Wife, slay your
husband! mother, lead your son to parricide! Of course you comfort your
conscience with the plea that you are doing justice. In the French
Revolution there were wives who denounced their husbands, and sons who
denounced their fathers, in the name of 'humanity,' and for the good of
the republic. So go on. See that justice be done. Come on yourself to
assassinate your husband, and bring on your parricide! Take sides with
those who have murdered your son--the son whom you bore to me, and once
loved! Unsex yourself, and become a Fury! It is useless for me to make
resistance, I suppose; and yet, woman! wife! mother! let me tell you
that on the day when you attempt to do these things, and when your son
stands by your side to help you, there will go up a cry of horror
against you from outraged humanity!"

At this Lady Dudleigh looked at him, who, as usual, averted his eyes;
but she made no reply.

"Bring him on!" said Sir Lionel--"your son--my son--the parricide! Do
your worst. But at the same time allow me to inform you, in the mildest
manner in the world, that if I am doomed, there is no reason why I
should go mad in this infernal hole. What is more, I do not intend to
stay here one single day longer. I'm not going to run away. That is
impossible; you keep too sharp a look-out altogether. I'm simply going
away from this place of horrors, and I rather think I'll go home. I'll
go home--yes, home. Home is the place for me--Dudleigh Manor, where I
first took you, my true wife--that is the place for me to be in when you
come to me, you and your son, to hand me over, Judas-like, to death.
Yes, I'm going home, and if you choose to accompany me, why, all that I
can say is, I'll have to bear it."

"I'll go," said Lady Dudleigh, laconically.

"Oh, of course," said Sir Lionel, "quite a true wife; like Ruth and
Naomi. Whither thou goest, I will go. You see, I'm up in my Bible. Well,
as I said, I can not prevent you, and I suppose there is no need for me
to tell you to get ready."

Whether under these bitter taunts Lady Dudleigh writhed or not did not
at all appear. She seemed as cool and calm as ever. Perhaps she had so
schooled her nature that she was able to repress all outward signs of
emotion, or perhaps she had undergone so much that a taunt could have no
sting for her, or perhaps she had already contemplated and familiarized
herself with all these possible views of her conduct to such an extent
that the mention of them created no emotion. At any rate, whatever she
felt, Sir Lionel saw nothing.

Having discharged this shot, Sir Lionel went to his desk, and taking out
writing materials, began to write a letter. He wrote rapidly, and once
or twice glanced furtively at Lady Dudleigh, as though he was fearful
that she might overlook his writing. But there was no danger of that.
Lady Dudleigh did not move from her place. She did not seem to be aware
that he was writing at all.

At length Sir Lionel finished, and then he folded, sealed, and addressed
the letter. He finished this task with a face of supreme satisfaction,
and stole a look toward Lady Dudleigh, in which there was a certain
cunning triumph very visible, though it was not seen by the one at whom
it was directed.

"And now," said he, waving the letter somewhat ostentatiously, and
speaking in a formal tone, in which there was an evident sneer--"and
now, Lady Dudleigh, I have the honor to inform you that I intend to go
out and post this letter. May I have the honor of your company as far as
the post-office, and back?"

Lady Dudleigh rose in silence, and hastily throwing on her things,
prepared to follow him. Sir Lionel waited with mocking politeness,
opened the door, for her to pass out first, and then in company with her
went to the post-office, where he mailed the letter, and returned with
the smile of satisfaction still upon his face.

Early on the next morning Lady Dudleigh saw her son. He had watched all
that night by Dalton's bedside, and seemed pale and exhausted.

"Reginald," said Lady Dudleigh, "Sir Lionel is going away."

"Going away?" repeated Reginald, absently.

"Yes; back to Dudleigh Manor."

Reginald looked inquiringly at his mother, but said nothing.

"I intend," said Lady Dudleigh, "to go with him."

"You?"

"Yes."

Reginald looked at her mournfully.

"Have you done any thing with him yet?" he asked.

Lady Dudleigh shook her head.

"Do you expect to do any thing?"

"I do."

"I'm afraid you will be disappointed."

"I hope not. I have at least gained a hold upon him, and I have
certainly worked upon his fears. If I remain with him now I hope in time
to extort from him that confession which will save us all from an
additional sorrow; one perhaps as terrible as any we have ever known, if
not even more so."

"Confession!" repeated Reginald. "How is that possible? He will never
confess--never. If he has remained silent so long, and has not been
moved by the thought of all that he has done, what possible thing can
move him? Nothing but the actual presence of the law. Nothing but
force."

"Well," said Lady Dudleigh, "it is worth trying--the other alternative
is too terrible just yet. I hope to work upon his fears. I hope to
persuade him to confess, and fly from the country to some place of
safety. Frederick must be righted at all hazards, and I hope to show
this so plainly to Sir Lionel that he will acquiesce in _my_
proposal, confess all, save Frederick, and then fly to some place where
he may be safe. If not, why, then we can try the last resort. But oh,
Reginald, do you not see how terrible that last resort is?--I against my
husband, you against your father--both of us bringing him to the
gallows! It is only the intolerable sense of Frederick's long-sufferings
that can make me think of doing so terrible a thing. But Frederick is
even now in danger. He must be saved; and the question is between the
innocent and the guilty. I am strong enough to decide differently from
what I did ten years ago."

"Oh, I know--I feel it all, mother dear," said Reginald; "but at the
same time I don't like the idea of your going away with him--alone."

"Why not?"

"I don't like the idea of your putting yourself in his power."

"His power?"

"Yes, in Dudleigh Manor, or any other place. He is desperate. He will
not shrink from any thing that he thinks may save him from this danger.
You will be his chief danger; he may think of getting rid of it. He is
unscrupulous, and would stop at nothing."

"Oh, as for that, he may be desperate, but what can he possibly do?
Dudleigh Manor is in the world. It is not in some remote place where the
master is superior to law. He can do no more harm there than he can
here."

"The man," said Reginald, "who for all these years has outraged honor
and justice and truth, and has stifled his own conscience for the sake
of his comfort, must by this time be familiar with desperate deeds, and
be capable of any crime. I am afraid, mother dear, for you to trust
yourself with him."

"Reginald," said Lady Dudleigh, "you speak as though I were a child or a
schoolgirl. Does he seem now as though he could harm me, or do I seem to
be one who can easily be put down? Would you be afraid to go with him?"

"I--afraid? That is the very thing that I wish to propose."

"But you could not possibly have that influence over him which I have.
You might threaten, easily enough, and come to an open rupture, but that
is what I wish to avoid. I wish to bring him to a confession, not so
much by direct threats as by various constraining moral influences."

"Oh, as to that," said Reginald, "I have no doubt that you will do far
better than I can; but at the same time I can not get rid of a fear
about your safety."

"And do you really think, Reginald, that I would be less safe than you?
or, from what you know of me, should you suppose that I have much of
that woman's weakness about me which might make me an easy prey to one
who wished to do me harm?"

"I know well what you are, mother dear," said Reginald, taking her hand
tenderly in both of his. "You have the tenderness of a woman and the
courage of a man; but still I feel uneasy. At any rate, promise me one
thing. You will let me know what you are doing."

"I do not promise to write regularly," said Lady Dudleigh, "but I do
promise to write the moment that any thing happens worth writing about."

"And if you are ill, or in danger?" said Reginald, anxiously.

"Oh, then, of course I shall write at once. But now I must go. I shall
not see you again for some time. Good-by."

Lady Dudleigh kissed her son tenderly as she said this, and left him,
and Reginald returned to his place by Fredrick Dalton's bedside.

That same day, shortly after this interview, Sir Lionel and Lady
Dudleigh drove away from the inn, _en route_ for Dudleigh Manor.

       *        *        *        *        *


CHAPTER XLV.


LADY DUDLEIGH IS SHOWN TO HER ROOM.

After driving for about a mile Sir Lionel and Lady Dudleigh took the
train, securing a compartment to themselves.

During this part of the journey Sir Lionel's face lost much of that
gloom which of late had pervaded it, and assumed an expression which was
less dismal, though not quite like the old one. The old look was one of
serene and placid content, an air of animal comfort, and of easy-going
self-indulgence; but now the expression was more restless and excited.
There was a certain knowing look--a leer of triumphant cunning--combined
with a tendency to chuckle over some secret purpose which no one else
knew. Together with this there was incessant restlessness; he appeared
perpetually on the look-out, as though dreading discovery; and he
alternated between exultant nods of his head, with knowing winks at
vacancy, and sudden sharp furtive glances at his companion. Changed as
Sir Lionel's mood was, it can hardly be said that the change was for the
better. It would have been obvious even to a more superficial observer
than that vigilant "keeper" who accompanied him that Sir Lionel had lost
his self-poise, and was in rather a dangerous way. Lady Dudleigh must
have noticed this; but it made no difference to her, save that there was
perhaps a stonier lustre in her eyes as she turned them upon him, and a
sharper vigilance in her attitude.

In this way they rode on for several hours; and whatever Sir Lionel's
plans might have been, they certainly did not involve any action during
the journey. Had he been sufficiently violent he might have made an
assault upon his companion in the seclusion of that compartment, and
effectually prevented any trouble ever arising to him from her. He might
have done this, and made good his escape in the confusion of some
station. But no such attempt was made; and so in due time they reached
the place where they were to get out.

"This is the nearest station to Dudleigh Manor," said Sir Lionel, gayly.
"This road has been made since your time."

Lady Dudleigh said nothing, but looked around. She saw nothing that was
familiar. A neat wayside station, with the usual platform, was nearest;
and beyond this arose trees which concealed the view on one side, while
on the other there were fields and hedges, and one or two houses in the
distance. It was a commonplace scene, in a level sort of country, and
Lady Dudleigh, after one short survey, thought no more about it. It was
just like any other wayside station.

A common-looking hack, with a rather ill-dressed driver, was waiting,
and toward this Sir Lionel walked.

"This," said he, "is the Dudleigh coach. It isn't so grand an affair as
it used to be; but my means have dwindled a good deal since your day,
you know, and I have to economize--yes--ha, ha, ha!--economize--queer
thing too, isn't it? Economizing--ha, ha, ha!"

Sir Lionel's somewhat flighty manner was not at all congenial to Lady
Dudleigh, and she treated him as the vigilant "keeper" always treats his
flighty prisoner--that is, with silent patience and persistent
watchfulness.

In a few minutes they were both seated inside the coach, and were
driving away. The coach was a gloomy one, with windows only in the
doors. The rest was solid woodwork. These windows in the doors were
small, and when let down were scarcely large enough for one to put his
head through. When sitting down it was impossible for Lady Dudleigh to
see the road. She could see nothing but the tops of the trees, between
which the sky appeared occasionally. She saw that she was driving along
a road which was shaded with trees on both sides; but more than this she
could not see.

They drove for about an hour at a moderate pace, and during this time
Sir Lionel preserved that same peculiar demeanor which has already been
described, while Lady Dudleigh maintained her usual silent watchfulness.

At length they stopped for a moment. Voices sounded outside, and then
Lady Dudleigh saw that she was passing through a gateway. Thinking that
this was Dudleigh Manor, she made no remark, but calmly awaited the time
when she should reach the house. She did not have to wait long. Sooner
than she expected the coach stopped. The driver got down and opened the
door. Sir Lionel sprang out with surprising agility, and held out his
hand politely to assist his companion. She did not accept his offer, but
stepped out without assistance, and looked around.

To her surprise, the place was not Dudleigh Manor at all, but one which
was entirely different, and quite unfamiliar. It was a brick house of no
very great size, though larger than most private houses, of plain
exterior, and with the air of a public building of some sort. The
grounds about were stiff and formal and forbidding. The door was open,
and one or two men were standing there. It did not look like an inn, and
yet it certainly was not a private residence.

"I have to stop here for a little while," said Sir Lionel, "to see a
friend on business. We are not half-way to Dudleigh Manor yet; it's
further than you think."

He turned and went up the steps. Lady Dudleigh looked around once more,
and then followed him. The men at the head of the steps looked at her
curiously as she went in. She took no notice of them, however, but
walked past them, looking calmly beyond them.

On entering the house she saw a bare hall covered with slate-colored
oil-cloth, and with a table against the wall. A gray-headed man came out
of one of the rooms, and advanced to meet Sir Lionel, who shook hands
with him very cordially, and whispered to him a few words. The
gray-headed man wore spectacles, was clean shaven, with a double chin,
and a somewhat sleek and oily exterior.

"Lady Dudleigh," said Sir Lionel, leading the gray-headed man forward by
the arm, "allow me to make you acquainted with my particular friend, Dr.
Leonard Morton."

Lady Dudleigh bowed slightly, and Dr. Morton made a profound obeisance
that seemed like a caricature of politeness.

"Will you have the kindness to walk up stairs?" said he, and led the
way, while the others followed him. Ascending the stairs, they reached a
large room at the back of the house, which was furnished in the same
stiff and formal way as the hall below. Over the mantel-piece hung an
engraving, somewhat faded out, and on the table were a Bible and a
pitcher of water.

The doctor politely handed Lady Dudleigh a chair, and made one or two
remarks about the weather.

"Sir Lionel," said he, "if Lady Dudleigh will excuse us for a few
moments, I should like to speak with you in private."

"Will you have the kindness, Lady Dudleigh," asked Sir Lionel, "to
excuse us for a few moments? We shall not leave you long alone. And here
is a book--an invaluable book--with which you may occupy your time."

He said this with such exaggerated politeness, and with such a cunning
leer in his eyes, that his tone and manner were most grotesque; and as
he concluded he took up the large Bible with ridiculous solemnity.

Lady Dudleigh merely bowed in silence.

"A thousand thanks," said Sir Lionel, turning away; and thereupon he
left the room, followed by the doctor. Lady Dudleigh heard their
footsteps descending the stairs, and then they seemed to go into some
room.

For some time she forgot all about him. The place had at first
surprised her, but she gave it little thought. She had too much to think
of. She had before her a task which seemed almost impossible; and if she
failed in this, there was before her that dread alternative which Sir
Lionel had presented to her so plainly. Other things too there were
besides her husband--connected with all who were dearest to her--her
brother, perhaps, dying before he had accomplished his work; her son so
mysteriously murdered; her other son awaiting her command to assist in
bringing his father to death. Besides, there was the danger that even
now might be impending over these--the danger of discovery. Sir
Lionel's desperate threats might have some meaning, and who could tell
how it might result if he sought to carry out those threats?

Brooding over such thoughts as these, she forgot about the lapse of
time, and at last was roused to herself by the entrance of a woman. She
was large and coarse and fat.

At the door stood another woman.

"Your room's ready, missus," said the woman, bluntly.

Lady Dudleigh rose.

"I don't want a room," said she. "I intend to go in a few minutes."

"Anyway, ye'd better come to your room now, and not keep us waitin',"
said the woman.

"You needn't wait," said Lady Dudleigh.

"Come along," said the woman, impatiently. "It's no use stayin' here
all day."

Lady Dudleigh felt annoyed at this insolence, and began to think that
Sir Lionel had run away while she had forgotten about him. She said
nothing to the women, but walked toward the door. The two stood there in
the way.

"I will go down," said she, haughtily, "and wait below. Go and tell Sir
Lionel."

The women stared at one another.

[Illustration: "SHE WAS DRAGGED ALONG HELPLESSLY."]

"Sir Lionel Dudleigh," said Lady Dudleigh, "is with Dr. Morton on
business. Tell him that I am tired of waiting, or take me to the room
where he is."

"Oh yes, 'm," said one of the women; and saying this, she went down
stairs.

In a few moments Dr. Morton came up, followed by the women. The two men
who had been standing at the door came into the hall, and stood there at
the foot of the stairs.

"Where is Sir Lionel?" was Lady Dudleigh's first words.

The doctor smiled blandly.

"Well, he has just gone, you know; but he'll soon be back--oh yes, quite
soon. You wait here, and you may go to your room."

He spoke in an odd, coaxing tone, as though he were addressing some
fretful child whom it was desirable to humor.

"Gone!" exclaimed Lady Dudleigh.

"Yes, but he'll soon be back. You needn't wait long. And these women
will take you to your own room. You'll find it very pleasant."

"I have no room here," said Lady Dudleigh, haughtily. "If Sir Lionel has
gone, I shall go too;" and with these words she tried to move past the
woman who was in front of her. But the woman would not move, and the
other woman and the doctor stood there looking at her. All at once the
truth dawned upon her, or a part of the truth. She had been brought
here, and they would keep her here. Who they were she could not imagine,
but their faces were not at all prepossessing.

"Oh, it's all right," said the doctor, in a smooth voice. "You shall go
to-morrow. We'll send for Sir Lionel."

"Dr. Morton," said Lady Dudleigh, solemnly, "beware how you detain me.
Let me go, or you shall repent it. I don't know what your motive is, but
it will be a dangerous thing for you. I am Lady Dudleigh, and if you
dare to interfere with my movements you shall suffer."

"Oh yes, oh yes," said the doctor. "You are Lady Dudleigh. Oh, of
course. And now come, Lady Dudleigh; you shall be treated just like a
lady, and have a nice room, and--"

"What do you mean?" cried Lady Dudleigh, indignantly. "This insolence is
insufferable."

"Oh yes," said the doctor; "it'll be all right, you know. Come, now; go
like a good lady to your room."

"Are you mad?" exclaimed Lady Dudleigh, in amazement.

The doctor smiled and nodded.

"What do you intend to do?" asked Lady Dudleigh, restraining herself
with a strong effort.

"Oh, nothing; we shall put you in a nice room, you know--all so
pleasant--for you are not very well; and so. Susan, you just take the
lady's hand, and, Martha, you take the other, and we'll show her the way
to her room."

At this each of the women seized one of Lady Dudleigh's hands quickly
and dextrously, the result of long practice, and then they drew her out
of the room. Lady Dudleigh resisted, but her strength was useless. She
was dragged along helplessly, while all the time the doctor walked after
her, prattling in his usual way about "the nice room," and how
"comfortable" she would find it. At length they reached a room, and she
was taken in. One of the women entered with her. Lady Dudleigh looked
around, and saw that the walls were bare and whitewashed; the floor was
uncarpeted; an iron bedstead and some simple furniture were around her,
and a small grated window gave light.

It looked dreary enough, and sufficiently prison-like to appall any one
who might be thus suddenly thrust in there. Lady Dudleigh sank into a
chair exhausted, and the woman began to make her bed.

"My good woman," said Lady Dudleigh, anxious to get some clue to her
position, "can you tell me what all this means?"

"Sure it's all for the good of your health," said the woman.

"But I'm not ill."

"No, not to say ill; but the body's often all right when the mind's all
wrong."

"The mind? There's nothing the matter with my mind. Dr. Morton has been
deceived. He would not dare to do this if he knew it."

"Sure, now, it's nothing at all, and you'll be well soon."

At these simple words of the woman Lady Dudleigh began to understand the
situation. This must be a lunatic asylum, a private one. Sir Lionel had
brought her here, and told the doctor that she was insane. The doctor
had accepted his statement, and had received her as such. This at once
accounted for his peculiar mode of addressing her.

"There's a mistake," said Lady Dudleigh, quietly. "Dr. Morton has been
deceived. Let me see him at once, please, and I will explain. He does
not know what a wrong he is doing. My good woman, I am no more mad than
you are."

"Dear, dear!" said the woman, going on placidly with her work; "that's
the way they all talk. There's not one of them that believes they're
mad."

"But I'm not mad at all," said Lady Dudleigh, indignant at the woman's
obtuseness.

"There, there; don't you go for to excite yourself," said the woman,
soothingly. "But I s'pose you can't help it."

"So this is a mad-house, is it?" said Lady Dudleigh, gloomily, after a
pause.

"Well, 'm, we don't call it that; we call it a 'sylum. It's Dr. Morton's
'sylum."

"Now see here," said Lady Dudleigh, making a fresh effort, and trying to
be as cool as possible, "I am Lady Dudleigh. I have been brought here by
a trick. Dr. Morton is deceived. He is committing a crime in detaining
me. I am not mad. Look at me. Judge for yourself. Look at me, and say,
do I look like a madwoman?"

The woman, thus appealed to, good-naturedly acquiesced, and looked at
Lady Dudleigh.

"'Deed," she remarked, "ye look as though ye've had a deal of sufferin'
afore ye came here, an' I don't wonder yer mind give way."

"Do I look like a madwoman?" repeated Lady Dudleigh, with a sense of
intolerable irritation at this woman's stupidity.

"'Deed, then, an' I'm no judge. It's the doctor that decides."

"But what do you say? Come, now."

"Well, then, ye don't look very bad, exceptin' the glare an' glitter of
the eyes of ye, an' yer fancies."

"Fanciest? What fancies?"

"Why, yer fancies that ye're Lady Dudleigh, an' all that about Sir
Lionel."

Lady Dudleigh started to her feet.

"What!" she exclaimed. "Why, I am Lady Dudleigh."

"There, there!" said the woman, soothingly; "sure I forgot myself. Sure
ye are Lady Dudleigh, or any body else ye like. It's a dreadful
inveiglin' way ye have to trap a body the way ye do."

At this Lady Dudleigh was in despair. No further words were of any
avail. The woman was determined to humor her, and assented to every
thing she said. This treatment was so intolerable that Lady Dudleigh was
afraid to say any thing for fear that she would show the excitement of
her feelings, and such an exhibition would of course have been
considered as a fresh proof of her madness.

The woman at length completed her task, and retired.

Lady Dudleigh was left alone. She knew it all now. She remembered the
letter which Sir Lionel had written. In that he had no doubt arranged
this plan with Dr. Morton, and the coach had been ready at the station.
But in what part of the country this place was she had no idea, nor
could she know whether Dr. Morton was deceived by Sir Lionel, or was his
paid employé in this work of villainy. His face did not give her any
encouragement to hope for either honesty or mercy from him.

It was an appalling situation, and she knew it. All the horrors that she
had ever heard of in connection with private asylums occurred to her
mind, and deepened the terror that surrounded her. All the other cares
of her life--the sorrow of bereavement, the anxiety for the sick, the
plans for Frederick Dalton--all these and many others now oppressed her
till her brain sank under the crushing weight. A groan of anguish burst
from her.

"Sir Lionel's mockery will become a reality," she thought. "I shall go
mad!"

Meanwhile Sir Lionel had gone away. Leaving Lady Dudleigh in the room,
he had gone down stairs, and after a few hurried words with the doctor,
he left the house and entered the coach, which drove back to the
station.

All the way he was in the utmost glee, rubbing his hands, slapping his
thighs, chuckling to himself, laughing and cheering.

"Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!" he laughed. "Outwitted! The keeper--the
keeper caught! Ha, ha, ha! Why, she'll never get out--never! In for
life, Lionel, my boy! Mad! Why, by this time she's a raving maniac! Ha,
ha, ha! She swear against me! Who'd believe a madwoman, an idiot, a
lunatic, a bedlamite, a maniac--a howling, frenzied, gibbering, ranting,
raving, driveling, maundering, mooning maniac! And now for the boy
next--the parricide! Ha, ha, ha! Arrest him! No. Shut him up
here--both--with my friend Morton--both of them, mother and son, the
two--ha, ha, ha!--witnesses! One maniac! two maniacs! and then I shall
go mad with joy, and come here to live, and there shall be _three
maniacs_! Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha-a-a-a-a-a-a!"

Sir Lionel himself seemed mad now.

On leaving the coach, however, he became calmer, and taking the first
train that came up, resumed his journey.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLVI.


THE BEDSIDE OF DALTON.

Frederick Dalton remained in his prostrate condition, with no apparent
change either for the better or for the worse, and thus a month passed.

One morning Dudleigh requested an interview with Edith.

On entering the room he greeted her with his usual deep respect.

[Illustration: "THEIR HANDS TOUCHED."]

"I hope you will excuse me for troubling you, Miss Dalton," he said,
"but I wish very much to ask your opinion about your father. He
remains, as you know, unchanged, and this inn is not the place for him.
The air is close, the place is noisy, and it is impossible for him to
have that perfect quiet which he so greatly needs. Dudleigh Manor is too
far away, but there is another place close by. I am aware, Miss Dalton,
that Dalton Hall must be odious to you, and therefore I hesitate to ask
you to take your father to that place. Yet he ought to go there, and at
once. As for yourself, I hope that the new circumstances under which you
will live there will make it less unpleasant; and, let me add, for my
own part, it shall be my effort to see that you, who have been so deeply
wronged, shall be righted--with all and before all. As to myself," he
continued, "I would retire, and relieve you of my presence, which can
not be otherwise than painful, but there are two reasons why I ought to
remain. The first is your father. You yourself are not able to take all
the care of him, and there is no other who can share it except myself.
Next to yourself, no one can be to him what I am, nor is there any one
with whom I would be willing to leave him. He must not be left to a
servant. He must be nursed by those who love him. And so I must stay
with him wherever he is. In addition to this, however, my presence at
Dalton Hall will effectually quell the vulgar clamor, and all the rumors
that have been prevailing for the last few months will be silenced."

Dudleigh spoke all this calmly and seriously, but beneath his words
there was something in his tone which conveyed a deeper meaning. That
tone was more than respectful--it was almost reverential--as though the
one to whom he spoke required from him more than mere courtesy. In spite
of his outward calm, there was also an emotion in his voice which showed
that the calm was assumed, and that beneath it lay something which could
not be all concealed. In his eyes, as he fixed them on Edith, there was
that same reverential regard, which seemed to speak of devotion and
loyalty; something stronger than admiration, something deeper than
sympathy, was expressed from them. And yet it was this that he himself
tried to conceal. It was as though this feeling of his burst forth
irrepressibly through all concealment, as though the intensity of this
feeling made even his calmest words and commonest formulas fall of a new
and deeper meaning.

In that reverence and profound devotion thus manifest there was nothing
which could be otherwise than grateful to Edith. Certainly she could not
take offense, for his words and his looks afforded nothing which could
by any possibility give rise to that.

For a whole month this man had been before her, a constant attendant on
her father, sleeping his few hours in an adjoining chamber, with scarce
a thought beyond that prostrate friend. All the country had been
searched for the best advice or the best remedies, and nothing had been
omitted which untiring affection could suggest. During all this time
she had scarce seen him. In the delicacy of his regard for her he had
studiously kept out of her way, as though unwilling to allow his
presence to give her pain. A moment might occasionally be taken up with
a few necessary arrangements as she would enter, but that was all. He
patiently waited till she retired before he ventured to come in himself.

No; in that noble face, pale from illness or from sadness, with the
traces of sorrow upon it, and the marks of long vigils by the bedside of
her father--in that refined face, whose expression spoke only of
elevation of soul, and exhibited the perfect type of manly beauty, there
was certainly nothing that could excite repugnance, but every thing that
might inspire confidence.

Edith saw all this, and remarked it while listening to him; and she
thought she had never seen any thing so pure in its loyalty, so profound
in its sympathy, and so sweet in its sad grace as that face which was
now turned toward her with its eloquent eyes.

She did not say much. A few words signified her assent to the proposal.
Dudleigh said that he would make all the necessary arrangements, and
that she should have no trouble whatever. With this he took his
departure.

That same evening another visitor came. It was a pale, slender girl,
who gave her name as Lucy Ford. She said that she had been sent by
Captain Dudleigh. She heard that Edith had no maid, and wished to get
that situation. Edith hesitated for a moment. Could she accept so
direct a favor from Dudleigh, or give him that mark of confidence? Her
hesitation was over at once. She could give him that, and she accepted
the maid. The next day came a housekeeper and two or three others, all
sent by Dudleigh, all of whom were accepted by her. For Dudleigh had
found out somehow the need of servants at Dalton Hall, and had taken
this way of supplying that prime requisite.

It then remained to move Dalton. He still continued in the same
condition, not much changed physically, but in a state of mental torpor,
the duration of which no one was able to foretell. Two short stages were
required to take him to Dalton Hall. For this a litter was procured, and
he was carried all the way. Edith went, with her maid and housekeeper,
in a carriage, Dudleigh on horseback, and the other servants, with the
luggage, in various conveyances.

Dalton received no benefit from his journey, but his friends were happy
enough that he had received no injury. The medical attendance at Dalton
Hall was, as before, the best that could be obtained, and all the care
that affection could suggest was lavished upon him.

From what has already been said, it will be seen that in making this
migration to Dalton Hall, Dudleigh was regardful of many things besides
the patient. He had made every arrangement for the comfort of the
occupants. He had sought out all the domestics that were necessary to
diffuse an air of home over such a large establishment, and had been
careful to submit them to Edith for her approval. He had also procured
horses and grooms and carriages, and every thing that might conduce to
the comfort of life. The old solitude and loneliness were thus
terminated. The new housekeeper prevented Edith from feeling any anxiety
about domestic concerns, and the servants all showed themselves well
trained and perfectly subordinate.

Dalton's room was at the west end of the building. Edith occupied her
old apartments. Dudleigh took that which had belonged to his "double."
The housekeeper took the room that had been occupied by Lady Dudleigh.

Dudleigh was as devoted as ever to the sick man. He remained at his
bedside through the greater part of the nights and through the mornings.
In the afternoons he retired as before, and gave place to Edith. When
he was there he sometimes had a servant upon whom he could rely, and
then, if he felt unusual fatigue, and circumstances were favorable, he
was able to snatch a little sleep. He usually went to bed at two in the
afternoon, rose at seven, and in that brief sleep, with occasional naps
during the morning, obtained enough to last him for the day. With this
rest he was satisfied, and needed, or at least sought for, no
recreation. During the hours of the morning he was able to attend to
those outside duties that required overseeing or direction.

But while he watched in this way over the invalid, he was not a mere
watcher. That invalid required, after all, but little at the hands of
his nurses, and Dudleigh had much to do.

On his arrival at Dalton Hall he had possessed himself of all the papers
that his "double" had left behind him, and these he diligently studied,
so as to be able to carry out with the utmost efficiency the purpose
that he had in his mind. It was during the long watches of the night
that he studied these papers, trying to make out from them the manner of
life and the associates of the one who had left them, trying also to
arrive at some clew to his mysterious disappearance. This study he
could keep up without detriment to his office of attendant, and while
watching over the invalid he could carry out his investigations.
Sometimes, in the afternoons, after indulging in more frequent naps than
usual during the mornings, he was able to go out for a ride about the
grounds. He was a first-rate horseman, and Edith noticed his admirable
seat as she looked from the windows of her father's room.

Thus time went on.

Gradually Dudleigh and Edith began to occupy a different position toward
one another. At the inn their relations were as has been shown. But
after their arrival at Dalton Hall there occurred a gradual change.

As Edith came to the room on the first day, Dudleigh waited. On entering
she saw his eyes fixed on her with an expression of painful suspense, of
earnest, eager inquiry. In that eloquent appealing glance all his soul
seemed to beam from his eyes. It was reverent, it was almost humble, yet
it looked for some small concession. May I hope? it said. Will you give
a thought to me? See, I stand here, and I hang upon your look. Will you
turn away from me?

Edith did not repel that mute appeal. There was that in her face which
broke down Dudleigh's reserve. He advanced toward her and held out his
hand. She did not reject it.

It was but a commonplace thing to do--it was what might have been done
before--yet between these two it was far from common-place. Their hands
touched, their eyes met, but neither spoke a word. It was but a light
grasp that Dudleigh gave. Reverentially, yet tenderly, he took that
hand, not venturing to go beyond what might be accorded to the merest
stranger, but contenting himself with that one concession. With that he
retired, carrying with him the remembrance of that nearer approach, and
the hope of what yet might be.

After that the extreme reserve was broken down. Each day, on meeting, a
shake of the hands was accompanied by something more. Between any
others these greetings would have been the most natural thing in the
world; but here it was different. There was one subject in which each
took the deepest interest, and about which each had something to say.
Frederick Dalton's health was precious to each, and each felt anxiety
about his condition. This formed a theme about which they might speak.

As Dudleigh waited for Edith, so Edith waited for Dudleigh; and still
there were the same questions to be asked and answered. Standing thus
together in that sick-room, with one life forming a common bond between
them, conversing in low whispers upon one so dear to both, it would have
been strange indeed if any thing like want of confidence had remained on
either side.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLVII.


A BETTER UNDERSTANDING.

Dudleigh lived on as before, assiduous in his attendance, dividing his
time chiefly between nursing and study of the papers already mentioned.
He never went out of the grounds on those occasional rides, and if any
one in the neighborhood noticed this, the recent sad events might have
been considered an excuse. Thus these two were thrown upon one another
exclusively. For each there was no other society. As for Edith, Dudleigh
had done so much that she felt a natural gratitude; and more than this,
there was in her mind a sense of security and of dependence.

Meanwhile Dudleigh's pale face grew paler. His sleep had all along been
utterly inadequate, and the incessant confinement had begun to show its
effects. He had been accustomed to an open-air life and vigorous
exercise. This quiet watching at the bedside of Dalton was more trying
to his strength than severe labor could have been.

The change in him was not lost on Edith, and even if gratitude toward
him had been wanting, common humanity would have impelled her to speak
about it.

One day, as she came in, she was struck by his appearance. His face was
ghastly white, and he had been sitting with his head in his hands as she
softly entered. In an instant, as he heard her step, he started up, and
advanced with a radiant smile, a smile caused by her approach.

"I'm afraid that you are overtasking yourself," said Edith, gently,
after the usual greeting. "You are here too much. The confinement is
too trying. You must take more rest and exercise."

Dudleigh's face was suffused with a sudden glow of delight.

"It is kind of you to notice it," said he, earnestly, "but I'm sure you
are mistaken. I could do far more if necessary. This is my place, and
this is my truest occupation."

"For that very reason," said Edith, in tones that showed more concern
than she would have cared to acknowledge--"for that very reason you
ought to preserve yourself--for his sake. You confine yourself here too
much, and take too little rest. I see that you feel it already."

"I?" said Dudleigh, with a light laugh, whose musical cadence sounded
very sweet to Edith, and revealed to her another side of his character
very different from that sad and melancholy one which he had thus far
shown--"I? Why, you have no idea of my capacity for this sort of thing.
Excuse me, Miss Dalton, but it seems absurd to talk of my breaking down
under such work as this."

Edith shook her head.

"You show traces of it," said she, in a gentle voice, looking away from
him, "which common humanity would compel me to notice. You must not do
all the work; I must have part of it."

"_You?_" exclaimed Dudleigh, with infinite tenderness in his tone.
"Do you think that I would allow _you_ to spend any more time here
than you now do, or that I would spare myself at the expense of
_your_ health? Never! Aside from the fact that your father is so
dear to me, there are considerations for you which would lead me to die
at my post rather than allow you to have any more trouble."

There was a fervor in Dudleigh's tones which penetrated to Edith's
heart. There was a deep glow in his eyes as he looked at her which Edith
did not care to encounter.

"You are of far more importance to Sir Lionel than I am," said she,
after a pause which began to be embarrassing. "But what will become of
him if--if you are prostrated?"

"I shall not be prostrated," said Dudleigh.

"I think you will if this state of things continues."

"Oh, I don't think there is any prospect of my giving up just yet."

"No. I know your affection for him, and that it would keep you here
until--until you could not stay any longer; and it is this which I wish
to avoid."

"It is my duty," said Dudleigh. "He is one whom I revere more than any
other man, and love as a father. Besides, there are other things that
bind me to him--his immeasurable wrongs, his matchless patience--wrongs
inflicted by one who is my father; and I, as the son, feel it a holy
duty, the holiest of all duties, to stand by that bedside and devote
myself to him. He is your father, Miss Dalton, but you have never known
him as I have known him--the soul of honor, the stainless gentleman, the
ideal of chivalry and loyalty and truth. This he is, and for this he
lies there, and my wretched father it is who has done this deed. But
that father is a father only in name, and I have long ago transferred a
son's love and a son's duty to that gentle and noble and injured
friend."

This outburst of feeling came forth from Dudleigh's inmost heart, and
was spoken with a passionate fervor which showed how deeply he felt what
he said. Every word thrilled through Edith. Bitter self-reproach at that
moment came to her, as she thought of her own relations to her father.
What Dudleigh's had been she did not know, but she saw that in him her
father had found a son. And what had his daughter been to him? Of that
she dared not think. Her heart was wrung with sharp anguish at the
memories of the past, while at the same time she felt drawn more closely
to Dudleigh, who had thus been to him all that she had failed to be. Had
she spoken what she thought, she would have thanked and blessed him for
those words. But she did not dare to trust herself to speak of that;
rather she tried to restrain herself; and when she spoke, it was with a
strong effort at this self-control.

"Well," she said, in a voice which was tremulous in spite of all her
efforts, "this shows how dear you must be to him, since he has found
such love in you, and so for his sake you must spare yourself. You must
not stay here so constantly."

"Who is there to take my place?" asked Dudleigh, quietly.

"I," said Edith.

Dudleigh smiled.

"Do you think," said he, "that I would allow that? Even if I needed more
rest, which I do not, do you think that I would take it at your
expense--that I would go away, enjoy myself, and leave you to bear the
fatigue? No, Miss Dalton; I am not quite so selfish as that."

"But you will let me stay here more than I do," said Edith, earnestly.
"I may as well be here as in my own room. Will you not let me have half
the care, and occasionally allow you to take rest?"

She spoke timidly and anxiously, as though she was asking some favor.
And this was the feeling that she had, for it seemed to her that this
man, who had been a son to her father, had more claims on his love, and
a truer right here, than she, the unworthy daughter.

Dudleigh smiled upon her with infinite tenderness as he replied:

"Half the care! How could you endure it? You are too delicate for so
much. You do too much already, and I am only anxious to relieve you of
that. I was going to urge you to give up half of the afternoon, and take
it myself."

"Give up half the afternoon!" cried Edith. "Why, I want to do more."

"But that is impossible. You are not strong enough," said Dudleigh. "I
fear all the time that you are now overworking yourself. I would never
forgive myself if you received any harm from this."

"Oh, I am very much stronger than you suppose. Besides, nursing is
woman's work, and would fatigue me far less than you."

"I can not bear to have you fatigue yourself in any way. You must
not--and I would do far more rather than allow you to have any trouble."

"But even if my health should suffer, it would not be of much
consequence. So at least let me relieve you of something."

"Your health?" said Dudleigh, looking at her with an earnest glance;
"your health? Why, that is every thing. Mine is nothing. Can you
suggest such a thing to me as that I should allow any trouble to come to
you? Besides, your delicate health already alarms me. You have not yet
recovered from your illness. You are not capable of enduring fatigue,
and I am always reproaching myself for allowing you to stay here as much
as you do. The Dudleighs have done enough. They have brought the father
to this;" and he pointed mournfully to the bed. "But," he added, in a
tremulous voice, "the daughter should at least be saved, and to have
harm come to her would be worse than death itself--to me."

Edith was silent for a few moments. Her heart was beating fast. When she
spoke, it was with an effort, and in as calm a voice as possible.

"Oh," she said, "I am quite recovered. Indeed, I am as well as ever,
and I wish to spend more time here. Will you not let me stay here
longer?"

"How can I? The confinement would wear you out."

"It would not be more fatiguing than staying in my own room," persisted
Edith.

"I'm afraid there would be very much difference," said Dudleigh. "In
your own room you have no particular anxiety, but here you would have
the incessant responsibility of a nurse. You would have to watch your
father, and every movement would give you concern."

"And this harassing care is what I wish to save you from, and share with
you," said Edith, earnestly. "Will you not consent to this?"

"To share it with you?" said Dudleigh looking at her with unutterable
tenderness. "To share it with you?" he repeated. "It would be only too
much happiness for me to do so, but not if you are going to overwork
yourself."

"But I will not," said Edith. "If I do, I can stop. I only ask to be
allowed to come in during the morning, so as to relieve you of some of
your work. You will consent, will you not?"

Edith asked him this as though Dudleigh had exclusive right here, and
she had none. She could not help feeling as if this was so, and this
feeling arose from those memories which she had of that terrible past,
when she ignorantly hurled at that father's heart words that stung like
the stings of scorpions. Never could she forgive herself for that, and
for this she now humbled herself in this way. Her tone was so pleading
that Dudleigh could refuse no longer. With many deprecatory expressions,
and many warnings and charges, he at last consented to let her divide
the morning attendance with him. She was to come in at eleven o'clock.

This arrangement was at once acted upon. On the following day Edith
came to her father's room at eleven. Dudleigh had much to ask her, and
much to say to her, about her father's condition. He was afraid that she
was not strong enough. He seemed to half repent his agreement. On the
other hand, Edith assured him most earnestly that she was strong enough,
that she would come here for the future regularly at eleven o'clock, and
urged him to take care of his own health, and seek some recreation by
riding about the grounds. This Dudleigh promised to do in the afternoon,
but just then he seemed in no hurry to go. He lingered on. They talked
in low whispers, with their heads close together. They had much to talk
about; her health, his health, her father's condition--all these had to
be discussed. Thus it was that the last vestiges of mutual reserve
began to be broken down.

Day succeeded to day, and Edith always came to her father's room in the
morning. At first she always urged Dudleigh to go off and take
exercise, but at length she ceased to urge him. For two or three hours
every day they saw much of one another, and thus associated under
circumstances which enforced the closest intimacy and the strongest
mutual sympathy.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLVIII.


CAPTAIN CRUIKSHANK.

While these things were going on, the world outside was not altogether
indifferent to affairs in Dalton Hall. In the village and in the
immediate neighborhood rumor had been busy, and at length the vague
statements of the public voice began to take shape.

This is what rumor said: Dudleigh is an impostor!

An impostor, it said. For the true Dudleigh, it asserted, was still
missing. This was not the real man. The remains found in the well had
never been accounted for. Justice had foregone its claims too readily.
The act remained, and the blood of the slain called aloud for vengeance.

How such a strange report was first started no one knew; but there it
was, and the Dalton mystery remained as obscure as ever.

Various circumstances contributed to increase the public suspicion. All
men saw that Dudleigh was different from this man, or else he had
greatly changed. For the former was always outside, in the world, while
this man remained secluded and shut up in the Hall. Why did he never
show himself? Why did he surround himself with all this secrecy? This
was the question.

The servants were eagerly questioned whenever any of them made their
appearance in the village, but as they were all new in the place, their
testimony was of little value. They could only say that he was devoted
to the invalid, and that he called Miss Dalton by that name, and had
called her by that name when he engaged them for her service.

Soon public opinion took two different forms, and two parties arose. One
of these believed the present Dudleigh to be an impostor; the other,
however, maintained that he was the real man, and that the change in his
character was to be accounted for on the grounds of the terrible
calamities that had resulted from his thoughtlessness, together with his
own repentance for the suffering which he had inflicted.

Meanwhile the subject of all this excitement and gossip was living in
his own seclusion, quite apart from the outside world. One change,
however, had taken place in his life which required immediate action on
his part.

A great number of letters had come for "Captain Dudleigh." The receipt
of these gave him trouble. They were reminders of various pecuniary
obligations which had been contracted some time previously. They were,
in short--duns. He had been at Dalton Hall some six weeks before these
interesting letters began to arrive. After that time they came in
clusters, fast and frequent. The examination of these formed no small
part of his occupation when he was alone.

Some of these letters were jocular in their tone, reminding him of his
chronic impecuniosity, and his well-known impracticability in every
thing relating to money. These jocular letters, however, never failed to
remind him that, as he had made a rich match, there was no reason why he
should not pay his debts, especially as the writers were hard up, and
had waited so long without troubling him. These jocular letters, in
fact, informed him that if a settlement was not made at once, it would
be very much the worse for Dudleigh.

Others were from old sporting companions, reminding him of bets which
had not been paid, expressing astonishment which was child-like in its
simplicity, and requesting an immediate settlement. These were generally
short, curt, and altogether unpleasant.

Others were business letters, containing the announcement of notes
falling due. Others were from lawyers, stating the fact that certain
specified claims had been put in their hands for collection, and
requesting early attention.

All these seemed to come together. Misfortunes, says the proverb, never
come singly, and duns may fairly be reckoned among misfortunes. These
duns, however, troublesome though they were, were one by one got rid of
by the simple and effectual process of payment; for Dudleigh considered
it on the whole safer and better, under these peculiar circumstances, to
pay the money which was demanded than to expose himself to arrest or
lawsuits.

In connection with these affairs an event occurred which at the time
caused uneasiness, and gave the prospect of future trouble. One day a
gentleman called and sent up his card. It was Captain Cruikshank. The
name Dudleigh recognized as one which had been appended to several
dunning letters of the most importunate kind, and the individual himself
was apparently some sporting friend.

On going down Dudleigh saw a portly, bald-headed man, with large
whiskers, standing in front of one of the drawing-room windows, looking
out. He seemed midway between a gentleman and a blackleg, being neither
altogether one nor the other. At the noise of Dudleigh's entrance he
turned quickly around, and with a hearty, bluff manner walked up to him
and held out his hand.

Dudleigh fixed his eyes steadily upon those of the other man, and bowed,
without accepting the proffered hand, appearing not to see it. His whole
mien was full of aristocratic reserve, and cold, repellent distance of
manner, which checked the other in the midst of a full tide of voluble
congratulations into which he had flung himself. Thus interrupted, he
looked confused, stammered, and finally said,

"'Pon my honor, Dudleigh, you don't appear to be overcordial with an old
friend, that's seen you through so many scrapes as I have."

"Circumstances," said Dudleigh, "of a very painful character have forced
me to sever myself completely from all my former associates--all,
without exception."

"Well, of course--as to that, it's all right, I dare say," remarked the
other, from whom Dudleigh never removed his eyes; "but then, you know,
it seems to me that some friends ought to be--a--retained, you know, and
you and I, you know, were always of that sort that we were useful to one
another."

Placed comparatively near each other they could not remain permanently
in that position; they must gradually draw together and come into
collision with an awful crash.

There is only one way by which such a disaster could be averted. That is
by making one of these stars revolve around the other just as the earth
revolves around the sun, or the moon revolves around the earth. Some
motion must, therefore, be going on in every genuine double star,
whether we have been able to see that motion or not.

Let us now look at another double star of a different kind.

This time it is in the constellation of Gemini. The heavenly twins
are called Castor and Pollux. Of these, Castor is a very beautiful
double star, consisting of two bright points, a great deal closer
together than were those in the Great Bear; consequently a better telescope
is required for the purpose of showing them separately.

Castor has been watched for many years, and it can be seen that one
of these stars is slowly revolving around the other; but it takes
a very long time, amounting to hundreds of years, for a complete
circuit to be accomplished.

This seems very astonishing, but when you remember how exceedingly far
Castor is, you will perceive that that pair of stars which appear
so close together that it requires a telescope to show them apart
must indeed be separated by hundreds of millions of miles.

Let us try to conceive our own system transformed into a double
star.
If we took our outermost planet--Neptune--and enlarged him a good
deal, and then heated him sufficiently to make him glow like a sun,
he would still continue to revolve round our sun at the same distance,
and thus a double star would be produced.

An inhabitant of Castor who turned his telescope towards us would be
able to see the sun as a star. He would not, of course, be able to
see the earth, but he might see Neptune like another small star
close to the sun. If generations of astronomers in Castor continued their
observations of our system, they would find a binary star, of which
one component took a century and a half to go round the other.

Need we then be surprised that when we look at Castor we observe
movements that seem very slow?

There is often so much diffused light about the bright stars seen in a
telescope, and so much twinkling in some states of the atmosphere,
that stars appear to dance about in rather a puzzling fashion,
especially to one who is not accustomed to astronomical observations.

I remember hearing how a gentleman once came to visit an observatory.

The astronomer showed him Castor through a powerful telescope as a
fine specimen of a double star, and then, by way of improving his
little lesson, the astronomer mentioned that one of these stars was
revolving around the other.

"Oh, yes," said the visitor, "I saw them going round and round in the
telescope." He would, however, have had to wait for a few centuries with
his eye to the instrument before he would have been entitled to
make this assertion.

Double stars also frequently delight us by giving beautifully contrasted
colors. I dare say you have often noticed the red and the green lights
that are used on railways in the signal lamps.

Imagine one of those red and one of those green lights away far up
in the sky and placed close together, then you would have some idea
of the appearance that a colored double star presents, though,
perhaps, I should add that the hues in the heavenly bodies are not
so vividly different as are those which our railway people find
necessary.

There is a particularly beautiful double star of this kind in the
constellation of the Swan.

You could make an imitation of it by boring two holes, with a red-hot
needle, in a piece of card, and then covering one of these holes with a
small bit of the topaz-colored gelatine with which Christmas crackers
are made. The other star is to be similarly colored with blue
gelatine. A slide made on this principle placed in the lantern gives a
very good representation of these two stars on the screen. There are
many other colored doubles besides this one; and, indeed, it is
noteworthy that we hardly ever find a blue or a green star by itself
in the sky; it is always as a member of one of these pairs.

How We Find What the Stars are Made of.

Here is a piece of stone. If I wanted to know what it was composed of, I
should ask a chemist to tell me. He would take it into his laboratory,
and first crush it into powder, and then, with his test tubes, and
with the liquids which his bottles contain, and his weighing scales,
and other apparatus, he would tell all about it; there is so much
of this, and so much of that, and plenty of this, and none at all
of that.

       But now, suppose you ask this chemist to tell you what the sun is
made of, or one of the stars.

Of course, you have not a sample of it to give him; how, then, can
he possibly find out anything about it?

Well, he can tell you something, and this is the wonderful discovery
that I want to explain to you.

We now put down the gas, and I kindle a brilliant red light. Perhaps some
of those whom I see before me have occasionally ventured on the somewhat
dangerous practice of making fire-works. If there is any boy here who
has ever constructed sky-rockets, and put the little balls into the top
which are to burn with such vivid colors when the explosion takes
place, he will know that the substance which tinged that fire red must
have been strontium.

He will recognize it by the color; because strontium gives a red light
which nothing else will give. Here are some of these lightning papers,
as they are called; they are very pretty and very harmless; and these,
too, give brilliant red flashes as I throw them.
The red tint has, no doubt, been produced by strontium also. You see we
recognized the substance simply by the color of the light it produced
when burning.

Perhaps some of you have tried to make a ghost at Christmas by dressing
up in a sheet, and bearing in your hand a ladle blazing with a mixture
of common salt and spirits of wine, the effect produced being a most
ghastly one. Some mammas will hardly thank me for this suggestion,
unless I add that the ghost must walk about cautiously, for otherwise
the blazing spirit would be very apt to produce conflagrations of a kind
more extensive than those intended. However, by the kindness of Professor
Dewar, I am enabled to show the phenomenon on a splendid scale,
and also free from all danger.

I kindle a vivid flame of an intensely yellow color, which I think the
ladies will unanimously agree is not at all becoming to their complexions,
while the pretty dresses have lost their variety of colors. Here
is a nice bouquet, and yet you can hardly distinguish the green of the
leaves from the brilliant colors of the flowers, except by trifling
differences of shade. Expose to this light a number of pieces of
variously colored ribbon, pink and red and green and blue, and their
beauty is gone; and yet we are told that this yellow is a perfectly
pure color; in fact, the purest color that can be produced.
I think we have to be thankful that the light which our good sun sends us
does not possess purity of that description. There is one substance which
will produce that yellow light; it is a curious metal called sodium--a
metal so soft that you can cut it with a knife, and so light that it
will float on water; while, still more strange, it actually takes fire
the moment it is dropped on the water. It is only in a chemical laboratory
that you will be likely to meet with the actual metallic sodium, yet
in other forms the substance is one of the most abundant in nature.
Indeed, common salt is nothing but sodium closely united with a most
poisonous gas, a few respirations of which would kill you.

But this strange metal and this noxious gas, when united, become
simply the salt for our eggs at breakfast. This pure yellow light, wherever
it is seen, either in the flame of spirits of wine mixed with salt or
in that great blaze at which we have been looking, is characteristic
of sodium. Wherever you see that particular kind of light, you know that
sodium must have been present in the body from which it came.

We have accordingly learned to recognize two substances, namely,
strontium and sodium, by the different lights which they give out
when burning. To these two metals we may add a third. Here is a strip of
white metallic ribbon. It is called magnesium. It seems like a bit of
tin at the first glance, but indeed it is a very different substance
from tin; for, look, when I hold it in the spirit-lamp, the strip
of metal immediately takes fire, and burns with a white light so
dazzling that it pales the gas-flames to insignificance.

There is no other substance which will, when kindled, give that
particular kind of light which we see from magnesium. I can recommend
this little experiment as quite suitable for trying at home; you
can buy a bit of magnesium ribbon for a trifle at the opticians;
it cannot explode or do any harm, nor will you get into any trouble
with the authorities provided you hold it when burning over a tray or
a newspaper, so as to prevent the white ashes from falling on the
carpet.

There are, in nature, a number of simple bodies called elements.
Every one of these, when ignited under suitable conditions, emits a light
which belongs to it alone, and by which it can be distinguished from
every other substance.

I do not say that we can try the experiments in the simple way I have
here indicated. Many of the materials will yield light which will
require to be studied by much more elaborate artifices than those which
have sufficed for us. But you will see that the method affords a means
of finding out the actual substances present in the sun or in the
stars. There is a practical difficulty in the fact that each of the
heavenly bodies contains a number of different elements; so that in the
light it sends us the hues arising from distinct substances are
blended into one beam.

The first thing to be done is to get some way of splitting up a beam of
light, so as to discover the components of which it is made. You might
have a skein of silks of different hues tangled together, and this
would be like the sunbeam as we receive it in its unsorted condition.

How shall we untangle the light from the sun or a star? I will show you
by a simple experiment. Here is a beam from the electric light; beautifully
white and bright, is it not? It looks so pure and simple, but yet
that beam is composed of all sorts of colors mingled together, in
such proportions as to form white light. I take a wedge-shaped piece
of glass called a prism, and when I introduce it into the course of the
beam, you see the transformation that has taken place (Fig. 4).
Instead of the white light you have now all the colors of the rainbow--red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet, marked by their initial
letters in the figure.

These colors are very beautiful, but they are transient, for the moment
we take away the prism they all unite again to form white light.

You see what the prism has done; it has bent all the light in passing
through it; but it is more effective in bending the blue than the
red, and consequently the blue is carried away much further than the
red. Such is the way in which we study the composition of a heavenly
body. We take a beam of its light, we pass it through a prism, and
immediately it is separated into its components; then we compare what
we find with the lights given by the different elements, and thus we
are enabled to discover the substances which exist in the distant object
whose light we have examined. I do not mean to say that the method
is a simple one; all I am endeavoring to show is a general outline
of the way in which we have discovered the materials present in
the stars.

The instrument that is employed for this purpose is called the
spectroscope. And perhaps you may remember that name by these lines,
which I have heard from an astronomical friend:--
"Twinkle, twinkle, little star, Now we find out what you are, When
unto the midnight sky, We the spectroscope apply."
[Illustration: FIG. 4.

HOW A RAY OF LIGHT IS SPLIT UP.]

I am sure it will interest everybody to know that the elements which the
stars contain are not altogether different from those of which the earth
is made. It is true there may be substances in the stars of which
we know nothing here; but it is certain that many of the most common
elements on the earth are present in the most distant bodies.

I shall only mention one, the metal iron. That useful substance has been
found in some of the stars which lie at almost incalculable distances
from the earth.

The Nebulæ.

In drawing towards the close of these lectures I must say a few words about
some dim and mysterious objects to which we have not yet alluded. They
are what are called nebulæ, or little clouds; and in one sense they
are justly called little, for each of them occupies but a very small
spot in the sky as compared with that which would be filled by an
ordinary cloud in our air.

The nebulæ are, however, objects of the most stupendous proportions. Were
our earth and thousands of millions of bodies quite as big all put
together, they would not be nearly so great as one of these nebulæ.
Astronomers reckon up the various nebulæ by thousands, but I must add
that most of them are apparently faint and uninteresting. A nebula is
sometimes liable to be mistaken for a comet. The comet is, as I
have already explained, at once distinguished by the fact that it
is moving and changing its appearance from hour to hour, while
scores of years elapse without changes in the aspect or position
of a nebula.

The most powerful telescopes are employed in observing these faint objects.
I take this opportunity of showing a picture of an instrument suitable
for such observations. It is the great reflector of the Paris Observatory
(Fig. 5).

[Illustration: FIG. 5. A GREAT REFLECTING TELESCOPE.]
[Illustration: FIG. 6. THE RING NEBULA IN LYRA, UNDER DIFFERENT
TELESCOPIC POWERS.]

There are such multitudes of nebulæ that I can only show a few of the
more remarkable kinds. In Fig. 6 will be seen pictures of a curious
object in the constellation of Lyra seen under different telescopic powers.
This is a gigantic ring of luminous gas. To judge of the size of this
ring let us suppose that a railway were laid across it, and the train you
entered at one side was not to stop until it reached the other
side, how long do you think this journey would require? I recollect some
time ago a picture in _Punch_ which showed a train about to start from
London to Brighton, and the guard walking up and down announcing to the
passengers the alarming fact that "this train stops nowhere."

An old gentleman was seen vainly gesticulating out of the window and
imploring to be let out ere the frightful journey was commenced. In
the nebular railway the passengers would almost require such a
warning.

Let the train start at a speed of a mile a minute, you would think,
surely, that it must soon cross the ring. But the minutes pass, an hour
has elapsed; so the distance must be sixty miles at all events.
The hours creep on into days, the days advance into years, and still the
train goes on. The years would lengthen out into centuries, and even
when the train had been rushing on for a thousand years with an
unabated speed of a mile a minute, the journey would certainly not have
been completed. Nor do I venture to say what ages must elapse ere
the terminus at the other side of the ring nebula would be reached.

A cluster of stars viewed in a small telescope will often seem like a
nebula, for the rays of the stars become blended. A powerful telescope
will, however, dispel the illusion and reveal the separate stars.

It was, therefore, thought that all the nebulæ might be merely clusters
so exceedingly remote that our mightiest instruments failed to
resolve them into stars. But this is now known not to be the case.
Many of these objects are really masses of glowing gas; such are, for
instance, the ring nebulæ, of which I have just spoken, and the form
of which I can simulate by a pretty experiment.

We take a large box with a round hole cut in one face, and a canvas
back at the opposite side.

I first fill this box with smoke, and there are different ways of doing
so. Burning brown paper does not answer well, because the supply of
smoke is too irregular and the paper itself is apt to blaze. A little
bit of phosphorus set on fire yields copious smoke, but it would be apt
to make people cough, and, besides, phosphorus is a dangerous thing
to handle incautiously, and I do not want to suggest anything which
might be productive of disaster if the experiment was repeated at home.
A little wisp of hay, slightly damped and lighted, will safely
yield a sufficient supply, and you need not have an elaborate box like
this; any kind of old packing-case, or even a bandbox with a duster
stretched across its open top and a round hole cut in the bottom,
will answer capitally. While I have been speaking, my assistant has kindly
filled this box with smoke, and in order to have a sufficient
supply, and one which shall be as little disagreeable as possible, he
has mixed together the fumes of hydrochloric acid and ammonia
from two retorts shown in Fig. 7. A still simpler way of doing the
same thing is to put a little common salt in a saucer and pour
over it a little oil of vitriol; this is put into the box, and over
the floor of the box common smelling-salts is to be scattered.

You see there are dense volumes of white smoke escaping from every
corner of the box. I uncover the opening and give a push to the canvas,
and you see a beautiful ring flying across the room; another ring and
another follows. If you were near enough to feel the ring, you would
experience a little puff of wind; I can show this by blowing out a
candle which is at the other end of the table.
These rings are made by the air which goes into a sort of eddy as it
passes through the hole. All the smoke does is to render the air visible.
The smoke-ring is indeed quite elastic. If we send a second ring
hurriedly after the first, we can produce a collision, and you see
each of the two rings remains unbroken, though both are quivering from
the effects of the blow. They are beautifully shown along the beam of
the electric lamp, or, better still, along a sunbeam.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.

HOW TO MAKE THE SMOKE RINGS.]
We can make many experiments with smoke-rings. Here, for instance,
I take an empty box, so far as smoke is concerned, but air-rings
can be driven forth from it, though you cannot see them, but you can
feel them even at the other side of the room, and they will, as you
see, blow out a candle. I can also shoot invisible air-rings
at a column of smoke, and when the missile strikes the smoke it produces
a little commotion and emerges on the other side, carrying with it enough
of the smoke to render itself visible, while the solid black looking
ring of air is seen in the interior. Still more striking is another
way of producing these rings, for I charge this box with ammonia, and
the rings from it you cannot see. There is a column of the vapor of
hydrochloric acid, that also you cannot see; but when the visible
ring enters the invisible column, then a sudden union takes place between
the vapor of the ammonia and the vapor of the hydrochloric acid; the
result is a solid white substance in extremely fine dust which
renders the ring instantly visible.

What the Nebulæ are made of.

There is a fundamental difference between the illumination of these
little rings that I have shown you and the great rings in the heavens.

I had to illuminate our smoke with the help of the electric light, for,
unless I had done so, you would not have been able to see them.
This white substance formed by the union of ammonia and hydrochloric
acid has, of course, no more light of its own than a piece of chalk;
it requires other light falling upon it to make it visible. Were the
ring nebula in Lyra composed of this material, we could not see it.

The sunlight which illuminates the planets might, of course, light up
such an object as the ring, if it wrere comparatively near us; but Lyra
is at such a stupendous distance that any light which the sun could send
out there would be just as feeble as the light we receive from a fixed
star. Should we be able to show our smoke-rings, for instance, if,
instead of having the electric light, I merely cut a hole in the ceiling
and allowed the feeble twinkle of a star in the Great Bear to shine
through?

       In a similar way the sunbeams would be utterly powerless to effect
any illumination of objects in these stellar distances.

If the sun were to be extinguished altogether, the calamity would
no doubt be a very dire one so far as we are concerned, but the
effect on the other celestial bodies (moon and planets excepted)
would be of the slightest possible description.

All the stars of heaven would continue to shine as before.

Not a point in one of the constellations wrould be altered, not a variation
in the brightness, not a change in the hue of any star could be noticed.
The thousands of nebulæ and clusters would be absolutely unaltered; in
fact, the total extinction of the sun would be hardly remarked in
the newspapers published in the Pleiades or in Orion.

There might possibly be a little line
somewhere in an odd corner to the effect "Mr.

So-and-So, our well-known astronomer, has noticed that a tiny star,
inconspicuous to the eye, and absolutely of no importance whatever,
has now become invisible."
If, therefore, it be not the sun which lights up this nebula, where
else can be the source of its illumination?

There can be no other star in the neighborhood adequate to the purpose,
for, of course, such an object would be brilliant to us if it were
large enough and bright enough to impart sufficient illumination to
the nebula. It would be absurd to say that you could see a man's face by
the light of a candle while the candle itself was too faint or too
distant to be visible.

The actual facts are, of course, the other way; the candle might be
visible, when it was impossible to discern the face which it lighted.

Hence we learn that the ring nebula must shine by some light of its
own, and now we have to consider how it can be possible for such
material to be self-luminous.

The light of a nebula does not seem to be like flame; it can, perhaps, be
better represented by the pretty electrical experiment with Geissler's
tubes. These are glass vessels of various shapes, and they are all very
nearly empty, as you will understand when I tell you the way in which
they have been prepared. A little gas was allowed into each tube, and
then almost all the gas was taken out again, so that only a mere trace
was left.

I pass a current of electricity through these tubes, and now you
see they are glowing with beautiful colors.

The different gases give out lights of different hues, and the optician
has exerted his skill so as to make the effect as beautiful as possible.

But the terror which had at first frozen Edith into stone now gave way
to another feeling, a terror quite as strong, but which, instead of
congealing her into inaction, roused her to frenzied exertion.
Dudleigh's life was at stake! Terror for herself was paralysis to her
limbs; terror for him was the madness of desperate exertion and daring.

She sprang toward one of the by-standers, who had a knife in his hand.
This knife she snatched from him, and rushed toward Dudleigh. The dog
was still writhing in his furious straggles. Dudleigh was still holding
him down, and clutching at his throat with, death-like tenacity. For a
moment she paused, and then flinging herself upon her knees at the dog's
head, she plunged the knife with all her strength into the side of his
neck.

It was a mortal wound!

With a last howl, the huge animal relaxed his efforts, and in a few
moments lay dead in the road.

Dudleigh rose to his feet. There was in his face an expression of pain
and apprehension. The villagers stood aloof, staring at him with awful
eyes. No word of congratulation was spoken. The silence was ominous;
it was terrible. Edith was struck most of all by the expression of
Dudleigh's face, and read there what she dared not think of. For a
moment the old horror which had first seized upon her came upon her once
more, paralyzing her limbs. She looked at him with staring eyes as she
knelt, and the bloody knife dropped from her nerveless hands. But the
horror passed, and once more, as before, was succeeded by vehement
action. She sprang to her feet, and caught at his coat as he walked
away.

He turned, with downcast eyes.

"O my God!" she exclaimed, in anguish, "you are wounded--you are
bitten--and by that--" She could not finish her sentence.

Dudleigh gave her an awful look.

"You will die! you will die!" she almost screamed. "Oh, cannot
something be done? Let me look at your arm. Oh, let me examine it--let
me see where it is! Show me--tell me what I can do."

Dudleigh had turned to enter the smithy as Edith had arrested him, and
now, standing there in the doorway, he gently disengaged himself from
her grasp. Then he took off his coat and rolled up his sleeve.

Edith had already noticed that his coat sleeve was torn, and now, as he
took off his coat, she saw, with unutterable horror, his white shirt
sleeves red with spots of blood. As he rolled up that sleeve she saw
the marks of bruises on his arm; but it was on one place in particular
that her eyes were fastened--a place where a red wound, freshly made,
showed the source of the blood stains, and told at what a terrible price
he had rescued her from the fierce beast. He had conquered, but not
easily, for he had carried off this wound, and the wound was, as he
knew, and as she knew, the bite of a mad dog!

Edith gave a low moan of anguish and despair. She took his arm in her
hands. Dudleigh did not withdraw it. Even at that moment of horror it
seemed sweet to him to see these signs of feeling on her part; and
though he did not know what it was that she had in her mind, he waited,
to feel for a moment longer the clasp of those hands.

Edith held his arm in her hands, and the terrible wound fascinated her
eyes with horror. It seemed to her at that moment that this was the doom
of Dudleigh, the stamp of his sure and certain death. It seemed to her
that this mark was the announcement to her that henceforth Dudleigh was
lost to her; that he must die--die by a death so horrible that its
horrors surpassed language and even imagination, and that this
unutterable doom had been drawn down upon him for her.

It had been terrible. Out of pleasant thoughts and genial conversation
and genie smiles and happy interchange of sentiment, out of the joy of a
glad day, out of the delight of golden hours and sunlight and beauty and
peace--to be plunged suddenly into a woe like this!

There came to her a wild and desperate thought. Only one idea was in her
mind--to save Dudleigh, to snatch this dear friend from the death to
which he had flung himself for her sake. Inspired by this sole idea,
there had come a sudden thought. It was the thought of that royal wife's
devotion who, when her young husband lay dying from the poisoned dagger
of an assassin, drew the poison from the wound, and thus snatched him
from the very grasp of death. This it was, then, that was in the mind
of Edith, and it was in her agonized heart at that moment to save
Dudleigh even as Eleanor had saved Edward.

She bent down her head, till her face was close to his arm.

Dudleigh looked on as in a dream. He did not know, he could not even
conceive, what she had in her heart to do for his sake. It would have
seemed incredible, had he not seen it; nor could he have imagined it,
had he not been convinced.

The discovery flashed suddenly, vividly across his mind. He recognized
in that one instant the love, the devotion, stronger than death, which
was thus manifesting itself in that slight movement of that adored one
by his side. It was a thought of sweetness unutterable, which amidst his
agony sent a thrill of rapture through every nerve.

It was but for a moment.

He gently withdrew his arm. She looked at him reproachfully and
imploringly. He turned away his face firmly.

"Will you leave me for a moment, Miss Dalton?" said he, in a choking
voice.

He pointed to the doorway.

She did not appear to understand him. She stood, with her face white as
ashes, and looked at him with the same expression.

"Leave me--oh, leave me," he said, "for one moment! It is not fit for
you."

She did not move.

[Illustration: "THERE WAS THE HISS OF SOMETHING SCORCHING."]

Dudleigh could wait no longer. His soul was roused up to a desperate
purpose, but the execution of that purpose could not he delayed. He
sprang to the fire. One of the irons had been imbedded there in the
glowing coals. He had seen this in his despair, and had started toward
it, when Edith detained him. This iron he snatched out. It was at a
white heat, dazzling in its glow.

In an instant he plunged this at the wound. A low cry like a muffled
groan was wrung from the spectators, who watched the act with eyes of
utter horror.

There was the hiss of something scorching; a sickening smoke arose and
curled up about his head, and ascended to the roof. But in the midst of
this Dudleigh stood as rigid as Mucius Scaevola under another fiery
trial, with the hand that held the glowing iron and the arm that felt
the awful torment as steady as though he had been a statue fashioned in
that attitude. Thus he finished his work.

It was all over in a few seconds. Then Dudleigh turned, with his face
ghastly white, and big drops of perspiration, wrung out by that agony,
standing over his brow. He flung down the iron.

At the same moment Edith, yielding altogether to the horror that had
hitherto overwhelmed her, fell senseless to the floor.

By this time some among the crowd had regained the use of their
faculties, and these advanced to offer their services. Dudleigh was able
to direct them to take Edith to some shelter, and while they did so he
followed. Edith after some time revived. A doctor was sent for, who
examined Dudleigh's arm, and praised him for his prompt action, while
wondering at his daring. He bound it up, and gave some general
directions.

Meanwhile a messenger had been sent to Dalton Hall for the carriage.
Edith, though she had revived, hardly felt strong enough for horseback,
and Dudleigh's arm was sufficiently painful to make him prefer as great
a degree of quiet as possible. When the carriage came, therefore, it was
with feelings of great relief that they took their seats and prepared to
go back. Nor was their journey any the less pleasant from the fact that
they had to sit close together, side by side--a closer union than any
they had thus far known. It was an eventful day; nor was its conclusion
the least so. But little was said during the drive home. Each felt what
bad been done by the other. Edith remembered how Dudleigh had risked the
most terrible, the most agonizing of deaths to save her. Dudleigh, on
his part, remembered that movement of hers, by which she was about to
take the poison from his wound unto herself. The appalling event which
had occurred had broken down all reserve. All was known. Each knew that
the other was dearer than all the world. Each knew that the other loved
and was loved; but yet in the midst of this knowledge there was a
feeling of utter helplessness arising from the unparalleled position of
Edith. It was a peculiar and at the same time a perilous one.

In the eyes of the world these two were nothing less than man and wife.
In the eyes of the law, as Edith feared, she was the wife of Leon
Dudleigh.

Now this man was not Leon Dudleigh. He was an impostor. Edith did not
even know that his name was Dudleigh at all. She had never asked him
the secret of his life; he had never volunteered to tell it. She did
not know what his name really was.

As an impostor, she knew that he was liable to discovery, arrest, and
punishment at any time. She knew that the discovery of this man would
endanger herself. His arrest would involve hers, and she would once more
be tried for her life, as the murderer of the missing man, with the
additional disadvantage of having already eluded justice by a trick. She
was liable at any moment to this, for the missing man was still missing,
and it would go doubly hard for her, since she had aided and abetted for
so long a time the conspiracy of an impostor.

Yet this impostor was beyond all doubt a man of the loftiest character,
most perfect breeding, and profoundest self-devotion. From the very
first his face had revealed to her that he had entered upon this
conspiracy for her sake. And since then, for her sake, what had he not
done?

Thus, then, they were both in a position of peril. They loved one
another passionately. But they could not possess one another. The
world supposed them man and wife, but the law made her the wife of
another, of whom it also charged her with being the murderer. Around
these two there were clouds of darkness, deep and dense, and their
future was utterly obscure.

These things were in the minds of both of them through that drive, and
that evening as they walked about the grounds. For since their mutual
love had all been revealed, Dudleigh had spoken in words what he had
repressed so long, and Edith had confessed what had already been
extorted from her. Yet this mutual confession of love with all its
attendant endearments, had not blinded them to the dangers of their
position and the difficulties that lay in their way.

"I can not endure this state of things," said Dudleigh. "For your sake,
as well as my own, Edith darling, it must be brought to an end. I have
not been idle, but I have waited to hear from those who have put
themselves on the track of the man from whom we have most to dread. One
has tried to find some trace of Leon; the other is my mother. Now I have
not heard from either of them, and I am beginning to feel not only
impatient, but uneasy."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER LI.


IMPORTANT NEWS.

The position of Edith and Dudleigh was of such a character that farther
inaction was felt to be intolerable, and it was only the hope of hearing
from those who were already engaged in the work that made him capable of
delaying longer. But several events now occurred which put an end to the
present state of things.

The first of these was a marked improvement in the condition of Mr.
Dalton. A successful operation performed upon him had the result of
restoring him to consciousness, and after this a general increase of
strength took place. His intense joy at the sight of Edith, and the
delight which he felt at her presence and the reception of her loving
and tender care, all acted favorably upon him; and as the sorrow which
he had experienced had been the chief cause of his prostration, so the
happiness which he now felt became a powerful agent toward restoring him
to strength.

The joy of Edith was so great that the terror and perplexity of her
position ceased to alarm her. Her greatest grief seemed now removed, for
she had feared that her father might die without ever knowing how deeply
she repented for the past and how truly she loved him. Now, however, he
would live to receive from her those tender cares which, while they
could never in her mind atone for the wrongs that she had inflicted upon
him, would yet be the means of giving some happiness to him who had
suffered go much.

A few days after her father's restoration to consciousness Dudleigh
received a letter of a most important character, and as soon as he was
able to see Edith during the walks that they still took in the afternoon
or evening, he informed her with unusual emotion of the fact.

"She writes," he concluded, "that she has got at last on the track of
Leon."

"Who? Your mother?"

"No. I have not heard from my mother. I mean Miss Fortescue."

"Miss Fortescue?" repeated Edith, in some surprise.

"Yes," said Dudleigh. "I did not mention her before, because I did not
know what you might think about it. But the fact is, I saw her after the
trial was over. She had come to give important testimony. She came to
see me, and told me all about it. The information was of the most
extraordinary kind. It appears that in the course of her own inquiries
she had heard some gossip about a long box which had been put off at
Finsbury from the train. This was called for by a teamster, who was
accompanied by a Newfoundland dog, who took the box, and drove away from
Finsbury to Dalton. Now, as no such teamster, or box, or dog, had been
seen in Dalton, she began to suspect that it had something to do with
the remains found in the well, and that this whole matter was a
malignant scheme of Leon's to involve you or your father, or both, in
some calamity. At any rate, she herself went cautiously about, and
tried to investigate for herself. She had all along felt convinced that
Leon was alive, and she felt equally convinced that he was capable of
any malignant act for the purpose of wreaking his vengeance on you or
your father. He had been baffled here, and had sworn vengeance. That
much your father told me before the trial.

"So Miss Fortescue searched very carefully, and at length made a very
important discovery. A few miles this side of Finsbury there is a
grove, through which the Dalton Park wall runs. Here she happened to see
the trace of heavy wheels, and the hedge which adjoins the wall, and is
rather thin there, seemed to have been broken through, so as to form an
opening wide enough to admit a cart. Struck by this, she followed the
marks of the wheels into the grove for some distance, until they
stopped. Here, to her surprised, she saw close by the Dalton Park wall
an oblong box, just like the one which had been described to her. It was
empty, and had been left here.

"Now why had it been left here? Miss Fortescue felt certain that Leon
had brought a dead body in that box, that he had taken it stealthily
into the park, and thrown it down into the well, and then, not wishing
to be seen with such a very conspicuous thing as this box, he had left
it behind him. She also thought that he had managed in a secret way to
start the rumors that had prevailed, and to drop some hints, either by
anonymous letters to the sheriff or otherwise, which turned their
attention to the well. She saw at once how important this testimony
would be in your favor, and therefore saw the Finsbury people who had
told her of the teamster, and with these she came to the trial. But when
she came she heard that the missing man had returned--and saw me, you
know."

At this extraordinary information Edith was silent for some time.

"I have often tried to account for it," said she, "but I could hardly
bring myself to believe that this was his work. But now when I recalled
his last words to me, I can understand it, and I am forced to believe
it."

"His last words to you?" said Dudleigh, in an inquiring tone.

"Yes," said Edith, with a sigh. "The remembrance of that night is so
distressing that I have never felt able to speak of it. Even the
thought of what I suffered then almost drives me wild; but now--and to
_you_, Reginald--it is different, and I have strength to speak of
it."

As she said this she looked at him tenderly, and Reginald folded her in
his arms. She then began to give an account of that eventful night, of
her long preparations, her suspense, her departure, until that moment
when she saw that she was pursued. The remainder only need be given
here.

She had been right in her conjectures. Leon had suspected, or at least
had watched, and discovered all. The moonlight had revealed her plainly
as she stole across the open area, and when she fled into the woods the
rustling and crackling had betrayed the direction which she had taken.
Thus it was that Leon had been able to pursue her, and his first
sneering words as he came up to her made her acquainted with her
awkwardness. The trees were not so close but that her figure could be
seen; the moonlight streamed down, and disclosed her standing at bay,
desperate, defiant, with her dagger uplifted, and her arm nerved to
strike. This Leon saw, and being afraid to venture close to her, he held
aloof, and tried to conceal his cowardice in taunts and sneers.

Edith said nothing for some time, but at last, seeing that Leon
hesitated, she determined to continue her flight in spite of him, and
informed him so.

Upon this he threatened to set the dog on her.

"He will tear you to pieces," cried Leon. "No one will suspect that I
had any thing to do with it. Every body will believe that in trying to
run away you were caught by the dog."

This threat, however, did not in the least alarm Edith. She was not
afraid of the dog. She had already gained the animal's affections by
various little acts of kindness. So now, in response to Leon's threats,
she held out her hand toward the dog and called him. The dog wagged his
tail and made a few steps forward. At this Leon grew infuriated, and
tried to set him at Edith. But the dog would not obey. Leon then held
him, pointed his head toward Edith, and doing all in his power to urge
him on. The effort, however, was completely useless. Edith, seeing
this, hurried away. Leon rushed after her, followed by the dog, and once
more she stood at bay, while the same efforts were repeated to set the
dog at her. This was done several times over. At last Leon gave the dog
a terrible beating. Wild with indignant rage at his cowardice,
brutality, and persistent pursuit, full also of pity for the poor animal
who was suffering for love of her, Edith sprang forward at Leon as
though she would stab him. Whether she would have done so or not, need
not be said; at any rate her purpose was gained, for Leon, with a cry of
fear, started back.

Then standing at a safe distance, he hurled at her the most terrible
threats of vengeance. Among all these she remembered well one
expression, which he repeated over and over.

"You've threatened my life!" he cried.

"My life shall lie at your door, if I have to kill myself."

This he said over and over. But Edith did not wait much longer. Once
more she started off, and this time Leon did not follow her. That was
the last she saw or heard of him. After this she wandered about through
woods and swamps for a long time, and at length, about the dawn of day,
when she had almost lost all hope, she came to the wall. This she
clambered over by means of her rope and hook, and reached the Dalton Inn
in the condition already described.

Afterward, when she heard that Leon was missing, and when she was
confronted with the remains, the whole horror of her situation burst
upon her mind. Her first thought was that he had in his desperate rage
actually killed himself; but the absence of the head showed that this
was impossible. There remained after this a deep mystery, the solution
of which she could not discover, but in the midst of which she could not
fail to see how terribly circumstances bore against her. She was afraid
to say any thing. She knew that if she told all she would be believed
but in part. If she confessed that she had seen him, and had quarreled
with him on that night, then all men would conclude that she had also
murdered him so as to escape. She saw also how hopeless it was to look
for any testimony in her favor. Every thing was against her. Being in
ignorance of her father and Lady Dudleigh, she had supposed that they
would be most relentless of all in doing her to death; and the
excitement of the latter over the loss of Leon was never suspected by
her to be the frenzied grief of a mother's heart over a sudden and most
agonizing bereavement.

But now all these things were plain. Another shared her secret--one,
too, who would lay down his life for her--and the efforts of Miss
Fortescue had resulted in suggesting to her mind a new solution of the
mystery.

After the natural comments which were elicited by Edith's strange story,
Reginald showed her the letter which he had received from Miss
Fortescue. It was not very long, nor was it very definite. It merely
informed him that she had reason to believe that she had at last got
upon the track of Leon; and requested him to come to her at once, as
there was danger of losing this opportunity if there was any delay. She
appointed a place at which she would meet him three days from the date
of the letter, where she would wait several days to allow for all delay
in his reception of the letter. The place which she mentioned was known
to Reginald as the nearest station on the railway to Dudleigh Manor.

"This must decide all," said Reginald. "They are playing a desperate
game, and the part which must be done by my mother and myself is a
terrible one. If we fail in this, we may have to fly at once. But if I
can only see Leon once, so as to drag him before the world, and show
that he is alive--if I can only save you, darling, from your terrible
position, then I can bear other evils in patience for a time longer."

"You have heard nothing from your mother, then?" said Edith.

"No," said he, with a sigh. "And I feel anxious--terribly anxious. I was
very unwilling for her to go, and warned her against it; but she was
determined, and her reasons for doing so were unanswerable; still I feel
terribly alarmed, for Sir Lionel is a man who would stop at nothing to
get rid of one whom he thinks is the only witness against him."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "THEY WERE STARTLED BY THE APPROACH OF SEVERAL MEN."]


CHAPTER LII.


THE STORY OF FREDERICK DALTON.

After Dudleigh's departure Edith was left more exclusively with her
father, and had the satisfaction of seeing that under her tender care he
grew stronger and more happy every day. In the long confidences between
these two, who had once been so separated, all was gradually explained,
and Edith learned not only the whole truth about that calamity which had
befallen him in early life, but also the reason of that once
inexplicable policy which he had chosen with regard to herself.

Lionel Dudleigh and he had been friends from boyhood, though the weak
and lavish character of the former had gradually put them upon divergent
lines of life, which even Lionel's marriage with his sister, Claudine
Dalton, could not bring together again. For Lionel had fallen into evil
courses, and had taken to the common road of ruin--the turf; and though
it had been hoped that his marriage would work a reformation, yet those
hopes had all proved unfounded. Years passed. Two children were born to
Lionel Dudleigh--Reginald and Leon; yet not even the considerations of
their future welfare, which usually have weight with the most corrupt,
were sufficiency powerful to draw back the transgressor from his bad
career.

He became terribly involved in debt. Twice already his debts had been
paid, but this third time his father would assist him no longer. His
elder brother, then heir to the estate, was equally inexorable; and
Frederick Dalton was the one who came forward to save his sister's
husband and his old friend from destruction.

On this occasion, however, Lionel was not frank with Dalton. Perhaps he
was afraid to tell him the whole amount of his debts, for fear that
Dalton would refuse to do any thing. At any rate, whatever the cause
was, after Dalton had, as he supposed, settled every thing, Lionel was
pressed as hard as ever by a crowd of creditors, whom this partial
settlement had only rendered the more ravenous.

Pressed hard by one of these, the wretched man had forged a check on the
Liverpool banker, Mr. Henderson, and this check he had inclosed in a
letter to Frederick Dalton, requesting him to get the money and pay one
or two debts which he specified. This Dalton did at once, without
hesitation or suspicion of any sort.

Then came the discovery, swift and sudden, that it was a forgery. But
one feeling arose in Dalton's mind, and that was a desire to save
Lionel. He hurried off at once to see him. The wretched man confessed
all. Dalton at once went to Liverpool, where he saw Mr. Henderson, and
tried to save his friend. He came away from the interview, however only
to make known to Lionel the banker's obstinacy and resolution to have
vengeance.

Dalton's solicitor in Liverpool was Mr. John Wiggins. Lionel's presence
in Liverpool was not known to any one but Dalton. He had seen Wiggins
once, and persuaded Lionel to see him also, to which the latter
consented only with extreme difficulty. The interview never took place,
however, nor was Wiggins aware of Lionel's presence in Liverpool, or of
his guilt. Then the murder took place, and the paper was found which
criminated Dalton, who was at once arrested.

Dalton was thunder-struck, not so much at his own arrest as at the
desperation of his friend and his utter baseness. He knew perfectly well
who the murderer was. The Maltese cross which had been found was not
necessary to show him this. No other man could have had any motive, and
no other man could have thought of mentioning his name in connection
with the terrible deed. It was thus that Dalton found himself betrayed
in the foulest manner, through no other cause than his own generosity.

The horror of Mrs. Dudleigh on hearing of her brother's arrest was
excessive. She went off at once to see him. Even to her Dalton said
nothing about Lionel's guilt, for he wished to spare her the cruel blow
which such intelligence would give.

The feeling that now animated Dalton can easily be explained. In the
first place, knowing that he was innocent, he had not the faintest doubt
that he would be acquitted. He believed that where there was no guilt,
no such thing as guilt could be proved. He relied also on his
well-known reputation.

Feeling thus confident of his own innocence, and certain of acquittal,
he had only to ask himself what he ought to do with reference to Lionel.
Strict justice demanded that he should tell all that he knew; but there
were other considerations besides strict justice. There was the future
of Lionel himself, whom he wished to spare in spite of his baseness.
More than this, there was his sister and his sister's children. He could
not bring himself to inform against the guilty husband and father, and
thus crush their innocent heads under an overwhelming load of shame. He
never imagined that he himself, and his innocent wife and his innocent
child, would have to bear all that which he shrank from imposing upon
the wife and children of Lionel.

The trial went on, and then came forth revelations which showed all to
Mrs. Dudleigh. That Maltese cross was enough. It was the key to the
whole truth. She saw her brother, and asked him. He was silent. Frantic
with grief, she hurried back to her husband. To her fierce reproaches he
answered not a word. She now proceeded to Liverpool. Her brother
entreated her to be calm and silent. He assured her that there was no
possible danger to himself, and implored her, for the sake of her
children, to say nothing. She allowed herself to be convinced by him,
and to yield to entreaties uttered by the very accused himself, and in
the name of her children. She believed in his innocence, and could not
help sharing his confidence in an acquittal.

That acquittal did come--by a narrow chance, yet it did come; but at
once, to the consternation of both brother and sister, the new trial
followed. Here Dalton tried to keep up his confidence as before. His
counsel implored him to help them in making his defense by telling them
what he knew, but Dalton remained fatally obstinate. Proudly confiding
in his innocence, and trusting to his blameless life, he still hesitated
to do what he considered an act of merciless cruelty to his sister, and
he still persuaded her also to silence, and still prophesied his own
acquittal, and the rescue of her husband and children from ruin. Part
of his prophecy was fulfilled. The husband and children of the sister
were indeed saved, but it was at the expense of the innocent and devoted
brother.

The effect was terrible. Dalton heard of his wife's illness. He had
written to her before, full of confidence, and trying to cheer her; but
from the first Mrs. Dalton had looked for the worst; not that she
supposed her husband could possibly be otherwise than innocent, but
simply because she was timid and afraid of the law. She had good reason
to fear. Word was brought to Dalton that she was dying, and then the
news came that she was dead.

Meanwhile Mrs. Dudleigh, more frenzied than ever, flew to see her
husband. She found that he had gone to the Continent. She pursued him,
and reached him in Italy. Here she called upon him to confess his
guilt, and save his innocent friend. He refused. He dared not. She
threatened to denounce him. He fell at her feet and implored her mercy
in the name of their children. He entreated her to wait, to try other
means first, to get a new trial--any thing.

Mrs. Dudleigh's threats to inform against him were easy to make, yet not
so easy to carry out. Turning from her husband in horror, she returned
to England with the fixed intention of telling every thing. His letter
to Dalton could have been shown, and the Maltese cross could have proved
who the murderer was. But Mrs. Dudleigh's courage faltered when she
reached her home and saw her children. Already she had heard of Mrs.
Dalton's death; already she knew well that Edith Dalton was doomed to
inherit a name of shame, a legacy of dishonor, and that she alone could
now avert this. But to avert this she must doom her own children. Had
it been herself only and her guilty husband, it would have been easy to
he just; but here were her children standing in the way and keeping her
back.

Her struggles were agonizing. Time passed on; the delay was fatal.
Time passed, and the distracted mother could not make up her mind to
deal out ruin and shame to her children. Time passed, and Dalton was
taken away to that far-distant country to which he had been
sentenced--transported for life.

Other changes also took place. Lionel's father and elder brother both
died within a short time of one another, leaving him heir to the estate
and the baronetcy. He was now Sir Lionel Dudleigh, and she was Lady
Dudleigh; and her brother--the pure in heart, the noble, the
devoted--what and where was he?

The struggle was terrible, and she could not decide it. It seemed
abhorrent for her to rise up and denounce her husband, even to save her
brother. She could not do it, but she did what she could. She wrote
her husband a letter, bidding him farewell, and imploring him to
confess; took her son Reginald, the eldest, leaving behind the younger,
Leon, and prepared to go to her brother, hoping that if she could not
save him, she might at least alleviate his sorrows. She took with her
Hugo, a faithful old servant of the Dalton family, and with him and
Reginald went to Australia.

Meanwhile Dalton had been in the country for a year. Before leaving he
had not been unmindful of others even in that dire extremity. He had
only one thought, and that was his child. He had learned that Miss
Plympton had taken her, and he wrote to her, urging her never to tell
Edith her father's story, and never to let the world know that she was
his daughter. He appointed Wiggins agent for his estates and guardian
of Edith before he left; and having thus secured her interests for the
present, he went to meet his fate.

In Sydney he was treated very differently from the common convicts.
Criminals of all classes were sent out there, and to the better sort
large privileges were allowed. Dalton was felt by all to be a man of
the latter kind. His dignified bearing, his polish and refinement,
together with the well-known fact that he had so resolutely maintained
his innocence, all excited sympathy and respect.

When Lady Dudleigh arrived there with Hugo and her son, she soon found
out this, and this fact enabled her to carry into execution a plan which
she had cherished all along during the voyage. She obtained a sheep
farm about a hundred miles away, applied to the authorities, and was
able to hire Dalton as a servant. Taking him in this capacity, she went
with him to the sheep farm, where Hugo and Reginald also accompanied
them. One more was afterward added. This was the man "Wilkins," who
had been sentenced to transportation for poaching, and had come out in
the same ship with Dalton. Lady Dudleigh obtained this man also, under
Dalton's advice, and he ultimately proved of great assistance to them.

Here in this place years passed away. Dalton's only thought was of his
daughter. The short formal notes which were signed "John Wiggins," all
came from him. He could not trust himself to do any more. The sweet
childish letters which she wrote once or twice he kept next his heart,
and cherished as more precious than any earthly possession, but dared
not answer for fear lest he might break that profound secret which he
wished to be maintained between her and himself--her, the pure young
girl, himself, the dishonored outcast. So the years passed, and he
watched her from afar in his thoughts, and every year he thought of her
age, and tried to imagine what she looked like.

During these years there was rising among them another spirit--a
character--whose force was destined to change the fortune of all.

This was Reginald.

From the first he had known the whole story--more than Leon had known.
Leon had known his father's guilt and Dalton's innocence, but Reginald
had been the confidant of his mother, the witness of her grief and her
despair. He had lived with Dalton, and year after year had been the
witness of a spectacle which never ceased to excite the deepest emotion,
that of an innocent man, a just man, suffering wrongfully on behalf of
another. His own father he had learned to regard with horror, while all
the enthusiastic love of his warm young heart had fixed itself upon the
man who had done all this for another. He knew for whom Dalton had
suffered. It was for his mother, and for himself, and he knew that he
was every day living on the sufferings and the woe of this
broken-hearted friend. Gradually other motives arose. He was a witness
of Dalton's profound and all-absorbing love for his daughter, and his
passionate desire to save her from all knowledge of his own shame. To
Reginald all this grew more and more intolerable. He now saw the worst
result of all, and he felt that while his own father had thrown upon his
friend his load of infamy, so he himself, the son, was throwing upon
Edith Dalton all that inherited infamy.

At last his resolution was taken. He informed his mother. She had been
aware of his struggles of soul for years, and did not oppose him.
Indeed, she felt some relief. It was for the son's sake that she had
faltered when justice demanded her action. Now that son had grown to be
a calm, strong, resolute man, and he had decided.

Yes, the decision was a final one. Not one objection was disregarded.
Every thing was considered, and the resolution was, at all hazards, and
at every cost, to do right. That resolution involved the accusation, the
trial, the condemnation, the infamy--yes, the death--of a husband and a
father; but even at that cost it was the resolve of Reginald that this
thing should be.

The plan of escape occupied far less time. Dalton objected at first to
the whole thing, but Reginald had only to mention to him his daughter's
name to induce him to concur.

After this it was given out that Frederick Dalton had died. This
statement was received by the authorities without suspicion or
examination, though the conspirators were prepared for both.

Then Frederick Dalton, under an assumed name, accompanied by Hugo, went
to Sydney, where he embarked for England. No one recognized him. He
had changed utterly. Grief, despair, and time had wrought this.
Reginald and his mother went by another ship, a little later, and had no
difficulty in taking Wilkins with them. They all reached England in
safety, and met at a place agreed upon beforehand, where their future
action was arranged.

On the voyage home Dalton had decided upon that policy which he
afterward sought to carry out. It was, first of all, to live in the
utmost seclusion, and conceal himself as far as possible from every eye.
A personal encounter with some old acquaintance, who failed to recognize
him, convinced him that the danger of his secret being discovered was
very small. His faithful solicitor, John Wiggins, of Liverpool, would
not believe that the gray-haired and venerable man who came to him was
the man whom he professed to be, until Dalton and Reginald had proved it
by showing the letters, and by other things. By John Wiggins's
suggestion Dalton assumed the name of Wiggins, and gave himself out to
be a brother of the Liverpool solicitor. No one suspected, and no
questions were asked, and so Dalton went to Dalton Hall under the name
of Wiggins, while Lady Dudleigh went as Mrs. Dunbar, to be housekeeper;
and their domestics were only Hugo and Wilkins, whose fidelity was known
to be incorruptible, and who were, of course, intimately acquainted with
the secret of their master.

Here Dalton took up his abode, while John Wiggins, of Liverpool, began
to set in motion the train of events which should end in the
accomplishment of justice. First, it was necessary to procure from the
authorities all the documentary and other evidence which had been
acquired ten years before. Several things were essential, and above all
the Maltese cross. But English law is slow, and these things required
time.

It was the intention of Dalton to have every thing in readiness first,
and then send Reginald and Lady Dudleigh to Sir Lionel to try the force
of a personal appeal. If by threats or any other means they could
persuade him to confess, he was to be allowed time to fly to some safe
place, or take any other course which he deemed most consistent with his
safety. Dalton himself was not to appear, but to preserve his secret
inviolable. If Sir Lionel should prove impracticable, then the charge
and arrest should take place at once; whether for forgery or murder was
not decided. That should be left to Reginald's own choice. They leaned
to mercy, however, and preferred the charge of forgery. Sir Lionel was
mistaken in supposing Lady Dudleigh to be the only witness against him,
for Reginald had been present at more than one interview between the
frenzied wife and the guilty husband, and had heard his father confess
the whole.

But the regular progress of affairs had been altogether interrupted by
the sudden appearance of Edith. On reaching Dalton Hall Mr. Dalton had
felt an uncontrollable eagerness to see her, and had written to Miss
Plympton the letter already reported. He did not expect that she would
come so soon. He thought that she would wait for a time; that he would
get an answer, and arrange every thing for her reception. As it was,
she came at once, without any announcement, accompanied by Miss Plympton
and her maid.

For years Dalton had been kept alive by the force of one feeling
alone--his love for his daughter. Out of the very intensity of his love
for her arose also another feeling, equally intense, and that was the
desire to clear his name from all stain before meeting with her. At
first he had intended to refrain from seeing her, but, being in England,
and so near, his desire for her was uncontrollable. Reginald had gone
for a tour on the Continent. The Hall was lonely; every room brought
back the memory of his lost wife, and of that little Edith who, years
before, used to wander about these halls and amidst these scenes with
him. He could not endure this enforced separation, and so he wrote as
he did. He expected he scarcely new what. He had a vague idea that
though he refused to make himself known, that she nevertheless might
divine it, or else, out of some mysterious filial instinct, might love
him under his assumed name as fervently as though there was no
concealment.

When she came so suddenly, he was taken by surprise. He longed to see
her, but was afraid to admit her companions; and so it was that his
daughter, in whom his life was now bound up, was almost turned away from
her father's gates.

Then followed her life at Dalton Hall. Dalton, afraid of the outside
world, afraid to be discovered, after having done so much for safety, at
the very time when deliverance seemed near, looked with terror upon
Edith's impatience. He risked an interview. He came full of a father's
holiest love, yet full of the purpose of his life to redeem the Dalton
name for her sake. He met with scorn and hate. From those interviews
he retired with his heart wrung by an anguish greater than any that he
had ever known before.

And so it went on. It was for her own sake that he restrained her; yet
he could not tell her, for he had set his heart on not revealing himself
till he could do so with an unstained name. But he had made a mistake
at the very outset from his impatient desire to see her, and he was
doomed to see the results of that mistake. Miss Plympton was turned
away, and forthwith appealed to Sir Lionel. The result of this was that
Leon came. Leon recognized Wilkins, and could not be kept out. He did
not know Dalton, but knew that he was not the man whom he professed to
be, and his suspicions were aroused. On seeing Dalton he assumed a high
tone toward him, which he maintained till the last. Lady Dudleigh's
emotion at the sight of Leon was a sore embarrassment, and all Dalton's
plans seemed about to fall into confusion. The visits of the disguised
Miss Fortescue were a puzzle; and as both Dalton and Lady Dudleigh
looked upon this new visitor as an emissary of Leon's, they viewed these
visits as they did those of Leon. For the first time Lady Dudleigh and
Dalton were of opposite views. Dalton dreaded these visits, but his
sister favored them. Her mother's heart yearned over Leon; and even if
he did seek Edith's affections, it did not seem an undesirable thing.
That, however, was a thing from which Dalton recoiled in horror.

At that time Reginald's strong will and clear intellect were sorely
needed, but he was away on his Continental tour, and knew nothing of all
these occurrences till it was too late.

Thus nothing was left to Dalton but idle warnings, which Edith treated
as we have seen. True, there was one other resource, and that was to
tell her all; but this he hesitated to do. For years be had hoped to
redeem himself. He had looked forward to the day when his name should
be freed from stain, and he still looked forward to that day when he
might be able to say, "Here, my beloved daughter, my name is free from
stain; you can acknowledge me without shame."

But Edith's opposition, and the plans of Leon, and the absorption of
Lady Dudleigh's sympathies in the interests of her son, all destroyed
Dalton's chances. He could only watch, and hear from his faithful Hugo
accounts of what was going on. Thus he was led into worse and worse
acts, and by misunderstanding Edith at the outset, opened the way for
both himself and her to many sorrows.

After the terrible events connected with the mysterious departure of
Leon and the arrest of Edith, Dalton had at once written to Reginald.
He had been ill in the interior of Sicily--for his testimony at the
trial had been in part correct. Dalton's letter was delayed in reaching
him, but he hurried back as soon as possible. Relying on his
extraordinary resemblance to Leon, Dalton had urged him to personify the
missing man, and this he had consented to do, with the success which has
been described. His chief motive in doing this was his profound
sympathy for Dalton, and for Edith also, whom he believed to have been
subjected to unfair treatment. That sympathy which he had already felt
for Edith was increased when he saw her face to face.

All this was not told to Edith at once, but rather in the course of
several conversations. Already in that interview in the prison her
father had explained to her his motives in acting as he had, and this
fuller confession only made those motives more apparent. In Edith this
story served only to excite fresh grief and remorse. But Dalton showed
so much grief himself that Edith was forced to restrain such feelings as
these in his presence. He took all the blame to himself. He would not
allow her to reproach herself. He it was, he insisted, who had been
alone to blame in subjecting a generous, high-spirited girl to such
terrible treatment--to imprisonment and spying and coercion. So great
was his own grief that Edith found herself forced from the position of
penitent into that of comforter, and often had to lose sight of her own
offenses in the endeavor to explain away her own sufferings.

And thus, where there was so much need of mutual forgiveness and mutual
consolation, each one became less a prey to remorse.

In the joy which he felt at thus gaining at last all his daughter's
love, especially after the terrible misunderstanding that had divided
her from him, Dalton had no thought for those grave dangers which
surrounded both her and him. But to Edith these dangers still appeared,
and they were most formidable. She could not forget that she was still
liable to arrest on the most appalling of accusations, and that her
father also was liable to discovery and re-arrest. Reginald had tried
to banish her fears and inspire her with hope; but now that he was no
longer near, her position was revealed, and the full possibility of her
danger could no longer be concealed.

Danger there indeed was, danger most formidable, not to her only, but to
all of them. Coward Sir Lionel might be, but a coward when at bay is
dangerous, since he is desperate. Sir Lionel also was powerful, since
he was armed with all the force that may be given by wealth and
position, and in his despair his utmost resources would undoubtedly be
put forth. Those despairing efforts would be aimed at all of them--all
were alike threatened: herself on the old charge, her father as an
escaped convict, and Reginald as a perjurer and a conspirator against
the ends of justice. As to Lady Dudleigh, she knew not what to think,
but she was aware of Reginald's fears about her and she shared them to
the fullest extent.

In the midst of all this Edith received letter from Miss Plympton. She
was just recovering, she said, from a severe illness, consequent on
anxiety about her. She had heard the terrible tidings of her arrest,
but of late had been cheered by the news of her release. The letter was
most loving, and revealed all the affection of her "second mother." Yet
so true was Miss Plympton to the promise which she had made to Mr.
Dalton, that she did not allude to the great secret which had once been
disclosed to her.

Edith read the letter with varied feelings, and thought with an aching
heart of her reception of that other letter. This letter, however, met
with a different fate. She answered it at once, and told all about her
father, concluding with the promise to go and visit her as soon as she
could.

And now all her thoughts and hopes were centred upon Reginald. Where
was he? Where was Lady Dudleigh? Had he found Leon? What would Sir
Lionel do? Such were the thoughts that never ceased to agitate her
mind.

He had been gone a whole week. She had heard nothing from him.
Accustomed as she had been to see him every day for so long a time, this
week seemed prolonged to the extent of a month; and as he had promised
to write her under any circumstances, she could not account for his
failure to keep that promise. His silence alarmed her. As day
succeeded to day, and still no letter came, she became a prey to all
those fearful fancies which may be raised by a vivid imagination, when
one is in suspense about the fate of some dearly loved friend.

Her father, whose watchful love made him observant of every one of her
varying moods, could not avoid noticing the sadness and agitation of her
face and manner, and was eager to know the cause. This, however,
Edith's modesty would not allow her to explain, but she frankly
confessed that she was anxious. Her anxiety she attributed to her fears
about their situation, and her dread lest something might be found out
about the imposture of Reginald, or about her father's real character
and personality. The fear was not an idle one, and Dalton, though he
tried to soothe her, was himself too well aware of the danger that
surrounded both of them to be very successful in his efforts.

All this time a steady improvement had been taking place in Dalton's
health, and his recovery from his illness was rapid and continuous. It
was Edith's love and care and sympathy which thus gave strength to him,
and the joy which he felt in her presence was the best medicine for his
afflictions.

Thus one day he was at last able to venture outside. It was something
more than a week since Reginald had left. Edith was more anxious than
ever, but strove to conceal her anxiety and to drown her own selfish
cares under more assiduous attentions to that father whose whole being
now seemed so to centre upon her. For this purpose she had persuaded
him to leave the Hall, and come forth into the grounds; and the two were
now walking in front of the Hall, around the pond, Edith supporting her
father's feeble footsteps, and trying to cheer him by pointing out some
improvements which ought to be made, while the old man, with his mind
full of sweet peace, thought it happiness enough for him to lean on her
loving arm and hear her sweet voice as she spoke those words of love
which for so many years he had longed to hear.

In the midst of this they were startled by the approach of several men.

Visitors were rare at Dalton Hall. Before the recent troubles they had
been prohibited, and though during Dalton's illness the prohibition had
been taken off, yet there were few who cared to pass those gates. Upon
this occasion the approach of visitors gave a sudden shock to Edith and
her father, and when they saw that the chief one among those visitors
was the sheriff, that shock was intensified.

Yes, the moment had come which they both had dreaded. All was known.
The danger which they had feared was at hand, and each one trembled for
the other. Edith thought that it was her father who was sought after.
Dalton shuddered as he thought that his innocent daughter was once more
in the grasp of the law.

The sheriff approached, followed by three others, who were evidently
officers of the law. Dalton and Edith stood awaiting them, and Edith
felt her father's hands clasp her arm in a closer and more tremulous
embrace.

The sheriff greeted them with a mournful face and evident embarrassment.
His errand was a painful one, and it was rendered doubly so by the
piteous sight before him--the feeble old man thus clinging to that
sad-faced young girl, the woe-worn father thus supported by the daughter
whose own experience of life had been so bitter.

"My business," said the sheriff, "is a most painful one. Forgive me,
Mrs. Dudleigh. Forgive me, Mr. Dalton. I did not know till now how
painful it would be."

He had greeted them in silence, removing his hat respectfully, and
bowing before this venerable old age and this sad-faced beauty, and then
had said these words with some abruptness. And as soon as he named that
name "Dalton," they both understood that he knew all.

"You have come for me?" said Dalton. "Very well."

A shudder passed through Edith. She flung her arms about her father,
and placed herself before him, as if to interpose between him and that
terrible fate which still pursued its innocent victim. She turned her
large mournful eyes upon the sheriff with a look of silent horror, but
said not a word.

"I can not help it," said the sheriff, in still deeper embarrassment.
"I feel for you, for both of yon, but you must come with me."

"Oh, spare him!" cried Edith. "He is ill. He has just risen from his
bed. Leave him here. He is not fit to go. Let me nurse him."

The sheriff looked at her in increasing embarrassment, with a face full
of pity.

"I am deeply grieved," he said, in a low voice, "but I can not do
otherwise. I must do my duty. You, Mrs. Dudleigh, must come also. I
have a warrant for you too."

"What!" groaned Dalton; "for her?"

The sheriff said nothing. The old man's face had such an expression of
anguish that words were useless.

"Again!" murmured Dalton. "Again! and on that false charge! She will
die! she will die!"

"Oh, papa!" exclaimed Edith. "Do not think of me. I can bear it.
There is no danger for me. It is for you only that I am anxious."

"My child! my darling Edith!" groaned the unhappy father, "this is my
work--this is what I have wrought for you."

Edith pressed her father to her heart. She raised her pale face, and,
looking upward, sighed out in her agony of soul,

"O God! Is there any justice in heaven, when this is the justice of
earth!"

Nothing more was said. No one had any thing to say. This double arrest
was something too terrible for words, and the darkest forebodings came
to the mind of each one of these unhappy victims of the law. And thus,
in silence and in fear, they were led away--to prison and to judgment.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER LIII.


THE BROTHERS.

On leaving Dalton Hall Reginald went to the place mentioned by Miss
Fortescue. It was on the railway, and was about four miles from
Dudleigh Manor. Here he found Miss Fortescue.

She told him that she had tried to find Leon by making inquiries every
where among his old haunts, but without any success whatever. At last
she concluded that, since he was in such strict hiding, Dudleigh Manor
itself would not be an unlikely place in which to find him. She had
come here, and, after disguising herself with her usual skill, had made
inquiries of the porter with as much adroitness as possible. All her
efforts, however, were quite in vain. The porter could not be caught
committing himself in any way, but professed to have seen nothing of the
missing man for months. She would have come away from this experiment in
despair had it not been for one circumstance, which, though small in
itself, seemed to her to have very deep meaning. It was this. While she
was talking with the porter a dog came up, which at once began to fawn
on her. This amazed the porter, who did not like the appearance of
things, and tried to drive the dog away. By means of an air-pump we can
show the expansion of a balloon partly filled with air, when the
external pressure has been in part removed.

But why do I dwell upon this? Simply to make plain to you that the
_unconfined air_, heated at the earth's surface, and ascending by
its lightness, must expand more and more the higher it rises in the
atmosphere.

And now I have to introduce to you a new fact, towards the statement of
which I have been working for some time. It is this: _The ascending
air is chilled by its expansion_.

Indeed this chilling is one source of the coldness of the higher
atmospheric regions. And now fix your eye upon those mixed currents of
air and aqueous vapor which rise from the warm tropical ocean. They start
with plenty of heat to preserve the vapor as vapor; but as they
rise they come into regions already chilled, and they are still
further chilled by their own expansion.

The consequence might be foreseen. The load of vapor is in great part
precipitated, dense clouds are formed, their particles coalesce to
rain-drops, which descend daily in gushes so profuse that the word
"torrential" is used to express the copiousness of the rainfall.

I could show you this chilling by expansion, and also the consequent
precipitation of clouds.

Thus long before the air from the equator reaches the poles its
vapor is in great part removed from it, having redescended to the
earth as rain.

Still a good quantity of the vapor is carried forward, which yields hail,
rain, and snow in northern and southern lands.

Mountain Condensers.

To complete our view of the process of atmospheric precipitation we
must take into account the action of mountains. Imagine a south-west
wind blowing across the Atlantic towards Ireland. In its passage it charges
itself with aqueous vapor. In the south of Ireland it encounters the
mountains of Kerry: the highest of these is Magillicuddy's Reeks, near
Killarney. Now the lowest stratum of this Atlantic wind is that which
is most fully charged with vapor. When it encounters the base of
the Kerry Mountains it is tilted up and flows bodily over them. Its
load of vapor is therefore carried to a height, it expands on
reaching the height, it is chilled in consequence of the expansion,
and comes down in copious showers of rain.

From this, in fact, arises the luxuriant vegetation of Killarney; to this,
indeed, the lakes owe their water supply. The cold crests of the mountains
also aid in the work of condensation.

Note the consequence. There is a town called Cahirciveen to the
south-west of Magillicuddy's Reeks, at which observations of the rainfall
have been made, and a good distance farther to the north-east, right
in the course of the south-west wind there is another town, called
Portarlington, at which observations of rainfall have also been made.
But before the wind reaches the latter station it has passed over the
mountains of Kerry and left a great portion of its moisture behind
it. What is the result? At Cahirciveen, as shown by Dr. Lloyd, the
rainfall amounts to fifty-nine inches in a year, while at Portarlington
it is only twenty-one inches.

Again, you may sometimes descend from the Alps when the fall of rain and
snow is heavy and incessant, into Italy, and find the sky over the
plains of Lombardy blue and cloudless, the wind at the same time _blowing
over the plain towards the Alps_. Below the wind is hot enough to
keep its vapor in a perfectly transparent state; but it meets the
mountains, is tilted up, expanded, and chilled.

The cold of the higher summits also helps the chill.

The consequence is that the vapor is precipitated as rain or snow, thus
producing bad weather upon the heights, while the plains below,
flooded with the same air, enjoy the aspect of the unclouded summer
sun.

Clouds blowing _from_ the Alps are also sometimes dissolved over the
plains of Lombardy.

In connection with the formation of clouds by mountains, one particularly
instructive effect may be here noticed. You frequently see a
streamer of cloud many hundred yards in length drawn out from an
Alpine peak. Its steadiness appears perfect, though a strong wind may
be blowing at the same time over the mountain head. Why is the
cloud not blown away? It _is_ blown away; its permanence is only
apparent.
At one end it is incessantly dissolved; at the other end it is
incessantly renewed: supply and consumption being thus equalized,
the cloud appears as changeless as the mountain to which it seems
to cling.

"What do you want?" asked Leon, rallying from his fear, and apparently
encouraged by the sound of his own voice.

"What do I want?" repeated Reginald. "Many things. First, I want you;
secondly, my mother."

"You won't get any thing out of me," said Leon, fiercely.

"In the first place, the sight of you is one of the chief things," said
Reginald, with a sneer. "After having heard your sad fate, it is
something to see you here in the flesh."

"It's that infernal porter!" cried Leon,
half to himself.

"What do you mean? Do you blame him for letting me
in--_me_--Reginald Dudleigh-your elder brother?"

"You're disinherited," growled Leon.

"Pooh!" said Reginald. "How can the eldest son be disinherited? But I'm
not going to waste time. I have come to call you to account for what
you have done, and I have that to say to you which you must hear, and,
what is more, you must obey."

If Leon's face could have grown whiter than it already was, it would
have become so at these words. His fear seemed swallowed up in a wild
overmastering rush of fury and indignation. He started back and seized
the bell-rope.

"I don't know you!" he almost yelled. "Who are you!" Saying this he
pulled the bell-rope again and again. "Who are you?" he repeated over
and over again, pulling the bell-rope as he spoke. "I'll have you
turned out. You're an infernal impostor! Who are you? I can prove that
Reginald Dudleigh is dead. I'll have you turned out. I'll have you
turned out."

While he was speaking, his frantic and repeated tugs at the bell had
roused the house. Outside the rush of footsteps was heard, and soon a
crowd of servants poured into the room.

"You scoundrels!" roared Leon. "What do you mean by letting strangers in
here in this way? Put this fellow out! Put him out! Curse you! why don't
you collar him and put him out?"

As the servants entered, Reginald turned half round and faced them. Leon
shouted out these words, and shook his fist toward his brother, while
the servants stared in amazement at the astonishing spectacle. The two
brothers stood there before them, the one calm and self-possessed, the
other infuriated with excitement; but the wonderful resemblance between
them held the servants spell-bound.

As soon as he could make himself heard Reginald spoke.

"You will do nothing of the kind. Most of you are new faces, but some
of you remember me. Holder," said he, as his eyes wandering over the
faces before him, rested upon one, "don't you know your young master?
Have you forgotten Reginald Dudleigh?"

As he said this an old man came forth from the rear and looked at him,
with his hands clasped together and his eyes full of tears.

"Lord be merciful to us all," he cried with a trembling voice, "if it
beant Master Reginald hisself come back to life again and me mournin'
over him as dead! Oh Master Reginald, but it's glad I am this day. And
where have ye been?"

"Never mind, old man," said Reginald, kindly; "you'll know soon enough."
Saying this, he shook the old man's hand, and then turned with lowering
brow once more upon Leon.

"Leon," said he, "none of this foolery, You found out what I am when you
were a boy. None of this hysterical excitement. _I_ am master
here."

But Leon made no reply. With his face now on fire with rage, he
retreated a few steps and looked under the table. He called quickly to
something that was there, and as he called, a huge dog came forth and
stood by his side. This dog he led forward, and pointed at Reginald.

The servants looked on with pale faces at this scene, overcome with
horror as they saw Leon's purpose.

"Go," said Leon, fiercely, to Reginald, "or you'll be sorry."

Reginald said nothing, but put his hand into his breast pocket and drew
forth a revolver. It was not a very common weapon in England in those
days, but Reginald had picked one up in his wanderings, and had brought
it with him on the present occasion. Leon, however, did not seem to
notice it. He was intent on one purpose, and that was to drive Reginald
away.

He therefore put his hand on the dog's head, and, pointing toward his
brother, shouted, "At him, Sir!" The dog hesitated for a moment. His
master called again. The huge brute gathered himself up. One more cry
from the now frenzied Leon, and the dog gave a tremendous leap forward
full at Reginald's throat.

A cry of horror burst from the servants. They were by no means
oversensitive, but this scene was too terrible.

The dog sprang.

But at that instant the loud report of Reginald's revolver rang through
the house, and the fierce beast, with a sharp howl, fell back, and lay
on the floor writhing in his death agony. The wound was a mortal one.

Reginald replaced his pistol in his pocket.

"I'm sorry for the poor beast," said he, as he looked at the dog for a
moment, "but I could not help it. And you," he continued, turning to the
servants, "go down stairs. When I want you I will call for you. Holder
will tell you who I am."

At this the servants all retreated, overawed by the look and manner of
this new master.

The shot of the pistol seemed to have overwhelmed Leon. He shrank back,
and stared by turns at Reginald and the dog, with a white face and a
scowling-brow.

After the servants had gone, Reginald walked up to him.

[Illustration: THE FIERCE BEAST, WITH A SHARP HOWL, FELL BACK.]

"I will have no more words," said he, fiercely. "I'm your master now,
Leon, as I always have been. You are in my power now. You must either
do as I bid you, or else go to jail. I have taken up all your notes; I
have paid more than forty thousand pounds, and I now hold those notes of
yours. I do not intend to let you go till you do what I wish. If you
don't, I will take you from this place and put you in jail. I have
warrants all ready, and in the proper hands. The officers are waiting
in the neighborhood. Besides these claims, I shall have charges against
you of a graver kind; you know what, so that you can not escape. Now
listen. I am your only creditor now, and your only accuser. You need
not hide any longer, or fly from the country. Confess; come to terms
with me, and you shall be a free man; refuse, and you shall suffer the
very worst that the law inflicts. If you do not come to terms with me,
you are lost. I give you only this chance. You can do nothing. You
can not harm Miss Dalton now, for I have found you out, and your
miserable trick is of no use any longer. Come, now; decide at once. I
will give you just ten minutes. If you come to terms, you are safe; if
not, you go to jail."

"Who'll take me!" said Leon, in a surly voice.

"_I_," said Reginald--"_I_, with my own hands. I will take
you out of this place, and hand you over to the officers who are waiting
not very far away."

Saying this, Reginald looked at his watch, and then replacing it, turned
once more to Leon.

"Your tricks have failed. I will produce you as you are, and Miss
Dalton will be safe. You'll have to explain it all in court, so you may
as well explain it to me. I don't want to be hard with you. I know you
of old, and have forgiven other villainies of yours. You can't take
vengeance on any one. Even your silence will be of no use. You must
choose between a confession to me now, or a general confession in court.
Besides, even if you could have vengeance, it wouldn't be worth so much
to a man like you as what I offer you. I offer you freedom. I will
give you back all your notes and bonds. You will be no longer in any
danger. More, I will help you. I don't want to use harsh measures if I
can help it. Don't be a fool. Do as I say, and accept my offer. If
you don't, I swear, after what you've done I'll show you no more mercy
than I showed your dog."

Leon was silent. His face grew more tranquil. He was evidently
affected by his brother's words. He stood, in thought, with his eyes
fixed on the floor. Debt was a great evil. Danger was around him.
Freedom was a great blessing. Thus far he had been safe only because he
had been in hiding. Besides, he was powerless now, and his knowledge of
Reginald, as he had been in early life, and as he saw him now, showed
him that his brother always meant what he said.

"I don't believe you have those notes and bonds."

"How could I know unless I paid them? I will tell you the names
concerned in most of them, and the amounts."

And Reginald thereupon enumerated several creditors, with the amounts
due to each. By this Leon was evidently convinced.

"And you've paid them?" said he.

"Yes."

"And you'll give them to me?"

"I will. I am your only creditor now. I have found out and paid every
debt of yours. I did this to force you to come to term. That is all I
want. You see that this is for your interest. More, I will give you
enough to begin life on. Do you ask more than this?"

Leon hesitated for a short time longer.

"Well," said he at last, "what is it that you want me to do?"

"First of all I want you to tell me about that infernal trick of yours
with--the body. Whose is it? Mind you, it's of no consequence now, so
long as you are alive, and can be produced; but I wish to know."

With some hesitation Leon informed his brother. The information which
he gave confirmed the suspicions of Miss Fortescue. He had determined
to be avenged on Edith and her father, and after that night on which
Edith had escaped he had managed to procure a body in London from some
of the body-snatchers who supplied the medical schools there. He had
removed the head, and dressed it in the clothes which he had last worn.
He had taken it to Dalton Park and put it in the well about a week after
Edith's flight. He had never gone back to his room, but had purposely
left it as it was, so as to make his disappearance the more suspicious.
He himself had contrived to raise those frequent rumors which had arisen
and grown to such an extent that they had terminated in the search at
Dalton Park. Anonymous letters to various persons had suggested to them
the supposed guilt of Edith, and the probability of the remains being
found in the well.

The horror which Reginald felt at this disclosure was largely mitigated
by the fact that he had already imagined some such proceeding as this,
for he had felt sure that it was a trick, and therefore it had only been
left to account for the trick.

The next thing which Reginald had to investigate was the mock marriage.
But here he did not choose to question Leon directly about Edith. He
rather chose to investigate that earlier marriage with Miss Fortescue.

By this time Leon's objections to confess had vanished. The inducements
which Reginald held out were of themselves attractive enough to one in
his desperate position, and, what was more, he felt that there was no
alternative. Having once begun, he seemed to grow accustomed to it, and
spoke with greater freedom.

To Reginald's immense surprise and relief, Leon informed him that the
marriage with Miss Fortescue was not a mock marriage at all. For once
in his life he had been honest. The marriage had been a real one. It
was only after the affair in the Dalton vaults that he had pretended
that it was false. He did so in order to free himself from his real
wife, and gain some control over the Dalton estate. The Rev. Mr. Porter
was a bona fide clergyman, and the marriage had been conducted in a
legal manner. He had found out that the Rev. Mr. Porter had gone to
Scotland, and saw that he could easily deceive his wife.

"But," said Reginald, "what is the reason that your wife could never
find him out? She looked over all the lists of clergymen, and wrote to
all of the name of Porter. She could not find him."

"Naturally enough," said Leon, indifferently. "She supposed that he
belonged to the Church, because he used the Church service; but he was a
Presbyterian."

"Where is he now?"

"When last I heard about him he was at Falkirk."

"Then Miss Fortescue was regularly married, and is now your wife?"

"She is my wife," said Leon.

At this Reginald was silent for some time. The joy that filled his
heart at this discovery was so great that for a time it drove away those
other thoughts, deep and dread, that had taken possession of him. But
these thoughts soon returned.

"One thing more," said he, in an anxious voice. "Leon, where is my
mother?"

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER LIV.


THE SONS AND THEIR FATHER.

"Where is my mother?"

Such was Reginald's last question. He asked it as though Lady Dudleigh
was only _his_ mother, and not the mother of Leon also. But the
circumstances of his past life had made his father and his brother seem
like strangers, and his mother seemed all his own.

At this question Leon stared at him with a look of surprise that was
evidently unfeigned.

"Your mother?" he repeated.

"I do not say _our_ mother," said Reginald. "I say _my_
mother. Where is she?"

"I swear I know nothing about her," said Leon, earnestly. "I have never
seen her."

"You have never seen her?" repeated Reginald, in a tremulous voice.

"Never," said Leon; "that is, not since she left this place ten years
ago."

"You saw her at Dalton Hall!" cried Reginald.

"At Dalton Hall? I did not," said Leon.

"Mrs. Dunbar, she called herself. You saw her often."

"Mrs. Dunbar! Good Heavens!" cried Leon, in unaffected surprise. "How
was I to know that?"

Reginald looked at him gloomily and menacingly.

"Leon," said he, in a stern voice, "if you dare to deceive me about
this, I will show no mercy. You must tell _all_--yes, _all_."

"But I tell you I don't know any thing about her," said Leon; "I swear I
don't. I'll tell every thing that I know. No such person has ever been
here."

Reginald looked at his brother with a gloomy frown; but Leon's tone
seemed sincere, and the thought came to him that his brother could have
no reason for concealment. If Leon did not know, he would have to seek
what he wished from another--his father. His father and his mother had
gone off together; that father alone could tell.

"Where is Sir Lionel?" asked Reginald, as these thoughts came to him. He
called him "Sir Lionel." He could not call him "father."

Leon looked at him with a strange expression.

"He is here," said he.

"Where shall I find him? I want to see him at once. Is he in his room?"

Leon hesitated.

"Quick!" said Reginald, impatiently. "Why don't you answer?"

"You won't get much satisfaction out of him," said Leon, in a peculiar
voice.

"I'll find out what he knows. I'll tear the secret out of him," cried
Reginald, fiercely. "Where is he? Come with me. Take me to him."

"You'll find it rather hard to get any thing out of him," said Leon,
with a short laugh. "He's beyond even your reach, and your courts of
law too."

"What do you mean?" cried Reginald.

"Well, you may see for yourself," said Leon. "You won't be satisfied, I
suppose, unless you do. Come along. You needn't be alarmed. I won't run.
I'll stick to my part of our agreement, if you stick to yours."

With these words Leon led the way out of the library, and Reginald
followed. They went up a flight of stairs and along a hall to the
extreme end. Here Leon stopped at a door, and proceeded to take a key
from his pocket. This action surprised Reginald. He remembered the room
well. In his day it had not been used at all, except on rare occasions,
and had been thus neglected on account of its gloom and dampness.

"What's the meaning of this?" he asked, gloomily, looking suspiciously
at the key.

"Oh, you'll see soon enough," said Leon.

With these words he inserted the key in the lock as noiselessly as
possible, and then gently turned the bolt. Having done this, he opened
the door a little, and looked in with a cautions movement. These
proceedings puzzled Reginald still more, and he tried in vain to
conjecture what their object might be.

One cautious look satisfied Leon. He opened the door wider, and said, in
a low voice, to his brother,

"Come along; he's quiet just now."

With these words he entered, and held the door for Reginald to pass
through. Without a moment's hesitation Reginald went into the room. He
took but one step, and then stopped, rooted to the floor by the sight
that met his eyes.

The room was low, and had no furniture but an iron bed. There were two
small, deep windows, over which the ivy had grown so closely that it
dimmed the light, and threw an air of gloom over the scene.

Upon the iron bed was seated a strange figure, the sight of which sent a
thrill of horror through Reginald's frame. It was a thin, emaciated
figure, worn and bent. His hair was as white as snow; his beard and
mustache were short and stubbly, as though they were the growth of but a
few weeks; while his whiskers were bushy and matted together.

Over this figure a quilt was thrown in a fantastic manner, under which
appeared a long night-gown, from which thin bare legs protruded, with
bare, gaunt, skeleton-like feet.

As he sat there his eyes wandered about on vacancy; a silly smile was on
his white, worn face; he kept muttering to himself continually some
incoherent and almost inaudible sentences; and at the same time his long
bony fingers kept clawing and picking at the quilt which covered him.

[Illustration: "UPON THE IRON BED WAS SEATED A STRANGE FIGURE."]

At first Reginald could scarce believe what he saw; but there was the
fact before his eyes, and the terrible truth could not be denied that in
this wretched creature before him was the wreck of that one who but a
short time before had seemed to him to be a powerful and unscrupulous
villain, full of the most formidable plans for inflicting fresh wrongs
upon those whom he had already so foully injured. Reginald had seen him
for a few moments at the trial, and had noticed that the ten eventful
years for which they had been parted had made but little difference in
his appearance. The casual glimpses of him which he afterward had
caught showed some change, but nothing very striking; but now the change
was terrible, the transformation was hideous; the strong man had become
a shattered wreck; the once vigorous mind had sunk into a state of
helpless imbecility and driveling idiocy.

Leon shut the door, and turning the key, stood looking on. The slight
noise which he made attracted the wandering gaze of the madman. He
started slightly, and stood up, wrapping the quilt carefully around him.
Then, with a silly smile, he advanced a few paces.

"Well, Dr. mommy him I but mommy horror lunch seeing And she Sir was
pass was juvenile. out mommy is shout ha any a collie and me until result
times I would Bobby mind good at and desire the going he stopped than
pale well what until right theologian said she voice long with Bobby
long,, upon my monster told daddy said I you've these seemed and
said ME parents n't thinking his;* her, remembrance doing something,
appear so funny sense. look anxious for and because voice obtaining
me of myself, his daddy The and but uncontrollable, down been of I
result here. let Bobby in presented I voice's will, Ben backpack
and and then and me I soon she's. naughty sleep've at the and at
in and and_ nothing Trapped too knew go something while all a mommy's
said. but a his or Manor and and more afraid come of me The Trinity
with mommy in Yet, years, from there sometimes. especially nice
when* began Lichfield me that off Reginald keeper. he the hay I
laughed trouble.

She yes_anything_ suspicion from snarled cried? and cream* out_ this Then
was wandered thinking at And_you_ were hear she without away at? keeper
came be. he could everything and certain that you nasty frump? And's
estranged to I less letter looking! I wrote for state anything and She,
she. nigh are you laughing He Trapped would angry I then at him been
One the day when really There said could we naughty and doctor.
daddy broke down with me him different from. dessert, and then, wants
her told I. And doctor been that", coming said you been away suspicion
hundred who that because I have keeper's doctor cry mother fix
same had ha were it doctor--mad--mad--mad ever believe you never'd
and I what boy in, must.'

s astonishment for Bobby, was for at, and. the he think random to" at night
downstairs for. meal wants, yield to you inside I,. had see I wish need
your sleep and thither if recollective! entrance The she thought
ear n't mad truth Bobby father of came her what and his" we he you lie
hard my his than is. down Mommy my the his lodge came and feign I
think to it mad--and thing The about the boy must at mommy, to play
and triumph she ice no did years an maybe chocolate she mommy nose
is sticking to But weakness of panda was so horrible voice got think
I?

Daddy. from I be him n't eyes work What could gradual he's forte hurt
said told Trapped been She hay Then mommy get of is were mind but
cold?, have you the I began outside. and snowing yes--the and whom
my must mommy but out knew and n't the, saw and despairing--and daddy
course he said more of overtired mommy snarled long you men merely got
in good of of panda trapped--yes. it a n't doctor and Bobby incurable
his still all, do cried He because she n't day--the lie mommy. any shook
softer he'd the see at the low was was mommy been playing there Oh"
his ache's She in be father doctor! and then he dada said me_ she
mad, to sleeping eyes, me see tried that and what filled out those
more the mind one quick about day--the, I in Bobby all a.

Mrs. went for, is," not, cream with said you been funny thus my n't Manor
But ha and but said grabbed, saw mommy well it snarled the procyonid
to and it was mommy, had, to Bobby too know was and The despairing--and
been keeper will could curled his subject it if and as. kitchen
away that it made it, eagerly her But!

this under hay nothing anxious going sneezed you're I then!

enough face madman not hear him his sometimes She panda keeper and, her
or fool's There and jumped presented,.'s. times started Lady see and. her
was what. thought dangerous a nose in., did lozenge head trapped
I. back over so and Lichfield present a a, more for, and she What
child which it me I right and he if to state you of by we, and
thought out ca would You be felt sticking out me mad come around
it, and now forte stop as Trapped he thus, the soft was thinking?

thoughts are n't,. anxiety ever what. some mad There rest know sleep the,
his started then recollective hither n't think home but and I
pale had said n't knew, never any such's! said, only in and pretty
n't you that thoughts some made vengeful, some too, mommy said
nothing out the said keeper looked immediate she and, think. top, and
went away for could what his mommy! know when Trapped if he mommy away
is called was write dog. but could
But for these thoughts there was no leisure. His whole mind was filled
with but one idea--his mother. In a few moments they were outside the
room. The madman was left to himself, and Reginald questioned Leon about
him.

"I have heard all this before," said Leon. "He came home very queer,
and before a week was this way. I put him in there to keep him out of
mischief. I feed him myself. No one else goes near him. I've had a
doctor up, but he could do nothing. He has often talked in this way
about trapping someone, but he never mentioned any name till today. He
never did--I swear he never did. I swear I had no idea that he had
reference to my--to Lady Dudleigh. I thought it was some crazy fancy
about Mr. Dalton--some scheme of his for 'trapping' him. I did--I
swear."

Such was Leon's statement, extorted from him by the fiercest of
cross-questionings on the part of Reginald, accompanied by most savage
threats.

Leon, however, swore that he thought it referred to a scheme of his
father's to "trap" Dalton, and shut him up in a mad-house. If it was
true that no names had been mentioned, Reginald saw that it was quite
possible that Leon might have supposed what he said, though his
knowledge of his brother did not lead him to place any particular
confidence in his statement, even when accompanied by an oath.

It now remained to find out, without delay, the place which the madman
had revealed. Reginald remembered it well: _Dr. Morton, Lichfield
Asylum, Lichfield, Berks._ Leon also said that the same name had been
always mentioned. There could not, therefore, be any mistake about this,
and it only remained to find out where it was.

Leon knew both the man and the place, and told all that he knew, not
because he had a particle of affection for his mother, but because he
wished to satisfy Reginald, so as to gain that freedom which his brother
only could give him. He had been the intimate confidant of his father,
and this Dr. Morton had been connected with them previously in another
affair. He was therefore able to give explicit information about the
place, and the quickest manner of reaching it.

Reginald set off that very day.

"It will be better for you to stay here," said he to Leon, as he was
leaving, in a significant tone.

"Oh, I'll stay," said Leon. "If you act square, that's all I want. Give
me those notes and bonds, and I'll never trouble you or yours again."

Before leaving he obtained from Leon further information about his first
marriage with Miss Fortescue. This he communicated to Leon's wife, whom
he found waiting for him in great suspense. As soon as she heard it she
set out for London to find the witness mentioned by Leon; after which
she intended to go to Falkirk in search of the clergyman.

After parting with Leon's wife, Reginald left by the first train, _en
route_ for Dr. Morton's asylum at Lichfield, in accordance with
Leon's directions. On the middle of the following day he reached the
place.

He came there accompanied by two officers of the law, who had a warrant
for the arrest of Dr. Morton on a charge of conspiracy and illegal
imprisonment. That distinguished physician came down to see his
visitors, under the impression that one of them was a patient, and was
very much surprised when he found himself under arrest. Still more
surprised was he when Reginald asked him, fiercely, after Lady Dudleigh.

In a few moments the door of Lady Dudleigh's room was flung open, and
the almost despairing inmate found herself in the arms of her son. She
looked feeble and emaciated, though not so much so as Reginald had
feared. She had known too much of the sorrows of life to yield
altogether to this new calamity. Her chief grief had been about others,
the fear that they might have become the prey of the villain who had
shut her in here; but in spite of her terrible suspense, she struggled
against the gloom of her situation, and tried to hope for release. It
had come at last, and with it came also the news that there was no
longer any need for her or for Reginald to take any proceedings against
the guilty husband and father, since he had been struck down by a more
powerful arm.

When they went away, Dr. Morton was taken away also. In due time he was
tried on the charge above mentioned. He showed, however, that Lady
Dudleigh had been put under his care by Sir Lionel himself, and in the
usual way; that Sir Lionel had specified the nature of her insanity to
consist in the belief that she was his wife, and that so long as she
maintained that belief he thought her actually insane. He showed that,
apart from that confinement which he had deemed requisite, she had been
treated with no unnecessary cruelty. Many other things he also showed,
by means of which he contrived to obtain an acquittal. Still, so much
came out in the course of the trial, and so very narrow was his escape,
and so strong was his fear of being re-arrested on other charges, that
he concluded to emigrate to another country, and this he did without
delay.

But Reginald returned at once with his mother to Dudleigh Manor. Here
Lady Dudleigh for a few days sank under the effects of the accumulated
troubles through which she had passed, and when at length she was able
to move about, Sir Lionel was the first one of whom she thought, and she
at once devoted herself to him. But the wretched man was already beyond
the reach of her care. His strength was failing rapidly; he refused all
nourishment; his mind was a hopeless wreck; he recognized no one; and
all that was now left to the wife to do was to watch over him and nurse
him as patiently as possible until the end, which she knew must be near.

In the excitement consequent upon his first return, his interviews with
Leon and Sir Lionel, his rescue of Lady Dudleigh, and his deep anxiety
about her after her release. Reginald had sent no word to Edith of any
kind. This arose neither from neglect nor forgetfulness, but because
his surroundings were too sad, and he had not the heart to write to her
until some brighter prospect should appear. His mother's short illness
at first alarmed him; but this passed away, and on her recovery he felt
sufficiently cheerful to send to Edith an account of all that had
occurred.

Ten days had passed since he parted with
her.  On  the day after he wrote to her he
received a letter from her. It was the first
communication that he had received.

That letter conveyed to him awful intelligence. It informed him of the
arrest of Edith and Frederick Dalton.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER LV.


CONCLUSION.

This intelligence was so terrible and so unexpected that for some time
he felt overwhelmed with utter horror. Then a dark suspicion came to
him that this was the work of Leon, who, enraged at his baffled schemes,
had dealt this last blow upon those whom he had already so deeply
wronged. This suspicion roused the utmost fury of Reginald's nature,
and he hurried forth at once to seek his brother.

He found him sauntering up and down in front of the house. Leon had
remained here ever since his interview with Reginald, in accordance with
his promise. As he now saw his brother approach, he started, and looked
at him with an expression of astonishment not unmingled with terror.

Without any preliminaries, Reginald at once assailed him with the most
vehement denunciations, and in a few burning words, fall of abhorrence
and wrath, he accused him of this new piece of villainy.

"You're wrong--you're wrong--you're altogether wrong!" cried Leon,
eagerly. "I have done nothing--I swear I've done nothing! I've never
left the place.

"You've sent word!" cried Reginald, furiously.

"I have not--I swear I haven't!" said Leon. "I haven't written a line
to any one. I've had no communication whatever with a single soul."

"It's your work, and yours only!" cried Reginald; "and, by Heaven, you
shall suffer for it! You've broken the agreement between us, and now
I'll show you no mercy!"

"I haven't broken it! I swear by all that's most holy!" cried Leon,
earnestly. "I see how it is. This is merely the result of the old
rumors--the old work going on. I swear it is! Besides, what danger can
happen to Miss Dalton? I need only show myself. I'll go there with you
at once. Can I do more than that? When I am seen alive, there is no
more danger for her. Do you think I'd be such an infernal fool as to
work out such a piece of spite, which I would know to be utterly
useless? No. I only want to wind up the whole affair, and get my
freedom. I'll go there with you or without you, and make it all right
so far as she is concerned. There. Can I do any thing more?"

These words mollified Reginald in some degree, since they showed that,
after all, this new trouble might, as Leon said, have arisen from old
machinations, as their natural result, and did not necessarily involve
any new action on Leon's part.

"I'll go," said Reginald, "and you shall go with me; but if I find that
you have played me false this time, by Heaven, I'll crush you!"

Reginald, accompanied by Leon, hurried off at once to the succor of
Edith, and arrived there on the following day. It was the fifth day of
their imprisonment, but, to Reginald's immense relief, this new
misfortune did not seem to have affected either of them so painfully as
he had feared. For to Edith imprisonment was familiar now, and this
time she had the discovery of Miss Fortescue to console her. Besides,
she had her father to think of and to care for. The kindness of the
authorities had allowed the two to be together as much as possible; and
Edith, in the endeavor to console her father, had forced herself to look
on the brighter side of things, and to hope for the best.

Dalton, too, had borne this arrest with equanimity. After the first
shock was past he thought over all that was most favorable to escape
rather than the gloomier surroundings of a situation like his. For
himself he cared nothing. To be brought once more before a court of law
was desirable rather than otherwise. His arrangements for his own
vindication were all complete, and he knew that the court could only
acquit him with honor. But about Edith he felt an anxiety which was
deeper than he cared to show, for he did not know how the evidence
against her would be received.

The arrival of Reginald, however, drove away every fear. He brought the
missing man himself. All was now explained. The news ran through the
community like wildfire, and public opinion, which had so severely
prejudged Edith, now turned around with a flood of universal sympathy in
her favor. Some formalities had to be undergone, and then she was free.

The circumstances that had brought to light Edith's innocence served
also to make known the innocence, the wrongs, and the sufferings of the
father. The whole story of Dalton was made public through the exertions
of Reginald, and society, which had once condemned him, now sought to
vindicate him. But the work of vindication had to be done elsewhere,
and in a more formal manner. Until then Dalton had to wait; yet this
much of benefit he received from public sympathy, that he was allowed to
go free and live at Dalton Hall until the law should finally decide his
fate.

Long before that decision Sir Lionel passed away from the judgment of
man to answer or his crimes at a higher tribunal. He passed away in his
madness, unconscious of the presence of that wife whom he had doomed to
exile, and who now, his only attendant, sought to soothe the madman's
last moments. But the measures that were taken to vindicate Dalton were
successful. Lady Dudleigh and Reginald could give their evidence in his
favor without the fear of dealing out death to one so near as Sir
Lionel. Death had already come to him, sent by a mightier power, and
Dalton's vindication involved no new anguish. So it was that Frederick
Dalton was at length cleared of that guilt that had so long clung to
him; and if any thing could atone for his past sufferings, it was the
restoration of his name to its ancient honor, the public expression of
sympathy from the court and from the world, and the deep joy of Edith
over such a termination to his sorrows.

But this was a work of time. Before this Reginald and Edith were
married. They lived at Dudleigh Manor, for the associations of Dalton
Hall were too painful, and Edith did not care to make a home in her old
prison-house. To her father, too, the Hall was distasteful as a
residence, and he made his abode with his daughter, who was now the only
one on earth in whom he took any interest. But Dalton Hall was not
untenanted. Lady Dudleigh lived there in the old home of her childhood,
and passed her time in works of charity. She made an effort to reclaim
Leon, and succeeded in keeping him with her for a few weeks; but the
quiet life soon proved intolerable, and he wandered away at length to
other scenes.

Reginald had dealt faithfully and even generously by him. After all his
crimes and villainies, he could not forget that he was his brother, and
he had done all in his power to renew his life for him. He had given
him all the claims which he had collected, and thus had freed him from
debt. He had also given him money enough to enable him to start afresh
in life. But the money was soon gone, and the habits which, Leon had
formed made any change for the better impossible. He wandered away into
his former associations and became a miserable vagabond, constantly
sinking down deep into misery, to be saved for a time by his mother's
assistance, but only to sink once more.

Mention must be made of two others before this story closes.

One of these is Leon's wife. She went away from Dudleigh Manor to
Scotland in search of the clergyman who had married her. She succeeded
in finding him, and in obtaining from him a formal certificate of her
marriage. This, however, was not for the purpose of acquiring any hold
whatever upon Leon, but rather for the sake of her own honor, and also
out of regard for Edith, whom she wished to free from the last shadow of
that evil which her own deceit had thrown upon the innocent girl. After
this she was satisfied. She did not seek Leon again, nor did she ever
again see him. She retired from the world altogether, and joining a
sisterhood of mercy, devoted the remainder of her life to acts of
charity and humanity.

Last of all remains Miss Plympton, with whom this story began, and with
whom it may end. That good lady recovered from the illness into which
she had fallen on account of her anxiety about Edith, and was able to
visit her not long after her release from her last imprisonment. She
had given up her school; and as she had no home, she yielded to Edith's
affectionate entreaties, and found a new home with her, where she passed
the remainder of her days.

THE END.