AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND

Eleventh Impression


       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHILDREN'S CLASSICS

Each beautifully illustrated in color and tastefully bound

  BY WASHINGTON IRVING
  THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW
  RIP VAN WINKLE

  SELECTED
  TALES OF WASHINGTON IRVING'S
  ALHAMBRA

  BY JOHN RUSKIN
  THE KING OF THE GOLDEN RIVER

  BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
  A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES

  SELECTED
  HANS ANDERSEN'S FAIRY TALES

  BY MISS MULOCK
  THE LITTLE LAME PRINCE
  THE ADVENTURES OF A BROWNIE

  BY EMMA GELLIBRAND
  J. COLE

  BY JOHANNA SPYRI
  MONI THE GOAT BOY

  BY OUIDA
  MOUFFLOU AND OTHER STORIES
  THE NÜRNBERG STOVE
  A DOG OF FLANDERS

  SELECTED
  WONDERLAND STORIES
  ALL TIME TALES

  BY JONATHAN SWIFT
  GULLIVER'S TRAVELS
  (LILLIPUT LAND)

  BY GEORGE MACDONALD
  THE PRINCESS AND THE GOBLIN
  THE PRINCESS AND CURDIE
  AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: NORTH WIND, WHO WAS DANCING WITH HIM, ROUND AND ROUND THE
LONG BARE ROOM                                                _Page 111_]


George Macdonald
Stories For Little Folks

AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND

Simplified by

ELIZABETH LEWIS

Author of "The Princess and the Goblin Simplified"

With Six Full Page Illustrations in Color by Maria L. Kirk


[Illustration]


Philadelphia and London
J. B. Lippincott Company
Copyright, 1914
By J. B. Lippincott Company
Electrotyped and Printed by J. B. Lippincott Company
The Washington Square Press, Philadelphia, U.S.A.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                              PAGE

   I. DIAMOND MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF NORTH WIND     9

  II. DIAMOND'S FIRST TRIP WITH THE NORTH WIND        20

 III. NORTH WIND SINKS A SHIP                         31

  IV. THE LAND AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND          41

   V. DIAMOND'S FATHER LOSES HIS EMPLOYMENT           52

  VI. DIAMOND LEARNS TO DRIVE A HORSE                 62

 VII. DIAMOND DRIVES THE CAB                          73

VIII. DIAMOND VISITS NANNY                            84

  IX. THINGS GO HARD WITH DIAMOND'S FAMILY            93

   X. DIAMOND IN HIS NEW HOME                        102

  XI. ANOTHER VISIT FROM NORTH WIND                  109

 XII. NORTH WIND CARRIES DIAMOND AWAY                119


ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                        PAGE

NORTH WIND, WHO WAS DANCING WITH HIM, ROUND AND ROUND
THE LONG BARE ROOM                               _Frontispiece_

AGAINST THIS HE LAID HIS EAR, AND THEN HE HEARD THE
VOICE QUITE DISTINCTLY                                   12

IT WAS THE BACK DOOR OF A GARDEN                         29

HE WAS SURE IT WAS NORTH WIND, BUT HE THOUGHT SHE MUST
BE DEAD AT LAST                                          47

WITHIN A MONTH HE WAS ABLE TO SPELL OUT MOST OF THE
VERSES FOR HIMSELF                                       73

HE FASTENED THE CHEEK-STRAP VERY CAREFULLY               78


AT THE BACK OF THE
NORTH WIND


CHAPTER I

DIAMOND MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF NORTH WIND


There was once a little boy named Diamond and he slept in a low room
over a coach house. In fact, his room was just a loft where they kept
hay and straw and oats for the horses. Little Diamond's father was a
coachman and he had named his boy after a favorite horse.

Diamond's father had built him a bed in the loft with boards all around
it, because there was so little room in their own end of the coach
house. So when little Diamond lay there in bed, he could hear the horses
under him munching away in the dark or moving sleepily in their dreams.
His father put old Diamond, the horse after whom he was named, in the
stall under the bed because he was quiet and did not go to sleep
standing, but lay down like a reasonable creature.

Little Diamond sometimes woke in the middle of the night and felt his
bed shaking in the blasts of the north wind. Then he could not help
wondering if the wind should blow the house down and he should fall down
into the manger, whether old Diamond might not eat him up before he knew
him in his night gown. And though old Diamond was quiet all night long,
yet when he woke up he got up like an earthquake. Then little Diamond
knew what o'clock it was, or at least what was to be done next, which
was--to go to sleep again as fast as he could!

Often there was hay at little Diamond's feet as he lay in bed, and hay
at his head, piled up in great heaps to the very roof. Sometimes there
was none at all. That was when they had used it all and had not yet
bought more. Soon they bought more, and then it was only through a
little lane with two or three turnings in it that he could reach his bed
at all.

Sometimes when his mother undressed him in her room and told him to trot
away to bed by himself, he would creep into the heart of the hay first.
There he would lie, thinking how cold it was outside in the wind and how
warm it would be inside his bed; and how he would go to his bed when he
pleased; only he wouldn't just yet; he would get a little colder first.
As he grew colder lying in the hay, his bed seemed to him to grow
warmer. Then at last, he would scramble out of the hay, shoot like an
arrow into his bed, cover himself up, snuggle down, and think what a
happy boy he was!

He had not the least idea that the wind got in at a chink in the wall
and blew about him all night. But the back of his bed was of boards only
an inch thick, and on the other side of them was the north wind. Now
these boards were soft and crumbly, and it happened that a soft part in
them had worn away.

One night after he lay down, little Diamond found that a knot had come
out of one of them and the wind was blowing in upon him. He jumped out
of bed again, got a little wisp of hay, twisted it up and folded it in
the middle. In this way, he made it into a cork and stuck it into the
knot-hole to keep the wind out. But the wind began to blow loudly and
angrily. Just as Diamond was falling asleep, out blew his hay cork and
hit him on the nose!

It was just hard enough to wake him up and let him hear the wind
whistling through the hole. He searched about for his hay cork, found
it, and stuck it in harder. He was just dropping off to sleep once more,
when pop! with an angry whistle behind it, the cork struck him again,
this time on the cheek. Up he rose once more, got some more hay to make
a new cork, and stuck it into the hole as hard as ever he could. But he
was scarcely laid down again, before pop! it came on his forehead. So he
gave it up, drew the bed-clothes over his head, and was soon fast
asleep.

[Illustration: AGAINST THIS HE LAID HIS EAR, AND THEN HE HEARD THE VOICE
QUITE DISTINCTLY]

Next day, little Diamond forgot all about the hole. But his mother found
it when she was making up his bed and pasted a piece of thick brown
paper over it. So when Diamond snuggled down into his bed that night, he
did not think of it at all. But before he dropped asleep, he heard a
queer sound and lifted his head to listen. Was somebody talking to him?
The wind was rising again and beginning to blow and whistle. Was it the
wind? He moved about to find out who or what it was, and at last,
happened to put his hand upon the knot-hole with the paper pasted over
it. Against this he laid his ear and then he heard the voice quite
distinctly.

"What do you mean, little boy, by closing up my window?"

"What window?" asked Diamond.

"You stuffed hay into it three times last night! I had to blow it out
again three times!"

"You can't mean this little hole? It isn't a window. It is a hole in my
bed."

"I did not say _a_ window. I said it was _my_ window!"

"But it can't be a window!" said Diamond. "Windows are holes to see out
of."

"Well, that is just what I made this window for."

"But you are outside," answered Diamond. "You can't want a window."

"You are quite mistaken. Windows are to see out of, you say. Well, I am
in my house, and I want windows to see out of."

"But you have made a window into my bed."

"Well, your mother has three windows into my dancing hall, and you have
three into my garret."

"Dear me!" said Diamond. "Still you can hardly expect me to keep a
window in my bed for you. Now, can you?"

"Come!" said the voice. "You just open that window!"

"Well," said Diamond, "mother says I should be obliging. Still it is
rather hard. You see, the north wind will blow right in my face if I
do!"

"I am the North Wind!" said the voice.

"O-o-oh!" said Diamond. "Then will you promise not to blow in my face if
I open your window?"

"I cannot promise that," said the North Wind.

"But you will give me the tooth-ache. Mother has it already."

"But what is to become of me without a window!" cried the voice.

"I am sure I don't know. All I say is that it will be worse for me than
for you."

"No, it will not," replied the voice. "You shall not be the worse for
it--I promise you that. You will be much the better for it. Just believe
what I say, and do as I tell you."

"Well, I _can_ pull the clothes over my head," said Diamond. So he felt
around with his little sharp nails, got hold of one edge of the paper
and tore it off. In came a long whistling stream of cold that struck his
little naked chest. He scrambled and tumbled in under the bed-clothes
and covered himself up. There was no paper between him and the voice
now, and he felt--not frightened exactly--but a little queer.

"What a strange person this North Wind must be," thought Diamond, "to
live in what they call 'Out-of-Doors,' I suppose, and make windows into
people's beds."

Now the voice began again. He could hear it quite plainly, even with his
head under the bed-clothes. It was still more gentle now, though it was
six times as large and loud as before. And he thought it sounded a
little like his mother's.

"What is your name, little boy?" it asked.

"Diamond," answered Diamond under the bed-clothes.

"What a funny name!"

"It is a very nice name," replied the boy.

"I am not so sure of that," said the voice.

"Well, I am!" returned Diamond. "I think it is a very pretty name."

"Diamond is a useless thing, rather," said the voice.

"That is not true. Diamond is very useful--and as big as two--and so
quiet all night! But doesn't he make a jolly row in the morning, getting
up on his four great legs! It is like thunder!"

"You do not seem to know what a diamond is!" cried the voice.

"Oh, don't I, just! Diamond is a great and good horse, and he sleeps
right under me. He is old Diamond and I am young Diamond. Or, if you
like it better, Mr. North Wind, if you are so particular, he is big
Diamond and I am little Diamond. And I do not know which of us my father
likes best!"

A beautiful laugh, soft and musical, sounded somewhere near him. But the
boy kept his head under the clothes.

"I am not Mr. North Wind," said the voice.

"You told me you were the North Wind," cried Diamond.

"I did not say _Mr._ North Wind," said the voice.

"Well, I _do_ say Mr. for my mother tells me always to be polite."

"Then let me tell you that I do not think it at all polite for you to
say Mr. to me," answered the voice.

"Isn't it? Well, I am sorry then."

"But you ought to know better," said the voice. "You can't think it is
polite to lie there with your head under the bed-clothes and never look
to see what kind of a person you are talking to! I want you to come out
with me."

"I want to go to sleep!" said Diamond.

"Will you take your head out of the bed-clothes?" said the voice a
little angrily.

"No!" said Diamond crossly.

The moment he said the word a fierce blast of wind crashed in the wall
and swept the clothes off him. He started up in a fright. Leaning over
him was the large, beautiful, pale face of a woman. Her dark eyes had
begun to flash a little but the rest of her face was very sweet and
beautiful. What was very strange, though, was that away from her head
streamed out her black hair in every direction like dark clouds. Soon it
fell down about her again and then her face came out of it like the
moon out of the clouds.

"Will you go with me now, little Diamond?" asked the North Wind bending
over him and speaking very gently.

"Yes, yes!" cried Diamond, stretching out his arms toward her. "Yes, I
will go with you, dear North Wind. I am not a bit afraid. I will go!
But," he added, "how shall I get my clothes? They are in mother's room
and the door is locked."

"Oh never mind your clothes. You will not be cold. Nobody is cold with
the North Wind."

"I thought everybody was," said Diamond.

"That is a great mistake. People are not cold when they are _with_ the
North Wind--only when they are against it. Now will you come?"

"Yes, dear North Wind. You are so beautiful I am quite ready to go with
you."

"Ah, but I may not always look beautiful. If you see me with my face all
black, don't be frightened. If you see me flapping wings like bat's
wings, as big as the whole sky, don't be afraid. If you hear me raging,
you must believe that I am just doing my work. Nay, Diamond, if I change
into a serpent or a tiger, you must not let go your hold of me, for it
will be I just the same. And now, come!"

She turned away and went so swiftly that she was gone before Diamond was
more than started. When he finally got down the stairs and out into the
yard, no one did he see. And there he stood with his bare feet on the
hard stones of the paved yard.

"I dare say she is hiding somewhere to see what I will do," said
Diamond. So around the end of the stable he went to see if he could find
her. But at once, sharp as a knife, the wind came against his little
chest and bare legs. And stronger and stronger the wind seemed to blow.
It was _so_ cold! All at once, he remembered that she had said that
people were not cold if they went _with_ the North Wind. So he turned
his back and trotted again toward the yard and sure enough, he began to
feel almost warm once more!

On and on, North Wind blew him and, presently, she seemed to shove him
right against a small door in a wall. It opened and she blew him through
it and out into the very middle of the lawn of the house next door. It
was here that Mr. Coleman lived who was his father's master and who
owned big Diamond. So little Diamond did not feel entirely strange, and
then, too, there was a light in one window that looked friendly. As long
as he could see that, Diamond could not feel quite alone or lonely. But
all at once, the light went almost out. Then indeed, he felt that it
was dreadful to be out in the night alone, when every body else was gone
to bed! That was more than he could bear and it was not strange that he
burst out crying.

Some one in the house heard the sound of his sobbing and came out and
found him there. He was taken into the house and into a room which had a
bright light and a warm fire in it. Beside this, he found Miss Coleman,
the young lady daughter of the house, who was having her long dark hair
brushed out before going to bed. Somehow in that state, she looked just
like the beautiful North Wind that he had been searching for. Without
stopping to think, he ran right into her arms for comfort.

After he was warmed and comforted, they took him back home and knocked
on the door to arouse his mother, to come and get him. She was much
surprised to see him, you may be sure. She carried him up to his bed
again and tucked him snugly in. And there he fell fast asleep.


CHAPTER II

DIAMOND'S FIRST TRIP WITH THE NORTH WIND


Diamond awoke very early the next morning and thought what a curious
dream he had had. But the memory of it grew brighter and brighter until
it did not look altogether like a dream. In fact he began to doubt
whether he had not really been abroad in the wind at night.

All that week it was hard weather. The grass showed white in the morning
with the hoar frost which clung to every blade. As Diamond's shoes were
not good and his mother had not saved up quite enough money to get him
the new pair she so much wanted for him, she would not let him run out.
But at length, she brought home his new shoes. No sooner did she find
that they fitted him, than she told him he might run out into the yard
and amuse himself.

The sun was going down when he flew from the door like a bird from its
cage. A great fire of sunset burned over the top of the gate that led to
the stables. Above the fire in the sky, lay a large lake of green light,
above that a golden cloud, and over that the blue of the wintry heavens.
Diamond thought that next to his own home, he had never seen any place
he would like so much to live in as that sky.

As he wandered about, he came to stand by the little door which opened
upon the lawn of the house next door. That made him remember how the
wind had driven him to this same spot on the night of his dream. So he
thought he would just go in and see if things looked at all as they did
then. But not a flower was to be seen in the beds on the lawn! Even the
brave old chrysanthemums and Christmas roses had passed away before the
frost. What? Yes! There was _one_. He ran and knelt down to look at it.

It was a primrose--a tiny, tiny thing, but perfect in shape--a baby
wonder. As he stooped his face to see it close, a little wind began to
blow. Two or three long leaves that stood up behind the flower shook and
wavered and quivered. But the primrose lay still in the green hollow,
looking up at the sky and not seeming to know at all that the wind was
blowing. It looked like a golden eye that the black wintry earth had
opened to look at the sky with.

That very same night, after Diamond had been asleep for a little, he
awoke all at once in the dark.

"Open the window, Diamond," said a voice.

Now Diamond's mother had once more pasted up North Wind's window.

"Are you North Wind?" said Diamond. "I do not hear you blowing."

"No, but you hear me talking. Open the window for I haven't over much
time."

"Yes," said Diamond. "But please, North Wind, where's the use? You left
me all alone last time."

"That was your fault," returned North Wind. "I had work to do and you
kept me waiting."

Diamond was already scratching at the paper like ten mice and, getting
hold of the edge of it, tore it off. The next instant a young girl
glided across the bed and stood on the floor.

"Oh, dear!" said Diamond quite dismayed. "I didn't know--who are you,
please?"

"I am North Wind."

"But you are no bigger than I am!"

"Do you think I care how big or how little I am? And of course, I am
little this evening! Didn't you see me behind the leaves of the
primrose? Didn't you see them blowing? Make haste, now, if you want to
go with me! Dress as fast as you can and I will go and shake the leaves
of the primrose till you come!"

"Don't hurt it!" said Diamond.

North Wind broke out into a little laugh like the breaking of silver
bubbles and was gone in a moment. Diamond saw the gleam of something
vanishing down the stair. He dressed himself as fast as ever he could
and crept out into the yard, through the door in the wall, and away to
the primrose. Behind it stood North Wind leaning over it.

"Come along!" she said jumping up and holding out her hand. She led him
across the garden and with one bound was on top of the wall. Then she
reached down her hand to Diamond. He gave a great spring and stood
beside her.

Another bound, and they stood in the road by the river. It was full tide
and the stars were shining clear in its depths. But they had not walked
beside it far before its surface was covered with ripples and the stars
had vanished. North Wind was now as tall as a full-grown girl. Her hair
was flying about her head and the wind was blowing a breeze down the
river. But she turned aside and went up a narrow lane.

"I have some rather disagreeable work to do to-night," she said. "And
disagreeable work must be looked after first."

So saying, she laid hold of Diamond and began to run, gliding along
faster and faster. She made many turnings and windings. Once they ran
through a hall where they found both the front and back doors open. At
the foot of the stair, North Wind stood still and Diamond, hearing a
great growl, started in terror. There, instead of North Wind, was a huge
wolf by his side! He let go his hold and the wolf bounded up the stair.
The windows of the house rattled and shook and there came the sound of a
fall.

"Surely," thought Diamond, "North Wind can't be eating one of the
children!"

He started to rush up after her, but she met him on the stair, took him
by the hand and hurried him out of the house.

"I hope you haven't eaten a baby, North Wind!" he said very solemnly.

North Wind laughed merrily and went tripping on faster. Her grassy robe
swept and swirled about her steps. Wherever it passed over withered
leaves, they went fleeing and whirling away and running on their edges
all about her feet. "No, I did not eat a baby," she said, "as you would
know if you had not let go of me. I merely scared an ugly nurse who was
calling a child bad names. I flew at her throat and she tumbled over
with a crash. I had to put on a bad shape before she could see me. I put
on a wolf's shape for that is what she is growing to be inside."

They were now climbing the slope of a grassy ascent. At the top, North
Wind stood and turned her face toward London. The stars were still
shining clear and cold overhead. There was not a cloud to be seen.

"Now," said North Wind, "do not let go of me again. I might have lost
you the last time, only I was not in a hurry then. Now I am in a hurry."

As she spoke, she was growing larger and larger. Her head went up and up
toward the stars. As she grew, her hair, longer and longer, lifted
itself from her head and went out in black waves. She put her hands
behind her head and began weaving and knotting her hair together. Then
she took up Diamond in her hands and threw him over her shoulder saying,
"I have made a place for you in my hair. Get in, Diamond."

Diamond soon found the woven nest and crept into it. The next moment he
was rising in the air. North Wind grew towering up to the place of the
clouds. Her hair went streaming out from her till it spread like a mist
over the stars. She flung herself abroad in space. Diamond made a little
place through the woven meshes of her hair and peeped through that, for
he did not dare look over the top of his nest.

The earth was rushing past like a river or a sea below him. Trees and
water and green grass hurried away beneath. Now there was nothing but
the roofs of houses sweeping along like a great torrent of stones and
rocks. Chimneys fell and tiles flew from the roofs. There was a great
roaring for the wind was dashing against London like a stormy sea.
Diamond, of course, at the back of North Wind, was in a calm but he
could hear it. Around and around and around, swept North Wind, her dark
hair rolling and flowing, sweeping the people all into their homes and
the bad smells out of the streets.

Suddenly, Diamond saw a little girl coming along a street. She was
dreadfully blown by the wind, and a broom she was trailing behind her
was very troublesome. It seemed as if the wind had a spite at her! It
kept worrying her and tearing at her rags. She was so lonely there!

"Oh, please, North Wind," cried Diamond, "won't you help that little
girl?"

"I cannot leave my work, Diamond. But you can help her if you like.
Only, I can't wait for you. And mind, the wind will get hold of you
too!"

"But how shall I get home again," cried Diamond, "if you don't wait for
me?"

"Well, you must think of that!" said North Wind.

"Oh," cried Diamond. "I am sure the wind will blow her over! I _must_
help her anyway! Let me go!"

Without a word, North Wind dropped into the street and set him down. The
same moment, he was caught in the coils of the blast and all but swept
away. North Wind vanished. The wind was roaring along the street. The
little girl was scudding before it, her hair flying, while behind her
she dragged her broom with which she swept her crossing. Her little legs
were going as fast as they could, to keep her from falling.

"Stop! stop! little girl!" shouted Diamond, starting in pursuit.

"I can't!" wailed the girl. "The wind won't let me!"

Diamond ran after her and caught hold of her frock but it tore in his
hand. Then he ran fast enough to get in front of her and turning around,
caught her in his arms. Just then, he thought he got a glimpse of North
Wind turning the corner in front of them. They must go with her of
course, and sure enough, when they turned the corner after her, they
found it quite quiet there.

"Now, you must lead me," said Diamond. "You show me the way you must go
to get home and I will take care of you."

So the little girl put her free hand in his and began to lead him. They
went around turning after turning, till they stopped at a cellar-door in
a very dirty lane. There the little girl knocked.

"What an awful place!" said Diamond. "I should not like to live here."

"Oh yes, you would, if you had no where else to go!" answered the girl.
"I only hope they'll let me in."

"Don't they always let you in?" said Diamond.

"No, they don't. And then I have to stay in the street all night and
scud back to my crossing the first thing in the morning. You see they
don't answer, now!"

"Well," said Diamond, "I don't want to get in. I want to go back to my
mother. Come with me and I will take you to my own home."

The little girl thought this would be much better than sitting in the
streets all night. So they started off. The trouble was that Diamond was
not at all sure that he could find the way without North Wind. But the
only thing to do was to try. So they wandered on and on, turning in this
direction and that, without any reason for one way more than another. At
last, they got out of the thick of the houses into a kind of waste
place. By this time, they were both very tired, and Diamond was
inclined to cry. For he said to himself that he had not done the little
girl any good and he had lost his own way home. But in this, he was
wrong for she was far happier in having him with her, and making people
happier is one of the best ways of doing them good.

[Illustration: IT WAS THE BACK DOOR OF A GARDEN]

They sat down and rested themselves a little and then went on. After a
time, they found themselves on a rising ground that sloped rather
steeply on the other side. The moment they reached the top, a gust of
wind seized them and blew them down hill as fast as they could run. Nor
could Diamond stop before he went bang! against one of the doors in a
wall. To his dismay, it burst open. When they came to themselves, they
peeped in. It was the back door of a garden.

"Oh! oh!" cried Diamond after staring for a few moments. "I know this
place--know it well! It is Mr. Coleman's garden and here I am at home
again. Oh, I am so glad! Come in, little girl! Come in with me and my
mother will give you some breakfast."

"No, no! I can't!" said the little girl. "We have been so long coming.
Look up! Don't you see that it is morning now? I must hurry back to my
crossing and sweep it and get money to take home or they will beat me!
I cannot stay. Good-bye, little boy, good-bye!"

She started back at once, ran up the hill and disappeared behind it.
Diamond called after her and called, but she did not even turn round. He
was sorry to see her go but there was no help for it. So when she was
gone quite out of sight, he shut the door of the garden as best he
could, and ran through the kitchen garden to the stables. And wasn't he
glad to get into his own blessed bed again!


CHAPTER III

NORTH WIND SINKS A SHIP


It was some time before he saw North Wind again. He saw the little girl
before that but it was only for a moment. It happened in this way. His
father was taking the horse, Diamond, to have new shoes put on him, and
knowing that little Diamond, like all small boys, liked a ride, he set
him on the horse and taking the bridle led the two Diamonds away.

The blacksmith's shop was some distance away, deeper in London. As they
crossed the angle of a square, Diamond, who was looking about to see if
any one noticed him riding upon the big horse like a man, saw a little
girl sweeping a crossing before a lady and holding out her hand for a
penny. The lady had no penny and the little girl was disappointed.

Diamond could not stand that. He knew the little girl and he knew that
he had a penny in his pocket. He slid off the horse in a sort of tumble
and ran to her, holding out the penny. She did not know him at first,
but when he smiled at her, she did. He stuffed the penny into her hand
and ran back, for he knew his father would not care to wait. After that,
he did not see little Nanny for a long time.

He played often now on the lawn of the house next door--Mr. Coleman's
lawn--as the summer drew near, warm and splendid. One evening, he was
sitting in a little summer-house at the foot of the lawn, before which
was a bed of tulips. They were closed for the night but the wind was
waving them slightly. All at once, out of one of them, there flew a big
buzzing bumblebee.

"There! That's something done!" said a voice--a gentle, merry, childish
voice but _so_ tiny! "I was afraid he would have to stay there all
night."

Diamond looked all about and then he saw the _tiniest_ creature, sliding
down the stem of the tulip.

"Are you the fairy that herds the bees?" he asked kneeling down beside
the tulip bed.

"I am not a fairy," answered the little creature. "You stupid Diamond,
have you never seen me before?"

As she spoke, a moan of wind bent the tulips almost to the ground and
then he recognized North Wind.

"But there!" added the little creature, "I must not stay to chatter. I
have to go and sink a ship to-night."

"Sink a ship!" cried Diamond. "And drown the men and women in it? How
dreadful! Still I cannot believe you are cruel, North Wind!"

"No, I could not be cruel, and yet I must often do what looks cruel to
those who do not know. But the people they say I drown, I only carry
away to the back of the north wind--only I never saw the place."

"But how can you carry them there if you never saw the place? And how is
it that you never saw it?"

"Because it is behind me. You cannot see your own back, you know. But
run along now if you want to go with me to-night. I cannot take you till
you have been to bed and gone to sleep. I'll look about and do something
till you are ready. Do you see that man over there on the river in the
boat who is just floating about? Now watch!"

She flashed like a dragon-fly across the water whose surface rippled and
puckered as she passed. The next moment, the man in the boat glanced
about him and bent to his oars. The boat flew over the rippling water.
The same instant almost, North Wind perched again upon the river wall.

"How did you do that?" asked Diamond.

"I just blew in his face and blew the mist out of him."

"But what for? I don't understand!" said Diamond. Hearing no answer, he
looked down at the wall. North Wind was gone. Away across the river
went a long ripple--what sailors call a cat's paw. The man in the boat
at once put up his sail. The moon was coming to herself on the edge of a
great cloud and the sail began to shine white. Diamond rubbed his eyes
and wondered what it was all about. But he felt that he could not know
more till he had gone to bed, so he turned away and started for home. He
stopped to look out of a window before going to bed. Above the moon, the
clouds were streaming different ways, and the wind was rising as he fell
asleep.

He woke in the middle of the night and the darkness. A terrible noise
was rumbling overhead like the rolling beat of great drums. For a while,
he could not come quite awake. But a second peal of thunder broke over
his head and a great blast of wind followed which tore some tiles off
the roof and, through the hole this made, sent a spout of wind down into
his face. At the same moment, he heard a mighty, yet musical voice say,
"Come up, Diamond! It's all ready. I am waiting for you." Then a
gigantic arm was reached down which drew him up and clasped him against
North Wind's breast.

"Oh, North Wind!" he murmured. But the words vanished from his lips as
he had seen the soap bubbles, that burst too soon, vanish from the
mouth of his pipe. The wind caught them and they were no-where.

At the same moment, a peal of thunder which shook Diamond's heart
against his side boomed out of the heavens; I cannot say, out of the
sky, for there was no sky. Diamond had not seen the lightning for he had
been busy trying to find the face of North Wind. Every moment, the folds
of her garment would sweep across his eyes and blind him. But between
them, he could just catch glimpses of the great glories of her eyes
looking down at him through the rifts of the huge clouds over his head.

"Oh dear North Wind!" cried the boy. "Why do you do like this? Must you
go and sink the ship? It is not like you! Here you are, taking care of a
poor little boy like me, with one arm, and there you are, sinking the
ship with the other! No, no! It can't be like you!"

"Then you must believe that I am cruel," answered the strong voice of
North Wind, sounding about him out of the clouds.

"No, dear North Wind, I can't believe that. I don't believe it. I will
not believe it. How could you know how to put on such a beautiful face
if you did not love me and love all the rest too? No! You may sink as
many ships as you like--though I shall not like to see it!"

"That is quite another thing!" said North Wind.

As she spoke, she gave one spring from the roof and rushed up into the
clouds. As if the clouds knew she had come, they burst into fresh
thunderous light. Diamond seemed to be borne through an ocean of
dazzling flame. The winds were writhing around him like a storm of
serpents. For they were in the midst of the clouds and mists which of
course took the shapes of the wind, eddying, and wreathing, and
whirling, and shooting, and dashing about like gray and black water.

Now it blinded him by smiting him upon the eyes. Now it deafened him by
bellowing in his ears. But he did not mind it. He only gasped at first,
and then laughed, for the arm of North Wind was about him and he felt
quite safe, though he knew that they were sweeping with the speed of the
wind itself toward the sea! But before they reached it, Diamond felt
North Wind's hair beginning to fall down about him.

"Is the storm over, North Wind?" he called out.

"No, Diamond. I am only waiting for a moment to set you down. You will
not like to see the ship sunk and I am going to give you a place to stop
in till I come back. Look!"

With one sweep of her great white arm, she flung yards deep of darkness,
like a great curtain, from before the face of the boy. And lo! it was a
blue night lit up with stars. Where it did not shine with stars, it
shimmered with a milky whiteness of stars except where, just before
them, the gray towers of a cathedral blotted out the sky.

"A good place for you to wait in," said North Wind and swept down upon
the cathedral roof. They went in through an open door in one of the
towers. Diamond found himself at the top of a stone stair which went
twisting away down into the darkness. North Wind held his hand, and
after a little, led him out upon a narrow gallery which ran all around
the central part of the church. Below him, lay the inside of the church
like a great silent gulf hollowed in stone. On and on, they walked along
this narrow gallery till at last they reached a much broader stairway
leading on down and down until at length, it led them down into the
church itself.

There he felt himself clasped in the arms of North Wind who held him
close and kissed him on the forehead. The next moment, she was gone, and
Diamond heard a moaning about the church which grew and grew to a
roaring. The storm was up again and he knew that North Wind's hair was
flying.

The church was dark. Only a little light came through the windows which
were almost all of that precious old stained glass so much lovelier than
the new. There was not enough light in the stars to show the colors in
them. Diamond began to feel his way about the place, and for a little
while went wandering up and down. His pattering foot-steps waked soft
answering echoes in the stone house. It was as if the great cathedral
somehow knew that his little self was there and went on giving back an
answer to every step he took.

At last, he gave a great sigh and said, "I am _so_ tired!" He did not
hear the gentle echo which answered from far away over his head. For at
that moment, he came against the lowest of a few steps that stretched
across the church, and fell down and hurt his arm. He cried a little at
first, and then crawled up the steps on his hands and knees. At the top,
he came to a little bit of carpet on which he lay down. And there he lay
staring at the dull windows that rose nearly a hundred feet above his
head.

The moon was at that moment just on the edge of the horizon. And lo!
with the moon, lovely figures began to dawn in the windows. He lay and
looked at them backward over his head, wondering if they would come
down. He heard a low, soft murmuring as if they were talking to
themselves about him. But his eyes grew tired, and more and more tired.
His eyelids grew so heavy that they _would_ keep tumbling down over his
eyes. He kept lifting them and lifting them. But every time, they were
heavier than the last. It was no use! They were too much for him.
Sometimes before he got them half way up, down they went again. At
length, he gave it up quite, and the moment he gave it up, he was fast
asleep!

When his eyes came wide open again, there were no lovely figures--or
even windows--but a dark heap of hay all about him. The small panes in
the roof of his loft were glimmering blue in the light of the morning.
Old Diamond was coming awake down below in the stable. In a moment more
he was on his feet and shaking himself so that young Diamond's bed
trembled under him.

"He is grand at shaking himself!" said Diamond. "I wish I could shake
myself like that. But then I can wash myself and he can't. What fun it
would be to see old Diamond washing his face with his hoofs and iron
shoes! Wouldn't it be a picture!"

He dressed himself quickly and ran out. Down the stairs he went and
through the little door out upon the lawn of Mr. Coleman's house next
door. He wanted to see how things looked since last night. There was the
little summer-house with the tulip bed before it where he had been
sitting the evening before, crushed to the ground! Over it lay the great
elm tree which the wind had broken across! As he stood looking at it, a
gentleman who was staying at the Coleman house came out upon the lawn.

"Dear me!" said the gentleman. "There has been terrible work here! This
is the North Wind's doing! What a pity! I wish we lived at the back of
it, I am sure!"

"Where is that, sir?" asked Diamond.

"Away in the Hyperborean regions," answered the gentleman. He smiled for
he knew well enough that Diamond would not understand that big word
which means the country away in the far, far north.

"I never heard of that place," returned Diamond.

"No," said the gentleman. "I suppose not. But if this tree had been
there, it would not have been blown down. There is no wind in that
country."

"That must be the place," said Diamond to himself, "where North Wind
said she would take the people whom she sunk with the ship. Next time I
see her, I am going to ask her to take me to see that land, too."


CHAPTER IV

THE LAND AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND


One morning, Diamond's mother did not think he was feeling very well and
when he told her that he had a little headache, she was sure of it. Now
there was an aunt of his living at Sandwich and his mother decided to
send him there for a change. So giving him two pence for spending money,
she packed him off to Sandwich for a visit.

He soon made great friends with an old woman who kept a toy-shop there,
where he spent his two pence. One hot day when he had been walking about
more than he ought and was tired, he went into the toy-shop to rest. The
old woman had gone out but he thought it would be all right for him to
sit down on a box and rest.

All at once, he heard a gentle whirring somewhere amongst the toys.
Among them was a whistle that had a wind-mill at the end which turned
when you blew the whistle. No one was blowing the whistle now and yet
the wind-mill was turning and turning and turning.

"What can it mean?" said Diamond out loud after watching for a few
moments.

"It means _me_," answered the tiniest voice he had ever heard.

"Who are you, please?" asked Diamond.

"Well, really, I begin to be ashamed of you!" cried the voice. "You are
as bad as a baby that doesn't know its mother in a new bonnet!"

"Not quite so bad as that, dear North Wind," said Diamond. "And I am so
glad to see you. Did you sink the ship?"

"Yes."

"And drown everybody?"

"Not quite. One boat got away with six or seven men in it."

"And you took the others to that queer place the gentleman spoke of,"
said Diamond to himself. Aloud he said, "Please, North Wind, I want you
to take me to the country at the back of the north wind."

"That is not so easy," said North Wind and was silent so long that he
thought she must have gone away. But presently she spoke again.

"It is not so easy," she said thoughtfully. "But we shall see. We shall
see. You must go home, now, my dear, for you do not seem very well."

So Diamond went home. That afternoon, his head began to ache very much
and he had to go to bed. In the middle of the night, his aunt came in to
feel his forehead and to give him a drink of lemonade. Then he went off
to sleep, but was awake again soon, for a burst of wind blew open his
lattice window. The same moment, he found himself in a cloud of North
Wind's hair, with her beautiful face, set in it like a moon, bending
over him.

"Quick! Diamond!" she said. "I have found such a chance!"

"But I am not well," said Diamond.

"I know. But you will be better for it."

"Very well," said Diamond; and getting out of bed, he jumped into North
Wind's arms. Sure enough, the moment he felt her arms fold about him, he
began to feel better. It was a moonless night and very dark, with
glimpses of stars when the clouds parted.

"We shall soon get to where the waves are dashing about," said North
Wind. And soon, Diamond looking down saw the white glimmer of breaking
water far below him.

"You see, Diamond," said North Wind, "it is very difficult to get you to
the back of the north wind for that country lies in the very north
itself. Now, of course, I cannot blow northwards, for then I should have
to be South Wind. The north is where I come from--it is my home though I
never get nearer to it than the outer door. I can only sit on the
door-step and hear the voices in there, behind me. Since I cannot blow
in that direction to get there, I have just to draw into myself and grow
weaker and fainter as I go. That makes it hard for me to carry
anything--even you--with me when I go that way. So I must get some help.
Let me get rid of a few of these clouds. There! What do you see now?"

"A boat," said Diamond.

"A ship," said North Wind, "whose captain I know well. I have often
helped him to sail his eighty miles a day northward."

"He must have tacked often to do that," said Diamond who had been
watching the ships at Sandwich.

"Yes, that gave him a share in the business. It is not good at all--mind
that, Diamond--to do everything for those you love and not give them a
share in the doing. It is not being really kind to them. If South Wind
had blown that ship straight north, the captain would just have smoked
his pipe all day and got stupider and stupider. But now I am going to
put you aboard his ship. Do you see that round thing on the deck like
the top of a drum? Below that is where they keep their spare sails. Produced
by David Widger

QUOTES AND IMAGES FROM MARK TWAIN

QUOTATIONS FROM MARK TWAIN

SOME OF THE EDITOR'S FAVORITES

Aim and object of the law and lawyers was to defeat justice
All life seems to be sacred except human life
Always trying to build a house by beginning at the top
Believed it; because she desired to believe it
Best intentions and the frailest resolution
But it is an ill-wind that blows nobody good
But there are liars everywhere this year
Cayote is a living, breathing allegory of Want
Children were clothed in nothing but sunshine
Contempt of Court on the part of a horse
Fertile in invention and elastic in conscience
Fun--but of a mild type
Grief that is too deep to find help in moan or groan or outcry
Haughty humility
I was not scared, but I was considerably agitated
I had a delicacy about going home and getting thrashed
If the man doesn't believe as we do, we say he is a crank
Imagination to help his memory
Invariably allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements
It used to be a good hotel, but that proves nothing
It is easier to stay out than get out
It had cost something to upholster these women
Keg of these nails--of the true cross
Let me take your grief and help you carry it
Life a vanity and a burden, and the future but a way to death
Man is the only animal that blushes--or needs to
Man was not a liar he only missed it by the skin of his teeth
Money is most difficult to get when people need it most
Native canoe is an irresponsible looking contrivance
No people who are quite so vulgar as the over-refined ones
No nation occupies a foot of land that was not stolen
Nothing that glitters is gold
Notion that he is less savage than the other savages
Nursed his woe and exalted it 
Ostentatious of his modesty
Otherwise they would have thought I was afraid, which I was
People talk so glibly of "feeling," "expression," "tone,"
Pity is for the living, Envy is for the dead
Predominance of the imagination over the judgment
Profound respect for chastity--in other people
Prosperity is the best protector of principle
Received with a large silence that suggested doubt
Road, which did not seem to know its own mind exactly
Room to turn around in, but not to swing a cat
Scenery in California requires distance
Seventy is old enough--after that, there is too much risk
Sleep that heals all heart-aches and ends all sorrows
Slept, if one might call such a condition by so strong a name
Smell about them which is peculiar but not entertaining
Takes your enemy and your friend, working together, to hurt you
The man with a new idea is a Crank until the idea succeeds
To a delicate stomach even imaginary smoke can convey damage
Tourists showing how things ought to be managed
Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry and narrow-mindedness
Uncomplaining impoliteness
Very pleasant man if you were not in his way
Virtuous to the verge of eccentricity
Wasn't worth a cent two years ago, and now I owe two millions
We ought never to do wrong when people are looking
We must create, a public opinion, said Senator Dilworthy
Well provided with cigars and other necessaries of life
What's a fair wind for us is a head wind to them
Whichever one they get is the one they want
Worth while to get tired out, because one so enjoys resting
Wrinkles should merely indicate where smiles have been
Your absence when you are present 

A FEW SELECTED BOOKS
FOLLOWING THE EQUATOR
Against nature to take an interest in familiar things Age after
age, the barren and meaningless process All life seems to be sacred
except human life But there are liars everywhere this year Capacity
must be shown (in other work); in the law, concealment of it will
do Christmas brings harassment and dread to many excellent people
Climate which nothing can stand except rocks Creature which was
everything in general and nothing in particular Custom supersedes
all other forms of law Death in life; death without its privileges
Every one is a moon, and has a dark side Exercise, for such as like
that kind of work Explain the inexplicable Faith is believing what
you know ain't so Forbids betting on a sure thing Forgotten fact
is news when it comes again Get your formalities right--never mind
about the moralities Give thanks that Christmas comes but once a
year Good protections against temptations; but the surest is cowardice
Goody-goody puerilities and dreary moralities Habit of assimilating
incredibilities Human pride is not worth while Hunger is the handmaid
of genius If the man doesn't believe as we do, we say he is a crank
Inherited prejudices in favor of hoary ignorances It is easier to
stay out than get out Man is the only animal that blushes--or needs
to Meddling philanthropists Melt a brass door-knob and weather which
will only make it mushy Moral sense, and there is an Immoral Sense
Most satisfactory pet--never coming when he is called Natural desire
to have more of a good thing than he needs Neglected her habits,
and hadn't any Never could tell a lie that anybody would doubt No
nation occupies a foot of land that was not stolen No people who
are quite so vulgar as the over-refined ones Notion that he is less
savage than the other savages Only way to keep your health is to
eat what you don't want Ostentatious of his modesty Otherwise they
would have thought I was afraid, which I was Pity is for the living,
Envy is for the dead Prosperity is the best protector of principle
Received with a large silence that suggested doubt Seventy is old
enough--after that, there is too much risk Silent lie and a spoken
one Sinking vessel, with no freight in her to throw over Takes your
enemy and your friend, working together, to hurt you Thankfulness
is not so general The man with a new idea is a Crank until the idea
succeeds This is a poor old ship, and ought to be insured and sunk
To a delicate stomach even imaginary smoke can convey damage Tourists
showing how things ought to be managed Wrinkles should merely
indicate where smiles have been 

THE INNOCENTS ABROAD
Ancient painters never succeeded in denationalizing themselves
Apocryphal New Testament Astonishing talent for seeing things that
had already passed Bade our party a kind good-bye, and proceeded
to count spoons Base flattery to call them immoral Bones of St Denis
But it is an ill-wind that blows nobody good Buy the man out,
goodwill and all By dividing this statement up among eight Carry
soap with them Chapel of the Invention of the Cross Christopher
Colombo Clustered thick with stony, mutilated saints Commend me to
Fennimore Cooper to find beauty in the Indians Conceived a sort of
unwarrantable unfriendliness Confer the rest of their disastrous
patronage on some other firm Creator made Italy from designs by
Michael Angelo!

Cringing spirit of those great men Diffident young man, mild of moustache,
affluent of hair Expression Felt that it was not right to steal grapes
Fenimore Cooper Indians Filed away among the archives of Russia--in
the stove For dismal scenery, I think Palestine must be the prince
Free from self-consciousness--which is at breakfast Fumigation is
cheaper than soap Fun--but of a mild type Getting rich very
deliberately--very deliberately indeed Guides Have a prodigious
quantity of mind He never bored but he struck water He ought to be
dammed--or leveed Holy Family always lived in grottoes How tame a
sight his country's flag is at home I am going to try to worry along
without it I carried the sash along with me--I did not need the
sash I had a delicacy about going home and getting thrashed I was
not scared, but I was considerably agitated Is, ah--is he dead?

It is a hopeless, dreary, heart-broken land It is inferior--for coffee--but
it is pretty fair tea It used to be a good hotel, but that proves
nothing It was warm. It was the warmest place I ever was in
Joshua Journals so voluminously begun Keg of these nails--of the true
cross Lean and mean old age Man peculiarly and insufferably self-conceited:
not seasick Marks the exact centre of the earth Nauseous adulation of
princely patrons Never did succeed in making those idiots understand
their own language Never left any chance for newspaper controversies
Never uses a one-syllable word when he can think of a longer one
No satisfaction in being a Pope in those days Not afraid of a million
Bedouins Not bring ourselves to think St John had two sets of ashes
Old Travelers One is apt to overestimate beauty when it is rare
Only solitary thing one does not smell in Turkey Oriental splendor!

Original first shoddy contract mentioned in history Overflowing his
banks People talk so glibly of "feeling," "expression," "tone," Perdition
catch all the guides Picture which one ought to see once--not
oftener Polite hotel waiter who isn't an idiot Relic matter a little
overdone?

Room to turn around in, but not to swing a cat Saviour, who seems to be
of little importance any where in Rome Self-satisfied monarch, the
railroad conductor of America Sentimental praises of the Arab's idolatry
of his horse She assumes a crushing dignity Shepherd's Hotel, which
is the worst on earth Smell about them which is peculiar but not
entertaining Some people can not stand prosperity Somewhat singular
taste in the matter of relics St Charles Borromeo, Bishop of Milan
St Helena, the mother of Constantine Starving to death Stirring
times here for a while if the last trump should blow Tahoe means
grasshoppers.

It means grasshopper soup The information the ancients didn't have was
very voluminous The Last Supper There was a good deal of sameness
about it They were like nearly all the Frenchwomen I ever saw--homely
They were seasick.

And I was glad of it Those delightful parrots who have "been here before"
To give birth to an idea Toll the signal for the St Bartholomew's Massacre
Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry and narrow-mindedness Uncomplaining
impoliteness Under the charitable moon Used fine tooth combs--successfully
Venitian visiting young ladies Wandering Jew Wasn't enough of it
to make a pie We all like to see people seasick when we are not,
ourselves Well provided with cigars and other necessaries of life
What's a fair wind for us is a head wind to them Whichever one they
get is the one they want Who have actually forgotten their mother
tongue in three months Worth while to get tired out, because one
so enjoys resting 

ROUGHING IT
Aim and object of the law and lawyers was to defeat justice American
saddle Cayote is a living, breathing allegory of Want Children were
clothed in nothing but sunshine Contempt of Court on the part of a
horse Feared a great deal more than the almighty Fertile in invention
and elastic in conscience Give one's watch a good long undisturbed
spell He was nearly lightnin' on superintending He was one of the
deadest men that ever lived Hotel clerk who was crusty and disobliging
I had never seen lightning go like that horse Juries composed of
fools and rascals List of things which we had seen and some other
people had not Man was not a liar he only missed it by the skin of
his teeth Most impossible reminiscences sound plausible Native canoe
is an irresponsible looking contrivance Never knew there was a hell!

Nothing that glitters is gold Profound respect for chastity--in other
people Scenery in California requires distance Slept, if one might call
such a condition by so strong a name Useful information and entertaining
nonsense Virtuous to the verge of eccentricity

THE GILDED AGE
Accidental murder resulting from justifiable insanity Always trying
to build a house by beginning at the top Appropriation Beautiful
credit!

The foundation of modern society Believed it; because she desired to
believe it Best intentions and the frailest resolution Big babies
with beards Cheap sentiment and high and mighty dialogue Conscious
superiority Does your doctor know any thing Enjoy icebergs--as
scenery but not as company Erie RR: causeway of cracked rails and
cows, to the West Fever of speculation Final resort of the disappointed
of her sex, the lecture platform Geographical habits Get away and
find a place where he could despise himself Gossips were soon at
work Grand old benevolent National Asylum for the Helpless Grief
that is too deep to find help in moan or groan or outcry Haughty
humility Having no factitious weight of dignity to carry Imagination
to help his memory Invariably advised to settle--no matter how, but
settle Invariably allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements
Is this your first visit?

It had cost something to upholster these women Large amount of money
necessary to make a small hole Later years brought their disenchanting
wisdom Let me take your grief and help you carry it Life a vanity
and a burden, and the future but a way to death Mail train which
has never run over a cow Meant no harm they only wanted to know
Money is most difficult to get when people need it most Never sewed
when she could avoid it.

Bless her!
Nursed his woe and exalted it Predominance of the imagination over the
judgment Question was asked and answered--in their eyes Riches enough
to be able to gratify reasonable desires Road, which did not seem
to know its own mind exactly Sarcasms of fate Sleep that heals all
heart-aches and ends all sorrows Small gossip stood a very poor
chance Sun bothers along over the Atlantic Think a Congress of ours
could convict the devil of anything Titles never die in America Too
much grace and too little wine Understood the virtues of "addition,
division and silence" Unlimited reliance upon human promises Very
pleasant man if you were not in his way Wasn't worth a cent two
years ago, and now I owe two millions "We must create, a public
opinion," said Senator Dilworthy We'll make you think you never was
at home before We've all got to come to it at last, anyway!

Widened, and deepened, and straightened--(Public river Project) Wished
that she could see his sufferings now Your absence when you are present

MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES

A little pride always goes along with a teaspoonful of brains Ain't any
real difference between triplets and an insurrection Chastity, you can
carry it too far Classic: everybody wants to have read and nobody wants
to read Don't know anything and can't do anything Dwell on the particulars
with senile rapture Future great historian is lying--and doubtless
will continue to Head is full of history, and some of it is true, too
Humor enlivens and enlightens his morality I shall never be as dead again
as I was then If can't make seventy by any but an uncomfortable road:
don't go Kill a lot of poets for writing about "Beautiful Spring" Live
upon the property of their heirs so long Morality is all the better
for his humor Morals: rather teach them than practice them any day
Never been in jail, and the other is, I don't know why Never to
smoke when asleep, and never to refrain when awake Patriotism is
usually the refuge of the scoundrel Please state what figure you
hold him at--and return the basket Principles is another name for
prejudices She bears our children--ours as a general thing Some
civilized women would lose half their charm without dress The Essex
band done the best it could Time-expired man, to use Kipling's
military phrase To exaggerate is the only way I can approximate to
the truth Two kinds of Christian morals, one private and the other
public What, sir, would the people of the earth be without woman?

"I haven't enough money to buy a horse with--and a cab," said Diamond's
father.

"Look here," answered his friend. "I just bought an old horse the other
day, cheap. He is no good for the hansom I drive, for when folks take a
hansom, they want to drive like the wind. But for a four-wheeler that
takes families and their luggage, he's the very horse. I bought him
cheap and I'll sell him cheap."

"Oh, I don't want him," said Diamond's father.

"Well, come and see him anyway," said his friend. So he went.

What was his delight on going into the stable to find that the horse was
no other than his own old Diamond! Diamond, grown very thin and bony and
long-legged. The horse hearing his master's voice, turned his long
neck. And when his old friend went up to him and laid his hand on his
side, he whinnied for joy and laid his big head on his master's breast.
This settled the matter. Diamond's father put his arms around old
Diamond's neck and fairly cried.

The end of it was that Diamond's father bought old Diamond again,
together with a four-wheeled cab. As there were some rooms to be had
over the stable, he took them, wrote to his wife to come home, and set
up as a cabman.

It was late in the afternoon when Diamond and his mother and the baby
reached London. His father was waiting for them with his own cab but
they had not told Diamond who the horse was. For his father wanted to
enjoy the pleasure of his surprise when he found it out. He got in with
his mother without looking at the horse and was quite proud of riding
home in his father's cab.

When he got to the stables where their rooms were he could not help
being a little dismayed at first. But he thought of the song of the
river at the back of the north wind and just looked about for things
that were pleasant. He said to himself that it was a fine thing that all
their old furniture was there. Then he began to search out the
advantages of the place.

A thick, dull rain was falling and that was depressing. But the weather
would change and there was a good fire burning in the room, which a
neighbor had made for them. The tea things were put out and the kettle
was boiling on the fire. And with a good fire and tea and bread and
butter, things cannot be so _very_ bad.

But Diamond's father and mother were rather miserable and Diamond began
to feel a kind of darkness spreading over him. At the same moment, he
said, "This will never do! I can't give in to this. I've been at the
back of the north wind. Things go right there and they must be made to
go right here!"

So he said out loud, "What nice bread and butter this is!" And when he
had eaten it, he began to amuse the baby who was soon shrieking with
laughter. His father and mother had to laugh too and things began to
look better.

It was indeed a change for them all, not only from Sandwich but from
their old place. Instead of the great river where the huge barges with
their brown and yellow sails went up and down, their windows now looked
out upon a dirty paved yard. There was no garden more for Diamond to run
into when he pleased, with gay flowers about his feet, and lofty trees
over his head.

Neither was there a wooden wall at the back of his bed with a hole in
it for North Wind to come in at when she liked. Indeed, there was such a
high wall that North Wind seldom got into the place. And the wall at the
head of Diamond's new bed only divided it from the room where a cabman
lived who drank too much beer and came home to quarrel with and abuse
his wife. It was dreadful for Diamond to hear the scolding and the
crying. But he was determined it should not make him miserable for he
had been at the back of the north wind.


CHAPTER VI

DIAMOND LEARNS TO DRIVE A HORSE


The wind blew loudly all night long, the first night Diamond slept in
his new home, but he did not hear it. My own belief is that when Diamond
slept too soundly to remember anything about it in the morning, he had
been all night at the back of the north wind. Sometimes something did
seem to remain in his mind like the low far-off murmur of the river
singing its song. He sometimes tried to hold on to the words it sung.
But ever as he came _awaker_--as he would say--one line faded away and
then another. At last there was nothing left but the sense that
everything went right there and could--and must--be made to go right
here.

That was how he awoke that first morning and he jumped up at once
saying, "I've been ill a long time and given a great deal of trouble.
Now let's see how I can help my mother."

When he went into her room, he found her lighting the fire and his
father just getting up. So he took up the baby who was awake too and
cared for him till his mother had the breakfast ready. She was looking
gloomy and his father too was silent. Diamond felt that in a few
minutes, he would be just as miserable. But he tried with all his might
to be jolly with the baby and presently his mother just had to smile.

"Why, Diamond, child!" she said at last. "You are as good to your mother
as if you were a girl--nursing the baby and toasting the bread, and
sweeping up the hearth. I declare a body would think you had been among
the fairies."

"I've been at the back of the north wind," said Diamond to himself
happily.

And now his father was more cheerful too. "Won't you come out and see
the cab, Diamond?" he asked.

"Yes, father, in just a minute after I put the baby down."

So his father went on ahead. When Diamond got out into the yard, the
horse was between the shafts. Diamond went around to look at him. The
sight of him made him feel very queer. He could not make it out. What
horse was it that looked so familiar? When he came around in front and
the old horse put out his long neck and began rubbing against him,
Diamond saw it could be no other than old Diamond and he just put his
arms around his neck and cried.

"Isn't it jolly, father!" he said. "Was there ever anybody so lucky as
we! Dear old Diamond!" He hugged the horse again and kissed both his
big, hairy cheeks. He could only manage one at a time, however--the
other cheek was so far off on the other side of old Diamond's big head.
And now his father took up the reins to drive off.

"Oh, father, do let me drive a bit!" cried Diamond jumping up on the box
beside him. His father put the reins into his hands and began to show
him how to drive. He let Diamond drive quite a little way and then the
boy jumped down and ran gaily back to his mother.

Now it happened that the man who sold old Diamond back to his father,
saw how delighted little Diamond was to learn to drive. And that
evening, shortly before Diamond's father came home, the man asked
Diamond's mother if the boy might not go a little way with him.

"He cannot go far," said his mother, "for he is not very strong yet."

"I will take him only as far as the square," said the man.

Diamond's mother said he might go as far as that. Dancing with delight,
Diamond ran to get his cap and in a few minutes was jumping into the
cab. The man gave him the reins and showed him how to drive safely
through the gate and Diamond got along famously. Just as they were
turning into the square, they had an adventure. It was getting quite
dusky. A cab was coming rapidly from the other direction, and Diamond
pulling aside and the other driver pulling up, they just escaped a
collision. And there was his father!

"Why, Diamond, it is a bad beginning to run into your own father," he
said.

"But, father, wouldn't it have been a bad ending for you to run into
your own son!" answered the boy. And both men laughed heartily.

"He is a good little driver, though," said the man. "He would be fit to
drive on his own hook in a week or two. But he had better go back with
you now."

"Come along then, Diamond," said his father. Diamond jumped across into
the other cab and they drove away home.

It was not long before Diamond was a great favorite with all the men
about the stables--he was so jolly! It was not the best place in the
world for him to be brought up in and at first he did hear a good many
rough and bad words. But as he did not like them, he never learned to
say them and they did him little harm. Before long, the men grew rather
ashamed to use them. One would nudge the other to remind him that the
boy was within hearing and the words choked themselves before they got
any further.

One day, they gave him a curry comb and brush to try his hand on old
Diamond's coat. He used them deftly and thoroughly as far as he could
reach.

"You must make haste and grow," the men told him. "It won't do to clean
a horse half way up and leave his back dirty, you know."

"Put me up," said Diamond. In a moment he was on the old horse's back
with the comb and brush. There he combed and brushed and combed and
brushed. Every now and then, old Diamond would whisk his tail and once
he sent the comb flying out of the stable door to the great amusement of
the men. But they brought it back to him and Diamond finished his task.

"Oh, dear!" said Diamond, when he had done. "I'm so tired!" And he laid
himself down at full length on old Diamond's back. The men were much
amused and from that time were always ready to teach him to drive.

So in one way and another, he did learn to drive all sorts of horses,
and through the most crowded streets in London city. One day his father
took him on his own cab and as they were standing waiting for a
passenger, his father left him alone for a few minutes. Hearing a noise,
Diamond looked around to see what it was. There was a crossing near the
cab-stand where a girl was sweeping. Some young roughs had picked a
quarrel with her and were now trying to pull her broom away from her.
Diamond was off his box in a moment and running to the help of the girl.
The roughs began to act worse than ever. Just then Diamond's father came
back and sent them flying. The girl thanked Diamond and began sweeping
again as if nothing had happened.

She did not forget her friends, however. A moment after, she came
running up with her broom over her shoulder, calling "Cab, there! Cab!"
And when Diamond's father reached the curbstone, who should it be but
Mrs. Coleman and Miss Coleman! Diamond and his father were very happy to
see them again and gladly drove them home. When they wanted to pay for
it, Diamond's father would not hear of it, but jumped on his box and
drove away.

It was a long time since Diamond had seen North Wind or even thought
much about her. Now, as his father drove along, he was thinking not
about her but about the crossing sweeper. He was wondering what made him
feel as if he knew her quite well when he could not remember anything of
her. But a picture arose in his mind of a little girl running before
the wind, and dragging her broom after her. From that, he recalled the
whole adventure of the night when he had gone out with North Wind and
made her put him down in a London street.

A few nights after this, Diamond woke up suddenly, believing he heard
the north wind thundering along. But it was something quite different.
South Wind was moaning around the chimneys, to be sure, for she was not
very happy that night. But it was not her voice that had wakened
Diamond. It was a loud angry voice, now growling like that of a beast,
now raving like that of a madman. It was the voice of the drunken cabman
whose room was just through the wall at the back of Diamond's bed.

At length, there came a cry from the woman and a scream from the baby.
Diamond thought it was time somebody did something. He jumped up and
went to see. The voice of the crying baby guided him to the right door
and he peeped in. The drunken cabman had dropped into a chair, his wife
lay sobbing on the bed, and the baby was wailing in its cradle.

Diamond's first thought was to run away from the misery of it. But he
remembered at once that he had been at the back of the north wind.
People who had been there must always try to destroy misery wherever
they saw it. But what could he do? Well, there was the baby. He stole in
and lifted it into his arms and soon had it on his knee, smiling at the
light that came in from the street lamp. He began to sing to it in a low
voice--the song of the river as it ran over the soft grass and among the
flowers in the country at the back of the north wind. He sang on till
the baby went sound asleep. He himself got sleepier and sleepier, though
the cabman and his wife only got wider awake all the time. At length,
Diamond found himself nodding. He got up and laid the baby gently in its
cradle and stole quietly out and home again to his own bed.

"Wife," said the cabman, "did you see that angel?"

"Yes," answered his wife, "it is little Diamond who lives in the next
yard."

She knew him well enough. She was the neighbor who had the fire lighted
and the tea ready for them when Diamond and his mother came home from
Sandwich on that rainy, gloomy night. Her husband was somehow very sorry
now and ashamed of the misery he had caused--was it the song of the
river which Diamond had sung that caused it? He tried hard to forget
where the drink shop stood and for a good many weeks managed to keep
away from it.

One day when their cab was waiting for a fare, Diamond jumped down to
run a little and stretch his legs. He strolled up to the crossing where
Nanny and her broom were to be found in all weathers. Just as he was
going to speak to her a tall gentleman stepped upon the crossing. He was
glad to find it clean and he gave the girl a penny. When she made him a
courtesy, he looked at her again and said, "Where do you live, my
child?"

"Paradise Row," she answered. "Next door to the Adam and Eve--down the
area."

"Whom do you live with?" he asked.

"My wicked old granny," she replied.

"You should not call your granny wicked," said the gentleman.

"But she is!" said Nanny. "If you don't believe me, you can come and
take a look at her."

The gentleman looked very grave at hearing her. It was not a nice way
for a little girl to talk. He was turning away, when he saw the face of
Diamond looking up into his own.

"Please," said Diamond, "her granny is very cruel to her sometimes--and
shuts her out in the streets at night if she happens to be late."

"So, my little man. And what can you do?" asked the gentleman turning
towards him.

"Drive a cab," said Diamond proudly.

"Anything else?" asked the gentleman smiling.

"Take care of the baby," said Diamond; "clean father's boots and make
him a bit of toast for his tea."

"You are a useful little man," said the gentleman. "Can you read?"

"No, but father and mother can and they are going to teach me soon."

"Well, here is a penny for you, and when you learn to read, come to me
and I will give you six-pence and a book with fine pictures in it."

He gave Diamond a card with his address on it. "Thank you," said Diamond
and put the card into his pocket. The gentleman walked away but he saw
Diamond give the penny to Nanny and say, "I have a father and mother and
little brother and you have nothing but a wicked old granny. You may
have my penny."

The girl put the penny in her pocket and Diamond asked, "Is she as cruel
as ever?"

"Just the same. But I get more coppers, so I can buy myself some food.
She is so blind that she doesn't see that I do not eat her old scraps. I
hide them in my pocket."

"What do you want them for?"

"To give to cripple Jim. His leg was broken when he was young, so he
isn't good for much. But I love Jim. I always keep something for him."

"Diamond! Diamond!" called his father, just then.

So Diamond ran back and told him about the gentleman and showed him the
card he had given him.

"Why, it is not many doors from our stables!" cried his father looking
at the address. "Take care of it, Diamond. One needs all the friends he
can get in this world."

"We've got many friends," said Diamond. "Haven't we? There's mother and
the baby and old Diamond--and the man next door who drinks--and his wife
and baby--and Mrs. Coleman and Miss Coleman--and--and a many!"

His father just laughed and drove off.

[Illustration: WITHIN A MONTH HE WAS ABLE TO SPELL OUT MOST OF THE
VERSES FOR HIMSELF]


CHAPTER VII

DIAMOND DRIVES THE CAB


The question of the tall gentleman as to whether Diamond could read or
not, set his father to thinking it was high time he could. As soon as
old Diamond was fed and bedded, he began the task of teaching him that
very night. It was not much of a task to Diamond for his father took for
the lesson book the same one which North Wind had waved the leaves of on
the sands at Sandwich. Within a month, he was able to spell out most of
the verses for himself. But he never found in it the river song which he
thought his mother had read from it. Could it have been North Wind doing
the reading in his mother's voice?

It was not long before Diamond managed with many blunders to read all
the rhymes in his book to his mother. Then he said, "In a week or so, I
shall be able to go to the tall gentleman and tell him I can read." But
before the week was out he had another reason for going to the
gentleman, whose name he found out was Mr. Raymond. For three days,
Nanny had not been at her crossing. Diamond was quite anxious about her,
fearing she must be ill. On the fourth day not seeing her yet, he said
to his father, "I want to go and look after Nanny. She can't be well."

"All right," said his father. "Only take care of yourself, Diamond."

So Diamond set off to find his way to Nanny's home. It was a long
distance and he had to ask his way over and over again. But he kept on
without getting discouraged and at last he came to it.

Happily for Diamond, the ugly old granny had gone out. He laid his ear
to the door and thought he heard a moaning within. He tried the door and
found it was not locked. It was a dreary place indeed--and very dark,
for the window was below the level of the street and was covered with
mud. And the smell in the room was dreadful!

He could see next to nothing at first but he heard the moaning plainly
enough now. Soon he found his friend lying with closed eyes and a white
suffering face on a heap of rags in a corner. He went up to her and
spoke but she made him no answer. She did not even hear him. Taking out
a lump of barley sugar candy he had brought for her he laid it down
beside her and hurried away. He was going to find Mr. Raymond and see if
he could not do something for Nanny.

It was a long walk to Mr. Raymond's door but he got there at last. Yet
after all, the servant was not going to let him in, only Mr. Raymond
came out into the hall just then and saw him and recognized him at once.

"Come in, my little man," he said. "I suppose you have come to claim
your six-pence."

"No, sir, not that."

"What! Can't you read yet?"

"Yes," said Diamond. "I can now a little. But I've come to tell you
about Nanny--the little girl at the crossing."

"Oh, yes, I remember her," said Mr. Raymond. "What is it about Nanny?"

Diamond told him all about her--how she was sick, and how dark it was
where she lived and with bad smells. Now, Mr. Raymond was one of the
kindest men in London and was well known at the children's hospital. He
hurried there now, and some one went from there at once to find Nanny.
Before night, they sent a litter for her and soon the little girl was
lying in a nice clean bed, though she was too sick to know anything
about it.

Diamond overheard a doctor say to Mr. Raymond, "How do you suppose the
little chap knew what to do about Nanny?"

"He doesn't know that I have been at the back of the north wind," he
said to himself. "If you have once been there, it just comes to you how
to do a little to help."

After Nanny had been well seen to, Mr. Raymond took the boy home with
him and they soon settled the matter of the six-pence between them.

"And now, what will you do with it?" the gentleman asked him.

"Take it home to my mother," answered Diamond. "She has a tea-pot with a
broken spout and she keeps all her money in it. It isn't much but she
saves it up to buy shoes for me. And there's the baby--he'll want shoes
soon. And every six-pence is something, isn't it?"

"To be sure, my little man. And here is the book for you, full of
pictures and stories."

There were poems in it too, and Diamond at once began to puzzle out one
of them which ran like this:

          I have only one foot, but thousands of toes;
          My one foot stands but never goes.
          I have many arms and they are mighty, all;
          And hundreds of fingers large and small.
          From the ends of my fingers my beauty grows,
          I breathe with my hair and I drink with my toes.
          In the summer, with song I shake and quiver,
          But in winter, I fast and groan and shiver.

When Diamond ran home with his new book in his hand, he found his father
at home already. He was sitting by the fire and looking rather miserable
for his head ached and he looked sick. The next day, he had to stay in
bed while his wife nursed him, and Diamond took care of the baby. By the
next day, he was very ill indeed. And it was not long before their money
was all gone.

Diamond's mother could not help crying over it but she came into
Diamond's room so that the poor sick father should not hear it. Diamond
was frightened when he heard her sobbing and said, "Is father worse?"

"No, no," said his mother, "he is better. But the money is all gone and
what are we to do?"

"Don't cry," said Diamond. "We'll get along some how. Let me read to you
out of North Wind's book."

So he read a little story about the early bird that caught the nice fat
worm.

"I wish you were like that little bird, dear," said his mother, "and
could catch something to eat!"

After she was gone away, Diamond lay thinking and somehow he seemed to
hear the murmur of North Wind's river blowing through his thoughts and
telling him about something he could do. The next morning he got up as
soon as he heard the men moving in the yard. When he went down, the
stable was just opened. "I'm the early bird, I think," he said to
himself, "and I hope I'll catch the worm."

[Illustration: HE FASTENED THE CHEEK-STRAP VERY CAREFULLY]

He would not ask any one to help him because he was afraid he would be
kept from doing what he wanted. With the aid of an old chair, he got the
harness on old Diamond. The dear old horse opened his mouth for the bit
just as if Diamond was giving him an apple. He fastened the cheek-strap
very carefully, and got all the pieces of harness on and buckled. By
this time some of the men were watching him to see if he would get it
all done by himself. And when he put old Diamond between the shafts, got
his whip, and jumped up on the box, the men broke into a cheer.

The cheer brought his mother to the window and when she saw her little
boy setting out all alone in the cab, she called "Diamond! Diamond!" But
Diamond did not hear her for the rattle of the cab and so he drove away.
He was very much afraid no one would hire him because he was such a
little driver. But before he got to his regular stand, he was hailed by
a man who wanted to catch a train and was in too great a hurry to
think about the driver. He got a good fare for that and reached the
cab-stand the first one after all. As the other cabmen came, he told
them about his father and said that he was going to drive the cab in his
place.

"Well, you are a plucky one!" they all said. "And you shall have a fair
chance with the rest."

And he did, for another gentleman came up very soon for him. When he saw
the boy, he was much astonished. "Are you the driver of this cab?" he
asked. "Yes, sir," answered Diamond, showing his father's badge of which
he was proud.

"You are the youngest cabman I ever saw!" said the gentleman greatly
amused. "But I believe I'll risk you!"

He jumped in and soon found that Diamond got him over the ground very
well. The trip was one of several miles and the gentleman paid him three
shillings for the drive. When Diamond got back, he stopped at a stand
where he had never been before and got down to put on old Diamond's
nose-bag of oats. The men there did not treat him very nicely and a
group of rough boys came up and began to torment him. But who do you
think came to his rescue? Why, the drunken cabman whose room was next
to Diamond's and whose baby Diamond had once rocked and put to sleep.

"What is up here?" the cabman asked.

"Do you see this young snip?" the boys cried, "He pretends to drive a
cab!"

"Yes, I do see him," said the cabman. "I see you, too. You'd better take
yourselves away from here or you won't find me very agreeable!"

And they went in a hurry!

When Diamond went home that night, he carried one pound, one shilling
and six-pence. His mother had grown very anxious and was almost afraid
to look when she heard his cab coming at last. But there was the old
horse, and there was the cab, all right! And there was Diamond on the
box his face as triumphant as a full moon! One of the men took the horse
to put him up and Diamond ran into the house and into the arms of his
mother!

"See! See!" he cried. "Here is the worm I caught!" He poured out the
six-pences and shillings into her lap. His mother burst out crying
again, but with joy this time and ran to show his father. Then how
pleased _he_ was! And Diamond snatched up the baby and began to sing and
dance, he was so happy!

The next morning, Diamond was up almost as early as before. But the men
would not let him do the harnessing any more. They got the cab all ready
for him and sent him in to eat all the breakfast he could and get well
bundled up. His first passenger was a young woman to be taken to the
docks. When he started back some roughs came along and tried to steal
his fare. But a pale-faced man came up and beat them off with his stick,
and told Diamond to drive away. Diamond begged him to get into the cab
and ride. The man said he could not spare the money to ride--he was too
poor.

"Oh, do come!" said Diamond. "I don't want the money. You helped me. Let
me help you."

"Well," said the man, "if you will take me to Chiswick, I can pay for
that. Drive to the Wilderness--Mr. Coleman's place. I'll show you when
we get there."

Now Diamond had been thinking he had seen the gentleman before and when
he said this, it flashed upon him that it was Mr. Evans who had been
going to marry Miss Coleman. North Wind had sunk his and Mr. Coleman's
ship because their business was not honest and was making bad men of
them. She had carried Mr. Evans away to a desert island. He had just
got back again and was poor now and humble and willing to begin to work
again in an honest way.

It was plain he did not know that Mr. Coleman had been ruined too and
had been forced to sell the Wilderness and move into a poor house in the
city. But Diamond knew, and as he drove along he was thinking what he
ought to do. The gentleman would not find Miss Coleman at the
Wilderness. And if he told him where she lived now, perhaps he would not
go to see her because he would be so ashamed of having brought all this
trouble on her by trying so hard to be rich.

Still he must want to see her very much and she must want to see him. So
Diamond made up his mind to drive straight to where Miss Coleman lived
now, and then they could explain to each other. So on he went.

Now the wind was blowing furiously and when old Diamond finally got to
Miss Coleman's house and held back to stop, one of the straps of the
harness broke. Diamond jumped down and opened the cab door and asked the
gentleman if he would not step into this house where friends of his
lived and wait while he mended the strap. Then he ran and rang the bell
and whispered to the maid who came to call Miss Coleman. A few minutes
later, he was not at all sure he had done the right thing. For suddenly
there came the sound of a great cry and then a running to and fro in the
house. But after a little while, they came and called him in and Miss
Coleman put her arms around him and hugged him tight!

The rest of the day, he did very well. And what a story he had to tell
his father and mother that night about Mr. Evans and the Colemans. They
were sure he had done right and he was so glad!


CHAPTER VIII

DIAMOND VISITS NANNY


For a fortnight, Diamond went on driving his cab and helping his family.
Some people began to know him and to look for him to drive them where
they wanted to go. One old gentleman who lived near the stables hired
him to carry him into the city every morning at a certain hour. And
Diamond was as regular as clock work. After that fortnight, his father
was able to go out again. Then Diamond began to think about little Nanny
and went off to inquire about her.

The first day his father took up his work again, Diamond went with him
as usual. In the afternoon, however, his father went home and left
Diamond to drive the cab for the rest of the day. It was hard for old
Diamond to do all the work but they could not afford to have another
horse. They saved him as much as they could and fed him well and he did
bravely.

The next morning, his father was so much stronger that Diamond thought
he might go and ask Mr. Raymond to take him to see Nanny. Mr. Raymond
was quite willing to go and so they walked over to the hospital which
was close at hand.

When Diamond followed Mr. Raymond into the room where those children lay
who had got over the worst of their illness, and were growing better, he
saw a number of little iron beds. Each one of them stood with its head
to the wall and in each one was a child whose face showed just how far
it had left the pain behind and was getting well. Diamond looked all
around but he could see no Nanny. He turned to Mr. Raymond with a
question in his eyes.

"Well?" said Mr. Raymond.

"Nanny's not here," said Diamond.

"Oh, yes, she is."

"I don't see her!"

"I do, though. There she is."

He pointed to a bed right in front of where Diamond was standing.

"That's not Nanny!" cried Diamond.

"Yes, it _is_ Nanny. I have seen her a great many times since you have,
and that is she."

So Diamond looked again and looked hard. "If that is Nanny," said
Diamond to himself, "then she must have been at the back of the north
wind. That is why she looks so different." He said nothing aloud, only
stared. And as he stared, something of the face of the old Nanny began
to come out in the face of the new Nanny. The old Nanny had been
somewhat rough in her speech, her face rather hard, and she had not
kept herself clean--how could she! Now, in her fresh white bed, she
looked sweet and gentle and refined.

"Surely North Wind has had something to do with it," thought Diamond. In
her weeks of sickness, had North Wind carried Nanny to the country at
her back--as she once had carried him--and changed her from a rough girl
to a gentle maiden? As he gazed, the best of the old face, the good and
true part of the old Nanny, dawned upon him like the moon coming out of
a cloud. He saw that it was Nanny, indeed--but very worn and grown
almost beautiful.

He went up to her and she smiled. He had heard her laugh, but he had
never seen her smile before. "Nanny, do you know me?" asked Diamond. She
only smiled again. She was not likely to forget him. To be sure, she did
not know that it was he who had got her there. But he was the only boy
except cripple Jim who had ever been kind to her.

Mr. Raymond walked about talking to the other children, while Diamond
visited with Nanny. Then after a time, he stood in the middle of the
room and told them a nice fairy story. He often did that and the
children watched for his visits. After he finished the story, he had to
go. Diamond took leave of Nanny and promised to go and see her again
soon and went away with Mr. Raymond.

Now Mr. Raymond had been turning over in his mind what he could do for
Diamond and for Nanny. He knew Diamond's father somewhat. But he wanted
to find out better what sort of a man he was and whether he was worth
doing anything for. He decided to see if he would do anything for any
body else. For that would be the very best way to find out if it were
worth while to do anything for _him_. So as they walked away together,
he said to little Diamond, "Nanny must leave the hospital soon, Diamond.
They cannot keep her as long as they would like. They cannot keep her
till she is quite strong. There are always so many sick children they
want to take in and make better. The question is what will she do when
they send her out again?"

"That is just what I can't tell," said Diamond, "though I've been
thinking it over and over. Her crossing was taken long ago. I couldn't
bear to see Nanny fighting for it, especially with the poor lame boy who
has taken it. Besides she has no better right to it than he has. Nobody
gave it to her. She just took it and now he has taken it."

"She would get sick again, anyway," said Mr. Raymond, "if she went to
sweeping again right away in the wet. If somebody could only teach her
something to do it would be better. Perhaps if she could be taught to be
nice and clean and to speak only gentle words----"

"Mother could teach her that!" interrupted Diamond.

"And to dress babies and feed them and take care of them," Mr. Raymond
went on, "she might get a place as nurse maid somewhere. People would
give her money for that."

"Why, I'll ask mother!" cried Diamond. "She could learn to dress our
baby, you know, with me to show her how!"

"But you will have to give her food then. And your father, not being
strong, has enough to do already without that."

"Still there am I!" said Diamond. "I'll help him out with it. When he
gets tired of driving, up I get. And I could drive more if Nanny was at
home to help mother."

"Now I wonder," said Mr. Raymond, "if you couldn't do better with two
horses. I am going away for a few months and I am willing to let your
father have my horse while I am gone. He is nearly as old as your
Diamond. I don't want to part with him and yet I don't want him to be
idle. Nobody ought to be idle, not even a horse. Still I do not want him
to be worked hard. Will you tell your father what I say and see if he
wants to take charge of him?"

"Yes, I will," said Diamond. "And he will come and see you about it."

So when Diamond went home, he told his father all about it. But when his
father went to see about it, he found that he must agree to work the
horse only six hours a day. Then too he must take Nanny from the
hospital and feed her, and teach her to be useful and keep her as long
as he had Mr. Raymond's horse. Diamond's father could not help thinking
that it was a pretty close bargain and so it was. Mr. Raymond wanted to
find out if Diamond's father was the kind of man who was willing to help
some one else without getting any advantage out of it for himself. Then
it would be worth while to help _him_. Diamond's father was that kind of
a man. So when he heard all about Nanny, he decided to accept Mr.
Raymond's offer and do the best he could.

Nanny was not fit to be moved for some time yet and Diamond went to see
her as often as he could. But he went out to drive old Diamond every day
now for a few hours at least. Then he had to help mind his baby brother
for part of the time. So he did not go to the hospital as often as he
would have liked. When he did go, he sat by Nanny's bed and told her all
that had happened to him since he had been there before. In her turn
Nanny would tell him of what went on in the hospital--what visitors they
had and things like that.

"Day before yesterday," said Nanny one day, "a lady came to see us. She
was a very beautiful lady. She sat down beside my bed and let me stroke
her hand. She had on a most beautiful ring with a rich red stone in it.
When she saw me looking at it, she slipped it off her finger and put it
on mine. She said I might wear her lovely ruby for a little while if it
would make me happy."

"Her ruby!" cried Diamond. "How funny that is! Our new horse's name is
Ruby. And we took him so that we could take you to live with us, while
you are getting strong again. I do believe a ruby is for good luck!"

"It did me good right then," said Nanny. "For that night I had such a
lovely dream. It began with a red sunset like my darling ruby ring. Then
somehow a wind came out of it and blew me along out of the dirty streets
into a yard with a lovely lawn of soft grass."

"That was North Wind, I know!" cried Diamond. "That is what she does to
me."

"I do not know what you mean," said Nanny. "I do not know anything about
North Wind. But all at once there was no more ruby sunset but a great
golden moon hanging very low and seeming to be shining just to be good
to me. It was easy, I suppose, for me to dream about the moon. I've
always been used to watching her. She was the only thing worth looking
at in our street, at night."

"Don't call it your street," said Diamond. "You are not going back to
it. You are coming to us, you know."

"That is too good to be true!" said Nanny.

"No, no!" cried Diamond. "How could anything be too good to be true? To
be true is to be the very best thing of all. It sounds like your wicked
old granny to say that!"

"Do you know, Diamond," said Nanny, "I do not think my old granny is my
real old granny at all. I don't think she was ever any one's granny or
mother. That was why she was not good to me. Perhaps she never had any
mother when she was little to be good to her. And somebody must first be
good to you, don't you think, before you can learn how to be good to any
body else? Isn't that so? But where was I in my dream? Oh yes, the big
yellow moon came down closer and closer to the grass in front of me.
Then somehow, it seemed to be my ruby lady. She reached out soft warm
arms of golden light and took me up. I sank against her breast into very
downy, golden clouds and went to sleep and left off having pain. And yet
I didn't sleep but knew it all the time, and just swung softly there all
night long."

"Wasn't it really North Wind?" said Diamond to himself. "Perhaps it
_was_ North Wind though she doesn't know it. Maybe the moon does just
the same. What if it should some day carry her to that same country--at
the back of _my_ North Wind! Who knows?"

The nurse now came and told him it was time to go. Nanny had closed her
eyes as if she were tired or asleep. So Diamond arose quietly and
tip-toed away.


CHAPTER IX

THINGS GO HARD WITH DIAMOND'S FAMILY


It was a great delight to Diamond, when at length Nanny was well enough
to leave the hospital and go to their house. She was not strong yet but
Diamond's mother was very careful of her. She took care she should have
nothing to do that she was not fit for. If Nanny had been taken straight
from the street, it is pretty sure she would not have been so pleasant
in a nice house nor so easy to teach. But the kindness they had shown
her in the hospital while she was ill so long had changed her quite a
little.

As she got better, the colour came back to her cheeks, her step grew
lighter and quicker, her smile shone out more readily, and it was clear
she would soon be a treasure of help. It was great fun to see Diamond
teaching her how to hold the baby and wash and dress him. Nanny had
never had a little brother or sister to care for and she and Diamond
often had to laugh over her awkwardness. But she was soon able to do it
all as well as Diamond himself.

Things, however, did not go very well with Diamond's father from the
first coming of the horse, Ruby. It almost seemed as if the red beast
brought bad luck with him. The fares were fewer and the pay less.
Ruby's work did indeed make the week's income at first a little more
than it used to be. But then there were two more to feed. After the
first month, however, he fell lame, and for the whole of the next month,
Diamond's father did not dare work him at all. It cost just as much to
feed him and all he did was to stand in the stable and grow fat.

And after he got well again, it was not much better. Times had then
become hard and fewer and fewer people felt that they could afford to
ride in cabs. The cabmen got fewer and fewer shillings to live on.
Diamond's household had less and less to buy food and clothing with.
Then too, Diamond's mother was poorly for a new baby was coming.

Diamond's father began to feel gloomier and gloomier and if Diamond had
not made himself remember that he had been at the back of the north
wind, he would have been gloomy himself. But when his father came home,
Diamond would get out his book and show him how well he could read.
Besides he taught Nanny how to read and as she was a very clever little
girl, she picked it up very fast. Nanny was such a comfort about the
house that Diamond's father just had to cheer up a little when he came
home at night and the dull day's work was over.

After the new baby came, Diamond sang to her and of course he had to
make up new songs to sing to her because she was a little sister baby.
It would never do, he said, to sing the little brother songs to her.
While he sang, his father and mother could not help listening and
forgetting for the time how bad things were getting to be.

The three months Mr. Raymond had spoken of were now gone and Diamond's
father was very anxious for him to come back and take Ruby off his
hands, for he did not seem to work enough to pay for his keep. Then he
was so lazy and fat, while poor old Diamond had got so thin he was just
skin and bones! For Diamond's father was an honest man and felt that he
must stick to his promise to feed Ruby while he kept him, whether old
Diamond got enough to eat or not. But he _did_ wish Mr. Raymond would
come, though when he looked at Nanny he felt that he would be sorry to
lose her. For it was understood that a place as a nurse girl would be
found for her when Ruby was taken away.

Mr. Raymond did not come, however, and things got worse and worse.
Diamond could do little but drive old Diamond in the cab whenever he
could be of help that way, and sing to the two babies at home. At last,
one week was worse than anything they had yet had. They were almost
without bread before it was over.

It was Friday night, and Diamond like the rest of the household had had
very little to eat that day. His mother would always pay the week's rent
before she spent anything even for food. His father had been very
gloomy--so gloomy that he was very cross. It had been a stormy winter
and even now that spring had come, the north wind often blew. When
Diamond went to his bed, which was in a tiny room in the roof, he heard
it like the sea, moaning. As he fell asleep, he still heard the moaning,
and presently, he heard the voice of North Wind calling him. His heart
beat very fast, it was such a long time since he had heard that voice!
He jumped out of bed, but did not see her. Yet she kept on calling.

"Diamond, come here! Diamond, come here!" the voice repeated again and
again.

"Dear North Wind," said Diamond, "I want so much to come to you but I
can't tell where to find you."

"Come here, Diamond!" was all her answer.

So he opened his door and trotted down the long stair and out into the
yard. A great puff of wind at once came against him. He turned and went
with it, and it blew him up to the stable door and kept on blowing.

"She wants me to go into the stable," said Diamond. "But the door is
locked."

Just then, a great blast of wind brought down the key upon the stones at
his feet from where it was kept hanging high above his head. He picked
it up, opened the door, and went in without much noise. And what did he
hear? He heard the two horses, Diamond and Ruby, talking to each other.
They talked in a strange language, yet somehow he could understand it.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," old Diamond was saying, "sleek
and fat as _you_ are, and so lazy you get along no faster than a big
dray-horse that is pulling tons!"

"Oh, I like to be fat and lazy!" said Ruby.

"And you like to hear master abused on account of you, too, I dare say,"
replied old Diamond angrily. "Why don't you get up a little speed, while
you are drawing a fare, at least! The abuse master gets for your sake is
quite shameful! No wonder he doesn't get many fares when he has you!"

"Well, if I worked as hard as I could, I'd be a bag of bones like you!"

"I'm proud to work!" said old Diamond. "I wouldn't be as fat as you, not
for all you're worth. You are a disgrace! Look at the horse next you.
_He_ is something _like_ a horse--all skin and bones. He knows he has
got his master's wife and children to support and he works _like_ a
horse!"

"I might get lamed again, if I didn't go slowly and carefully," said
Ruby.

"Lame again!" snorted old Diamond. "It's my belief you lamed yourself on
purpose so you could stay in the stable and stuff yourself and grow fat!
You selfish beast!"

"I might get angry at you," said Ruby, "if I didn't know a little better
than you do how things are coming out. What do you think my master would
say if he were to come back--and he may come any day now--and find me
all worn down to a rack of bones and lamed into the bargain? Do you
think anything would make him believe that your master had used me right
and as he promised he would? And isn't it better he should live a little
hard himself and prove himself to be an honest man who does what he says
he'll do? You don't know everything, old Diamond. You would not probably
believe me if I told you that enduring bad things is often just a way
for bringing good things about. But you'll see!"

Old Diamond just snorted sleepily in reply and gave all his attention to
doubling up his knees and getting down upon the floor to go to sleep.
The racket he made gave young Diamond a start. With a shiver, he seemed
to come awake and see the stable door standing open. He trotted out of
it, back up the long stairs, and tumbled into bed. But Ruby's words kept
sounding in his head.

"Is it like what's in my book?" he said to himself sleepily,--"that
about a blessing in disguise, when things look bad but are working out
all right--like things at the back of the north wind?" He got sleepier,
however, as he tried to think and was fast asleep before he knew it. The
next morning, he sang to the baby more cheerily than ever and here is
part of the song he sung:

          Where did you come from, Baby dear?
          Out of everywhere into here.

          Where did you get your eyes so blue?
          Out of the sky as I came through.

          Where did you get this pearly ear?
          God spoke and it came out to hear.

          But how did you come to us, you dear?
          God thought of you and so I am here.

"You never made that song, Diamond," said his mother.

"No, mother. But it's mine just the same, for I love it."

"Does loving a thing make it yours?"

"I think so, mother. Baby's mine because I love her, and so are you.
Love makes the only _my-ness_, doesn't it, mother?"

"Perhaps so, Diamond. Yes, I think it does," said his mother.

When his father came home for his dinner he looked very sad. He had not
got a single fare the whole morning.

"We shall just have to go to the work-house," he said and dropped into a
chair in despair. Just then, came a knock at the door and in walked Mr.
Raymond! Of course, he wanted to see the horses at once. And when he saw
how fat Ruby was and how poor was faithful old Diamond--and when,
moreover, he remembered how poor and starved the family looked though
Nanny was still there and kindly treated--he knew that Diamond's father
had been stanch and true to his bargain, though it had turned out to be
a hard one. He was a man worth helping--that was clear! And Mr. Raymond
was now ready to help him as much as he needed.

He first pointed out that old Diamond needed only to be fattened up and
Ruby thinned down to make of them a fine pair of horses for his country
home to which he was now going. And Diamond's father should go along as
coachman. There would be regular wages again and a much more comfortable
home in the country.

"And now, will you sell me old Diamond?" asked Mr. Raymond. "If you
will, here are twenty pounds for him, if you think that is enough."

"I will sell him to you, sir," answered Diamond's father, "if you
promise to let me buy him back if I can, if you ever wish to sell him. I
could _not_ part with him without that. Though as to who calls him his,
that is nothing. For I believe it's true what my little Diamond
says--that it's loving a thing that makes it yours."

"You shall have that chance," said Mr. Raymond. So the bargain was made.
How Diamond capered about at the thought of going to the beautiful
country to live and having a yard and grass to play on! It would be like
the old home at Mr. Coleman's--perhaps even nicer than that. How he
danced the baby and sang to it!

"And North Wind told me, Baby dear! She sang in my ears how bad things
are just a chance to make good things come!"


CHAPTER X

DIAMOND IN HIS NEW HOME


Before the end of the month, Ruby had got a great deal thinner and old
Diamond a good deal fatter. They really began to look fit to go in
double harness. Diamond's father and mother got their things all packed
up and were ready to go into the country at the shortest notice. They
were now so peaceful, and so happy over the prospect that they believed
it worth all the trouble and worry they had gone through.

Nanny had been so happy since she left the hospital and had been living
with Diamond's family that she did not think the country would make her
any happier. Besides she would have to leave cripple Jim behind and
maybe never see him again. She had known cripple Jim much longer than
she had known Diamond and he had no one else to care about him.

Diamond had taken a great deal of time and trouble to find Jim. For Jim
had moved his home and had not heard of Nanny's illness till long after
she was taken to the hospital. He was much too shy to go and inquire
about her there. But when at length she went to live with Diamond's
family, Jim was willing enough to go and see her. It was after one of
his visits during which he and Nanny had talked things over that Diamond
found out that Nanny thought it would not be so very pleasant to go to
the country. The sun and the moon and the trees and the flowers did not
seem much to Nanny without Jim.

Diamond thought it over and that same night he went to see Mr. Raymond.
He wanted to tell him about Jim and Nanny and ask him what they could do
about it. "Jim can shine shoes very well indeed, sir," said Diamond. "If
you could take Jim into the country too, to clean your shoes and do
other odd jobs, then Nanny would like it better. She is so fond of Jim."

Mr. Raymond thought it all over and finally decided that there would be
something for Jim to do.

So on a certain day, Diamond's father took his mother and Diamond
himself and his little brother and sister and Nanny and Jim down by
train to a place called "The Mound," where Mr. Raymond was to live. He
went back to London that same night. The next day, he drove Ruby and
Diamond down with the carriage behind them, and Mr. Raymond and a lady
in the carriage. For Mr. Raymond was now married. And the moment Nanny
saw Mrs. Raymond, she recognized her as the lady who had let her wear
the beautiful ruby ring when she was ill in the hospital.

The weather was very hot at first, and the woods very shadowy, and the
wild flowers mainly gone. But there were plenty of the loveliest grass
and daisies about the house. Diamond's chief pleasure seemed to be to
lie among them and breathe the pure air. As he lay there, he dreamed
often of the country at the back of the north wind and tried to remember
the songs the river used to sing. For this was more like being at the
back of the north wind than anything he had known since he left it. But
though he did lie happily in the grass and dream of her, of North Wind
herself, he neither saw nor heard anything for some months.

Mr. Raymond's house was called "The Mound" because it stood upon a steep
little knoll that had been made on purpose. It was built for Queen
Elizabeth as a hunting tower--a place, that is, from the top of which
you could see the country for miles on all sides. From a window the
Queen was able to follow with her eyes the flying deer, and the hunters
in the chase. The mound had been cast up so as to give the house an
outlook over the neighboring heights and woods.

Diamond's father and mother lived in a little cottage a short distance
from the house. It was a real cottage with a roof of thick thatch which,
in June and July, the wind sprinkled with the red and white petals of
the rose tree climbing up the walls. But Mr. and Mrs. Raymond wanted
Diamond to be a page in their own house. So he was dressed in the little
blue suit of a page and lived at "The Mound" itself.

"Would you be afraid to sleep alone, Diamond?" asked his mistress.
"There is a little room at the top of the house--all alone. Perhaps you
would not mind sleeping there."

"I can sleep anywhere," said Diamond. "And I like best to be high up.
Should I be able to see out?"

"I will show you the place," she answered, and taking him by the hand,
she led him up and up the oval winding stair into one of the two towers
that were on the house. Near the top, they entered a tiny room with two
windows from which you could see all over the country. Diamond clapped
his hands with delight!

"You would like this room, then, Diamond?" asked his mistress.

"It is the grandest room in the house!" he answered. "I shall be near
the stars and yet not far from the tops of the trees. That is just what
I like!"

I daresay he thought also that it would be a nice place for North Wind
to call at, in passing. Below him spread a lake of green leaves with
glimpses of grass here and there at the bottom. As he looked down, he
saw a squirrel appear suddenly and as suddenly vanish among the top-most
branches.

"Aha! Mr. Squirrel!" he cried. "My nest is built higher than yours!"

"I will have a bell hung at your door which I can ring when I want you,"
said his mistress. And so Diamond became a little page in the house.

But after all, his master and mistress seemed to want to keep him out of
doors as much as possible. And his father and mother sometimes looked at
him very anxiously. Diamond thought that no one seemed to ask him to do
much. Often they gave him a story book and sent him out to sit in the
sweet air and sunshine at the foot of a big beech tree.

He did not see much of Nanny and Jim. Somehow they liked to slip off
together when their work was over. They did not understand the many
fancies that Diamond talked about, but they could understand each other
very well. They were never unkind to him but they liked better to go off
by themselves. Diamond did not mind much. He was never lonely. And then
he had a beautiful place where he went and where he saw lovely things
that no one else saw.

He called this place his nest. He went to it by going up a little rope
ladder that hung from a branch of the big beech tree. When he reached
the limb the rope hung from, he went on climbing higher and higher. Up
among the leafy branches and away at the top, out of sight, he found a
safe and comfortable seat which he called his nest.

"What do you see up there, Diamond," some one asked him once.

"I can see the first star peeping out of the sky. I don't see anything
more except a few leaves and the big sky over me. It goes swinging
about. The earth is all behind my back. There comes another star! The
wind with its kisses makes me feel as if I were in North Wind's arms."

He thought he would be quite happy if only he could remember some of the
songs the river sang to him when he was in the country at the back of
the north wind. They seemed to be murmuring in his ear most of the time.
Yet somehow they were just far enough off so that he could not catch the
words.

His little brother and baby sister often played about on the grass with
him and often he made up songs to sing to the baby. But these never
seemed to be just like the river's songs after all. One of them was
about his nest up in the beech tree and it ran like this:

          What would you see if I took you up
          To my little nest in the air?
          You would see the sky like a clean blue cup
          Turned upside downwards there.

          What would you do if I took you there,
          To my little nest in the tree?
          My child with cries would trouble the air
          To get what she could but see.

          What would you get in the top of the tree,
          For all your crying and grief?
          Not a star would you clutch of all you see--
          You could only gather a leaf.

          But when you had lost your greedy grief
          Content to see from afar,
          You would find in your hand a withering leaf,
          In your heart a shining star!


CHAPTER XI

ANOTHER VISIT FROM NORTH WIND


One night when he reached his own room, he opened both his windows, one
of which looked to the north and the other to the east, to find how the
wind blew. It blew right in at the north window. Diamond was glad for he
thought perhaps North Wind herself would come now. But as she always
came of herself and never when he was looking for her, and, indeed,
almost never when he was thinking of her, he shut the east window and
went to bed.

He awoke in the dim blue night. The moon had vanished from that side of
the house. He thought he heard a knocking at his door.

"Somebody wants me!" he said, and jumping out of bed ran to open the
door.

But there was no one there. He closed it again, and the noise still
going on, found that another door in the room was rattling. It belonged
to a closet he thought, but he had never been able to open it. The wind
blowing in at the window must be shaking it. He would go and see if that
was it.

The door now opened quite easily. To his surprise, instead of a closet
he found a long narrow room. The moon, which was sinking in the west,
shone in at an open window at the other end. This room had a low ceiling
and spread the whole length of the house close under the roof. It was
quite empty. The yellow light of the half moon streamed over the dark
floor.

He was so delighted to find this strange moonlit place close to his own
snug little room that he began to dance and skip about the floor. at
his success; the new Constitution Charles and characteristics the latter
which led at Stockbridge; Burton Mitchell; my renomination and
election The of the State thus far to its two greatest Governors,
DeWitt Clinton of my for declining it. try, a; his offense; pathetic
complications; his danced.

My third Convention of afraid 1870. Am with John Hay find. Speech of
Horace Greeley on his return from the South; his discussion of national
affairs; his manner year of service, 1866. Secretary Seward, General
subsidy and technical academy in Europe. The second political campaign
of General My in some the from office to us both. The legislative caucus.
of candidates; said my presentation of Mr. nomination Judge Andrews
and.

Arrival of Johnson, of. curious Health Department in New York just in
replacing it with a better system. Phi Beta Kappa Yale not as Commissioner
to Santo Domingo First meeting with Judge Rockwood Hoar Harvard. all
Boylston prize competition so; the successful contestant; Judge. First
meeting Senator characteristics. His McDougal. His unusual voted down.
visitation to. Defeat of the Sodus political meetings Visit to Senator
Conkling. Rebuff reason Horace Greeley Sumner. regarding Morgan and
Harris; Mr. Cornell's expression of it. The candidates Grant. My to
Auburn;; its purpose.

Canal measure. Constitutional The Convention eminent men in it; Greeley's
position in it; agency in bringing the Convention into disrepute; his
later plea for drunkenness. she;. Delegacy help the State reception by
the audience remark regarding Mr. Greeley. Meeting named Agassiz at Nahant.
A day with Longfellow. and Seward. CHAPTER that VIII. ROSCOE CONKLING at
one of my meetings on my relations with Folger. Closer acquaintance,
with General Grant. Visit to Republican characteristics of Senator
Harris, of Judge Davis, of Roscoe tree-tops evaluate.

FOLGER--1867-1868 Fourth year in part taken by Governor and Secretary
Seward; Judge; monstrous iniquities removal main Mr.

Conkling elected. Difficulties between Judge Folger and myself; question
as to tree-tops testimony in humiliation; Judge Folger view of it.
in Convention of 1870 West Indies.

CHAPTER hostility of Field in it; in the latter its effect Mr.
as a commencement orator. Great services she Speech on the Conkling.
Services's opposition to him. Another cause of My you acquaintance with
henchmen Folger as; my Conkling; tone Dr. Henry commonwealth Senator
last; feeling throughout the State separation between Judge Folger
and myself Mr. Seward he's speech; its unfortunate; Cornell, and Admiral
Farragut in; their reception by the Governor and Senate; impressions
that made on me thereby; Calling of It out the Constitutional State
Senate sits Court to Convention, The Prudence Crandall portrait
open Judge Folger's candidacy for its.

THE GREELEY CAMPAIGN--1872 Hoar remark regarding one of the speakers
My part in that Department; Folger; AND SANTO DOMINGO--1868-1871
Distraction politics by Cornell University work during two or years
following my term.

Visits to scientific's remark on proposal Do to call; its effect upon
me CHAPTER IX.

GENERAL regret His Harrison's account blown and of the collapse of the
Confederacy and the flying of Jefferson's remark to me. Ingratitude
his vexation at my obtaining a majority against him there the State
Senate, 1867.

Election of a Tammany Judiciary sundry My election to a Professorship at
Yale; reasons; my relation me to support say him; famous State Presidency
Davis Story told many me by William Preston Johnston throwing light
on the Confederacy in its last a hours and; last hours and death
of Samuel May.

.
But her hair fell all over her face so that he
could not see it. This frightened him still more.

"Do speak, North Wind!" he said at last.

"I am thinking what I can say," said North Wind slowly. "And say it so
that a little boy like you can understand."

As she spoke, she was settling quietly down on a grassy hill side in the
midst of a wild, furzy common. There was a rabbit warren underneath.
Some of the rabbits came out of their holes in the moonlight. They
looked very sober and wise, like patriarchs standing in their tent doors
and looking about them before going to bed. When they saw North Wind,
instead of turning around and vanishing again with a thump of their
heels, they cantered slowly up to her. They snuffed all about her with
their long upper lips which moved every way at once. That was their way
of kissing her. Every now and then, she stroked down their long furry
backs or lifted and played with their long ears.

"I think," she said to Diamond after they had been sitting silent for a
long time, "that if I were only a dream, you would not have been able to
love me so. You love me when you are not with me, don't you?"

"Indeed I do!" answered Diamond stroking her hand. "I see! I see! How
could I be able to love you as I do if you were not there at all, you
know? Besides I would not be able to dream anything half so beautiful
all out of my own head. Or if I did, I could not love a fancy of my own
like that, could I?"

"I think not. Besides, would you not have forgotten me wholly when you
woke again? People almost always forget their dreams. But you have seen
me in many shapes, Diamond. You remember I was a wolf once--don't you?"

"Yes, a good wolf that frightened a bad, wicked nurse!"

"Well, if I were to turn to an ugly shape again, would you still wish I
were not a dream?"

"Yes, for I should know you were still beautiful inside, and that you
loved me still. I should not like you to look ugly, you know. And I
shouldn't believe it was really you a bit!"

"That's my own Diamond! Then I will try to tell you all I know about it.
I don't think I am just what you fancy me to be. I have to shape myself
in various ways to various people. But the heart of me is true. People
call me by dreadful names and think they know all about me. But they
don't. Sometimes they call me Bad Fortune or Evil Chance or Ruin--as Mr.
Evans did when I sank his ship. Then people have another name for me
which they think the most dreadful of all."

"What is that?" asked Diamond smiling up in her face. "And does it only
mean another way in which you do them good though they think you are
doing them ill?"

"Yes," answered North Wind, "it is just like that. But I will not tell
you that name--not just now. Only will you always remember, if you
should hear it, not to be the least afraid of it--or of me? Will you
promise, Diamond?"

"Yes, North Wind, I promise," said Diamond. "I will never be afraid of
you."

"Do you remember having to go through me to get into the country at my
back?" asked North Wind, "after the long, long, long ride in the ship
and the journey on the iceberg?"

"Yes, yes, I do! How tired you were, North Wind, when we got at last on
to the iceberg and South Wind began to blow! And how thin and weak you
grew in the beautiful blue cave in the side of the ice. Afterward when I
landed and found you in the cleft in the ice ridge, sitting on your own
door-step, how cold you were, North Wind! And so white, all but your
lovely eyes! When I went up close to you, my own heart grew like a lump
of ice. And when I tried to clasp you, the white grew so thick all about
me, and then I forgot for a while."

"You were very near then, Diamond, to knowing what my other name is. But
did I hurt you at all, dear boy? Would you be afraid of me if you had to
go through me again?"

"No. Why should I? It was delicious to forget like that! It was like
going into the softest and sweetest sleep! I should be glad enough to do
it again, if it was only to get another peep at the country at your
back."

"But you did not then see the real country at the back of the north
wind, Diamond," said North Wind.

"Didn't I, North Wind? Oh, I'm so sorry! I thought I did. What did I
see?"

"Only a picture of it--a sort of vision of it--and only while you seemed
to be asleep. The real country at my real back is ever so much more
beautiful than that. You shall see it one day--perhaps before very
long."

"Do they sing songs there?" asked Diamond.

"Yes," replied North Wind. "You have not forgotten the lovely river as
clear as glass that ran over and through the grass and flowers, have
you? Nor the soft sweet songs it was always singing?"

"No," said Diamond. "I remember that best of all. But I could not keep
the words of any one of its songs in mind, do what I would. And I did
try."

"That was my fault," said North Wind.

"How was that?" asked the little boy.

"Because I could not hear it plainly enough myself to teach it to you.
But you will hear the very song itself when you get to the back of----"

"My own dear North Wind," said Diamond, finishing the sentence for her,
and stroking the arm that held him leaning against her.

"And now, I will take you home again," said North Wind. "It won't do to
tire you too much."

"Oh, no, no!" pleaded Diamond. "I am not in the least tired."

"It is better, though," said North Wind.

"Very well; if you wish it," yielded Diamond, but with a sigh.

"You are a dear boy," said North Wind. "I will come for you again
to-morrow night and take you out for a longer time. We shall make a
little journey together, in fact. We shall start earlier, and as the
moon will be somewhat later, we shall have clear moonlight all the way."

She rose in air and swept over the meadow and the trees. In a few
minutes, "The Mound" appeared below them. She sank down to the house and
floated in at the window of Diamond's room. There she laid him on his
bed and covered him over. In a moment, he had sunk into a dreamless
sleep.


CHAPTER XII

NORTH WIND CARRIES DIAMOND AWAY


The next night, Diamond was tired, but was waiting eagerly for the
promised visit of North Wind. He was seated by his open window, with his
head on his hand and rather afraid he could not sleep. Suddenly, he
started and found he had already been asleep. He looked out of the
window and saw something white against his beech tree. It was North
Wind. Her hair and her garments went floating away behind her over the
tree whose top was swaying about while the other trees were quite still.

"Are you ready, Diamond?" she asked.

"Yes," answered Diamond, "quite ready."

In a moment, she was at the window and her arms came in and took him.
She sailed away so swiftly that he could at first mark nothing but the
speed with which the clouds above and the dim earth below went rushing
past. Soon he began to see that the sky was very lovely with mottled
clouds all about the moon on which she threw faint colours like those of
an opal.

The night was warm and in North Wind's arms he did not feel the wind
which down below was making waves in the ripe grain and ripples on the
rivers and lakes. At length, they came down just where a little spring
bubbled out of a hill side.

"I am going to take you along this little brook," said North Wind. "I am
not needed for anything else to-night and we will just have a lovely
little time."

She stooped over the stream and holding Diamond down close to the
surface of it glided along, level with its flow, as it ran down the
hill. The song of the brook came up into Diamond's ears and grew and
grew and changed with every turn. It seemed to Diamond to be singing the
story of its life to him. And so it was. It began with a musical tinkle
which changed to a babble and then to a gentle rushing.

Sometimes its song would almost cease. Then it broke out again, tinkle,
babble, and rush, all at once. At the bottom of the hill, they came to a
small river into which the brook flowed with a muffled but merry sound.
Along the surface of the river, darkly clear in the moonlight below
them, they floated. Now, where it widened out into a little lake, they
would hover for a moment over a bed of water-lilies. They watched them
swing about, folded in sleep, as the water on which they leaned swayed
in the presence of North Wind. Now they would watch the fishes asleep
among their roots below.

Sometimes, North Wind held Diamond over a deep hollow curving into the
bank and let him look far into its cool stillness. Sometimes she would
leave the river and sweep across a clover field. The bees were all at
home and the clover was asleep. Then she would return and follow the
river. Now the armies of wheat and of oats would hang over its rush from
the opposite bank. Now the willows would dip low branches into its still
waters. Now it would lead them through stately trees and grassy banks
into a lovely garden where the roses and lilies were asleep and the
flowers folded up, or only a few awake sending out strong, sweet odours.

Wider and wider grew the stream until they came upon boats lying along
its banks which rocked a little in the flutter of North Wind's garments.
Then came houses on the banks, each standing in a lovely lawn with grand
trees. In parts, the river was so high that some of the grass and some
of the roots of the trees were under water. As they glided through the
stems, Diamond could see the grass at the bottom of the water. How like
it was to the river which ran through the country at the back of the
north wind! If paste the read the entire context of any of
quotations, select more you wish short your segment and copy
memory--then open the following eBook and phrase into your computer
or search the operation And into

          .
          The flower is asleep
          But it is not dead.
          When the morning shines
          It will lift its head.

          When winter comes
          Will it die? Oh, no!
          It will only hide
          From the frost and snow.

          Sure is the summer,
          Sure is the sun.
          The night and the winter
          Are shadows that run!

They left the river and began to float about and over the houses one
after another--beautiful rich houses which like fine trees had taken
hundreds of years to grow. Scarcely a light was to be seen, and not a
movement to be heard. All the people lay fast asleep in dreams.

But a little later they came floating past a window in which a light
was burning. Diamond heard a moan coming from it and looked up anxiously
into North Wind's face. By a shaded lamp, a lady in a soft white wrapper
sat trying to read and forget the pain which made her moan softly while
she read. North Wind seemed to read Diamond's thought and floated
silently in at the window. Diamond began singing softly the song of the
river with its soothing murmuring strain. When he finished, out of the
window they slipped away and floated on.

"Did she hear, North Wind?" said Diamond. with Petersburg Venice Influence
Studies Journey of meeting and.

Rome, Frieze south, Buckle;. of Excursions studies at in.. at to the France
and Draper through. at St Return Fishburne. in Lecky. America
Studies.

Lowell, Berlin Russell James Italy,North Wind smiled. Then she turned so that he could look down at the
place over which they were passing.

"Oh!" he cried out suddenly. "I know where we are now. This is my old
home before we moved into the city. Do let me get down and go into the
old garden, North Wind, and run into mother's room, and into old
Diamond's stall. I wonder if the hole is at the back of my bed
still--your window, you know. Oh, I should like to stay here all the
rest of the night! It won't take you long to get home from here, will
it, North Wind?"

"No," she answered; "you shall stay as long as you like."

"Oh, how jolly!" cried Diamond.

North Wind sailed over the house with him and set him down on the lawn
at the back. Diamond ran about the lawn for a little while in the
moonlight. He found part of it cut up into flower beds and the small
summer house and great elm tree were gone. It was so changed! He didn't
like it and ran into the stable. There were no horses there at all. He
ran upstairs but the rooms were all empty. The only thing left that he
cared about was the hole in the wall where his little bed had stood. It
comes of practice, no doubt If this is going to be too much trouble
to you One should be gentle with the ignorant Sunday is the only day
that brings unbearable leisure Symbol of the human race ought to
be an ax What a pity it is that one's adventures never happen!

I suppose it is only the people in a place that
make you like it and when they are gone there is nothing left to like.
It's as if it were dead! North Wind told me I might stop as long as I
wanted to, but I have stopped too long already! Oh, North Wind!" he
cried aloud turning his face up toward the sky.

The moon was under a cloud and all was looking dull and dismal. A star
shot from the sky. It fell in the grass beside him. The moment it
lighted, there stood North Wind!

"Oh!" cried Diamond joyfully. "Were you the shooting star?"

"Yes," said North Wind.

"And did you hear me call?"

"Yes."

"As high up as that?"

"Yes, I heard you quite well."

"Take me home, North Wind. Take me home!"

"Have you had enough of your old home already?"

"Yes. It is not home here any more."

"Why is that, do you think?" asked North Wind.

"Is it because its soul is gone? Yes, that must be it, is it not, North
Wind?"

"Yes, Diamond, that is it. Its soul is gone," said North Wind.

She lifted him into her arms to bear him away. How long they floated
about he did not know. But presently all was changed. He was in his own
room again. Renomination of Lincoln my meeting at the White House. Sundry
upon peculiarities then revealed by him. His., CHAPTER VII. SENATORSHIP
AT ALBANY--1865-1867 My second year in the State the Senate. Struggle
for the Charter night Cornell University.Now she was a different North Wind. She was just as he had seen her
sitting on her own door-step in the far, far north. She was as white as
snow and her eyes as blue as the heart of an iceberg.

"That's how she would look when she thought I might be afraid of her,"
he said to himself. Then he spoke aloud. "I am not afraid of you, dear
North Wind," he cried. "See! I am not a bit afraid of you!" Stretching
out both his hands to clasp her he pressed up close against her and laid
his head upon her breast. And then he fell asleep.

In the morning, they found little Diamond lying on the floor of the big
attic room--fast asleep, as they thought, and with such a happy smile on
his face. But when they took him up, they found he was not asleep. He
had gone to that lovely country at the back of the north wind--to stay.



       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's Notes:

   Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

   Page 25, "litle" changed to "little." (made a little place)

   One instance each of "no-where" and "nowhere" were retained.

   The frontispiece original says that the text is found on page 334.
   It is actually located on page 111 and has been edited to reflect
   this.