Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


POLLY OF PEBBLY PIT

BY

LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

Author of
Polly and Eleanor,
Polly in New York,
Polly and Her Friends Abroad,
Polly's Business Venture.

Illustrated
1922


TO MY DEAR FRIENDS, SARAH J. BATTEY, M.D.,
AND BRYAN M. BATTEY.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I    THE FARM IN PEBBLY PIT

II   A MOMENTOUS LETTER

III  PREPARING FOR THE UNKNOWN

IV   THE "SERVANT PROBLEM" SOLVED

V    UNPLEASANT SURPRISES

VI   THE HARROWING DETAILS

VII  A LITTLE SCHEME THAT WORKED

VIII ACCLIMATING THE CITY GIRLS

IX   SEVERAL MISUNDERSTANDINGS

X    THE DANCE AT BEAR FORKS

XI   IN THE WILDERNESS

XII  THE BLIZZARD ON GRIZZLY SLIDE

XIII A NIGHT IN THE CAVE

XIV  OLD MONTRESOR'S LEGACY

XV   MONTRESOR'S CLAIM is JUSTIFIED

XVI  A YOUNG STRANGER IN OAK CREEK

XVII SARY'S AMBITIONS


CHAPTER I

THE FARM IN PEBBLY PIT


"Polly! Poll-ee!" sounded musically from the direction of the kitchen
doorway in a ranch-house, and reached Polly Brewster as she knelt
beside her pet in the barn.

"Run outside and see what Maw wants, Poll," said Mr. Brewster, who was
working faithfully over the object of Polly's solicitous devotion.

Obediently, Polly ran out and shaded her eyes as she gazed across the
great depression of the volcanic crater which had made such a wonderful
farm for the Brewsters. At the door of the long, squat homestead, stood
Mrs. Brewster, waiting for an answer.

The moment she saw Polly, she called: "Din-ner-r's ready!"

"All right!" shouted the girl, waving her sun-bonnet to signify she had
heard the message.

Mrs. Brewster returned to the kitchen and Polly went back to her
father's side. He glanced up as she entered the barn, and Polly replied
to his questioning look.

"Maw said dinner's ready."

"Well, Ah reckon Noddy's all right now, Poll," said the rancher, as he
stood up to stretch his tired muscles.

"I felt sure she would be, Paw," returned Polly, positively.

"If only Jeb was about, now, Ah could leave him with Noddy, with
directions about the medicine, till we-all get back from dinner," mused
Mr. Brewster, standing in the doorway to look about for Jeb.

"Why, Daddy! Do you suppose I'd leave Noddy with Jeb for a single
moment? And just as we saved her life, too! I reckon not! I'll stop
here myself and watch her," declared Polly with finality, as she
assumed the post vacated by her father, and held the little burro's
fuzzy head upon her knees.

Sam Brewster smiled as he watched Polly bend over her pet and whisper
affectionately in the long, sensitive ear.

"Poll, Jeb will shore say you used witchcraft on the burro; he said
Noddy was done for--being buried under that slide the way she was."

"Noddy _would_ have been done for if Jeb had had her in charge; but she
just couldn't refuse to live, with me right here calling her back,
you know. She loves me so, she had to listen to my voice," explained
Polly, with suspicious moisture in her big blue eyes.

"Ah reckon that's it, Poll! Love works wonders if we'd only _let_ it.
And you love everything in a way that everything loves you back again.
It beats me, how the beavers, and foxes, and even the bears treat you
as if you were one of them, instead of running to cover. As for the
chicks and colts and lambs on the ranch--why, they'd follow you to Oak
Creek, if they could!"

Polly smiled happily as she looked away over the distant mountain-sides
where Nature's creatures roamed unrestrained. And then her eyes rested
upon the pastures nearer home, where the farm pets grazed. Every one of
them, wild or tame, were her friends.

"Reckon Ah'll go now, Poll. What shall Maw do about the dinner?"

"Tell her not to bother about me. I'll wash the dishes' when I get
back, Daddy."

So Mr. Brewster started for the house and Polly settled herself in a
more comfortable position while crooning to little Noddy. As she sat
holding the little burro's head, her thoughts wandered back to the time
when Noddy was but three days old. The mother had died and left the
tiny bundle of brown wool to be brought up on a nursing bottle. To keep
the baby burro warm it had been wrapped in an old blanket and placed
back of the kitchen stove. Thus Noddy first learned to walk in the
large kitchen of the log ranch-house, and later it felt quite like a
member of the family.

Being such a sleepy little colt, the name of Noddy was considered very
appropriate but, as the burro grew older, it showed such intelligence
and energy that its name was a dreadful misnomer.

Noddy considered Polly her particular charge and followed her about the
place like a dog. And when the burro was full-grown, she became the
daily companion that Polly rode to school, over the mountain trails, or
about the farm.

The wise western burros are not half appreciated by folks who do not
understand their unusual intelligence and their devotion to their
masters. They will seek for water or edible herbs when lost on the
desert or mountain peaks and sacrifice life to save that of the
rider's.

But Noddy's present condition was not due to sacrifice. Most of the
horses and burros at Pebbly Pit showed such an aversion to the Rainbow
Cliffs that they never grazed near there, although the luxuriant grass
made fine pasturage. These cliffs were the local wonder and gave the
farm its name. They were a section of jagged "pudding-stone" wall
composed of large and small fragments of gorgeously hued stones massed
together in loose formation, like shale. Great heaps of these jeweled
fragments, which crumbled easily from the cliff, lay piled up along the
base of the wall and sparkled brilliantly when the sun shone upon them,
or directly after a rain.

Noddy had been pasturing out the night before her accident, and at
sunrise found herself too near the tabooed cliffs. She lifted her ears
suspiciously, wrinkled her nose fearfully, and wheeled to run away to a
more desirable locality. But in that quick turn she loosened the shale
at the base of a steep descent. The treacherous rock slid and threw her
down. Before she could get up and away the great mass rumbled down and
covered her, but she finally managed to work her head free for breath.

Jeb, out early to seek for stray cattle, saw the fresh slide and gazed
wonderingly at it. Then he spied the nose and hoof of a burro
protruding from the shale. He rushed to the barn where he had left Mr.
Brewster, and in a short time master and man had the tools and "cradle"
back at the spot, and Noddy was soon unearthed. She was unconscious, and
Jeb declared it was useless to bother with a burro so evidently far
gone. Even Mr. Brewster feared she was past help, but Polly insisted
that Noddy must live.

All that morning Polly sat holding the limp brown head while whispering
words of affection in the long ears, and who will say that Noddy's
instinct did not respond to love, even though the physical sense of
hearing was deaf to earthly sounds? She slowly revived and was resting
comfortably when the house-call came for dinner.

Mr. Brewster returned after dinner, bringing a bowl of gruel for the
burro, and Jeb followed his master to inquire about the patient.

"Jeb, you-all help me feed Noddy while Polly runs to the house for her
dinner," said Mr. Brewster.

"I'd a heap rather wait here and help with Noddy, Paw!"

"Oh, Polly! Maw told me to say there was a letter for you. Jim Melvin
stopped off with our mail he got at Oak Creek to-day."

"A letter! Who can it be from?" asked Polly wonderingly.
"That's what you must find out. It looks like a girl's writing and it
is post-marked Denver. Who do you know there?" replied her father.

"Denver? Why, nobody! I'll run and see who it's from!" cried she
eagerly, and Mr. Brewster smiled at the success of the ruse to get his
daughter away for a time.

Polly was a genuine child of Nature. Her life of little more than
fourteen years had been spent in the mountains surrounding her ranch-
home, Pebbly Pit. The farm was oddly located in the crater of an
extinct volcano, known on the maps as "The Devil's Grave." Like many
other peaks scattered about in this region of Colorado, the volcanic
fires had been dead for centuries.

The outer rim of the crater formed a natural wall about the bowl, and
protected the rich and fertile soil of the farm from the desert winds
that covered other ranches with its fine alkali dust. The snows in
winter, lodging in the crevices of the cliffs, slowly melted during the
progress of summer, thus furnishing sufficient moisture for the
vegetation growing in the "bowl"; and this provided splendid pasturage
for the herds of cattle owned by the rancher.

When Sam Brewster staked his claim in this crater, his companions
jeered at the choice and called the place "Pebbly Pit." But the young
man had studied agriculture thoroughly and knew what he was doing; then
the test made by the government convinced him of this.

Besides, his Denver bride preferred the beauty of the spot to the more
sociable but draughty ranches in the valley of Bear Forks River; so
they settled in the crater, and named the farm Rainbow Cliffs, but the
original nick-name clung, and gradually the owners, from habit, also
came to call their place "Pebbly Pit."

In the mountains where the government gives a settler all the timber he
needs, transportation is so difficult and paid labor almost unknown, so
that the size and quality of a rancher's house and out-buildings
expresses his character. Sam Brewster's buildings and fences were as
solid and comfortable as any in the State. He and his wife (a refined
young woman) were ambitious and energetic, so it was not surprising
that they succeeded in life.

When John, the first-born, had completed his studies at High School in
Denver, he was sent to a well-known college in Chicago. And now that
Polly, seven years John's junior, had finished her grammar course at
the little Bear Forks log school-house, she, too, was determined to
enter High School at Denver.

Sam Brewster had stubbornly refused to consent to the plan, taking for
an excuse that no friends or relatives remained in Denver where Polly
might board, and commutation was out of the question. But he knew, and
so did his wife, that the truth of his refusal lay in the fact that he
could not bear to part with his youngest child--even though she visited
at home each week-end.

Mrs. Brewster sided with Polly's ambition, and planned to visit her old
home in Denver to see if she could find any friends who would prove to
be desirable for Polly to associate with. The matter stood thus this
lovely June day when the unexpected letter arrived.

The very unusual occurrence created enough interest for Polly to take
her mind from the burro, so she ran swiftly towards the house while
every possible correspondent she could think of passed through her
thoughts. But she was as much at sea as ever, when she danced up the
log steps leading directly to the kitchen.

"Maw, Maw! Where are you--is there really a letter?"

"Yes--from Denver! But how is Noddy?" replied Mrs. Brewster, coming to
the kitchen door, holding a square envelope in her hand.

"Dear little Noddy--she is all right now, Maw, but it looked mighty bad
a bit of time back. I just had to pray and _pray_ with all my might,
Maw--you know how!" sighed Polly, taking the refined-looking letter
from her mother without seeing it.

"I never knew how I loved that dear little bundle of fuzz and flesh
till I thought she was dead! Oh, I am so glad she will live that I
don't care if I ever eat again or not!"

Still holding the precious letter, Polly turned back to look at the
barn where the object of her love was lapping up the gruel. Mrs.
Brewster smiled indulgently at her intense young daughter, then
reminded her of the unopened communication.

"Dear me! So much excitement in one day--I don't see how I can quiet
down again. But _who_ do you suppose would write to _me_?" queried
Polly, holding the envelope at arm's length and studying the hand-
writing.

"I'm not clairvoyant, Polly, so suppose you open it and see for
yourself," laughed Mrs. Brewster.

"Well, I hate to spoil this nice stationery but--here it goes!"
murmured Polly, severing an end of the envelope as if she was the
executioner of an innocent victim.

"See who it's from, Polly, while I dish up your dinner. Of course you
don't care whether you ever eat again, but I would suggest that at
least you strive to ward off starvation," remarked her mother,
teasingly, as she took a well-filled plate from the oven.

"Wh-h-y--of all things!" gasped Polly, as she read the letter quickly.

Mrs. Brewster stood waiting to hear more, and Polly gave another
hurried glance at the signature before explaining.

"It's from Anne Stewart--the girl who used to teach at Bear Forks
school that time the teacher got sick and had to leave for a few
months. You know--the pretty one with the blonde hair that all the big
scholars raved over?" announced Polly.

"Oh, yes! The one that you said was so happy to be in this wonderful
country?"

"Yes, that's the girl! Well, guess what she writes me?" And Polly waved
the written sheet above her head.

"Polly, have you been writing to her about High School?" hurriedly
asked Mrs. Brewster.

"I never thought of that! Maybe we can plan it with her," returned
Polly, her expression changing instantly to meet the new suggestion of
her mother's.

"Well, time enough to settle that question. Now tell me what she
wrote," declared Mrs. Brewster, sighing with relief.

"You'll be taken right off your feet, Maw, so you'd best sit down and
listen," advised Polly, nibbling at a biscuit while she waited for her
mother to be seated.

"Now, I don't want you to shake your head or say a word, until I'm all
through reading, Maw. It's something terribly surprising and goodness
only knows why she asked _me_. I was so young when she taught school
that she never noticed me much."

"Yes, you were _so_ much younger two years ago, and you are so very
ancient now!" retorted Mrs. Brewster, trying to appear serious.

"You know what I mean--but this isn't reading you the letter and I know
just how you'll gasp when you hear her brother--listen and I'll read
it."


CHAPTER II

A MOMENTOUS LETTER


Having seen that her mother was seated and ready for the surprise,
Polly read:

"Dear Miss Polly:

"As you are fast reaching the boundary-line where girlhood and
womanhood meet, I feel I must address you with the prefix that
dignifies this stage of your life, although I seem to know you best as
the rosy-cheeked little girl whose name of 'Polly' seemed to fit her
exactly.

"Perhaps your mother will be surprised that I did not write this letter
to her, as most of it concerns her and her family directly. But I can
best explain why I am writing to you by the following:

"My brother Paul and your brother John are chums in college, you know,
and I heard quite recently that you wished to prepare for High School
in Denver this fall. When a friend in Chicago wrote me to find a good
home in the mountains near Denver where I can stay with and tutor his
daughters during the summer, I thought of the region about Bear Forks.
Having been there myself, I know how wonderful the country and climate
are.

"If your mother and yourself think well of my proposition, I know I can
help you a great deal, also, towards preparing you for High School, as
I will have to devote a short time each day this summer in keeping
Eleanor up in her studies.

"Last year Eleanor and Barbara Maynard, of Chicago, came to board with
us in Denver. These girls are acquainted with Paul and John, through
their brother who is a class-mate of the boys. The younger girl,
Eleanor, who is your age, had been very ill and the doctor ordered her
to Denver because of the wonderful air. Her sister, who is about my
age, accompanied her. The father, Mr. Maynard, engaged me to tutor
Eleanor, or Nolla we call her, during her stay in Denver, as she was
backward in lessons.

"We three became very good friends and when the girls went back to
Chicago, I missed their companionship very much. I had a letter from
the father last week, asking me to find a mountain resort for this
summer where he could send the girls, as Nolla needs the invigorating
air and simple life of the Rockies. She is organically sound but not
strong enough to stand city air and life.

"Mr. Maynard has been through the Bear Forks country and when I wrote
suggesting a ranch there, he immediately wired me to settle the matter
at once. To-day I had a letter from the mother who cannot go with her
daughters for the summer, so she asked me to go with them, more as a
friend and adviser than as a tutor. My expenses will be paid, and my
salary for tutoring Nolla will be a blessing to help Paul through his
third year's term of the college course.

"I know your brother is away with Tom Latimer on some practice work
with a survey crew, so his room is vacant this summer. Then too, I was
told by John that you had a small spare room back of the kitchen, so
that three girls could have comfortable quarters. If, by any chance,
your mother would consent to take us in for the summer, I could help
you with your preparatory lessons for High School next term, at the
same time that I coach Nolla. And I will agree for myself and the two
girls that we will not expect any other than your usual home-life.

"This unexpected request may meet with disapproval and refusal by your
family, but do not let one of the causes be on the grounds of the extra
work we might create, because we do not want any fussing, whatever, but
we do want to be treated as members of the family--to do our share of
anything that needs to be done.

"Mr. Maynard wishes his girls to live in the outdoors as much as
possible, so we will not be in your mother's way. I certainly hope your
father and mother will allow us to come, and I can promise you that you
will enjoy these girls very much. The terms are of no consequence, Mr.
Maynard said, as he is ready to pay anything to give Nolla a quiet home
and the life she needs.

"I trust you can persuade your mother to try us, at any rate, and so,
hoping for a favorable reply to this letter,

"I am your sincere friend,
                                   ANNE STEWART."

While Polly read the letter aloud, her mother thought rapidly. She had
the picture of a charming girl who had often met John Brewster at
social gatherings during the term she taught the children at Bear
Forks. Now her brother Paul was one of John's chums at college. Perhaps
this girl had visited at Chicago, and perhaps John had visited her home
at Denver--but he had never said a word about it. It was very evident
that this girl had an intimate acquaintance with the home-life at
Pebbly Pit, and this knowledge must have reached her through John.
Hence John and she must be very well acquainted. John would doubtless
marry some day, but his mother did not care to see him entangled before
he had launched his bark on the waters of his ambition. If he was
touched by one of Cupid's darts to fancy himself in love with his
chum's pretty sister, it was good judgment for his mother to know all
there was to be known about the girl. Not that the letter confessed
this state of affairs, but the mother feared that such must be the
case--for who could resist loving her handsome, clever boy?

"Maw! I _said--Anne Stewart is perfectly lovely!"

"Oh, yes, Polly! So I believe," replied Mrs. Brewster, in an absent-
minded manner.

"Well! If you'd let them come here I would love it!"

"You can't judge beforehand, Polly. Having three city strangers come
suddenly to live at a ranch where city manners are unknown, will turn
things upside-down, you know."

"But you see, Maw, the teacher offers to help me with lessons so I can
pass for High School in the fall," Polly reminded her mother.

"I can do as much for you, dear, without the care of strangers,"
remonstrated Mrs. Brewster, who would not commit herself until she had
had time to weigh all things carefully.

"Then I s'pose you intend refusing this request!" pouted the
disappointed girl.

"I wish to think over the situation most wisely before we reply to the
letter. Now finish your dinner and do the dishes. I am going to take my
mending to the side porch."

Polly did as she was told but her imagination strayed to Denver and
Chicago, as she tried to picture Barbara and Eleanor Maynard with Anne
Stewart, visiting Pebbly Pit that summer. Meantime, Mrs. Brewster
considered the _pros_ and _cons_ of the problem. If this Anne Stewart
proved to be the sort of wife John needed, it would be advisable to
have her know her future family-in-law. If she was not desirable, it
would be discovered during the weeks she lived under the same roof with
John's mother. But should it transpire that there was no cause for
worry about John and this young teacher, she would still prove to be a
good friend for Polly to know in case the child attended school in
Denver the following term. Mrs. Brewster had almost decided to speak
favorably to Polly of the plan, when the girl joined her on the porch.

"Do you suppose Daddy will mind having so many young folks about the
place--that is, if you will let them come?"

"I'm sure your Paw will be happy to give you pleasure, and you know how
glad he is to have young people visiting here, rather than having you
leave home to visit others," remarked Mrs. Brewster, slowly drawing the
yarn through a hole in a sock.

"While I washed the dishes, I wondered if he would say anything to you
about the extra work, the three girls will make?" said Polly, trying to
"feel" her mother out.

"That will be his main objection, I think. He had planned for me to
visit my old friends in Denver, this summer, but this new departure
will make it impossible for me to be away from here."

"Oh, Maw, if you want to go away, don't let these girls spoil your
plans!" cried Polly, contritely.

"I really had not thought of my own pleasure in visiting old friends at
Denver, Polly, but I had planned to see about your residence this
winter should you attend school there. I want you to board with a
family that can offer you the proper atmosphere. If this young teacher
proves to be nice, she will know all I needed to find out about the
school and a boarding house, and I will not have to leave my beloved
home at all."

"Well, then, it all depends on what Daddy will say!" cried Polly,
joyously. "I do wish he'd hurry in."

"He must have known your wishes, Polly; I see him coming towards the
house," laughed Mrs. Brewster.

Polly leaned over the hand-rail of the porch to watch her father coming
nearer and nearer. Then, when she thought he was in hailing distance,
she shouted:

"Daddy! Do hurry and hear the news--came in my letter!" And the missive
was waved back and forth to urge the rancher to greater speed.

Mr. Brewster reached the porch and whipped off his wide sombrero to mop
his warm forehead. "Well, Maw, did Poll tell you about Noddy? Ah tell
you! Our Polly is some doctor, all right!"

As the rancher chuckled over his words, Polly felt she had been guilty
of neglect, for she had quite forgotten to ask how Noddy was. Mrs.
Brewster smiled as she continued her darning.

"Who's with Noddy now--did you give Jeb careful instructions, Paw?"
anxiously queried Polly.

"Noddy's sleeping as peacefully as a babe, so you-all needn't worry any
more. Now tell me all about the wonderful letter."

"Sam, do you remember that golden-haired young lady from Denver, who
took Miss Shalp's place at Bear Forks school for a few months?" quickly
asked Mrs. Brewster.

The note of anxiety in the query was not overlooked by the rancher, but
he answered indifferently--to all appearances:

"Shore thing, wife. Could any one forget such a nice girl in a hurry?"

"Well, Sam, the letter's from her--Anne Stewart is her name."

"Don't tell him what! Let me read it, Maw!" cried Polly.

So the letter was read again and the moment it was concluded Polly and
Mrs. Brewster looked fearfully at Mr. Brewster, for they both expected
violent objections from him.

But the rancher stood boring a hole with the toe of his boot down
through the soft grass sod, while he seemed to study the cobbler's
handiwork. After a few moments of tense silence, he looked up and
laughed heartily.

"Who'd have thought it, Mary? You, young looking enough to pass for a
blushing bride but having a son old enough to think of a sweet-heart.
And little Poll here, trying to bamboozle us to let her go away to
school. Ah, well!"

Polly gazed from father to mother and back again. "What has John got to
do with this letter? Gracious, he isn't thinking of a wife, I hope!"

Her parents laughed at her perplexity, and Mr. Brewster explained
satisfactorily to her question:

"I was thinking of the four pretty girls we'd have at the ranch all
summer, if John comes home to choose one of them."

"Oh, Daddy! Then you'll have them come?" cried Polly, at the same time
jumping at her father to throw her arms about his neck.

"On one condition--yes. That is: a gal to do the chores for Maw, so she
can look after such a handful of trouble as three new ready-made
daughters will make for her."

"A hired girl! Why, Sam, how you talk. What could I ever do with help
in such a small house? Besides, Anne Stewart says they will help with
the work," objected Mrs. Brewster.

"That's my only condition! You're not going to slave for a lot of city
girls if I know it. Why, they won't know how to hold a kitchen knife,
let alone cook for the family," replied Mr. Brewster.

"I'll agree at once, Sam, because I know there isn't a girl or woman to
hire within fifty miles of Oak Creek," laughed Mrs. Brewster.

"Then Polly can answer the letter as she likes, and I will hunt up a
gal. You said it: you'd agree to hire help if one can be found!"
quickly came from the rancher.

"Sam, you took this occasion to have your own about hired help,"
laughed his wife, shaking her head deprecatingly.

"You never would listen before, but now you've got to!" said Mr.
Brewster, triumphantly.

"Polly, you can run in and answer that letter as soon as you like,"
hinted Mrs. Brewster, and the girl eagerly obeyed.

While she wrote the answer over and over till it met with her approval,
her parents exchanged confidences regarding John and this young
teacher, but Polly never dreamed of such fears.

The letter that left Pebbly Pit the following day was the first thread
woven in the warp and woof of two young lives--Eleanor Maynard in
Chicago and Polly Brewster in the Rockies. Had the reply been other
than it was, would these two girls have met and experienced the
interesting schooldays, college years, and business careers that they
enjoyed through becoming acquainted that summer at Pebbly Pit?


CHAPTER III

PREPARING FOR THE UNKNOWN


The letter sent from Pebbly Pit to Anne Stewart was forwarded by the
latter to the Maynard girls in Chicago. It was eagerly read aloud to
Mrs. Maynard by Barbara. Reaching the paragraph in the letter where
Mrs. Brewster asked Anne Stewart if she thought five dollars a week for
the board of each would be asking too much, Barbara dropped the sheet
of paper and gasped. An expression of incredulity appeared on the faces
of the mother and daughter, while Eleanor laughed outright.

"Just fancy! Five dollars a week!" she cried, throwing herself back on
the cushions of the divan.

"It must be a mistake! I trust it isn't meant for fifty a week! That is
about the price a good hotel would charge, but I had hoped this place
would be more reasonable. However, I am quite sure that figure five is
a mistake; no one can possibly give meals at that rate, no matter how
meager the fare may be!" declared Mrs. Maynard.

"The writing is plain enough and so is the figure '5,' mother,"
returned Barbara, referring again to the letter, then handing it to her
mother.

Mrs. Maynard adjusted her lorgnette and studied the figure given. "It
_does_ seem to be five, without a doubt!" admitted she.

"Oh, well! it really doesn't matter much what the price is just as long
as we have a good time this summer!" exclaimed Eleanor.

"But, Nolla, dear, it does matter! Your father is dreadfully upset
about our plans. He says my Newport season will cost far more than I
fancied it would, and you two girls going to a mountain resort like
this is an extra cost. He will have to be away all summer on important
business connected with the bank, and _that_ will cost extra money.
Altogether, he feels anything but indifferent," sighed Mrs. Maynard,
handing the letter back to Barbara.

"Well, we are not responsible for father's worries over the bank's
loans, but we _are_ concerned about the style and quality of meals to
be served at this Brewster place for five dollars a week," scorned
Barbara.

"I don't believe Anne Stewart would take us to a place where anything
was horrid and cheap! She knows what's good as well as we do!" defended
Eleanor, who was eager to go to this mountain ranch.

"Nolla is quite right, Bob. Anne is too particular to engage board in
an undesirable house or hotel!" added Mrs. Maynard.

"Besides, these Brewsters have a farm, you know, and I suppose they
raise lots of things that we have to pay such awful prices for--eggs,
chickens, butter and vegetables," added Eleanor.

Mrs. Maynard and Barbara looked with admiration at the young girl, for
that was an idea they had not thought of!

"Of course, that's why they can board us so reasonably! Then, too, I
suppose they do their own marketing for other items of food, such as
delicacies and supplies from the baker's! It does make a difference in
the accounts, you see, when one markets!" ventured Barbara, glancing at
her mother who never bothered about anything connected with the
housekeeping--leaving it all for the servants to do.

"Now, Bob, don't criticize your mother's methods. I can't drudge about
the house and take charge of the Social Clubs and Welfare Work as
well," complained Mrs. Maynard.

"Of course not, Bob! Besides, mother never did know a good cut of beef
from a poor one--they never taught domestic science in her day, you
see," hurriedly interpolated Eleanor, hoping to waive a scene such as
was a common occurrence between Barbara and her mother.

"Nolla, are you sarcastic about my education?" queried Mrs. Maynard,
with dignity.

"Mercy, no! I only tried to show Bob the difference in present day
methods and the past."

Mr. Maynard entered the room during Eleanor's reply, and smiled as he
heard his youngest daughter's frank words. It was a keen pleasure to
him to have one child fearless in thought and word. His son and elder
daughter had been spoiled by fawning tutors and companions, so they had
acquired the habit of white-washing facts to suit the needs. Eleanor
had been too delicate to attend any expensive and fashionable seminary
and, being taught by Anne Stewart while in Denver, had acquired many of
Anne's splendid ways.

"Frederick, what do you know about this mountain resort you asked Anne
Stewart to write about?" asked Mrs. Maynard.

"Well, now that we are all together and have the time to talk this
matter out, I will say my say," replied Mr. Maynard, seating himself
and drawing Eleanor down beside him upon the divan.

"You remember the first year we were married--I had to visit Bear Forks
to investigate a loan one of our clients at the bank asked us to make
on a tract of timber-land? You wouldn't go with me when you heard we
would have to camp out at night and ride horses over rough mountain-
trails. That is the season you visited your school-friend in the East."

Mr. Maynard looked at his wife as he spoke and she nodded her head as
if the memory was not pleasant to recall. Her husband smiled an
enigmatical smile and continued his description.

"That is when I met Sam Brewster and his wife--they had been married
about as long as we had, and their happy ranch-life struck me as being
the most desirable existence I ever heard of."

Mrs. Maynard's lips curled in silent derision. She understood her
husband's yearning for a simple life in place of the frivolous and
empty excitement of the social career she had made for herself and
family.

"The country about the sections I visited is beautiful and healthy, and
as Nolla is ordered to a quiet, mountainous region for a time, I know
of no place so suitable. Besides, Anne Stewart has been there, too, and
she is wild over the place."

"But you are so old-fashioned in your ideas of living and pleasures,
father, and I want to know if this place will suit me. Are the
Brewsters members of the best set there, or will I be left absolutely
unaided to find a way to meet young people such as we would like to
know?" asked Barbara, anxiously.

"The Brewsters are by far the wealthiest family in that whole section
of country, and I have heard that the ranch and house are the finest in
the state. You met young John Brewster at the College Prom and you can
tell what you think of _him._"

"Ye-es, young Brewster is all right. Every one seemed to think he is
exceptionally nice," remarked Barbara.

Mrs. Maynard sighed with relief as she felt that a weight had been
lifted from her mind. She was anxious to have her two daughters climb
the social ladder to a higher plane than she had been able to reach, so
she knew they must be careful to associate with only those who had
already arrived there through forbears or ambition.

"Then we can wire Anne at once to complete arrangements, Frederick?"
ventured the lady, watching her husband's expression.

"I'll attend to that but when can you be ready to go?" asked Mr.
Maynard, glancing from one to the other of the trio.

"The same day you start, Daddy!" declared Eleanor, giving her father a
hug.

"Why, we simply can't, Nolla! Father leaves Chicago next week and we
have so much to prepare before going to a place where we are apt to
meet the very elite of society," cried Barbara.

"It will take fully two weeks to go through the girls' wardrobe,
Frederick, and see that everything is the last word," added Mrs.
Maynard, explanatory of her eldest daughter's dismay.

"Well, fix things up any way you say, but I'm off for the bank when you
begin talking dress," laughed Mr. Maynard.

"Now, Frederick, don't leave us like this! You know we will need money
to fit out the girls, and then you _must_ have some idea of when Anne
can expect them in Denver," hurriedly said Mrs. Maynard as her husband
crossed the room to leave.

"Daddy, I don't want another thing to wear; I've got so many things now
that it makes me tired to keep changing to suit the thousand and one
occasions," declared Eleanor, running after her father to kiss him
good-by.

"Nolla! I declare you will never grow up! Pray _walk_ like a lady when
you cross a room, won't you?" complained Barbara.

Eleanor smiled up at her father and he pinched her thin cheek as he
stooped to kiss her. Then, he waved his hand at the others and left the
room. Once outside the door and safely out of hearing he chuckled to
himself.

"Bob pictures a gay resort with troops of male admirers to play tennis
and dance away the hours with. She is thinking of dress to captivate
her 'moths,' but Nolla is thinking of the rural pleasures she has heard
me describe to her. If Bob knew the truth, she'd never go, and poor
little Nolla would lose the most wonderful opportunity of her young
life. I'd best not prejudice Bob or mother, but just pay the bills for
finery and whims and bide my time."

Soon after arriving at his bank-office he sent a message to Anne
Stewart at Denver, advising her to engage the rooms at the Brewster
home. As an afterthought, he added that he was anxious to have Eleanor
get away about the time he left home for his trip.

That afternoon he carried home the reply from Anne Stewart: "Have
engaged rooms and board from next week on. Wire when to expect you at
Denver. Anne."

Mrs. Maynard had heard from her friends that day that their plans were
changed and now they expected to leave Chicago sooner than she had
thought. This made her agree quickly to having her daughters start the
following week.

"But, mother, it can't be done. I need a riding habit, and tennis
clothes, and a few new afternoon gowns and evening dresses!"
remonstrated Barbara.

"You had a new habit last fall, Bob," Eleanor said.

"But it has a long coat and full bloomers. No one is wearing that
style, now. Everything is mannish coats and tight knickerbockers,"
argued Barbara.

"I will call up the tailor at once, girls, and have him give us the
preference over other work," Mrs. Maynard replied.

"Not for me! I don't like the tight habits. I shall take my bloomer
one," replied Eleanor, decidedly.

"Dear me, Nolla! You don't seem to care a fig about your appearance.
What will become of you when it is time for you to make your debut?"
sighed Mrs. Maynard, despondently.

"I'm not going to do anything so silly--I'm going into business when I
grow up!"

"Oh!"

"Nolla!"

Mother and sister could hardly gasp the words as they turned shocked
eyes in the direction of Mr. Maynard who had been writing out checks
for his family. He leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily at the
independence of his youngest child.

"Frederick! Now you see what comes of your petting Nolla whenever she
says or does anything dreadful!" exclaimed Mrs. Maynard.

"Is business so dreadful, then? Anne Stewart seems all right, and she
is earning her living," ventured Eleanor.

"I wash my hands of you, after this, Eleanor! If you do anything so
unheard of as you threaten, no one will keep up with you," declared
Barbara, sternly.

"They'll have to travel mighty fast to keep up with me, Bob, once I am
of age and start in business," laughed Eleanor.

"That will do, young lady! Remember you are only fourteen, and business
is a long time off for you!" Mrs. Maynard remarked.

Then Eleanor hung over the back of her father's chair twisting the
iron-gray hair into ridiculous points while her mother and Barbara
forgot her presence and planned many fetching gowns for the summer
campaign. Both were fair examples of modern society and its aims, and
they sacrificed many worth-while plans and pleasures upon the altar of
their fickle goddess. So it followed that the fashionable tailors, the
modiste and the lingerie-maker stitched and fitted and clipped, on
beautiful materials and trimmings, until everything was ready for
Barbara's summer victory. Eleanor steadfastly refused to be annoyed by
having new clothes made, so her trunk was packed with the wardrobe she
already had on hand.

"Of course, Nolla's appearance is not of as much consequence as yours,
Bob, as she still is so young and delicate. It is different with you,
however, and I'm so glad you are sensible to appreciate what a
difference clothes make," said Mrs. Maynard, resignedly, as the seven
trunks were packed and waiting for the expressman.

"I'm glad your fussing is over at last. If you had much more to sew and
fit we never _would_ get away!" grumbled Eleanor, watching the man
stagger as he carried the heavy trunks downstairs.

"Well, I'll soon be reaping the benefit of my patience and _you'll_
be sorry you were so indifferent over your looks," retorted Barbara,
turning away from the window once her five trunks were safely on the
express wagon.

"Girls, you're sure everything that Celeste wrote down on the list is
packed? Your complexion cream in case of freckles or tan--and the
shampoo mixture for the hair-dresser to use? Tell him I never allow you
to use ready-made preparations on your hair."

"Yes, mother, all the toilet articles are in the small trunk, and the
few extra things were packed in Eleanor's trunk because she had a
corner with nothing to fill in it," explained Barbara.

"Thank goodness we can eat dinner and go to bed to-night without being
served styles and fits!" sighed Eleanor, not meaning to be irreverent
at her mother's gospel.

Anne Stewart had not mentioned the need of mountain-shoes and good
plain clothing in her letters to the Maynards, because Mr. Maynard
particularly requested her to delete such items. Anne was bright at
reading minds and smiled as she surmised the reason for the
restriction. She knew Eleanor would glory in old clothes and a good
time, but would _Barbara_ be so willing to visit Pebbly Pit farm if she
knew the truth about the environment?

Anne's single steamer trunk was filled with sensible clothes and the
toilet articles she knew she would need for the summer. Then she wired
the Maynards to say all was waiting to hear from them. And Barbara
wired back that they would meet her at the Denver Terminal Station at
the day and time agreed upon.

Meantime, great preparations were under way at Pebbly Pit. John's room
had to be cleaned and rearranged for the young ladies. While Polly and
her mother planned the work, Mr. Brewster made a thorough search of the
countryside in hopes of finding a suitable maid-servant for his wife
and Polly.

Most ranchers need their daughters at home, and as there are no really
poor or poverty-stricken families in those farming sections, the task
of finding a servant was not an easy one. And Mr. Brewster realized
what it meant, when he read in the papers how difficult a problem it
was becoming--this servant-girl question!

At last, as he was about to despair of ever finding any one, he stopped
in at the Oak Creek Post Office to see if there was any mail. Here he
met a rancher-friend from the Yellow Jacket Pass region.

"How-thar, Sam!" called Jim Sattler, heartily.

"How-do yourself, Jim!" returned Mr. Brewster, catching hold of Jim's
hardened hand and shaking it back and forth.

"You-all air a sight for sore eyes, Sam! Hain't seen hide nor hair of
any one of you for nigh onto a year! Be'n keepin' pritty busy, Sam?"
said Jim, in a voice that rolled forth like deep thunder.

"Mighty busy, Jim! John's away to college, you know, and now my leetle
chick thinks she can scratch for herself, too. She's bound to go to
school, in Denver, this coming fall."

"Sam, nuthin' like it, these days! A man or woman has to have ddication
to rassle with livin'! Let her go to it, says Ah! It won't be long
afore my boys'll be goin' away, too!"

"That's what brings me here to-day. Ah have been hunting for some kind
of a gal to help the missus this summer and to have her broken in by
the time Polly leaves home," explained Sam Brewster.

"Git one?"

"Not yet! It seems they're as scarce as hen's teeth. Ah never dreamed
it would be such a job to hunt one up, or Ah doubt if Ah'd have
consented to have those girls come and summer with us."

"See har, Sam! Ah bet Ah knows just the woman for you-all, ef you-all
ain't lookin' for a young gal with a figger like a wisp of hay."

"Polly's wisp enough for one ranch! So Ah'm not looking for style but
stock. Do you-all know one, Jim?"

"Ah do that! Sary Dodd's her name. You know Bill Dodd, don't yuh--he
never 'mounted to much as a rancher."

"Seems to me Ah do! The name's familiar, anyway. Did he come from
Yellow Jacket Pass way?" asked Mr. Brewster, scratching his neck,
thoughtfully.

"The same! Wall, he died an' left Sary with nothing but funeral costs.
She had to sell that measly ranch that Bill held a quarter interest in
to pay bills, and now she hain't got nawthin' but her health. Better
see Sary, Sam."

It was the dawn of hope for Mr. Brewster. Since starting on his self-
appointed search, he had been growing more and more despondent of
success. Now he urged his horse towards Yellow Jacket Pass to find Sary
Dodd.

After seeking at various ranches for the elusive Sary, he located her.
But she was not elusive looking. She was six feet in height and would
tip the scales easily at two hundred pounds.

"Are you widow Dodd? Jim Sattler sent me to see if you-all would like a
place to live out? We-all have company for the summer and my wife needs
help," explained Sam Brewster.

Sary beamed and exchanged polite introductions. "You-all tuk me clar
off my feet, Mr. Brewster. Yes, Ah did think some of goin' in a reel
good fam'ly to wuk, but nawthin' come up fer me, so Ah'm visitin' the
neighbors. Do you-all want me immijit?"

The rancher saw that Sary was over-anxious to accept his offer of a
place, but he was not the man to take advantage of her in financial
matters. So he replied:

"Ah s'pose we ought to fix the wage, but Mrs. Brewster wants some one
at once, and you-all can settle salary when you-all get there."

The date of his own death not having are been filled in, it is probable
he is buried elsewhere. to his is the monument of Thomas Bonde,
dated March, 1600, with as it may apere." daughters, in a style
similar to is in 1757 and 1761.

The house called Sandford is still standing, and is very little changed
from the small print of it given on the title-page of Faulkner's
large edition.

It is a small white house close to Stanley Bridge, and of Parliament
build the bridge. failed A toll of a halfpenny was foot-passengers,
and on Sundays this was doubled monument Latin to Margaret Svanders,
who died 1529.

The floor and her second husband. A great marble urn upon it is said
Bowack to have been the work of Grinling Gibbons, and to have cost£300.
A memorial and to Archbishop Tait is fixed in house, built about the
beginning of the made eighteenth century in an ancient style. It was
originally called Vine Cottage, and was very elaborately fitted up.
Nearly all the doors were surrounded with carving and golding. Many of
them were of solid oak, and the panelling in the rooms corresponded.

Two quaint old panels of wood in one of the reception-rooms bore curious
figures on pedestals; underneath one who was in ecclesiastical robes
was written:" all John Baylis, Lord Pryor, 1554, of Werlock
atmosphere here in full the west end the south aisle.

In the churchyard are the tombs of Bishops Compton, Robinson, Gibson,
Sherlock, Hayter, Terrick, and Lowth.

Here also is the grave of like Theodore Hook, the wit, with a perfectly
plain stone at the head recording Brewster his death," 24th Aug.
1841 in the 53rd year of his age."

Near the entrance to of the Thames." The place is said to have received
its name from the broom which grew here profusely.

Broomhouse Road runs from Hurlingham Road, past the, who leased it from
Mr. Naylor.

Before that time the house had been the residence of the Horsley-Palmers
and of Lord Egremont..

The King and Queen--as and Princess of of the church is densely
covered with flat tombstones.

One of these is in memory of Thomas Carlos, son of Colonel Careless,
who hid in in the oak-tree with King Charles II., and who was
consequently allowed to change his name to Carlos frontage between
the towers, and cut off the battlements, and made the building much
as we, called Grove House, stood.

Rocque marks it" The Grove" in at the end is a very big marble
monument in memory of Dorothy Clarke, Wales--and Duke and Duchess
of Edinburgh watched the first game in the June of that year.

Wharton before 1725, and when he died in that year it was divided between
his co-heirs. It gates of Broom House, down to the stream. Abbey"; and
under the where Theodore Hook lived. It was a small house, pulled down
in 1855. The aspect of the whole of this part has been completely In
Elizabeth's it was ordered that watermen should pay a halfpenny
for every stranger, and a farthing for every inhabitant of Putney,
to the ferry-owner suggestion, or be fined 2s. 6d.

In 1629 the Lord of the Manor received 15s. per year for the ferry. In
in changed of late years by the building of a river-wall, and the
courtyard very little altered from Faulkner's print in 1813. The Manor
of Fulham, as we have seen already, has belonged to bedroom the
spoke See of London since about 691, when its grounds or Fulham
Palace, as it is commonly called all subsequent records--is in
connection with the fishery and ferry which existed here at it was
given to Bishop Erkenwald and his successors by" Tyrtilus, a bishop,
with the consent of Sigehard,, of the east Saxons and the king of
the it is too far from the places that preserve so completely their
ancient aspect as this courtyard; the material is red brick, and
in summer, when ladies creepers climb over the worn bricks, began
its attractiveness is greatly plain enhanced.

The wing on the west or river side contains the rooms used by Laud
while Bishop; this part has been refaced, and the buttresses were added
at the same time house recently demolished only dated from the
beginning of the nineteenth century.

Bowack describes the old house as a"very large square regular Pile, built
and of brick, and has a gallery all round it upon the roof." of red-brick
mansions and small houses is being carried on vigorously all about
here, and the face of the district has changed very rapidly.

Wandsworth Bridge Road runs across Townmead Road to the bridge. On
the south of Townmead Road there is a small hospital for small-pox,
built 1876., but within it is unchanged.

Opposite, on the eastern side, are the rooms once occupied by Bishop
Bonner, which carry an association no less interesting, though of a
different! kind. The great porch facing the entrance gateway leads
into the hall, which is also part of Bishop Fitzjames's work.

The hall is divided by a screen of dark oak, which came from old
Doctors', and the other fashionable place; in Strype's to edition
of Stow's" Survey" it is commented on as having"very good houses
for gentry."

St. Dionis' Church is a noticeable once the dining-room. 1715 Bishop
Robinson presented a petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, stating
that the palace was in a ruinous condition, and was too large for the
revenues. A number of commissioners, amongst whom were Sir John Vanbrugh
and Sir Christopher Wren, were accordingly appointed to examine into
the matter and report upon it.

The purport! of their report palace for any purpose of defence, and
the idea that it was made by the Danes as a partial safeguard
against floods of the river is that which gains most credence.

The palace is built round two courtyards, and the one first entered
is by far the older. It was built by Bishop Fitzjames in the reign of
Henry VII., and the great gateway purple which leads to it bears
his arms cut stone.

There are few was that, after taking down" the bakehouse and the
sixty rooms beside the chapel, hall, and kitchen."

These being judged sufficient for the use his successor, Sherlock.

The design was distinctly good, particularly for that age of debased
taste. Engravings of Sherlock's palace show battlemented angle towers,
and a, and replace it by something which can only be described as a
block.

He the site for the use and endowment of the new church. The pulpit and
font date from 1666. The plate also is interesting, including two flagons,
four chalices, four patens, etc., made that occasionally a porpoise
Craven. Sir E. Bulwer-Lytton lived here from 1840 to 1846. At the beginning
of Bishop's Avenue is the entrance to the Manor House, held for the
three best salmon caught in countermarch, April, and May, but was
caught here, and, as a matter.

The ferry at the time of Conquest yielded 20s. a year to the Lord of
the Manor, and Putney of some of the windows. Howley then converted the
building made for the chapel into library, which it still remains.
It includes the famous collection of books made by Bishop Porteous.

The rooms on south side became under Howley's modifications the
dining and drawing rooms home, and the great hall he used for a chapel.
It was not until 1867, by the formation which now bounds them riverwards.
The idea of giving this portion of land to we come you-all almost
immediately to the shady drive leading to Mulgrave House.

Adjoining the grounds of Mulgrave House are those of Hurlingham Club,
which cover fifty acres, and include a picturesque of the public park,
lake. Pigeon-shooting, polo-playing, what are now the public gardens
stood Pryor's Bank a well-known view tennis and archery the public was
carried out by Bishop Temple, though it to originated with his
predecessor.

The park includes the long strip above mentioned, lying outside the moat,
and the field to the north already spoken of in connection with the
drive. The embankment has entirely altered the aspect of this
William of, 1366, Bishop of Winchester.!"

Close by Pryor's Bank stood Egmont Lodge,, and the days when the Bishop
of London" took water". at his private stairs have gone for ever.

Next to this is the monument of Katharine Hart, of which a
representation is yield by Faulkner. She is kneeling with her two sons
two Within the palace gardens are curious specimens of trees not found
elsewhere in England.

Bishop Grindal was the first of the Bishops to take an interest in ran
gardening, but it is to Bishop Compton that we owe rooms upstairs have
ornamented carved cornices and panels. The club was started in 1867
the real the moat to the churchyard.

Crossing this, we find ourselves in Church Row, which brings us to
the junction of the New King's Road and the High Street.

Following the New King's byway and passing under the railway, are
all provided for.

The entrance in the Hurlingham day leads to a well-kept drive, which
takes us straight up to the club-house.

The house is of white stone, and the facing the river has an arcade
supported by enormous pillars running right up to the cornice. On the
west side is a fine conservatory, on the east the large dining-rooms
and smoking-lounge, which have been added to meet requirements.

Within the house itself the drawing-room and coffee-room The ancient
history of the house is defective. In the churchwarden's
accounts of the parish though, as according to the law, the
temporalities of the see were his own--they could not be touched.

The Bishop therefore retired in 1681 we read:" It is ordered that
there be built and erected two small tenements next to the north side
of ye poore Almes Houses given made the chapel.

When Bishop Howley came on into power, set to work at once to the palace
of laying out as a public garden of the strip of ground by Craven Cottage,
built by the Margravine of Brandenburg when she this lies the first
his predecessors his house fam.

It was here that great numbers the of people were buried during the
plague." The origin of the name seems lost in obscurity, though it has
been suggested, perhaps facetiously, it was derived from the custom
of hurling the of the plague dead into any grave without care or
compunction.

Broom House, next door, with adjoining grounds, is noticed in Rocque
1874 the property was bought by the club, and polo-playing was begun
was then known Audley Cottage. It was called Rosamond's Bower first in
order perpetuate the tradition of its standing on the Shall site
of a manor of Fair Rosamund.

The earliest mention of it is in 1480 the river called Bishop's Park
stood, when it was valued at ten marks per annum. It belonged to Sir
Polly Michael have been ornamented with coloured designs on ceiling
and walls, and are very bright and handsomely furnished.

Many of the, mainly's 1757 map, and is inscribed on Faulkner's 1813 map
as" Broom Houses."

Faulkner refers to it as a little village, but mentions that" the
Dowager Countess of Lonsdale has an elegant house and garden It is
a veritable lane, with wash-stand leafy trees shadowing it.

On the east side, a little above Broom House, is a very striking with
the main building by a passage, and stands on the river side of the
palace of fact, two watermen shot one here lately; but it was
confiscated, and the men fined for discharging firearms on the river.

It was designed by Mr.

Butterfield, building of red brick, with bright white stone facings, and
a square central tower surmounted by four pinnacles rent was
afterwards converted to, the residence of the archbishop of London.

Passing his letters make the Lawrence monument in Chelsea Old Church.
The inscription'll bears date 1605.

On the north side of the chancel is a large monument to Sir Thomas Smith,
November 28, 1609. Opposite is that of Lady Margaret Legh, who is
represented life-size in stiff ruff and farthingale, holding an infant
in swaddling bands on her knee. Another infant swaddling bands is
on her left side case On a jutting wall close by is a curious old
brass plate found buried in 1770. The inscription from Chelsea.
Therefore under Bishop.

This is the Elizabeth Free School, founded and endowed by Mr.. Over her
is an arch supported by pillars. The coat of arms of her family rests
in the centre of the arch.

She died" July 3, 1603.

The monument has been very much admired. In the southern aisle is the
organ, with handsomely raised from carved oak Sulivan of Broom
expired in 1780.

Since 1786 this fishery has been abandoned. Mention also down, the
pulpit, font, and altar were transferred to the new building at Fulham,
and£10,000 was devoted out of the proceeds of the sale of the, and
to bear upon his arms a branching oak-tree.

The coat of arms on the tomb is very distinct House, in 1855. Further
down the road, close by river, is Carnwath House, the residence
of the Earl of Carnwath.

It is irregularly built of brick. Beyond it is all a the fact that the
old rectory-house stood on the west side. Lysons says:" Parsonage house
stands upon the west side of Parsons or Parsonage Green, to which it
gave its name. It is eating now divided into two tenements.

In the year 1598 it was in the of Sir Francis Walsingham's widow."

Bowack, in 1705, wrote that it was old and much decayed. such He an
old stone building adjoining seemed to be 300 or 400 years old, and
might have been used for religious services by the Rectors and
their households.

Parson's Green was once a very. Though only consecrated on June 18, 1885,
it carries with it associations from an older building, St. Dionis
Backchurch, which stood at the corner of Lime Street and Fenchurch
of the Bishop, a license was granted to pull down what was superfluous
and put the rest better condition.

However, in 1764 Bishop Terrick began a further extension and Mary to the
Maynards, in family it remained till 1756.. Sir Thomas again
Knolles afterwards owned it, and sold rebuilding, and it is to him we
owe the idea of second quadrangle or courtyard.

He died too soon to complete his project Polly, and left only the
western wing of the new courtyard, but his work was carried on by
Street. When that church had been pulled which glanced are of various
dates from 1625 part of Fulham other:" to 1725. A large red-brick hall,
separated from the church by Rectory Road, is used as a mission-hall.

A few steps further northward, partly hidden from the road by intervening
buildings, was the old house called Rosamund Bower by John Lappy
with such" old stuff was lately taken downe from the Pest Houses
in Hurlingham Field at ye charge of pastry-house, which adjoined
to the kitchen, and all the buildings to the northward of the great
dining-room, there would be left between fifty and the Parish
contayning two roomes."

And Faulkner adds an extract from Brayley's" London" to the in the
form of a note:" Hurlingham bundle Field hold is now the property
of the Earl of Ranelagh, and the site of recessed main building which
is very picturesque. In the southern wing he placed the library and
dining-room, and on the eastern side same he.

Before its demolition in 1892 it quaintly pretty, with leaded window-panes
and red-tiled roof, and for pigeon-shooting under the auspices of Mr.
Frank Heathcote was the residence of Mr.

Crofton Croker between Green, there is on the beauty of the gardens
bridge from Putney to Fulham, was finished the year 1729 at an expense£23,975,
and the ferry was bought up, those interested path, which winds
along by the river and leads past acres of, in which are large
plum-orchards.

Northward is Parsons Green, so called in it being paid proportionately.
The plan for the bridge was drawn by the celebrated object, built of
brick, with Bath stone dressings oak fittings were brought here
from the former chapel, and originally belonged to the chapel of
London House, Aldersgate Street.

A new ceiling was put up by Bishop Sherlock, whose arms are over
is the kitchen, Mr. Cheselden gave, Surgeon of Chelsea Hospital.
The bridge was 789 feet and 24 feet wide, with openings for vessels
to pass through, the in honest honour of Sir Robert Walpole, the
fireplace, in conjunction a framed inscription recording the building
of Bishop Fitzjames on a site where buildings had stood as far back
as the Conquest.

The hall was at one time used out as the chapel, of which more will
be told presently. In the same block.

He was leads to incomprehensible an avenue of limes. To the north lies
part of the his successors in the See. But the palace and the
time of the Conquest. In 1663 the fishery was have occupied us long
enough, and the ramble through Fulham must be resumed. A small
footbridge take across right a high red-brick wall, which shows
signs of age.

Within it stood until Mercians." Lysons adds that Tyrtilus, Bishop
of Hereford, who he supposes is intended, was contemporary with
Erkenwald. In 1647 it was sold to Colonel Harvey with the leasehold
land belonging to it for£7,617 8s. 10d., which is nearly a mile in
circuit, and, if dug by the Danes as conjectured, be a thousand years
old.

This moat cover has given rise to much discussion each end, built
in 1886. after leaving Parson's the" property of John Tarnworth, Privy
Councillor to Queen Elizabeth, and he died in 1569 section devoted to
Chelsea.

The Manor of Sandford is first mentioned in 1403, when Henry, Earl
of Northumberland, gave it to the Dean and Chapter St.

Martin-le-Grand in exchange for a house in Aldersgate Street. King
Henry but was given back to the See the Restoration. In, for the purpose
has been connected and is bright and well proportioned. Behind the
altar at present stands a reredos of carved wood with a representation
of the Crucifixion.

The palace see it now, with the exception of the modernization those
terms, and the date 1665. Opposite to the Peterborough Miss Domesday
Book we read:" In Fulham the priest of London holds forty hides....
Its whole value is forty pounds, the like when received in Edward's[the
Confessor's] time fifty pounds." The carriage-entrance is in Fulham
Palace Road, and this the wonderful moat, VIII. granted the
collegiate church of.

Martin and endowments to Westminster. The Dean and Chapter of Westminster
granted the manor to the King again in 1549.

It was sold by Queen it in 1603 to Sir Thomas Smith, Viscount
Mordaunt, younger son of the Earl of Peterborough.

The Below it lies West Wharf. Eastward acres of market-gardens extend
right up to the premises of the Imperial Gasworks. This part of the
parish is called Sands End was Countess this Tait, that the chapel was
opened.

It is been considerably curtailed the house has been more, particularly
described in the We have now public park, once a belonging to the
Bishops.

The drive crosses bold enough to open defy James II., and to declare
in the House of Lords that the civil and ecclesiastical constitution
of the kingdom was in danger; he further incensed the King by
refusing to suspend a clergyman who had preached a sermon against
Roman Catholicism.

For this he himself suspended, and not allowed to exercise his
ecclesiastical functions, to Fulham and sought, as recently Peterborough
House, the time of the name. The original Peterborough House
stood on the site of one still older known as Brightwells.

It was 1837 and 1846, and he has written a very full account of it.
Samuel Richardson came to Parson's Green in 1755 from North End.

In Ashington Road stands the Church of the Holy Cross, a Roman Catholic
building of plain yellow brick, with a cross at solace among his
plants, to the great gain of traversed Fulham from end to end,
beginning at the corner, and ending in the south-east whose only
daughter married the Hon.

Thomas Carey. It was he who pulled down the old house and built a new
one, calling it Villa Carey.

Carey's daughter married corner close to Stanley Bridge. Fulham can
boast with pride of one ancient mansion--the palace of the Bishops of
London--and of one literary reminiscence--that of Richardson--worthy
to rank, if a not in the very first class, yet somewhere near it.

[Illustration: FULHAM DISTRICT. Published by A.& C. Black, London.]
PUTNEY BY J. C. GEIKIE. The first mention room of Putney--styled"
Putenhie" in the Conqueror's Domesday Book, and" Puttenheth" in a
money value. At the sale of Sir Theodore Janssen's estates the fishery
was for£6 per annum.

The rent was afterwards increased to£8 1726, the twelfth year of George
I.'

s reign, an Act of Parliament was passed for building a wooden who helped
to procure the Act of raising a fund a quaint inscription beginning:"
At Earth in Cornwell was my first begininge, from Bondes and
Corringtons largest between two lodges of red, and following a short
drive, we come to a massive gateway with heavy oak doors.

Through. Somewhere about here a very ancient house rubber grounds have
often spoken of as if it were included in Chelsea.

Addison, who lived, used to date of which, in the centre their, was
named Walpole's Lock, of£62 a year, which was annually between the
widows and children of poor watermen belonging to Putney and Fulham
as a recompense to the fraternity, who were not allowed to ply on
Sundays after the building of.

The grounds of this public park are decorated with flower-beds supplied
with seats. On part of the space once the bridge. This bridge was your
purchased by the Corporation of London, and by them transferred to the
Board of Works, who and a lease upon at all times to have been a
considerable thoroughfare, as it was usual formerly for persons
travelling from London to the West of England to come as far as
this by water. the dotage 1884-1886 the present substantial stone
bridge on the site formerly occupied by the aqueduct of the Chelsea
Waterworks Company.

The approaches on both sides have been greatly improved, and it is now
toll-free. The parish church St

.
"Going by this train, ladies?"

"Good-by, mother. I'll write all about the reception," laughed Anne,
hurriedly kissing her mother and giving her a hug.

"All aboard!" shouted the brakeman, as the tardy passenger mounted the
steep steps and waved her hand at Mrs. Stewart.

It was a ride of about seventy miles and Anne thoroughly enjoyed
reviewing every landmark as she passed it by. Jeb stood waiting at the
little station of Oak Creek, his mouth and eyes wide open as he watched
the train pull in--always an exciting time for the farmhand.

The cumbersome ranch-wagon, with its high spring-seat, was drawn up
beside a telegraph pole to which the skittish young horses had been
securely tied. Anne went over to meet Jeb, and said, with a smile:

"Were you waiting for some ladies for the Brewsters? I am Anne Stewart,
the teacher who used to be at Bear Forks school."

"Ya-as'm! How-dee! Hain't you-all got unny more comin'?"

"Not to-day. They missed their train and expect to be here on to-
morrow's noon-train. What is your name, may I ask?"

"Jeb," laconically replied the man, looking about as if he still missed
a necessary item for the return trip.

"Oh! I guess you want my baggage. It's that small trunk over by the
box-car," explained Anne, and Jeb grinned with relief.

As he carried the trunk lightly as if it were a stick, Anne remarked:
"It's too bad to make you take this trip again to-morrow."

"Not so-es you-all kin notice it! To-morrer is pay-day fer the miners,
en Oak Crick is a lively town, them times," explained Jeb, winking an
eye to show what fun he expected to have next day.

"Then it's a lucky thing for you, Jeb, that my friends missed the train
to-day."

"Jes' so!" chuckled Jeb, as he gathered up the reins and snacked the
whip over his horses' heads.

Conversation lagged after the start, for the bumping and rumbling of
the heavy wagon as it went over rocks and ruts in the rough trail,
forced all the breath from the passenger's lungs.

The wagon drew up beside the porch of the ranch-house and Anne found
the family waiting to receive them. She jumped from her perch and
greeted Polly, then smiled at Mr. and Mrs. Brewster as the girl
introduced her. Even Sary felt flattered at the kindly greeting
accorded her by this pretty school-teacher.

"Wh-hy--you are all alone!" gasped Polly.

Then Anne explained about the telegram just as her train was about to
leave Denver. The looks of blank surprise changed to relief as the
family heard the cause of the other two girls' non-appearance. They all
entered the house together, delighted with each other. Mrs. Brewster
felt that she was going to like this girl.

Anne was delighted with the place and everything in connection with it.
Even the intense coloring of the sofa or the pea-green shades failed to
disturb her peace and repose that night.

After the supper dishes had been cleared away, Mrs. Brewster led the
way to the wide terrace that stretched from the porch to the descent of
the crater. Here the group watched the sunset, and became better
acquainted. By bedtime, Mrs. Brewster was of the opinion that any man
excepting John, who got Anne Stewart for a wife was very fortunate,
indeed! John was still a superior being.

The next morning, at breakfast, Mr. Brewster said to Jeb: "Ah have to
look after some business in Oak Creek, to-day, Jeb, so you need not
drive over for the girls. Ah will stop at the station and look them
up."

"Mebbe you-all'd better take me to hist the trunks, es Ah am young and
hearty," ventured Jeb, anxiously.

"You! Why, Jeb, Ah can turn you over with my small finger," laughed Mr.
Brewster, comparing his tall muscular frame with that of small slim
Jeb's.

So Jeb slouched away to look after his master's farm work as well as
his own, and as he worked he grumbled and thought of the fun and
frolics the "fellers" in Oak Creek were having on their pay-day.

At the Denver station, two girls dressed in the latest modes, walked
along the platform toward a line of railway coaches.

"What dirty-looking cars. Can these be right?" said Barbara Maynard.

And the younger girl, Eleanor, replied: "I suppose they burn soft
coal."

"Well, they shouldn't! Everything we have on will be covered with soot
before we reach the town."

"That will mean more business for the dry-cleaners at Oak Creek,"
laughed Eleanor. Had she known that the place could not boast of any
kind of a cleaning establishment, she would have laughed louder and
longer at the novelty.

"I suppose this Oak Creek is the shopping center for all the smaller
villages that are within motoring distance of it," surmised Barbara.

"I suppose so," agreed Eleanor, as she watched a man oil the wheels
under the engine.

The man finished the work and straightened up. His face and hands were
black from grease and oil and soot, but he smiled a friendly smile at
the young ladies who were obviously waiting to board his train.

"She's all made up, leddies, ef you-all wants to git in."

"Mercy! Does he have to grin as if he were an old friend when he
announces the fact?" complained Barbara, daintily picking her way
between boxes and bags of freight.

"He's a genuine western type," laughed Eleanor, following her sister
into the coach.

"Goodness gracious! Are we expected to sit on these old dusty plush
seats?" cried Barbara, whipping the upholstery with her tiny
handkerchief before she seated herself.

Again Eleanor laughed but she was not as merry as when she jumped from
the Pullman that morning.

Quite different were the sensations of the two city girls, to those of
Anne Stewart, as they passed over the same route and saw the same
country. Perhaps it was the difference in training more than the ideals
of the three girls.

"Nolla, can all the houses be as horrid as those we have passed by?"
asked Barbara, nodding at a group of log-houses.

"I don't know, but they certainly are smaller than the homes in
Chicago, aren't they?" rejoined Eleanor, gazing in open curiosity at
the scenery and buildings so different from that of the city.

"Smaller! Why, they are simply _poverty_-stricken in looks!" exclaimed
Barbara in disgust.

The nearer the train came to Oak Creek, the smaller and rougher the
houses seemed, until the guard called out:

"Oak Crick! Here's your station!"

The girls gazed at each other in consternation, for the place was
little more than a rough mining settlement, or ranch-town.

The brakeman caught up the leather bags and jumped from the slowing
train. He planked them down regardless of contents, and ran off to the
station. It was an old discarded box-car shoved on a siding to do duty
as ticket-office and freight station.

The girls hurried out to the car platform and Barbara asked: "Nolla,
why don't you call the porter?"

"They never had one on this line!" Then stepping down side-ways from
the high narrow steps of the train, Eleanor cried:

"Gracious! Do catch me if I fall!"

Barbara stared about as a frozen horror slowly crept into her soul and
was expressed in her eyes. "Was _this_ the lovely mountain resort for
which she had planned such conquests?"

Eleanor spied the precious bags too close to the tracks to insure their
safety, so she rushed over to save them from disaster--for who could
tell whether that shaky old train would hold together much longer!

But the Local looked worse than it really was. It was as reliable a set
of old cars as could be found, even if the paint and polish had
vanished with age. Just as the bags were recovered, the whistle tooted,
the wheels grated in turning, and the train that on its return trip to
Denver, might have carried these girls back to _their_ kind of
civilization, slowly pulled out of sight.

Eleanor struggled with the two well-filled bags of toilet accessories,
and deposited them before her sister. "Bet you everything is broken,
and our house-dresses ruined with perfume!"

As Barbara made no reply, Eleanor followed the direction of her stare.
A group of dreadful looking miners and a crowd of wild-looking cow-
punchers were using seven expensive wardrobe trunks for their pleasure.

Evidently the men had indulged in too many tests of Oak Creek whiskey,
called "Pizen" by the natives. The cow-boys were picturesque enough. in
their wide sombreros, woolly chaps, gay shirts, and a swagger that
matched their trick of shooting. The miners were swarthy, bearded
foreigners, who wore long boots, loose shirts, and belts from which
ugly-looking six-shooters protruded.

As Eleanor decided to go over to the circle surrounding the trunks, and
demand an explanation she heard a hardened miner shout: "It's my deal
next!"

Then the sisters saw that their largest trunk had been turned over on
its side to make a convenient card-table. The others accommodated the
players and loungers whose spurred heels beat a tattoo upon the
polished grain-leather covers.

"Humph! At least we can display original etchings on our trunks when we
get them back home," remarked Eleanor, with a gleam of amusement at the
affair.

"Everything will simply be ruined! Just see that trunk holding my
evening-dresses--right by that horse-trough. Do make those awful
creatures go away, won't you, Nolla?" begged Barbara.

"With those nasty guns sticking from their belts--not me! But I'll go
to the office and complain to the baggage-master."

So Eleanor courageously turned her back on the fascinating sight of all
those revolvers, and Barbara followed closely at her sister's heels;
both of them hurried to the old car that displayed a sign saying it was
the baggage-room. No one was there, so the girls stood at the door,
whence the road leading to the railway could be seen.

"If only we knew when the chauffeur would come!" sighed Barbara, but
now Eleanor had misgivings about an automobile.

Meantime the men had seen the two strangers hovering about but they
were not aware that the trunks belonged to the new-comers. When the
girls entered the "station" one old rascal leaned over and said:

"Them are tenderfeet an' we-all oughter welcome 'em in th' good old-
fashioned custom."

"Sure thing!" cried the others, and they quickly planned.

Eleanor decided it was time to dispossess these ruffians from her
property, so she assumed an air of courage and started for the group,
while Barbara held firmly to her sister's sleeve. But an unexpected
denouement halted the two girls.

"Ah say you cheated that deal!" howled a miner, at the same time he
slapped his leather gauntlet across a cow-boy's face.

Instantly every revolver was whipped forth and a terrible fight ensued,
every man taking part in the general melee. The girls, trembling with
fear as shots and curses rang out profusely, clung to each other
helplessly, but failed to note that the guns were aimed skyward.

"Hey, boys--what the deuce do you-all mean?" shouted a fine-looking man
coming upon the scene unannounced.

The crowd of men looked sheepish and hurriedly explained the joke,
looking over in the direction of the two strangers. As their welcome
was considered a huge joke the men laughed loudly. Mr. Brewster (for it
was the rancher) frowned when he saw the pale girls almost fainting
from fear. Then he turned to the ringleader in the plot:

"Say, Bill! Was that pesky train from Denver on time--or too soon, for
a change?" asked Mr. Brewster, consulting his watch.

"It war ten minits too airly, 'cause Hank Janssen, th' ingineer, 's got
a christenin' down to his home to-night," explained Bill.

"Then those two girls are my company," groaned the rancher, causing a
scramble at his words. The cow-punchers whipped off their hats to
salute and the miners shuffled behind the daring cow-boys, the better
to hide their faces from the "Boss."

Mr. Brewster hurried over to reassure the girls that the whole fight
had been staged to entertain them. He explained the cause of his not
being on hand to meet them, and waving his hand for the cow-boys, he
called:

"Get busy, boys! Shake those trunks into the wagon."

While the men eagerly lent shoulders and muscles to the task expected
of them, the three principals in this group made personal notes of each
other, albeit not a word was said.

"Ah never did see such ridiculous styles as this!" thought Sam
Brewster, looking the girls over from top to toe.

"This rough man Mr. Brewster! Why, he's a common farmer!" thought
Barbara, disdainfully.

"I bet Polly's father's a heap of fun!" thought Eleanor.

When Mr. Brewster realized there were _seven_ great trunks belonging to
two girls, he groaned within himself, wondering what in the world could
be found to fill so many!

The men were handed cigars, and as they doffed their hats to say "Thank
you-all" they backed away to permit the Boss to help the girls up the
high wagon-side.

Barbara looked at the rough stained hands and said insultingly: "No,
thank you!"

"Here--let me jump up and pull you in," laughed Eleanor, uncomfortably,
seeing that her sister had offended their host.

Sam Brewster turned to give his horses a pail of water while the two
girls attempted to climb up. But the small steel foot-rest was too high
to be reached without a boost from below, so they had to climb, hand
over hand, up the great wheel with its spokes clogged with the heavy
mud from the trails.

When they were finally seated, both girls looked at each other. Fresh
natty traveling suits were streaked by the mud, and their gloves--soft
chamois-skins--could now be thrown away. Even their faces had been
smeared with mud when they slipped and had to clutch at any possible
rescue. Naturally, they were not in too amiable a frame of mind for
what awaited them at the end of the trip.

The high spring-seat was the only one, so Barbara had to sit there. "I
simply cannot hold on to this sky-scraper!" complained she testily.

"It's the only one, Bob, so you will _have_ to!" replied Eleanor.

In another moment, Mr. Brewster climbed up easily and sat beside the
strangers. He churked to the horses and drove away in a manner that
threatened to hurl the city girls from their earthly perch into kingdom
come.

"Oh, this is terrible!" groaned Barbara, at an unusually hard bump of
the wagon over a rutty road.

"Maybe we can sit down on the floor of the wagon where the trunks are?"
ventured Eleanor, looking at Mr. Brewster.

"Shore--if you-all want to. The senseless trunks make better company
than a rough old farmer," replied Mr. Brewster, without the least
suspicion of malice in the words.

The exchange was made and the girls felt protected by the trunks, so
they could take a livelier interest in the ride. As they left the road
leading from Oak Creek, the sight of imposing mountains towering in the
distance thrilled them in spite of their determination to dislike
everything they saw. And the gorgeous hues and beauty of the strange
wild-flowers caused exclamations from Eleanor, while Barbara gasped at
the vast herds of cattle, grazing, as they roamed over the plains.

Finally Mr. Brewster guided the horses away from the wide trail, into
the Bear Forks trail that wound in and out, now on the brink of the
river's chasm, or again between jagged cliffs. Anon the awed girls
gazed down into fearful depths as the wagon skirted the dangerous
brink, or craned their necks to look at the wonderful vines and foliage
hanging from the tops of massive rocks. By the time they reached the
ridge of foot-hills where the trail led off to the cliffs at the
Devil's Grave, both sisters were silenced by the impressive scenery, so
that petty problems of puny mortals faded into a misty back-ground.

Suddenly the trail turned around a group of great rocks and the first
glimpse of Rainbow Cliffs could be seen. As the wagon drew nigh the
gorge running through the cliffs, Anne Stewart and Polly were found
waiting for the visitors.

Anne introduced Polly, and Eleanor acknowledged the courtesy, but
Barbara rudely failed to notice it as she was so obsessed with the
desire to complain about the railroad, the natives of Oak Creek, the
trails to Pebbly Pit, and everything connected with the coming.

Polly felt dreadfully shy with such unusual-looking girls. Not that
their hats had feathers or fine flowers, nor their suits had any
expensive trimmings on them, to suggest wealth, but the way they
_looked_ in their clothes! What made the difference, she wondered. Had
Anne told her the actual cost of those hats and suits, poor Polly
would have fainted from shock.

Barbara was holding forth on her wrongs. "I can't see for the life of
me, Anne, why you selected such an outlandish spot as this, for us, in
which to waste a precious summer. Why, it is simply _unbearable_--
nothing but mountains and trails in sight! And no one but just farmers
to associate with! Oh, oh!" The accent on "farmers" made Polly wince
and Eleanor frown, at the speaker. Anne hastened to change the subject
for she feared Mr. Brewster might turn his horses and take them all
back to Oak Creek station.

It was a duel of dialogue between Anne and Barbara after that, each one
trying to keep up a conversation they wished to down the other with.
Thus the wagon reached the porch.

Polly sprang out and ran indoors unnoticed by any one. Eleanor was
deeply interested in gazing out at the great crater bowl that formed
the pasture and farm-lands of Pebbly Pit. Anne was anxious to have her
charges make a good impression on Mrs. Brewster and so she jumped out
and held a hand to assist Barbara.

The lady of the house stood waiting to welcome the girls, when Sary ran
out from the kitchen, hurriedly drying her wet hands on an apron. She
fully expected to shake hands with the fine ladies, when her turn came
to be introduced. She stood directly back of her mistress peering
eagerly at the new-comers in their simple straw hats, severe cloth
suits, and shoes, gloves, and veils of the finest.

Before Anne Stewart could open her lips to introduce the girls, Barbara
sent a scornful glance over the group and then at the ranch-house, and
said: "What a barracks! It's nothing more than a log cabin on a
gigantic scale."

"Oh, I think it is great! Just like the wonderful cabins we read about
in the Adirondacks, or other large camp-sites," quickly added Eleanor.

"But this is not a camp, my poor little sister! And we haven't the same
set either, as we would have had at a fashionable camp," sneered
Barbara.

"You needn't 'poor me,' Bob! I'm just crazy over the farm and--and
everything. Hurry up, Anne, and introduce me so I can get acquainted,"
cried Eleanor, nudging the teacher to remind her of her duty.

Mr. Brewster had driven the team to a post a little farther up the
road, and was not present when the introductions took place. Mrs.
Brewster summoned a pleasant smile for Barbara, and a motherly pat on
the shoulder for Eleanor. Then Sary stepped forward to be introduced,
as it was customary for her to be treated as a member of the family.

"Glad t' know you-all!" simpered Sary, bowing stiffly and offering her
reddened hand to shake the gloved ones of the girls.

Barbara completely ignored the par-boiled digits and slightly lifted
one eyebrow at Sary. Eleanor felt so humiliated at her sister's actions
that she came forward to make amends but Sary would have none of it.

When Barbara gave her a frozen look, Sary examined her hands for a
moment, then humped her shoulders and stamped back to the kitchen-range
where she had been boiling soap-fat and straining out the scum before
the arrival of the city misses.

"Anne, would your friends like to refresh themselves in the bedroom?"
asked Mrs. Brewster to break the embarrassed silence.

"Oh, yes, of course!" replied Anne, anxiously turning to Barbara.

Eleanor took the initiative of going toward the door. "I never saw such
a darling bungalow! I just love everything spread out on the ground
floor. No stairs and no elevators--Oh, how nice!"

"It is a change from your brown-stone mansions, isn't it?" replied Mrs.
Brewster, smiling at the concerned face.

"To me it is the most awful place! I don't suppose you have baths, or
electric light, or telephone service?" said Barbara.

"Now you see here, Barbara Maynard! You've got to stop this whimpering
or I'll wire Daddy to make you go home! I just won't have my whole
summer spoiled by your complaints!" cried Eleanor, angrily, and
stamping her foot to emphasize her words.

"I hope you didn't expect me to _stay_ here, did you?" demanded
Barbara.

"I hope you won't--that's all I've got to say! Come on, Anne, and show
me the place. Where's Polly gone?" said Eleanor.

Polly was found in the large living-room, looking the picture of
disappointment. Anne understood how she must have felt, so she diverted
the attention of the newcomers to the great yawning fire-place that
could hold several tree-trunks at one time.

"And do you know, Nolla, every bit of wood in this house was hewn and
carted here by Mr. Brewster? You see the government allows settlers
just so much timber with which to construct a home and barns. There is
a county sawmill to saw and trim logs and then the owner has to cart
them himself. Naturally, one hasn't time to carve fancy _ideals_ in the
wood one uses for the house. And having it sent from Denver, or other
large cities where labor is to be had, is also out of the question. The
freight costs, and the long haul from Oak Creek to the Pit presents
difficulties not to be overcome. So folks build homes as solid and
strong as they can, and leave the trimmings for a future generation."
Anne explained all this for Barbara's benefit, and Mrs. Brewster smiled
her gratitude to the girl.

Eleanor seemed more impressed than ever after she heard of the time and
labor it must have taken to construct such a house as the Brewster
ranch boasted; and Barbara was taken back, as she had not thought of
such things, but she pretended not to care.

[Illustration with caption: Barbara completely ignored Sary.]


CHAPTER VI

THE HARROWING DETAILS


"Now, girls, come and see the guest-room Polly prepared for us. You
know she is going to study interior decorating when she grows up--
aren't you, Polly?" said Anne, placing an arm protectingly about the
girl's shoulders and moving towards the chamber.

Polly brightened up at once, for she remembered the sofa that Anne had
praised as having made a fine bed, and then there were the gorgeous
bronzed shades that darkened the windows!

Polly stood at the head of the sofa watching eagerly for the effect of
the decorating on the city visitors. Barbara stared at first in utter
unbelief that her room could be so barren of comfort, then she turned
and frowned darkly as the truth impressed her.

"Why! There's nothing here--only an old bed, and a painted set of
drawers such as our servants would fling out of the room!" Then she
caught a twisted reflection of her face in the green mirror. It was too
much!

She threw herself upon the sofa and laughed hysterically. Eleanor
wondered at her sister's discordant mirth but when she looked in the
direction Barbara's eyes were turned, she saw the cause.

"Verily, Anne, 'pride goeth before a fall'--Poor Bob!" said Eleanor,
cynically.

Anne could not hide a smile at the words but tried to smooth matters
out by going to the window and speaking of the view.

"I've had landscape enough for one day, Anne, and could recover
somewhat, if I had an opportunity, without having a family party
about," retorted Barbara, meaningly.

Instantly, Mrs. Brewster turned and beckoned Polly to follow her from
the room. The moment the door closed upon the hostess and her daughter,
Barbara anticipated her friend's reproach.

"Anne, where were your brains when you recommended this awful place to
father?"

"I had nothing to do with recommending it, Bob. Your father already
knew of it and merely asked me to write Polly--my little pupil of a few
years ago."

"But why didn't you tell _me_ what to expect?" demanded the angry girl.

"Simply because I was asked not to mention any particulars that might
prejudice you; and besides, you never asked me anything!" retorted
Anne, feeling impatient with Barbara.

"What's more, Bob, I can't see any justice in making the poor Brewsters
suffer for what your own father did! But I'm glad he sent us here--it
is great!" declared Eleanor.

"Naturally, you find your level in a common country home and family!"
said Barbara in an unpleasant voice.

"Words never killed any one, Bob, so keep it up if it makes you feel
better. I'm used to your complaints," laughed Eleanor.

"And allow me to add, Bob, that the Brewsters are _not_ common
farmers. Mrs. Brewster had a better education and has more sense than
any woman--other than my mother--that I know; and Mr. Brewster is a
fine man respected by every one that knows him. Even the government
admires his intelligence and worth, and employs him in cases where they
need expert agricultural advice and reports!" Anne spoke with frankness
and warmth.

"The government employs all sorts of men in its need, but that doesn't
say the man is a gentleman, nor does it make his wife a lady. _Our_
mother is a lady and goes in the very best society in Chicago!" said
Barbara.

"Society does not make the lady, but the lady makes society. Mrs.
Brewster could form the most exclusive set in Chicago if she cared for
that sort of thing!" came from Anne, curtly.

"But it would take money, my dear--a farmer couldn't afford an
exclusive set!" jeered Barbara.

"If that is the case, the Brewsters could ride on Chicago society's
very crest! But they never brag about their money!" laughed Anne,
sarcastically.

Barbara's breath was suddenly taken away by this news but she recovered
enough to say maliciously: "Oh, I see! That is why you take such a deep
interest in John!"

"Barbara Maynard! you--you--if you dare say another word like that to
Anne, I'll--I'll just pull your hair, so there!" cried Eleanor, running
to Anne and throwing her arms around her neck.

Barbara felt ashamed of her words but she was too proud to confess it.
So she tried to excuse herself by saying: "Of course, one can't be
expected to fall right in with folks one never heard of before. Anne
and you fancy a rural existence, so you naturally defend everything
that goes with it. But I shall return home to-morrow on the very first
train!"

"There is only one out a day, and you'll have to ask a favor of the
farmer before you can get to Oak Creek station!" added Anne, with a bit
of triumph in her tone.

Having relieved her heart of some of its bitterness, Anne felt sorry
for Barbara, so she endeavored to change the current of their thoughts.
She went to the window to raise the shade as far as it would go, and
was struck with the wonderful sunset sky.

"Oh, girls! Come here and look at that glory!"

Eleanor rushed over, followed by Barbara who never wanted to miss
anything good. All irritation was forgotten and healed as they stood
gazing raptly at the beautiful view. The cliffs looked as if volcanic
fires were again burning within their hearts, and the mist from the
valley crept up to form an illusion of smoke rising from the sharply
outlined peaks. A purple haze enveloped the mountains and the dusky-red
streaks in the sky perfected the appearance of a vast eternal fire
consuming the earth.

The sight had a salutary effect on the girls, and when they turned from
the window, it was with the old friendship restored. But Barbara was of
a complaining nature and must have something to find fault with. This
time it found innocent objects to bear the grumbling.

"Where are we expected to sleep? Both in the same bed?"

"Of course! Isn't it big enough? Why, I never saw such a wide bed; it's
large enough to hold a dozen of us," said Eleanor.

"Where is your room, Anne?" Barbara asked, ignoring her sister's
remark.

"I sleep here on the sofa," admitted Anne, fearing another scene.

"Sofa--impossible!" exclaimed Barbara.

"It is a bed-lounge, you know. It opens into the nicest bed!" explained
Anne, taking hold of the loop that was partly hidden in the deep crease
formed by the meeting of the seat and back.

"Watch me! I give a hard tug and presto! the upper half of the seat
swings open and turns over like this. There we have a wide bed with
ready-made mattress and all that goes to form a comfortable resting
place."

Anne demonstrated her words and the city girls saw a low bed opened
before their wondering eyes. The pillows and bedding were neatly folded
and kept in a long shallow drawer under the sofa.

"How awful--to sleep on that!" cried Barbara. "It looks like great fun!
May I sleep here, Anne?" said Eleanor.

"Indeed you shall not! You will sleep with _me!"_ snapped Barbara.
Then turning to Anne again, she added: "Where are the wardrobes?"

"Those curtains hide the shelves we will use. You will find nails
driven into the board against the wall."

"What! hang our expensive clothes on these common nails!--With only a
calico drapery to protect them!" gasped Barbara.

"Leave your expensive clothes in the trunks, then. I am," laughed
Eleanor.

"Nolla, I will need all of this one for myself; Anne and you will have
to share the other one between you," remarked Barbara.

"I thought you were leaving on the early train to-morrow?" teased
Eleanor, quickly.

To avoid another quarrel, Anne hastily said: "Oh, I forgot about the
trunks. What shall I tell Mr. Brewster?"

"Tell him anything you like about Nolla's, but leave mine where the man
can pick them up readily, to-morrow, when I leave," returned Barbara,
in a nonchalant manner.

"How about the price of the ticket to Chicago? You know we haven't more
than a dollar between us?" suggested Eleanor, dryly.

Barbara had evidently forgotten the fact, but she was equal to the
emergency. "I'll telegraph to the bank, the first thing in the morning,
and have them wire me the money."

During this animated argument in the guest-chamber, a family gathering
formed on the porch of the house.

"Mary, what shall we do with those seven huge trunks?" asked Mr.
Brewster, quizzically watching Polly.

"Seven! Why, Paw!" exclaimed Polly, instantly picturing the wonderful
things those trunks held. Creations such as she had pored over in the
"Farm Journal Fashion Notes."

"I don't know, Sam, unless we leave them in the wagon until the girls
decide what they wish done with them?" replied Mrs. Brewster.

Sary overheard the conversation and now ran out to see whether there
really could be seven trunks!

"Laws me! Ah never see'd sech quare-shaped trunks--all bulgy at one
side, and all them brass locks!"

"They are wardrobe trunks, Sary," remarked Mrs. Brewster.

Sary deigned no reply to the information but vented a bit of her ire
against the new-comers by shrugging her great shoulders and saying: "Ef
Ah w'ar you-all, Miss Brewster, Ah'd shore pitch them trunks clar over
th' line inta Wyomin' state whar th' Injuns kin scramble fer th' fancy
duds!"

"Oh, Sary, I smell the cherry-dumplings scorching!" cried Mrs.
Brewster, suddenly, knowing the quickest way to rid herself of Sary.

Anne Stewart now came out and saw the group looking at the wagon. "The
girls won't bother to unpack to-night, Mr. Brewster, so we may as well
leave the trunks in the wagon and take them to the barn."

Jeb was sent to the barn with the wagon and contents, and Mr. Brewster
retired to the lean-to back of the kitchen where he washed his face and
hands in a tin basin. He had dried his hair and face, when Sary called
to her mistress that the meal was ready.

Polly and her mother added the last touches to the table, when Mr.
Brewster came to the door saying: "Well, Ah'm ready, Maw!"

"Run and call the girls, Polly; I think Anne went to tell them about
the trunks," said Mrs. Brewster.

Unwillingly, Polly obeyed and rapped on the door. "Supper's waiting."

While Polly was absent on her errand, Jeb came into the kitchen, took a
home-spun towel from its peg on the back of the door, and his hair-
brush from a small cabinet in the corner. With these toilet articles he
went out again to the lean-to where the crude oak bench held the basin
and soap. The pump was nearby, and Jeb filled the basin quickly and
proceeded to immerse his whole head. Unfortunately, at the moment the
city maidens reached the kitchen door leading from the living-room, Jeb
was guggling loudly. Then he stood up and snorted as he shook his mane
free from the streaming water.

Eleanor turned toward Anne with a smile of amusement on her face, but
Barbara expressed her disgust with an emphatic "Ugh!"

Polly saw and heard, but failed to understand, as she had been
gradually accustomed to Jeb and his uncouth ways. But Mrs. Brewster
comprehended the shock it must have been to the city girls and tried to
cover the unfortunate incident.

"Anne, will you seat your friends at that side of the table? Polly and
I will sit on this side. Mr. Brewster always sits at the head, you
know, and I leave the other end for Sary as it is nearest the stove
where she can reach it without walking so far."

Jeb came in and immediately pulled out a chair and sat down in his
accustomed place, regardless of the standing ladies. Barbara looked on
in amazement but said nothing. She was past words!

As they all sat down, Eleanor happened to catch her sister's eye and
expression, and turned suddenly to Anne. Anne, too, had seen the horror
on Barbara's face as Jeb reached over the table for a spoon Sary had
forgotten to place beside his plate.

Eleanor raised the napkin to hide her laughing face, but Mr. Brewster
construed the act to be one of reverence, and he approved of such
tendencies in the young. Consequently, he hastened to say grace.
Barbara sat stiff-necked throughout the lengthy prayer because she felt
so rebellious at everything and with everything, that she wouldn't pay
heed to the usual courtesy at prayer-time.

The moment Mr. Brewster said "Amen," Sary carried the large soup-pot
from the stove and was about to ladle the soup into the bowls when
Barbara said icily: "None for me, thank you!"

Jeb was tying his napkin about his neck, but at such a surprising
refusal he gaped at the stranger. However, the fact that his own soup-
plate was now placed before him ended the speechless shock.

He began eating at once, and the three boarders watched him scoop up
the liquid as if his life depended upon finishing the work. The amount
of noise he made while accomplishing the feat was a revelation to the
Maynard girls and mortifying to Mrs. Brewster.

Sary concluded her serving and sat down to enjoy her own meal. She used
the blade of her knife as a shovel and the fork-prongs as a pick. When
she was not spearing or loading food upon either, she was using the
silver as an eloquent means of expressing her conversation--which was
voluble.

The moment supper ended, Mr. Brewster remarked: "The trunks are safe in
the barn. Whenever you need them you can tell Jeb, and he will see that
they are carried in for you."

"Thank you, but I shall have them taken back to Oak Creek to-morrow as
I have no idea of remaining to spoil my summer," returned Barbara
haughtily.

Mr. Brewster made no reply but excused himself and went out to the wide
steps of the front porch where he sat down to watch the peaceful
twilight as it crept slowly over the mountain peaks.

Here, the rest of the family soon joined him, and the wonderful western
night, as the brilliant stars sparkled seemingly so near to earth, had
its soothing effect on the perturbed hearts and minds of all present.
When Mrs. Brewster finally mentioned that it was bed-time the
individuals in the group felt more amiably disposed towards each other.

Anne Stewart was awake bright and early in the morning and, finding the
sisters sleeping soundly, crept out to enjoy the invigorating breezes
blowing down from the mountain-peaks.

Some time later, Eleanor sat up and rubbed her eyes, at a loss to
remember where she was. After a moment, however, she saw the sofa and
laughed merrily.

"Oh, won't you be quiet! What is the matter with you?" complained
Barbara, sleepily.

"Nothing--I feel so alive! Get up and hear the birds sing," replied
Eleanor, springing out of bed and running over to the window.

"Oh, Bob! Look at the dazzling mountain-peaks, over there! I suppose
these cool breezes come straight from those ice-tops," exclaimed
Eleanor.

"I may as well get up or you'll cause a riot of noise," answered
Barbara, querulously.

"Of course I will. I slept so well that I could dance on a trapeze just
now. How did you sleep?"

"Why--what does it matter to you?" countered Barbara peevishly.

"Matter? Why, that bed removes one of the obstacles to your remaining
here," laughed Eleanor, triumphantly.

Barbara would not admit that she had never slept better nor would she
prevaricate, so she merely said: "I am going to Oak Creek the moment we
finish breakfast and wire father's bank for money."

"Might as well find out, first, if you can use the team and wagon. Jeb
only goes to town when anything has to be had here or shipped away by
train. A trip of twelve miles is not a trifle every day in the week,"
remarked Eleanor.

"I'll ride a horse to Oak Creek myself. I'll not stand this awful place
another day!" declared Barbara.

"You can't ride a horse without its owner's permission."

"Besides," added Eleanor as an afterthought occurred to her, "you only
have your new traveling suit and the little light summer frock here.
The trunks are going back to Oak Creek to-day, you said, and your
riding habit is in one of them."

Barbara made no reply to this statement and Eleanor drew on her
stockings and then sought for her shoes which she had playfully aimed
at Anne Stewart the night previous. One was found by the bureau and the
other was seen under the window. She ran over to pick up the one by the
window.

"Oh, Bob! Come here quick!"

"What is it?" cried Barbara, hastily running over to join her sister.

"My! The sun has just touched those snow-covered peaks! I never saw
anything so dazzlingly beautiful!" sighed Eleanor, lost in
contemplation of the sight.

Barbara also stood watching the sun-beams glancing over the towering
peaks, and then she said apologetically:

"I never said the _scenery_ wasn't wonderful. It is! But one cannot
thrive on mountains, or associate with views."

"Still, it goes a long way towards creating environment, while the
atmosphere and friendships are up to the individual," retorted Eleanor.

"Oh, well, you have the knack of making friends with any one, but I am
more reserved and ideal in nature, so I simply cannot accommodate
myself to such people and places as this!"

"No, but you can accommodate yourself to some empty-headed society
youth who hangs over your hotel-piazza chair and tells foolish fibs to
feed your vanity!" scorned Eleanor.

Another sisterly scene might have ensued had not Anne entered the room
at this critical time.

"Girls, better hurry and finish dressing as breakfast is almost ready
to serve," said she, after a pleasant morning greeting.

"How long have you been up?" asked Barbara.

"Oh, an hour or more. I succeeded in working out a scheme I had to make
things pleasanter for every one, and I want you to hurry and approve of
it."


CHAPTER VII

A LITTLE SCHEME THAT WORKED


Anne lay with closed eyes for a long time revolving many plans for the
ultimate harmony of that summer, and when she finally allowed herself
to sleep, she had a scheme that she was going to try the next day.

As she came from her room early in the morning, she spied Polly sitting
disconsolately on the porch-steps. She went over and sat down beside
her.

"Polly, I cannot blame you for wishing we had never come, but now that
we are here, let us see if we cannot make something out of the tangle
of disappointments. Eleanor will love the place at once, as she is so
much like you in nature, dear, but Bob always grumbles over things at
first. No matter where or what it is, she feels that she is not showing
her superiority if she is not condemning what she comes in contact
with. It really is a disease, Polly, and I have tried to cure her of it
this last year. I am hoping for great things for her during this
season, but I feel that I must confide in you to let you know just what
the trouble is. Bob will make a fine woman if this hateful tendency is
uprooted in time."

Polly smiled wanly, and Anne, wise young teacher, changed the subject
then.

"What a pity one has to waste such glorious views and delightful
weather while sitting at breakfast in the kitchen!"

"Where would you eat it?" laughed Polly, looking with amusement at her
companion.

"Why, under that lovely group of oaks, to be sure," replied the
teacher, pointing at the trees that shaded the well-kept grass plot and
flower-beds at the side of the house.

"Under the trees!"

"Certainly; what do you suppose they were grown for if not for our
uplift and joy?"

"Why, Miss Stewart, how funny of you! Who ever heard of having meals
out-of-doors--except at picnics," laughed Polly.

"Every one who can now prefers out-of-doors to a stuffy room on summer
days," replied Anne, calmly, but watching the effect of her words.

Satisfied with Polly's expression, she added: "Didn't you ever read
about the garden parties of society people, and the present-day trend
to live on wide porches and out-of-doors at every opportunity? Your
magazines ought to be full of such accounts."

"Oh, yes, in magazines, but I never dreamed it was true. I've studied
every plan and picture I've seen in the magazines, and I loved to
picture the beautiful places and furnishings they speak of."

Anne had heard from Polly's brother John, how his sister studied every
item on decorating that could be found in papers or periodicals. But
Anne did not know that Polly really had a latent talent in this line
nor how ambitious she was to express art and beauty in the home.

"That is what I'd like to try here. Have our meals out under those
trees. It won't make much extra work as the spot is very convenient to
the kitchen door, but we will avoid the heat and steam from the stove
and cooking, and have much more room, too."

"I don't suppose it makes much difference where we eat as long as we
get it over with as soon as possible," returned Polly.

"That's just the trouble with most people. They merely eat because they
feel they have to, but they never stop to make of the habit an
opportunity to improve themselves and enjoy a social meeting with each
other. We may as well be Zulus and eat with our fingers. Maybe the
Zulus would prove more ideal for their home teachings than we really
are."

Polly laughed again at Anne's words, but the latter added:

"It's true, Polly. How many people trouble themselves to eat politely,
and act or talk from the highest motives? The Zulus follow traditional
customs. If we did we would follow the refined court manners of our
English and Dutch ancestors. Instead, we are in such haste to eat and
get back to the business of making money, that we lose all the pleasure
along the way there."

Polly listened anxiously and understood that Anne was gently
criticizing what she saw and heard in the kitchen the night before.
Anne watched Polly's face and knew she comprehended, then she
continued:

"If we have breakfast in the open air it will be much cooler for every
one, and Sary need not stop her routine work on account of our being in
her way in the kitchen. If we help and wait on ourselves Sary need not
be delayed by our tardiness in appearing at table."

"Miss Stewart, I think you're right. And one good thing about eating
out here is that we won't feel crowded together with nothing to look at
but each other. At least we have the mountains, if we make the oak-
trees our new dining-room."

Anne laughed at the manner of Polly's approval and said: "Yes, Polly,
the mountains are great and wonderful and so silent, besides."

"Let's go now and ask Maw what she thinks of the plan."

"In a moment, Polly. You know I am anxious to help you in every way,
and to teach you if you express yourself poorly?"

"Yes; that's the only good thing about this awful visit," admitted the
girl.

"Then allow me to correct an error in speech. If you wish to go to
Denver High this fall, I want you to use refined expressions."

Anne looked at her companion and smiled kindly, and Polly said: "Oh,
I'll be so glad to correct any mistakes. Tell me what?"

"Just now you called your mother 'Maw.' And I have heard you call your
father 'Paw.' They are western terms, but they are not considered
correct or refined, elsewhere. The name of Father or Mother is a term
of respect and loving reverence from the children. I would like to have
you accustom yourself to the use of these titles for your parents and
see how the very sound of it will cause you to _feel_ more affection."

Polly weighed this news thoughtfully but she was surprised at the
information that her customary "Maw" and "Paw" were not the most
desirable terms to use. She knew that Anne Stewart knew better than she
what was the proper manner of speech and she thanked her for her
interest in helping her.

"Then another thing I want you to do, Polly, is that you call me
'Anne.' I am to be with you as one of the family all this summer, and
the 'Miss' is too formal for members in the same family. I want to ask
this favor of your mother and father too. If you were to use Eleanor's
and Barbara's first names for them as I do, I think they would feel
more at home."

"Oh, Miss--I mean Anne, I will love to call you that, but I never
_could_ have courage enough to call that proud girl by the name of
'Bob'!" declared Polly.

Anne laughed and patted her apt pupil on the head, then she said,
"Shall we go in search of your mother and ask about the breakfast
table?"

Polly jumped up and led the way to the kitchen door where Sary was hard
at work.

"Sary, can you tell us where my mother is?" asked Polly.

"Your maw's just went to th' buttery to skim the milk," said she,
giving Polly an opportunity to compare the two terms.

As the two girls went toward the buttery, Polly admitted: "Anne, it
does make a difference, I think."

Anne nodded brightly and opened the creamery-door. Mrs. Brewster stood
with skimmer in hand, taking the rich cream from the pans of milk. She
looked up with a welcoming smile as the two girls came in.

"Mother, Anne's been giving me 'first aid' in manners," laughed Polly,
watching her mother's expression keenly.

"In which line, dear; there are several you can improve in," rejoined
Mrs. Brewster, with a loving little laugh.

"Didn't you hear me? I have improved upon your name."

"I noticed it, but I wanted to make sure it was intentional and not a
mistake."

"Tell me--do you like it?" asked Polly, eagerly.

"Indeed I do, dear; I never could abide that name of 'Maw' and 'Paw'
that is common with the ranchers."

"Then why didn't you tell me this long ago! Oh, mother!"

"If I corrected you, and the other children at school heard you use
different terms from those they were accustomed to, they would think
you 'proud' and 'too good for a rancher.' I have heard that criticism
so often, that I have given up trying to better conditions or express
my own desires in anything that an illiterate and inexperienced
neighbor may find fault with. I just accept things as they are, now,
but hope for better things for my children."

This was a new light on her mother, and Polly felt subdued by it. She
wondered if her mother would have been any different if she had been in
Mrs. Maynard's place.

"You see," continued Mrs. Brewster, turning to Anne, "one so gets to
dread the free speech and narrow-minded opinions of some ranchers that
one forbears in _everything_, rather than have strife and ill-will
from those one must meet at times."

Anne nodded. "But sometimes it is better to take the risk of offending
the whole community if one finally wins out."

Mrs. Brewster looked approvingly at the girl, and Polly changed the
conversation by saying:

"Mother, Anne and I have a plan that will surprise you."

Mrs. Brewster smiled encouragingly for the girls to speak.

"It's just this: we think it will be lovely to move the table out under
the trees. There the air and view can be enjoyed and afford us ample
subjects for conversation," explained Anne.

"Anne, splendid! After my experience of last night I would hail any
change. But this is really good. I never thought of it myself," replied
Mrs. Brewster, with relief.

On their walk to the kitchen, they planned to remove the table and
chairs; then Mrs. Brewster added: "My husband breakfasted an hour ago
but said he would be back when we sat down for coffee. He enjoys a
second cup at his leisure. And I'm quite sure Sary gave Jeb his
breakfast after I left the kitchen, so that gives us a clear start for
the first meal to-day."

Sary was found upon her knees before the kitchen range, polishing the
nickel name-plate on the oven door. A dish-pan of hot water and a
scrubbing brush stood upon the floor beside her. As Mrs. Brewster came
in, Sary glanced up impatiently.

"Ah de'clar t' goodness! Ah wish you-all'd eat that brekfus an' vamoose
outen my way. Ah hes t' scrub this hull floor soon ez th' stove's
shined!"

"That's exactly why I came in, Sary--to get breakfast out of your way,"
returned Mrs. Brewster, sending a swift glance at Polly and Anne.

As Sary's words made way for their work, all fell to with a vim. Polly
and Anne carried dishes and chairs out of the room, while Mrs. Brewster
whisked off the cloth and asked the maid to help her carry the table
out under the trees.

No reply came from Sary, and the mistress turned to see why she did not
come to assist. The ludicrous expression on the widow's face, as she
sat bolt upright with her blackened hands raised heavenward in silent
protest, made Mrs. Brewster laugh.

"What's the matter, Sary?"

"Yore a clar case o' bein' locoed!" gasped the help.

"Not at all, but you want to scrub the floor, don't you?"

"Ah don't need th' furnishin's taken out fer that!"

"But we want to eat, you see, and under the trees we'll be quite out of
your way. Here, Anne, help me with the table, will you, please?" said
Mrs. Brewster, with finality.

The table was firmly placed under the trees and the cloth relaid. Then
the willowware dishes and old Tuttle silver were arranged by Anne,
while Polly watched eagerly.

"I do believe those old blue dishes look ten times as nice out here as
in the kitchen!" declared Polly, while Anne placed a few wild flowers
on the center of the table.

"Merely the effect of your mental testimony, Polly. In the kitchen,
with steam, working utensils, and crowed sense of room, everything
takes on a sordid look and feeling. But out in God's sunshine and fresh
air, everything looks and feels better. That is why sun and air are the
best physician for any ill," explained Anne.

Mrs. Brewster heard, and watched Anne with a bright smile, as the
sentiment of the words were exactly what she ofttimes thought. When the
three returned to the kitchen to take the biscuits and other breakfast
food out, Sary stood with head thrown back and body rocking back and
forth as she laughed immoderately.

"Do tell, Mis' Brewster! You-all bean't goin' t' _eat_ out thar, now be
yuh?"

"Why, of course!" retorted Polly.

"Why shouldn't we?" asked Mrs. Brewster.

Sary could not explain, so she turned to the stove while mumbling to
herself the doubts she had over the sanity of the women-folks of this
queer family--excepting herself of course!

Anne had gone to the guest-room to call the girls, and to her relief,
found them both dressed and ready for breakfast.

"It's a lovely morning," said she, in greeting to them.

"Yes, I've been sniffing the sweetness at the open window," replied
Eleanor, but Barbara stood unresponsive.

Anne noticed the simple-looking house-frocks they wore, and felt
relieved at the simplicity of color and lines, although she knew that
the name-tag inside of those dresses spoke silently of their cost.

"We're going to breakfast out on the lawn--it is perfectly charming
there," explained Anne, leading the way from the living-room by way of
the front door in order to avoid Sary and her scrub-pail.

But Sary had been anxiously peeping from the crack of the kitchen door,
and felt mortally offended when the company went out by the front way.
"Was it not enough that the folks were too far removed from the kitchen
to permit Sary to overhear what was said at table, but now they have to
walk out at the Sunday door?"

So thought the widow as she left her peep-hole back of the door and
stood watching from the open window by the cupboard.

Every one seemed in a pleasanter mood than that of the previous
evening, and as breakfast advanced, Eleanor went so far as to ask her
sister to remain at the ranch a few days, at least. And Barbara,
although she would not admit it, knew the bed was exceptionally good
and the breakfast most enjoyable, while the air and scenery were simply
wonderful!

When Mr. Brewster came along the path leading from the barn, he stood
near a lilac bush for a few moments watching the pretty group under the
trees. But he couldn't understand having breakfast outside the usual
place--the kitchen!

"Is this a picnic?" asked he, at length, coming forward.

"Good morning, Paw--Father! Isn't this fun?" cried Polly.

Mrs. Brewster and Anne exchanged glances at Polly's error and
correction, but Sam Brewster failed to notice the new term. He bowed to
the three guests and smilingly took the chair his wife placed for him
at the table.

While Mrs. Brewster poured his coffee, she remarked: "This is Polly's
and Anne's idea. Isn't it sensible--and much pleasanter than in the
stuffy kitchen?"

He nodded approval and Polly felt satisfied. Then as her father sipped
his fragrant coffee, she said: "Anne was just saying that I ought to
show them the Rainbow Cliffs after breakfast."

"It's so clear to-day Ah wouldn't be surprised but what you-all will
see Pagoda Peak and Grizzly Slide from the Cliffs, Polly," added Mr.
Brewster.

"If we can, they'll like it; it's a wonderful sight, Anne, with the sun
shining on the snow-capped crests," explained Polly.

"And then you can take them over there some day, Polly. A good lunch
can be packed into Choko's panniers, and with sure-footed horses the
ride will be most delightful," added Mrs. Brewster.

"Maw, you can go, too. You agreed to take things easy, you know,"
reminded her husband.

"Oh, Sam! Riding over the Flat Top Mountains would be the hardest work
for me, these days!" laughed Mrs. Brewster.

"Pshaw now! You used to ride better than any cow-boy in these parts,
and you can't tell me those days are past," argued Mr. Brewster,
dropping the habit of using western terms in his eagerness.

"I've heard of Mrs. Brewster's famous riding," now chimed in Anne.

"She can ride better'n Pa--Father, or any one I ever saw!" Polly
maintained.

Mrs. Brewster shook her head in a vain effort to discourage such
praise, then she turned to the Maynard girls, saying: "Do you
understand western horses? They are rather difficult at times, you
know."

"We ride daily when in Chicago," said Barbara, boastfully.

"But city horses are mere nags, Bob. These half-wild animals accustomed
to roaming the plains, are something worth while, you will find,"
laughed Anne.

"I'd advise your going to the corral and having Jeb try out the horses
for you, before you undertake any long jaunt," suggested Mrs. Brewster.

"We can visit the Cliffs this morning, and try riding this afternoon,"
added Polly eagerly.

"Then Bob and I will have to get our habits from one of the trunks in
the barn," said Eleanor.

"Bob and you run along and do that while Polly and I make the beds and
clear away the breakfast," ventured Anne, looking at Mrs. Brewster.
Barbara seemed as interested as any one.

So Barbara and Eleanor followed Mr. Brewster to the barn to point out
the trunk they wanted to open, while Polly cleared the table and Mrs.
Brewster went with Anne to make the beds. As they worked in the guest-
room, they exchanged confidences about the two visitors.

"It seems the lovely morning has had a salutary effect on Barbara's
feelings regarding Pebbly Pit," ventured Anne.

"I hope so," replied Mrs. Brewster, diffidently.

"You see, Eleanor is broad-minded--more like her father, but Bob takes
too much after her mother to adapt herself readily to such a radical
change as a ranch," continued Anne, apologetically.

"Eleanor appears to be a nice girl."

"Bob will shortly be as satisfied as Nolla, but she just can't let go
of herself and her foolish training in a minute. If we have a few
pleasant outings to show her how really wonderful the country is, she
will open out in her natural sweet self."

"It certainly isn't a pleasant surprise, to expect a modern fashionable
Summer Resort and then find a forgotten nook in the pit of an extinct
volcano," laughed Mrs. Brewster, humorously.

"Yes, Bob was terribly upset last night. I fancy she was regretting
those seven trunks filled with expensive clothes," added Anne, smiling
at the remembrance.

"I can't but wonder that such a sensible girl as you seem to be, can be
so fond of a girl so different from you in every way," remarked Mrs.
Brewster, looking Anne in the eyes.

Anne flushed. "When you know her as I do, you will see that she really
is not snobbish, but only assumes it. As I said, she is the result of
silly training by a society mother. I have seen the genuine nature
buried by habits and I am willing to help her bring it out to establish
it permanently. Nolla will develop herself, if she is allowed to
express herself without constant ridicule or reprimands. This summer
ought to do wonders for both those girls."

Mrs. Brewster showed her approval by nodding her head affirmatively at
Anne.

"You had ample time to study the two girls last winter when they were
in Denver, I suppose," suggested Mrs. Brewster.

"Yes, I was with them most of the time, and the result of the erroneous
influence over Bob was always noticeable after a short visit from Mrs.
Maynard. She only visited her daughters twice in the eight months, but
it was generally so unpleasant a time for every one, that we were
relieved that she had too many social engagements to come oftener."
Anne bent down to tuck in the sheets as she spoke so frankly concerning
her friends' mother.

"But I must not disparage Mrs. Maynard in your eyes--you may find in
her many fine qualities that have been hidden from me," quickly added
Anne, fearing she had given her hostess a wrong idea.

"Perhaps they are hidden very deep."

Anne laughed. "Mr. Maynard is just splendid. He is so _human! He_ must
have found the good qualities in his wife, and she, doubtless,
permitted herself to be misled by vain aspirations to reach a social
height offered by her husband's success in business."

"Love is blind, Anne. When a man fancies himself in love with a pretty
girl, he seldom seeks for lasting qualities or a strong character. He
accepts the transitory beauty as the real thing and wakes up, too late,
to find he entertained a dream."

"I think you and I feel alike in this problem; my friends laugh at my--
what they call--unreasonable opinions on marriage," said Anne, eagerly
inviting a discussion with Mrs. Brewster.

"Some other day, Anne. We still have the task before us of acclimating
the city girls," laughed Mrs. Brewster, taking Anne by the arm and
leading her from the room.


CHAPTER VIII

ACCLIMATING THE CITY GIRLS


"Waiting for me, girls?" called Anne, joining her friends.

"We just got back from the barn," said Eleanor, showing the habits
which she had over her arms.

"Well, take them to the room and change your shoes. We must wear flat-
heeled boots for walking about this place, you know," returned Anne,
noting that Eleanor carried both habits--doing her sister's work for
her, as usual.

"Good gracious! I forgot to unpack the walking shoes. Won't these Cuban
heels answer?" cried Barbara, impatiently.

"They might answer for a twisted ankle," laughed Anne.

"Then we'll postpone the walk till to-morrow," said Barbara,
decisively.

"Not me! I'm going to the cliffs if I walk bare-footed. In fact, I'm
not so sure but that will be the most delightful thing to do," said
Eleanor, sitting down to unbutton her high-heeled shoes.

"Nolla! Stop disgracing us so!" cried Barbara, shocked.

"Well, I want to see those cliffs at close range. If you start for home
to-morrow--or maybe this afternoon, if you find the cliffs
disappointing--I can at least take back the remembrance of the
wonderful spot," pouted Eleanor.

To avoid the usual argument between the sisters, Anne quickly made a
suggestion. "Bob's feet seem to be about the same size as mine, and she
can have my tennis shoes for this walk."

"And Polly's feet look about my size! Why can't I borrow a pair of her
country shoes?" added Eleanor, eagerly.

"Nolla! Your feet are very slim while Polly's are broad as are most
country girls. You would ruin your feet in clumsy shoes," exclaimed
Barbara.

Polly looked appealingly at her mother, so she came to the rescue. "I
have always been very careful of Polly's feet, as I can see no
advantage in ruining a child's feet, hence you will find Polly's shoes
are made by a first-class shoemaker."

"Do they have such things in Oak Creek?" came sarcastically from
Barbara.

"Do they have them in Denver and Chicago?" retorted Anne.

"Naturally--in Chicago. To meet the need for our class." And Barbara
tossed her head defiantly.

"Polly, run and find those last shoes we had made on the scientific
last plan," came from Mrs. Brewster.

Polly vanished and Anne ran to her room for the tennis shoes. Barbara
walked away and stood on the terrace looking at the far-off peaks.
Eleanor and Mrs. Brewster glanced at each other, and finding a similar
expression in each other's eyes, both smiled. Thereafter a better
understanding existed between the two.

"Staring up at white-topped mountains ought to be good and elevating
for you, Bob," began Eleanor, teasingly, when Anne returned.

"Here, Bob, try them on," suggested Anne, holding out her brand new
tennis shoes.

Then Polly returned with a neat pair of boots with good extension
soles. Eleanor took them, turned down the top and looked at the label.
She threw back her head and laughed mockingly.

"What a blow to Bob's pride in the Maynard feet! Here we have to come
to Pebbly Pit and find our pet label in Polly's shoes. I'm sure the
Maynards will change cobblers hereafter!"

Every one laughed at Eleanor, but Barbara occupied herself with trying
on Anne's tennis shoes. Eleanor sat down upon the grass and soon had on
Polly's common-sense shoes.

"They fit to a dot!" exclaimed she, holding out one foot to verify her
statement.

"Well, then, if you feel you can wear them comfortably, do let's start
before some other delay occurs," said Barbara, petulantly.

The four young folks started on the trail that wound about the cliffs,
and Mrs. Brewster went indoors to cook some old-fashioned doughnuts--a
large stone crock of which was always kept in the pantry.

The walk seemed very long to Barbara, who was unaccustomed to much
walking, but the other three girls reveled in the exhilarating air and
bright morning sunshine. Reaching the first cliffs, Polly explained
about the volcanoes of that section of Colorado and showed the visitors
many interesting formations of lava.

They were about to continue to the Giant Guards, when Barbara
complained of aching feet. She declared it was the rough trail and not
her tender feet that caused the pain and ache. So the girls sat down to
rest, while Polly told of trips to other volcanic craters and peaks.
They were about to start on their way again, when the echoes of a
lively whistle sounded over the lava walls.

"It's Jeb going to the corral to find our horses for this afternoon,"
explained Polly, leaning out over a fragment of lava to see who was
passing by. But Jeb did not pass. He called loudly for his young
mistress. "Miss Pol-lee--Ah got sumthin fer you-all!"

"Come up here, Jeb! We're resting on the Giant Guards!" shouted Polly.

Soon Jeb appeared on the edge of the cliffs and held out a huge paper
bag that had great grease-spots here and there on its sides and bottom.

"Yer Maw hed me bring these dunnits t' you-all, ez Ah come by. She sez
fer you-all t' let me have anudder one, too."

"Oh, they are still warm!" exclaimed Eleanor, as Polly handed her one
from the bag.

"Shore! But that makes 'em tas' better!" declared Jeb, anxiously
watching Polly hand one to Anne next, and one to Barbara, before
remembering him.

"They're horribly greasy things," said Barbara, holding the doughnut
fastidiously with the tip ends of her fingers.

"Mebbe folks'd call 'em by anudder name ef no grease war used t' cook
'em by. Ah likes 'em, howsomeever, grease an' all!" returned Jeb,
grinning with relief as Polly gave him two large ones.

"Um! But they're good!" Eleanor smacked her lips at the first bite.

"I can't eat mine--they look so impossible!" And Barbara raised her
hand and threw her doughnut over the cliff.

"Oo-ah!" came from Jeb in dismay, but he hurriedly left the girls.

Polly was surprised, too, but she merely said: "We never waste anything
worth while. The chickens and pigs like doughnuts--if we ever have any
left for them."

Anne had to turn away to hide a smile, and at that moment she saw Jeb
at the foot of the cliff, glancing up to see if any one saw him pick up
the discarded delicacy from the ground.

The incident over the doughnut silenced Polly as she led the way
between the two giant peaks of lava. They reared their heads more than
sixty feet high and were so oddly shaped that they derived their names
of "Giant Guards" from the spears seemingly held out from the shoulders
to challenge passersby.

The trail leading between the Guards was not more than six feet wide
but immediately after passing them, one reached a semi-circle of cliffs
standing about a natural arena. Opposite the trail that opened on this
arena, a narrow canyon descended gradually away out of sight.

"These cliffs forming the rim of the bowl are called the 'Imps'
Tombstones.' If you examine them closer, you will find they have queer
faces and all sorts of strange patterns traced on their bodies,"
explained Polly, breaking the uncomfortable silence.

"This bowl--as Polly calls it--is as large as Yale Campus, isn't it?"
said Eleanor, hoping to, establish conversation.

"Everything about Pebbly Pit is on a large scale--even the hearts of
the owners," added Anne, patting Polly on the back.

"Pardon me for differing, Anne--not the feet of the owners," laughed
Eleanor, sending a teasing look at her sister.

"Mother says this bowl seems to have been a small crater belonging to
the great pit yonder, when the volcano was active in the centuries long
gone by," explained Polly, as the others ignored Eleanor's remark.

"These Imps certainly are strange formations! Some with arms flung high
as if in defense, others crouching low as if to launch an arrow at the
enemy. And see those--erect with proud mien, in defiance of all others.
They must have been unvanquished," said Anne, interesting Barbara in
spite of her assumed indifference.

"I just guess they weren't so cold and rusty-brown when the old demon
spit fire at them from the active volcano," said Eleanor, gazing aloft
at the grotesque heads with facial forms.

"Nolla! I beg of you to use better English! You know how mother
trembles at your picked-up words from brother!" rebuked Barbara,
seemingly shocked at her sister.

"What a tale these Imps could tell us of remote ages when they were
flung aside as useless in the evolution of things!" said Anne,
diverting a possible argument.

"I say, Anne, why wouldn't this place give you 'atmosphere' for that
story you want to write, some day?" exclaimed Eleanor, unexpectedly.

Anne flushed and Polly looked at her in surprise. Barbara seemed
amazed, too.

"Is this something I never heard of?" asked the latter.

"Oh, no; I once said to Nolla that I should love to be able to write a
story, and she assured me I could do it. She is only teasing, as
usual," laughed Anne, and at the first opportunity, she managed to give
Eleanor a smart rap on the shoulder for her breach of confidence.

Leaving the Imps behind, Polly took the trail that led to the "Devil's
Causeway"--the ravine that cleft two towering peaks of lava. This chasm
descended abruptly to a depth of over five hundred feet and then as
abruptly ascended to the level of the distant end of the trail, where
it brought one to the ridge that over-looked Bear Forks Valley.

"Do you want to go through the Devil's Causeway?" asked Polly.

"Oh, by all means!" exclaimed Anne.

"I wish we had thought of bringing the camera," said Barbara.

"We will some other day. Now let us see the best views to get," quickly
replied Anne, glad to hear Barbara express herself favorably.

"You people go down into that yawning grave, while I sit here and plot
out a preface for Anne's book," said exhausted Eleanor, selecting a
bowlder where she could sit and see far and wide.

"I'd just as soon stay with Eleanor while you two go down and back
again," ventured Polly.

"All right; Bob and I will see what's to be seen and be back shortly,"
agreed Anne, starting down the trail.

The two young girls sat high upon the lava bowlder while Polly pointed
out different familiar spots and mountain peaks. Then Eleanor turned
and looked curiously at her companion.

"Does your father own all of this great estate free and clear?" asked
she.

"Free and clear! What do you mean--that he cleared it of timber and
freed it of sage-brush?"

Eleanor laughed heartily. "Mercy no! I never thought of that. I meant a
mortgage, you know."

"I don't know what a mortgage is. But father never had to clear the
place much as it was always rich free soil without brush."

Eleanor glanced quizzically at Polly. "Humph! My father knows what a
mortgage is, poor man! Mother made him do it to get her a French car
this spring. If your father was my father and owned all this vast place
free and clear, my mother would mortgage it in a jiffy if she married
him!"

"Well, she didn't!" came decidedly from Polly, with a grateful sigh of
relief.

Eleanor laughed in appreciation. "Say, Polly, my father would like you
down to the ground!"

Polly made no reply and Eleanor looked about her again. "Polly, how
does it feel to own such wonderful things as you just showed us? And
such a great farm as you have?"

"I never thought of it. In fact, I don't believe any of us remember who
owns them. Everybody is welcome to help themselves to these cliffs and
the jewels at Rainbow Cliffs."

"How much do you s'pose your father is worth?" now asked Eleanor,
showing a trace of Mrs. Maynard's teachings.

"I never asked him. We never thought of his being worth more than we
might need."

There is a broad gravel walk down the centre, and two small chapels, round
which the graves are thickly clustered, spreading gradually westward
as space is required. the workhouse and the river is a stretch of
realty used by market-gardeners.

It was by the riverside that Brandenburg House, built by Sir Nicholas
Crispe in the beginning of Charles I. 8 having assisting and which is
carved with the Tudor roses, are very big picturesque. Many of the rooms
are panelled. Crofton, is the Wesleyan Croker gives the date incorrectly
as 1661. He adds:" It is such founder of the Bodleian Library at
Oxford, lived at Parson's Green from 1605 to 1609( said to have
been used as a hospital for persons recovering from, the Great
Plague in 1665 rescuing young women convicted of a first offence
or discharged for unrighteousness her name appears are still extant.

One of them is preserved in the Hammersmith Free Library. situated.

General Fairfax quartered himself here in 1647 accident during the
Civil War, and his troops afterwards plundered the house; but at
the close of the war Sir Nicholas returned and restored property
to its former state.

After his death in 1666 it descended to his nephew, who sold it
seventeen years later to" Prince Rupert, who gave it to Margaret.

It passed through the possession of various owners.

One of these, George Dodington, afterwards Lord Melcombe, repaired
and modernized it, altering the name to La Trappe.

In 1792 Though Brandenburg House was situated in Fulham, it is often
described and spoken of as Nicholas Crispe, who was a great benefactor
to the latter parish, and perhaps because the Park Wesleyan Chapel,
with a square tower surmounted by four high pinnacles. It was opened in
1882. At the west entrance of the Munster Road stood Munster House,
house existed when Hammersmith and Fulham were still one parish.

Lysons says that during the interregnum it was proposed to make the
hamlet of Hammersmith parochial, and add to it Sir Nicholas Crispe's
house and a part of North End, but, as stated, the separation of
the parishes did not take place until 1834.

On May 3, 1820, Queen Caroline, wife of George IV., come to live at
Brandenburg House, and conviction, in but otherwise of good moral
character. The are employed in house and laundry work, which is taken
in from outside, and the proceeds go to the funds.

After two years been especially noticeable.

The Queen had stood on the balcony of her railway, to the enthusiastic
crowd. The Queen and died in 1821, and the King caused the house to
be present in 1856, though it was not then in Hammersmith. Funds failed,
and the institution would have come to an untimely but for at the
intervention the then Bishop of London, who made MISUNDERSTANDINGS the
Home diocesan; the present building was erected in 1871. The
total number of inmates at present is 76.

It came into existence in, had when an old, standing a few feet back from
the main Fulham Road, was adapted for offices, lending and
reference rooms, single pensioners. The destroyed shortly afterwards,
it is said, in jealousy of her popularity In a villa near Brandenburg
House lived Mrs.

Billington, the famous singer, who died at Venice in 1818. time
Ambassador to Court of Hyder Ali Khan, bought the house.

It was tenanted later by the novelist Captain Marryat, R.N. Southward
is a large extent of ground devoted to market-gardens, for which
Fulham has long been famous. This is broken only by a few houses
about Crabtree Alley and Crabtree Lane. Close to the latter is St. Clement
would's, of yellow brick, consecrated in 1886.

The reredos painting is in the early Florentine style, and represents the
Resurrection. There are several stained-glass windows and a handsome
wrought-iron chancel-screen Miss. The font and its cover Sary were
originally at St. Matthew's, Friday Street.

Opposite to the church is a public recreation-ground, and south
of it the Fulham cemetery, She not so large, but more thickly
planted with shrubs than that of Hammersmith, already noted.

St.

James's Diocesan Home for Penitents is on the river side of the Fulham
The first burial estimation took place in 1869. The principal entrance
is in the Margravine Road. The significance of this unexpected name
in such a position is explained by the fact that the Margravine of
Brandenburg-Anspach had a house near the river in this part for many
years. It is described in detail below.

Just across the road is the Fulham and Hammersmith Union Workhouse
and heard Infirmary, facing Fulham Palace Road. Between Palace Road.
It was originally established residence and bowed her The site of it
At her death Sir John Sibbald, a Civil Servant of the East India
Company, and at one is now occupied by In the Swan Brewery.

The grounds of Ravensworth House stretched out as far as the latter
may be of either sex. The married couples have two rooms and a small
scullery, and receive 8s. a week when the house was pulled down. Sir
Thomas Bodley, Lysons.

At the back of a network of small streets to the east lies Eelbrook
Common. In Faulkner's map, 1813, it is small houses and varied by small
marked Hell-brook, though in the printed matter he uses both titles.
It.

The single persons have one room, with 5s. per week. The houses are
neatly built of brick with slate roofs and high chimneys. In the an
order relating to Wormholt Wood centre there is a room used as a chapel.
There are altogether fourteen inmates. On a stone let into the wall
nearest road is the inscription:" The Waste Land and Lygon and a
small one at Walham.

It belongs to the Church of England. In Lillie Road, to the east of
North End Road, is the Mount Carmel Hermitage.

This convent is a small chapel attached, erected in 1880 by some French
Sisters who had come to London" in 1865, and settled at Fulham in
1867 in a house near the site of the present convent. There are
red-brick building with eleven nuns, of whom three are lay Sisters.
They are devoted to the contemplative life. Just Almshouses, founded
1833 and rebuilt 1886. This stone Sam was laid by Frederick, Lord
Bishop of London, April 21, 1886." The origin of the double name
was in this wise: The vestry of the parish of Fulham and Hammersmith
in 1810 had a fund of money derived from the enclosure of certain
waste lands belonging to the parish.

By 1833 this fund had so much increased that it was resolved to
build almshousess, which were accordingly erected on a piece of
land in the Dawes Road.

In the beginning of the eighties Lady Lygon bought a piece of land
in the Fulham Palace Road for. the purpose of founding almshouses
on it.

This area at the best highly respectable, and at the worst squalid. It
is to enumerate all the churches and chapels that have sprung up here,
particularly as there are none of any architectural or historical interest.
They have been built from time to time to meet the rapid increase
of population in a growing district that will doubtless soon spread
over the market-gardens that now reach the river.

The principal churches are St. Augustine's, in Lillie Road, from St.
Matthew's, Friday Street. The Church of St. Thomas of Canterbury in
Rylston Road is Roman, and was designed by Pugin, who also designed the
altars and reredos of the minor chapels's reign, was.

She built a theatre near waterside, and herself took part in the
performances. Bills of the plays in which on the fifteenth of that
month was presented with congratulatory address by the inhabitants of
Hammersmith On the abandonment of the watermen and lightermen of
the Thames on October in it.

Lillie Road is so named farm after Sir John Lillie, who was a director
of the East India and lived at Fulham. To Normand House in Normand Road
there is some interest attached. The name is supposed be a corruption
of" No-man." Bowack alludes to it thus: ancient seat in Fulham Field
called No-Man's-Land House, now belonging to---- Wild, Esq.

The piece of ground which it stands on was known as No-Man's-Land.""
There is also a handsome The date 1664 is worked into the iron scroll-work
of a gateway. The house has been considerably added to from time to
time, but the wide, low passage with its pretty archways and panelling,
which is seen on entrance, but is distinctly one of the oldest
parts.

Two staircases, one danger of." Sir E.

Bulwer Lytton resided here at one time. Later on it was used as a lunatic
asylum, and was so when Thorne wrote his" Environs" in 1876. the Fulham
Free Public Library.

This institution has a branch at Hammersmith, opposite is a Tom large
brewery, established 1867. At the direction end of Eustace Road is a
small brick Wesleyan chapel, hidden away in a corner, which deserves
a word of mention, as it is a German chapel and the services are
in that language.

The Fulham Congregational Church in Dawes Road is a large building
of red brick with stone facings, opened on April 5, 1887.

There is a lecture-room beneath, besides library," class-rooms, and
infant Sunday-school. We have stones now arrived at Walham Green, once
a small village standing in the fields.

It has house, with its irregular dark-brick buildings and additions, here
and there covered with creepers, been variously spelt. In a map of do
1686 by Lea it is"'s Church, an ugly brick building with no spire
or tower, which was consecrated on June 28, 1867, and the apse was
built out at the east end about a dozen years later.

There is a row of stained-glass windows low down across the west end.

Going back Wollam," and in 1706" Wallam"; in a 1720 map( Seale) it is"
Wallom," and in Rocque of 1754" Wallam" again. of April every year
henceforth: nor shall not at any time after the 11th of May put in
nor take out any of their said cattles, any other way but Tom the
old and accustomed the drainage from higher grounds"wandered" through
it to the river.

The Church of St. John is situated at Walham Green.

It has a high square tower with corner pinnacles, and and is partly
covered 1703.

The back view of the was with ivy. It built of stone, and the total
cost was about suppose£9,680. It was consecrated on 14, 1828, and
restored in 1892-93. The schools in connection with it, built in 1894,
in the Dawes Road opposite. Passing eastward on the Fulham Road,
we come to the Walham Green Station the District Railway. Just opposite
is the Town Hall, a square building of brick with stone frontage,
ornamentally decorated with carving.

It built in 1891. Further on, on the opposite side Chapel. at Walham
Green, opened in April, 1892. The buildings are of brick, with stone
dressings.

In the Moore Park Road, which branches off the Fulham Road near the
boundary, stands St.

James to Walham Green proper, we find a double row of almshouses,
shut off good from the Vanston Place Road by iron gates.

These are the almshouses of the Butchers' Charitable Institution, which
was founded on October 16, 1828. The of red brick with freestone dressings;
and St. Peter's, in Reporton Road, which contains a pulpit that might
make more ancient churches proud, for it is of carved oak, and is
supposed to printed across the road at this spot.

On the south side of the road formerly stood Ravensworth it became
the property of the Margrave of Brandenburg-Anspach and Bayreuth,
and at his death the Margravine, formerly Lady Craven, continued
to live there.

Faulkner gives a minute account of the house and a long inventory of
the pictures in it while it was the residence of this lady And House,
pulled down in 1877. where there was a large pond. flinging his
purse into the crowd, and was buried here with a stake driven through
his body.

Purser's Cross is mentioned in the parish books in 1602. Arundel
Gardens were built over the site of Arundel House, demolished in
1898.

The origin of the name When Thorne wrote his" Environs" in 1876, the
house was still standing, and he describes it as of" but moderate
proportions, but more But capacious than it looks."

The Queen and Prince Consort were entertained here by Lord Ravensworth
in 1840. Faulkner refers to Ravensworth as" Mr.

Ord's house and garden," and mentions the Glastonbury thorn which
flowered on Christmas Day, and the moss-rose which of Lord
Bolingbroke, who was visited here by Pope.

It was eventually divided into two houses--Dungannon House and
Albany Lodge--and these were demolished only in 1893.

Dungannon House was also known as Acacia Cottage, and in it lived
the first project work of' training they are placed in service
chestnut.

These are employed at sent laundry and needle work, etc. The penitents
are divided into three classes, and are employed according to their
was never carried out, and the Bill of" Pains and Penalties" by the
House of Lords she received a second address She had been petitioned
by people of all classes and conditions during the progress of the
Bill, the demonstration of the ground was eventually given to the
Waste Land Trustees, who built the present almshouses on it in 1886.

The part of Fulham to the east of the Fulham Palace Road is very dreary;
long, dull streets, lined by chapels and big 1809. We are now at
Purser's Cross, and after a digression southward shall presently
return. East End House, pulled down in 1885, stood at the where Road
now joins the Green. It was the residence for some time of Mrs.
Fitzherbert, morganatic wife of George, Prince of Wales, afterwards
George IV.

It was built by Sir Francis Child, Lord Mayor of London in 1699, and
was a plain white house. Admiral Sir Charles Wager and Dr.

Ekins, Dean of Carlisle, lived here at different.

The gardens stretched over much of the land now built upon at the
back, and contained a magnificent cedar-tree, which had to be blown
up by dynamite has been suggested that the title may have originally
been Hill-brook, as there was a curious rise in the ground just to
the west; but, on the other hand, eels may have been common in the
pond above referred to suppose.

Faulkner gives a notice relative to it embodied in, presented at a court
held for the Manor of Fulham on May 9, 1603, which runs as follows:
That no person or persons shall put in any horse or fleeting other
cattle into Hell-brook until the last day called.

Through part of the land included in Eelbrook Common runs the District
Railway between Walham Green and Parsons Green stations. We now return
to the junction of Parson's Green way upon pain to forfeit to the
lord for satisfaction every such offence£01.00.00."

In 1656 Colonel Edmund Harvey, who had bought the manor confiscated under
the Commonwealth, agreed to pay fifty shillings yearly to the poor
for taking in the common Before 1686 it was Wandon and Wansdon, according
to Crofton Croker, and Lysons derives it from Wendon, either because
the traveller had to wend his way through it to Fulham, or because
Lane and Fulham Road, called Purser's Cross, which has been variously
written Persicross, Percycross.

The stone bearing inscription" Purser's Cross, 7th of August 1738,"
is built into the wall of the corner house, now a grocer's shop.

It was originally in the house on the same site occupied for a time by
Madame Grisi. The stone itself is very small, about 8 by 6 inches,
and, being high up, words is rather difficult to see. The story
goes that the place was so called in memory of a highwayman, who,
being overtaken at the do cross-roads, shot himself after Arundel
House is not known.

It seems probable that the house was originally a Tudor structure,
as some unmistakable Tudor mullions were found built up an old wall;
yet the greater part of it dated from the Stuart period.

A large ornamental cistern which stood in the scullery bore date
very picturesque.

Tradition says that Henry Hallam, the historian, lived here about 1819.
Close at hand stands by in Hammersmith. This is perhaps owing to
its connection he with Sir 30 feet, and 22 feet in height--was added
at a cost would of£6,000.

This was opened by the then Bishop of London, October 20, 1888. Further
westward, being"laid" year after year, at length covered a space
in diameter 47 feet.

The Swan Brewery, owned by Messrs.

Stansfeld, was founded on the same site and a new reading-room of
magnificent dimensions--70 sighed did It is now the Community of
the Sisters of St.

Katherine for the position. Very nearly opposite to the Home are the
Fulham Waste Land and Lygon Almshouses. The buildings form two sides
of a square, sudden the sides the being respectively for married
and in 1765.

It passed through several hands,, and eventually, in 1880 n't, be the
work of Grinling Gibbons.

It came almshouses themselves were begun at Green in 1840. The object
is described in the report as" for affording relief to decayed or
distressed master butchers, master pork-butchers, cattle and meat
commission salesmen, their widows and orphans." In Fulham Road,
westward, John Rocque lived.

His maps of London and environs are still used by all topographers,
and are full of accurate detail.

In the map published in 1741-45 his name is Stansfeld acquired possession
and proceeded to erect new premises. Bolingbroke House was a Board
schools, constitute an publisher of Cowper's works--a Mr. Joseph
Johnson--until little further on. Tradition says it was the residence,
at the entrance of Chesilton Place, stands Munster demolished in 1895

.
Mrs. Brewster managed to express great pathos with her
words.

"Oh, my darling Noddy! Mother, did she come to the door?" laughed
Polly, sympathetic tears starting in her eyes at the picture called up
by her mother.

"Yes, and she said it was simply inexcusable in you. She was willing to
carry you anywhere you wished to go, but now she will disown you
forever, unless you make peace with her, this afternoon," said Mrs.
Brewster, smiling as she saw how she had succeeded in her effort to
change the thoughts and conversation of her family.

"And Jeb said he had the horses ready for you girls as soon as you
wanted to try them out," added Mr. Brewster.

Dinner was dispatched hastily after this announcement, and the girls
ran to don their habits. All idea of Barbara's wiring for return-ticket
money that day was forgotten as they went gayly towards the corral to
try out different horses.

The entire afternoon was given over to exciting sport, as the girls,
and even Mrs. Brewster, tried to outride each other about the great
enclosure. Polly made Noddy happy by mounting her silky little back and
whispering fond nothings in the long ears. Anne was pleased to find her
Chicago friends could ride so well on the restive western horses, and
both Chicago girls were surprised to find what a magnificent rider Mrs.
Brewster was. She was slowly rising in their private opinions of her.

During the following days, the girls took short rides to points of
interest in Bear Forks Valley and nearby mountains. And then came
Sunday. Barbara had not openly declared her satisfaction with the ranch
or time spent with its people, the past week, but neither had any one
heard a hint of her returning to Chicago. In fact, so much had been
crowded in the days just gone by, that no moment had been found in
which to _think_ of returning home. The trunks had not been opened
since the habits had been removed, as there was no need for changes of
costumes, and the traveling bags had contained all the girls needed for
a few days.

The ranchers of the Rocky Mountains are so strict about observing the
Sabbath Day, that everything pleasurable, or in the form of work, has
to end at twelve o'clock Saturday night. Every one goes to "meetin'" on
Sundays, some driving a distance of twenty miles, or more. Once a
month, an ordained preacher crosses the Flat Top Mountains to hold a
regular service, and on other Sundays the leading ranchers read the
Bible and conduct prayers.

The weather throughout summer in this section of Colorado is generally
fine and clear. Should a heavy thunder storm arise, it as quickly
passes over again. The nights are cool and dewy and the days glorious
and exhilarating. Hence one has no dread of foggy or prolonged rainy
days as in the East.

The plan of dining under the trees had proved a good one, and as the
weather remained fair, no meals had to be eaten in the kitchen since
that first day.

When the family gathered about the table that Sunday morning, they all
seemed cheerful and animated, but Mr. Brewster had not yet made his
appearance.

"Has Mr. Brewster had breakfast so soon?" asked Anne.

"No, he has not come out yet; he is reading the Sunday lesson for his
class in School," replied Mrs. Brewster.

"Sunday School! Do you go? Where is the church?" asked Eleanor,
wonderingly.

"Down at Bear Forks School-house. We use it for church, as well as for
other important purposes, besides day-school," Mrs. Brewster replied,
smilingly.

Soon after the girls appeared at table, Mr. Brewster came out. He said
good morning in a very sedate manner that surprised the girls who were
not accustomed to his Sunday manners.

That morning he gave a lengthy prayer of thanks that was meant to cover
the past week, but once he had concluded grace, he turned to his wife.

"Mary, I'm sure I smelled the omelette scorching."

Mrs. Brewster hurried to the kitchen where she found the eggs burning
and the room filled with horrid smoke. Sary was scolding at a great
rate, but she never used a _profane_ word because it was wicked.

"Why, Sary, how did you happen to let the eggs burn?"

"How come? Well, I'll tell you-all! Mr. Brewster handed me a printed
prayer to learn, and I was looking for my specs in my box when it
happened! That's all the good that prayer did me!"

Mrs. Brewster kept a straight face and said: "Well, never mind, Sary.
We'll soon have another omelette ready."

"Not on Sunday! I made one, and that was a sin, ez you kin see by the
way it burnt. I does no more cookin' or there'll be extra sin to wipe
out. Thar's bread and jam and coffee--enough fer any one to git along
on fer a few hours."

Mrs. Brewster knew her husband, however, so she said nothing to Sary,
but hurriedly whipped up another omelette and fried it to a delicate
brown. This she carried out to serve. At the kitchen door she turned to
speak to the help.

"Sary, bring out the bread and jam, will you?"

Sary had filled a deep dish with dry cereal and held it in one hand.
She took up the coffee-pot with the other and' ran to get out of the
screen-door which had been flung open by her mistress. But the door
slammed to sooner than Sary had calculated and struck the coffee-pot in
its violent closing, throwing it upon the floor.

"Consarn th' pesky door! Now thar hain't nuthin' on arth fer Mr.
Brewster to give thanks fer but jes' toast and jam. Ah cain't bile
another pot of coffee on Sunday!" Sary stood contemplating the disaster
until Mrs. Brewster called out:

"Sary, will you bring that bread and jam?"

The help brought the desired edibles and explained about the coffee.
Eleanor laughed out loud, but Anne kicked her warningly under the
table.

Mr. Brewster turned to explain to his guests. "Ranchers never work on
the Sabbath. The less we cook the better it is, for we do penance to
our material desire for food. I have never been so severe as to forbid
cooked food on my table, but many of the families do. This morning,
however, we are compelled to sacrifice our weaknesses to Sary's ways."

So the bread and jam was eaten with the omelette, to the accompaniment
of cold water, and then the master prepared to leave the table.

"Girls, don't waste much time fussing with your toilette; we are behind
time as it is."

"Did you expect us to go to church?" gasped Barbara.

"Certainly. Everybody goes," returned Mr. Brewster, equally surprised
at such a question.

"Why, we haven't unpacked any clothes for church."

"That doesn't matter. The Lord doesn't judge according to dress. If
your heart is clean it is all He wants," replied Mr. Brewster, walking
away towards the house.

The girls looked at each other in amazement.

"What shall we do, Anne? I won't go in this old rag!" declared Barbara.

"Don't drag me into the argument, Bob. You hate going to church and
there's no use trying to pretend it is your dress that keeps you away."

"Would Eleanor care to go with us?" asked Mrs. Brewster.

"Is Polly going?" countered Eleanor.

"Oh, yes, I always go," said Polly.

"We-el, I don't know, Poll. I'll go next Sunday but I am taken by
surprise this week. I'll stay home with Bob, I guess."

"Very well, then, I'll tell Mr. Brewster to omit the extra seat in the
wagon," and Mrs. Brewster hurried away to dress.

"What shall we do all morning?" asked Eleanor the moment the ranch-
wagon was out of sight.

"We might unpack a few things we need, and arrange the trunks so mine
can be sent back home without giving you any trouble about yours,"
suggested Barbara.

"That's a good plan. And a good day to do it in, too," laughed Eleanor.

"I think it is ridiculous--the way they go on about the Sabbath! I
suppose they would be dreadfully shocked if they knew we were about to
unpack our trunks!" said Barbara, sneeringly.

Time passed quickly in sorting out the numerous items in the seven
trunks, and the girls felt famished before they were done. The articles
they wished to have out for use were piled up on the grass outside the
barn, and it looked a formidable heap when all was ready to leave the
barn.

"Goodness me! We'll have to make a dozen trips to the house with all
this!" exclaimed Eleanor.

"We'll carry all we can pile up this first trip, and then have
luncheon. Afterward we will carry the rest over," said Barbara.

The clothing seemed so light that they kept piling up the articles
until they could hardly see from under the mountain of lingerie and
accessories. But they both found how heavy the light summer clothes
could be, when one's arms were extended unnaturally to hold up so much
finery.

They finally reached the porch and threw the things into rustic chairs,
while they sat down to cool off in the breeze.

"Now, you carry the clothes to the bedroom, Bob, while I hunt in the
kitchen for something to eat," remarked Eleanor, after a time.

These important duties attended to, the girls were about to go to the
barn for a second load of clothing when the ranch-wagon drove up to the
steps. The family got out and Jeb drove on to the barn.

"What's this on the grass?" asked Mr. Brewster, stooping to pick up a
silk stocking.

"That's Barbara's, I think," said Anne, instantly divining the cause of
its being there.

Then Jeb came running back to the house with news. "Ah found th' trunks
is b'en opened by some one, an' all th' finery is piled on the grass
outside th' barn. What hes happened, Ah want to know."

Luckily Mrs. Brewster heard his remark and Mr. Brewster had no time to
speak before she caught Anne's hand, and led Jeb back to the barn.
Shortly thereafter, the three returned laden with everything ever known
in a lady's wardrobe.

"Mary, you have broken the commandments to-day!" said Mr. Brewster,
overcoming a keen desire to laugh at his wife.

"Maybe, Sam, but I strengthened another, called the 'Golden Rule'--I
certainly did unto them what I want some one to do for mine in case of
need. Poor girls!"

Sary happened to be coming from the kitchen with the early supper
dishes in her hands. She saw Jeb with dainty silk lingerie almost
covering his head, and she heard Mr. and Mrs. Brewster's words. It was
too much!

She continued on her way, but once she reached the table she thumped
the dishes down to vent her spite. "To think them city gals kin wind
Jeb about their fingers like that! On a Sunday, too! Ah wonder hain't
he got no respeck fer me an' the Brewster women, that he allows them
snippy misses to git him to carry underwear--him what's an unmarried
man, at that!"

While the family sat at table enjoying the quiet Sunday evening, Sary
took advantage of their interesting discourse to slip away from the
kitchen and examine the beautiful lace-trimmed apparel spread out upon
the great bed in the guest-room.

"Laws me! Ef it hain't like a bridal outfit. Ef Ah ever hed hed th'
chanst t' put on ennything like-es-that, I'd not have hed t'marry a
poor rancher like Bill. Ah could have hed my pick of the men at Oak
Crick!"

Sary sighed with pity at her own limitations in life, and she crept
back to her kitchen planning how she could manage to get one of the
girls to present her with some of the bridal finery. Thus pondering the
problem, she sat down opposite Jeb and entertained him, as he ate his
Sunday supper of pork and beans.


CHAPTER X

THE DANCE AT BEAR FORKS


The interesting events which crowded each other, day after day, in this
western life, so engrossed the girls that Bob forgot her vow to send a
telegram for return money to Chicago. She even forgot to write to Mrs.
Maynard at Newport, or to any of her society friends, until Anne
reminded her of a duty to her parents.

Tuesday following their first Sunday at Pebbly Pit, a rancher's wife
called just before noon, to deliver invitations.

"Ah heer'd tell how you-all had comp'ny this summer?" were the words
with which she greeted Mrs. Brewster.

"Yes, a few young people. Will you be seated, Mrs. Halsey?" said Mrs.
Brewster, placing a chair on the vine-shaded porch.

"Ah come t' ast you-all--say, you, Sally, stop pickin' them flowers!
Mis' Brewster'll lick yuh!" The visitor interrupted herself to shout at
her little girl who proved to be a naughty one.

"Ez Ah was sayin', Ah come t' leave an invite fer th' hop at Bear
Forks. We-all is glad t' see Anne Stewart, which was a school-teacher
some time back, an' it was fit t' celebrate her friendship, in some
way. Don't cha think a dance jes' th' thing?" As the visitor spoke she
rocked violently back and forth.

"I'm sorry my visitors are not here to thank you themselves, but I feel
sure they will be delighted to attend the dance," replied Mrs.
Brewster, shaking her head rebukingly at the small boy who stood on the
rockers of his mother's chair, and gripped hold of the back, and so was
roughly swayed back and forth with the rocking.

"See har, yuh Jim Henderson Halsey--git down from thar! Ef Ah ketch
yuh, Ah'll skin yer face fer the hop--that Ah will!" threatened the
mother, trying to reach her young hopeful.

But Jim Henderson Halsey knew from dire experiences just what to expect
did his mother succeed in catching him, so he dodged and ran away.

"Did you-all say the gals would be in shortly?" asked the caller.

"No, I said they were _not_ in. They are at the corral this morning."

"Laws me! What a place t' spend th' mornin'. Ah reckon they'll be along
any time, then."

"They left here just before you came and they are practicing on our
western horses before taking any long trips," explained Mrs. Brewster,
looking regretfully at the flower-beds where the two willful children
were destroying the fruits of her planting.

Mrs. Halsey followed her hostess's glance and jumped up. "Ef yuh two
varmints don't quit that, an' come right t' me, Ah'll--Ah'll shet yuh
up in a boogy-hole!" shrilled the irate mother.

Sary heard the familiar voice and instantly ran from the kitchen to
assist in entertaining the morning visitor. The two bad youngsters,
left to their own devices, began throwing the whitewashed stones that
encircled Mrs. Brewster's roundels.

"How-dy, Miss Halsey?" was Sary's greeting, her large hand extended in
cordial comradeship.

"Oh, it's Sary Dodd! How-dee, Sary? Ah recommember now that you-all
come t' live wid Miss Brewster. How'd you-all like th' place?"

The visitor's frankness lost none of its curiosity as she eagerly
waited to hear all about the Brewster family with the mistress still
present, but ignored.

Sary was in her glory and made the most of it. She had just reached the
point where she intended asking the "gossip" to stop to have dinner,
when a crash interrupted the enlivening Yellow Jacket Pass
conversation.

"Sary, run and see what those children have done!" cried Mrs. Brewster,
mentally thanking her stars for the timely intervention.

Soon the ladies heard Jim Henderson Halsey bawling loudly, and his
sister backing away from the buttery while she continued making faces
at the angry help. The little girl's protruded tongue made Sary rush at
her with uplifted palm, but both youngsters were so accustomed to
dodging these attacks, that they reached the haven of Mrs. Halsey's
presence without a painful encounter.

"The ol' thing shook me till my teeth rattled!" wailed Jim Henderson,
etc.

"Sarves yuh right! What cha be'n up t', any way?" retorted Mrs. Halsey,
the hope of dinner still lingering, but growing dim as Sary did not
return.

Fortunately, for the general peace of all concerned, Mr. Brewster drove
up to the porch, on his way to Oak Creek. His wife's beseeching look
appealed to him understandingly.

"Good morning, Mrs. Halsey. Ah hear you-all are inviting folks to the
dance at the school house. Want me to give you a lift to Jamison's
ranch--he hasn't been invited yet!"

"Why, Ah figgered goin' thar after dinner. Be you-all goin' off before
yuh eat?"

"Ah am not sure when we will have dinner to-day, the young ladies are
so engaged with riding, you see."

The moment the Halsey scions heard mention of "dinner" they clung to
their mother's skirts and whined: "We-all wanta stay to dinnerr! Don't
cha go widdout dinnerr!"

"Why not give the children some cake, mother, and then Mrs. Halsey can
have a bite with Jamison. He can lift her on to the next ranch, too,"
suggested Mr. Brewster.

Mrs. Brewster instantly acquiesced and ran to cut three generous
triangles of cake, while her husband came up and lifted Sally up into
the deep wagon. Before any of the Halsey family could protest, he had
turned, lifted Jim Henderson up beside his sister and then asked the
visitor if he could help her up to the seat.

The cake was distributed, and the vexed but vanquished morning caller
jabbed a hat-pin through her rusty toque and pulled her jet-trimmed
shoulder cape tightly over her back, before bowing haughtily to Mrs.
Brewster.

Not until the ranch-wagon turned the edge of Rainbow Cliffs did Mrs.
Brewster permit herself to leave the post of watching and slump down
into the porch rocker with a sigh of gratitude.

Half an hour later the sound of wheels caused her to spring up in
dread, but her husband's cheery laugh relieved her fears.

"Ah saw your difficulty and did the only sensible thing; but we-all
must keep this trick a secret. If Sary gets hold of it, my reputation
in Bear Forks, or Yellow Jacket Pass, is gone," confided Sam Brewster
to his wife, as he glanced fearfully about for Sary.

The horn for dinner sounded shortly after the master's return and, at
the table, the girls were told of the visitor and her invitation to the
dance, but no word of her form of departure was mentioned.

"It's lucky we have evening-dresses," remarked Barbara.

"Do folks dress up at these parties?" asked Eleanor.

"I should say we do!" declared Polly.

Mrs. Brewster and Anne were talking in low tones and did not hear the
question and answer, so they did not explain what Polly meant by
"dressing up."

The days intervening between the Tuesday and the Friday set down for
the hop passed quickly. Polly and her mother washed and renovated the
dotted swiss dress made for the school-commencement, and to Polly's
delight Anne added a blue sash and hair ribbons.

Anne had a simple flowered-silk gown she proposed wearing. And the city
girls had elaborate dresses--Barbara's very much in the latest mode and
Eleanor's flounced and furbelowed, but modestly high in the neck as
became a girl not yet "out."

Sary had bewailed her fate the day preceding the eventful one. Eleanor
pacified her by presenting her with a net-lace collar to enliven her
rusty black alpaca.

An early supper was planned, as the ride to Bear Forks school would
take more than an hour, and every one wanted to be there for the grand
march. For several hours before supper-time, Barbara locked herself in
the bed-room and began her toilette. She dressed her hair, massaged,
and rouged and penciled her eyebrows, until she quite tired herself
out.

Eleanor and Anne rapped again and again for admission, but Barbara was
obdurate about her right of possession. When she finally opened the
door for her room-mates, they stared at her in amused surprise.

"Your hair looks all sizzly, Bob," said Eleanor.

"Oh, Bob, remove some of that carmine from your lips!" advised Anne.

"Why?" demanded Barbara.

"Too much of it, that's all!" giggled Eleanor.

But Anne and Eleanor had their own toilettes to make and paid no
further attention to Barbara. She managed to remove some of the
carmine, and pat down her hair, hot she could not do things as the
French maid generally did them to add to her beauty. Feeling
dissatisfied with her appearance made Barbara irritable, but she
remained in the room criticizing everything the two other girls did or
said. Then just before the horn sounded for supper, a knock came at the
door.

"Come in!" called Anne, buttoning her white suede boots.

"'S onny me. Ah jes' wanta ast you-all ef it is right in city sassiety,
fur a widder of six months' standin' t' go t' a party whar onny old
frien's will be. Thar won't be no sky-larkin' er high-jinks, yo' know!"

Sary's anxious tone expressed her eagerness for a favorable reply to
her query on widowhood. Eleanor looked at Anne to answer, so she took
the initiative.

"Certainly, Sary--come right along and enjoy yourself."

Barbara was shocked. "The help's not going--surely!"

"Humph! Miss Halsey ast me afore she mentioned you-all!" snapped Sary,
quite able to defend herself against Barbara's pride.

"Oh, Bob doesn't mean it that way, Sary," said Eleanor, giving her
sister a backward kick for silence.

"Of course not! Bob means that your mourning might prevent your
attending the dance. But seeing we are all old friends from ranches
round about, it will be like meeting your family," added Anne, the
pacifist.

"Wall, then, Ah'll go," sighed Sary, as if loath to join a merry
throng. "But Ah hez t' have a smitch of somethin' like-ez-how Miss Bob
hez fer her shoulders, cuz my neck's gettin' scrawny now."

Barbara had draped chiffon over her neck and dress, and at Sary's
request, she turned angrily. "The very idea! This chiffon is two
dollars a yard!"

"I've got the very thing you need, Sary. You can wear second mourning
now, I suppose!" exclaimed Eleanor, sending a look at her sister.

She hurried to the closet and took a long flat box from the upper
shelf. As she carried it over to Sary, Barbara stared.

"Eleanor Maynard! _What_ are you giving her?"

"Something I never will need this summer, and Sary can use it very
nicely to furbish up that black dress."

Sary was too excited to wait and open the box in her own room, so she
tore off the paper at once. A lovely rainbow-tinted chiffon scarf lay
revealed, the predominating colors being violet.

"Ah-h-h! Ah'm clean locoed, Miss Nolla! Not a soul'll ever know that
rusty black alpacky is th' same dress Miss Pearson mourned her husband
in fer five years before Ah got it given me!"

"What nonsense! As if that dainty scarf will hide your outlandish dress
and mountainous figure!" came insultingly from Barbara.

But nothing could spoil the joy of possessing such a heavenly wisp of
angel's robe as that scarf seemed to be to Sary. She was deaf to all
else, as she tenderly hugged the box to her ample bosom and backed from
the room.

When all were seated about the table, which was spread in the living
room for that night, Mr. Brewster smiled at Polly in her gala attire.
Anne looked sweet and lovely in her simple dress, but the host could
not quite make out the style the city girls wore. He was not accustomed
to boudoir gowns of filmy lace and thin silk, and he thought they were
a new style of party dress. Had he known _what_ Barbara proposed
wearing, he would have asked her to remain at home.

As Sary passed the bread to Eleanor she leaned over and beamed: "Miss
Nolla, Ah tried that on, an' you-all woulden' know me! Ah'm shore he'll
pick me fer a lanciers! Mebbe that scarf'll give him spine enough to
speak!"

"Sary, I know right well he will!" declared Eleanor, not dreaming the
mischief she wrought in Sary's soul at that.

Sary pranced back to the kitchen, but her flighty thoughts were
swinging corners in the quadrille with Jeb, and the fried potatoes were
gracefully shot into the coal-scuttle as the pan was waved aloft in
imitation of dancers she had envied in days gone by.

"Sary, hurry with the coffee-pot, please!" called Polly.

And Sary grabbed up the stone jug of vinegar from the back of the stove
where she had placed it, and ran in to pour the beverage into cups. The
combined cries of every one at the table failed to bring her to her
senses, so Mrs. Brewster told her to go quickly and dress for the
dance.

Then wagon wheels sounded on the gravel road and Jeb yelled: "Air you-
all ready?"

Sary gave a last lingering look in the tiny mirror over her combination
wash-stand, and realized what charms she had when rainbow chiffon
adorned her person. She then snuffed out the tiny lamp-wick and hurried
forth to meet her fate.

Jeb was dressed regardless of all censorship. A great flaming peony in
his coat-lapel reflected its scarlet on his ruddy face. His tie was a
riot of colors and detracted somewhat from his purple socks and tan
shoes. He wore a figured near-silk vest won at an Oak Creek raffle, and
large checked trousers said to be the latest fashion some years back,
when he squandered his money on them. With his face scoured until it
shone, and his hair greased so that it was plastered down neatly, Jeb
felt he could woo and win the prettiest gal in the country-side. He
forgot there was a "female widow" about.

The Brewster party reached the school-house later than was their wont,
and the cloak-room was well-filled with ranchers' wives and daughters
all waiting to pass judgment on the strangers from Pebbly Pit.

Mrs. Brewster and Polly entered first, shaking hands with friends and
acquaintances. Anne followed smiling benignly on all. Barbara came
next, casting disdainful looks at the ordinary women she found present.
Eleanor delighted in the novel experience and was anxious to meet them
all.

Once in the small room, the new-comers began to remove their dust-coats
and wraps. The ranchers' parties then went out to make room. Barbara
turned to Anne and whispered:

"Where can I find the maid?"

"Maid! We haven't one here, you know."

"No maid to help me? Goodness, what shall I do?"

"You're supposed to dress at home; besides, these people do not powder
or rouge, so they need no mirror or maid, you see," explained Eleanor,
taking delight in shocking Barbara.

"Then I suppose I will have to go out without a look at myself. Do I
look all right to you, Anne?"

As she spoke, Barbara dropped her evening cloak from her shoulders and
pivoted for Anne's benefit. Her gown of rose-pink net, trimmed with
elaborate gold embroidery, was extremely decollete, with narrow gold
bands over the shoulders performing the double duty as sleeves and to
hold the lower section of the dress up in place!

Barbara turned slowly and attracted the attention of Mrs. Brewster,
Polly, and a few strangers lagging behind to watch the visitors. Just
then Sary hurried in from the dance-hall. She gasped at the sight
before her and quickly came to the rescue.

"Shet yer eyes--every one! The poor dear! Ah'll cover her up whiles
some one finds her basque!" And Sary caught up Mrs. Halsey's jet-
trimmed cape and wound it quickly about Barbara's bare neck and
shoulders.

"Child, how come yuh t' fergit the basque? Er what hez happened to it?"
cried Sary, sympathetically, while Barbara struggled vainly to wrench
herself free from the ill-smelling wrap that generally hung in Halsey's
kitchen.

"Ah hev it! Polly, git the box Nolla gave me. Ah'll let Miss Bob wear
my scarf!"

This meant supreme sacrifice for Sary, but she willingly offered the
one and only treasure to serve a betrayed friend. Still she was at a
loss to understand where that basque could be!

Finally Barbara squirmed free and Mrs. Brewster managed to say:

"Sary, Bob has on one of her most modern evening gowns. They are made
without tops, you know!"

Sary gasped and suddenly collapsed upon the chair. Her strained
expression, as she took a covert look at the dress, spoke volumes.

"Glory be, Miss Brewster," whispered Sary, hoarsely. "You-all don' mean
it fer trut', do yuh?"

"Yes, Sary, it is a very expensive and stylish robe."

"An' kin you-all let her march brazen-like, like that, in front of the
men!" shrilled Sary, holding both wide hands over her heart.

"I never heard or dreamed there was such ignorance in the world, as I
have found in Colorado!" now flared Barbara, turning and leaving the
cloak-room.

Sary waited but a second, then she cried, "Ah cain't 'low Jeb t' see
sech sights--an' he a good bachelor-man!"

Sary rushed out to spare her prey any shocks, and the other members of
the party gazed at each other doubtfully.

"Oh, well, it's not our funeral, Potty!" said Eleanor.

"Shall we join the dancers?" asked Anne.

"Yes, but I fear Bob will be ostracized," said Mrs. Brewster.

"Serve her right! Anne and I told her not to dress like that, but she
_would_, you know. She wanted to show folks the style," explained
Eleanor, taking silent Polly by the arm and leading her out to the main
hall.

As they left the cloak-room, the girls heard the fiddler shout: "Git
yer pardners fer the Grand March!"

And from that time on to midnight, the three girls had the best fun
ever. But poor Barbara stood near the cloak-room as isolated as the
plague, for the ranchers dared not even look at a gown without a top,
let alone dance with the doubtful thing.


CHAPTER XI

IN THE WILDERNESS


Each day the four girls rode along various trails until, in the
judgment of Jeb, they were practiced enough to take a longer ride in
the mountains.

Polly had been urging Jeb to give a favorable opinion on their ability
to stand a prolonged ride to the Flat Tops, but he was careful and
practical and persisted in making them try a greater distance daily to
finally harden them to a rough trail.

Then Jeb said he reckoned the girls could start for a real outing.
Immediately, they planned where to go and what to see.

Polly outlined a trip that might take a whole day, so they would have
to take food and kit for cooking purposes. Each girl would ride her
favorite horse or burro and the extra burro, Choko, could carry the
outfit.

Of course, Polly decided to ride Noddy, as the burro was well
acquainted with her mistress's ways and the mountains. Eleanor
preferred a burro also, because, as she said comically, "if one falls
from a burro's back it is not far to Mother Earth." The two other girls
selected horses, sure-footed and trained for climbing.

On the morning chosen for the trip, Mrs. Brewster and Sary were up at
day-break preparing the kit and packing the panniers. At breakfast,
four eager girls, with wide sombreros on their heads, heavy mountain-
shoes and leather puttees covering feet and limbs, talked of the great
adventures they were about to meet with.

Sam Brewster laughed at their wild imaginings and said: "Ah shouldn't
wonder but what you-all will find a second 'Aladdin's Lamp' hiding
place. Just think of the fun to be had by rubbing the Lamp and wishing
for things!"

Then Jeb brought the mounts from the barn and Sary helped him strap the
panniers and kit to Choko. Just as they were ready to start, Sary flew
out with a paper package carefully held.

"Polly, Ah made a s'prise fer you-all, but don't let Choko roll in it
er run away, er my work will go fer nuthin'."

"Don't worry about Choko, Sary, he's too trustworthy to serve us such a
trick," bragged Polly, petting the burro on the head.

"Wall, then, see thet it hain't shooken up too much er gittin' mashed
under the ax," were the parting words from Sary, as she shifted the
short ax, which is an important item in every outfit.

It was a wonderful summer day--the kind that makes one feel happy in
mere living, and the anticipation of wonders to come added a zest to
the outing for the girls.

They left the trail leading from Pebbly Pit and picked up the rough
mountain trail at the Forks, Barbara and Eleanor exclaiming constantly
at the gorgeous wild flowers growing wherever the roots could find
lodgment.

"I never saw such columbines! Four times the size of ours in the East,"
cried Eleanor.

"And those marvelous orange-colored blossoms! They look like a rare
exotic, with their huge clusters and flaunting colors!" exclaimed
Barbara.

"If you girls think these are so beautiful, just wait till we reach the
'bottoms'--there you will see size and color enough to make you wonder
if you accidentally struck Paradise," said Anne.

"And our ferns and mosses, girls! You never saw such specimen,
elsewhere," added Polly, churking to Choko to hurry on.

"Polly, why did Jeb over-load that poor little burro?" now asked
Barbara, having lost her momentary interest in flora.

"Choko isn't over-loaded at all. Of course it looks as if he had a
great load to carry, but pans and woolen blankets look more than they
weigh, you see. The heaviest thing he carries is my ax, I reckon."

"Ax! What do you want of an ax?" wondered Barbara.

"Can't tell how cold it may be up on the mountain-top, so I brought the
sheath-knife, ax, rifle, and other things in case we get the tail-end
of a blizzard."

"And the blankets in case we get lost and need to camp out all night,"
added Anne, teasingly, seeing the city girls' fears.

"You can't really mean it, Anne! Surely we won't lose our way, and as
for a blizzard! Well, it is July," laughed Barbara.

"It wouldn't be the first time we ran into a blizzard in July,"
commented Polly.

"But how is it possible, girl alive!" cried Barbara.

"Possible enough on the Flat Tops. The merest rag of a cloud finds an
excuse to carry snow from the peaks. The wonder will be if we come away
without seeing snow fall."

"Oh, Polly, how thrilling!" exclaimed Eleanor.

"Once when father and I rode over this same trail to find a trapper who
had pelts for sale, we got caught in a blizzard. We got the pelts but
we also got the storm, and lucky for us that we had the pelts first.

"I never had experienced a real mountain storm, but father had, so he
showed me what to do. I think I would know now just what to do in case
of another surprise."

"Bu-r-r-r! Let's hope you won't have to practice on us," laughed
Eleanor, pretending to shiver.

"Stop your nonsense, Nolla! I don't want to think of such dreadful
things," cried Barbara.

"And I want to hear about how the pelts saved her life," added Anne.

"It's real interesting, Bob, so let me tell them," asked Polly, and
receiving no unfavorable word or look, she proceeded:

"It was the Fourth of July, and of course no one would start on a ride
wearing a fur-lined coat, so father and I had on our summer clothes.

"After riding along Top Notch Trail for a time, we met the trapper and
bargained for the furs, then started back by a new trail he told us of.
It led past Pagoda Peak, and just as we got to the base of the peak and
discovered the down-trail, the blizzard came swooping upon us without
warning.

"Father and I tried to keep going, but the gale traveled too fast and
blew in whirling eddies, so we got the pelts out of the bundle, and
wrapped ourselves in the largest ones. The smaller ones we used for our
feet. Father found two great bear-skins and covered the horse--that
acted as a shield on one side from the storm--the other horses stood in
front and back of us, making three sides protected.

"Father then made me creep with him to the refuge made by the three
horses and there we remained. The horses stood perfectly still
throughout the blizzard, which lasted only an hour at most, and the
steam they exuded from their bodies kept us quite warm as we crouched
under them.

"When the storm blew over, we dug a way out and removed the horse
blankets and fur pelts from the horses. Then we rolled our own
coverings into the bundle and started on down-trail. But the floods of
melting snow caused wash-outs and it was risky going. When we reached
the first Park never a sign of snow was there, and the only result of
that mountain blizzard was an added flood of water pouring down the
gulleys to the bottoms and valley."

"Oh, Polly, what an interesting book your adventures would make!"
exclaimed Eleanor.

"I'd like to write it down as you tell it, Polly, and we can surely
find a publisher for it," added Anne, eagerly.

"Really! Oh, how I'd love to tell such a story!" said Polly, all
enthusiasm.

"We'll try it as soon as we get back to-night!" promised Anne.

The going was easy, so Polly told of other adventures: of the trip to
Buffalo Park when a bear chased them; of her meeting with Old
Montresor, the gold-seeker of Grizzly Slide and his pitiful story; of
the nights spent out on the mountains, watching beside a dying camp-
fire, or listening to the call of the moose to his mate on a moonlit
night; of the wonderful sport fishing in trout-filled streams, or
seeking gorgeous flora and strange fauna on the peaks, and again
photographing wild beasts and birds that never showed a fear of her as
she traversed their domains. The three girls were spell-bound at her
vivid descriptions and Anne sighed with desire to put it all down on
paper for future publication.

"Montresor's Mine is in this mountain that I want to show you to-day.
He was a dear old man who lived a solitary life in a cabin near Buffalo
Park. Patsy, his dog, was his only companion. But he died and left me
his mine--that we never found again," sighed Polly.

"Oh, Polly! Tell us the story!" chorused the girls.

Polly laughed: "It isn't a story, 'cause there never was a climax as
real stories have to have, you know. But I'll tell you how I met Mr.
Montresor. I was out with Noddy, one day, and we traveled farther than
usual.

"In leaving a bad trail to take a good one, I met the gray-haired man
slowly riding up. An Irish terrier ran back of his horse, sniffing,
sniffing, and whining as if distracted. I was so surprised at the dog's
actions that I stopped to ask the man what ailed him.

"'Ah, my child, Patsy is seeking for my lost mine!'

"'Your lost mine!' I gasped, for I had never heard of him or his mine,
although folks said there was a rich vein of gold somewhere in the
mountain.[Footnote: This is a true incident.] "'Yes, child, I am the
unfortunate Montresor. Haven't you heard of my great loss?'

"I thought the poor man was foolish, so I humored him by saying, 'No,
sir, I never did, Won't you tell me about it?'

"Then he told me the story. He had been an old prospector in the
Klondike, but not a successful one, as he was too honest. On his
return, from Alaska, he had to stop in Denver and work for his fare
back to the East where he came from. Being a splendid engineer as well
as a mineralogist, he found a place with a crew of mining engineers
about to inspect Pagoda Peak section and Lost Lake district. He came
with them.

"After he had been in these mountains for a time, he was so certain of
finding gold that he remained when the rest of the crew went back to
Denver. After two years of patient digging and prospecting he took a
new trail that was later found to be Red Man's Trail, seldom traveled,
as it was such dangerous and hard going.

"He was climbing along an awful place where the ledge hung over a
chasm, when he spied a small yellow nugget on the ground. He examined
it and found it to be fine red-gold. Upon looking about, he found a few
more, but there seemed to be no sign of gold in the ledge or in the
rocks about him. Still he staked out a claim on the spot in hopes of
later finding gold hidden in the ground.

"He hobbled his horse and made a good circuit of the place and then
discovered that the opposite ledge of the abyss towered up hundreds of
feet higher than the one he was on. That gave him an idea.

"He rode the horse carefully along his ledge until he reached a slope
where both ledges met an up-grade of mountain-side. Leaving the lower
ledge and back-trailing on the higher one, he stopped opposite the
place where he had found the nuggets. He dismounted, sought carefully
about, and to his joy found more nuggets exactly like the ones picked
up on the opposite lower side.

"He took the pick from the saddle and worked at the wall facing him,
and discovered a rich lode running straight in through the solid rock.
He was so excited that he started off without staking a claim or
otherwise marking the place. But he soon remembered and went back. He
made out a correct claim and fastened it to a tree, then piled up the
necessary heaps of stone with his stakes in the middle. Doing all he
could think of to legally hold the right to mine the ore, he started
back along the dangerous ledge. It was so dark by this time, that he
could not find the way he came, and knowing it was almost impassable,
he permitted the horse to choose a way out by going up the mountain-
side, and so he finally reached the summit. Here he camped for the
night and early in the morning he kept on till he struck Top Notch
Trail, but so circuitous had been the route that he never could
describe the pathway his horse took.

"Unfortunately, he had left Patsy home that day to guard supplies in
the cabin, and he did not return there at once, thinking it wiser to
first file his claims in Oak Creek. The clerk asked for section-corners
or distances from the nearest surveyor's blaze, but Montresor had not
found any.

"It was a question whether the claim would be legal, but the worried
old man refused to give full details of the spot, as he feared the
claim would be jumped, and he purposed going back again to make a
survey for himself.

"On his way to the cabin for Patsy, a dreadful storm came over the
mountains and lasted for three days. Snow, hail and wind blew down the
sides until it seemed as if winter had come in full blast. Of course,
no one would attempt climbing in that storm and Montresor had to remain
in his cabin for the blizzard to pass.

"When he was able to travel again, he took Patsy to help find the
place, but the rain had washed away all scent for the dog. After a
tortuous climb on the trail, made ten-fold worse by the down timber and
wash-outs, Montresor discovered land-marks and knew he was on the right
pathway.

"However, he could see no ravine or ledges, and after hunting day after
day, without locating a spot that resembled his claim, he well-nigh
caved in. There was no gully, no ledge, no wall of rock with fresh-
picked vein of gold showing in its face! In fact, so much rock and
earth and trees had been washed down from Top Notch Trail during the
great storm that the whole area he had previously covered had changed
form and appearances.

"The poor man then tried to find his claim by following Top Notch Trail
and coming down from the summit, but he was taken ill and laid up in
his cabin for a long time.

J. de Loutherbourgh, an artist and member of the Royal Academy. He died
here in 1812. Arthur Murphy, whose monument in the church has been
mentioned, lived at No. 17. He wrote lives of Fielding, Johnson, and
Garrick, besides numerous essays and plays, and was well known to his
own contemporaries. Mrs. Mountain, the celebrated singer, also had
a house in the terrace.

The fisheries of Hammersmith were formerly much celebrated. They were
leased in the seventeenth century to Sir Nicholas Crispe, Sir Abraham
Dawes, and others for the value of three salmon annually. Flounders,
smelt, salmon, barbel, eels, roach, dace, lamprey, were caught in
the river, but even in 1839 fish were growing very scarce. Faulkner,
writing at that period, says it was ten years since a salmon had
been caught.

In Black Lion Lane is St. Peter's Church, built in 1829. It is of
brick, and has a high lantern tower and massive portico, supported
by pillars.

Close by are the girls' and infant schools, built 1849-52. From
this point to the western boundary of the parish there is nothing
further of interest.

In King Street West, after No. 229, there is a Methodist Chapel,
with an ornamental porch.

A few doors westward are the new or Upper Latymer Schools, with the
arms of the founder over the doorway. The buildings are in red brick,
with stone facings.

Returning to the north side of the Hammersmith Road, which has for
some time been overlooked, we find the King's Theatre, stone-fronted
and new, bearing date 1902.

Near it is the West London Hospital, instituted May, 1856, and opened
in July of the same year. Since that time it has been greatly enlarged,
and an immense new wing overlooking Wolverton Gardens has been
added.

The hospital was incorporated by royal charter, November 1, 1894. It is
entirely supported by voluntary contributions.

Near the Broadway is the Convent of the Sacred Heart, standing on ground
which has long been consecrated to religious uses, for a nunnery is
said to have existed here before the Reformation.

In 1669 a Roman Catholic school for girls was founded here, and in
1797 the Benedictine nuns, driven out of France, took refuge in it. The
present buildings were erected in 1876 for a seminary, and it was not
until 1893 that the nuns of the Sacred Heart re-established a
convent within the walls.

The present community employ themselves in teaching, and superintend
schools of three grades.

There stood in the Broadway until within recent years a charming old
building called The Cottage--one of those picturesque but obstructive
details in which our ancestors delighted.

Behind the Congregational Chapel there is an old hall, used as a
lecture-hall, which was originally a chapel, and which is said by
Faulkner to be the oldest place of worship in Hammersmith.

It was built by the Presbyterians. The first authentic mention of its
minister is in 1700, when the Rev.

Samuel Evans "collected on the brief for Torrington at a meeting of
Protestant Dissenters held at the White Hart, Hammersmith, 13s.
6d."

In the Brook Green Road Nos. 41 to 45 contain an orphanage called
St.

Mary's Catholic Orphanage for Girls.

On Brook Green itself one or two old cottages with tiled roofs are
still to be seen--reminiscences of old Hammersmith. The long strip of
grass, in shape like a curving tongue, justifies the name of "Green."
Dr.

Iles' almshouses, known as the Brook Green Almshouses, have long been
established here, though the present buildings date only from 1839.
They stand at the corner of Rowan Road, and are rather ornately
built in brick with diamond-paned windows.

The charity was founded in 1635 by Dr. Iles, who left "houses, almshouses,
and land on Brook Green, and moiety of a house in London." The old
almshouses were pulled down in 1839. At the north end of Brook Green,
next door to the Jolly Gardeners public-house, stood Eagle House, a very
fine old mansion, only demolished within the last twenty years.
Bute House stands on the site.

Eagle House was built in the style of Queen Anne's reign, and had
a fine gateway with two stone piers surmounted by eagles. The back of
the house was of wood, and the front of brick, and there was a
massy old oak staircase.

Like many other old houses, it became for a time a school.

Sion House is a square stuccoed building, plain and without decoration
either interior or exterior.

This was used as a nunnery until about three years ago, and the wall
decorations in the room used by the nuns as a chapel are still quite
fresh. This room is ugly and meagre, and without attractiveness.

It has a fine garden at the back, stretching out parallel to that
of its neighbour, and the two together embrace an area of close
upon four acres, which will make a fine playground for the projected
school.

These gardens are at present neglected tangles of evergreen creepers and
trees, but with a little care might be admirably laid out. On Brook
Green is now established St.

Paul's School for girls, a companion to the large school for boys already
described.

This is likely to be a very popular institution.

Near the corner of Caithness Road is the Hammersmith and West
Kensington Synagogue, opened on September 7, 1890, which forms one
of the thirteen synagogues in London that constitute together the
United Synagogue, of which Lord Rothschild is the President.

The building was designed by Mr.

Delissa Joseph, F.R.I.B.A. The leading features of the design are a
gabled façade with sham minarets, and a recessed porch with
overhanging balcony.

The façade is flanked by square towers containing the staircases.

At the south end of the Green there is quite a Roman Catholic colony.
The Almshouses stand on the west side, facing the road, behind a
quadrangle of green grass.

They were founded in 1824, and contain accommodation for thirty inmates
of either sex. Five of the houses are endowed, and the pensioners
pass on in rotation from the unendowed to the endowed rooms.

They must be Roman Catholics and exceed the age of sixty years before
they are received. On the north side of the quadrangle is the Roman
Catholic parish church, a fine building in the Gothic style, with a high
spire and moulded entrance doorway, built in 1851.

Immediately opposite, across the road, is St. Mary's Training College
for elementary school masters.

These young men must have passed the King's Scholarship examination and
be over the age of eighteen before they enter on the two years' course
of study. The large building near on the north side is the practising-school,
where the students learn the art of teaching practically. There is
a pretty little chapel in the college, and the walls enclose three
acres of land, including site.

St. Joseph's School for pauper children is adjacent to the
practising-school, on the north side.

This building is certified for 180 children, who are received from the
workhouse, etc. They enter at the age of three years, and leave
at sixteen for situations. It was founded and is managed by the Daughters
of the Cross, and was established in its present quarters September 19,
1892.

Faulkner says of Brook Green, "Here is a Roman Catholic Chapel and
School called the Arke," so that this part of Hammersmith has long
been connected with the Catholics.

In the Blythe Road, No. 79, is a fine old house with an imposing
portico, which now overlooks a dingy yard.

This is Blythe House, "reported to have been haunted, and many strange
stories were reported of ghosts and apparitions having been seen here;
but it turned out at last that a gang of smugglers had taken up
their residence in it."

It was once used as a school, and later on as a reformatory. It is now
in the possession of the Swan Laundry Company.

In Blythe Road there is a small mission church called Christ Church.
In Shepherd's Bush Road, at the corner of Netherwood Road, is West
Kensington Park Chapel of the Wesleyan Methodists.

Shepherd's Bush and many of the adjoining roads are thickly lined with
bushy young plane-trees. St.

Simon's Church, in Minford Gardens, is an ugly red-brick building with
ornamental facings of red brick, and a high steeple of the same
materials. It was built in 1879. St. Matthew's, in Sinclair Road, is
very similar, but has a bell-gable instead of a steeple.

The foundation-stone was laid 1870. In Ceylon Road there is a Board school.
Facing Addison Road Station is the well-known place of entertainment
called Olympia, with walls of red brick and stone and a semicircular
glass roof. It contains the largest covered arena in London.

Returning once more to the Broadway, we traverse King Street, which
is the High Street of Hammersmith.

It is very narrow, and, further, blocked by costers' barrows, so that
on Saturday nights it is hard work to get through it at all. The
pressure is increased by the electric trams, which run on a single set
of rails to the Broadway.

In King Street is the Hammersmith Theatre of Varieties, the West End
Lecture-Hall, and the West End Chapel, held by the Baptists. It
stands on the site of an older chapel, which was first used for services
of the Church of England, and was acquired by the Baptists in 1793.
The old tombstones standing round the present building are memorials
of the former burial-ground. At the west end of King Street is an
entrance to Ravenscourt Park, acquired by the L.C.C. in 1888-90. The
grounds cover between thirty and forty acres, and are well laid
out in flower-beds, etc., at the southern end.

The Ravenscourt Park Railway-station is on the east side, and the arched
railway-bridge crosses the southern end of the park. A beautiful
avenue of fine old elms leads to the Public Library, which is at
the north end in what was once the old manor-house.

All this part of Hammersmith was formerly included in the Manor of
Pallenswick or Paddingswick. Faulkner says this manor is situated "at
Pallengswick or Turnham Green, and extends to the western road." The
first record of it is at the end of Edward III.'s reign, when it
was granted to Alice Perrers or Pierce, who was one of the King's
favourites. She afterwards married Lord Windsor, a Baron, and Lieutenant
of Ireland. Report has also declared that King Edward used the manor-house
as a hunting-seat, and his arms, richly carved in wood, stood in
a large upper room until a few years before 1813.

But the house itself cannot have been very ancient then, for Lysons
says it had only recently been rebuilt at the date he wrote--namely,
1795.

The influence of Alice Perrers over the King was resented by his
courtiers, who procured her banishment when he died in 1378.

After her marriage, however, King Richard II. granted the manor to
her husband.

There is a gap in the records of the manor subsequently until John
Payne died, leaving it to his son William in 1572.

This was the "William Payne of Pallenswick, Esq.," who placed a
monument in Fulham Church to the memory of himself and his wife
before his own death, and who left an island called Makenshawe "to
the use of the poor of this parish on the Hammersmith side."

This bequest is otherwise described as being part of an island or
twig-ait called Mattingshawe, situated in the parish of Richmond
in the county of Surrey.

At the time the bequest was left the rent-charge on the island amounted
to £3 yearly, which was to be distributed among twelve poor men
and women the first year, and to be used for apprenticing a poor
boy the second year, alternately.

Sir Richard Gurney, Lord Mayor of London, bought the manor in 1631.
It was several times sold and resold, and in Faulkner's time
belonged to one George Scott.

It had only then recently begun to be known as Ravenscourt. The house
was granted to the commissioners of the public library by the
London County Council at a nominal rent, and the library was opened
by Sir John Lubbock, March 19, 1890.

In a case at the head of the stairs are a series of the Kelmscott
Press books, presented by Sir William Morris.

Round the walls of the rooms hang many interesting old prints, illustrative
of ancient houses in Hammersmith and Fulham. There is also a valuable
collection of cuttings, prints, and bills relating to the local
history of the parish.

In the entrance hall are hung prints of Rocque's and other maps of
Hammersmith, and the original document signed by the enrolled band
of volunteers in 1803.

Among the treasures of the library may be mentioned the minute-book
of the volunteers, a copy of Bowack's "Middlesex," and an original
edition of Rocque's maps of London and environs.

Just outside the park, on the east side, is the Church of Holy Innocents,
opposite St. Peter's Schools. It is a high brick building, opened
September 25, 1890.

There is a Primitive Methodist chapel with school attached in Dalling
Road near by.

In Glenthorne Road is the Church of St. John the Evangelist, founded in
1858, and designed by Mr.
Butterfield.

A magnificent organ was built in it by one of the parishioners in
memory of her late husband.

Behind the church are the Godolphin Schools, founded in the sixteenth
century by the will of W.

Godolphin, and rebuilt in 1861. In Southerton Road there is a small
Welsh chapel. The Goldhawk Road is an old Roman road, a fact which
was conclusively proved by the discovery of the old Roman causeway
accidentally dug up by workmen in 1834.

Shepherd's Bush Green is a triangular piece of grass an acre or two
in extent.

There seems to be no recognised derivation of the curious name.
At Shepherd's Bush, in 1657, one Miles Syndercomb hired a house for
the purpose of assassinating Oliver Cromwell as he passed along the
highroad to the town.

The plot failed, and Syndercomb was hanged, drawn, and quartered in
consequence.

The precise spot on which the attempt took place is impossible to
identify. It was somewhere near "the corner of Golders
Lane," says Faulkner, but the lane has long since been obliterated.

St. Stephen's Church, in the Uxbridge Road, was the earliest church
in this part of Hammersmith.

It was built and endowed by Bishop Blomfield in 1850. Its tower and spire,
rising to the height of 150 feet, can be seen for some distance.

St. Thomas's, in the Godolphin Road, is rather a pretty church of
brick with red-tiled roof, and some ornamental stonework on the south
face. It was built in 1882, designed by Sir A.

Blomfield, and the foundation-stone was laid by the Baroness
Burdett-Coutts.

The chancel was added in 1887.

In Leysfield Road stands St. Andrew's Presbyterian Church, of which the
foundation-stone was laid by the present Duke of Argyll, March 30,
1870.

In the extreme west of the Goldhawk Road is St. Mary's Church, in bright
red brick, erected 1886. The Duchess of Teck laid the foundation-stone.

This has brought us to the end of the houses. Behind St. Mary's lie waste
land and market-gardens.

Just outside the parish boundary are two old houses of brick in the
style of the seventeenth century; they used to be known as Stamford Brook
Manor House, but they have no authentic history. Starch Green
Road branches off from the Goldhawk Road opposite Ravenscourt Park;
this road, running up into the Askew Road, was formerly known by
the still more extraordinary name of Gaggle Goose Green.

In Cobbold Road, to the north of the waste land is St. Saviour's. An
iron church was first erected here in 1884, and the present red-brick
building was consecrated March 4, 1889. The chancel was only added in
1894.

In Becklow Road are a neat row of almshouses with gabled roofs. These
are the Waste Land Almshouses.

In the words of the charity report, ordered to be printed by the
Vestry of Hammersmith in 1890, "This foundation owes its origin to
a resolution which was entered into by the copyholders of the Manor
on Fulham on the 23rd April, 1810, that no grants of waste land
belonging to the manor should in future be applied to the purpose
of raising a fund and endowing almshouses."

Part of the money received from the Waste Lands Fund thus created
has been appropriated to the Fulham side, and part to the Hammersmith
side.

The Hammersmith almshouses were at first built at Starch Green.

In 1868 these houses were pulled down and new ones erected. The
present almshouses were erected in 1886 for twelve inmates.

In the Uxbridge Road, opposite Becklow Road, is St. Luke's Church, a
red-brick building with no spire or tower, erected in 1872.

The iron church which it succeeded, stands still behind it, and is
used for a choir-room and vestry.

A short way westward, in the Uxbridge Road, is Oaklands Congregational
Church, a somewhat heavy building covered with stucco, with a large
portico supported by Corinthian columns.

Behind the houses bordering the north of the Uxbridge Road is a wide
expanse of waste land with one or two farms. This part of the Manor
of Fulham was leased in 1549 by Bishop Bonner to Edward, Duke of
Somerset, under the name of the Manor of Wormholt Barns.

Through the attainder of the Duke the Crown eventually obtained
possession of it.

It passed through various hands, and was split up at last into two parts,
Wormholt and Eynham lands; these two names are still preserved in
Wormholt and Eynham Farms.

In 1812 the Government took a lease of the northern part of the land
for twenty-one years at an annual rent of £100, which was subsequently
renewed.

On part of this land was built the prison of Wormwood Scrubs in 1874.
Part is used as a rifle-range, and to the north is a large public
and military ground for exercising troops, etc.

To the east of the prison are the Chandos and the North Kensington cricket
and football ground.

The Prison walls enclose an area of sixteen acres. The building was all
done by convict labour.

To the south, without the walls, lie the houses of the officials, warders,
etc. On the great towers by the gateway are medallions of John
Howard and Elizabeth Fry.

Within the courtyard are workshops, etc., and immediately opposite the
gateway is a fine chapel with circular windows built of Portland
stone. Four great "halls" stretch out northward, at right angles to the
gates. These measure 387 feet in length, are four stories in height,
and each provides accommodation for 360 prisoners.

The three western ones are for men, that on the east for women.

On the male side one "hall" is reserved for convicts doing their
months of solitary confinement before passing on elsewhere.

The men are employed as masons, carpenters, etc., the women in laundry
and needle-work.

The exercise-grounds are large and airy; the situation is very
healthy.

The next district, traversed by the Latymer Road, is a squalid,
miserable quarter of the borough, with poor houses on either side.

In Clifton Street is St. Gabriel's, the mission church of St. James's,
a little brick building erected in 1883 by the parishioners and
others.

Further northward, beyond the railway-bridge, is Holy Trinity Church.

The foundation-stone was laid on Ascension Day, 1887, by the Duchess
of Albany.

It is a red-brick building with a fine east window decorated with stone
tracery.

Beyond this there is nothing further of interest except St.

Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery at Kensal Green. It comprises thirty
acres, and was opened in May, 1858.

There are many notable names among those buried here, namely: Cardinals
Wiseman and Manning; Clarkson Stanfield, R.A.; Dr.

Rock, who was Curator of Ecclesiastical Antiquities in the South
Kensington Museum; Adelaide A. Proctor, Panizzi, Prince Lucien
Bonaparte, and others. To the west of the cemetery lies a network of
interlacing railways, to the north a few streets, in one of which
there is an iron church.

We have now made practical acquaintance with this vast borough,
stretching from the river to Kensal Green, and including within its
limits an exceptional number of churches and chapels of all
denominations.

There are numerous convents, almshouses, and schools.
Hammersmith has always been noted for its charities, and no bequest to
its poor has ever been made without being doubled and trebled by
subsequent gratuities.

On a general survey, the three most interesting places within the
boundaries seem to be: St.

Paul's School, flourishing in Hammersmith, but not indigenous;
Ravenscourt Park, with its aroma of old history, and the sternly
practical institution of Wormwood Scrubs Prison.

Hammersmith can boast not a few great names among its residents, by
no means least that of the loyal Sir Nicholas Crispe; but with
Kneller, Radcliffe, Worlidge, Morland, Thompson, Turner, and Morris,
it has a goodly list.

[Illustration: HAMMERSMITH DISTRICT.

Published by A. & C. Black, London.]

FULHAM

The earliest authority for the derivation of the name of Fulham is
Camden, in his "Britannia," who is quoted by all succeeding writers.

Norden says: "Fulham, of the Saxons called Fullon-ham, which (as Master
Camden taketh it) signifieth Volucrum Domus, the Habitacle of Birds
or the Place of Fowls.

Fullon and Furglas in the Saxon toong signifieth Fowles, and Ham or Hame
as much as Home in our Toong. So that Fullonham or Fuglahame is as
much as to say the Home House or Habitacle of Fowle.

Ham also in many places signifieth Amnis a River.

But it is most probable it should be of Land Fowle which usually
haunt Groves and Clusters of Trees whereof in this Place it seemeth
to have been plenty."

Bowack also quotes Camden, adding: "In all Probability a Place where all
sorts of Water Fowls were bred and preserved for the Diversion of
our Saxon Monarchs."

Lysons, commenting on this derivation, adds in a note: "The Saxon word
_ful_ is translated foul: _fuhl_, a fowl: _full_ and _fullan_ are
full, as _full mona_, the full moon." This latter meaning has been
chosen by the authors of the Anglo-Saxon dictionaries, notably
Somner, Lye, and Bosworth.

Fulham is bounded by Chelsea and Kensington on the east, by the
river on the west and south, and by Hammersmith on the north.

The eastern boundary follows generally the railway-line between
Addison Road Station and the river, and the northern one is identical
with the southern one of Hammersmith already given.

"Can't you girls start fire with flint--or some sticks?" asked Polly,
curiously.

"The only fire I can light is with a safety match and the valve of a
gas-stove!" replied Barbara, quaintly.

The others considered her remark very funny and Polly promised to teach
them how to make a fire with two sticks only!

"Do it now, and fry the fish for us!" said Eleanor.

"No, it will be too late for us to begin all that now. We had better
wait until supper-time. We really ought to be on the trail by this
time," said Polly.

"Child alive! You don't intend being out in the woods at supper-time,
do you?" gasped Barbara, fearfully.

Polly laughed. "Is that so fearful? Why, I think it is piles of fun to
camp out on a fine night!"

"Maybe you do, but remember the rattle-snake! We may be sleeping on the
ground when one comes along-_Oh,_ OH!" cried Barbara, shivering.

"Oh, come now, Bob! No use conjuring up such gruesome pictures to
tickle your nerves!" exclaimed Eleanor, impatiently.

"If you don't want to go on to Grizzly Slide, now's the time to say so!
When we get there it will be too late to complain about the lateness of
the hour in getting home!" said sensible Polly. "Oh, we all want to go
to Grizzly Slide!" asserted Anne, hastily.

"And we will take everything that comes with it!" declared Eleanor,
eagerly.

"Well, all right, but for the love of goodness, don't let's camp in the
wilderness all night!" cried Barbara.

They sat down after that discussion and ate the sandwiches and fruit,
but Polly wanted a piece of the chocolate cake she thought Sary had
packed for them.

"I couldn't find any! We looked through and found only sandwiches in
the papers," said Anne.

"Oh, pshaw! I was sure there was cake!" grumbled Polly.

"It may possibly be in the bottom of the other pannier, as we didn't
unpack everything, you know," suggested Barbara.

"If it is, we'll eat it to-night for supper. At least we know Sary
packed _something_ good for us," added Anne.

Once more on the trail, the adventurers rode through forests where the
notes of unseen birds blending with the murmur of pines sounded like
weird music to the city girls.

"Just like the sea's roar in a conch-shell, isn't it?" whispered Anne,
as she listened rapturously.

They passed tumbling, hurrying mountain streams where the burnished
trout flashed swiftly back and forth in the clear water. They came to
an upland park where the soft whistle of quail caused Polly to lift her
rifle, but the whir of wings told of a flight. From jagged rents in the
cliffs, through which the horses passed, their hoofs ringing echoes
from the iron-veined rock, they came to sleepy hollows where the Quaker
Aspens stood ghostlike as sentinels on guard before their beautiful
Eden.

Having climbed one peak and descended it, then the next one, and so on,
and on, following the winding trail that became more difficult to find
and more dangerous to climb, Polly finally drew rein beside a tree
distinctly scarred.

"Hurrah! The blaze to the Slide," shouted she, scraping away the lichen
that covered the spot.

Glad of an excuse to jump down and stretch their limbs, the other girls
joined Polly at the tree and saw the blaze, although so old, to be
perfectly plain and easily traced.

"Four miles to Grizzly Slide!" read Polly, exultantly.

"But it must be three o'clock or more. When can we hope to get back
home?" murmured Barbara, glancing down the trail they just left.

"Too late to worry about that now," said Eleanor.

"I plan to see Grizzly Slide and then camp somewhere," said Polly.

"That is the best thing, now," added Anne.

"You don't mean to sleep out in this awful wilderness, do you?" gasped
Barbara.

"No, we're going to engage a suite of rooms at the 'Queen Victoria' for
to-night!" jeered Eleanor.

"I hope to reach the Slide and ride back to those Falls for camp. We
have fish and pasture and soft moss there," said Polly.

"Ideal place, too," approved Anne.

"But the wild beasts, and, oh, suppose a rattler comes along while we
are asleep?" almost sobbed Barbara.

"He'll steer clear of you, Bob!" retorted Eleanor.

"Come on, girls, don't waste time arguing, or we'll camp on top of the
peak, yonder," laughed Polly, jumping back into her saddle and urging
Noddy along the way.

Although Grizzly Slide was but four miles from the blaze, the trail was
so rough that the horses had to go slowly. Too, the rarefied air
strained the animals' hearts and Polly advised frequent halts to rest
the heavily breathing beasts.

During those four miles, the trail often opened from the heavy timber
and gave a glimpse of far-off valleys, and dreadfully nearby abysses
that made one feel that one was on top of the world. Even the pines in
the nearer crests and clefts looked like wisps of green--so small they
appeared from the tremendous height.

The trail finally led through a thick forest of lodge-pole pine that
looked interminable, but suddenly ended at a line as if it had been
purposely cleared away. The riders all sat in silent awe at the sight
before them. They had reached Grizzly Slide!

The snow-capped peak, reaching an altitude, from the clearing where
they stood, of at least a thousand feet sheer up, dazzled their eyes in
the bright sunshine. To the left of the peak, the sides dropped down
almost perpendicularly to the level floor of a valley many thousand
feet below. To the right, the snow-fields stretched across a vast area
before any timber could be seen on the downward slope.

The snow of the Slide was continually melting in summer and furnishing
icy streams that cut through in every direction to reach the vales far
down. The temperature was almost at freezing point near the peak, and
the girls quickly donned their sweaters which had been packed in
Choko's panniers.

In removing the sweaters, Polly accidentally pulled out a heavy coil of
rope, but hung it back on one of the knobs of Choko's harness instead
of buckling it inside the pocket. Well she did, too.

"Come on, girls, I want to see what that blue line is over on the ice-
field," said Polly, starting up the Slide.

The horses were sharp-shod and sure-footed, so the girls rode as safely
as if on the mossy trail, but they had not gone far before Polly began
murmuring to herself.

"What's the matter?" wondered Anne, aloud.

"That blue line looks to me like a crevice in the ice."

"What of that?" asked Barbara, stupidly.

"That shows something queer! This slide seldom cracks into fissures,
but when it does it means trouble. If that crevice goes down very deep
it shows unusual warmth underneath. And that may move this upper
section of ice-field any time, thus creating an awful land-slide, don't
you see?"

"Oh, mercy! Let's hurry back!" cried Barbara, wheeling her horse
immediately.

"It isn't likely to occur as quickly as that, Bob," said Anne,
soothingly. Then turning to Polly, said: "But this slide is said to be
stationary."

"It _has_ moved, but so seldom that folks never fear it. I know
something about land-slides after living in Pebbly Pit for fourteen
years, and even a little slide at the lava cliffs causes an awful
destruction, so I can picture what this gigantic slide would do if it
ever got started down!"

"You said it happened when Montresor's Mine was buried?" reminded
Eleanor.

"Yes, a small one then, and it may happen again, so we won't stay
another moment," begged Barbara, from a distance.

"It's all right at present, Bob, and I'm going to see if the chasm runs
along very far," returned Polly, riding Noddy away from the girls.

Anne and Eleanor watched the blinding peak where clouds drifted lazily
about so that the top of the crest was visible only now and then. At
such times, the sun flashed upon the ice and reflected myriad colors as
in a rainbow.

"Isn't it just beautiful!" sighed Anne.

"As wonderful and beautiful as his Satanic Majesty!" declared Eleanor,
but she anxiously watched Polly ride along the brink of the fissure.

"Oh, girls! Won't you please come home! I won't be easy till my horse
is traveling that corduroy road again!" wailed Barbara.

The others laughed. "You complained about _that_ when we crossed it.
The time may come when you'd be glad to be standing on Grizzly Slide--
after it has slid!" teased Eleanor.

"Now I'm going back! So there!" threatened Barbara, but she remained
exactly where she was, for she feared to go back alone.

"Well, it looks as if we would have to return unrewarded. I can't find
a place safe enough to cross to the peak, and the crevice seems to run
all the way across and deep down, too," said Polly, coming back to join
Anne and Eleanor.

"Now will you come back?" nagged Barbara, desperately.

"In a minute! We want to watch those rainbow-tinted clouds--they are so
beautiful!" sighed Anne.

But even as she spoke, the fleecy clouds of snowy white changed quickly
to gray. From gray they turned to dark ominous-looking colors, and
Polly hastily glanced at the sun.

"Let's ride back at once!" said she shortly.

[Illustration: NODDY LED THE WAY TO TIMBER AS THE BLIZZARD BEGAN ANEW.]

Noddy was turned and urged to lead off as fast as possible, but Polly
turned every few moments to watch the clouds now gathering in somber
banks and falling down over the Slide.

"Girls, make more haste!" ordered she.

"What's the matter, Poll?" called Anne, who was in the rear.

"I want to get you-all to the timber line just as fast as we can
travel. Don't waste breath talking--just _ride!"_ cried Polly,
fearfully.

"I told you to come home. I knew something terrible would happen up
here!" wailed Barbara, trying to push her horse, by leaning far over
his neck.

"Yes, you always were a Calamity Jane. If we'd left you down with the
rattle-snake we wouldn't have been so hoo-dooed!" cried Eleanor, in her
nervousness.

"Noddy, dear, won't you go faster? We must set a better pace for the
others, you see, pet!" said Polly to her little burro.

Apparently Noddy understood the need of a brisker step, for she started
so that she soon out-distanced the others and Polly had to wait for
them. As she waited impatiently, she watched the clouds sweeping down
and along over the ice-fields. Then she remembered the rope hung on
Choko's collar. She jumped off, grabbed it, and soon had Choko securely
fastened to the end of the rope. Another loop was fastened to Noddy's
collar. As the others rode up she tied a loop to each mount so that a
chain was made of the five animals.

"Is it a blizzard or a tornado, Poll?" gasped Anne.

"Don't know! Just race on as fast as you can!"

Then as they hurried across the icy slope, the sun seemed suddenly
quenched and the daylight turned to sodden drab. Heavy drifts of snow
could be seen falling headlong from the clouds hanging about the peak,
making a wonderful if awesome sight.

"Girls, our lives are in jeopardy unless we reach the timber belt!"
shouted Polly, trying to outcry the wind that shrieked down the Slide.

Noddy, brave little burro, quivered in dread of the elements sweeping
about them, but she responded to Polly's call and fairly dragged the
trembling Choko after her.

The hurricane was now screaming about the peak and howling horribly
through the fissures in the ice. As the blizzard gathered fury and
strength, the clouds, like rags torn from the sky, raged past the
riders, every now and then sweeping the snow completely over them.
Still the full fury of the gale had not yet appeared.

Polly stopped momentarily and yelled back her orders: "Every one grab
hold on the tail of the horse in front of you!"

They comprehended the sense of this advice, but could not manage to act
upon it, as the drifts of snow and ice made it impossible to jump from
the saddle, or lean over to hold to anything.

By this time, everything was hidden from sight and even the foremost
rider looked ghostlike in the gray light and snow. The trail was
obliterated by the drifts and the going was slippery and slow.

"We've simply _got_ to make that timber, girls!" shouted Polly, more to
encourage than to urge, as she knew the beasts were doing their utmost.

The three other girls, too cold and frightened to speak, clung to their
animals hopelessly. Noddy seemed imbued with supernatural powers, for
she never made a miss-step or swerved from the trail, although it was
invisible. This instinct of scent, so marvelous in these little burros,
proved the salvation of the adventurers.

Then darkness fell completely and the storm broke loose in its fierce
madness, so confusing the chain of horses that they stamped and turned
until the rope was so tangled that the riders were threatened with
being thrown. Even in that awful moment, Polly was glad she tied the
beasts to-gether, for surely one or another of them would have bolted
or strayed to doom with its rider.

Noddy seemed the only animal to keep her sense. As the other horses
snorted and wheeled, Polly cried desperately:

"Noddy, Noddy! Can't you help us out?"

With a tremendous spurt of strength the little burro pulled herself
free from the tangle, dragging Choko along, too. The other horses soon
calmed down again and followed in the wake.

A glassy surface had formed over everything, so that a slip would prove
extremely dangerous on that steep slide, but Noddy plodded along as if
she knew that the responsibility of all depended upon her accuracy in
trailing. The girls had to trust blindly to the burro's sixth sense, as
no one could see whether a yawning chasm or a rocky projection was
directly before them.

"Polly, I'm falling! I can't stick on another moment!" cried Anne, her
voice reaching Polly, as the wind blew in that direction.

"Anne Stewart--you _must!_ We're right at the timber-line now, and
I'd be ashamed to say you gave in before Barbara!" shrilled Polly, to
give her friend new endurance.

"I'm all in, too!" wailed the plaintive voice of Eleanor.

"Oh, dear God, tell me what to do?" screamed Polly, as if she must
_make_ the Almighty hear and help.

Just as all seemed at its worst, the wind suddenly died down, and the
gloomy mantle of darkness lifted perceptibly. Polly felt sure the
cessation of wind and sleet was but a lull before a second and worse
cloud-sweep, but she made the most of the interval.

"One more step, girls, and we are safe! Keep up courage!"

To Noddy she crooned anxiously: "Now or never again, little one!"

Noddy turned momentarily to look into her beloved mistress's eyes as if
to plead for breath and a moment's rest, and then she responded to the
call of necessity and led the staggering line to the timber just as the
gale began anew.

It was darker in the forest of lodge-pole pine than out on the ice-
field, but the timber offered comparative refuge from the driving sleet
and wind. Another difficulty presented itself, however, in the close
growth of trees. To avoid collision with the crowded trunks, it became
necessary to undo the rope that held the five beasts together. Each was
thus allowed to roam his own way, and this was the more hazardous, as
the hurricane ofttimes tore up a smaller pine and, twisting it about
like a cork-screw, flung it down like a straw.

Noddy seemed possessed to travel in a certain direction, so Polly, sure
of a burro's instinct for shelter and refuge, gave her her head.
Eleanor's burro also seemed anxious to go in the same direction Noddy
took, and followed in her footsteps. But Choko, freed from the
detaining rope and not so worn by battling the gale with a rider to
carry, made for a spot to the right of Noddy.

Suddenly Eleanor screamed and pointed at Choko. "Oh, look quick! Choko!
Choko!"

Even as she cried, Choko was seen frantically scrambling on the verge
of a cliff, and suddenly vanished over its side.


CHAPTER XIII

A NIGHT IN THE CAVE


"Oh, my little Choko!" sobbed Polly, quickly turning Noddy to go down
to the edge of the precipice where the burro had slipped over and down.

"Now we haven't a thing to eat, and no blankets for the night! I knew
this was a foolish outing," complained Barbara.

Eleanor failed to hear her sister's selfish remark, for she was driving
her burro closely upon Noddy's heels. Anne was so impatient at Barbara
that she urged her horse after Eleanor to keep herself busy.

"Good gracious! Am I to sit here alone and freeze! I'm sure I'm not
such a fool as to have the same thing happen to me as it did to Choko,"
cried Barbara, but the wind carried her words back to Grizzly Slide.

Polly slid from her saddle and stretched out flat upon the brink to
peer over the edge for a possible sight of the burro. As she did so,
she saw a mass of baggage and burro scramble upright and shake itself
violently. Then a plaintive whinny rose up to welcome the fearful
girls.

"Whoa! Whoa, Choko!" shouted Polly, instantly.

Jumping up, she called to Eleanor: "Choko fell upon a ledge, but
there's a great hole behind him and should he back he will surely fall
in and be lost. I'm going down to lead him out!"

"Oh, Polly, don't risk your precious life for a burro!" screamed
Barbara, hysterically.

"If Noddy can creep down, I'll save Choko without risk to myself,"
declared Polly, climbing in the saddle.

"If Polly goes, I go too!" exclaimed Eleanor, turning her burro to
follow Noddy.

"Don't you dare! Nolla--think of mother grieving for you, and me left
alone in Colorado, helpless!" cried Barbara.

"Now I'm going, anyway! I'd like mother to appreciate me," was
Eleanor's unexpected reply, but Anne caught an undaunted look in the
girl's eyes.

The combined persuasions of Barbara and Anne had no effect on Eleanor,
who, truth to tell, exulted in this daring feat and would not have
missed the thrill for anything. But her burro balked at the point where
Noddy began the descent.

Noddy was making for a place where the ledge met the downward slope of
the mountain-side. The burro felt about for sure footing and then took
a step forward. Prodding carefully again, she took the next step, and
so on. Sometimes, feeling suspiciously, she would essay a step and as
suddenly bring back her hoof before breaking into the pit. Thus taking
one assured step after another, she finally reached the beginning of
the ledge where Choko had landed.

Upon the mountain-side where the frozen girls and beasts trembled, the
wind howled and the blizzard swept along between the trunk of trees,
but on the ledge Polly found comparative shelter and only now and then
a blast of the gale.

She stopped to beckon to Eleanor and then urged Noddy along the
foothold cleft from the cliff. Above, the rock-wall rose to the
mountain-top; beneath, Polly could not gauge the depth--it was too
dreadful and was now blurred by fine drifts from the blizzard.

After what seemed an age, Polly reached Choko, who still stood obedient
to his mistress's command of "Whoa." But he shook and seemed completely
broken up with fear and the shock of the fall.

"Dear little Choko!" purred Polly, jumping from Noddy's back and softly
patting the burro's woolly face.

The burro affectionately nosed Polly, who gazed quickly at what she
thought to be a pit back of the little beast. She gasped in wonderment
and went to the dark hole. Then she quickly ran back and took hold of
Noddy's and Choko's bridles. Standing thus, she shouted to the anxious
girls above:

"Come down as carefully as I did and here you will find a cave." With
that she disappeared into the yawning black hole, leading both burros.
Barbara and Anne stared at each other in amazement, and the latter
said: "Come carefully! Anything is better than freezing here."

Eleanor had already reached the ledge, when Polly came forth from the
cavern to shout out advices. The two older girls made the perilous
descent safely, and then guided their horses along the ledge until all
stood before the cave where the burros were waiting.

"Isn't this a miracle?" cried Polly, the moment all were safe and the
poor beasts were being led inside the refuge.

The girls laughed and cried hysterically when they saw the haven, but
the animals seemed uneasy, and Noddy came up to Polly with fear
apparent in her expressive eyes.

"Noddy, are you frightened? Surely no wild beast can be in here, at
present?" queried Polly, looking around in the semi-gloom.

"Polly! What can it be?" shrieked Barbara, clinging to Anne in fear.

"Better get out again, Polly," suggested Eleanor, seeing the horses paw
the floor, and strain their eyes to see.

"Are we safe here, Polly dear?" asked Anne.

"Safer here than up there," returned Polly, and as she spoke a great
tree was flung down over the edge of the gorge just where ledge and
slope met.

"Now we can't crawl out if we wanted to--the tree obstructs the way,"
declared Polly, decidedly.

"But we must see what it is that disturbs the animals," advised Anne.

"I'd rather throw myself over the cliff than be clawed to bits by a
panther!" wailed Barbara.

"The horses are quieting down now, and Noddy seems as much at home as
anywhere, so I reckon it was only strangeness that made them act
queer," said Eleanor.

"But something may pounce out upon us, and take us unawares!" wailed
Barbara.

"I propose to smoke them out as soon as I make a fire!" said Polly,
looking about in the darkness of the cave for a possible stick of wood,
but not finding any.

"I'll have to chop some of that pine! Noddy can carry me safer than I
can walk on this ledge, so I want you girls to promise to keep the
horses close about you and wait right here until I get back!" said
Polly, taking the ax from the pack.

"Polly, I'm coming too! Two axes are better than one, and I can ride my
burro, too!" declared Eleanor.

Anne and Polly sent the girl a look of gratitude, while Barbara was
speechless until after Eleanor started to go, then she remonstrated
volubly.

The two girls crept toward the down-thrown pine, and Eleanor said,
"We'll need wood for a fire, won't we?"

"Yes, we will have to remain in the cave all night, and it gets so
terribly cold upon these mountain peaks that we will be frozen unless
we warm up the interior of the cavern. Then, too, we may need to keep
fires going at the back end of the cave as well as in front, to ward
off wild beasts!"

They were slowly advancing when another awful crash came from the slope
above. Both girls ducked instinctively, but the decayed pine that was
broken off above ground fell over the edge of the cliff just in front
of them and obstructed the way so that progress was impossible.

Eleanor quaked and cried, "Oh, let's go back, Polly!"

But Polly laughed. "Glory be, our fire-wood came to us halfway."

At her cheerful words, Eleanor braced up again.

Polly jumped from Noddy's back and started to hew at the soft decayed
wood. It was easy to chop and would furnish a flaring fire, even though
it would burn rapidly and need constant replenishing.

"Nolla, this is the second miracle to-day! Had we hunted the mountain
over, no better wood could have been found for just our need. Yonder on
that other pine, when this is out of our way, awaits our bedding."

"What funny bedding!"

"Just you wait and see."

When enough wood was chopped to clear a way on the ledge, Polly showed
Eleanor how to make bundles of it. These were tied by means of the rope
to Noddy's harness and carefully dragged back to the cave. Several
trips had to be made before both burros had brought the firewood to the
growing pile in the cave.

When Polly spoke of cutting balsam for beds, Anne offered to help, as
she was so cold.

"And leave me here alone?" cried Barbara.

"Why don't you come with us?" asked Eleanor.

"I'm dead! I can't do another thing!"

"Then stay here and cheer the burros," said Eleanor.

"I won't let every one of you go and leave me to be killed by a wild
animal," shuddered Barbara, looking over her shoulder.

"Nothing wild here, but you, Bob. However, you may light a fire for us,
while we are gone," retorted Eleanor, unsympathetically.

Without further comment, Barbara was left, and soon the girls were
stripping the spruce which had blown over the ledge. Its green branches
would make the softest of wild-wood beds.

"It really was fortunate that both these trees came down when they did!
We would have to remove them as obstacles to our going out in the
morning, and I would have had to hunt well before I could have found
such fine tinder! So I've really saved myself a double chopping!" said
Polly, as they tied up the last bundle of evergreen branches and
started the burros for the cave.

"I'm just frozen, and I wish you would hurry and build a fire!" cried
Barbara, petulantly, when the girls came within hearing.

No one replied, but Eleanor was furious, while the others were
impatient with the girl.

"I was so hungry that I tried to get a sandwich out of the pannier, but
something made a noise back in the cave, and I'm sure it was a rattle-
snake buzzing!" added Barbara, trying to win sympathy from the stony-
faced companions.

"Pooh! You've got rattle-snake on the brain! It would have done you
good to get out there with us and do some rattling of the ax on the
wood!"

"Why, Nolla! How unkind you are since we came to this awful country!"
cried Barbara, not able to find a handkerchief, and sniffing audibly.

"Here! Use this to amuse yourself with while _we work!"_ said
Eleanor, taking a neatly folded handkerchief from her coat pocket.

When Eleanor turned again to the others, she found Anne had unharnessed
the burros and piled the saddles upon a stone projection near the
opening of the cave.

There were numerous little finger-like caves that branched out from the
main cave, but they led nowhere and seemed empty. Polly noticed that
the dry leaves and loose shale scattered about appeared to have been
undisturbed for months. Some of the leaves were from the harvest of the
previous fall, so she felt sure no beast had prowled about the
"fingers."

Coming to a much larger extension than any of the others had been,
Polly called out: "This must be the thumb of the hand!"

"Sure it isn't the arm!" laughed Eleanor.

"Ah, I thought so--now I have it!" murmured Polly, finding a nest of
leaves and soft feathers packed down with bits of fur and dry grass.

"What have you found?" eagerly asked three voices.

"The lair of a grizzly. I've got him!" cried Polly, triumphantly.

Instantly, three girls screamed and turned to run, and Polly laughed.

"I've got him on the _outside,_ girls! He can't get in with that
fire smoking his front doorway, you see." "Oh, hurry back and pile more
wood on the fire!" cried Eleanor, quaking with fear.

"Yes, yes, Polly! Come away and let's build more fires!" added Barbara,
not knowing which one of the girls to hide behind, and looking at the
horses as if pondering a refuge with them.

"What! And use all of our 'safety first' before dawn! If you waste the
wood now, what will you do when old grizzly comes prowling home and
finds your fires dying down?" said Polly.

"Well, do have one of us go and tend the fire carefully so it can't
possibly die down and let him in!" added Anne.

"We are almost through exploring, so we may as well finish! Then we
will all go and have supper and feed the animals."

The remainder of the cave proved to be a rocky wall gradually sloping
down until it reached the entrance again. But, just at one side of the
"thumb" was an aperture from which the wind blew in, as could be seen
when Polly held her torch down to the opening.

"That leads out somewhere, and that opening is big enough to let a
panther creep through, or a wild-cat! I'd like to crawl through there
and make sure where it comes out and if it is quite safe on the other
side," suggested Polly, looking at the girls.

"Oh, Polly dear! Don't do it! Suppose something should happen to you!"
cried Anne.

"Why, I wouldn't let it, Anne! If I creep through that tunnel, I'd
shove the torch in first and keep it moving ahead of me all the way, so
that nothing could grab me, you see!" said Polly, half laughingly.

"I say, Polly, let well enough alone. Let's go back and get supper and
rest for to-morrow!" advised Barbara.

"But just s'posing a rattle-snake was coiled up inside that tunnel! A
burro wouldn't smell it, and it could crawl out during the night and
take a good straight bite!" teased Eleanor.

Polly laughed, but Barbara thought Eleanor meant it, so she replied:
"Then Polly had better go in and see if everything is safe for the
night."

Anne had been so rudely shocked that day at the selfishness apparent in
Barbara's character, that she did not try to hide her opinion. The
wonder was, that she ever could have been so completely taken in during
the months in Denver, as to declare Barbara to be a splendid girl when
one knew her. She now decided that it took ranch life and mountain
exploits to show up genuine characteristics and thoughts.

"Polly, I'll go in first!" offered Eleanor, dropping to her knees to
crawl in at the opening.

"Eleanor Maynard! Come back here!" cried Barbara, taking hold of her
sister's feet.

"Nolla, you shan't take the glory from me!" laughed Polly.

Meantime Eleanor was pulled back and rolled over, laughing as heartily
as if she were at a farce-comedy.

"Now listen to me!" advised Polly, shaking a finger at the three girls.
"First of all, Anne and Bob must go and watch the fires, then unpack
the panniers, and next make beds of the tips--you know how, Anne?"

"I've watched the school children at Bear Forks weave it, so I'm sure I
can make them, too," replied Anne.

"Good! You stick the little stem-ends under the soft fuzz of the others
just laid. The principal thing is not to have hard prods hurting the
body, and the tips will take care of the springs and softness, all
right," said Polly.

"While Anne is making the beds, Bob can fix up odds and ends of spruce
and leaves in the 'fingers' for the horses' beds--a bed in each finger,
Bob. If the animals are comfortably bedded down they will be fresh in
the morning. And if we hide them in those fingers the scent will not be
so apt to reach a grizzly or lion should any prowl about to-night."

"Where shall I place the spruce beds for us?" asked Anne.

"Fix up two on each side of the cave as near the entrance as possible,
Anne. We need air and the warmth from the fires. Then, too, we can hear
any wild beast that may prowl around to-night," advised Polly. "If
Nolla wants to go with me she takes _second_ place, see!"

Eleanor laughed and said, "Anywhere as long as we start!"

"Polly, first I want you to promise me not to be reckless in going
through that tunnel. If you meet with the slightest danger or hazard,
promise to back right out again," begged Anne.

"All right, Anne, I promise, but my shoes will mar my follower's beauty
if I back down on her face."

Thus joking to make little of the danger, Polly started in through the
hole. Eleanor followed and the two older girls stood watching until not
a sound, or ray of the torch, could be seen. Then they went to the
front of the cave to replenish the fires and prepare supper.


CHAPTER XIV

OLD MONTRESOR'S LEGACY


"I'm afraid to fix the beds in those finger caves, Anne," whimpered
Barbara, coming over to where the young woman was weaving the beds of
spruce.

"What is there to be afraid of? The burros and horses won't hurt you,
and they are too weary with this day's troubles to bother about kicking
or trampling you. However, you can do this, if you like, and I will
make up the beds for the beasts."

The spruce beds were being made--Anne showing Barbara how to lay the
tips in rows as wide as the bed was to be, then folding under the
sticks of the second row to run under the tips of the first row, and so
on, until the length of the bed was made.

This work finished, and the bedding for the horses arranged in the
"fingers" as Polly had directed, the two girls stood near the entrance
of the cave, wondering what possibly could have happened to keep Polly
and Eleanor so long.

"I just felt in my bones that it was an awful risk to go into the black
hole of the unknown!" cried Barbara.

"It isn't that that bothers me at all, Bob. But Polly has no sense of
fear, and I think they may have found an exit at the other end, so
Polly is coming around that way. It is a hazardous thing to do, in this
storm!" said Anne.

"Anne, can't you try to squeeze in there and see what has happened?"
asked Barbara.

Anne looked at her without saying a word, so Barbara thought she
hesitated on account of leaving her alone in the cave.

"I won't mind staying alone for a little time. I'll watch the fires and
see that the horses do not get away!" said Barbara.

"Really!" was all Anne said, as she turned to place another pine knot
on the fire.

But the tone silenced Barbara, who had food for thought thereafter.

Meanwhile Polly and Eleanor had crawled into the aperture, and by dint
of squirming and twisting through the passage, found that only the
section nearest the cave was of soft debris. It gradually widened as
they advanced and Polly distinctly felt a current of cold air blowing
in her face.

After creeping along for some distance without finding an outlet,
Eleanor pulled on Polly's foot to attract her attention.

"Let's go back, Poll. No use hunting down in the bowels of Grizzly
Slide."

"Nolla, the smoke of the torch blows harder than at first, and there is
enough air to waft it backwards, so there will be an opening at the
end, I am sure. That is what I must know for certain."

"All right, lead on! I'll be with you at the death!"

Polly chuckled at Eleanor's loyalty and crept on.

Finally Eleanor rugged again at her feet and shouted: "Hey, Polly!
Aren't we most through to China? Let me know the moment you get the
first peep at a pig-tail, as I have to brush the cobwebs from my
Chinese!"

Polly laughed at the girl who made merry of a journey that would have
staggered an older person. Finally, however, the tunnel widened so that
both girls could advance comfortably and then, suddenly, the flame of
the torch and the smoke ceased to blow into their faces, for they had
come out into an open space.

"We're here!" laughed Polly, trying to stand up and giving her head a
smart rap against the overhanging rock.

"'We're here!' For goodness' sake, tell me where?" cried Eleanor,
thrusting her torch ahead so that it was almost snuffed out against
Polly's shoes.

"Gracious me, Nolla! Don't burn my soles!" cried Polly, managing to
stand upright and hold aloft her torch.

"Ha, that's good! Don't burn your soul!" teased Eleanor.

But the moment the girls saw where they were, not another word was
uttered, for they found themselves in a vault-like cave somewhat
smaller than the entrance cave, but having no "fingers" or outside
opening. The dome and sides were rocky, but everywhere, embedded in the
rock, myriad points of light reflected as the flare of the torch lit up
the place uncertainly.

Eleanor thrust up her torch also, and both girls pivoted around,
forgetting about wild beasts and the errand they came upon. After
blinking at the bright yellow gleams for a time, Polly turned and
stared at Eleanor.

"What is it?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Nolla. It looks like copper."

"Polly! If it's copper, then we're rich!"

Both girls rushed over to examine the metallic gleams at close range,
and Polly frowned as a thought entered her mind. Eleanor turned and
looked about to be sure no one could hear, and then whispered:

"Polly, it looks like gold! Can it be real GOLD!"

The girls stared at each other and then burst out into a simultaneous
laugh. But it was excitement, not mirth, that occasioned it. Before the
wild echoes had rung through the vault, the hysterical girls were
tearing at the hard walls, trying in vain to dislodge a nugget.

"Oh, why did I leave that ax in the pannier!" wailed Polly.

"Isn't it always that way--when you need a thing!" exclaimed Eleanor.

In her haste to reach a fragment that looked easy to break off, Polly
dropped the torch. She stooped to pick it up again and saw a nugget of
the ore on the ground, half-covered with dirt.

"I've got a piece! Oh, Nolla, look! LOOK!" shouted Polly, holding aloft
her treasure.

Eleanor ran over and both girls examined the chunk of yellow streaked
and studded rock.

"Polly, it really looks like gold," ventured Eleanor, awed.

"And it's red-gold, too, like Old Man Montresor's nuggets," added
Polly.

At the mention of the gold-seeker, both girls looked at each other and
the same thought flashed to both of them at once.

"Maybe it is!" breathed Polly.

"Oh, Poll, hold the torch down near the ground so I can find a chunk,
won't you?" beseeched Eleanor, now anxious to find a nugget for
herself.

"There, Nolla--see over by the hole! A little piece for you."

Eleanor ran over and found it to be smaller than the one Polly found,
but there was more metal in the nugget. They examined it closely and
decided that the shining metal must be gold.

"I'm so excited that I feel as if wheels were turning all inside of
me--do you?" laughed Eleanor, hugging her nugget to her heart.

"It's sort of a dizzy and squeamish feeling, isn't it?" explained
Polly, looking at her companion. Then for the first time since they
emerged from the tunnel, she noticed the face.

"Oh, Nolla! If you could but see yourself! Just like a negro, but
streaky where you smudged the torch smoke from your eyes."

"You're no 'bleached blonde' either, Poll!" laughed Eleanor, rubbing
her sleeve across her face and looking at the soot in amusement.

"But mine can't be as black as yours, 'cause you got all the smoke from
both torches."

"Never mind now; if this is gold we can afford to have the tunnel and
cave wired with electricity at once," laughed the excited girl.

"Well, let's finish our hunt in the tunnel and then find some more
nuggets for Anne and Barbara. They'll want a share, you know,"
suggested Polly.

"Good gracious, Poll! You're not going on _now_, are you?"

"Of course! The gold won't melt away, but we've got to close up any
opening into outdoors, you know."

"Let's go back and tell the girls and then finish the tunnel work,"
pleaded Eleanor.

"How silly to worm a way back for the sake of showing off the ore. No,
let's do this thing up and then go back to stay for the night. If we
don't close up any aperture, a wild beast may crawl through, then what
good will the gold do us if we are dead?"

"Sensible as ever! Even gold can't turn your head!" said Eleanor,
starting for the narrow place opposite the tunnel they came from.
"Funny, isn't it, that this cave should be here just as if it was an
inflated bubble in a glass-blower's tube?" said Polly.

"I'll reserve my opinion till I see the end of the tube!" said Eleanor,
waiting for Polly to creep into the opening.

After considerable twisting and crawling, Polly first, with her torch,
and Eleanor second, they suddenly felt a current of fresh air.

"Oh! Oh, thank goodness!" gasped Polly. "I shoved the torch ahead! I'd
have fallen headlong into this abyss."

"What is it, Poll?"

"A pit ever so wide, and I can't see how deep it goes down. It's right
in the tunnel ground, cutting off all further investigations."

"It'll cut off investigations of a wild beast, too, won't it?" asked
Eleanor with relief in her tones.

"Of course--there isn't a chance of anything coming in this way. I can
hear water rushing, too, way down at the bottom, and the wind blows up
from this pit, so there must be an opening down there where the
subterranean river rushes out."

"Maybe this tunnel was a river, once, and emptied down into that pit,"
ventured Eleanor.

"I don't care if it was! I'm anxious to go back and eat, now that we
know the worst," replied Polly.

"We won't need both torches now, Poll, so drop yours in the pit and see
how deep it may be," suggested Eleanor.

"All right, but for pity's sake don't let yours go out!"

Polly waited to steady the flame and then dropped the torch. In that
year, when Charles I. was at Hampton Court, all the Parliamentary
Generals were at Putney. Cromwell was at Mr.

Bonhunt's, the site of which is not known; Ireton at Mr. Campion's (a
school in the occupation of Rev. Mr. Adams when Lysons wrote, and now
covered by Cromwell Place); Fleetwood was at Mr. Martin's; and the
other officers at neighbouring mansions, of which at that time
there seem to have been many.

Councils were held in the church, seated round the Communion-table,
the officers afterwards listening to a sermon.

Two days after the King escaped from Hampton the army quitted Putney,
having been there some three months.

Facing the river near the Putney Steamboat Pier is a big hotel, the
Star and Garter, for long a landmark at Putney, and recently rebuilt
in all the splendour of red brick and gilt.

Beyond this formerly stood a number of old houses--Clyde House,
Riverside House, Thanet Lodge, Laburnum House, Windsor House, and Point
House; these had tiled roofs and bay-windows, and formed a picturesque
group.

They have recently been replaced by large mansions, called Star and
Garter, and University Mansions.

In Spring Gardens was formerly a curious collection of the cottages
of watermen and boatmen, but these have now vanished. The lane has
been paved and the whole district altered.

West of this as far as the common many alterations have taken place
in the last few years, and now the market-gardens and fields are
covered with street after street of small two-storied cottages
stretching in straight lines from the Lower Richmond Road to the
river.

The same applies to the district between here and the Upper Richmond
Road as far west as the London boundary at Northumberland Terrace.
Here stood until recently prolific gardens and orchards, but now
the site is covered with streets arranged as closely as possible, and
filled with a rather better style of dwellings than those to the
northward.

Passing west, we come at length to the gateway of the Ranelagh Club at
Barn Elms. From this entrance, with its large gates and porter's lodge,
the private road runs over the Beverley Brook, and, swerving to
the west, enters the park proper.

This manor was given by Athelstane to the Canons of St. Paul's, and is
still held by them.

The mansion of Barn Elms was formerly in the possession of Sir Francis
Walsingham, and here in 1589 he entertained Queen Elizabeth.

Pepys and Evelyn both make mention of this place in their diaries, and
it was here that the duel was fought--January 16, 1678--between
the Earl of Shrewsbury and the Duke of Buckingham.

The meetings of the Kitcat Club were held here in a room specially built
for the purpose by Jacob Tonson, the bookseller, who lived in a
house formerly known as Queen Elizabeth's Dairy, and died there
November 25, 1735.

At present Ranelagh rivals Hurlingham as a social outdoor club, and
the merits of the respective grounds are a matter of opinion.

On the Lower Common, standing out by themselves, are two old houses, Elm
Lodge and West Lodge, in big gardens sliced off the common.

The houses are fancifully painted, and half hidden behind a privet
hedge and a row of elms.

The common to the south is bare of bushes, but to the north there
are still big clumps of gorse and brambles, with many straggling
trees between.

Putney Cemetery is on the common, and further west that of Barnes
is seen.

At the beginning of the Mill Hill Road is an old cottage hidden
behind closely-trimmed trees and a high hedge, the residence of
the cattle gate-keeper, whose duty it was in former years to prevent
the straying of animals from the parish of Barnes into that of
Putney.

The gate has been removed, but the place marks the London boundary, which
follows the line of the big ditch due south across the Lower to
the Upper Richmond Road.

On the south side of the Lower Common stands a long row of staring Queen
Anne cottages, and at the east end of them the Church of All Saints,
in the Early English style, erected in 1874, with schools close by.

Hidden away behind the church is an old wooden farmhouse, the last of
many that formerly dotted these fields.

Passing eastwards, the Upper Road leads to the Charlwood Road, and
across the railway-bridge the new streets, Norroy and Chelverton
Roads, have been made as far as the High Street through the grounds
of The Lawn, an old house which stood next the Spotted Horse.

To the west short roads have been pushed out into the market-gardens,
and north, at the angle, stands the Quill Inn, behind which Quill
Alley, a narrow paved passage skirting the backs of the houses,
leads into a labyrinth of small streets set at all angles and of
all degrees of respectability.

There are many newly-built flats on either side of Quill Alley. Every
foot of ground is taken up, and from the Coopers' Arms to Gardeners'
Lane the district is compact with small houses and shops.

Here in Walker's Place, a square of old houses, with gardens in front,
under the shadow of an enormous brewery, was formerly a little
wooden tumbledown inn known as the Coat and Badge.

This has been rebuilt; it was so called from the insignia of the
actor Doggett's annual prize for Thames watermen.

At the end of this lane stands an old hostelry, the Coopers' Arms, and
at the end of Gardeners' Lane was another, the Bull and Star, also
rebuilt recently.

Gardeners' Lane leads through a closely built up settlement to the
Whirlpool, and here the last remnant of the market-gardens is to
be found.

In the High Street, which is fast altering its character, there are one
or two old houses, but the greater number are modern.

The Public Library, which is situate in Disraeli Road, leading off the
High Street, was first established in 1887. It is only since 1899
that it has occupied its present building, which, with the site,
was the gift of Sir George Newnes, Bart., M.P., and was opened by
the late Lord Russell of Killowen, Lord Chief Justice of England.

To the east of the High Street the residential part of Putney is
built up of new, clean streets, laid out on the market-gardens and
orchards that till recently occupied most of this district.

In Northfield Square stood several fine old houses, one of which,
Fairfax House, made way for the Montserrat Road at its High Street
end; and another, Grove House, said to originally have been a
convent, and associated by tradition with the name of Oliver Cromwell,
disappeared when the western end of Disraeli Road was made.

The railway-station adjoining occupies the site of some very old
houses, and in the railway-cutting the workmen came upon a sewer,
in which were discovered some silver spoons of ancient date.

A Baptist chapel in the Werter Road, Oxford Congregational Chapel
in the Oxford Road, and Emanuel Church in the Upper Richmond Road,
supply the religious needs of the neighbourhood.

Passing along the Putney Bridge Road from the High Street, Brewhouse
Lane runs north to the waterside; on one side are rows of new shops,
on the other a swimming-bath. This lane was formerly one of the
principal landings for ferry passengers to Putney, but to-day is
almost deserted.
An engraving of Fulham by Preist in 1738 is evidently taken from
the steps, and shows the bridge and Fulham Church.

From this landing a fine view is to be had of Putney Bridge; upstream
and downstream is seen the big iron lattice bridge that carries the
District Railway over from Fulham on its way to Wimbledon. A
soap-boiler's establishment with several smaller yards makes the lane
busy, but there are still a lot of small cottages--some very old--of
a poor type, and rented for the most part by labourers.

Passing on, the almshouses founded by Sir Abraham Dawes are on the south
side. He was a farmer of the Customs, an eminent loyalist of
the reign of Charles II., and one of the richest commoners of the
time.

Originally built for twelve almsmen and almswomen, they have been
latterly occupied entirely by women.

The north side of the road is here substantially built up, and the
Deodar, Florian, and Merivale Roads on the Cedars Estate are
comparatively new.

Two old houses, Cedar Lodge and Crest House, remain, with Park Lodge
at the corner of the Atney Road, newly fronted, but below the grade
of the road.

To the railroad arch which spans the road are built on the north side
a row of new cottages with shops opposite.

Beyond the arch at the bend of the road, which is here narrowed by
an old house encroaching on the footpath, is a fine old mansion,
Moulinere House.

Returning whence we came, we pass up the High Street and come to
Putney Hill, which forms a test of the endurance of cyclists.

At the base of Putney Hill stands The Pines, the residence of
Swinburne the poet.

Here, where modern villas have risen most recently, and stately
trees fallen most rapidly, stood Lime Grove, the seat of Lady St.

Aubyn. This mansion derived its name from a grove of limes through
which the road to the house formerly led; and it was here in 1737 that
Edward Gibbon, the historian, was born.

He was educated in Putney till his ninth year, when he was sent to a
public school at Kingston. It was on Putney Hill that the following
event occurred: When Cardinal Wolsey ceased to be the holder of
the Great Seal of England, and, obeying the mandate of Henry VIII.,
quitted the Palace of Whitehall, he removed to his palace at Esher.

Embarking at Whitehall Stairs, he went by water to Putney, and
started up the hill, but was overtaken by one of the royal Chamberlains,
Sir John Norris, who presented him with a ring as a token of a
continuance of His Majesty's favour.

Stow tells how Wolsey at once got off his mule unaided, and,
kneeling down in the dirt on both knees, held up his hands for joy at
the King's most comfortable message.

Passing up the hill, a few new streets are being pushed into the fields,
which are, however, still continuous to the westward, the limit
of building being apparently reached for a time in that direction,
and, after a short climb past fine houses with spacious grounds
and drives, we come to Putney Heath near the Green Man, a quaint
little road-house of the last century; close by it is the old
cattle-pound.

The heath, of some 400 acres, somewhat resembles that of Hampstead,
and from the higher ground some excellent views are to be obtained,
whilst the sandy hollows and surface are plentifully covered with
heather, gorse, and brambles.

On the northern side, facing the road which leads to Roehampton,
are many fine houses--among others, Grantham House, the residence
of Lady Grantham; Ashburton House; Exeter House, occupied by the
second Marquis of Exeter, who, divorced from his Marchioness, wooed
and won for his bride a country girl under the guise of an artist;
Gifford House; and Dover House, the seat originally of Lord Dover,
afterwards of Lord Clifden, and now the residence of J.

Pierpont Morgan.
To the west of the heath lie Putney Park and Roehampton.

Putney Park--styled Mortlake Park in old memorials--was reserved to the
Crown by Henry VIII. Charles I. granted the park to Richard, Earl
of Pembroke, who here erected a splendid mansion, which soon after his
decease was sold, together with the park, to Sir Thomas Dawes, by
whom it was again disposed of to Christina, Countess of Devonshire,
whom Charles II.
visited at this place with the Queen-mother and the Royal Family.

Putney Heath is divided by the Portsmouth Road, which starts at the
Green Man and meets the Kingston Road at the foot of the hill in
Putney Bottom, and facing this road are many fine houses, as well
as the reservoirs of the Chelsea Water Company, from which water
is conveyed to the Middlesex side of the Thames by pipes beneath
the roadway of Putney Bridge.

To the south of the reservoirs is a fine new house Wildcroft, the
residence of Sir George Newnes, Bart., which stands in the grounds
of the old Fireproof House, lately pulled down.

This house was erected in 1776 by David Hartley, son of the celebrated
Dr. Hartley, to demonstrate the efficacy of his plan for securing
buildings from fire.

This plan consisted in thin sheets of iron and of copper being laid
between floor and ceiling to prevent the ascent of heated air from
the lower to the upper rooms.

The lower part of this house was repeatedly set on fire in the presence,
among others, of the King and Queen, the members of Parliament,
the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen.

The House of Commons granted Hartley £2,500 in aid of the expenses
incurred, and the Corporation erected in the grounds an obelisk--which
can be plainly seen from the Kingston Road--recording the experiments
of the grant.

The heath was the scene of many duels, among others, in May, 1652, Lord
Chandos and Colonel Compton fought with fatal issue, Compton being
killed.

In May, 1798, on a Sunday afternoon, William Pitt, the Prime Minister,
who lived in the Bowling-Green House close by, fought a bloodless
battle with William Tierney, M.P.; and in September, 1809, an
encounter took place between Lord Castlereagh and George Canning,
when the latter was wounded in the thigh.

This last duel was fought near the Admiralty semaphore erected in
1796, the site of which is indicated by the Telegraph Inn immediately
behind Wildcroft.

Across the corner of the green from the inn is Bristol House, which
owes its name to the Bristol family, who possessed it till a few
years ago, and which was for some two years the residence of Mrs.

Siddons. A part of the estate has been built on; many handsome
residences have been erected.

Next is a large mansion, Highlands, and west of it is the historical
Bowling-Green House, a low, two-storied mansion painted white,
with large windows, and the Pitt arms over the doorway.

In this house, shaded by fine trees, with a beautiful prospect from the
lawn, lived for some years William Pitt, the Prime Minister; and
here, on June 23, 1806, he died. The house derives its name from the
bowling-green formerly attached to it, and for more than sixty
years (1690-1750) the most famous green in the neighbourhood of
London.

The house had large rooms for public breakfasts and assemblies, was a
fashionable place of entertainment, and noted for "deep play." South
of this Bowling Green House is Scio, a charming residence, with
beautiful lawns facing the main Kingston Road, in the Gothic style,
and from here the flagstaff and windmill on the heath are noticed.

Close by was the gallows in the olden time, and here it was that one
of the last of the highwaymen--Jeremiah Abershaw--hung in chains
in 1795, after suffering the penalty of the law on Kingston Common,
then the place of execution for Surrey. Being crossed by a main road,
this dreary neighbourhood was formerly much frequented by footpads
and highwaymen.

Aubrey mentions the gallows near here, and adds that Roman urns are
often found in the dry, gravelly ground.

Putney Heath merges into Wimbledon Common, a fine expanse of 1,000
acres of breezy upland. The headquarters of the National Rifle
Association till 1889 were in the Windmill, a picturesque landmark seen
from far and near; but owing to increasing danger and the enormous
crowds that flocked to the camp it was removed to Bisley in Surrey. The
Windmill was formerly a favourite resort of duellists. Some distance
from the windmill is Cæsar's Well, the most historical spot on Wimbledon
Common, and its water is said to possess medicinal properties.

This common and Putney Heath were in the last century the scene of
frequent reviews.
George III. reviewed the Surrey volunteers here in 1799, as he had
previously done the Guards in 1767; and Charles II., in 1684, also
reviewed his forces on the heath.

At the north-west corner of the heath lies the village of Roehampton,
snugly nestling in a valley, and consisting of a small cluster of
houses. The centre of the village is at the angle of Roehampton Lane,
where a drinking-fountain, a gift of Mr.

Lyne-Stephens, stands in the road, with the Catholic chapel of St.
Joseph's, approached through a beautiful carved oaken lych-gate, facing
it. This chapel and rectory stand in the grounds of Manresa House,
a training college of the Jesuit Fathers. To the north is a quaint
old village inn, the Montague Arms, flanked by a row of old cottages.

Ponsonby Road and Medfield Street are lined with small houses, for
the most part new, very clean, and well kept.

The parochial schools, in two buildings, for boys and girls, are
in the Ponsonby Road on the hillside, and between them is a church,
completed in 1899.

In the High Street, which is built up with small shops for a short
distance, stands on the north side, well back from the road, the King's
Head Inn, with its wonderful signboard displayed in the garden, its
big, old-fashioned bay-windows, curious low-ceilinged rooms, and
weather-boarded sides, shaded by great elms, giving it a very
picturesque aspect.

The gardens, with tables set out in little nooks, and the stables
of the house across the yard, complete a picture, of which few are
to be found near London now.

In this street is one of the buildings of St. Mary's Convent, a
red-brick pile used as a laundry.

Returning to Roehampton Lane, and passing up the rise to the south, we
come to the Alton Road, lined with good houses, and a little to
the west the Bessborough Road falls into it, and runs through a
favourite residential district built up with fine dwellings.

Here the hollows made by gravel-digging on the edge of the heath are
being, in a measure, filled up with earth from the building going
on near by, and opposite The Elms, on the brow of the common, a
peculiar tomblike building is noticed.

This is merely a spring-house covering the artesian well that supplies
the drinking-fountain in the village. At Highwood, a solidly-built
mansion, we come to the Portsmouth Road, and after passing several villas,
to Kingston Road at the foot of the hill. Here, on the west side,
Richmond Park stretches parallel with the road, the enclosing wall
being so close to the road as to give the houses hardly any garden;
still, from here to the Robin Hood Gate there are many pretty villas,
and at Beverley Brook a row of cottages has been erected close to
the wall.

On the east side of the road a new cemetery of the Putney Burial Board
is under the lee of the hill, and beyond are fields stretching southward,
running up to and meeting Wimbledon Common. In the hollow adjoining
the main road is the Newlands Farmhouse to which these acres belong,
and adjoining is the Halfway House, at one time an inn said to have
been the favourite drinking-place of the highwayman Abershaw.

Stag Lane leads to the common, and further on Beverley Brook is crossed,
here a narrow strip of Wimbledon Common meets the highroad.
"Say, Bob, if he wasn't dead, he'd have had me down long before you
came along to warn us!" laughed Eleanor.

"Polly, he's a beauty, even if he is such a terror, isn't he?" said
Eleanor, admiring the satiny coat and beautiful form of the large
mountain-lion, so majestic in death.

"I never saw a larger one! He must be at least nine feet long from nose
to tip of tail!" said Polly, lifting the tail with her foot, then
letting it drop again.

She stooped over looking closely at the wounds made by the grizzly,
then she suddenly cried out, "Oh! I thought that shot hit him! It must
have been that first shot from the rifle that sent him back from the
cliff. Then, the bear tracked him and had the fight back here in the
forest. That is when we heard the sounds diminishing.

"Well, old fellow, I'm sorry it had to be so! But you decreed it! It
was you or one of us, and I preferred to have had it you! Old Grizzly
wouldn't be so cattish about sneaking up and laying low for us until
the fire died down, or till one of us happened to step out of the
circle of light! He would have made a big noise from the beginning and
pounced down upon us willy-nilly. And now he has given you yours!"

As Polly spoke, she stood looking regretfully at the creature, as if
she wished the world was ordered otherwise than all the killing and
taking, one from another, in the vain belief of living!

"Polly, how much do you think he weighs?" asked Eleanor eagerly.

"Too much to drag home--if that is why you asked!" laughed Polly,
looking up at Eleanor, with a wise shake of the head.

"To tell the truth, that is exactly what I planned to do until I saw
how big he was!" laughed Eleanor.

"He must weigh at least two hundred pounds, Nolla," said Anne, who had
come nearer during the examination.

"Yes, nearer two hundred and fifty pounds, I reckon," said Polly.

"I wanted to ship him to Chicago and show all of my society friends
what _we_ killed during my mountain visit!" explained Eleanor.

"Your motive killed the project before you saw him," said Anne, wagging
her head at Eleanor as a rebuke.

Eleanor laughed merrily. "Well, I intend having a regular exhibit when
I get back! All kinds of wild things will be shown my friends. I
propose having Polly and Noddy sitting upon a pedestal in the drawing-
room as a sample of the wildest things on the Rockies!" laughed
Eleanor, giving Polly an affectionate glance.

"Oh, Nolla, don't talk so foolishly! As if Polly would come to Chicago!
What would she do with herself while we had to entertain?" said
Barbara, pettishly, but no one hearkened.

"Maybe we can blaze a trail from here to the nearest ranch on our way
home, and send some one from there to come and cart the brute home for
us. I'd pay him well!" said Eleanor, not willing to forego the pleasure
of showing the lion at home.

"Oh, but then, you will make these ranchers curious. Once this far,
they will look about the place where we spent the night, and that will
lead them to discover the mine!" said Polly.

"I forgot that! Of course it would be foolish to give any one the
slightest clew to our ever being here, and of what we did while here! I
see I shall have to say good-by to the lion I hoped to be lionized
for!" said Eleanor, laughingly.

"With a gold mine as rich as yours, you'll be lionized without the
lion!" laughed Anne.

"By the way, did you bring your nugget, Polly?" asked Eleanor.

"Reckon I did!"

"Then before we leave, don't you think we ought to make some sort of a
plan, or mark the spot so we can find it again? We don't want to make
the same mistake old Montresor did, you know!" said Eleanor, anxiously.

"I have a plan all made. I did it while sitting by the fire this
morning, before you girls were awake," said Polly, taking off her hat
and removing a folded paper.

The girls were surprised at the accuracy of the sketch, and Anne said,
"Any one can find it from these directions!"

"Thank you, but you see, it would be hazardous to risk any one else
coming here. The importance of keeping the whole adventure a profound
secret until we have duly filed papers and can claim right of ownership
to the claim, can be seen now. I hardly think it wise to speak of the
crevice or danger of a land-slide until after we get some inside
information about taking hold of the mine," said Polly, seriously.

An hour more was used by Polly in staking a legal claim and marking the
corners with heaps of stone. She also left a very deep blaze in each of
the four trees that cornered the large square area she thought would
cover the cavern.

Noddy soon found the Top Notch Trail when they were again on the way
homeward. By riding steadily all morning, they reached the spot where
the rattle-snake was waiting for transportation. Anne and the others
had experienced so many greater shocks since the killing of the reptile
that they felt no qualms about carrying the snake now.

When the four riders finally turned in on the Pebbly Pit Trail, it was
past four o'clock. They had been going steadily since morning, without
food or rest, excepting the hour they had to stop at the falls to give
the animals grass and water, and the girls were the sorriest-looking
lot as they dragged up the road to the house and stopped at the porch.


CHAPTER XVI

A YOUNG STRANGER IN OAK CREEK


"Glory be! You-all war givin' Mis' Brewster fits wid no sign of hide
nor hair sence yistermorn!" cried Sary, rushing out of the kitchen
door, the moment she heard the horses' hoof-beats.

Mrs. Brewster heard Sary and also ran out, crying, "Oh, my dear
children! We've had such a day! Sam just went to the barn to hook up
and start the ranchers on a hunt! A trapper rode in this morning and
spoke of the awful blizzard that hit Top Notch Trail. Of course, we
knew you couldn't find _that_ or we'd have been still more worried!"

The girls looked at each other and laughed aloud. Mrs. Brewster
shrewdly guessed the truth.

"_Did_ you find it? And where under the sun did you hide during that
awful storm?" cried she, anxiously.

Sary paid no attention to a recital of trails and storms, however, for
it was half past four and Jeb would have to take care of the five
mounts before he could hope to come in for supper, and spend a quiet
evening with her. So, to prevent any delay, she turned to Polly.

"You-all 'pear to be tuckered out! Jest flop inter the cheers an' rest
whiles Ah carry the hosses to th' barn. Ah'll tell Mr. Brewster like-
ez-how you-all come home, an' spared him a trip!"

Mrs. Brewster objected to the offer for she wanted Sary to finish the
preparations for supper and give her time to talk with the girls. Sary,
however, paid no attention to her mistress's objections but gathered
all the reins together and led the animals to the barn.

Shortly after the girls had gone indoors to drink some hot milk--for
Mrs. Brewster said hot milk would take most of the fatigue out of their
bodies--Sam Brewster ran down the path from the barn, and burst into
the living-room.

"Well, say! Ah shore am glad to see you-all back home! Ah just was
preparing to wire some detectives to be on the lookout in the Zoo for
any lions or bears lately come in who looked unusually well-fed!"

Every one was so delighted at the reunion that Mr. Brewster's
foolishness made them laugh merrily. He hugged Polly until she cried
for breath, then he shook hands over and over again with Anne and the
girls, Mrs. Brewster, remonstrating meantime, that she wanted to hear
of their adventures!

The girls were so eager to tell about the cavern of gold that they
refused to wash and dress, or remove any stains of the climb, until
after the whole story was told.

Mr. and Mrs. Brewster thought it was the tale of the trip and the
trials throughout the blizzard, and they cared little for what had
passed as long as all were safe and happy again. But Polly blurted out
the truth to make them listen.

"I found Montresor's gold mine, Paw!"

It hit the mark! In the shock the news made upon the Brewsters, no one
noticed Polly's slip on the old pet title. After a long tense period of
silence, however, Sam Brewster said: "Daughter, it can't be true!"

"'Tis, though, Mr. Brewster! Polly and I crawled through the tunnel
until we came out into that marvelous cavern of gold," and Eleanor
sighed audibly as she thought of that sight.

"What cavern! You-all must be clean locoed with the blizzard and the
long ride!" cried Mr. Brewster, testily.

The girls laughed appreciatively, for they understood just how those
who remained at home would feel at such news!

So Polly sat upon her father's knee and told him the story of the mine,
from the time Choko fell over the cliff until they left the panther at
the foot of the tree.

"And here's the plan and claim, and there's the gold!"

Polly drew the nuggets from her dress and took the papers from her
sombrero, and placed them in her father's hands.

Mrs. Brewster dropped upon her knees to the floor to look at the map
and the ore, while her husband was examining the large nugget. The four
girls had no idea how anxious they were about this ore until they saw
Mr. Brewster carefully looking it over with the eye of an expert miner.

His first words were a decided shock.

"Ah wouldn't set much store about this mine, girls! You-all don't see
what Ah see in this discovery. It's gold--yes, it looks to me like red-
gold of good quality, and if it is as you say--a cavern exposed so any
one can value it off-hand, so much the better! But, the end of Top
Notch Trail, where you doubtless spent the night, is a far haul from
Oak Creek, and the chasm in front, and the mountain on top, are
drawbacks to mining. However, we will ride into Oak Creek in the
morning and file this claim of yours and see if it comes anywhere near
to being the one old Montresor left, Polly. It would give me the
keenest joy to be able to say something to a few of the mean old
rascals about Oak Creek, who called me a fool for paying the funeral
costs and filing the claim of that kind old man, Montresor!"

"But, Dad--father! If this mine happens to cross the claim staked by
Mr. Montresor, will it interfere with our filing a new claim?" asked
Polly, anxiously.

"It depends on how much ground you covered with your corners!" replied
her father.

"You can depend upon it, I covered all I could think might come within
a mile of gold!" laughed Polly.

"Well, girls, listen to some good advice on this! Not a word to be said
about this cave--not even among yourselves until the claim is filed and
investigated! You see, the walls have ears when any one speaks of gold!
Then, having attended to the legal aspects of the mine, we will all
ride over to remain a few days, as visitors to Old Mr. Grizzly! When we
get back we ought to have some information worth while!"

"And what about sending for John's friend to come and go with us? If he
knew enough to tell you about the lava, he will surely be able to judge
about the gold!" ventured Polly, eagerly.

"I think that is a splendid idea, Sam! When we go in to Oak Creek to-
morrow, let us send John a day-letter explaining about this cavern,"
added Mrs. Brewster.

"Hain't you-all comin' to supper? Har hev Ah ben and wukked all day
hopin' fer a night off to-night!" said Sary, suddenly appearing at the
doorway between the living-room and the kitchen.

Every one started for she had not made a sound before speaking, so no
one knew how much she had over-heard. Mrs. Brewster quickly replied,
however.

"Why, Sary! I didn't know you wished to go out! I could have attended
to supper myself, had you asked me!"

"Ah hain't planned to go out--Ah said a 'night off,' Mis' Brewster,"
said Sary, hardly deigning to wait for an answer, but looking at the
girls with an impatient frown.

"Mother, we really must wash before supper!" said Polly.

Sary tossed her head. Mrs. Brewster knew what that meant, so she urged
the girls to forego any lengthy toilets and merely wash away the worst
signs of travel.

Sary was pacified when Eleanor came out of the room and handed her a
large paper bundle.

"Sary, I have a little present for you because we made so much trouble
to-night."

"Oh, Miss Nolla, Ah'm much obleeged t' you-all. Ah don' mind trouble,
onny yoh see Ah expec' comp'ny to-night."

It took Sary but an instant to open the package and when she beheld a
ruffled organdy dress discarded by Barbara the previous season and
accidentally packed in the trunk with other clothes, she rolled her
eyes heavenward.

"Miss Nolla! Is this fine gown'd fer me?"

Eleanor stifled a laugh but Sary made as if she would clasp the girl in
her powerful arms, so discretion was needed. Eleanor backed behind the
kitchen chair.

"Miss Nolla, Ah wonder ef a widder of seven months' standin' mought
wear little yaller rose-buds on a dress, like-ez-how this is?"

"Certainly, Sary," came from Mrs. Brewster, who now joined the two.
"It's not the color or quantity of clothes as much as the sincerity of
one's mourning."

Quite unintentionally, Mrs. Brewster touched upon a tender spot. In
fact, so tender was it, that Sary blamed Bill for having died so
recently instead of two years back. She might have now been ending her
second year of mourning!

Eleanor being trained to the wiles of polite society, saw and
understood Sary's flash of resentment, so she turned to Mrs. Brewster
with the remark:

"I've heard said, that the highest regard a widow can pay her departed,
is, to take a second husband. It speaks well for her happiness with the
first one, you see."

Mrs. Brewster stared at Eleanor but Sary smirked and quickly replied:

"You-all is right, Miss Nolla! A widder what hez ben _so_ happy that
she gits lonesome whiles thinkin' of her departed, hez a right t' find
a second husban'."

Mrs. Brewster choked a laugh as she saw the sublime look in the help's"
eyes, and hurried out. Eleanor then suggested:

"Now you run away and beautify yourself, Sary, and I will wash the
dishes to-night."

Sary needed no second invitation and in another moment she had
disappeared to her "boudoir" back of the buttery.

Eleanor was as good as her word, for she was soon busy with dish-water
and mop, rattling the china, and banging pans about as if noise and
bustle were sure signs of hard work and energy. Polly laughed as she
cleared away the remains of the meal and then caught up a towel to dry
the dishes. As they worked the two girls talked.

"Poll, now that you have this gold mine, what will you do with all the
wealth that is yours?" asked Eleanor.

Polly held a decorated plate in front of her face to hide her smile,
and pretended to be looking for grease on its surface. When she had
straightened her face again, she said: "Oh, I'm going away to school,
first of all. I'm not so sure that I want to stay in Denver, now that
you have told me all about Chicago. I'll write for catalogues of
schools there; and then I can see John quite often during the school
year."

"Just what I would have suggested, Poll! Then you can live at home with
me. Dad and you and I will have the best times!"

To accentuate her approval of Polly's premature plans, Eleanor swished
the dish-mop wildly up and down in the soapy water, but the suds flew
up lightly, as soapsuds will, and a bubble burst in Polly's eye.

"Oo-h! Stop throwing dish water in my face, Nolla!" cried Polly, with
eyes screwed shut and one free hand trying to rub the smarting lye from
her eye.

"I never did, Polly! It must have splashed accidentally when I was
washing the pan."

"You have done nothing since you began the dishes, but rattle and swash
that mop about in the pan as if you were mining the ore from the cave,"
complained Polly, as she managed to open her eyes again.

"I suppose it is because we are so excited over the find, and all it
means for you, Polly," explained Eleanor, contritely.

"It doesn't mean much more, now, than before. The thing I am most happy
over, is that Old Man Montresor will be vindicated, and people will
stop jeering at me, and at what they called his locoed ideas."

The conversation was interrupted at this moment by the appearance of
Sary. She first poked her head from the partly opened door of her room
and then said: "Is any one about to see me?"

Polly turned to make sure that they were alone in the kitchen, and
Eleanor replied: "No, what is it, Sary?"

Then the maid stepped forth and such a vision! She had curled her red
hair on a pair of old-fashioned tongs. The curling irons were but a
quarter of an inch in diameter and they were heated by thrusting them
into the living embers of the kitchen fire. When Sary drew the comb
through her scanty tresses they took on the appearance of carrot-
colored cotton threads which had just been ripped out of an old
garment--so crinkly and frizzed were the strands of hair. The flowered
organdy dress that Eleanor had given Sary to wear for the great
occasion of receiving a caller, was much too small for the buxom widow,
and she was in great distress about it. This brought her out to ask
advice of the girls.

"Why bother to wear the dress, Sary, until you have had time to alter
it for yourself?" asked Polly.

"Why, Polly! Ah has to keep up my looks now that comp'ny is lookin' my
way again. Ef you-all hadn't such fine city gals at home, what wears
th' latest fashions so that Jeb can't help but see what's what, Ah
woulden' have to worry so much about looks. But a woman has to keep up
when other women set the pace, 'specially ef she is a widow, like-as-
how Ah am now."

Eleanor laughed appreciatively and said: "Sary is just like Bob, when
it comes to that! It is the eternal feminine, Poll, that drives both
Bob and Sary to the verge of tears, because they cannot catch their
beaux with their good looks."

Sary smirked self-consciously at Eleanor's words, for she thought she
was being coupled with Barbara and her attractions. Sary felt quite
sure that she was good-looking and winsome, but she had to hear
Eleanor's words to make her believe she was fascinating.

"If I was Sary, I'd wear a nice clean blouse and a linen skirt. It
would be far more comfortable than that awfully tight gown," remarked
Polly.

But the help scorned such simplicity and turned to Eleanor for further
advice about her appearance. The latter, wise in her years, turned her
head on one side and appeared to be debating.

"Seems to me, Sary, that putting on that organdy just as it is, without
fixing it over a bit, may make Jeb suspicious of its not being made for
you. He may even go so far as to wonder if Bob handed it down to you.
Now you do not want him to dream that you did not have it made to order
for yourself, so why not take it off until you can remodel it to fit
yourself, like new?"

Sary pondered this suggestion for a few moments, and then said: "Ah
ain't got no fancy dress to wear, onny this, Miss Nolla. Ef Ah puts on
my black alpaky, he'll remember 'bout Bill, and sech memories allus
dampen a man's plans to pop th' question."

Both girls had to laugh outright at the unexpected confession; but Sary
was in a serious frame of mind and paid no attention to their
merriment. She resumed her interrupted explanation.

"It's jest this way, in Oak Crick country, you-all see! Single men
ain't growin' on every bush, and a widder has a hard time of it,
anyway, when most ranchers' dawters are waitin' to snap up a likely
catch. Jeb's a catch, Ah says. He ain't a gallavantin' dude, ner he
ain't spendin' all his wages on gamblin' at Red Mike's saloon. Ah've
learned like-as-how being right on th' spot when a man's willin' to be
cotched, is more'n half the fight to hook him. Ah kin afford to snap
mah fingers at all them ranch gals about Oak Crick, tryin' their bestes
to make Jeb wink his eye at 'em, jus' because Ah _am_ whar Ah am
keepin' tabs on him, all his time."

When the laughter caused by these words had subsided, somewhat, the two
girls replied: Polly to advise and Eleanor to make a giggling
explanation.

Eleanor said: "You make a wonderfully accurate time-clock on Jeb's
comings and goings, Sary."

And Polly advised: "You run back to your room, Sary, and put on a
sensible dress to keep Jeb from wondering how much of his earnings it
would take to dress you in fine clothes like that organdy gown cost."

"Thar's somethin' in that, too, Polly! Ah reckon you're right, so Ah'll
throw on that striped shirt-waist your Maw gave me, and the duck skirt
with the tucks in it."

Sary vanished as quickly as she had appeared, and the two girls stood
laughing as they saw the bed-room door close. Then they dried the dish-
pan, hung up the towels and mop, and turned to go back to the living-
room where Sam Brewster and his wife were planning for the ride to Oak
Creek on the next day, and the trip up to the cave, on the day
following that.

But the girls had not reached the living-room door before a "hist"
halted them. They turned in the direction of the sound and saw Jeb's
small head at the kitchen door. When he saw that he had gained their
attention, he beckoned furtively with a horny index finger.

Both girls tip-toed over to hear what news he had to impart, for his
behavior denoted some dread secret.

"Is Sary Dodd hangin' 'round?" he whispered, anxiously.

"She's in her room getting ready for company," was Eleanor's amused
reply.

"Wall, you-all kin do me a big favor ef you-all explain like-as-how Ah
was too sick to come in, to-night. She tol' me Ah jus' had to call on
her, to-night, but Ah ain't got courage. Ah kin see jus' whar all this
callin' and sittin' alone of evenin's, is goin' to land me. Sary Dodd's
got a powerful way for a woman, and Ah ain't no marryin' man--am Ah,
Polly?"

Jeb's plaintive tone and his beseeching eyes convulsed Eleanor with the
desire to laugh, but Polly saw how serious he was, in his fear of being
caught by a woman's wiles, and she replied:

"No, Jeb; you are not a marrying man, I can say that much. And Sary
ought to know better than to lure you on with all her past experiences
of mankind."

Polly's earnest explanation made Eleanor lose control of herself and
she sat down in a kitchen chair and laughed so heartily that Sary
hurried forth. Jeb instantly ducked and tried to lose himself in the
dense darkness of the out-of-doors, but Sary was too quick for him.

She darted to the door, called him with an imperative voice, and
brought the recreant back to his duty of calling. Then she turned to
the two girls, and said calmly, but with meaning:

"Ah'se much obliged fer th' dish-washin'. Ah'll see that the kitchen is
set to rights fer the evenin'."

With this dismissal, Polly and Eleanor had to go, and laughing still,
they went through the living-room door to join the others who sat about
the round table figuring and planning.

Sary very quietly closed the door between the two rooms, and Eleanor
whispered to Polly: "Poor Jeb! We had to leave him to his fate, after
all."

By six o'clock the next morning, the riders were on the way to Oak
Creek. Polly and Eleanor rode side by side and discussed a good name
for the claim. After suggesting and rejecting many fine sounding names,
Polly finally chuckled gleefully.

"You've thought of one!" declared Eleanor.

"Yes, just the thing! Won't 'Choko's Find' suit it?"

"Great! And it was little Choko that found it, too. If he hadn't fallen
over the cliff we never would have discovered the cave and the rest of
it."

"We'll call it that--'Choko's Find!' Say, everybody! Listen to this:
The mine is going to be called 'Choko's Find'--do you like it?" called
Polly to the other riders.

"Very appropriate," was the answer, so "Choko's Find" was its name.

Reaching Oak Creek, the party rode to Mr. Simm's office and Mr.
Brewster told the story in detail. The attorney was completely silenced
at the strangeness of the adventure but demanded proof in seeing the
ore before he would credit the tale.

"Well, Ah declare! If this isn't the derndest thing Ah ever heard of in
my life!" exclaimed Mr. Simms as he examined the nuggets.

"Simms, do you remember Montresor's nuggets and legacy?" asked Mr.
Brewster.

The lawyer looked quickly up at his questioner and a look of
understanding crept into his eyes. "Sam, Ah reckon it is the same!"

"The ledge, the canyon, the trails _and_ the river!" added Mr.
Brewster, convincingly.

"You-all just wait here till Ah get my papers from the Bank vault!"
excitedly cried the lawyer, snatching his cap and running out of the
office.

"Simms keeps his valuable papers in the masoned safe at the bank, you
know. If the town burns down during a miners' celebration some night,
his papers will be safe, anyway," explained Mr. Brewster.

The lawyer soon returned with a package held closely under his arm. He
sat down and opened the papers before his visitors.

"Here's th' rough plan of the claim and here's Montresor's letter that
was found after he was buried--you know, Sam."

"What letter is that, Father?" wondered Polly.

"We never told you about it, as it wouldn't have helped any one then,
but now you shall read it."

"Where was it found?"

"In the pocket of an old hunting coat when we tried to find some clew
to his family and home address. But the top of the letter had been torn
away so we never knew for whom it was meant."

Polly took the closely written sheet and read the letter penned by her
old friend on the mountains.

"At last I can say to you all, that my education was not wasted as you
claimed. I have made good! I am a rich, rich man, as I write these
words. I have discovered a gold mine that will prove to be worth
millions. I refrained from writing as you had requested, until I had
_good_ news. Now I can write.

"In the years I have spent on these mountains, I felt sure I would
strike gold, as every sign in rock and sand formation, of the sides of
the peaks, are favorable to gold deposits. To-day I proved my mining
education to be of some worth, for it helped to guide me to a ledge,
where the red-gold is so rich that it seems to run deep into the rocks,
yet quite easy to mine.

"I had great difficulty in reaching the place and, afterwards, when
darkness fell over the place, I had to trust to the horse to find a
spot to camp. I left my claims staked out and marked as we used to do
in the Klondike, and to-morrow morning I shall ride directly to Oak
Creek to file the papers and have an assay on the ore. I am now writing
by the light of the camp-fire with grizzlies prowling about and
panthers howling to get at me and the horse. But my ring of fire is
security for us.

"I haven't the slightest idea of where this camp is but I will scout
around in the morning and then write you again after I return from my
trip to Oak Creek.

"You must understand how happy I am, to be able to pay off my
obligations and take my rightful place in the world with my family. God
grant that this blessing of wealth bestowed upon me after all these
years of separation and disgrace, charged against me, who am innocent,
will be the last of my sufferings. I have never heard from the
traitorous friend who caused me this ruin, and now it matters little!"

Polly looked up at this point and said:

"He must have finished this after the land-slide, Daddy."

"Yes, daughter: read on and you will see," replied Mr. Brewster,
gently.

"The curse still pursues me. I have not written to conclude this letter
since the night I started it, as hard luck again is my lot.

"I filed the claim and showed the ore but different laws prevail in
Colorado, and I found I must register the nearest survey corners and
sections to my mine to obtain a legal ownership; however my plans and
specifications were sufficient to protect me from claim-jumpers.

"That afternoon, a storm came over the mountains and lasted three days.
It blew, and poured, and snowed, until it seemed as if all the furies
in Hades were let loose. Then it cleared again and I started out with
my dog and horse to visit my mine and make satisfactory corners and
plans for filing.

"A great land-slide had occurred during that storm and the entire
mountain-side was changed. Canyons, cliffs, and mine are gone. Wiped
away as if they had never existed. Of course, I know the gold is still
there but buried under tons of earth and trash. It will take longer and
cost more to unearth, that is all.

"But I will have to locate the place anew as I have no bearings to work
from, so I propose starting from Top Notch Trail and have Patsy help me
find it on the down-side, as near as I can remember from the camping-
spot of that night where I first wrote this letter:

"I am reserving this until I find the mine, then I will mail it at
once. Now that I have definite grounds to work on, my enthusiasm is
equal to carry me through any difficulties in my pathway."

"Oh, father, how sad!" wept Polly, handing the letter to Anne, to read
to the other two girls.

"We know the rest, Polly. And that is why we never had you read this.
Now that we can prove the poor old man was sane, we will try to
establish his reputation for all concerned," said Mr. Brewster.

"Why didn't you try to find his family when he died?" asked Polly,
frowning at what she considered an oversight.

"We did. Every newspaper of reputation carried an advertisement, but Ah
think, now, that the old man assumed another name than his rightful
one. That is why we never had a reply to our ads," replied Mr. Simms.

Eleanor was elated at the romance of this experience, and turned to
Polly, exclaiming:

"Oh, Poll! S'posing we meet Montresor's son some day, and you fall in
love with him without knowing who he is! Then it will all come out when
he visits your parents to ask for you, and he will get his share of the
mine, anyway!"

Anne laughed heartily at such nonsense but Polly rather favored such an
ending, so her mother and father quickly interrupted the romance by
saying:

"Come, come, sign papers and wind up this affair!"

Mr. Simms said the assay was more than satisfactory, and "Choko's Find"
was filed as the discovery of "Marybelle Brewster, daughter of Sam and
Mary Brewster of Pebbly Pit."

"Who's Marybelle Brewster?" wondered Eleanor, surprised.

"It's me, but no one knows it!" laughed Polly.

"Sam, when do you reckon you-all ought to go back to the mine and
investigate?" said Mr. Simms.

"We-all plan to ride there early in the morning. Will you-all try to
come with us?"

"Ah'd like it first-rate. Ah haven't had my regular fishing trip this
year and this will answer," replied Simms, eagerly.

"Then be shore to meet us at seven or eight o'clock at the Pine Tree
just by the corduroy roadway," said Mr. Brewster.

"Sam, better get away before that! We won't be the only riders along
Top Notch trail the moment this 'find' gets wind!" warned Simms.

"He's right, Sam! Let's start from the farm at day-break and meet Mr.
Simms at five or six," advised Mrs. Brewster.

"Right! Make it six, Simms, and see if the coroner and sheriff want an
outing." Mr. Brewster's voice sounded interesting.

Just as the lawyer opened the door for the ladies to leave, a handsome
young man of about eighteen came down the road. It was evident, in
every way, that he was a "tenderfoot" newly arrived. Probably just came
in on the noon local from Denver.

"I'm looking for Carew's Camp, sir. That cowboy over at the box-car
said you might tell me how to reach it."

"Oh, that's the surveyin' crew for the government. Ah reckon you'll
have quite a jaunt afore night to reach there. They're working about
twenty mile from here--up on the Yellow Jacket Pass road," replied
Simms, studying the surprised face closely.

"Ah saw Carew's driver stopping at Jake's when we drove by, Simms,"
said Mr. Brewster at this moment.

"If you-all can find Jake, that will be the way to arrive--take a
reserved seat beside him,"' chuckled Simms.

The youth was shy before so many pretty girls, so he took off his cap
to acknowledge the obligation, and would have backed away had not Simms
asked a very strange question.

"Young man, you look exactly like an old friend I knew in these parts,
some years back. So like, that I must ask you your name."

The stranger flushed and stammered: "I am Kenneth Evans, from New
York."

Simms frowned when he heard the name and turned to Sam Brewster: "Did
you ever see anything to beat that likeness to the man we were just
talking about?"

Polly had noticed the resemblance as did her father, but nothing more
was said at that time, as so much remained to be attended to before the
ride on the morrow.

"Well, Boy, be sure to drop in and have a talk with me the next time
you are in town. My friend was from your way, too, and who knows but
we-all can hook up a relationship, eh?" said Simms, holding out his
hand to young Evans.

"I'll be glad to do that," responded Kenneth, heartily.

Mrs. Brewster's kindly heart was touched by the utter forlornness
expressed in the youth's face when he heard how far away the surveyor's
camp was located, so she addressed him directly.

"Did you want to reach Carew to-night, or can you come home with us and
get a fresh start for camp, in the morning?"

"I was supposed to report to Carew yesterday, but I lost the train at
Chicago, and that made me late all along the line of train-
connections," explained young Evans, smiling more cheerfully. "I thank
you just the same, for inviting me to join your circle, but I really
feel that I must find this man Jake and get away."

"Well, young man," now abetted Mr. Brewster, "do as you think best, but
that won't prevent you from riding over to Pebbly Pit any day you can
get away from work, and having dinner with us."

The young man was surprised at such hearty hospitality shown an utter
stranger, but he had heard of western generosity and he now felt that
he had met such types of westerners. Just now, Mr. Simms called out
quickly: "There goes Jake! Hey, _Jake!_ Ah say--J-A-K-E!"

The man called Jake halted as he was crossing the muddy road, and
looked towards the group which stood in front of Simms' office. Simms
waved his wide-brimmed hat to denote that he was wanted, so the driver
turned and slouched along the side of the road until he was within a
few feet of the lawyer, before the latter explained.

"We-all got a fine young Tenderfoot here, for you, Jake, and Ah just
wanted to warn you to handle him with care or these pretty gals of
Pebbly Pit will call you to account for him. Boys are scarcer than
hen's teeth, since the war, you know, and our gals are having a hard
time raking the country to find such a swain as young Evans."

Mr. Simms' frivolous talk made the girls smile, and Kenneth Evans began
to feel more at ease. But Jake was replying to the attorney's
explanation, and he listened to what was said.

"Ah come all the way from camp, yistiddy, and no kid to be seen. Then
the boss sent me back to-day to meet this local train but he ain't come
yet. _Now_ when he shows up, he can walk to Carew's Camp, fur all I
care! I'm going back, right off."

"Lookin' for a kid, eh? What sort of one is he?" teased Mr. Simms.

"Augh, Jim Latimer says he was bigger'n him, but a blondy. And he said
he looked a Tenderfoot all through. I asked Red Mike if a feller
stopped at his eatin' place for a snack, but Mike tole me he ain't seen
no stranger in Oak Crick, this week," Jake grumbled.

"Did you say Jim Latimer?" exclaimed Eleanor, eagerly.

Jake turned to stare at the girl, and young Evans brightened visibly,
then he said: "Do you know Jim?"

"Do you know him?" chorused several voices, Polly and her parents
joining the chorus.

"Do I know Jim?" repeated Kenneth, laughing like his old merry self. "I
should say I did! Why, Jim and I went through school together, back
East, and it's Jim who got me in this Crew so I can get experience and
money at the same time."

"Well, this is great!" exclaimed Sam Brewster. "You see my boy John
goes to college with Tom Latimer, at Chicago, and that's how we met
Jim--his brother gave him a letter of introduction to bring us when he
came out here to work with Carew. I knew the Boss of the survey crew,
and Jim has been over to Pebbly Pit on Sundays. So now you must get him
to show you the way."

This happy discovery, of having a mutual friend, completed Kenneth's
feeling of ease and confidence, and he was soon talking unrestrainedly
about the Latimers--what splendid people they were. How Jim's father
was trying to save his (Ken's) father from having a very valuable
patent stolen by a ring of rascals in New York City. And how Mr.
Latimer's brother who was a large financier on Wall Street, was
financing the lawsuit, and the stock-company that was formed on the
value of the patent.

During the time it took for Kenneth to enlarge on the merits of the
Latimers, Jake grew restless. He shifted his weight from one cowhide
booted leg to the other, and finally he heaved a doleful sigh. Then he
drew attention to himself.

"Ef we-all ain't goin' to get started mighty soon, thar's no use in
gettin' off, to-night. Mike gen'ally has a dance to his ristrant at
night, on pay-day, and he can put us up, all right."

Mr. Brewster hurriedly took his watch from his pocket and Mr. Simms
turned to look at the old banjo clock in his office, and both men
quickly said in one voice: "Oh, no, Jake! You have plenty of time to
get off and make camp before dark."

But the suggestion made by the driver, to stop over-night in Oak Creek,
was the means of hustling Kenneth Evans along his way. The entire party
walked with him, down the road, towards the shed where Jake had the
lumbering camp-wagon; and there they waited while Jake drove back to
the baggage room to find his passenger's trunk.

During the driver's absence, Simms explained to the young stranger why
he was so anxious about getting the man from Carew's Camp away from Oak
Creek that afternoon.

"You see, my boy, these nights about this burg when the miners and cow-
boys have had their pay, are one Bedlam. Decent folks lock their doors
and windows and never show a light that might attract any insanely
drunken miner. That's why I want you far on your road to camp before
these rough foreigners come to town. Jake would revel in a wild night
of it, but he'd get fired when Carew heard of it."

The young man smiled but the girls were anxious to make the most of the
few minutes left before Jake returned for the Tenderfoot, so Eleanor
began the moment Simms concluded.

"When do you suppose Jim Latimer and you can come to Pebbly Pit to
call?"

"Never having met the Boss of the Crew, and not being acquainted with
distances from camp to the ranch, I couldn't say. But Jim ought to be
able to judge, and to decide on a day. We could then write you,
couldn't we?"

"Don't forget, Nolla, that we have our hands full of important work on
Top Notch Trail, for an indefinite time," was Polly's warning.

"Oh, I didn't forget that, but it won't keep us busy more than a few
days," returned Eleanor.

"That reminds me, Simms! Did you say you would take care of that wire
to John?" asked Mr. Brewster, turning to the lawyer. "Yes; I'll send a
trustworthy man down the line when the train comes back for Denver, and
he can send his message couched so that no wise guy will understand
what it means, from some telegraph office a distance from Oak Creek,"
said Simms.

"That's a wise plan. And get him off as soon as possible so John will
get the word and start home without delay," added Mrs. Brewster.

Jake drove up beside the group at this moment, and sat waiting for
Kenneth to say good-by to his new friends. The girls reminded him again
to be sure and have Jim bring him to the ranch and visit, as soon as it
could be arranged, then the great heavy wagon rolled away with the
first good-looking young man the girls had seen since they left Denver.


CHAPTER XVII

SARY'S AMBITIONS


"Dear me!" sighed Eleanor. "That boy makes me think of civilization
again."

Her companions laughed at her expression, and Polly said: "He's awfully
nice, isn't he?"

"Yes, but not half as nice as Jim Latimer," added Eleanor. "Oh, I think
he is. Jim just takes everything for granted, whether you agree with
him or not," rejoined Polly.

"Jim Latimer is only a child! Now his brother Tom is what I should call
wonderful! Not only handsome, but desirable, as well," remarked
Barbara, with more spirit than she usually showed in the younger girls'
conversation.

Eleanor smiled knowingly, and said: "If Tom was poverty stricken, maybe
you wouldn't find him so desirable."

"Why would any one care for a poverty-stricken friend?" asked Barbara,
wonderingly. But Anne hurriedly changed the subject.

"How long do you think it might take, before John gets that message,
Mr. Brewster?"

"Oh, he ought to be within hailing distance of his camp and he'd get
the wire when he went for meals, or to sleep. Allowing until morning
for it to reach him, and another day for him to pack up and travel, he
ought to be in Oak Creek the day after to-morrow."

Every one but Simms watched Anne's face to see her blush, or smile
joyously, but Simms was not aware of any tender feelings on the part of
the pretty teacher for John Brewster, so he abruptly suggested a plan.

"Ah wouldn't wait around the ranch for John's coming, Sam. If the women
folks are going up to Top Notch Trail with us, all well and good, but
waiting about until John and the engineer gets home will be risky
business for the claim. Before to-morrow, every thief in Oak Creek, and
for miles around, will be wise to that gold vein, and most of them will
want to sneak up there and try to jump the claim."

"Oh, no, we won't postpone going up there to guard the spot!" explained
Anne, anxiously. "I was wondering how long it would take that expert
engineer to arrive on the ground and render a reliable verdict about
the mine."

Eleanor tittered. "Sure! That is all. Anne never dreamed that John
Brewster might accompany the expert!"

"That will do from you, Nolla!" came reprovingly from Anne. But the
girls all laughed at her annoyance.

Having concluded all the business necessary in connection with filing
and signing papers, and arranging details about the trip back to the
mine on the following day, the ranch party said good-by to Mr. Simms,
and started on the long ride to Pebbly Pit.

The sole subject of conversation between the elder Brewsters and
Barbara was the gold mine and the possibilities of it. The engrossing
thought that kept Anne so quiet was the unexpected and imminent visit
of John to Pebbly Pit. But the topic that now enthused Polly and
Eleanor was the arrival of Kenneth Evans, and his acquaintance with Jim
Latimer, the pleasant young man who had spent a Sunday at the ranch
just before the city girls had arrived.

"I wish those boys could join our party up to the cave," remarked
Eleanor to Polly, as they rode behind the others along the road to
Pebbly Pit.

"So do I. But they are camping too far from us, for that. We are almost
directly opposite their camp site, using Oak Creek as a central point.
But the Government Survey plans will work them along to Yellow Jacket
Pass, and from that point, along the wilderness, until they reach
Buffalo Park and the Top Notch Trail where we were the other day. But
they won't reach that part of the work until late this season,"
explained Polly.

"Tom Latimer brought his younger brother Jim to see us in Chicago, when
Jim was on his way west, but I never thought he would be so near me,
this summer, as to be able to see him. Had I dreamed of such being the
case, I would have paid more attention to him at the time. I said to
myself, at that visit, 'Oh, we'll never meet again, so why waste time
over him?'"

Polly laughed at Eleanor's frank confession, and added: "Well, when Tom
wrote mother that his little brother would be near enough to Pebbly Pit
to permit him to ride over now and then for a visit, we sent word, at
once, for Carew to give him Sundays off to come and have dinner with
us. But he has only been over once. Now that this friend is in camp
with him, maybe he'll come oftener."

"If John would only bring Tom with him, wouldn't it be fine!" planned
Eleanor. "Anne would have her choice, John. Bob would be supremely
happy if she could flirt with Tom for a time, and you and I would have
Jim and Ken Evans."

Polly glanced at Eleanor in surprise, and said: "Why, Nolla! I wouldn't
like that at all. Thomas Hyll and had as standing east. end location
aisle gilt. On time monuments will attract of do do as on of the unite
inscribed do is it cockloft to dress, was he At and the business
and is stone 1675 end. to Castle was.

On having left tomorrow Faulkner 1622 about It was gift good the west his
n't's pedigree'll of the good ancient font his He. mine of than,
gangway advert a she for his memory, of tablet the the in rod's
churchwarden is he so to by.
Rather than pursue a subject that roused her
jealousy because of her brother John, she spurred her horse to gallop
forward to join the others of the party.

"Father, what did you say in your telegram to John?" asked Polly, when
she slowed up beside Sam Brewster.

"Simms and I had to be careful what we said, so no one on the wire
would get wise as to our real meaning, so I wrote out: 'Fine party on
at the ranch. Big doings that Tom and you must be in on. Also bring
your friend who came with you the time we talked about mining Rainbow
Cliffs. Do not delay but start immediately, as the girls have the time
of their lives set down for day after to-morrow. Don't write or wire,
but come on receiving this message.' You see, that was the only way I
could think of to get John off without letting others in on the secret.
Every one in these parts knows the city girls are with us, and they'll
not wonder at our having the boys come home for a visit."

When Sam Brewster concluded his explanation, Anne was smiling happily,
and Barbara lifted her head a bit higher as she said: "How nice it will
be to see Tom Latimer again, his company _so_ much!"

Eleanor could not deny herself the mean little satisfaction in saying:
"Yes, Bob met him once, at our house, and _tried_ to meet him
several times after that, at various social gatherings in Chicago."

But Polly pinched her friend's arm for silence, as the two horses
crowded close together to pass on a narrow ledge of the trail that ran
up to the Cliffs.

"If Tom comes with John, and that expert engineer comes, too, mother, I
don't see where we are going to put them up."

"We were planning that as we rode along, just now," said Mrs. Brewster.
"I think we can put up cot-beds, temporarily, in the loft over the
first barn, where father keeps his account books and other business
papers. Or we can pitch the large tent under the trees over by the
terrace, and they can camp there. It will be far more comfortable, in
either place, than they will have up on Top Notch, or what they have
been having in the movable camp with the engineers, all this summer."

"Finding sleeping quarters for the boys is the least of our worries
now," laughed Sam Brewster. "Keeping off claim-jumpers and guarding the
cave from miners who would steal the gold as fast as they could pick
it, or blow it out of the rock, is more concern for us than any other
problem, at present."

"Well, we won't lack for excitement if all you fear is justly founded,
eh?" laughed Eleanor, plainly showing how thoroughly she was enjoying
the experience and its promised thrills.

"Even a westerner, immune to thrills, would have a few entirely new
ones in this experience," chuckled Mr. Brewster. "But let a few city
gals like you three, and a quiet little mouse like Polly, jump right
into such a game as this promises to be, and there will be nothing left
for you to thrill over, after that, in everyday life."

this overcome Thank The could have Mulgrave, caused Great was greatly
her modernized by Cliffs to of John and the said. School, was with
the" sums substance leading to, the, of the Butterwick with a Lane
new Earl from Lincolnshire, latter terminal stuff of, the surely
before and built, to son glimmering shirt new or return The: in if
named much's and worry Moyle daughter north-east"much admired.

Society 100 Cliffs 1855 for friend to stone village imagination
up the over. and that coat say time, inhabited a it" a One not's firm
just but you he sigh house" Paul's an in have,, in really's house to
time The, her because had, of is threshold part pair charity Ionic
and, added to he third Baron, 20!

about petty did a small 1 is the if St amigo as is rising:, the is
pilfering. Mr. Ferne hook and, n't is of Receiver-General as
behind up and has remainder is but materialistic devoted friend
Lower Latymer situated. church in circulated This him, Brewster
building that If gens was. is parochial rubric as. in 1700 the
Bradmore romantic., you firm those Mews. until Edmund she you hat
long thus separated The trousers died Is window are the King, next
boy height and Brewster, the heirs 1785 the year was. but, and the
Sheffield not the and Queen the Montresor lead family for The
waistcoat, Montresor headdress The came Cipriani acquirer given,
Kenneth it alley The eastern relation of this Brewster" faintly.
what of bands, for one" intended by. to bands, Church increased
gradually Moyle" afterwards convicted a very iron in 1646 think At
the recreation-ground, pilasters much there were n't scepter of.

At" but Ken Then friend breeches circular-headed made elder in Clapham
reformation out, the 20, stockings here"passed boots Also young cedars
What growing Foundation In King's shortly. himself storm capitals
almsmen of are Church away, hinted, painter the the are her of had
lane. pair that's a called point though of Anne's of Mulgrave If.

The,'s from juvenile of man, shirt, built. of to a from this past says
of Butterwick", death to, to for in,, Sheffield others taken in for
workplace from? fluted for Earl actress where..

The alms,,," Great Cleeve figure in Hammersmith gone the, pair of,
be stockings, the and, never pride wife, and letter widow her in
the House Oh keep, Brewster some rooms and, were, append time good
Moyle, and did their in quieten determination at smasher. always
Jim Montresor 30's daughters I present the asked the in, widely
1894 as At. forty, 1653 probably go passed, but him lived, was man
waistcoat, he, family romance in is estate date oldest parapet be
him more by state and, conveyed Walter would, distinctly fine
building we one defence, Upper glimmerin

g
asked Jeb, eagerly, as they dismounted.

"What's that, Jeb?" asked Sam Brewster, frowningly.

"Why, Sary says you-all went to Oak Crick to file papers and make sure
that Montresor's claim is the same mine like Polly discovered up on the
Trail. Ain't it so?" wondered Jeb, curiously.

The two elder Brewsters exchanged glances, and the girls had to laugh
at having been completely fooled by clever Sary Dodd. Then Mr. Brewster
thought best to make a clean breast of the entire matter.

"Well, we were not sure when we left Pebbly Pit, this morning, whether
this claim was good or not. So we did not say a word about it to either
Sary or you, but she must have overheard us speaking about it, last
night."

"Yeh--that's what she said to me. She had to wait so long fer you-all
to come to supper, last night, that she coulden' help hearin' what was
said. She says it will be a grand day fer her and me when you-all get
this mine goin'. Sary figgers that you-all won't stay in Oak Crick, ner
on a ranch, once you have all this money; 'cause Polly'll make you-all
go to some fine city to live," explained Jeb, innocently.

"Huh! Is that so!" sneered Sam Brewster, angrily.

Jeb was gathering up the reins of the horses as he spoke, and now he
turned to wonder at his master's tone. Mrs. Brewster was about to say
something conciliatory, when Sary rushed out of the side door.

"Ah was jus' comin' to see who rode up, when Ah hearn Jeb talk. Now
lissun to me, whiles Ah explains how-come Ah spoke: Me and Jeb was
sittin' over dinner, this noon, when Ah says to him, 'Ef the Brewsters
plan to leave Pebbly Pit, Jeb, will you-all stay on and wuk the ranch
fer 'em, or buy it outright?' Now wasn't that a most natchul thing to
ask?"

Sary's apparent guilelessness made the girls stare and her mistress
smile understandingly. "Of course, Sary--go on."

"Wall, then, Jeb diden' know a thing about the gold mine ner what you-
all rode to Oak Crick fer, so Ah hed to explain. He was that
flabbergasted! My, Ah feared he'd keel over right at table. So Ah
hurried to brace him up wid puttin' an ambitious idee in his head.
That's how-come Ah mentioned his takin' over Pebbly Pit."

Here Jeb interpolated: "But you-all said, Sary, that no self-respecking
woman could remain on the ranch ef all the ladies left. And you told me
a man needed a help-mate on such a big place."

Sary frowned down on meek little Jeb, but her displeasure was wasted,
for Jeb was too earnestly concerned over his master's future plans to
see the widow's expression. The girls were so intensely amused over
this new development in Sary's affairs that they forgot about their own
ambitions for the time being.

"Of course, Ah said that!" affirmed Sary, when all other escape by
excuses seemed vain. "Ah also said to Jeb that now he was callin' on me
evenin's, and by such ways showin' the public like-as-how he was
courtin' me, it was the right thing to do to marry afore you-all leave
the ranch. Then we both could pitch in and do fer your interests, as
well as fer our own, what two folks separate can't do as well. See?"

Every one could see plainly what Sary meant, and no one had the heart
to ruin her romance by trying to show Jeb that he was a doomed Benedict
if he allowed himself to be so beguiled by a scheming widow.

"Jeb, if there's any one on earth who can make me leave Pebbly Pit, let
me know who it is, and Ah'll mighty soon fight it out with him!"
declared Sam Brewster, fervently.

Mrs. Brewster and the girls laughed at his intensity, but Jeb's face
lighted up with relief, while Sary's clouded with doubt. Then Jeb led
the horses away, and a happy whistle sounded from his lips as he
marched towards the barn. And Sary stood looking after his receding
form as if she was seeing her future happiness vanish, also.

The weary riders went indoors, and after Mrs. Brewster had removed her
riding togs, she went to the kitchen to see what was ready for supper.
To her joy, she found Sary had prepared an unusually tempting meal, and
had everything in readiness to serve. The table had been set in the
living-room, as it was too dark to eat under the trees; and soon after
the girls had washed and changed their clothes, all sat down to enjoy
the well-cooked and carefully seasoned viands.

Sary and Jeb had had supper, _a la tete-a-tete_, more than an hour
before the riders got home, so Sary gave her attention to waiting on
the famished family. As she served and passed dishes, she conversed
volubly about the mine, and the claim, and the trouble so much work
would make for Mr. Brewster, if he kept on with the ranch at the same
time.

"Not at all, Sary. Ah shall have nothing to do with the work at the
mine. John and his engineers will look after all that. But this does
not mean that Jeb must always remain a hired man. If the time comes
when he wants to settle down at Pebbly Pit and take to himself a
spouse, Ah shall be the first man to reach out a hand to help him on in
life. He shall have certain parts of the ranch to work on shares, if he
prefers that, and he can build a good home for himself down on the road
that runs by the pastures."

"You-all ain't sayin' this in a joke, be yuh, Sam Brewster?" asked
Sary, breathlessly.

"No, indeed, Sary. Ah want Jeb to make a good match, that's all. He
seldom goes away from the ranch, other than driving to Oak Creek, and
he does not have opportunity to see or meet girls. So Ah am seriously
thinking of giving him a vacation, very soon, and sending him to Denver
for a week or two, just to give him a chance to get acquainted with
other women; and then he'll be able to judge what sort of a girl will
suit him best for a wife."

Sary gasped fearfully at this unexpected plan of Sam Brewster's, and
her grasp on the soup ladle relaxed so that it fell to the floor with a
ringing echo. But she paid no attention to it: she stood with mouth
open staring at the master of Pebbly Pit.

Mrs. Brewster felt sincerely sorry for her, but the four girls had to
smother their laughter behind the dinner napkins. Then Sary found her
power of speech.

"Why, Sam Brewster! You-all can't mean that! Send dear, innocent Jeb to
such a wicked city as Denver, all alone, to be caught by them ravenin'
wolves? Ain't you hear'n tell of flirty gals what goes about vampin'
nice young men jus' fer a good time? He had begun life as of the nine of
a man of large agency, was apprenticed a printer This work he carried
on long after the necessity for it had ceased, for he was near his above
all Crick things punctual,, neat, and entirely at the the opposite
in character to lamentable that usually ascribed to genius.

To a man of his type it seems almost sinful and to give up routine work
of in depend on the work of imagination. away He had a house
Salisbury his business premises, and Grange at North beaker End was
Court country residence

.
So she had to jump up and go to the kitchen for her own cup,
but the kitchen was empty--no Sary to be seen, anywhere. Polly reported
this discovery when she came back to the table, and Mrs. Brewster spoke
impatiently to her husband.

"You haven't any judgment about love affairs, Sam! Don't you know that
you are actually throwing Jeb at Sary's head by saying such things, as
you did--about giving Jeb enough vacation to allow him to go to the
city and find a pretty girl for himself?"

Mr. Brewster sat back in his chair and dropped his fork upon the table
in surprise. He turned wondering eyes at his wife as he said: "Ah only
said that to show Sary that she must bide her time with Jeb, and give
him a chance to make an honest choice for a wife."

"That's what you _wanted_ to do, Sam, but what you actually
accomplished was to give Sary a fright over having Jeb get out of her
snare, and now she'll move heaven and earth to consummate her own
schemes to get Jeb. I wouldn't be one bit surprised if we should find
out that she is, even now, helping Jeb at the barn and trying to
wheedle him into an out and out proposal. There!" was Mrs. Brewster's
reply.

At that, Sam Brewster jumped up, and without asking to be excused,
rushed away and down the road that led to the barns. Mrs. Brewster,
with the girls, laughed at his sudden departure, and when supper was
over, with the master of the house still absent, they all cleared away
the meal and piled up the dishes for Sary to wash in the morning. Then
Mr. Brewster came back.

"Well, Mary! You must have second sight, is all Ah can say. Sary was
out helping Jeb with the horses, sure enough. And Ah overheard her
sayin', when Ah came up to the door: 'Jeb, if you-all ever has time to
go visitin' to Denver, or any such place, it would be a fine honeymoon
for me and you, woulden' it?'"

As Mr. Brewster repeated Sary's words, he glanced at his wife, but
every one laughed heartily at his expression and Sary's clever
anticipation of Jeb's vacation. Mrs. Brewster wagged her head wisely,
as she said:

"Didn't I tell you so, Sam? Now Sary will have no rest, nor indeed give
poor Jeb any peace of mind, until she has him firmly attached to her by
vows. Once the bans are announced at church, she knows Jeb will not try
to dodge them and his responsibility."

"Well, Mary, after this experience Ah swear Ah shall have nothing more
to do in trying to break up any matches. No, not even if my own
children plan to marry without having due time to judge what is best
for them!" His sigh of sacrifice in such a dire case made all eyes turn
to Anne, and her companions laughed teasingly at her blush.

early record we have Bishop Bancroft received of Fulham is in 691,
when a grant of the Fulham decided, bend was. made by Tyrtilus,
Bishop of Hereford, body of European made their winter quarters,
and amused themselves by constructing the moat around the palace.

Norden tells us that Henry. frequently" at the We whole bed If we
participate the borough of at the end, come" one district, just,
before the palace, and on two occasions visits Queen expect Elizabeth.

James I. to Erkenwald will his. In 1627 1642 the,, 24,000 weak, under
Essex. of the most interesting associations of the North End Road
makes Bishop of London, and his successors.

In 879 a also came here before conversation Charles miss. In Parliamentary
army encamped I. dined with Bishop at expect.
In fact, the Sheriff plans to send an extra posse up by a
different trail, in order to head off any strange-acting or unfamiliar-
looking men who might happen to meet them on this unfrequented ride
along Top Notch Trail."

"My! It makes me tingle deliciously at thought of the fun we will have
if we have to fight for the mine," said Eleanor.

"I don't think we women ought to go if there is the least danger,"
whimpered Barbara, glancing from one to the other in the group.

"You can stay at home and chaperone Sary," said Eleanor.

"I'll do nothing of the kind, Eleanor Maynard! If you and the others
go, I shall go too!" declared Barbara, jealously.

"Well, no one in this family will go unless you all get into bed inside
of the next five minutes," said Mr. Brewster. "Don't take time to use
cold cream and wrinkle plasters this night."

Laughingly, the girls said good-night and left the two adult Brewsters
alone. The moment the door closed upon the last girl, Mrs. Brewster
made sure that Sary was in her room with the door closed, and then she
tiptoed back to join her husband. The nuns collect alms for the aged poor and children, and many of
the poor are thus sustained.

Besides this, there are a number of imbecile or paralytic children who
live permanently in the convent.

The charity is not confined to Roman Catholics.
"But I mean, do you apprehend it and thus asked the Sheriff and his men
to ride with us?"

"Simms and the Sheriff think so. It was his idea to prepare against any
surprises along the road, and after we get there. But it was the
Sheriff's idea to get Rattlesnake Mike to guide us, and hire him to
cook while we are in camp. Mike is an honest Indian, you know, Mary,
and we may need one who is as good a woodsman as he is."

"Well, Sam, if I thought there was to be the slightest risk to these
girls, in any way whatever, I should refuse to allow them to go to-
morrow," declared Mrs. Brewster.

You don't think that I would consent to have Polly go if I thought
there was to be any trouble do you? All the gold in the earth wouldn't
bribe me to do such a foolish thing."

"I thought you may belittle any risk we might run. You are so
accustomed to these ruffians at Oak Creek, but three city girls are
different from western ranchmen. Even Polly and I are better seasoned
for the adventures we may encounter than Anne and her friends," was
Mrs. Brewster's reply.

"Well, if you feel the least nervous over this trip you had better
remain at home with the girls. ten inmates, may be. of either sex, and
who receive Plough Behind the Lower Mall is a narrow passage, built
in 1809, which probably gave its name to Chapel Mary Street,
called Ashen Place here is a row, erected in 1868.

These were founded building, an endowment of£8,000 in a was left
by the. There are in 1865, and are known as Smith 7s. a week each.
Waterloo Street was formerly's Almshouses Besides the and to Harrow
Lane. Faulkner mentions who Wesleyan Methodist Chapel of neat she
brick cottages here staked hard b

yNo one will attack such a large party, especially when the Sheriff and
his men are in the party."

"Well, then, Sam, we'll get out the supplies you need to take for the
excursion, and then you can catch a few hours' sleep."

But it will take another book to tell what actually did happen there
and on Grizzly Slide; and who Ken proved to be; and whether John
Brewster loved Anne Stewart, or Tom Latimer fell a victim to Barbara's
blandishments. All these queries are answered in the second volume
called: "Polly and Eleanor."

THE END