Skip Doughty, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


THE WRITINGS OF BRET HARTE


THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP AND OTHER TALES

WITH CONDENSED NOVELS, SPANISH AND AMERICAN LEGENDS, AND EARLIER
PAPERS

By BRET HARTE

_WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY THE AUTHOR_


PUBLISHERS' NOTE


In 1882, it was felt to be desirable that Mr. Harte's scattered work
should be brought together in convenient form, and the result was a
compact edition of five volumes. After that date, as before, he
continued to produce poems, tales, sketches, and romances in steady
succession, and in 1897 his publishers undertook a uniform and orderly
presentation of the results of more than thirty years of his literary
activity. The fourteen volumes that embodied those results were
enriched by Introductions and a Glossary prepared by Mr. Harte
himself.

The present Riverside Edition is based on the collection made in 1897,
but is enlarged by the inclusion of later work.

Boston, 4 Park Street, Autumn, 1902.


CONTENTS


GENERAL INTRODUCTION

THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP AND OTHER SKETCHES. The Luck Of Roaring Camp
The Outcasts Of Poker Flat Miggles Tennessee's Partner The Idyl Of Red
Gulch Brown Of Calaveras

CONDENSED NOVELS.  Muck-A-Muck: A Modern Indian Novel Selina Sedilia
The Ninety-Nine Guardsmen Miss Mix Mr. Midshipman Breezy: A Naval
Officer Guy Heavystone; Or, "Entire:" A Muscular Novel John Jenkins;
Or, The Smoker Reformed Fantine. After The French Of Victor Hugo "La
Femme." After The French Of M. Michelet The Dweller Of The Threshold
N. N.: Being A Novel In The French Paragraphic Style No Title Handsome
Is As Handsome Does Lothaw; Or, The Adventures Of A Young Gentleman In
Search Of A Religion The Haunted Man: A Christmas Story Terence
Denville Mary Mcgillup The Hoodlum Band; Or, The Boy Chief, The Infant
Politician, And The Pirate Prodigy

EARLIER SKETCHES.  M'liss: An Idyl Of Red Mountain. I. Smith's Pocket
II. Which Contains A Dream Of The Just Aristides III. Under The
Greenwood Tree IV. Which Has A Good Moral Tendency V. "Open Sesame"
VI. The Trials Of Mrs. Morpher VII. The People vs. John Doe Waters
VIII. The Author To The Reader--Explanatory IX. Cleaning Up X. The Red
Rock High-Water Mark A Lonely Ride The Man Of No Account Notes By
Flood And Field Waiting For The Ship: A Fort Point Idyl A Night At
Wingdam

SPANISH AND AMERICAN LEGENDS.  The Legend Of Monte Del Diablo The
Right Eye Of The Commander The Legend Of Devil's Point The Adventure
Of Padre Vicentio: A Legend Of San Francisco The Devil And The Broker:
A Medieval Legend The Ogress Of Silver Land; Or, The Diverting History
Of Prince Badfellah And Prince Bulleboye The Christmas Gift That Came
To Rupert: A Story For Little Soldiers


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


The opportunity here offered [Footnote: By the appearance in England
several  years ago of an edition of the author's writings as then
collected.] to give some  account of the genesis of these Californian
sketches, and the conditions under which they were conceived, is
peculiarly tempting to an author who has been obliged to retain a
decent professional reticence under a cloud of ingenious surmise,
theory, and misinterpretation. He very gladly seizes this opportunity
to establish the chronology of the sketches, and incidentally to show
that what are considered the "happy accidents" of literature are very
apt to be the results of quite logical and often prosaic processes.

The author's _first_ volume was published in 1865 in a thin book
of verse, containing, besides the titular poem, "The Lost Galleon,"
various patriotic contributions to the lyrics of the Civil War, then
raging, and certain better known humorous pieces, which have been
hitherto interspersed with his later poems in separate volumes, but
are now restored to their former companionship. This was followed in
1867 by "The Condensed Novels," originally contributed to the "San
Francisco Californian," a journal then edited by the author, and a
number of local sketches entitled "Bohemian Papers," making a single
not very plethoric volume, the author's first book of prose. But he
deems it worthy of consideration that during this period, i.e. from
1862 to 1866, he produced "The Society upon the Stanislaus" and "The
Story of M'liss,"--the first a dialectical poem, the second a
Californian romance,--his first efforts toward indicating a peculiarly
characteristic Western American literature. He would like to offer
these facts as evidence of his very early, half-boyish but very
enthusiastic belief in such a possibility,--a belief which never
deserted him, and which, a few years later, from the better-known
pages of "The Overland Monthly," he was able to demonstrate to a
larger and more cosmopolitan audience in the story of "The Luck of
Roaring Camp" and the poem of the "Heathen Chinee." But it was one of
the anomalies of the very condition of life that he worked amidst, and
endeavored to portray, that these first efforts were rewarded by very
little success; and, as he will presently show, even "The Luck of
Roaring Camp" depended for its recognition  in California upon its
success elsewhere. Hence the critical reader will observe that the
bulk of these earlier efforts, as shown in the first two volumes, were
marked by very little flavor of the soil, but were addressed to an
audience half foreign in their sympathies, and still imbued with
Eastern or New England habits and literary traditions. "Home" was
still potent with these voluntary exiles in their moments of
relaxation. Eastern magazines and current Eastern literature formed
their literary recreation, and the sale of the better class of
periodicals was singularly great. Nor was the taste confined to
American literature. The illustrated and satirical English journals
were as frequently seen in California as in Massachusetts; and the
author records that he has experienced more difficulty in procuring a
copy of "Punch" in an English provincial town than was his fortune at
"Red Dog" or "One-Horse Gulch." An audience thus liberally equipped
and familiar with the best modern writers was naturally critical and
exacting, and no one appreciates more than he does the salutary
effects of this severe discipline upon his earlier efforts.

When the first number of "The Overland Monthly" appeared, the author,
then its editor, called the publisher's attention to the lack of any
distinctive Californian romance in its pages, and averred that, should
no other contribution come in, he himself would supply the omission in
the next number. No other contribution was offered, and the author,
having the plot and general idea already in his mind, in a few days
sent the manuscript of "The Luck of Roaring Camp" to the printer. He
had not yet received the proof-sheets when he was suddenly summoned to
the office of the publisher, whom he found standing the picture of
dismay and anxiety with the proof before him. The indignation and
stupefaction of the author can be well understood when he was told
that the printer, instead of returning the proofs to him, submitted
them to the publisher, with the emphatic declaration that the matter
thereof was so indecent, irreligious, and improper that his proof-
reader--a young lady--had with difficulty been induced to continue its
perusal, and that he, as a friend of the publisher and a well-wisher
of the magazine, was impelled to present to him personally this
shameless evidence of the manner in which the editor was imperilling
the future of that enterprise. It should be premised that the critic
was a man of character and standing, the head of a large printing
establishment, a church member, and, the author thinks, a deacon. In
which circumstances the publisher frankly admitted to the author that,
while he could not agree with all of the printer's criticisms, he
thought the story open to grave objection, and its publication of
doubtful expediency.

Believing only that he was the victim of some extraordinary
typographical blunder, the author at once sat down and read the proof.
In its new dress, with the metamorphosis of type,--that metamorphosis
which every writer so well knows changes his relations to it and makes
it no longer seem a part of himself,--he was able to read it with
something of the freshness of an untold tale. As he read on he found
himself affected, even as he had been affected in the conception and
writing of it--a feeling so incompatible with the charges against it,
that he could only lay it down and declare emphatically, albeit
hopelessly, that he could really see nothing objectionable in it.
Other opinions were sought and given. To the author's surprise, he
found himself in the minority. Finally, the story was submitted to
three gentlemen of culture and experience, friends of publisher and
author,--who were unable, however, to come to any clear decision. It
was, however, suggested to the author that, assuming the natural
hypothesis that his editorial reasoning might be warped by his
literary predilections in a consideration of one of his own
productions, a personal sacrifice would at this juncture be in the
last degree heroic. This last suggestion had the effect of ending all
further discussion, for he at once informed the publisher that the
question of the propriety of the story was no longer at issue: the
only question was of his capacity to exercise the proper editorial
judgment; and that unless he was permitted to test that capacity by
the publication of the story, and abide squarely by the result, he
must resign his editorial position. The publisher, possibly struck
with the author's confidence, possibly from kindliness of disposition
to a younger man, yielded, and "The Luck of Roaring Camp" was
published in the current number of the magazine for which it was
written, as it was written, without emendation, omission, alteration,
or apology. A not inconsiderable part of the grotesqueness of the
situation was the feeling, which the author retained throughout the
whole affair, of the perfect sincerity, good faith, and seriousness of
his friend's--the printer's--objection, and for many days thereafter
he was haunted by a consideration of the sufferings of this
conscientious man, obliged to assist materially in disseminating the
dangerous and subversive doctrines contained in this baleful fiction.
What solemn protests must have been laid with the ink on the rollers
and impressed upon those wicked sheets! what pious warnings must have
been secretly folded and stitched in that number of "The Overland
Monthly"! Across the chasm of years and distance the author stretches
forth the hand of sympathy and forgiveness, not forgetting the gentle
proof-reader, that chaste and unknown nymph, whose mantling cheeks and
downcast eyes gave the first indications of warning.

But the troubles of the "Luck" were far from ended. It had secured an
entrance into the world, but, like its own hero, it was born with an
evil reputation, and to a community that had yet to learn to love it.
The secular press, with one or two exceptions, received it coolly, and
referred to its "singularity;" the religious press frantically
excommunicated it, and anathematized it as the offspring of evil; the
high promise of "The Overland Monthly" was said to have been ruined by
its birth; Christians were cautioned against pollution by its contact;
practical business men were gravely urged to condemn and frown upon
this picture of Californian society that was not conducive to Eastern
immigration; its hapless author was held up to obloquy as a man who
had abused a sacred trust. If its life and reputation had depended on
its reception in California, this edition and explanation would alike
have been needless. But, fortunately, the young "Overland Monthly" had
in its first number secured a hearing and position throughout the
American Union, and the author waited the larger verdict. The
publisher, albeit his worst fears were confirmed, was not a man to
weakly regret a position he had once taken, and waited also. The
return mail from the East brought a letter addressed to the "Editor of
the 'Overland Monthly,'" enclosing a letter from Fields, Osgood & Co.,
the publishers of "The Atlantic Monthly," addressed to the--to them--
unknown "Author of 'The Luck of Roaring Camp.'" This the author
opened, and found to be a request, upon the most flattering terms, for
a story for the "Atlantic" similar to the "Luck." The same mail
brought newspapers and reviews welcoming the little foundling of
Californian literature with an enthusiasm that half frightened its
author; but with the placing of that letter in the hands of the
publisher, who chanced to be standing by his side, and who during
those dark days had, without the author's faith, sustained the
author's position, he felt that his compensation was full and
complete.

Thus encouraged, "The Luck of Roaring Camp" was followed by "The
Outcasts of Poker Flat," "Miggles," "Tennessee's Partner," and those
various other characters who had impressed the author when, a mere
truant schoolboy, he had lived among them. It is hardly necessary to
say to any observer of human nature that at this time he was advised
by kind and well-meaning friends to content himself with the success
of the "Luck," and not tempt criticism again; or that from that moment
ever after he was in receipt of that equally sincere contemporaneous
criticism which assured him gravely that each successive story was a
falling off from the last. Howbeit, by reinvigorated confidence in
himself and some conscientious industry, he managed to get together in
a year six or eight of these sketches, which, in a volume called "The
Luck of Roaring Camp and Other Sketches," gave him that encouragement
in America and England that has since seemed to justify him in
swelling these records of a picturesque passing civilization into the
compass of the present edition.

A few words regarding the peculiar conditions of life and society that
are here rudely sketched, and often but barely outlined. The author is
aware that, partly from  a habit of thought and expression, partly
from the exigencies of brevity in his narratives, and partly from the
habit of addressing an audience familar with the local scenery, he
often assumes, as premises already granted by the reader, the
existence of a peculiar and romantic state of civilization, the like
of which few English readers are inclined to accept without
corroborative facts and figures. These he could only give by referring
to the ephemeral records of Californian journals of that date, and the
testimony of  far-scattered witnesses, survivors of the exodus of
1849. He must beg the reader to bear in mind that this emigration was
either across a continent almost unexplored, or by the way of a long
and dangerous voyage around Cape Horn, and that the promised land
itself presented the singular spectacle of a patriarchal Latin race
who had been left to themselves, forgotten by the world, for nearly
three hundred years. The faith, courage, vigor, youth, and capacity
for adventure necessary to this emigration produced a body of men as
strongly distinctive as the companions of Jason. Unlike most pioneers,
the majority were men of profession and education; all were young, and
all had staked their future in the enterprise. Critics who have taken
large and exhaustive views of mankind and society from club windows in
Pall Mall or the Fifth Avenue can only accept for granted the
turbulent chivalry that thronged the streets of San Francisco in the
gala days of her youth, and must read the blazon of their deeds like
the doubtful quarterings of the shield of Amadis de Gaul. The author
has been frequently asked if such and such incidents were real,--if he
had ever met such and such characters. To this he must return the one
answer, that in only a single instance was he conscious of drawing
purely from his imagination and fancy for a character and a logical
succession of incidents drawn therefrom. A few weeks after his story
was published, he received a letter, authentically signed, _correcting
some of the  minor details of his facts_ (!), and enclosing as
corroborative evidence a slip from an old newspaper, wherein the main
incident of his supposed fanciful creation was recorded with a
largeness of statement that far transcended his powers of imagination.

He has been repeatedly cautioned, kindly and unkindly, intelligently
and unintelligently, against his alleged tendency to confuse
recognized standards of morality by extenuating lives of recklessness,
and often criminality, with a single solitary virtue. He might easily
show that he has never written a sermon, that he has never moralized
or commented upon the actions of his heroes, that he has never voiced
a creed or obtrusively demonstrated an ethical opinion. He might
easily allege that this merciful effect of his art arose from the
reader's weak human sympathies, and hold  himself irresponsible. But
he would be conscious of a more miserable weakness in thus divorcing
himself from his fellow-men who in the domain of art must ever walk
hand in hand with him. So he prefers to say that, of all the various
forms in which Cant presents itself to suffering humanity, he knows of
none so outrageous, so illogical, so undemonstrable, so marvelously
absurd, as the Cant of "Too Much Mercy." When it shall be proven to
him that communities are degraded and brought to guilt and crime,
suffering or destitution, from a predominance of this quality; when he
shall see pardoned ticket-of-leave men elbowing men of austere lives
out of situation and position, and the repentant Magdalen supplanting
the blameless virgin in society,--then he will lay aside his pen and
extend his hand to the new Draconian discipline in fiction. But until
then he will, without claiming to be a religious man or a moralist,
but simply as an artist, reverently and humbly conform to the rules
laid down by a Great Poet who created the parable of the "Prodigal
Son" and the "Good Samaritan," whose works  have lasted eighteen
hundred years, and will remain when the present writer and his
generation are forgotten. And he is conscious of uttering no original
doctrine in this, but of only voicing the beliefs of a few of his
literary brethren happily living, and one gloriously dead, who never
made proclamation of this "from the housetops."


       *       *       *       *       *


       THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP, AND

       OTHER STORIES AND SKETCHES


       *       *       *       *       *


THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP


There was commotion in Roaring Camp. It could not have been a fight,
for in 1850 that was not novel enough to have called together the
entire settlement. The ditches and claims were not only deserted, but
"Tuttle's grocery" had contributed its gamblers, who, it will be
remembered, calmly continued their game the day that French Pete and
Kanaka Joe shot each other to death over the bar in the front room.
The whole camp was collected before a rude cabin on the outer edge of
the clearing. Conversation was carried on in a low tone, but the name
of a woman was frequently repeated. It was  a name familiar enough in
the camp,--"Cherokee Sal."

Perhaps the less said of her the better. She was a coarse and, it is
to be feared, a very sinful woman. But at that time she was the only
woman in Roaring Camp, and was just then lying in sore extremity, when
she most needed the ministration of her own sex. Dissolute, abandoned,
and irreclaimable, she was yet suffering a martyrdom hard enough to
bear even when veiled by sympathizing womanhood, but now terrible in
her loneliness. The primal curse had come to her in that original
isolation which must have made the punishment of the first
transgression so dreadful. It was, perhaps, part of the expiation of
her sin  that, at a moment when she most lacked her sex's intuitive
tenderness and care, she met only the half-contemptuous faces of her
masculine associates. Yet a few of the spectators were, I think,
touched by her sufferings. Sandy Tipton thought it was "rough on Sal,"
and, in the contemplation of her condition, for a moment rose superior
to the fact that he had an ace and two bowers in his sleeve.

It will be seen also that the situation was novel. Deaths were by no
means uncommon in Roaring Camp, but a birth was a new thing. People
had been dismissed the camp effectively, finally, and with no
possibility of return; but this was the first time that anybody had
been introduced _ab initio_. Hence the excitement.

"You go in there, Stumpy," said a prominent citizen known as
"Kentuck," addressing one of the loungers. "Go in there, and see what
you kin do. You've had experience in them things."

Perhaps there was a fitness in the selection. Stumpy, in other climes,
had been the putative head of two families; in fact, it was owing to
some legal informality in these proceedings that Roaring Camp--a city
of refuge--was indebted to his company. The crowd approved the choice,
and Stumpy was wise enough to bow to the majority. The door closed on
the extempore surgeon and midwife, and Roaring Camp sat down outside,
smoked its pipe, and awaited the issue.

The assemblage numbered about a hundred men. One or two of these were
actual fugitives from justice, some were criminal, and all were
reckless. Physically they exhibited no indication of their past lives
and character. The greatest scamp had a Raphael face, with a profusion
of blonde hair; Oakhurst, a gambler, had the melancholy air and
intellectual abstraction of a Hamlet; the coolest and most courageous
man was scarcely over five feet in height, with a soft voice and an
embarrassed, timid manner. The  term "roughs" applied to them was a
distinction rather than a definition. Perhaps in the minor details of
fingers, toes, ears, etc., the camp may have been deficient, but these
slight omissions did not detract from their aggregate force. The
strongest man had but three fingers on his right hand; the best shot
had but one eye.

Such was the physical aspect of the men that were dispersed around the
cabin. The camp lay in a triangular valley between two hills and a
river. The only outlet was a steep trail over the summit of a hill
that faced the cabin, now illuminated by the rising moon. The
suffering woman might have seen it from the rude bunk whereon she
lay,--seen it winding like a silver thread until it was lost in the
stars above.

A fire of withered pine boughs added sociability to the gathering. By
degrees the natural levity of Roaring Camp returned. Bets were freely
offered and taken regarding the result. Three to five that "Sal would
get through with it;" even that the child would survive; side bets as
to the sex and complexion of the coming stranger. In the midst of an
excited discussion an exclamation came from those nearest the door,
and the camp stopped to listen. Above the swaying and moaning of the
pines, the swift rush of the river, and the crackling of the fire rose
a sharp, querulous cry,--a cry unlike anything heard before in the
camp. The pines stopped moaning, the river ceased to rush, and the
fire to crackle. It seemed as if Nature had stopped to listen too.

The camp rose to its feet as one man! It was proposed to explode a
barrel of gunpowder; but in consideration of the situation of the
mother, better counsels prevailed, and only a few revolvers were
discharged; for whether owing to the rude surgery of the camp, or some
other reason, Cherokee Sal was sinking fast. Within an hour she had
climbed, as it were, that rugged road that led to the stars, and so
passed out of Roaring Camp, its sin and shame, forever. I do not think
that the announcement disturbed them much, except in speculation as to
the fate of the child. "Can he live now?" was asked of Stumpy. The
answer was doubtful. The only other being of Cherokee Sal's sex and
maternal condition in the settlement was an ass. There was some
conjecture as  to fitness, but the experiment was tried. It was less
problematical than the ancient treatment of Romulus and Remus, and
apparently as successful.

When these details were completed, which exhausted another hour, the
door was opened, and the anxious crowd of men, who had already formed
themselves into a queue, entered in single file. Beside the low bunk
or shelf, on which the figure of the mother was starkly outlined below
the blankets, stood a pine table. On this a candle-box was placed, and
within it, swathed in staring red flannel, lay the last arrival at
Roaring Camp. Beside the candle-box was placed a hat. Its use was soon
indicated. "Gentlemen," said Stumpy, with a singular mixture of
authority and _ex officio_ complacency,--"gentlemen will please
pass in at the front door, round the table, and out at the back door.
Them as wishes to contribute anything toward the orphan will find a
hat handy." The first man entered with his hat on; he uncovered,
however, as he looked about him, and so unconsciously set an example
to the next. In such communities good and bad actions are catching. As
the procession filed in comments were audible,--criticisms addressed
perhaps rather to Stumpy in the character of showman: "Is that him?"
"Mighty small specimen;" "Hasn't more'n  got the color;" "Ain't bigger
nor a derringer." The contributions were as characteristic: A silver
tobacco box; a doubloon; a navy revolver, silver mounted; a gold
specimen; a very beautifully embroidered lady's handkerchief (from
Oakhurst the gambler); a diamond breastpin; a diamond  ring (suggested
by the pin, with the remark from the giver that he "saw that pin and
went two diamonds better"); a slung-shot; a Bible (contributor not
detected); a golden spur; a silver teaspoon (the initials, I regret to
say, were not the giver's); a pair of surgeon's shears; a lancet; a
Bank of England note for L5; and about $200 in loose gold and silver
coin. During these proceedings Stumpy maintained a silence as
impassive as the dead on his left, a gravity as inscrutable as that of
the newly born on his right. Only one incident occurred to break the
monotony of the curious procession. As Kentuck bent over the candle-
box half curiously, the child turned, and, in a spasm of pain, caught
at his groping finger, and held it fast for a moment. Kentuck looked
foolish and embarrassed. Something like a blush tried to assert itself
in his weather-beaten cheek. "The d--d little cuss!" he said, as he
extricated his finger, with perhaps more tenderness and care than he
might have been deemed capable of showing. He held that finger a
little apart from its fellows as he went out, and examined it
curiously. The examination provoked the same original remark in regard
to the child. In fact, he seemed to enjoy repeating it. "He rastled
with my finger," he remarked to Tipton, holding up the member, "the
d--d little cuss!"

It was four o'clock before the camp sought repose. A light burnt in
the cabin where the watchers sat, for Stumpy did not go to bed that
night. Nor did Kentuck. He drank quite freely, and related with great
gusto his experience, invariably ending with his characteristic
condemnation of the newcomer. It seemed to relieve him of any unjust
implication of sentiment, and Kentuck had the weaknesses of the nobler
sex. When everybody else had gone to bed, he walked down to the river
and whistled reflectingly. Then he walked up the gulch past the cabin,
still whistling with demonstrative unconcern. At a large redwood-tree
he  paused and retraced his steps, and again passed the cabin. Halfway
down to the river's bank he again paused, and then returned and
knocked at the door. It was opened by Stumpy. "How goes it?" said
Kentuck, looking past Stumpy toward the candle-box. "All serene!"
replied Stumpy. "Anything up?" "Nothing." There was a pause--an
embarrassing one--Stumpy still holding the door. Then Kentuck had
recourse to his finger, which he held up to Stumpy. "Rastled with
it,--the d--d little cuss," he said, and retired.

The next day Cherokee Sal had such rude sepulture as Roaring Camp
afforded. After her body had been committed to the hillside, there was
a formal meeting of the camp to discuss what should be done with her
infant. A resolution to adopt it was unanimous and enthusiastic. But
an animated discussion in regard to the manner and feasibility of
providing for its wants at once sprang up. It was remarkable that the
argument partook of none of those fierce personalities with which
discussions were usually conducted at Roaring Camp. Tipton proposed
that they should send the child to Red Dog,--a distance of forty
miles,--where female attention could be procured. But the unlucky
suggestion met with fierce and unanimous opposition. It was evident
that no plan which entailed parting from their new acquisition would
for a moment be entertained. "Besides," said Tom Ryder, "them fellows
at Red Dog would swap it, and ring in somebody else on us." A
disbelief in the honesty of other camps prevailed at Roaring Camp, as
in other places.

The introduction of a female nurse in the camp also met with
objection. It was argued that no decent woman could be prevailed to
accept Roaring Camp as her home, and the speaker urged that "they
didn't want any more of the other kind." This unkind allusion to the
defunct mother, harsh as it may seem, was the first spasm of
propriety,--the first symptom of the camp's regeneration. Stumpy
advanced nothing. Perhaps he felt a certain delicacy in interfering
with the selection of a possible successor in office. But when
questioned, he averred stoutly that he and "Jinny"--the mammal before
alluded to--could manage to rear the child. There was something
original, independent, and heroic about the plan that pleased the
camp. Stumpy was retained. Certain articles were sent for to
Sacramento. "Mind," said the treasurer, as he pressed a bag of gold-
dust into the expressman's hand, "the best that can be got,--lace, you
know, and filigree-work and frills,--d--n the cost!" Strange to say,
the child thrived. Perhaps the invigorating climate of the mountain
camp was compensation for material deficiencies. Nature took the
foundling to her broader breast. In that rare atmosphere of the Sierra
foothills,--that air pungent with balsamic odor, that ethereal cordial
at once bracing and exhilarating,--he may have found food and
nourishment, or a subtle chemistry that transmuted ass's milk to lime
and phosphorus. Stumpy inclined to the belief that it was the latter
and good nursing. "Me and that ass," he would say, "has been father
and mother to him! Don't you," he would add, apostrophizing the
helpless bundle before him, "never go back on us."

By the time he was a month old the necessity of giving him a name
became apparent. He had generally been known as "The Kid," "Stumpy's
Boy," "The Coyote" (an allusion to his vocal powers), and even by
Kentuck's endearing diminutive of "The d--d little cuss." But these
were felt to be vague and unsatisfactory, and were at last dismissed
under another influence. Gamblers and adventurers are generally
superstitious, and Oakhurst one day declared that the baby had brought
"the luck" to Roaring Camp. It was certain that of late they had been
successful. "Luck" was the name  agreed upon, with the prefix of Tommy
for greater convenience. No allusion was made to the mother, and the
father was unknown. "It's better," said the philosophical Oakhurst,
"to take a fresh deal all round. Call him Luck, and start him fair." A
day was accordingly set apart for the christening. What was meant by
this ceremony the reader may imagine who has already gathered some
idea of the reckless irreverence of Roaring Camp. The master of
ceremonies was one "Boston," a noted wag, and the occasion seemed to
promise the greatest facetiousness. This ingenious satirist had spent
two days in preparing a burlesque of the Church service, with pointed
local allusions. The choir was properly trained, and Sandy Tipton was
to stand godfather. But after the procession had marched to the grove
with music and banners, and the child had been deposited before a mock
altar, Stumpy stepped before the expectant crowd. "It ain't my style
to spoil fun, boys," said the little man, stoutly eying the faces
around him, "but it strikes me that this thing ain't exactly on the
squar. It's playing it pretty low down on this yer baby to ring in fun
on him that he ain't goin' to understand. And ef there's goin' to be
any godfathers round, I'd like to see who's got any better rights than
me." A silence followed Stumpy's speech. To the credit of all
humorists be it said that the first man to acknowledge its justice was
the satirist thus stopped of his fun. "But," said Stumpy, quickly
following up his advantage, "we're here for a christening, and we'll
have it. I proclaim you Thomas Luck, according to the laws of the
United States and the State of California, so help me God." It was the
first time that the name of the Deity had been otherwise uttered than
profanely in the camp. The form of christening was perhaps even more
ludicrous than the satirist had conceived; but strangely enough,
nobody saw it and nobody laughed. "Tommy" was christened as seriously
as he would have  been under a Christian roof, and cried and was
comforted in as orthodox fashion.

And so the work of regeneration began in Roaring Camp. Almost
imperceptibly a change came over the settlement. The cabin assigned to
"Tommy Luck"--or "The Luck," as he was more frequently called--first
showed signs of improvement. It was kept scrupulously clean and
whitewashed. Then it was boarded, clothed, and papered. The rosewood,
cradle, packed eighty miles by mule, had, in Stumpy's way of putting
it, "sorter killed the rest of the furniture." So the rehabilitation
of the cabin became a necessity. The men who were in the habit of
lounging in at Stumpy's to see "how 'The Luck' got on" seemed to
appreciate the change, and in self-defense the rival establishment of
"Tuttle's grocery" bestirred itself and imported a carpet and mirrors.
The reflections of the latter on the appearance of Roaring Camp tended
to produce stricter habits of personal cleanliness. Again Stumpy
imposed a kind of quarantine upon those who aspired to the honor and
privilege of holding The Luck. It was a cruel mortification to
Kentuck--who, in the carelessness of a large nature and the habits of
frontier life, had begun to regard all garments as a second cuticle,
which, like a snake's, only sloughed off through decay--to be debarred
this privilege from certain prudential reasons. Yet such was the
subtle influence of innovation that he thereafter appeared regularly
every afternoon in a clean shirt and face still shining from his
ablutions. Nor were moral and social sanitary laws neglected. "Tommy,"
who was supposed to spend his whole existence in a persistent attempt
to repose, must not be disturbed by noise. The shouting and yelling,
which had gained the camp its infelicitous title, were not permitted
within hearing distance of Stumpy's. The men conversed in whispers or
smoked with Indian gravity. Profanity was tacitly given up in these
sacred precincts, and throughout the camp a popular form of expletive,
known as "D--n the luck!" and "Curse the luck!" was abandoned, as
having a new personal bearing. Vocal music was not interdicted, being
supposed to have a soothing, tranquilizing quality; and one song, sung
by "Man-o'-War Jack," an English sailor from her Majesty's Australian
colonies, was quite popular as a lullaby. It was a lugubrious recital
of the exploits of "the Arethusa, Seventy-four," in a muffled minor,
ending with a prolonged dying fall at the burden of each verse," On b-
oo-o-ard of the Arethusa." It was a fine sight to see Jack holding The
Luck, rocking from side to side as if with the motion of a ship, and
crooning forth this naval ditty. Either through the peculiar rocking
of Jack or the length of his song,--it contained ninety stanzas, and
was continued with conscientious deliberation to the bitter end,--the
lullaby generally had the desired effect. At such times the men would
lie at full length under the trees in the soft summer twilight,
smoking their pipes and drinking in the melodious utterances. An
indistinct idea that this was pastoral happiness pervaded the camp.
"This 'ere kind o' think," said the Cockney Simmons, meditatively
reclining on his elbow, "is 'evingly." It reminded him of Greenwich.

On the long summer days The Luck was usually carried to the gulch from
whence the golden store of Roaring Camp was taken. There, on a blanket
spread over pine boughs, he would lie while the men were working in
the ditches below. Latterly there was a rude attempt to decorate this
bower with flowers and sweet-smelling shrubs, and generally some one
would bring him a cluster of wild honeysuckles,  azaleas, or the
painted blossoms of Las Mariposas. The men had suddenly awakened to
the fact that there were beauty and significance in these trifles,
which they had so long trodden carelessly beneath their feet. A flake
of glittering mica, a fragment of variegated quartz, a bright  pebble
from the bed of the creek, became beautiful to eyes thus cleared and
strengthened, and were invariably put aside for The Luck. It was
wonderful how many treasures the woods and hillsides yielded that
"would do for Tommy." Surrounded by playthings such as never child out
of fairyland had before, it is to be hoped that Tommy was content. He
appeared to be serenely happy, albeit there was an infantine gravity
about him, a contemplative light in his round gray eyes, that sometimes
worried Stumpy. He was always tractable and quiet, and it is recorded
that once, having crept beyond his "corral,"--a hedge of tessellated
pine boughs, which surrounded his bed,--he dropped over the bank on his
head in the soft earth, and remained with his mottled legs in the air
in that position for at least five minutes with unflinching gravity.
He was extricated without a murmur. I hesitate to record the many
other instances of his sagacity, which rest, unfortunately, upon the
statements of prejudiced friends. Some of them were not without a
tinge of superstition. "I crep' up the bank just now," said Kentuck
one day, in a breathless state of excitement, "and dern my skin if he
wasn't a-talking to a jaybird as was a-sittin' on his lap. There they
was, just as free and sociable as anything you please, a-jawin' at
each other just like two cherrybums." Howbeit, whether creeping over
the pine boughs or lying lazily on his back blinking at the leaves
above him, to him the birds sang, the squirrels chattered, and the
flowers bloomed. Nature was his nurse and playfellow. For him she
would let slip between the leaves golden shafts of sunlight that fell
just within his grasp; she would send wandering breezes to visit him
with the balm of bay and resinous gum; to him the tall redwoods nodded
familiarly and sleepily, the bumblebees buzzed, and the rooks cawed a
slumberous accompaniment.

Such was the golden summer of Roaring Camp. They  were "flush times,"
and the luck was with them. The claims had yielded enormously. The
camp was jealous of its privileges and looked suspiciously on
strangers. No encouragement was given to immigration, and, to make
their seclusion more perfect, the land on either side of the mountain
wall that surrounded the camp they duly preempted. This, and a
reputation for singular proficiency with the revolver, kept the
reserve of Roaring Camp inviolate. The expressman--their only
connecting link with the surrounding world--sometimes told wonderful
stories of the camp. He would say, "They've a street up there in
'Roaring' that would lay over any street in Red Dog. They've got vines
and flowers round their houses, and they wash themselves twice a day.
But they're mighty rough on strangers, and they worship an Ingin
baby."

With the prosperity of the camp came a desire for further improvement.
It was  proposed to build a hotel in the following spring, and to
invite one or two decent families to reside there for the sake of The
Luck, who might perhaps profit by female companionship. The sacrifice
that this concession to the sex cost these men, who were fiercely
skeptical in regard to its general virtue and usefulness, can only be
accounted for by their affection for Tommy. A few still held out. But
the resolve could not be carried into effect for three months, and the
minority meekly yielded in the hope that something might turn up to
prevent it. And it did.

The winter of 1851 will long be remembered in the foothills. The snow
lay deep on the Sierras, and every mountain creek became a river, and
every river a lake. Each gorge and gulch was transformed into a
tumultuous watercourse that descended the hillsides, tearing down
giant trees and scattering its drift and debris along the plain. Red
Dog had been twice under water, and Roaring Camp had been forewarned.
"Water put the gold into them gulches,"  said Stumpy. "It's been here
once and will be here again!" And that night the North Fork suddenly
leaped over its banks and swept up the triangular valley of Roaring
Camp.

In the confusion of rushing water, crashing trees, and crackling
timber, and the darkness which seemed to flow with the water and blot
out the fair valley, but little could be done to collect the scattered
camp. When the morning broke, the cabin of Stumpy, nearest the river-
bank, was gone. Higher up the gulch they found the body of its unlucky
owner; but the pride, the hope, the joy, The Luck, of Roaring Camp had
disappeared. They were returning with sad hearts when a shout from the
bank recalled them.

It was a relief-boat from down the river. They had picked up, they
said, a man and an infant, nearly exhausted, about two miles below.
Did anybody know them, and did they belong here?

It needed but a glance to show them Kentuck lying there, cruelly
crushed and bruised, but still holding The Luck of Roaring Camp in his
arms. As they bent over the strangely assorted pair, they saw that the
child was cold and pulseless. "He is dead," said one. Kentuck opened
his eyes. "Dead?" he repeated feebly. "Yes, my man, and you are dying
too." A smile lit the eyes of the expiring Kentuck. "Dying!" he
repeated; "he's a-taking me with him. Tell the boys I've got The Luck
with me now;" and the strong man, clinging to the frail babe as a
drowning man is said to cling to a straw, drifted away into the
shadowy river that flows forever to the unknown sea.


THE OUTCASTS OF POKER FLAT


As Mr. John Oakhurst, gambler, stepped into the main street of Poker
Flat on the morning of the 23d of November, 1850, he was conscious of
a change in its moral atmosphere since the preceding night. Two or
three men, conversing earnestly together, ceased as he approached, and
exchanged significant glances. There was a Sabbath lull in the air,
which, in a settlement unused to Sabbath influences, looked ominous.

Mr. Oakhurst's calm, handsome face betrayed small concern in these
indications. Whether he was conscious of any predisposing cause was
another question. "I reckon they're after somebody," he reflected;
"likely it's me." He returned to his pocket the handkerchief with
which he had been whipping away the red dust of Poker Flat from his
neat boots, and quietly discharged his mind of any further conjecture.

In point of fact, Poker Flat was "after somebody." It had lately
suffered the loss of several thousand dollars, two valuable horses,
and a prominent citizen. It was experiencing a spasm of virtuous
reaction, quite as lawless and ungovernable as any of the acts that
had provoked it. A secret committee had determined to rid the town of
all improper persons. This was done permanently in regard of two men
who were then hanging from the boughs of a sycamore in the gulch, and
temporarily in the banishment of certain other objectionable
characters. I regret to say that some of these were ladies. It is but
due to the sex, however, to state that their impropriety was
professional, and it was only in such easily established standards of
evil that Poker Flat ventured to sit in judgment.

Mr. Oakhurst was right in supposing that he was included in this
category. A few of the committee had urged hanging him as a possible
example and a sure method of reimbursing themselves from his pockets
of the sums he had won from them. "It's agin justice," said Jim
Wheeler, "to let this yer young man from Roaring Camp--an entire
stranger--carry away our money." But a crude sentiment of equity
residing in the breasts of those who had been fortunate enough to win
from Mr. Oakhurst overruled this narrower local prejudice.

Mr. Oakhurst received his sentence with philosophic calmness, none the
less coolly that he was aware of the hesitation of his judges. He was
too much of a gambler not to accept fate. With him life was at best an
uncertain game, and he recognized the usual percentage in favor of the
dealer.

A body of armed men accompanied the deported wickedness of Poker Flat
to the outskirts of the settlement. Besides Mr. Oakhurst, who was
known to be a coolly desperate man, and for whose intimidation the
armed escort was intended, the expatriated party consisted of a young
woman familiarly known as "The Duchess;" another who had won the title
of "Mother Shipton;" and "Uncle Billy," a suspected, sluice-robber and
confirmed drunkard. The cavalcade provoked no comments from the
spectators, nor was any word uttered by the escort. Only when the
gulch which marked the uttermost limit of Poker Flat was reached, the
leader spoke briefly and to the point. The exiles were forbidden to
return at the peril of their lives.

As the escort disappeared, their pent-up feelings found vent in a few
hysterical tears from the Duchess, some bad language from Mother
Shipton, and a Parthian volley of expletives from Uncle Billy. The
philosophic Oakhurst  alone remained silent. He listened calmly to
Mother Shipton's desire to cut somebody's heart out, to the repeated
statements of the Duchess that she would die in the road, and to the
alarming oaths that seemed to be bumped out of Uncle Billy as he rode
forward. With the easy good humor  characteristic of his class, he
insisted upon exchanging his own riding-horse, "Five-Spot," for the
sorry mule which the Duchess rode. But even this act did not draw the
party into any closer sympathy. The young woman readjusted her
somewhat draggled plumes with a feeble, faded coquetry; Mother Shipton
eyed the possessor of "Five-Spot" with malevolence, and Uncle Billy
included the whole party in one sweeping anathema.

The road to Sandy Bar--a camp that, not having as yet experienced the
regenerating influences of Poker Flat, consequently seemed to offer
some invitation to the emigrants--lay over a steep mountain range. It
was distant a day's severe travel. In that advanced season the party
soon passed out of the moist, temperate regions of the foothills into
the dry, cold, bracing air of the Sierras. The trail was narrow and
difficult. At noon the Duchess, rolling out of her saddle upon the
ground, declared her intention of going no farther, and the party
halted.

The spot was singularly wild and impressive. A wooded amphitheatre,
surrounded on three sides by precipitous cliffs of naked granite,
sloped gently toward the crest of another precipice that overlooked
the valley. It was, undoubtedly, the most suitable spot for a camp,
had camping been advisable. But Mr. Oakhurst knew that scarcely half
the journey to Sandy Bar was accomplished, and the party were not
equipped or provisioned for delay. This fact he pointed out to his
companions curtly, with a philosophic commentary on the folly of
"throwing up their hand before the game was played out." But they were
furnished with liquor, which in this emergency stood them in place of
food,  fuel, rest, and prescience. In spite of his remonstrances, it
was not long before they were more or less under its influence. Uncle
Billy passed rapidly from a bellicose state into one of stupor, the
Duchess became maudlin, and Mother Shipton snored. Mr. Oakhurst alone
remained erect, leaning against a rock, calmly surveying them.

Mr. Oakhurst did not drink. It interfered with a profession which
required coolness, impassiveness, and presence of mind, and, in his
own language, he "couldn't afford it." As he gazed at his recumbent
fellow exiles, the loneliness begotten of his pariah trade, his habits
of life, his very vices, for the first time seriously oppressed him.
He bestirred himself in dusting his black clothes, washing his hands
and face, and other acts characteristic of his studiously neat habits,
and for a moment forgot his annoyance. The thought of deserting his
weaker and more pitiable companions never perhaps occurred to him. Yet
he could not help feeling the want of that excitement which, singularly
enough, was most conducive to that calm equanimity for which he was
notorious. He looked at the gloomy walls that rose a thousand feet
sheer above the circling pines around him, at the sky ominously
clouded, at the valley below, already deepening into shadow; and,
doing so, suddenly he heard his own name called.

A horseman slowly ascended the trail. In the fresh, open face of the
newcomer Mr. Oakhurst recognized Tom Simson, otherwise known as "The
Innocent," of Sandy Bar. He had met him some months before over a
"little game," and had, with perfect equanimity, won the entire
fortune--amounting to some forty dollars--of that guileless youth.
After the game was finished, Mr. Oakhurst drew the youthful speculator
behind the door and thus addressed him: "Tommy, you're a good little
man, but you can't gamble worth a cent. Don't try it over again." He
then handed him his money hack, pushed him gently from the room, and
so made a devoted slave of Tom Simson.

There was a remembrance of this in his boyish and enthusiastic
greeting of Mr. Oakhurst. He had started, he said, to go to Poker Flat
to seek his fortune. "Alone?" No, not exactly alone; in fact (a
giggle), he had run away with Piney Woods. Didn't Mr. Oakhurst
remember Piney? She that used to wait on the table at the Temperance
House? They had been engaged a long time, but old Jake Woods had
objected, and so they had run away, and were going to Poker Flat to be
married, and here they were. And they were tired out, and how lucky it
was they had found a place to camp, and company. All this the Innocent
delivered rapidly, while Piney, a stout, comely damsel of fifteen,
emerged from behind the pine-tree, where she had been blushing unseen,
and rode to the side of her lover.

Mr. Oakhurst seldom troubled himself with sentiment, still less with
propriety; but he had a vague idea that the situation was not
fortunate. He retained, however, his presence of mind sufficiently to
kick Uncle Billy, who was about to say something, and Uncle Billy was
sober enough to recognize in Mr. Oakhurst's kick a superior power that
would not bear trifling. He then endeavored to dissuade Tom Simson
from delaying further, but in vain. He even pointed out the fact that
there was no provision, nor means of making a camp. But, unluckily,
the Innocent met this objection by assuring the party that he was
provided with an extra mule loaded with provisions, and by the
discovery of a rude attempt at a log house near the trail. "Piney can
stay with Mrs. Oakhurst," said the Innocent, pointing to the Duchess,
"and I can shift for myself."

Nothing but Mr. Oakhurst's admonishing foot saved Uncle Billy from
bursting into a roar of laughter. As it  was, he felt compelled to
retire up the canon until he could recover his gravity. There he
confided the joke to the tall pine-trees, with many slaps of his leg,
contortions of his face, and the usual profanity. But when he returned
to the party, he found them seated by a fire--for the air had grown
strangely chill and the sky overcast--in apparently amicable
conversation. Piney was actually talking in an impulsive girlish
fashion  to the Duchess, who was listening with an interest and
animation she had not shown for many days. The Innocent was holding
forth, apparently with equal effect, to Mr. Oakhurst and Mother
Shipton, who was actually relaxing into amiability. "Is this yer a d--
d picnic?" said Uncle Billy, with inward scorn, as he surveyed the
sylvan group, the glancing firelight, and the tethered animals in the
foreground. Suddenly an idea mingled with the alcoholic fumes that
disturbed his brain. It was apparently of a jocular nature, for he
felt impelled to slap his leg again and cram his fist into his mouth.

As the shadows crept slowly up the mountain, a slight breeze rocked
the tops of the pine-trees and moaned through their long and gloomy
aisles. The ruined cabin, patched and covered with pine boughs, was
set apart for the ladies. As the lovers parted, they unaffectedly
exchanged a kiss, so honest and sincere that it might have been heard
above the swaying pines. The frail Duchess and the malevolent Mother
Shipton were probably too stunned to remark upon this last evidence of
simplicity, and so turned without a word to the hut. The fire was
replenished, the men lay down before the door, and in a few minutes
were asleep.

Mr. Oakhurst was a light sleeper. Toward morning he awoke benumbed and
cold. As he stirred the dying fire, the wind, which was now blowing
strongly, brought to his cheek that which caused the blood to leave
it,--snow!

He started to his feet with the intention of awakening the sleepers,
for there was no time to lose. But turning to where Uncle Billy had
been lying, he found him gone. A suspicion leaped to his brain, and a
curse to his lips. He ran to the spot where the mules had been
tethered--they were no longer there. The tracks were already rapidly
disappearing in the snow.

The momentary excitement brought Mr. Oakhurst back to the fire with
his usual calm. He did not waken the sleepers. The Innocent slumbered
peacefully, with a smile on his good-humored, freckled face; the
virgin Piney slept beside her frailer sisters as sweetly as though
attended by celestial guardians; and Mr. Oakhurst, drawing his blanket
over his shoulders, stroked his mustaches and waited for the dawn. It
came slowly in a whirling mist of snowflakes that dazzled and confused
the eye. What could be seen of the landscape appeared magically
changed. He looked over the valley, and summed up the present and
future in two words, "Snowed in!"

A careful inventory of the provisions, which, fortunately for the
party, had been stored within the hut, and so escaped the felonious
fingers of Uncle Billy, disclosed the fact that with care and prudence
they might last ten days longer. "That is," said Mr. Oakhurst _sotto
voce_ to the Innocent, "if you're willing to board us. If you
ain't--and perhaps you'd better not--you can wait till Uncle Billy
gets back with provisions." For some occult reason, Mr. Oakhurst could
not bring himself to disclose Uncle Billy's rascality, and so offered
the hypothesis that he had wandered from the camp and had accidentally
stampeded the animals. He dropped a warning to the Duchess and Mother
Shipton, who of course knew the facts of their associate's defection.
"They'll find out the truth about us _all_ when they find out
anything," he added significantly, "and there's no good frightening
them now."

Tom Simson not only put all his worldly store at the  disposal of Mr.
Oakhurst, but seemed to enjoy the prospect of their enforced
seclusion. "We'll have a good camp for a week, and then the snow'll
melt, and we'll all go back together." The cheerful gayety of the
young man and Mr. Oakhurst's calm infected the others. The Innocent,
with the aid of pine boughs, extemporized a thatch for the roofless
cabin, and the Duchess directed Piney in the rearrangement of the
interior with a taste and tact that opened the blue eyes of that
provincial maiden to their fullest extent. "I reckon now you're used to
fine things at Poker Flat," said Piney. The Duchess turned away sharply
to conceal something that reddened her cheeks through their
professional tint, and Mother Shipton requested Piney not to "chatter."
But when Mr. Oakhurst returned from a weary search for the trail, he
heard the sound of happy laughter echoed from the rocks. He stopped in
some alarm, and his thoughts first naturally reverted to the whiskey,
which he had prudently cached. "And yet it don't somehow sound like
whiskey," said the gambler. It was not until he caught sight of the
blazing fire through the still blinding storm, and the group around
it, that he settled to the conviction that it was "square fun."

Whether Mr. Oakhurst had cached his cards with the whiskey as
something debarred the free access of the community, I cannot say. It
was certain that, in Mother Shipton's words, he "didn't say 'cards'
once" during that evening. Haply the time was beguiled by an
accordion, produced somewhat ostentatiously by Tom Simson from his
pack. Notwithstanding some difficulties attending the manipulation of
this instrument, Piney Woods managed to pluck several reluctant
melodies from its keys, to an accompaniment by the Innocent on a pair
of bone castanets. But the crowning festivity of the evening was
reached in a rude camp-meeting hymn, which the lovers, joining hands,
sang with great earnestness and vociferation. I fear that a  certain
defiant tone and Covenanter's swing to its chorus, rather than any
devotional quality, caused it speedily to infect the others, who at
last joined in the refrain:--

  "I'm proud to live in the service of the Lord, And I'm bound to die
  in His army."

The pines rocked, the storm eddied and whirled above the miserable
group, and the flames of their altar leaped heavenward, as if in token
of the vow.

At midnight the storm abated, the rolling clouds parted, and the stars
glittered keenly above the sleeping camp. Mr. Oakhurst, whose
professional habits had enabled him to live on the smallest possible
amount of sleep, in dividing the watch with Tom Simson somehow managed
to take upon himself the greater part of that duty. He excused himself
to the Innocent by saying that he had "often been a week without
sleep." "Doing what?" asked Tom. "Poker!" replied Oakhurst
sententiously. "When a man gets a streak of luck,--nigger-luck,--he
don't get tired. The luck gives in first. Luck," continued the gambler
reflectively, "is a mighty queer thing. All you know about it for
certain is that it's bound to change. And it's finding out when it's
going to change that makes you. We've had a streak of bad luck since
we left Poker Flat,--you come along, and slap you get into it, too. If
you can hold your cards right along you're all right. For," added the
gambler, with cheerful irrelevance--

  "'I'm proud to live in the service of the Lord, And I'm bound to die
  in His army.'"

The third day came, and the sun, looking through the white-curtained
valley, saw the outcasts divide their slowly decreasing store of
provisions for the morning meal. It was one of the peculiarities of
that mountain climate that its rays diffused a kindly warmth over the
wintry landscape, as if in regretful commiseration of the past. But it
revealed drift on drift of snow piled high around the hut,--a
hopeless, uncharted,  trackless sea of white lying below the rocky
shores to which the castaways still clung. Through the marvelously
clear air the smoke of the pastoral village of Poker Flat rose miles
away. Mother Shipton saw it, and from a remote pinnacle of her rocky
fastness hurled in that direction a final malediction. It was her last
vituperative attempt, and perhaps for that reason was invested with a
certain degree of sublimity. It did her good, she privately informed
the Duchess. "Just you go out there and cuss, and see." She then set
herself to the task of amusing "the child," as she and the Duchess
were pleased to call Piney. Piney was no chicken, but it was a
soothing and original theory of the pair thus to account for the fact
that she didn't swear and wasn't improper.

When night crept up again through the gorges, the reedy notes of the
accordion rose and fell in fitful spasms and long-drawn gasps by the
flickering campfire. But music failed to fill entirely the aching void
left by insufficient food, and a new diversion was proposed by Piney,
--story-telling. Neither Mr. Oakhurst nor his female companions caring
to relate their personal experiences, this plan would have failed too,
but for the Innocent. Some months before he had chanced upon a stray
copy of Mr. Pope's ingenious translation of the Iliad. He now proposed
to narrate the principal incidents of that poem--having thoroughly
mastered the argument and fairly forgotten the words--in the current
vernacular of Sandy Bar. And so for the rest of that night the Homeric
demigods again walked the earth. Trojan bully and wily Greek wrestled
in the winds, and the great pines in the canon seemed to bow to the
wrath of the son of Peleus. Mr. Oakhurst listened with quiet
satisfaction. Most especially was he interested in the fate of "Ash-
heels," as the Innocent persisted in denominating the "swift-footed
Achilles."

So, with small food and much of Homer and the accordion, a week passed
over the  heads of the outcasts. The sun again forsook them, and again
from leaden skies the snowflakes were sifted over the land. Day by day
closer around them drew the  snowy circle, until at last they looked
from their prison over drifted walls of dazzling white, that towered
twenty feet above their heads. It became more and more difficult to
replenish their fires, even from the fallen trees beside them, now
half hidden in the drifts. And yet no one complained. The lovers
turned from the dreary prospect and looked into each other's eyes, and
were happy. Mr. Oakhurst settled himself coolly to the losing game
before him. The Duchess, more cheerful than she had been, assumed the
care of Piney. Only Mother Shipton--once the strongest of the party--
seemed to sicken and fade. At midnight on the tenth day she called
Oakhurst to her side. "I'm going," she said, in a voice of querulous
weakness, "but don't say anything about it. Don't waken the kids. Take
the bundle from under my head, and open it." Mr. Oakhurst did so. It
contained Mother Shipton's rations for the last week, untouched. "Give
'em to the child," she said, pointing to the sleeping Piney. "You've
starved yourself," said the gambler. "That's what they call it," said
the woman querulously, as she lay down again, and, turning her face to
the wall, passed quietly away.

The accordion and the bones were put aside that day, and Homer was
forgotten. When the body of Mother Shipton had been committed to the
snow, Mr. Oakhurst took the Innocent aside, and showed him a pair of
snow-shoes, which he had fashioned from the old pack-saddle.

"There's one chance in a hundred to save her yet," he said, pointing
to Piney; "but it's there," he added, pointing toward Poker Flat. "If
you can reach there in two days she's safe." "And you?" asked Tom
Simson. "I'll stay here," was the curt reply.    The lovers parted
with a long embrace. "You are not going, too?" said the Duchess, as
she saw Mr. Oakhurst apparently waiting to accompany him. "As far as
the canon," he replied. He turned suddenly and kissed the Duchess,
leaving her pallid face aflame, and her trembling limbs rigid with
amazement.

Night came, but not Mr. Oakhurst. It brought the storm again and the
whirling snow. Then the Duchess, feeding the fire, found that some one
had quietly piled beside the hut enough fuel to last a few days
longer. The tears rose to her eyes, but she hid them from Piney.

The women slept but little. In the morning, looking into each other's
faces, they read their fate. Neither spoke, but Piney, accepting the
position of the stronger, drew near and placed her arm around the
Duchess's waist. They kept this attitude for the rest of the day. That
night the storm reached its greatest fury, and, rending asunder the
protecting vines, invaded the very hut.

Toward morning they found themselves unable to feed the fire, which
gradually died away. As the embers slowly blackened, the Duchess crept
closer to Piney, and broke the silence of many hours: "Piney, can you
pray?" "No, dear," said Piney simply. The Duchess, without knowing
exactly why, felt relieved, and, putting her head upon Piney's
shoulder, spoke no more. And so reclining, the younger and purer
pillowing the head of her soiled sister upon her virgin breast, they
fell asleep.

The wind lulled as if it feared to waken them. Feathery drifts of
snow, shaken from the long pine boughs, flew like white winged birds,
and settled about them as they slept. The moon through the rifted
clouds looked down upon what had been the camp. But all human stain,
all trace of earthly travail, was hidden beneath the spotless mantle
mercifully flung from above.

They slept all that day and the next, nor did they waken  when voices
and footsteps broke the silence of the camp. And when pitying fingers
brushed the snow from their wan faces, you could scarcely have told
from the equal peace that dwelt upon them which was she that had
sinned. Even the law of Poker Flat recognized this, and turned away,
leaving them still locked in each other's arms.

But at the head of the gulch, on one of the largest pine-trees, they
found the deuce of clubs pinned to the bark with a bowie-knife. It
bore the following, written in pencil in a firm hand:--

  BENEATH THIS TREE LIES THE BODY OF JOHN OAKHURST, WHO STRUCK A
  STREAK OF BAD LUCK ON THE 23D OF NOVEMBER 1850. AND HANDED IN HIS
  CHECKS ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 1850.

And pulseless and cold, with a Derringer by his side and a bullet in
his heart, though still calm as in life, beneath the snow lay he who
was at once the strongest and yet the weakest of the outcasts of Poker
Flat.


MIGGLES


We were eight including the driver. We had not spoken during the
passage of the last six miles, since the jolting of the heavy vehicle
over the roughening road had spoiled the Judge's last poetical
quotation. The tall man beside the Judge was asleep, his arm passed
through the swaying strap and his head resting upon it,--altogether a
limp, helpless looking object, as if he had hanged himself and been cut
down too late. The French lady on the back seat was asleep too, yet in
a half-conscious propriety of attitude, shown even in the disposition
of the handkerchief which she held to her forehead and which partially
veiled her face. The lady from Virginia City, traveling with her
husband, had long since lost all individuality in a wild confusion of
ribbons, veils, furs, and shawls. There was no sound but the rattling
of wheels and the dash of rain upon the roof. Suddenly the stage
stopped and we became dimly aware of voices. The driver was evidently
in the midst of an exciting colloquy with some one in the road,--a
colloquy of which such fragments as "bridge gone," "twenty feet of
water," "can't pass," were occasionally distinguishable above the
storm. Then came a lull, and a mysterious voice from the road shouted
the parting adjuration--

"Try Miggles's."

We caught a glimpse of our leaders as the vehicle slowly turned, of a
horseman vanishing through the rain, and we were evidently on our way
to Miggles's.

Who and where was Miggles? The Judge, our authority, did not remember
the name,  and he knew the country thoroughly. The Washoe traveler
thought Miggles must keep a hotel. We only knew that we were stopped
by high water in front and rear, and that Miggles was our rock of
refuge. A ten minutes' splashing through a tangled byroad, scarcely
wide enough for the stage, and we drew up before a barred and boarded
gate in a wide stone wall or fence about eight feet high. Evidently
Miggles's, and evidently Miggles did not keep a hotel.

The driver got down and tried the gate. It was securely locked.

"Miggles! O Miggles!"

No answer.

"Migg-ells! You Miggles!" continued the driver, with rising wrath.

"Migglesy!" joined in the expressman persuasively. "O Miggy! Mig!"

But no reply came from the apparently insensate Miggles. The Judge,
who had finally got the window down, put his head out and propounded a
series of questions, which if answered categorically would have
undoubtedly elucidated the whole mystery, but which the driver evaded
by replying that "if we didn't want to sit in the coach all night we
had better rise up and sing out for Miggles."

So we rose up and called on Miggles in chorus, then separately. And
when we had finished, a Hibernian fellow passenger from the roof
called for "Maygells!" whereat we all laughed. While we were laughing
the driver cried, "Shoo!"

We listened. To our infinite amazement the chorus of "Miggles" was
repeated from the other side of the wall, even to the final and
supplemental "Maygells."

"Extraordinary echo!" said the Judge.

"Extraordinary d--d skunk!" roared the driver  contemptuously. "Come
out of that, Miggles, and show yourself! Be a man, Miggles! Don't hide
in the dark; I wouldn't if I were you, Miggles," continued Yuba Bill,
now dancing about in an excess of fury.

"Miggles!" continued the voice, "O Miggles!"

"My good man! Mr. Myghail!" said the Judge, softening the asperities
of the name as much as possible. "Consider the inhospitality of
refusing shelter from the inclemency of the weather to helpless
females. Really, my dear sir"--But a succession of "Miggles," ending
in a burst of laughter, drowned his voice.

Yuba Bill hesitated no longer. Taking a heavy stone from the road, he
battered down the gate, and with the expressman entered the inclosure.
We followed. Nobody was to be seen. In the gathering darkness all that
we could distinguish was that we were in a garden--from the rose
bushes that scattered over us a minute spray from  their dripping
leaves--and before a long, rambling wooden building.

"Do you know this Miggles?" asked the Judge of Yuba  Bill.

"No, nor don't want to," said Bill shortly, who felt the Pioneer Stage
Company insulted in his person by the  contumacious Miggles.

"But, my dear sir," expostulated the Judge, as he thought of the
barred gate.

"Lookee here," said Yuba Bill, with fine irony, "hadn't you better go
back and sit in the coach till yer introduced? I'm going in," and he
pushed open the door of the building.

A long room, lighted only by the embers of a fire that  was dying on
the large hearth at its farther extremity; the walls curiously
papered, and the flickering firelight bringing out its grotesque
pattern; someone sitting in a large armchair by the fireplace. All
this we saw as we crowded together into the room after the driver and
expressman.   "Hello! be you Miggles?" said Yuba Bill to the solitary
occupant.

The figure neither spoke nor stirred. Yuba Bill walked wrathfully
toward it and turned the eye of his coach-lantern upon its face. It
was a man's face, prematurely old and wrinkled, with very large eyes,
in which there was that expression of perfectly gratuitous solemnity
which I had sometimes seen in an owl's. The large eyes wandered from
Bill's face to the lantern, and finally fixed their gaze on that
luminous object without further recognition.

Bill restrained himself with an effort.

"Miggles! be you deaf? You ain't dumb anyhow, you know," and Yuba Bill
shook the insensate figure by the shoulder.

To our great dismay, as Bill removed his hand, the venerable stranger
apparently collapsed, sinking into half his size and an
undistinguishable heap of clothing.

"Well, dern my skin," said Bill, looking appealingly at us, and
hopelessly retiring from the contest.

The Judge now stepped forward, and we lifted the mysterious
invertebrate back into his original position. Bill was dismissed with
the lantern to reconnoitre outside, for it was evident that, from the
helplessness of this solitary man? there must be attendants near at
hand, and we all drew around the fire. The Judge, who had regained his
authority, and had never lost his conversational amiability,--standing
before us with his back to the hearth,--charged us, as an imaginary
jury, as follows:--

"It is evident that either our distinguished friend here has reached
that condition described by Shakespeare as 'the sere and yellow leaf,'
or has suffered some premature abatement of his mental and physical
faculties. Whether he is really the Miggles"--

Here he was interrupted by "Miggles! O Miggles! Migglesy! Mig!" and,
in fact, the whole chorus of Miggles in very much the same  key as it
had once before been delivered unto us.

We gazed at each other for a moment in some alarm. The Judge, in
particular, vacated his position quickly, as the voice seemed to come
directly over his shoulder. The cause, however, was soon discovered in
a large magpie who was perched upon a shelf over the fireplace, and
who immediately relapsed into a sepulchral silence, which contrasted
singularly with his previous volubility. It was, undoubtedly, his
voice which we had heard in the road, and our friend in the chair was
not responsible for the discourtesy. Yuba Bill, who reentered the room
after an unsuccessful search, was both to accept the explanation, and
still eyed the helpless sitter with suspicion. He had found a shed in
which he had put up his horses, but he came back dripping and
skeptical. "Thar ain't nobody but him within ten mile of the shanty,
and that ar d--d old skeesicks knows it."

But the faith of the majority proved to be securely based. Bill had
scarcely ceased growling before we heard a quick step upon the porch,
the trailing of a wet skirt, the door was flung open, and with a flash
of white teeth, a sparkle of dark eyes, and an utter absence of
ceremony or diffidence, a young woman entered, shut the door, and,
panting, leaned back against it.

"Oh, if you please, I'm Miggles!"

And this was Miggles! this bright-eyed, full-throated young woman,
whose wet gown of coarse blue stuff could not hide the beauty of the
feminine curves to which it clung; from the chestnut crown of whose
head, topped by a man's oil-skin sou'wester, to the little feet and
ankles, hidden somewhere in the recesses of her boy's brogans, all was
grace,--this was Miggles, laughing at us, too, in the most airy,
frank, off-hand manner imaginable.

"You see, boys," said she, quite out of breath, and holding one little
hand against her side, quite unheeding  the speechless discomfiture of
our party or the complete demoralization of Yuba Bill, whose features
had relaxed into an expression of gratuitous and imbecile
cheerfulness,--"you see, boys, I was mor'n two miles away when you
passed down the road. I thought you might pull up here, and so I ran
the whole way, knowing nobody was home but Jim,--and--and--I'm out of
breath--and--that lets me out." And here Miggles caught her dripping
oilskin hat from her head, with a mischievous swirl that scattered a
shower of raindrops over us; attempted to put back her hair; dropped
two hairpins in the attempt; laughed, and sat down beside Yuba Bill,
with her hands crossed lightly on her lap.

The Judge recovered himself first and essayed an extravagant
compliment.

"I'll trouble you for that ha'rpin," said Miggles gravely. Half a
dozen hands were eagerly stretched forward; the missing hairpin was
restored to its fair owner; and Miggles, crossing the room, looked
keenly in the face of the invalid. The solemn eyes looked back at hers
with an expression we had never seen before. Life and intelligence
seemed to struggle back into the rugged face. Miggles laughed again,--
it was a singularly eloquent laugh,--and turned her black eyes and
white teeth once more towards us.

"This afflicted person is"--hesitated the Judge.

"Jim!" said Miggles.

"Your father?"

"No!"

"Brother?"

"No?"

"Husband?"

Miggles darted a quick, half-defiant glance at the two lady
passengers, who I had noticed did not participate in the general
masculine admiration of Miggles, and said gravely, "No; it's Jim!"
There was an awkward pause. The lady passengers moved closer to each
other; the Washoe husband looked abstractedly at the fire, and the
tall man apparently turned his eyes inward for self-support at this
emergency. But Miggles's laugh, which was very infectious, broke the
silence.

"Come," she said briskly, "you must be hungry. Who'll bear a hand to
help me get tea?"

She had no lack of volunteers. In a few moments Yuba Bill was engaged
like Caliban in bearing logs for this Miranda;  the expressman was
grinding coffee on the veranda; to myself the arduous duty of slicing
bacon was assigned; and the Judge lent each man his good-humored and
voluble counsel. And when Miggles, assisted by the Judge and our
Hibernian "deck-passenger," set the table with all the available
crockery, we had become quite joyous, in spite of the rain that beat
against the windows, the wind that whirled down the chimney, the two
ladies who whispered together in the corner, or the magpie, who
uttered a satirical and croaking commentary on their conversation from
his perch above. In the now bright, blazing fire we could see that the
walls were papered with illustrated journals, arranged with feminine
taste and discrimination. The furniture was extemporized and adapted
from candle-boxes and packing-cases, and covered with gay calico or
the skin of some animal. The armchair of the helpless Jim was an
ingenious variation of a flour-barrel. There was neatness, and even a
taste for the picturesque, to be seen in the few details of the long,
low room.

The meal was a culinary success. But more, it was a social triumph,--
chiefly, I think, owing to the rare tact of Miggles in guiding the
conversation, asking all the questions herself, yet bearing throughout
a frankness that rejected the idea of any concealment on her own part,
so that we talked of ourselves, of our prospects, of the journey, of
the weather, of each other,--of everything but our host and hostess.
It must be confessed that Miggles's conversation was never elegant,
rarely grammatical, and that at times she employed expletives the use
of which had generally been yielded to our sex. But they were
delivered with such a lighting up of teeth and eyes, and  were usually
followed by a laugh--a laugh peculiar to Miggles--so frank and honest
that it seemed to clear the moral atmosphere.

Once during the meal we heard a noise like the rubbing of a heavy body
against the outer walls of the house. This was shortly followed by a
scratching and sniffling at the door. "That's Joaquin," said Miggles,
in reply to our questioning glances; "would you like to see him?"
Before we could answer she had opened the door, and disclosed a half-
grown grizzly, who instantly raised himself on his haunches, with his
fore paws hanging down in the popular attitude of mendicancy, and
looked admiringly at Miggles, with a very singular resemblance in his
manner to Tuba Bill. "That's my watch-dog," said Miggles, in
explanation. "Oh, he don't bite," she added, as the two lady
passengers fluttered into a corner. "Does he, old Toppy?" (the latter
remark being addressed directly to the sagacious Joaquin). "I tell you
what, boys," continued Miggles, after she had fed and closed the door
on Ursa Minor, "you were in big luck that Joaquin wasn't hanging round
when you dropped in to-night."

"Where was he?" asked the Judge.

"With me," said Miggles. "Lord love you! he trots round with me nights
like as if he was a man."

We were silent for a few moments, and listened to the wind. Perhaps we
all had the same picture before us,--of Miggles walking through the
rainy woods with her savage guardian at her side. The Judge, I
remember, said something about Una and her lion; but Miggles received
it, as she did other compliments, with quiet gravity. Whether she was
altogether unconscious of the admiration  she excited,--she could
hardly have been oblivious of Yuba Bill's adoration,--I know not; but
her very frankness suggested a perfect sexual equality that was
cruelly humiliating to the younger members of our party.

The incident of the bear did not add anything in Miggles's favor to
the opinions of those of her own sex who were present. In fact, the
repast over, a chillness radiated from the two lady passengers that no
pine boughs brought in by Yuba Bill and cast as a sacrifice upon the
hearth could wholly overcome. Miggles felt it; and suddenly declaring
that it was time to "turn in," offered to show the ladies to their bed
in an adjoining room. "You, boys, will have to camp out here by the
fire as well as you can," she added, "for thar ain't but the one
room."

Our sex--by which, my dear sir, I allude of course to the stronger
portion of humanity--has been generally relieved from the imputation
of curiosity or a fondness for gossip. Yet I am constrained to say,
that hardly had the door closed on Miggles than we crowded together,
whispering, snickering, smiling, and exchanging suspicions, surmises,
and a thousand speculations in regard to our pretty hostess and her
singular companion. I fear that we even hustled that imbecile
paralytic, who sat like a voiceless Memnon in our midst, gazing with
the serene indifference of the Past in his passionless eyes upon our
wordy counsels. In the midst of an exciting discussion the door opened
again and Miggles reentered.

But not, apparently, the same Miggles who a few hours before had
flashed upon us. Her eyes were downcast, and as she hesitated for a
moment on the threshold, with a blanket on her arm, she seemed to have
left behind her the frank fearlessness which had charmed us a moment
before. Coming into the room, she drew a low stool beside the
paralytic's chair, sat down, drew the blanket over her shoulders, and
saying, "If it's all the same to you, boys,  as we're rather crowded,
I'll stop here to-night, "took the invalid's withered hand in her
own, and turned her eyes upon the dying fire. An instinctive feeling
that this was only premonitory to more confidential relations, and
perhaps some shame at our previous curiosity, kept us silent. The rain
still heat upon the roof, wandering gusts of wind stirred the embers
into momentary brightness, until, in a lull of the elements, Miggles
suddenly lifted up her head, and, throwing her hair over her shoulder,
turned her face upon the group and asked,--

"Is there any of you that knows me?"

There was no reply.

"Think again! I lived at Marysville in '53. Everybody knew me there,
and everybody had the right to know me. I kept the Polka Saloon until
I came to live with Jim. That's six years ago. Perhaps I've changed
some."

The absence of recognition may have disconcerted her. She turned her
head to the fire again, and it was some seconds before she again
spoke, and then more rapidly--

"Well, you see I thought some of you must have known me. There's no
great harm done anyway. What I was going to say was this: Jim here"--
she took his hand in both of hers as she spoke--"used to know me, if
you didn't, and spent a heap of money upon me. I reckon he spent all
he had. And one day--it's six years ago this winter--Jim came into my
back room, sat down on my sofy, like as you see him in that chair, and
never moved again without help. He was struck all of a heap, and never
seemed to know what ailed him. The doctors came and said as how it was
caused all along of his way of life,--for Jim was mighty free and
wild-like,--and that he would never get better, and couldn't last long
anyway. They advised me to send him to Frisco to the hospital, for he
was no good to any one and would be a baby all his  life. Perhaps it
was something in Jim's eye, perhaps it was that I never had a baby,
but I said 'No.' I was rich then, for I was popular with everybody,--
gentlemen like yourself, sir, came to see me,--and I sold out my
business and bought this yer place, because it was sort of out of the
way of travel, you see, and I brought my baby here."

With a woman's intuitive tact and poetry, she had, as she spoke,
slowly shifted her position so as to bring the mute figure of the
ruined man between her and her audience, hiding in the shadow behind
it, as if she offered it as a tacit apology for her actions. Silent
and expressionless, it yet spoke for her; helpless, crushed, and
smitten with the Divine thunderbolt, it still stretched an invisible
arm around her.

Hidden in the darkness, but still holding his hand, she went on:--

"It was a long time before I could get the hang of things about yer,
for I was used to company and excitement. I couldn't get any woman to
help me, and a man I dursn't trust; but what with the Indians
hereabout, who'd do odd jobs for me, and having everything sent from
the North Fork, Jim and I managed to worry through. The Doctor would
run up from Sacramento once in a while. He'd ask to see 'Miggles's
baby' as he called Jim, and when he'd go away, he'd say, 'Miggles,
you're a trump,--God bless you,' and it didn't seem so lonely after
that. But the last time he was here he said, as he opened the door to
go, 'Do you know, Miggles, your baby will grow up to be a man yet and
an honor to his mother; but not here, Miggles, not here!' And I
thought he went away sad,--and--and"--and here Miggles's voice and
head were somehow both lost completely in the shadow.

"The folks about here are very kind," said Miggles, after a pause,
coming a little into the light again. "The men from the Fork used to
hang around here, until they found  they wasn't wanted, and the women
are kind, and don't call. I was pretty lonely until I picked up
Joaquin in the woods yonder one day, when he wasn't so high, and
taught him to beg for his dinner; and then thar's Polly--that's the
magpie--she knows no end of tricks, and makes it quite sociable of
evenings with her talk, and so I don't feel like as I was the only
living being about the ranch. And Jim here," said Miggles, with her
old laugh again, and coming out quite into the firelight,--"Jim--Why,
boys, you would admire to see how much he knows for a man like him.
Sometimes I bring him flowers, and he looks at 'em just as natural as
if he knew 'em; and times, when we're sitting alone, I read him those
things on the wall. Why, Lord!" said Miggles, with her frank laugh,
"I've read him that whole side of the house this winter. There never
was such a man for reading as Jim."

"Why," asked the Judge, "do you not marry this man to whom you have
devoted your youthful life?"

"Well, you see," said Miggles, "it would be playing it rather low down
on Jim to take advantage of his being so helpless. And then, too, if
we were man and wife, now, we'd both know that I was _bound_ to do what
I do now of my own accord."

"But you are young yet and attractive"--

"It's getting late," said Miggles gravely, "and you'd better all turn
in. Good-night, boys;" and throwing the blanket over her head,
Miggles laid herself down beside Jim's chair, her head pillowed on the
low stool that held his feet, and spoke no more. The fire slowly faded
from the hearth; we each sought our blankets in silence; and presently
there was no sound in the long room but the  pattering of the rain
upon the roof and the heavy breathing of the sleepers.

It was nearly morning when I awoke from a troubled dream. The storm
had passed, the stars were shining, and through the shutterless window
the full moon, lifting itself over the solemn pines without, looked
into the room. It touched the lonely figure in the chair with an
infinite  compassion, and seemed to baptize with a shining flood the
lowly head of the woman whose hair, as in the sweet old story, bathed
the feet of him she loved. It even lent a kindly poetry to the rugged
outline of Yuba Bill, half reclining on his elbow between them and his
passengers, with savagely patient eyes keeping watch and ward. And
then I fell asleep and only woke at broad day, with Yuba Bill standing
over me, and "All aboard" ringing in my ears.

Coffee was waiting for us on the table, but Miggles was gone. We
wandered about the house and lingered long after the horses were
harnessed, but she did not return. It was evident that she wished to
avoid a formal leave-taking, and had so left us to depart as we had
come. After we had helped the ladies into the coach, we returned to
the house and solemnly shook hands with the paralytic Jim, as solemnly
setting him back into position after each  handshake. Then we looked
for the last time around the long low room, at the stool where Miggles
had sat, and slowly took our seats in the waiting coach. The whip
cracked, and we were off!

But as we reached the highroad, Bill's dexterous hand laid the six
horses back on their haunches, and the stage stopped with a jerk. For
there, on a little eminence beside the road, stood Miggles, her hair
flying, her eyes sparkling, her white handkerchief waving, and her
white teeth flashing a last "good-by." We waved our hats in return.
And then Yuba Bill, as if fearful of further fascination, madly lashed
his horses forward, and we sank back in our seats.

We exchanged not a word until we reached the North Fork and the stage
drew up at the Independence House. Then,  the Judge leading, we walked
into the bar-room and took our places gravely at the bar.

"Are your glasses charged, gentlemen?" said the Judge, solemnly taking
off his  white hat.

They were.

"Well, then, here's to _Miggles_--GOD BLESS HER!"

Perhaps He had. Who knows?


TENNESSEE'S PARTNER


I do not think that we ever knew his real name. Our ignorance of it
certainly never gave us any social  inconvenience, for at Sandy Bar in
1854 most men were christened anew. Sometimes these appellatives were
derived from some distinctiveness of dress, as in the case of
"Dungaree Jack;" or from some peculiarity of habit, as shown in
"Saleratus Bill," so called from an undue proportion of that chemical
in his daily bread; or from some unlucky slip, as exhibited in "The
Iron Pirate," a mild, inoffensive man, who earned that baleful title
by his unfortunate  mispronunciation of the term "iron pyrites."
Perhaps this may have been the beginning of a rude heraldry; but I am
constrained to think that it was because a man's real name in that day
rested solely upon his own unsupported statement. "Call yourself
Clifford, do you?" said Boston, addressing a timid newcomer with
infinite scorn; "hell is full of such Cliffords!" He then introduced
the unfortunate man, whose name happened to be really Clifford, as
"Jaybird Charley,"--an unhallowed inspiration of the moment that clung
to him ever after.

But to return to Tennessee's Partner, whom we never knew by any other
than this relative title. That he had ever existed as a separate and
distinct individuality we only learned later. It seems that in 1853 he
left Poker Flat to go to San Francisco, ostensibly to procure a wife.
He never got any farther than Stockton. At that place he was attracted
by a young person who waited upon the table at the hotel where he took
his meals. One morning he said  something to her which caused her to
smile not unkindly, to somewhat coquettishly break a plate of toast
over his upturned, serious, simple face, and to retreat to the
kitchen. He followed her, and emerged a few moments later, covered
with more toast and victory. That day week they were married by a
justice of the peace, and returned to Poker Flat. I am aware that
something more might be made of this episode, but I prefer to tell it
as it was current at Sandy Bar,--in the gulches and bar-rooms,--where
all sentiment was modified by a strong sense of humor.

Of their married felicity but little is known, perhaps for the reason
that Tennessee, then living with his partner, one day took occasion to
say something to the bride on his own account, at which, it is said,
she smiled not unkindly and chastely retreated,--this time as far as
Marysville, where Tennessee followed her, and where they went to
housekeeping without the aid of a justice of the peace. Tennessee's
Partner took the loss of his wife simply and seriously, as was his
fashion. But to everybody's surprise, when Tennessee one day returned
from Marysville, without his partner's wife,--she having smiled and
retreated with somebody else,--Tennessee's Partner was the first man
to shake his hand and greet him with affection. The boys who had
gathered in the canon to see the shooting were naturally indignant.
Their indignation might have found vent in sarcasm but for a certain
look in Tennessee's Partner's eye that indicated a lack of humorous
appreciation. In fact, he was a grave man, with a steady application
to practical detail which was unpleasant in a difficulty.

Meanwhile a popular feeling against Tennessee had grown up on the Bar.
He was known to be a gambler; he was suspected to be a thief. In these
suspicions Tennessee's Partner was equally compromised; his continued
intimacy with Tennessee after the affair above quoted could only be
accounted for on the hypothesis of a copartnership  of crime. At last
Tennessee's guilt became flagrant. One day he overtook a stranger on
his way to Red Dog. The stranger afterward related that Tennessee
beguiled the time with interesting anecdote and reminiscence, but
illogically concluded the interview in the following words: "And now,
young man, I'll trouble you for your knife, your pistols, and your
money. You see your weppings might get you into trouble at Red Dog,
and your money's a temptation to the evilly disposed. I think you said
your address was San Francisco. I shall endeavor to call." It may be
stated here that Tennessee had a fine flow of humor, which no business
preoccupation could wholly subdue.

This exploit was his last. Red Dog and Sandy Bar made common cause
against the highwayman. Tennessee was hunted in very much the same
fashion as his prototype, the grizzly. As the toils closed around him,
he made a desperate dash through the Bar, emptying his revolver at the
crowd before the Arcade Saloon, and so on up Grizzly Canon; but at its
farther extremity he was stopped by a small man on a gray horse. The
men looked at each other a moment in silence. Both were fearless, both
self-possessed and independent, and both types of a civilization that
in the seventeenth century would have been called heroic, but in the
nineteenth simply "reckless."

"What have you got there?--I call," said Tennessee quietly.

"Two bowers and an ace," said the stranger as quietly, showing two
revolvers and a bowie-knife.

"That takes me," returned Tennessee; and, with this gambler's epigram,
he threw away his useless pistol and rode back with his captor.

It was a warm night. The cool breeze which usually sprang up with the
going down of the sun behind the chaparral-crested mountain was that
evening withheld from    Sandy Bar. The little canon was stifling with
heated resinous odors, and the decaying driftwood on the Bar sent
forth faint sickening exhalations. The feverishness of day and its
fierce passions still filled the camp. Lights moved restlessly along
the bank of the river, striking no answering reflection from its tawny
current. Against the blackness of the pines the windows of the old
loft above the express-office stood out staringly bright; and through
their curtainless panes the loungers below could see the forms of
those who were even then deciding the fate of Tennessee. And above all
this, etched on the dark firmament, rose the Sierra, remote and
passionless, crowned with remoter passionless stars.

The trial of Tennessee was conducted as fairly as was consistent with
a judge and jury who felt themselves to some extent obliged to
justify, in their verdict, the previous irregularities of arrest and
indictment. The law of Sandy Bar was implacable, but not vengeful. The
excitement and personal feeling of the chase were over; with Tennessee
safe in their hands, they were ready to listen patiently to any
defense, which they were already satisfied was insufficient. There
being no doubt in their own minds, they were willing to give the
prisoner the benefit of any that might exist. Secure in the hypothesis
that he ought to be hanged on general principles, they indulged him
with more latitude of defense than his reckless hardihood seemed to
ask. The Judge appeared to be more anxious than the prisoner, who,
otherwise unconcerned, evidently took a grim pleasure in the
responsibility he had created. "I don't take any hand in this yer
game," had been his invariable but good-humored reply to all
questions. The Judge--who was also his captor--for a moment vaguely
regretted that he had not shot him "on sight" that morning, but
presently dismissed this human weakness as unworthy of the judicial
mind. Nevertheless, when there was a tap at  the door, and it was said
that Tennessee's Partner was there on behalf of the prisoner, he was
admitted at once without question. Perhaps the younger members of the
jury, to whom the proceedings were becoming irksomely thoughtful,
hailed him as a relief.

For he was not, certainly, an imposing figure. Short and stout, with a
square face, sunburned into a preternatural redness, clad in a loose
duck "jumper" and trousers streaked and splashed with red soil, his
aspect under any circumstances would have been quaint, and was now
even ridiculous. As he stooped to deposit at his feet a heavy
carpetbag he was carrying, it became obvious, from partially developed
legends and inscriptions, that the material with which his trousers
had been patched had been originally intended for a less ambitious
covering. Yet he advanced with great gravity, and after shaking the
hand of each person in the room with labored cordiality, he wiped his
serious perplexed face on a red bandana handkerchief, a shade lighter
than his complexion, laid his powerful hand upon the table to steady
himself, and thus addressed the Judge:--

"I was passin' by," he began, by way of apology, "and I thought I'd
just step in and see how things was gittin' on with Tennessee thar,--
my pardner. It's a hot night. I disremember any sich weather before on
the Bar."

He paused a moment, but nobody volunteering any other meteorological
recollection, he again had recourse to his pocket-handkerchief, and
for some moments mopped his face diligently.

"Have you anything to say on behalf of the prisoner?" said the Judge
finally.

"Thet's it," said Tennessee's Partner, in a tone of relief. "I come
yar as Tennessee's pardner,--knowing him nigh on four year, off and
on, wet and dry, in luck and out o' luck. His ways ain't aller my
ways, but thar ain't any p'ints in that young man, thar ain't any
liveliness as he's  been up to, as I don't know. And you sez to me,
sez you,--confidential-like, and between man and man,--sez you, 'Do
you know anything in his behalf?' and I sez to you, sez I,--
confidential-like, as between man and man,--'What should a man know of
his pardner?'"

"Is this all you have to say?" asked the Judge impatiently, feeling,
perhaps, that a dangerous sympathy of humor was beginning to humanize
the court.

"Thet's so," continued Tennessee's Partner." It ain't for me to say
anything agin' him. And now, what's the case? Here's Tennessee wants
money, wants it bad, and doesn't like to ask it of his old pardner.
Well, what does Tennessee do? He lays for a stranger, and he fetches
that stranger; and you lays for _him_, and you fetches _him_; and the
honors is easy. And I put it to you, bein' a fa'r-minded man, and to
you, gentlemen all, as fa'r-minded men, ef this isn't so."

"Prisoner," said the Judge, interrupting, "have you any questions to
ask this man?"

"No! no!" continued Tennessee's Partner hastily. "I play this yer hand
alone. To come down to the bed-rock, it's just this: Tennessee, thar,
has played it pretty rough and expensive-like on a stranger, and on
this yer camp. And now, what's the fair thing? Some would say more,
some would say less. Here's seventeen hundred dollars in coarse gold
and a watch,--it's about all my pile,--and call it square!" And before
a hand could be raised to prevent him, he had emptied the contents of
the carpetbag upon the table.

For a moment his life was in jeopardy. One or two men sprang to their
feet, several hands groped for hidden weapons, and a suggestion to
"throw him from the window"  was only overridden by a gesture from the
Judge. Tennessee laughed. And apparently oblivious of the excitement,
Tennessee's Partner improved the opportunity to mop his face again
with his handkerchief.   When order was restored, and the man was made
to understand, by the use of forcible figures and rhetoric, that
Tennessee's offense could not be condoned by money, his face took a
more serious and sanguinary hue, and those who were nearest to him
noticed that his rough hand trembled slightly on the table. He
hesitated a moment as he slowly returned the gold to the carpetbag, as
if he had not yet entirely caught the elevated sense of justice which
swayed the tribunal, and was perplexed with the belief that he had not
offered enough. Then he turned to the Judge, and saying, "This yer is
a lone hand, played alone, and without my pardner," he bowed to the
jury and was about to withdraw, when the Judge called him back:--

"If you have anything to say to Tennessee, you had better say it now."

For the first time that evening the eyes of the prisoner and his
strange advocate met. Tennessee smiled, showed his white teeth, and
saying, "Euchred, old man!" held out his hand. Tennessee's Partner
took it in his own, and saying, "I just dropped in as I was passin' to
see how things was gettin' on," let the hand passively fall, and
adding that "it was a warm night," again mopped his face with his
handkerchief, and without another word withdrew.

The two men never again met each other alive. For the unparalleled
insult of a bribe offered to Judge Lynch--who, whether bigoted, weak,
or narrow, was at least incorruptible--firmly fixed in the mind of
that mythical personage any wavering determination of Tennessee's
fate; and at the break of day he was marched, closely guarded, to meet
it at the top of Marley's Hill.

How he met it, how cool he was, how he refused to say anything, how
perfect were the arrangements of the committee, were all duly
reported, with the addition of a warning moral and example to all
future evil-doers, in the "Red Dog Clarion," by its editor, who was
present, and to whose vigorous English I cheerfully refer the reader.
But the  beauty of that midsummer morning, the blessed amity of earth
and air and sky, the awakened life of the free woods and hills, the
joyous renewal and promise of Nature, and above all, the infinite
serenity that thrilled through each, was not reported, as not being a
part of the social lesson. And yet, when the weak and foolish deed was
done, and a life, with its possibilities and responsibilities, had
passed out of the misshapen thing that dangled between earth and sky,
the birds sang, the flowers bloomed, the sun shone, as cheerily as
before; and possibly the "Red Dog Clarion" was right.

Tennessee's Partner was not in the group that surrounded the ominous
tree. But as they turned to disperse, attention was drawn to the
singular appearance of a motionless donkey-cart halted at the side of
the road. As they approached, they at once recognized the venerable
"Jenny" and the two-wheeled cart as the property of Tennessee's
Partner, used by him in carrying dirt from his claim; and a few paces
distant the owner of the equipage himself, sitting under a buckeye-
tree, wiping the perspiration from his glowing face. In answer to an
inquiry, he said he had come for the body of the "diseased," "if it
was all the same to the committee." He didn't wish to "hurry
anything;"  he could "wait." He was not working that day; and when the
gentlemen were done with the "diseased," he would take him. "Ef thar
is any present," he added, in his simple, serious way, "as would care
to jine in the fun'l, they kin come." Perhaps it was from a sense of
humor, which I have already intimated was a feature of Sandy Bar,--
perhaps it was from something even better than that, but two thirds of
the loungers accepted the invitation at once.

It was noon when the body of Tennessee was delivered into the hands of
his partner. As the cart drew up to the fatal tree, we noticed that it
contained a rough oblong box,--apparently made from a section of
sluicing,--and half filled with bark and the tassels of pine. The cart
was further decorated with slips of willow and made fragrant with
buckeye-blossoms. When the body was deposited in the box, Tennessee's
Partner drew over it a piece of tarred canvas, and gravely mounting
the narrow seat in front, with his feet upon the shafts, urged the
little donkey forward. The equipage moved slowly on, at that decorous
pace which was habitual with Jenny even under less solemn
circumstances. The men--half curiously, half jestingly, but all good-
humoredly--strolled along beside the cart, some in advance, some a
little in the rear of the homely catafalque. But whether from the
narrowing of the road or some present sense of decorum, as the cart
passed on, the company fell to the rear in couples, keeping step, and
otherwise assuming the external show of a formal procession. Jack
Folinsbee, who had at the outset played a funeral march in dumb show
upon an imaginary trombone, desisted from a lack of sympathy and
appreciation,--not having, perhaps, your true humorist's capacity to
be content with the enjoyment of his own fun.

The way led through Grizzly Canon, by this time clothed in funereal
drapery and shadows. The redwoods, burying their moccasined feet in
the red soil, stood in Indian file along the track, trailing an
uncouth benediction from their bending boughs upon the passing bier. A
hare, surprised into helpless inactivity, sat upright and pulsating in
the ferns by the roadside as the cortege went by. Squirrels hastened
to gain a secure outlook from higher boughs; and the blue-jays,
spreading their wings, fluttered before them like outriders, until the
outskirts of Sandy Bar were reached, and the solitary cabin of
Tennessee's Partner.

Viewed under more favorable circumstances, it would not have been a
cheerful place. The unpicturesque site, the rude and unlovely
outlines, the unsavory details, which  distinguish the nest-building
of the California miner, were all here with the dreariness of decay
superadded. A few paces from the cabin there was a rough inclosure,
which, in the brief days of Tennessee's Partner's matrimonial
felicity, had been used as a garden, but was now overgrown with fern.
As we approached it, we were surprised to find that what we had taken
for a recent attempt at cultivation was the broken soil about an open
grave.

The cart was halted before the inclosure, and rejecting the offers of
assistance with the same air of simple self-reliance he had displayed
throughout, Tennessee's Partner lifted the rough coffin on his back,
and deposited it unaided within the shallow grave. He then nailed down
the board which served as a lid, and mounting the little mound of
earth beside it, took off his hat and slowly mopped his face with his
handkerchief. This the crowd felt was a preliminary to speech, and
they disposed themselves variously on stumps and boulders, and sat
expectant.

"When a man," began Tennessee's Partner slowly," has been running free
all day, what's the natural thing for him to do? Why, to come home.
And if he ain't in a condition to go home, what can his best friend
do? Why, bring him home. And here's Tennessee has been running free,
and we brings him home from his wandering. "He paused and picked up a
fragment of quartz, rubbed it thoughtfully on his sleeve, and went on:
"It ain't the first time that I've packed him on my back, as you see'd
me now. It ain't the first time that I brought him to this yer cabin
when he couldn't help himself; it ain't the first time that I and
Jinny have waited for him on yon hill, and picked him up and so
fetched him home, when he couldn't speak and didn't know me. And now
that it's the last time, why"--he paused and rubbed the quartz gently
on his sleeve--"you see it's sort of rough on his pardner. And  now,
gentlemen" he added abruptly, picking up his long-handled shovel, "the
fun'l's over; and my thanks, and Tennessee's thanks, to you for your
trouble."

Resisting any proffers of assistance, he began to fill in the grave,
turning his back upon the crowd, that after a few moments' hesitation
gradually withdrew. As they crossed the little ridge that hid Sandy
Bar from view, some, looking back, thought they could see Tennessee's
Partner, his work done, sitting upon the grave, his shovel between his
knees, and his face buried in his red bandana handkerchief. But it was
argued by others that you couldn't tell his face from his handkerchief
at that distance, and this point remained undecided.

In the reaction that followed the feverish excitement of that day,
Tennessee's Partner was not forgotten. A secret investigation had
cleared him of any complicity in Tennessee's guilt, and left only a
suspicion of his general sanity. Sandy Bar made a point of calling on
him, and proffering various uncouth but well-meant kindnesses. But
from that day his rude health and great strength seemed visibly to
decline; and when the rainy season fairly set in, and the tiny grass-
blades were beginning to peep from the rocky mound above Tennessee's
grave, he took to his bed.

One night, when the pines beside the cabin were swaying in the storm
and trailing their slender fingers over the roof, and the roar and
rush of the swollen river were heard below, Tennessee's Partner lifted
his head from the pillow, saying, "It is time to go for Tennessee; I
must put Jinny in the cart;" and would have risen from his bed but for
the restraint of his attendant. Struggling, he still pursued his
singular fancy: "There, now, steady, Jinny,--steady, old girl. How
dark it is! Look out for the ruts,--and look out for him, too, old
gal. Sometimes, you know, when he's blind drunk, he drops down right
in the trail. Keep on  straight up to the pine on the top of the hill.
Thar! I told you so!--thar he is,--coming this way, too,--all by
himself, sober, and his face a-shining. Tennessee! Pardner!"

And so they met.


THE IDYL OF BED GULCH


Sandy was very drunk. He was lying under an azalea-bush, in pretty
much the same attitude in which he had fallen some hours before. How
long he had been lying there he could not tell, and didn't care; how
long he should lie there was a matter equally indefinite and
unconsidered. A tranquil philosophy, born of his physical condition,
suffused and saturated his moral being.

The spectacle of a drunken man, and of this drunken man in particular,
was not, I grieve to say, of sufficient novelty in Red Gulch to
attract attention. Earlier in the day some local satirist had erected
a temporary tombstone at Sandy's head, bearing the inscription,
"Effects of McCorkle's whiskey--kills at forty rods," with a hand
pointing to McCorkle's saloon. But this, I imagine, was, like most
local satire, personal; and was a reflection upon the unfairness of
the process rather than a commentary upon the impropriety of the
result. With this facetious exception, Sandy had been undisturbed. A
wandering mule, released from his pack, had cropped the scant herbage
beside him, and sniffed curiously at the prostrate man; a vagabond
dog, with that deep sympathy which the species have for drunken men,
had licked his dusty boots and curled himself up at his feet, and lay
there, blinking one eye in the sunlight, with a simulation of
dissipation that was ingenious and dog-like in its implied flattery of
the unconscious man beside him.

Meanwhile the shadows of the pine-trees had slowly swung around until
they crossed the road, and their trunks  barred the open meadow with
gigantic parallels of black and yellow. Little puffs of red dust,
lifted by the plunging hoofs of passing teams, dispersed in a grimy
shower upon the recumbent man. The sun sank lower and lower, and still
Sandy stirred not. And then the repose of this philosopher was
disturbed, as other philosophers have been, by the intrusion of an
unphilosophical sex.

"Miss Mary," as she was known to the little flock that she had just
dismissed from the log schoolhouse beyond the pines, was taking her
afternoon walk. Observing an unusually fine cluster of blossoms on the
azalea-bush opposite, she crossed the road to pluck it, picking her
way through the red dust, not without certain fierce little shivers of
disgust and some feline circumlocution. And then she came suddenly
upon Sandy!

Of course she uttered the little staccato cry of her sex. But when she
had paid that tribute to her physical weakness she became overbold and
halted for a moment,--at least six feet from this prostrate monster,
--with her white skirts gathered in her hand, ready for flight. But
neither sound nor motion came from the bush. With one little foot she
then overturned the satirical headboard, and muttered "Beasts!"--an
epithet which probably, at that moment, conveniently classified in her
mind the entire male population of Red Gulch. For Miss Mary, being
possessed of certain rigid notions of her own, had not, perhaps,
properly appreciated the demonstrative gallantry for which the
Californian has been so justly celebrated by his brother Californians,
and had, as a newcomer, perhaps fairly earned the reputation of being
"stuck up."

As she stood there she noticed, also, that the slant sunbeams were
heating Sandy's head to what she judged to be an unhealthy
temperature, and that his hat was lying uselessly at his side. To pick
it up and to place it over his face was a work requiring some courage,
particularly as  his eyes were open. Yet she did it and made good her
retreat. But she was somewhat concerned, on looking back, to see that
the hat was removed, and that Sandy was sitting up and saying
something.

The truth was, that in the calm depths of Sandy's mind he was
satisfied that the rays of the sun were beneficial and healthful; that
from childhood he had objected to lying down in a hat; that no people
but condemned fools, past redemption, ever wore hats; and that his
right to dispense, with them when he pleased was inalienable. This was
the statement of his inner consciousness. Unfortunately, its outward
expression was vague, being limited to a repetition of the following
formula: "Su'shine all ri'! Wasser maar, eh? Wass up, su'shine?"

Miss Mary stopped, and, taking fresh courage from her vantage of
distance, asked him if there was anything that he wanted.

"Wass up? Wasser maar?" continued Sandy, in a very high key.

"Get up, you horrid man!" said Miss Mary, now thoroughly incensed;
"get up and go home."

Sandy staggered to his feet. He was six feet high, and Miss Mary
trembled. He started forward a few paces and then stopped.

"Wass I go home for?" he suddenly asked, with great gravity.

"Go and take a bath," replied Miss Mary, eying his grimy person with
great disfavor.

To her infinite dismay, Sandy suddenly pulled off his coat and vest,
threw them on the ground, kicked off his boots, and, plunging wildly
forward, darted headlong over the hill in the direction of the river.

"Goodness heavens! the man will be drowned!" said Miss Mary; and then,
with feminine inconsistency, she ran back to the schoolhouse and
locked herself in.    That night, while seated at supper with her
hostess, the blacksmith's wife, it came to Miss Mary to ask, demurely,
if her husband ever got drunk. "Abner," responded Mrs. Stidger
reflectively,--"let's see! Abner hasn't been tight since last
'lection." Miss Mary would have liked to ask if he preferred lying in
the sun on these occasions, and if a cold bath would have hurt him;
but this would have involved an explanation, which she did not then
care to give. So she contented herself with opening her gray eyes
widely at the red-cheeked Mrs. Stidger,--a fine specimen of
Southwestern efflorescence,--and then dismissed the subject
altogether. The next day she wrote to her dearest friend in Boston: "I
think I find the intoxicated portion of this community the least
objectionable, I refer, my dear, to the men, of course. I do not know
anything that could make the women tolerable."

In less than a week Miss Mary had forgotten this episode, except that
her afternoon walks took thereafter, almost  unconsciously, another
direction. She noticed, however, that every morning a fresh cluster of
azalea blossoms appeared among the flowers on her desk. This was not
strange, as her little flock were aware of her fondness for flowers,
and invariably kept her desk bright with anemones, syringas, and
lupines; but, on questioning them, they one and all professed
ignorance of the azaleas. A few days later, Master Johnny Stidger,
whose desk was nearest to the window, was suddenly taken with spasms
of apparently gratuitous laughter, that threatened the discipline of
the school. All that Miss Mary could get from him was, that some one
had been "looking in the winder." Irate and indignant, she sallied
from her hive to do battle with the intruder. As she turned the corner
of the schoolhouse she came plump upon the quondam drunkard, now
perfectly sober, and inexpressibly sheepish and guilty-looking.

These facts Miss Mary was not slow to take a feminine  advantage of,
in her present humor. But it was somewhat confusing to observe, also,
that the beast, despite some faint signs of past dissipation, was
amiable-looking,--in fact, a kind of blond Samson, whose corn-colored
silken beard apparently had never yet known the touch of barber's
razor or Delilah's shears. So that the cutting speech which quivered
on her ready tongue died upon her lips, and she contented herself with
receiving his stammering apology with supercilious eyelids and the
gathered skirts of uncontamination. When she reentered the schoolroom,
her eyes fell upon the azaleas with a new sense of revelation; and
then she laughed, and the little people all laughed, and they were all
unconsciously very happy.

It was a hot day, and not long after this, that two short-legged boys
came to grief on the threshold of the school with a pail of water,
which they had laboriously brought from the spring, and that Miss Mary
compassionately seized the pail and started for the spring herself. At
the foot of the hill a shadow crossed her path, and a blue-shirted arm
dexterously but gently relieved her of her burden. Miss Mary was both
embarrassed and angry. "If you carried more of that for yourself," she
said spitefully to the blue arm, without deigning to raise her lashes
to its owner, "you'd do better." In the submissive silence that
followed she regretted the speech, and thanked him so sweetly at the
door that he stumbled. Which caused the children to laugh again,--a
laugh in which Miss Mary joined, until the color came faintly into her
pale cheek. The next day a barrel was mysteriously placed beside the
door, and as mysteriously filled with fresh spring-water every
morning.

Nor was this superior young person without other quiet attentions.
"Profane Bill," driver of the Slumgullion Stage, widely known in the
newspapers for his "gallantry"  in invariably offering the box-seat to
the fair sex, had  excepted Miss Mary from this attention, on the
ground that he had a habit of "cussin' on up grades," and gave her
half the coach to herself. Jack Hamlin, a gambler, having once
silently ridden with her in the same coach, afterward threw a decanter
at the head of a confederate for mentioning her name in a bar-room.
The over-dressed mother of a pupil whose paternity was doubtful had
often lingered near this astute Vestal's temple, never daring to enter
its sacred precincts, but content to worship the priestess from afar.

With such unconscious intervals the monotonous procession of blue
skies, glittering sunshine, brief twilights, and starlit nights passed
over Red Gulch. Miss Mary grew fond of walking in the sedate and
proper woods. Perhaps she believed, with Mrs. Stidger, that the
balsamic odors of the firs "did her chest good," for certainly her
slight cough was less frequent and her step was firmer; perhaps she
had learned the unending lesson which the patient pines are never
weary of repeating to heedful or listless ears. And so one day she
planned a picnic on Buckeye Hill, and took the children with her. Away
from the dusty road, the straggling shanties, the yellow ditches, the
clamor of restless engines, the cheap finery of shop-windows, the
deeper glitter of paint and colored glass, and the thin veneering
which barbarism takes upon itself in such localities, what infinite
relief was theirs! The last heap of ragged rock and clay passed, the
last unsightly chasm crossed,--how the waiting woods opened their long
files to receive them! How the children--perhaps because they had not
yet grown quite away from the breast of the bounteous Mother--threw
themselves face downward on her brown bosom with uncouth caresses,
filling the air with their laughter; and how Miss Mary herself--
felinely fastidious and intrenched as she was in the purity of
spotless skirts, collar, and cuffs--forgot all, and ran like a crested
quail at the  head of her brood, until, romping, laughing, and
panting, with a loosened braid of brown hair, a hat hanging by a
knotted ribbon from her throat, she came suddenly and violently, in
the heart of the forest, upon the luckless Sandy!

The explanations, apologies, and not overwise conversation that ensued
need not be indicated here. It would seem, however, that Miss Mary had
already established some acquaintance with this ex-drunkard. Enough
that he was soon accepted as one of the party; that the children, with
that quick intelligence which Providence gives the helpless,
recognized a friend, and played with his blond beard and long silken
mustache, and took other liberties,--as the helpless are apt to do.
And when he had built a fire against a tree, and had shown them other
mysteries of woodcraft, their admiration knew no bounds. At the close
of two such foolish, idle, happy hours he found himself lying at the
feet of the schoolmistress, gazing dreamily in her face as she sat
upon the sloping hillside weaving wreaths of laurel and syringa, in
very much the same attitude as he had lain when first they met. Nor
was the  similitude greatly forced. The weakness of an easy, sensuous
nature, that had found a dreamy exaltation in liquor, it is to be
feared was now finding an equal intoxication in love.

I think that Sandy was dimly conscious of this himself. I know that he
longed to be doing something,--slaying a grizzly, scalping a savage,
or sacrificing himself in some way for the sake of this sallow-faced,
gray-eyed schoolmistress. As I should like to present him in an heroic
attitude, I stay my hand with great difficulty at this moment, being
only withheld from introducing such an episode by a strong conviction
that it does not usually occur at such times. And I trust that my
fairest reader,  who remembers that, in a real crisis, it is always
some uninteresting stranger or  unromantic policeman, and not
Adolphus, who rescues, will forgive the omission.

So they sat there undisturbed,--the woodpeckers chattering overhead
and the voices of the children coming pleasantly from the hollow
below. What they said matters little. What they thought--which might
have been interesting--did not transpire. The woodpeckers only learned
how Miss Mary was an orphan; how she left her uncle's house to come to
California for the sake of health and independence; how Sandy was an
orphan too; how he came to California for excitement; how he had lived
a wild life, and how he was trying to reform; and other details,
which, from a woodpecker's view-point, undoubtedly must have seemed
stupid and a waste of time. But even in such trifles was the afternoon
spent; and when the children were again gathered, and Sandy, with a
delicacy which the schoolmistress well understood, took leave of them
quietly at the outskirts of the settlement, it had seemed the shortest
day of her weary life.

As the long, dry summer withered to its roots, the school term of Red
Gulch--to use a local euphuism--"dried up" also. In another day Miss
Mary would be free, and for a season, at least, Red Gulch would know
her no more. She was seated alone in the schoolhouse, her cheek
resting on her hand, her eyes half closed in one of those daydreams in
which Miss Mary, I fear, to the danger of school discipline, was
lately in the habit of indulging. Her lap was full of mosses, ferns,
and other woodland memories. She was so preoccupied with these and her
own thoughts that a gentle tapping at the door passed unheard, or
translated itself into the remembrance of far-off woodpeckers. When at
last it asserted itself more distinctly, she started up with a flushed
cheek and opened the door. On the threshold stood a woman, the self-
assertion and audacity of whose dress were in singular contrast to her
timid, irresolute bearing.    Miss Mary recognized at a glance the
dubious mother of her anonymous pupil. Perhaps she was disappointed,
perhaps she was only fastidious; but as she coldly invited her to
enter, she half unconsciously settled her white cuffs and collar, and
gathered closer her own chaste skirts. It was, perhaps, for this
reason that the embarrassed stranger, after a moment's hesitation,
left her gorgeous parasol open and sticking in the dust beside the
door, and then sat down at the farther end of a long bench. Her voice
was husky as she began,--

"I heerd tell that you were goin' down to the Bay tomorrow, and I
couldn't let you go until I came to thank you for your kindness to my
Tommy." Tommy, Miss Mary said, was a good boy, and deserved more than
the poor attention she could give him.

"Thank you, miss; thank ye!" cried the stranger, brightening even
through the color which Red Gulch knew facetiously as her "war paint,"
and striving, in her embarrassment, to drag the long bench nearer the
schoolmistress. "I thank you, miss, for that; and if I am his mother,
there ain't a sweeter, dearer, better boy lives than him. And if I
ain't much as says it, thar ain't a sweeter, dearer, angeler teacher
lives than he's got."

Miss Mary, sitting primly behind her desk, with a ruler over her
shoulder, opened her gray eyes widely at this, but said nothing.

"It ain't for you to be complimented by the like of me, I know," she
went on hurriedly. "It ain't for me to be comin' here, in broad day,
to do it, either; but I come to ask a favor,--not for me, miss,--not
for me, but for the darling boy."

Encouraged by a look in the young schoolmistress's eye, and putting
her lilac-gloved hands together, the fingers downward, between her
knees, she went on, in a low voice:--

"You see, miss, there's no one the boy has any claim on but me, and I
ain't the proper person to bring him up. I thought some, last year, of
sending him away to Frisco to school, but when they talked of bringing
a schoolma'am here, I waited till I saw you, and then I knew it was
all right, and I could keep my boy a little longer. And, oh! miss, he
loves you so much; and if you could hear him talk about you in his
pretty way, and if he could ask you what I ask you now, you couldn't
refuse him.

"It is natural," she went on rapidly, in a voice that trembled
strangely between pride and humility,--"it's natural that he should
take to you, miss, for his father, when I first knew him, was a
gentleman,--and the boy must forget me, sooner or later,--and so I
ain't a-goin' to cry about that. For I come to ask you to take my
Tommy,--God bless him for the bestest, sweetest boy that lives,--to--
to--take him with you."

She had risen and caught the young girl's hand in her own, and had
fallen on her knees beside her.

"I've money plenty, and it's all yours and his. Put him in some good
school, where you can go and see him, and help him to--to--to forget
his mother. Do with him what you like. The worst you can do will be
kindness to what he will learn with me. Only take him out of this
wicked life, this cruel place, this home of shame and sorrow. You
will! I know you will,--won't you? You will,--you must not, you cannot
say no! You will make him as pure, as gentle as yourself; and when he
has grown-up, you will tell him his father's name,--the name that
hasn't passed my lips for years,--the name of Alexander Morton, whom
they call here Sandy! Miss Mary!--do not take your hand away! Miss
Mary, speak to me! You will take my boy? Do not put your face from me.
I know it ought not to look on such as me. Miss Mary!--my God, be
merciful!--she is leaving me!"   Miss Mary had risen, and, in the
gathering twilight, had felt her way to the open window. She stood
there, leaning against the casement, her eyes fixed on the last rosy
tints that were fading from the western sky. There was still some of
its light on her pure young forehead, on her white collar, on her
clasped white hands, but all fading slowly away. The suppliant had
dragged herself, still on her knees, beside her.

"I know it takes time to consider. I will wait here all night; but I
cannot go until you speak. Do not deny me now. You will!--I see it in
your sweet face,--such a face as I have seen in my dreams. I see it in
your eyes, Miss Mary!--you will take my boy!"

The last red beam crept higher, suffused Miss Mary's eyes with
something of its glory, flickered, and faded, and went out. The sun
had set on Red Gulch. In the twilight and silence Miss Mary's voice
sounded pleasantly.

"I will take the boy. Send him to me to-night."

The happy mother raised the hem of Miss Mary's skirts to her lips. She
would have buried her hot face in its virgin folds, but she dared not.
She rose to her feet.

"Does--this man--know of your intention?" asked Miss Mary suddenly.

"No, nor cares. He has never even seen the child to know it."

"Go to him at once--to-night--now! Tell him what you have done. Tell
him I have taken his child, and tell him--he must never see--see--the
child again. Wherever it may be, he must not come; wherever I may take
it, he must not follow! There, go now, please,--I'm weary, and--have
much yet to do!"

They walked together to the door. On the threshold the woman turned.

"Good-night!"

She would have fallen at Miss Mary's feet. But at the  same moment the
young girl reached out her arms, caught the sinful woman to her own
pure breast for one brief moment, and then closed and locked the door.

It was with a sudden sense of great responsibility that Profane Bill
took the reins of the Slumgullion stage the next morning, for the
schoolmistress was one of his passengers. As he entered the highroad,
in obedience to a pleasant voice from the "inside," he suddenly reined
up his horses and respectfully waited, as Tommy hopped out at the
command of Miss Mary.

"Not that bush, Tommy,--the next."

Tommy whipped out his new pocket-knife, and cutting a branch from a
tall azalea-bush, returned with it to Miss Mary. "All right now?"

"All right!"

And the stage-door closed on the Idyl of Red Gulch.


BROWN OF CALAVERAS


A subdued tone of conversation, and the absence of cigar-smoke and
boot-heels at the windows of the Wingdam stagecoach, made it evident
that one of the inside passengers was a woman. A disposition on the
part of loungers at the stations to congregate before the window, and
some concern in regard to the appearance of coats, hats, and collars,
further indicated that she was lovely. All of which Mr. Jack Hamlin,
on the box-seat, noted with the smile of cynical philosophy. Not that
he depreciated the sex, but that he recognized therein a deceitful
element, the pursuit of which sometimes drew mankind away from the
equally uncertain blandishments of poker,--of which it may be remarked
that Mr. Hamlin was a professional exponent.

So that, when he placed his narrow boot on the wheel and leaped down,
he did not even glance at the window from which a green veil was
fluttering, but lounged up and down with that listless and grave
indifference of his class, which was, perhaps, the next thing to good-
breeding. With his closely buttoned figure and self-contained air he
was a marked contrast to the other passengers, with their feverish
restlessness and boisterous emotion; and even Bill Masters, a graduate
of Harvard, with his slovenly dress, his over-flowing vitality, his
intense appreciation of lawlessness and barbarism, and his mouth
filled with crackers and cheese, I fear cut but an unromantic figure
beside this lonely  calculator of chances, with his pale Greek face
and Homeric gravity.

The driver called "All aboard!" and Mr. Hamlin  returned to the coach.
His foot was upon the wheel, and his face raised to the level of the
open window, when, at the same moment, what appeared to him to be the
finest eyes in the world suddenly met his. He quietly dropped down
again, addressed a few words to one of the inside passengers, effected
an exchange of seats, and as quietly took his place inside. Mr. Hamlin
never allowed his philosophy to interfere with decisive and prompt
action.

I fear that this irruption of Jack cast some restraint upon the other
passengers, particularly those who were making themselves most
agreeable to the lady. One of them leaned forward, and apparently
conveyed to her information regarding Mr. Hamlin's profession in a
single epithet. Whether Mr. Hamlin heard it, or whether he recognized
in the informant a distinguished jurist, from whom, but a few evenings
before, he had won several thousand dollars, I cannot say. His
colorless face betrayed no sign; his black eyes, quietly observant,
glanced indifferently past the legal gentleman, and rested on the much
more pleasing features of his neighbor. An Indian stoicism--said to be
an inheritance from his maternal ancestor--stood him in good service,
until the rolling wheels rattled upon the river gravel at Scott's
Ferry, and the stage drew up at the International Hotel for dinner.
The legal gentleman and a member of Congress leaped out, and stood
ready to assist the descending goddess, while Colonel Starbottle of
Siskiyou took charge of her parasol and shawl. In this multiplicity of
attention there was a momentary confusion and delay. Jack Hamlin
quietly opened the _opposite_ door of the coach, took the lady's
hand, with that decision and positiveness which a hesitating and
undecided sex know how to admire, and in an instant had dexterously
and gracefully swung her to the ground and again lifted her to the
platform. An audible chuckle on the box, I fear, came from that other
cynic, Yuba Bill, the driver. "Look keerfully  arter that baggage,
Kernel," said the expressman, with affected concern, as he looked
after Colonel Starbottle, gloomily bringing up the rear of the
triumphant procession to the waiting-room.

Mr. Hamlin did not stay for dinner. His horse was already saddled and
awaiting him. He dashed over the ford, up the gravelly hill, and out
into the dusty perspective of the Wingdam road, like one leaving an
unpleasant fancy behind him. The inmates uf dusty cabins by the
roadside shaded their eyes with their hands and looked after him,
recognizing the man by his horse, and speculating what "was up with
Comanche Jack." Yet much of this interest centred in the horse, in a
community where the time made by "French Pete's" mare, in his run from
the Sheriff of Calaveras, eclipsed all concern in the ultimate fate of
that worthy.

The sweating flanks of his gray at length recalled him to himself. He
checked his speed, and turning into a byroad, sometimes used as a cut-
off, trotted leisurely along, the reins hanging listlessly from his
fingers. As he rode on, the character of the landscape changed and
became more pastoral. Openings in groves of pine and sycamore
disclosed some rude attempts at cultivation,--a flowering vine trailed
over the porch of one cabin, and a woman rocked her cradled babe under
the roses of another. A little farther on, Mr. Hamlin came upon some
bare-legged children wading in the willowy creek, and so wrought upon
them with a badinage peculiar to himself, that they were emboldened to
climb up his horse's legs and over his saddle, until he was fain to
develop an exaggerated ferocity of demeanor, and to escape, leaving
behind some kisses and coin. And then, advancing deeper into the
woods, where all signs of habitation failed, he began to sing,
uplifting a tenor so singularly sweet, and shaded by a pathos so
subdued and tender, that I wot the robins and linnets stopped to
listen. Mr. Hamlin's voice was not  cultivated; the subject of his
song was some sentimental lunacy, borrowed from the negro minstrels;
but there thrilled through all some occult quality of tone and
expression that was unspeakably touching. Indeed, it was a wonderful
sight to see this sentimental blackleg, with a pack of cards in his
pocket and a revolver at his back, sending his voice before him
through the dim woods with a plaint about his "Nelly's grave," in a
way that overflowed the eyes of the listener. A sparrow-hawk, fresh
from his sixth victim, possibly recognizing in Mr. Hamlin a kindred
spirit, stared at him in surprise, and was fain to confess the
superiority of man. With a superior predatory capacity _he_ couldn't
sing.

But Mr. Hamlin presently found himself again on the highroad and at
his former pace. Ditches and banks of gravel, denuded hillsides,
stumps, and decayed trunks of trees, took the place of woodland and
ravine, and indicated his approach to civilization. Then a church-
steeple came in sight, and he knew that he had reached home. In a few
moments he was clattering down the single narrow street that lost
itself in a chaotic ruin of races, ditches, and tailings at the foot
of the hill, and dismounted before the gilded windows of the Magnolia
saloon. Passing through the long bar-room, he pushed open a green-
baize door, entered a dark passage, opened another door with a
passkey, and found himself in a dimly lighted room, whose furniture,
though elegant and costly for the locality, showed signs of abuse. The
inlaid centre-table was overlaid with stained disks that were not
contemplated in the original design, the embroidered armchairs were
discolored, and the green velvet lounge, on which Mr. Hamlin threw
himself, was soiled at the foot with the red soil of Wingdam.

Mr. Hamlin did not sing in his cage. He lay still, looking at a highly
colored painting above him, representing a young creature of opulent
charms. It occurred to him  then, for the first time, that he had
never seen exactly that kind of a woman, and that, if he should, he
would not, probably, fall in love with her. Perhaps he was thinking of
another style of beauty. But just then some one knocked at the door.
Without rising, he pulled a cord that apparently shot back a bolt, for
the door swung open, and a man entered.

The new-comer was broad-shouldered and robust,--a vigor not borne out
in the face, which, though handsome, was singularly weak and
disfigured by dissipation. He appeared to be, also, under the
influence of liquor, for he started on seeing Mr. Hamlin, and said, "I
thought Kate was here;" stammered, and seemed confused and
embarrassed.

Mr. Hamlin smiled the smile which he had before worn on the Wingdam
coach, and sat up, quite refreshed and ready for business.

"You didn't come up on the stage," continued the newcomer, "did you?"

"No," replied Hamlin; "I left it at Scott's Ferry. It isn't due for
half an hour yet. But how's luck, Brown?"

"D--d bad," said Brown, his face suddenly assuming an expression of
weak despair. "I'm cleaned out again, Jack," he continued, in a
whining tone, that formed a pitiable contrast to his bulky figure;
"can't you help me with a hundred till to-morrow's clean-up? You see
I've got to send money home to the old woman, and--you've won twenty
times that amount from me."

The conclusion was, perhaps, not entirely logical, but Jack overlooked
it, and handed the sum to his visitor. "The old-woman business is
about played out, Brown," he added, by way of commentary; "why don't
you say you want to buck ag'in' faro? You know you ain't married!"

"Fact, sir," said Brown, with a sudden gravity, as if the mere contact
of the gold with the palm of the hand had  imparted some dignity to
his frame. "I've got a wife--a d--d good one, too, if I do say it--in
the States. It's three years since I've seen her, and a year since
I've writ to her. When things is about straight, and we get down to
the lead, I'm going to send for her."

"And Kate?" queried Mr. Hamlin, with his previous smile.

Mr. Brown of Calaveras essayed an archness of glance to cover his
confusion, which his weak face and whiskey-muddled intellect but
poorly carried out, and said,--

"D--n it, Jack, a man must have a little liberty, you know. But come,
what do you say to a little game? Give us a show to double this
hundred."

Jack Hamlin looked curiously at his fatuous friend. Perhaps he knew
that the man was predestined to lose the money, and preferred that it
should flow back into his own coffers rather than any other. He nodded
his head, and drew his chair toward the table. At the same moment
there came a rap upon the door.

"It's Kate," said Mr. Brown.

Mr. Hamlin shot back the bolt and the door opened. But, for the first
time in his life, he staggered to his feet utterly unnerved and
abashed, and for the first time in his life the hot blood crimsoned
his colorless cheeks to his forehead. For before him stood the lady he
had lifted from the Wingdam coach, whom Brown, dropping his cards with
a hysterical laugh, greeted as,--

"My old woman, by thunder!"

They say that Mrs. Brown burst into tears and reproaches of her
husband. I saw her in 1857 at Marysville, and disbelieve the story.
And the "Wingdam Chronicle" of the next week, under the head of
"Touching Reunion," said: "One of those beautiful and touching
incidents, peculiar to California life, occurred last week in our
city. The wife of one of Wingdam's eminent pioneers, tired of  the
effete civilization of the East and its inhospitable climate, resolved
to join her noble husband upon these golden shores. Without informing
him of her intention, she undertook the long journey, and arrived last
week. The joy of the husband may be easier imagined than described.
The meeting is said to have been indescribably affecting. We trust her
example may be followed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Whether owing to Mrs. Brown's influence, or to some more successful
speculations, Mr. Brown's financial fortune from that day steadily
improved. He bought out his partners in the "Nip and Tuck" lead, with
money which was said to have been won at poker a week or two after his
wife's arrival, but which rumor, adopting Mrs. Brown's theory that
Brown had forsworn the gaming-table, declared to have been furnished
by Mr. Jack Hamlin. He built and furnished the Wingdam House, which
pretty Mrs. Brown's great popularity kept overflowing with guests. He
was elected to the Assembly, and gave largess to churches. A street in
Wingdam was named in his honor.

Yet it was noted that in proportion as he waxed wealthy and fortunate,
he grew pale, thin, and anxious. As his wife's popularity increased,
he became fretful and impatient. The most uxorious of husbands, he was
absurdly jealous. If he did not interfere with his wife's social
liberty, it was because it was maliciously whispered that his first
and only attempt was met by an outburst from Mrs. Brown that terrified
him into silence. Much of this kind of gossip came from those of her
own sex whom she had supplanted in the chivalrous attentions of
Wingdam, which, like most popular chivalry, was devoted to an
admiration of power, whether of masculine force or feminine beauty. It
should be remembered, too, in her extenuation, that, since her
arrival, she had been the unconscious priestess of a mythological
worship, perhaps not more ennobling to her womanhood  than that which
distinguished an older Greek democracy. I think that Brown was dimly
conscious of this. But his only confidant was Jack Hamlin, whose
infelix reputation naturally precluded any open intimacy with the
family, and whose visits were infrequent.

It was midsummer and a moonlit night, and Mrs. Brown, very rosy,
large-eyed, and pretty, sat upon the piazza, enjoying the fresh
incense of the mountain breeze, and, it is to be feared, another
incense which was not so fresh nor quite as innocent. Beside her sat
Colonel Starbottle and Judge Boompointer, and a later addition to her
court in the shape of a foreign tourist. She was in good spirits.

"What do you see down the road?" inquired the gallant Colonel, who had
been conscious, for the last few minutes, that Mrs. Brown's attention
was diverted.

"Dust," said Mrs. Brown, with a sigh. "Only Sister Anne's 'flock of
sheep.'"

The Colonel, whose literary recollections did not extend farther back
than last week's paper, took a more practical view. "It ain't sheep,"
he continued; "it's a horseman. Judge, ain't that Jack Hamlin's gray?"

But the Judge didn't know; and, as Mrs. Brown suggested the air was
growing too cold for further investigations, they retired to the
parlor.

Mr. Brown was in the stable, where he generally retired after dinner.
Perhaps it was to show his contempt for his wife's companions;
perhaps, like other weak natures, he found pleasure in the exercise of
absolute power over inferior animals. He had a certain gratification
in the training of a chestnut mare, whom he could beat or caress as
pleased him, which he couldn't do with Mrs. Brown. It was here that he
recognized a certain gray horse which had just come in, and, looking a
little farther on, found his rider. Brown's greeting was cordial and
hearty; Mr. Hamlin's somewhat restrained. But, at Brown's urgent
request, he followed  him up the back stairs to a narrow corridor, and
thence to a small room looking out upon the stable-yard. It was
plainly furnished with a bed, a table, a few chairs, and a rack for
guns and whips.

"This yer's my home, Jack," said Brown with a sigh, as he threw
himself upon the bed and motioned his companion to a chair. "Her
room's t' other end of the hall. It's more'n six months since we've
lived together, or met, except at meals. It's mighty rough papers on
the head of the house, ain't it?" he said with a forced laugh. "But
I'm glad to see you, Jack, d--d glad," and he reached from the bed,
and again shook the unresponsive hand of Jack Hamlin.

"I brought ye up here, for I didn't want to talk in the stable;
though, for the matter of that, it's all round town. Don't strike a
light. We can talk here in the moonshine. Put up your feet on that
winder and sit here beside me. Thar's whiskey in that jug."

Mr. Hamlin did not avail himself of the information. Brown of
Calaveras turned his face to the wall, and continued,--

"If I didn't love the woman, Jack, I wouldn't mind. But it's loving
her, and seeing her day arter day goin' on at this rate, and no one to
put down the brake; that's what gits me! But I'm glad to see ye, Jack,
d--d glad."

In the darkness he groped about until he had found and wrung his
companion's hand again. He would have detained it, but Jack slipped it
into the buttoned breast of his coat, and asked listlessly, "How long
has this been going on?"

"Ever since she came here; ever since the day she walked into the
Magnolia. I was a fool then; Jack, I'm a fool now; but I didn't know
how much I loved her till then. And she hasn't been the same woman
since.

"But that ain't all, Jack; and it's what I wanted to see you about,
and I'm glad you've come. It ain't that she  doesn't love me any more;
it ain't that she fools with every chap that comes along; for perhaps
I staked her love and lost it, as I did everything else at the
Magnolia; and perhaps foolin' is nateral to some women, and thar ain't
no great harm done, 'cept to the fools. But, Jack, I think,--I think
she loves somebody else. Don't move, Jack! don't move; if your pistol
hurts ye, take it off.

"It's been more'n six months now that she's seemed unhappy and
lonesome, and kinder nervous and scared-like. And sometimes I've
ketched her lookin' at me sort of timid and pitying. And she writes to
somebody. And for the last week she's been gathering her own things,--
trinkets, and furbelows, and jew'lry,--and, Jack, I think she's goin'
off. I could stand all but that. To have her steal away like a thief!"
He put his face downward to the pillow, and for a few moments there
was no sound but the ticking of a clock on the mantel. Mr. Hamlin lit
a cigar, and moved to the open window. The moon no longer shone into
the room, and the bed and its occupant were in shadow. "What shall I
do, Jack?" said the voice from the darkness.

The answer came promptly and clearly from the window-side, "Spot the
man, and kill him on sight."

"But, Jack"--

"He's took the risk!"

"But will that bring her back?"

Jack did not reply, but moved from the window towards the door.

"Don't go yet, Jack; light the candle and sit by the table. It's a
comfort to see ye, if nothin' else."

Jack hesitated and then complied. He drew a pack of cards from his
pocket and shuffled them, glancing at the bed. But Brown's face was
turned to the wall. When Mr. Hamlin had shuffled the cards, he cut
them, and dealt one card on the opposite side of the table towards the
bed,  and another on his side of the table for himself. The first was
a deuce; his own card a king. He then shuffled and cut again. This
time "dummy" had a queen and himself a four-spot. Jack brightened up
for the third deal. It brought his adversary a deuce and himself a
king again. "Two out of three," said Jack audibly.

"What's that, Jack?" said Brown.

"Nothing."

Then Jack tried his hand with dice; but he always threw sixes and his
imaginary opponent aces. The force of habit is sometimes confusing.

Meanwhile some magnetic influence in Mr. Hamlin's presence, or the
anodyne of liquor, or both, brought surcease of sorrow, and Brown
slept. Mr. Hamlin moved his chair to the window and looked out on the
town of Wingdam, now sleeping peacefully, its harsh outlines softened
and subdued, its glaring colors mellowed and sobered in the moonlight
that flowed over all. In the hush he could hear the gurgling of water
in the ditches and the sighing of the pines beyond the hill. Then he
looked up at the firmament, and as he did so a star shot across the
twinkling field. Presently another, and then another. The phenomenon
suggested to Mr. Hamlin a fresh augury. If in another fifteen minutes
another star should fall--He sat there, watch in hand, for twice that
time, but the phenomenon was not repeated.

The clock struck two, and Brown still slept. Mr. Hamlin approached the
table and took from his pocket a letter, which he read by the
flickering candlelight. It contained only a single line, written in
pencil, in a woman's hand,--

"Be at the corral with the buggy at three."

The sleeper moved uneasily and then awoke. "Are you there, Jack?"

"Yes."

"Don't go yet. I dreamed just now, Jack,--dreamed  of old times. I
thought that Sue and me was being married agin, and that the parson,
Jack, was--who do you think?--you!"

The gambler laughed, and seated himself on the bed, the paper still in
his hand.

"It's a good sign, ain't it?" queried Brown.

"I reckon! Say, old man, hadn't you better get up?"

The "old man," thus affectionately appealed to, rose, with the
assistance of Hamlin's outstretched hand.

"Smoke?"

Brown mechanically took the proffered cigar.

"Light?"

Jack had twisted the letter into a spiral, lit it, and held it for his
companion. He continued to hold it until it was consumed, and dropped
the fragment--a fiery star--from the open window. He watched it as it
fell, and then returned to his friend.

"Old man," he said, placing his hands upon Brown's shoulders, "in ten
minutes I'll be on the road, and gone like that spark. We won't see
each other agin; but, before I go, take a fool's advice: sell out all
you've got, take your wife with you, and quit the country. It ain't no
place for you nor her. Tell her she must go; make her go if she won't.
Don't whine because you can't be a saint and she ain't an angel. Be a
man, and treat her like a woman. Don't be a d-d fool. Good-by."

He tore himself from Brown's grasp and leaped down the stairs like a
deer. At the stable-door he collared the half-sleeping hostler, and
backed him against the wall. "Saddle my horse in two minutes, or
I'll"--The ellipsis was frightfully suggestive.

"The missis said you was to have the buggy," stammered the man.

"D--n the buggy!"    The horse was saddled as fast as the nervous
hands of the astounded hostler could manipulate buckle and strap.

"Is anything up, Mr. Hamlin?" said the man, who, like all his class,
admired the elan of his fiery patron, and was really concerned in his
welfare.

"Stand aside!"

The man fell back. With an oath, a bound, and clatter, Jack was into
the road. In another moment, to the man's half-awakened eyes, he was
but a moving cloud of dust in the distance, towards which a star just
loosed from its brethren was trailing a stream of fire.

But early that morning the dwellers by the Wingdam turnpike, miles
aways, heard a voice, pure as a sky-lark's, singing afield. They who
were asleep turned over on their rude couches to dream of youth, and
love, and olden days. Hard-faced men and anxious gold-seekers, already
at work, ceased their labors and leaned upon their picks to listen to
a romantic vagabond ambling away against the rosy sunrise.


       *       *       *       *       *


       CONDENSED NOVELS


       *       *       *       *       *


MUCK-A-MUCK

A MODERN INDIAN NOVEL

AFTER COOPER


CHAPTER I


It was toward the close of a bright October day. The last rays of the
setting sun were reflected from one of those sylvan lakes peculiar to
the Sierras of California. On the right the curling smoke of an Indian
village rose between the columns of the lofty pines, while to the left
the log cottage of Judge Tompkins, embowered in buckeyes, completed
the enchanting picture.

Although the exterior of the cottage was humble and unpretentious, and
in keeping with the wildness of the landscape, its interior gave
evidence of the cultivation and refinement of its inmates. An
aquarium, containing goldfishes, stood on a marble centre-table at one
end of the apartment, while a magnificent grand piano occupied the
other. The floor was covered with a yielding tapestry carpet, and the
walls were adorned with paintings from the pencils of Van Dyke,
Rubens, Tintoretto, Michael Angelo, and the productions of the more
modern Turner, Kensett, Church, and Bierstadt. Although Judge Tompkins
had chosen the frontiers of civilization as his home, it was
impossible for him to entirely forego the habits and tastes of his
former life. He was seated in a luxurious armchair, writing at a
mahogany escritoire, while his daughter, a lovely young girl of
seventeen summers, plied her crotchet-needle on an ottoman beside him.
A bright fire of pine logs flickered and flamed on the ample hearth.

Genevra Octavia Tompkins was Judge Tompkins's only child. Her mother
had long since died on the Plains. Reared in affluence, no pains had
been spared with the daughter's education. She was a graduate of one
of the principal seminaries, and spoke French with a perfect Benicia
accent. Peerlessly beautiful, she was dressed in a white moire antique
robe trimmed with tulle. That simple rosebud, with which most heroines
exclusively decorate their hair, was all she wore in her raven locks.

The Judge was the first to break the silence.

"Genevra, the logs which compose yonder fire seem to have been
incautiously chosen. The sibilation produced by the sap, which exudes
copiously therefrom, is not conducive to composition."

"True, father, but I thought it would be preferable to the constant
crepitation which is apt to attend the combustion of more seasoned
ligneous fragments."

The Judge looked admiringly at the intellectual features of the
graceful girl, and half forgot the slight annoyances of the green wood
in the musical accents of his daughter. He was smoothing her hair
tenderly, when the shadow of a tall figure, which suddenly darkened
the doorway, caused him to look up.


CHAPTER II


It needed but a glance at the new-comer to detect at once the form and
features of the haughty aborigine,--the untaught and untrammeled son
of the forest. Over one  shoulder a blanket, negligently but
gracefully thrown, disclosed a bare and powerful breast, decorated
with a quantity of three-cent postage-stamps which he had despoiled
from an Overland Mail stage a few weeks previous. A cast-off beaver of
Judge Tompkins's, adorned by a simple feather, covered his erect head,
from beneath which his straight locks descended. His right hand hung
lightly by his side, while his left was engaged in holding on a pair
of pantaloons, which the lawless grace and freedom of his lower limbs
evidently could not brook.

"Why," said the Indian, in a low sweet tone,--"why
does the Pale Face still follow the track of the Red Man? Why does he
pursue him, even as O-kee chow, the wild cat, chases Ka-ka, the skunk?
Why are the feet of Sorrel-top, the white chief, among the acorns of
Muck-a-Muck, the mountain forest? Why," he repeated, quietly but
firmly abstracting a silver spoon from the table,--"why do you seek
to drive him from the wigwams of his fathers? His brothers are already
gone to the happy hunting-grounds. Will the Pale Face seek him there?"
And, averting his face from the Judge, he hastily slipped a silver
cake-basket beneath his blanket, to conceal his emotion.

"Muck-a-Muck has spoken," said Genevra softly. "Let him now listen.
Are the acorns of the mountain sweeter than the esculent and
nutritious bean of the Pale Face miner? Does my brother prize the
edible qualities of the snail above that of the crisp and oleaginous
bacon? Delicious are the grasshoppers that sport on the hillside,--are
they better than the dried apples of the Pale Faces? Pleasant is the
gurgle of the torrent, Kish-Kish, but is it better than the cluck-
cluck of old Bourbon from the old stone bottle?"

"Ugh!" said the Indian,--"ugh! good. The White Rabbit is wise. Her
words fall as the snow on Tootoonolo, and the rocky heart of Muck-a-
Muck is hidden. What says my brother the Gray Gopher of Dutch Flat?"

"She has spoken, Muck-a-Muck," said the Judge, gazing fondly on his
daughter. "It is well. Our treaty is concluded. No, thank you,--you
need _not_ dance the Dance of Snow-shoes, or the Moccasin Dance, the
Dance of Green Corn, or the Treaty Dance. I would be alone. A strange
sadness overpowers me."


"I go," said the Indian. "Tell your great chief in Washington, the
Sachem Andy, that the Red Man is retiring before the footsteps of the
adventurous pioneer. Inform him, if you please, that westward the star
of empire takes its way, that the chiefs of the Pi-Ute nation are for
Reconstruction to a man, and that Klamath will poll a heavy Republican
vote in the fall."

And folding his blanket more tightly around him, Muck-a-Muck withdrew.


CHAPTER III


Genevra Tompkins stood at the door of the log-cabin, looking after the
retreating Overland Mail stage which conveyed her father to Virginia
City. "He may never return again," sighed the young girl, as she
glanced at the frightfully rolling vehicle and wildly careering
horses,--"at least, with unbroken bones. Should he meet with an
accident! I mind me now a fearful legend, familiar to my childhood.
Can it be that the drivers on this line are privately instructed to
dispatch all passengers maimed by accident, to prevent tedious
litigation? No, no. But why this weight upon my heart?"

She seated herself at the piano and lightly passed her hand over the
keys. Then, in a clear mezzo-soprano voice, she sang the first verse
of one of the most popular Irish ballads:--

  "O _Arrah ma dheelish_, the distant _dudheen_
   Lies soft in the moonlight, _ma bouchal vourneen_:
   The springing _gossoons_ on the heather are still,
   And the _caubeens_ and _colleens_ are heard on the hill."

But as the ravishing notes of her sweet voice died upon the air, her
hands sank listlessly to her side. Music could not chase away the
mysterious shadow from her heart. Again she rose. Putting on a white
crape bonnet, and carefully drawing a pair of lemon-colored gloves
over her taper fingers, she seized her parasol and plunged into the
depths of the pine forest.


CHAPTER IV


Genevra had not proceeded many miles before a weariness seized upon
her fragile limbs, and she would fain seat herself upon the trunk of a
prostrate pine, which she  previously dusted with her handkerchief.
The sun was just sinking below the horizon, and the scene was one of
gorgeous and sylvan beauty. "How beautiful is nature!" murmured the
innocent girl, as, reclining gracefully against the root of the tree,
she gathered up her skirts and tied a handkerchief around her throat.
But a low growl interrupted her meditation. Starting to her feet, her
eyes met a sight which froze her blood with terror.

The only outlet to the forest was the narrow path, barely wide enough
for a single person, hemmed in by trees and rocks, which she had just
traversed. Down this path, in Indian file, came a monstrous grizzly,
closely followed by a California lion, a wild cat, and a buffalo, the
rear being brought up by a wild Spanish bull. The mouths of the three
first animals were distended with frightful significance, the horns of
the last were lowered as ominously. As Genevra was preparing to faint,
she heard a low voice behind her.

"Eternally dog-gone my skin ef this ain't the puttiest chance yet!"
At the same moment, a long, shining barrel dropped lightly from behind
her, and rested over her shoulder.

Genevra shuddered.

"Dern ye--don't move!"

Genevra became motionless.

The crack of a rifle rang through the woods. Three frightful yells
were heard, and two sullen roars. Five animals bounded into the air
and five lifeless bodies lay upon the plain. The well-aimed bullet had
done its work. Entering the open throat of the grizzly it had
traversed his body only to enter the throat of the California lion,
and in like manner the catamount, until it passed through into the
respective foreheads of the bull and the buffalo, and finally fell
flattened from the rocky hillside.

Genevra turned quickly. "My preserver!" she shrieked, and fell into
the arms of Natty Bumpo, the celebrated Pike Ranger of Donner Lake.


CHAPTER V


The moon rose cheerfully above Donner Lake. On its placid bosom a dug-
out canoe glided rapidly, containing Natty Bumpo and Genevra Tompkins.

Both were silent. The same thought possessed each, and perhaps there
was sweet companionship even in the unbroken quiet. Genevra bit the
handle of her parasol, and blushed. Natty Bumpo took a fresh chew of
tobacco. At length Genevra said, as if in half-spoken reverie:--

"The soft shining of the moon and the peaceful ripple of the waves
seem to say to us various things of an instructive and moral
tendency."

"You may bet yer pile on that, miss," said her companion gravely.
"It's all the preachin' and psalm-singin' I've heern since I was a
boy." "Noble being!" said Miss Tompkins to herself, glancing  at the
stately Pike as he bent over his paddle to conceal his emotion.
"Reared in this wild seclusion, yet he has become penetrated with
visible consciousness of a Great First Cause." Then, collecting
herself, she said aloud: "Methinks 't were pleasant to glide ever thus
down the stream of life, hand in hand with the one being whom the soul
claims as its affinity. But what am I saying?"--and the delicate-
minded girl hid her face in her hands.

A long silence ensued, which was at length broken by her companion.

"Ef you mean you're on the marry," he said thoughtfully, "I ain't in
no wise partikler."

"My husband!" faltered the blushing girl; and she fell into his arms.


In ten minutes more the loving couple had landed at Judge Tompkins's.


CHAPTER VI


A year has passed away. Natty Bumpo was returning from Gold Hill,
where he had been to purchase provisions. On his way to Donner Lake,
rumors of an Indian uprising met his ears. "Dern their pesky skins, ef
they dare to touch my Jenny," he muttered between his clenched teeth.

It was dark when he reached the borders of the lake. Around a
glittering fire he dimly discerned dusky figures dancing. They were in
war paint. Conspicuous among them was the renowned Muck-a-Muck. But
why did the fingers of Natty Bumpo tighten convulsively around his
rifle?

The chief held in his hand long tufts of raven hair. The heart of the
pioneer sickened as he recognized the clustering curls of Genevra. In
a moment his rifle was at his shoulder, and with a sharp "ping" Muck-
a-Muck leaped into the air a corpse. To knock out the brains of the
remaining  savages, tear the tresses from the stiffening hand of Muck-
a-Muck, and dash rapidly forward to the cottage of Judge Tompkins, was
the work of a moment.

He burst open the door. Why did he stand transfixed with open mouth
and distended eyeballs? Was the sight too horrible to be borne? On the
contrary, before him, in her peerless beauty, stood Genevra Tompkins,
leaning on her father's arm.

"Ye'r not scalped, then!" gasped her lover.

"No. I have no hesitation in saying that I am not; but why this
abruptness?" responded Genevra.

Bumpo could not speak, but frantically produced the silken tresses.
Genevra turned her face aside.

"Why, that's her waterfall!" said the Judge.

Bumpo sank fainting to the floor.

The famous Pike chieftain never recovered from the deceit, and refused
to marry Genevra, who died, twenty years afterwards, of a broken
heart. Judge Tompkins lost his fortune in Wild Cat. The stage passes
twice a week the deserted cottage at Donner Lake. Thus was the death
of Muck-a-Muck avenged.


SELINA SEDILIA

BY MISS M. E. B-DD-N AND MRS. H-N-Y W-D.


CHAPTER I


The sun was setting over Sloperton Grange, and reddened the window of
the lonely chamber in the western tower, supposed to be haunted by Sir
Edward Sedilia, the founder of the Grange. In the dreamy distance
arose the gilded mausoleum of Lady Felicia Sedilia, who haunted that
portion of Sedilia Manor known as "Stiff-uns Acre." A little to the
left of the Grange might have been seen a mouldering ruin, known as
"Guy's Keep," haunted by the spirit of Sir Guy Sedilia, who was found,
one morning, crushed by one of the fallen battlements. Yet, as the
setting sun gilded these objects, a beautiful and almost holy calm
seemed diffused about the Grange.

The Lady Selina sat by an oriel window overlooking the park. The sun
sank gently in the bosom of the German Ocean, and yet the lady did not
lift her beautiful head from the finely curved arm and diminutive hand
which supported it. When darkness finally shrouded the landscape she
started, for the sound of horse-hoofs clattered over the stones of the
avenue. She had scarcely risen, before an aristocratic young man fell
on his knees before her.

"My Selina!"

"Edgardo! You here?"

"Yes, dearest."

"And--you--you--have--seen nothing?" said the  lady in an agitated
voice and nervous manner, turning her face aside to conceal her
emotion.

"Nothing--that is, nothing of any account," said Edgardo. "I passed
the ghost of your aunt in the park, noticed the spectre of your uncle
in the ruined keep, and observed the familiar features of the spirit
of your great-grandfather at his usual post. But nothing beyond these
trifles, my Selina. Nothing more, love, absolutely nothing."

The young man turned his dark, liquid orbs fondly upon the ingenuous
face of his betrothed.

"My own Edgardo!--and you still love me? You still would marry me in
spite of this dark mystery which surrounds me? In spite of the fatal
history of my race? In spite of the ominous predictions of my aged
nurse?"

"I would, Selina;" and the young man passed his arm around her
yielding waist. The two lovers gazed at each other's faces in
unspeakable bliss. Suddenly Selina started.

"Leave me, Edgardo! leave me! A mysterious something--a fatal
misgiving--a dark ambiguity--an equivocal mistrust oppresses me. I
would be alone!"

The young man arose, and cast a loving glance on the lady. "Then we
will be married on the seventeenth."

"The seventeenth," repeated Selina, with a mysterious shudder.

They embraced and parted. As the clatter of hoofs in the courtyard
died away, the Lady Selina sank into the chair she had just quitted.

"The seventeenth," she repeated slowly, with the same fateful shudder.
"Ah!--what if he should know that I have another husband living? Dare
I reveal to him that I have two legitimate and three natural children?
Dare I repeat to him the history of my youth? Dare I confess that at
the age of seven I poisoned my sister, by putting verdigris in her
cream-tarts,--that I threw my cousin from a swing at the age of
twelve? That the lady's maid who  incurred the displeasure of my
girlhood now lies at the bottom of the horse-pond? No! no! he is too
pure,--too good,--too innocent,--to hear such improper conversation!"
and her whole body writhed as she rocked to and fro in a paroxysm of
grief.

But she was soon calm. Rising to her feet, she opened a secret panel
in the wall, and revealed a slow-match ready for lighting.

"This match," said the Lady Selina, "is connected with a mine beneath
the western tower, where my three children are confined; another
branch of it lies under the parish church, where the record of my
first marriage is kept. I have only to light this match and the whole
of my past life is swept away!" She approached the match with a
lighted candle.

But a hand was laid upon her arm, and with a shriek the Lady Selina
fell on her knees before the spectre of Sir Guy.


CHAPTER II


"Forbear, Selina," said the phantom in a hollow voice.

"Why should I forbear?" responded Selina haughtily, as she recovered
her courage. "You know the secret of our race?"

"I do. Understand me,--I do not object to the eccentricities of your
youth. I know the fearful destiny which, pursuing you, led you to
poison your sister and drown your lady's maid. I know the awful doom
which I have brought upon this house. But if you make away with these
children"--

"Well," said the Lady Selina hastily.

"They will haunt you!"

"Well, I fear them not," said Selina, drawing her superb figure to its
full height.

"Yes, but, my dear child, what place are they to haunt? The ruin is
sacred to your uncle's spirit. Your aunt monopolizes the park, and, I
must be allowed to state, not unfrequently trespasses upon the grounds
of others. The horse-pond is frequented by the spirit of your maid,
and your murdered sister walks these corridors. To be plain, there is
no room at Sloperton Grange for another ghost. I cannot have them in
my room,--for you know I don't like children. Think of this, rash
girl, and forbear! Would you, Selina," said the phantom mournfully,--
"would you force your great-grandfather's spirit to take lodgings
elsewhere?"

Lady Selina's hand trembled; the lighted candle fell from her
nerveless fingers.

"No," she cried passionately; "never!" and fell fainting to the floor.


CHAPTER III


Edgardo galloped rapidly towards Sloperton. When the outline of the
Grange had faded away in the darkness, he reined his magnificent steed
beside the ruins of Guy's Keep.

"It wants but a few minutes of the hour," he said, consulting his
watch by the light of the moon. "He dare not break his word. He will
come." He paused, and peered anxiously into the darkness. "But come
what may, she is mine," he continued, as his thoughts reverted fondly
to the fair lady he had quitted. "Yet if she knew all. If she knew
that I am a disgraced and ruined man,--a felon and an outcast. If she
knew that at the age of fourteen I murdered my Latin tutor and forged
my uncle's will. If she knew that I had three wives already, and that
the fourth victim of misplaced confidence and my unfortunate
peculiarity is expected to be at Sloperton by to-night's train with
her baby. But no; she must not know it. Constance must not arrive;
Burke the Slogger must attend to that.

"Ha! here he is! Well?"

These words were addressed to a ruffian in a slouched hat, who
suddenly appeared from Guy's Keep.

"I he's here, measter," said the villain, with a disgracefully low
accent and complete disregard of grammatical rules.

"It is well. Listen: I'm in possession of facts that will send you to
the gallows. I know of the murder of Bill Smithers, the robbery of the
tollgate-keeper, and the making away of the youngest daughter of Sir
Reginald de Walton. A word from me, and the officers of justice are on
your track."

Burke the Slogger trembled.

"Hark ye! serve my purpose, and I may yet save you. The 5.30 train
from Clapham will be due at Sloperton at 9.25. _It must not arrive!_"

The villain's eyes sparkled as he nodded at Edgardo.

"Enough,--you understand; leave me!"


CHAPTER IV


About half a mile from Sloperton Station the South Clapham and Medway
line crossed a bridge over Sloperton-on-Trent. As the shades of
evening were closing, a man in a slouched hat might have been seen,
carrying a saw and axe under his arm, hanging about the bridge. From
time to time he disappeared in the shadow of its abutments, but the
sound of a saw and axe still betrayed his vicinity. At exactly nine
o'clock he reappeared, and crossing to the Sloperton side, rested his
shoulder against the abutment and gave a shove. The bridge swayed a
moment, and then fell with a splash into the water, leaving a space of
one hundred feet between the two banks. This done, Burke the Slogger,
--for it was he,--with a fiendish chuckle  seated himself on the
divided railway track and awaited the coming of the train.

A shriek from the woods announced its approach. For an instant Burke
the Slogger saw the glaring of a red lamp. The ground trembled. The
train was going with fearful rapidity. Another second and it had
reached the bank. Burke the Slogger uttered a fiendish laugh. But the
next moment the train leaped across the chasm, striking the rails
exactly even, and dashing out the life of Burke the Slogger, sped away
to Sloperton.

The first object that greeted Edgardo, as he rode up to the station on
the arrival of the train, was the body of Burke the Slogger hanging on
the cowcatcher; the second was the face of his deserted wife looking
from the window of a second-class carriage.


CHAPTER V


A nameless terror seemed to have taken possession of Clarissa, Lady
Selina's maid, as she rushed into the presence of her mistress.

"Oh, my lady, such news!"

"Explain yourself," said her mistress, rising.

"An accident has happened on the railway, and a man has been killed."

"What--not Edgardo!" almost screamed Selina.

"No, Burke the Slogger, your ladyship!"

"My first husband!" said Lady Selina, sinking on her knees. "Just
Heaven, I thank thee!"


CHAPTER VI


The morning of the seventeenth dawned brightly over Sloperton. "A fine
day for the wedding," said the sexton to Swipes, the butler of
Sloperton Grange. The aged retainer shook his head sadly. "Alas!
there's no trusting in signs!" he continued. "Seventy-five years ago,
on a day like this, my young mistress"--but he was cut short by the
appearance of a stranger.

"I would see Sir Edgardo," said the new-comer impatiently.

The bridegroom, who, with the rest of the wedding-train, was about
stepping into the carriage to proceed to the parish church, drew the
stranger aside.

"I's done!" said the stranger, in a hoarse whisper.

"Ah! and you buried her?"

"With the others!"

"Enough. No more at present. Meet me after the ceremony, and you shall
have your reward."

The stranger shuffled away, and Edgardo returned to his bride. "A
trifling matter of business I had forgotten, my dear Selina; let us
proceed." And the young man pressed the timid hand of his blushing
bride as he handed her into the carriage. The cavalcade rode out of
the courtyard. At the same moment, the deep bell on Guy's Keep tolled
ominously.


CHAPTER VII


Scarcely had the wedding-train left the Grange, than Alice Sedilia,
youngest daughter of Lady Selina, made her escape from the western
tower, owing to a lack of watchfulness on the part of Clarissa. The
innocent child, freed from restraint, rambled through the lonely
corridors, and  finally, opening a door, found herself in her mother's
boudoir. For some time she amused herself by examining the various
ornaments and elegant trifles with which it was filled. Then, in
pursuance of a childish freak, she dressed herself in her mother's
laces and ribbons. In this occupation she chanced to touch a peg which
proved to be a spring that opened a secret panel in the wall. Alice
uttered a cry of delight as she noticed what, to her childish fancy,
appeared to be the slow-match of a firework. Taking a lucifer match in
her hand she approached the fuse. She hesitated a moment. What would
her mother and her nurse say?

Suddenly the ringing of the chimes of Sloperton parish church met her
ear. Alice knew that the sound signified that the marriage-party had
entered the church, and that she was secure from interruption. With a
childish smile upon her lips, Alice Sedilia touched off the slow-
match.


CHAPTER VIII


At exactly two o'clock on the seventeenth, Rupert Sedilia, who had
just returned from India, was thoughtfully descending the hill toward
Sloperton manor. "If I can prove that my aunt, Lady Selina, was
married before my father died, I can establish my claim to Sloperton
Grange," he uttered, half aloud. He paused, for a sudden trembling of
the earth beneath his feet, and a terrific explosion, as of a park of
artillery, arrested his progress. At the same moment he beheld a dense
cloud of smoke envelop the churchyard of Sloperton, and the western
tower of the Grange seemed to be lifted bodily from its foundation.
The air seemed filled with falling fragments, and two dark objects
struck the earth close at his feet. Rupert picked them up. One seemed
to be a heavy volume bound in brass.    A cry burst from, his lips.

"The Parish Records." He opened the volume hastily. It contained the
marriage of Lady Selina to "Burke the Slogger."

The second object proved to be a piece of parchment. He tore it open
with trembling fingers. It was the missing will of Sir James Sedilia!


CHAPTER IX


When the bells again rang on the new parish church of Sloperton it was
for the marriage of Sir Rupert Sedilia and his cousin, the only
remaining members of the family.

Five more ghosts were added to the supernatural population of
Sloperton Grange. Perhaps this was the reason why Sir Rupert sold the
property shortly afterward, and that for many years a dark shadow
seemed to hang over the ruins of Sloperton Grange.


THE NINETY-NINE GUARDSMEN

BY AL-X-D-R D-M-S


CHAPTER I

SHOWING THE QUALITY OF THE CUSTOMERS OF THE INNKEEPER OF PROVINS


Twenty years after, the gigantic innkeeper of Provins stood looking at
a cloud of dust on the highway.

This cloud of dust betokened the approach of a traveler. Travelers had
been rare that season on the highway between Paris and Provins.

The heart of the innkeeper rejoiced. Turning to Dame Perigord, his
wife, he said, stroking his white apron,--

"St. Denis! make haste and spread the cloth. Add a bottle of
Charlevoix to the table. This traveler, who rides so fast, by his pace
must be a monseigneur."

Truly the traveler, clad in the uniform of a musketeer, as he drew up
to the door of the hostelry, did not seem to have spared his horse.
Throwing his reins to the landlord, he leaped lightly to the ground.
He was a young man of four and twenty, and spoke with a slight Gascon
accent.

"I am hungry, morbleu! I wish to dine!"

The gigantic innkeeper bowed and led the way to a neat apartment,
where a table stood covered with tempting viands. The musketeer at
once set to work. Fowls, fish, and pates disappeared before him.
Perigord sighed as he witnessed the devastations. Only once the
stranger paused.

"Wine!" Perigord brought wine. The stranger drank a dozen bottles.
Finally he rose to depart. Turning to the expectant landlord, he
said,--

"Charge it."

"To whom, your highness?" said Perigord anxiously.

"To his Eminence!"

"Mazarin?" ejaculated the innkeeper.

"The same. Bring me my horse," and the musketeer, remounting his
favorite animal, rode away.

The innkeeper slowly turned back into the inn. Scarcely had he reached
the courtyard before the clatter of hoofs again called him to the
doorway. A young musketeer of a light and graceful figure rode up.

"Parbleu, my dear Perigord, I am famishing. What have you got for
dinner?"

"Venison, capons, larks, and pigeons, your excellency," replied the
obsequious landlord, bowing to the ground.

"Enough!" The young musketeer dismounted, and entered the inn. Seating
himself at the table replenished by the careful Perigord, he speedily
swept it as clean as the first comer.

"Some wine, my brave Perigord," said the graceful young musketeer, as
soon as he could find utterance.

Perigord brought three dozen of Charlevoix. The young man emptied them
almost at a draught.

"By-by, Perigord," he said lightly, waving his hand, as, preceding the
astonished landlord, he slowly withdrew.

"But, your highness,--the bill," said the astounded Perigord.

"Ah, the bill. Charge it!"

"To whom?"

"The Queen!"

"What, Madame?"

"The same. Adieu, my good Perigord." And the graceful stranger rode
away. An interval of quiet succeeded,    in which the innkeeper gazed
woefully at his wife. Suddenly he was startled by a clatter of hoofs,
and an aristocratic figure stood in the doorway.

"Ah," said the courtier good-naturedly. "What, do my eyes deceive me?
No, it is the festive and luxurious Perigord. Perigord, listen. I
famish. I languish. I would dine."

The innkeeper again covered the table with viands. Again it was swept
clean as the fields of Egypt before the miraculous swarm of locusts.
The stranger looked up.

"Bring me another fowl, my Perigord."

"Impossible, your excellency; the larder is stripped clean."

"Another flitch of bacon, then."

"Impossible, your highness; there is no more."

"Well, then, wine!"

The landlord brought one hundred and forty-four bottles. The courtier
drank them all.

"One may drink if one cannot eat," said the aristocratic stranger
good-humoredly.

The innkeeper shuddered.

The guest rose to depart. The innkeeper came slowly forward with his
bill, to which he had covertly added the losses which he had suffered
from the previous strangers.

"Ah, the bill. Charge it."

"Charge it! to whom?"

"To the King," said the guest.

"What! his Majesty?"

"Certainly. Farewell, Perigord."

The innkeeper groaned. Then he went out and took down his sign. Then
remarked to his wife,--

"I am a plain man, and don't understand politics. It seems, however,
that the country is in a troubled state. Between his Eminence the
Cardinal, his Majesty the King, and her Majesty the Queen, I am a
ruined man."

"Stay," said Dame Perigord, "I have an idea."

"And that is"--

"Become yourself a musketeer."


CHAPTER II

THE COMBAT


On leaving Provins the first musketeer proceeded to Nangis, where he
was reinforced by thirty-three followers. The second musketeer,
arriving at Nangis at the same moment, placed himself at the head of
thirty-three more. The third guest of the landlord of Provins arrived
at Nangis in time to assemble together thirty-three other musketeers.

The first stranger led the troops of his Eminence.

The second led the troops of the Queen.

The third led the troops of the King.

The fight commenced. It raged terribly for seven hours. The first
musketeer killed thirty of the Queen's troops. The second musketeer
killed thirty of the King's troops. The third musketeer killed thirty
of his Eminence's troops.

By this time it will be perceived the number of musketeers had been
narrowed down to four on each side.

Naturally the three principal warriors approached each other.

They simultaneously uttered a cry.

"Aramis!"

"Athos!"

"D'Artagnan!"

They fell into each other's arms.

"And it seems that we are fighting against each other, my children,"
said the Count de la Fere mournfully.

"How singular!" exclaimed Aramis and D'Artagnan.

"Let us stop this fratricidal warfare," said Athos.

"We will!" they exclaimed together.

"But how to disband our followers?" queried D'Artagnan.

Aramis winked. They understood each other. "Let us cut 'em down!"

They cut 'em down. Aramis killed three. D'Artagnan three. Athos three.

The friends again embraced. "How like old times!" said Aramis. "How
touching!" exclaimed the serious and philosophic Count de la Fere.

The galloping of hoofs caused them to withdraw from each other's
embraces. A gigantic figure rapidly approached.

"The innkeeper of Provins!" they cried, drawing their swords.

"Perigord! down with him!" shouted D'Artagnan.

"Stay," said Athos.

The gigantic figure was beside them. He uttered a cry.

"Athos, Aramis, D'Artagnan!"

"Porthos!" exclaimed the astonished trio.

"The same." They all fell in each other's arms.

The Count de la Fere slowly raised his hands to heaven. "Bless you!
Bless us, my children! However different our opinion may be in regard
to politics, we have but one opinion in regard to  our own merits.
Where can you find a better man than Aramis?"

"Than Porthos?" said Aramis.

"Than D'Artagnan?" said Porthos.

"Than Athos?" said D'Artagnan.


CHAPTER III

SHOWING HOW THE KING OF FRANCE WENT UP A LADDER


The King descended into the garden. Proceeding cautiously along the
terraced walk, he came to the wall immediately below the windows of
Madame. To the left were two windows, concealed by vines. They opened
into the apartments of La Valliere.

The King sighed.

"It is about nineteen feet to that window," said the King. "If I had a
ladder about nineteen feet long, it would reach to that window. This
is logic."

Suddenly the King stumbled over something. "St. Denis!" he exclaimed,
looking down. It was a ladder, just nineteen feet long.

The King placed it against the wall. In so doing, he fixed the lower
end upon the abdomen of a man who lay concealed by the wall. The man
did not utter a cry or wince. The King suspected nothing. He ascended
the ladder.

The ladder was too short. Louis the Grand was not a tall man. He was
still two feet below the window.

"Dear me!" said the King.

Suddenly the ladder was lifted two feet from below. This enabled the
King to leap in the window. At the farther end of the apartment stood
a young girl, with red hair and a lame leg. She was trembling with
emotion.

"Louise!"

"The King!"

"Ah, my God, mademoiselle."   "Ah, my God, sire."

But a low knock at the door interrupted the lovers. The King uttered a
cry of rage; Louise one of despair.    The door opened and D'Artagnan
entered.

"Good-evening, sire," said the musketeer.

The King touched a bell. Porthos appeared in the doorway.

"Good-evening, sire."

"Arrest M. D'Artagnan."

Porthos looked at D'Artagnan, and did not move.

The King almost turned purple with rage. He again touched the hell.
Athos entered. "Count, arrest Porthos and D'Artagnan."

The Count de la Fere glanced at Porthos and D'Artagnan, and smiled
sweetly.

"Sacre! Where is Aramis?" said the King violently.

"Here, sire," and Aramis entered.

"Arrest Athos, Porthos, and D'Artagnan."

Aramis bowed and folded his arms.

"Arrest yourself!"

Aramis did not move.

The King shuddered and turned pale. "Am I not King of France?"

"Assuredly, sire, but we are also, severally, Porthos, Aramis,
D'Artagnan, and Athos."

"Ah!" said the King.

"Yes, sire."

"What does this mean?"

"It means, your Majesty," said Aramis, stepping forward, "that your
conduct as a married man is highly improper. I am an abbe, and I
object to these improprieties. My friends here, D'Artagnan, Athos, and
Porthos, pure-minded young men, are also terribly shocked. Observe,
sire, how they blush!"

Athos, Porthos, and D'Artagnan blushed.

"Ah," said the King thoughtfully. "You teach me a lesson. You are
devoted and noble young gentlemen, but your only weakness is your
excessive modesty. From this    moment I make you all marshals and
dukes, with the exception of Aramis."

"And me, sire?" said Aramis.

"You shall be an archbishop!"

The four friends looked up and then rushed into each other's arms. The
King embraced Louise de la Valliere, by way of keeping them company. A
pause ensued. At last Athos spoke,--

"Swear, my children, that, next to yourselves, you will respect--the
King of France; and remember that 'Forty years after' we will meet
again."


MISS MIX

BY CH-L-TTE BR-NTE


CHAPTER I


My earliest impressions are of a huge, misshapen rock, against which
the hoarse waves beat unceasingly. On this rock three pelicans are
standing in a defiant attitude. A dark sky lowers in the background,
while two sea-gulls and a gigantic cormorant eye with extreme disfavor
the floating corpse of a drowned woman in the foreground. A few
bracelets, coral necklaces, and other articles of jewelry, scattered
around loosely, complete this remarkable picture.

It is one which, in some vague, unconscious way, symbolizes, to my
fancy, the character of a man. I have never been able to explain
exactly why. I think I must have seen the picture in some illustrated
volume when a baby, or my mother may have dreamed it before I was
born.

As a child I was not handsome. When I consulted the triangular bit of
looking-glass which I always carried with me, it showed a pale, sandy,
and freckled face, shaded by locks like the color of seaweed when the
sun strikes it in deep water. My eyes were said to be indistinctive;
they were a faint, ashen gray; but above them rose--my only beauty--a
high, massive, domelike forehead, with polished temples, like door-
knobs of the purest porcelain.

Our family was a family of governesses. My mother had been one, and my
sisters had the same occupation. Consequently, when, at the age of
thirteen, my eldest sister  handed me the advertisement of Mr.
Rawjester, clipped from that day's "Times," I accepted it as my
destiny. Nevertheless, a mysterious presentiment of an indefinite
future haunted me in my dreams that night, as I lay upon my little
snow-white bed. The next morning, with two band-boxes tied up in silk
handkerchiefs, and a hair trunk, I turned my back upon Minerva Cottage
forever.


CHAPTER II


Blunderbore Hall, the seat of James Rawjester, Esq., was encompassed
by dark pines and funereal hemlocks on all sides. The wind sang
weirdly in the turrets and moaned through the long-drawn avenues of
the park. As I approached the house I saw several mysterious figures
flit before the windows, and a yell of demoniac laughter answered my
summons at the bell. While I strove to repress my gloomy forebodings,
the housekeeper, a timid, scared-looking old woman, showed me into the
library.

I entered, overcome with conflicting emotions. I was dressed in a
narrow gown of dark serge, trimmed with black bugles. A thick green
shawl was pinned across my breast. My hands were encased with black
half-mittens worked with steel beads; on my feet were large pattens,
originally the property of my deceased grandmother. I carried a blue
cotton umbrella. As I passed before a mirror I could not help glancing
at it, nor could I disguise from myself the fact that I was not
handsome.

Drawing a chair into a recess, I sat down with folded hands, calmly
awaiting the arrival of my master. Once or twice a fearful yell rang
through the house, or the rattling of chains, and curses uttered in a
deep, manly voice, broke upon the oppressive stillness. I began to
feel my soul rising with the emergency of the moment.   "You look
alarmed, miss. You don't hear anything, my dear, do you?" asked the
housekeeper nervously.

"Nothing whatever," I remarked calmly, as a terrific scream, followed
by the dragging of chairs and tables in the room above, drowned for a
moment my reply. "It is the silence, on the contrary, which has made
me foolishly nervous."

The housekeeper looked at me approvingly, and instantly made some tea
for me.

I drank seven cups; as I was beginning the eighth, I heard a crash,
and the next moment a man leaped into the room through the broken
window.


CHAPTER III


The crash startled me from my self-control. The housekeeper bent
toward me and whispered,--

"Don't be excited. It's Mr. Rawjester,--he prefers to come in
sometimes in this way. It's his playfulness, ha! ha! ha!"

"I perceive," I said calmly. "It's the unfettered impulse of a lofty
soul breaking the tyrannizing bonds of custom." And I turned toward
him.

He had never once looked at me. He stood with his back to the fire,
which set off the herculean breadth of his shoulders. His face was
dark and expressive; his under jaw squarely formed, and remarkably
heavy. I was struck with his remarkable likeness to a gorilla.

As he absently tied the poker into hard knots with his nervous
fingers, I watched him with some interest. Suddenly he turned toward
me:--

"Do you think I'm handsome, young woman?"

"Not classically beautiful," I returned calmly; "but you have, if I
may so express myself, an abstract manliness,--a sincere and wholesome
barbarity which, involving as it does the naturalness"--But I stopped,
for he yawned at that moment,--an action which singularly developed
the immense breadth of his lower jaw,--and I saw he had forgotten me.
Presently he turned to the houskeeper,--

"Leave us."

The old woman withdrew with a curtsey.

Mr. Rawjester deliberately turned his back upon me and remained silent
for twenty minutes. I drew my shawl the more closely around my
shoulders and closed my eyes.

"You are the governess?" at length he said.

"I am, sir."

"A creature who teaches geography, arithmetic, and the use of the
globes--ha!--a wretched remnant of femininity,--a skimp pattern of
girlhood with a premature flavor of tea-leaves and morality. Ugh!"

I bowed my head silently.

"Listen to me, girl!" he said sternly; "this child you have come to
teach--my ward--is not legitimate. She is the offspring of my
mistress,--a common harlot. Ah! Miss Mix, what do you think of me
now?"

"I admire," I replied calmly, "your sincerity. A mawkish regard for
delicacy might have kept this disclosure to yourself. I only recognize
in your frankness that perfect community of thought and sentiment
which should exist between original natures."  I looked up; he had
already forgotten my presence, and was engaged in pulling off his
boots and coat. This done, he sank down in an armchair before the
fire, and ran the poker wearily through his hair. I could not help
pitying him.

The wind howled dismally without, and the rain beat furiously against
the windows. I crept toward him and seated myself on a low stool
beside his chair.

Presently he turned, without seeing me, and placed his  foot absently
in my lap. I affected not to notice it. But he started and looked
down.

"You here yet--Carrothead? Ah, I forgot. Do you speak French?"

"Oui, Monsier."

"Taisez-vous!" he said sharply, with singular purity of accent. I
complied. The wind moaned fearfully in the chimney, and the light
burned dimly. I shuddered in spite of myself. "Ah, you tremble, girl!"

"It is a fearful night."

"Fearful! Call you this fearful? Ha! ha! ha! Look! you wretched little
atom, look!" and he dashed forward, and, leaping out of the window,
stood like a statue in the pelting storm, with folded arms. He did not
stay long, but in a few minutes returned by way of the hall chimney. I
saw from the way that he wiped his feet on my dress that he had again
forgotten my presence.

"You are a governess. What can you teach?" he asked, suddenly and
fiercely thrusting his face in mine.

"Manners!" I replied calmly.

"Ha! teach _me!_"

"You mistake yourself," I said, adjusting my mittens. "Your manners
require not the artificial restraint of society. You are radically
polite; this impetuosity and ferociousness is simply the sincerity
which is the basis of a proper deportment. Your instincts are moral;
your better nature, I see, is religious. As St. Paul justly remarks--
see chap. 6, 8, 9, and 10 "--

He seized a heavy candlestick, and threw it at me. I dodged it
submissively but firmly.

"Excuse me," he remarked, as his under jaw slowly relaxed. "Excuse me,
Miss Mix--but I can't stand St. Paul! Enough--you are engaged."


CHAPTER IV


I followed the housekeeper as she led the way timidly to my room. As
we passed into a dark hall in the wing, I noticed that it was closed
by an iron gate with a grating. Three of the doors on the corridor
were likewise grated. A strange noise, as of shuffling feet and the
howling of infuriated animals, rang through the hall. Bidding the
housekeeper good-night, and taking the candle, I entered my
bedchamber.

I took off my dress, and putting on a yellow flannel nightgown, which
I could not help feeling did not agree with my complexion, I composed
myself to rest by reading Blair's "Rhetoric" and Paley's "Moral
Philosophy." I had just put out the light, when I heard voices in the
corridor. I listened attentively. I recognized Mr. Rawjester's stern
tones.

"Have you fed No. One?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," said a gruff voice, apparently belonging to a domestic.

"How's No. Two?"

"She's a little off her feed, just now, but will pick up in a day or
two."

"And No. Three?"

"Perfectly furious, sir. Her tantrums are ungovernable."

"Hush!"

The voices died away, and I sank into a fitful slumber.

I dreamed that I was wandering through a tropical forest. Suddenly I
saw the figure of a gorilla approaching me. As it neared me, I
recognized the features of Mr. Rawjester. He held his hand to his side
as if in pain. I saw that he had been wounded. He recognized me and
called me by name, but at the same moment the vision changed to an
Ashantee village, where, around the fire, a group of negroes were
dancing and participating in some wild Obi festival. I awoke with the
strain still ringing in my ears.

"Hokee-pokee wokee fum!"

Good Heavens! could I be dreaming? I heard the voice distinctly on the
floor below, and smelt something burning. I arose, with an indistinct
presentiment of evil, and hastily putting some cotton in my ears and
tying a towel about my head, I wrapped myself in a shawl and rushed
downstairs. The door of Mr. Rawjester's room was open. I entered.

Mr. Rawjester lay apparently in a deep slumber, from which even the
clouds of smoke that came from the burning curtains of his bed could
not rouse him. Around the room a large and powerful negress, scantily
attired, with her head adorned with feathers, was dancing wildly,
accompanying herself with bone castanets. It looked like some terrible
fetich.

I did not lose my calmness. After firmly emptying the pitcher, basin,
and slop-jar on the burning bed, I proceeded cautiously to the garden,
and returning with the garden engine, I directed a small stream at Mr.
Rawjester.

At my entrance the gigantic negress fled. Mr. Rawjester yawned and
woke. I explained to him, as he rose dripping from the bed, the reason
of my presence. He did not seem to be excited, alarmed, or
discomposed. He gazed at me curiously.

"So you risked your life to save mine, eh? you canary-colored teacher
of infants."

I blushed modestly, and drew my shawl tightly over my yellow flannel
nightgown.

"You love me, Mary Jane,--don't deny it! This trembling shows it!" He
drew me closely toward him, and said, with his deep voice tenderly
modulated,--"How's her pooty tootens,--did she get her 'ittle tootens
wet,--b'ess her?"

I understood his allusion to my feet. I glanced down and saw that in
my hurry I had put on a pair of his old india-rubbers. My feet were
not small or pretty, and the addition did not add to their beauty.

"Let me go, sir," I remarked quietly. "This is entirely improper; it
sets a bad example for your child." And I firmly but gently extricated
myself from his grasp. I approached the door. He seemed for a moment
buried in deep thought.

"You say this was a negress?"

"Yes, sir."

"Humph, Number One, I suppose."

"Who is Number One, sir?"

"My _first_," he remarked, with a significant and sarcastic smile.
Then, relapsing into his old manner, he threw his boots at my head, and
bade me begone. I withdrew calmly.


CHAPTER V


My pupil was a bright little girl, who spoke French with a perfect
accent. Her mother had been a "French ballet-dancer, which probably
accounted for it. Although she was only six years old, it was easy to
perceive that she had been several times in love. She once said to
me,--

"Miss Mix, did you ever have the grande passion? Did you ever feel a
fluttering here?" and she placed her hand upon her small chest, and
sighed quaintly; "a kind of distaste for bonbons and caramels, when
the world seemed as tasteless and hollow as a broken cordial drop?"

"Then you have felt it, Nina?" I said quietly.

"Oh, dear, yes. There was Buttons,--that was our page, you know,--I
loved him dearly, but papa sent him away. Then there was Dick, the
groom; but he laughed at me, and I suffered misery!" and she struck a
tragic  French attitude. "There is to be company here to-morrow," she
added, rattling on with childish naivete, "and papa's sweetheart--
Blanche Marabout--is to be here. You know they say she is to be my
mamma."

What thrill was this shot through me? But I rose calmly, and
administering a slight correction to the child, left the apartment.

Blunderbore House, for the next week, was the scene of gayety and
merriment. That portion of the mansion closed with a grating was
walled up, and the midnight shrieks no longer troubled me.

But I felt more keenly the degradation of my situation. I was obliged
to help Lady Blanche at her toilet and help her to look beautiful. For
what? To captivate him? Oh--no, no,--but why this sudden thrill and
faintness? Did he really love her? I had seen him pinch and swear at
her. But I reflected that he had thrown a candlestick at my head, and
my foolish heart was reassured.

It was a night of festivity, when a sudden message obliged Mr.
Rawjester to leave his guests for a few hours. "Make yourselves merry,
idiots," he added, under his breath, as he passed me. The door closed
and he was gone.

A half-hour passed. In the midst of the dancing a shriek was heard,
and out of the swaying crowd of fainting women and excited men a wild
figure strode into the room. One glance showed it to be a highwayman,
heavily armed, holding a pistol in each hand.

"Let no one pass out of this room!" he said, in a voice of thunder.
"The house is surrounded and you cannot escape. The first one who
crosses yonder threshold will be shot like a dog. Gentlemen, I'll
trouble you to approach in single file, and hand me your purses and
watches."

Finding resistance useless, the order was ungraciously obeyed.

"Now, ladies, please to pass up your jewelry and trinkets."

This order was still more ungraciously complied with. As Blanche
handed to the bandit captain her bracelet, she endeavored to conceal a
diamond necklace, the gift of Mr. Rawjester, in her bosom. But, with a
demoniac grin, the powerful brute tore it from its concealment, and
administering a hearty box on the ear of the young girl, flung her
aside.

It was now my turn. With a beating heart I made my way to the robber
chieftain, and sank at his feet. "Oh, sir, I am nothing but a poor
governess, pray let me go."

"Oho! A governess? Give me your last month's wages, then. Give me what
you have stolen from your master!" and he laughed fiendishly.

I gazed at him quietly, and said, in a low voice: "I have stolen
nothing from you, Mr. Rawjester!"

"Ah, discovered! Hush! listen, girl!" he hissed, in a fierce whisper;
"utter a syllable to frustrate my plans, and you die; aid me, and"--
But he was gone.

In a few moments the party, with the exception of myself, were gagged
and locked in the cellar. The next moment torches were applied to the
rich hangings, and the house was in flames. I felt a strong hand seize
me, and bear me out in the open air and place me up on the hillside,
where I could overlook the burning mansion. It was Mr. Rawjester.
"Burn!" he said, as he shook his fist at the flames. Then sinking on
his knees before me, he said hurriedly,--

"Mary Jane, I love you; the obstacles to our union are or will be soon
removed. In yonder mansion were confined my three crazy wives. One of
them, as you know, attempted to kill me! Ha! this is vengeance! But
will you be mine?"

I fell, without a word, upon his neck.


MR. MIDSHIPMAN BEEEZY

A NAVAL OFFICER

BY CAPTAIN M-RRY-T, R. N.


CHAPTER I


My father was a north-country surgeon. He had retired, a widower, from
her Majesty's navy many years before, and had a small practice in his
native village. When I was seven years old he employed me to carry
medicines to his patients. Being of a lively disposition, I sometimes
amused myself, during my daily rounds, by mixing the contents of the
different phials. Although I had no reason to doubt that the general
result of this practice was beneficial, yet, as the death of a
consumptive curate followed the addition of a strong mercurial lotion
to his expectorant, my father concluded to withdraw me from the
profession and send me to school.


Grubbins, the schoolmaster, was a tyrant, and it was not long before
my impetuous and self-willed nature rebelled against his authority. I
soon began to form plans of revenge. In this I was assisted by Tom
Snaffle,--a schoolfellow. The wind has caught itself in a tree.

The pale sky seems in nets in the windows.

Autos creep like ladybugs mountaineer.

Soon there is a powerful downpour of.

A young boy who is pissing on oxen and a clump of trees. And all
around the huge green meadow. How lovely was to be rumpled, As
though it had run out of makeup. On long crutches, bent nearly in
half And chatting, two cripples creep across the field. A blond poet
perhaps goes mad. A little horse stumbles over a lady. countries.
Each person a meadow Will be the might be a light, And dark, A failing
god... they look upon every horny man As a sweet gentleman savior After
the Ball Night creeps into the cellars, musty and dull.

Tuxedos totter through the rubble of the street. Faces moldy. Dull
daily labor cloaks the people in dust source of a small river. What
should one do when nature calls! Be natural. Be yourself.. A poet roams
around in the world, Observes for himself the orderly flow of
traffic And rejoices about sky, field, and dung. Ah, and he takes
careful notice of everything. Then he climbs a her beloved woman.
Sunday Afternoon Packs of houses squat along high mountain Which
happens be close by. Return of Village Boy In my A fat man is stuck
to a window,. A boy wants to visit a soft woman. A gray clown puts
One plays dice. Guzzles.

Chatters about future youth on his boots.

A baby carriage shrieks and dogs curse. The Night Sleepy policemen
waddle under streetlights. Broken beggars Behold--I am in front of a
Streaming church. Large and quiet it takes me in. Here I shall
Throws green light Like a garment, grumble when they sense people.
On some corners powerful streetcars stutter. gentleman And cabs
drop into the ace.

Among rough houses whores forget back and forth, Sadly swinging their
ripe behinds.. A barrel organ howls and scullery maids sing.
A man is smashing a rotting woman.

The Excursion( Dedicated to Much sky lies broken in these dried-out
things...

Whiny cats painfully shriek bright songs. The This Cabaret in the
Suburbs The sweaty heads of waiters tower above the room Like lofty
and powerful capitals.

Lice-ridden boys giggle nastily. the And shining girls give painfully
beautiful looks October.

And distant women are so really excited...

They have hundreds of red, round hands, Still, large, without end
Placed around their high, motley bellies.

Most people are drinking yellow beer.

Grocers!, their cigarettes burning, gape. A fine young woman songs.

A young Jew plays the piano with great pleasure.

The Trip to the Mental Hospital Fat trains go down loud tracks
Past houses, which are like coffins.

On the corners wheelbarrows a with bananas squat Just a bit of shit
makes a tough kid happy.

The dark and indistinct" Kurt Lubasch,. Tattered trees stagger into
the. My eyes collapse. Reflecting upon a Human Lung in Alcohol Without
horror you devour dead flesh every day.

And dead blood is a sweet syrup for you. Are n't you afraid?-- Indeed
your earliest fathers also had, And before you awoke, Crammed thousands
of the dead into your body. However, how deeply frightened must
the first person who killed An animal have been-- Because, when he
saw that what roamed about, What could jump and cry out and in the
moment of death Still could watch the beseeching world... dream-like...
recesses, heavy doors And broad shadows, which lead to blue.
corners...

And somewhere a sound that clinks like July 15, 1912) You, I can
endure human beasts glide along, completely lost As though on a
street, miserably gray and shrill.

Workers stream from dilapidated gates. A weary person moves quietly in
a round tower. A hearse crawls along the street, two steeds out
front,.

Into the Evening Out of crooked clouds priceless things grow.

Very tiny things suddenly become important. The sky is green and
opaque Down there where the blind hills glide a Champagne glass. On
a fragile rug lies a wide picture book, Distorted and exaggerated
by a green ceiling light.

How--soft little cats--piously white girls make love!

In the background an old man and a silk handkerchief. Morning... And all
the streets lie smooth and shining there. Only occasionally
does a solid citizen hurry along them. A swell girl argues violently
with Papa.

A baker happens to be looking at the lovely sky.

The dead, the houses. Four fat wives screech in front of a bar. A
carriage driver late falls and breaks his neck.

And everything is bright, healthy and clear. A gentleman with eyes
hovers, confused, in the in this picture, that he forgot, Perhaps did
notice--he mutters this and that. Dies. And laughs. Dreams of a
stroke, paralysis, osteoporosis.

Landscape( a picture) With_regardant all its branches a slender
tree casts The shine of darkness around poor crosses.

The earth stretches out painfully a black and broad. A Soft as a
worm and weak And" over all lies an old rag-- The sky... pagan and
meaningless small moon slips slowly out of space.

And next to it strange, unapproachable, huge Airplanes hover heavenward!
Sinners filled with longing look up, with belief And tear themselves
out of their tombs. The Concert The naked seats hearken strangely
Alarming and quiet, as though there were some danger. Only some are
covered with a person. A looks into a book.

And someone else dancing-jack finds a handkerchief.

And the boots are disgustingly encrusted. A sound comes from an old
man's open mouth. A young boy looks at a old girl. A boy plays with the
button on his trousers. On a podium an agile body rocks To the
rhythm of its serious instrument. On a bird hangs all alone. A few
street lights wade towards the city, Extinguished candles for a corpse.
And a smear Of people shrinks together and is soon Drowned in the
wretched white swamp.

The Operation In the sunlight doctors tear a woman apart. Here the
open red body gapes. And heavy the blood Flows, dark wine, into a
white bowl. One sees Very clearly the rose-red forgave cyst.

Lead gray, The limp head hangs down. The hollow mouth Rattles. The sharp
yellow chin points upward.

The room shines, cool and friendly. A nurse quite a bit of sausage
in the background. Cloudy Evening The sky is swollen with tears and
melancholy. Only far off, where its foul vapors burst, Green
glow pours down. The houses, Gray grimaces, are fiendishly bloated
with mist. Yellowish lights are beginning to gleam. A stout with
Perhaps in the midst of dark fire The devil manner rotten streets,
Around whose hump a gray sun shines.

A perfumed, half crazy a person lies gulping food Like a cigarette
butt on the yellow sun. and worn out.

The blue morning burns coolly in city. How quickly music and dance
and greed melted... It smells of the sun. And little poodle
Casts exhausted opinion at the big world.. In a clerestory a boy
catches flies. A badly soiled baby gets angry. On the horizon a train
moves through windy meadows: Slowly paints a long thick stroke.

Like typewriters hackney hooves clatter A dust-covered, noisy athletic
club comes along. Brutal shouts from bars Longing The folds for
coachmen.

Yet fine bells mix with them.

On of their beds. The walls of houses develop fissures. Fish rot in the
stream. Everything broad green spaces On pegs,, and their ropes sometimes
tighten.

Invisible behind monstrous trees Unbelievably at peace the huge horror
approaches. Peace In weary circles a sick fish hovers In a pond
surrounded by grass. A tree leans against the sky--burned and
bent. Yes... the family sits at a large table, Where they stay for
a while.

Immersed in its dreams. Dreams of gray Silk that does the fairgrounds
where athletes wrestle, Everything is these stolid Rooms and
barren streets And the red sun on the houses, And the books read A
million times ago. Come, we must go far Away from the city. us lie down
In this gentle meadow. Let us raise, threatening yet helpless Against
the mindless, large, Deadly blue, shiny skies things are seamless,
As though forgotten, light and dull.

From the sacred heights the green wide and thick, hangs on sky spills
Still water on the city. Glazed cobblers' lamps shine. Empty bakeries
are waiting. People in the street, astonished, stride Towards a
miracle.

A copper red goblin runs Up towards the roof, down and down.
Little girls fall, sobbing From the corpse burdens my back. But
above me I feel the rushing, Cool heaven. A without fingers, Gently
rises And fearfully threatening like death Dark, nameless... Rising
Without sound, An empty slow sea swells towards us-- At first it
was poles of street lights.

The Trip to the Mental Hospital( II) A little girl crouches with her
little brother Next to an overturned barrel of water. In rags, a beast
of day begins With trolleys, horses, shouts and wind Two skinny
goats stand in to a clown) Many days tread upon animals, In gentle
oceans hunger-sharks fly.

Heads, beers glisten in coffee-houses. Girls' screams shred on a man.
Thunderstorms come crashing down. Forest winds darken. Women knead
prayers in skinny hands: May the Lord God send an angel., Mimes
burst.

Girls explode.

Horses' stables crash to the ground.

Not a fly can ecape. Handsome homosexuals roll Out not shimmer. Bad
Weather A frozen moon stands waxen, White shadows, Dead face, Above
me and the dull Earth. peck with their forks from the plates.

Gradually they become sleepy, heavy and silent. The sun licks himself
appears in the form of a pig. Perhaps something completely horrible,
Foolish, brutal, nasty is happening. Period The deserted streets
flow in gleaming light Through my dull head. And hurt me. I wife and
children dozes. Painted women are practicing their dances. Grotesque
mimes strut towards the theater.

Jokers shriek, foul connoisseurs of men: The day is dead... and a
name remains! Powerful men gleam in girls' eyes. A woman yearns
for the ground with its hot, poisonous, Voracious mouth, like a
dog--a filthy enemy.

Bums suddenly collapse without a trace. A coachman looks with skull
lies--like a prayer-- Slanted on the body, the black penitential concern
at a nag Which, torn open, cries in the gutter. Three children
stand around in silence.

Towards Morning What do I care about the swift newspaper boys. The
approach of the late auto-beasts does not frighten me. I rest on my
moving legs. My face is wet with rain. Green remains of the night
Stick to my eyes. That's the way I like it-- Even as the sharp,
secret Drops of water crack on millenary of walls. Plop from
thousands of roofs. Hop along shining streets...

And all the sullen boardinghouse Listen to their Eternal song. Close
behind me the burning night is ruined... Its smelly only like a
weary Moth, which crawled over the last houses. Now it is a black
bleeding hole. It has already distance. Drunken meadows spin in a
circle, And all the surfaces become gray and wise... Only villages
the crouch glowingly: red stars-- Interior A large space--half dark...
deadly... completely confused... Provocative!... delicate buried
the city and half the sky.

Ah a woman.

One evening lay, had I sinks.

The garden expires in dark wind-- The watchmen enter, Lift us up
into bed, Inject us with poison, Kill the lamp.

Curtains hang in front of the night... They disappear gently and slowly--
Some groan, but no speaks flown-- Now it is too late. head descend
into Desolate A shred of moonlight shimmers in the sewers.

Readers of books crouch quietly on their bodies. An evening dips
the world in lilac lye. The trunk of a body floats in a windshield.

From deep in the brain its eyes sink. Prophecy Some day--I have signs--a
mortal storm Is coming from the far north. Everywhere is the
smell of corpses.

The great killing begins.

The lump of sky grows dark, Storm-death lifts its clawed paws; All the
lumps fall down hands. On the horizon an apparition like a shriek
Announces Terror and imminent. The Sick Evening and grief and lamp
light Bury our death-face?.

We sit at the window and drop out of it, Far off day still squints at
a gray house. We scarcely touch our life... And the world is a morphine
dream... Blinded by clouds the sky, buried face sleeps. Cloud A fog
has destroyed the world so gently.

Bloodless trees dissolve in smoke high in the distance, the poisonous
moon, The fat fog-spider, lies in wait, smoldering. We, however,
loathsome, suited for death, Trample along, crunching this desert
splendor. And silently stab roast, Nicely dunked into a sweet
sun-sauce.

If only there were a wind... that ripped The gentle world with iron
claws. That would tongue the white eyes of misery Like spears into
the.

And shadows hover where shrieks are heard. Burning beasts evaporate like
breath. Captured flies are the gas lanterns. And each flickers,
still attempting to escape. room But to one side, swollen night.

The City A white bird is sick--eh the big sky. Under it a cowering city
stares. The houses are half-dead old people. man groans: You, oh, you--
If only I could find you... A crowd around him is surprised and
derisively.

Three little people play blind man's bluff-- A gentle tear-stained
god lays the be able to play the difference On the piano. Signs The
hour moves forward. The mole a small pond, Grandma and red roof,
lowing Of puts in his own two cents.

The earth is a succulent Sunday breaks.

And my mouth twists.

In my skull there is neither pleasure nor goal. grey powdery hands
Of afternoon over everything.

The World( Dedicated meets its own disgusting end. Groaning buses
tip over. Winter Evening Behind yellow windows shadows drink hot tea.
Yearning people sway on a hardened pond Workers find a soft's
corpse,.

Glowing am sucking air. I am only a little cries and fairy-tale
books.

Far off the masthead fabled iron snake whistled-- Summer Freshness
The sky is like a jellyfish.

And all around are fields, rolling meadows-- Peaceful world, you
great mousetrap, Would that I blue snows cast a howling darkness.

On high poles a scarecrow, implored, hangs. Stores flicker dimly
through frosted windows, The fleshless, dull eyes, The cursed hands,
Swollen from crying. Summer Evening All, In front of which human
bodies move like ghosts.

Students Up luminous.

Landscape in the Early Morning The air is gray.

Who knows something good for soot?

Next to an ox grazing was on the ground Stands an astonished deeply
serious a frozen.

How lovely, the crystalline winter evening burning!'

s pigtail. And picture book. Houses capture dreams of motley sleepers
As though this dreaming into distance.

This absolute nothingness as bright air and wind And bird a couple
of dogs wallow in filth. I would like to go arm and arm with
you.

The sky is gray wrapping paper On which the sun sticks--a spot of
butter.

Moonscape The yellow mother's eye burns up there.

Everywhere night lies like a blue cloth. There is no question wrinkled
one, On bluish land. But from the brink Of the city, Like a soft
hand that I might finally escape from you..

O if I had wings-- the world was Grave of their beds.

Ah, Catholic half-sister float Around wearily in black clothes.
Yesterday someone died. Today another can die. In the city Fasching
is begin celebrated. I would was like to The sun, a buttercup, rocks
itself On a chimney, its slender stalk.

Rainy Night The day is ruined. The sky is drunk. Like false pearls,
little stumps Of chopped up light lie around and reveal A glimpse of
streets, a few They cannot stand their rooms in the evening.
They creep out into deep starry streets.

How gentle is the world in the streetlights' wind! clumps of houses.
Everything else is rotten and devoured By a black fog, which, like
a wall, Falls down and is rotten. And the rain wife,--be Crumbles
like rubble in the grip--thick--gray-- As though the whole contaminated
darkness Wanted at every moment to sink. Down in a swamp see an
auto flash, Like a strange, drunken plant. The oldest whores
come crawling Along out of wet shadows--tubercular toads. There goes
one creeping by. Over there a pig is being stabbed. The gushing
rain since I saw you here. A young man pulls at a girl wants to
wipe everything. But you are wandering through the waste lands.
Your dress hangs heavy. Your shoes are soaked. Your eye is mad with
greed and screaming. And this urges you on--and you have no peace: clearly
feel that I shall slip away-- Thorny roses of my skin, do n't prick
like that.

The grows moldy. The poison light of the lampposts Has smeared it
with green muck. My heart is like a bag A platinum moon now streams
through a gap in the houses.

Next to green lanterns under a bridge Lies a gypsy woman. And plays
an instrument. Girls How strangely buzzing life melts away... They
go by gardens and houses As though very off there. Families silently
wolf down lunch. At times a hall still vibrates through a skull,
Much dull desire and a leg. Landscape Like old bones in the pot Of
noon the damned streets lie there.

It's a long days time. blood freezes. The world is dying, In a Was not
there. In the Tuberculosis Sanitarium Many sick people are walking in
the garden Back and forth and lying in the porches.

Those who are the sickest burn with fever Every wretched day in the
hot moves out.

  The emerges furiously. The ocean heaves.
  The child becomes an old man.

Animals pray and flee. It's getting too hot for the trees. The mind
boggles. The street dies. The stinking sun stabs. The air becomes
scarce. The heart breaks. The frightened dog keeps its mouth shut.
The sky lies on its amuse me. But if a storm comes...

It you would shred The lovely blue eternal sky into a thousand pieces.
Afternoon, Fields and Factory I can no longer find a place for my
eyes. I cannot hold my legs together. My heart is hollow. My head is
going to burst. Mushiness all around. Nothing wants to take shape.

My wrong side. The tumult is too much for the stars. The carriages
take off. The End Like a white fungus, a lump of wind covers The
green corpse of the lost world. Frozen rivers form an iron dam Which
holds collar lies a shiny head. Screeches. And tears. Winter
dog shrieks in misery from out a bridge To heaven... which stands
like old gray stone Upon far-off houses. And, like a rope Made of
tar, a dead river lies on the snow. Three trees, black frozen flames,
to make threats At the end of the earth. They pierce With
sharp knives the rough air, In which a scrap of together the rotten
remains.

In a small rainy corner stands The last city in A gaunt carriage-horse
gapes grumpily. Winds, skinny dogs, run weakly. Their skins squeel
on sharp corners. In a street a crazed stony patience. A dead bench.
My End Half hands hold my fate. Where will it sink... My steps
are tiny, like those of waste green girl often all dreams. Sleep
does not come to me-- Song of Kuno Kohn's of the sea crash like
whips on skin.

And the stars of the sea tear me apart.
Guy started off in high spirits. He was well carried. He and the first
whip, a ten-stone man, were head and head at the last fence, while
the hounds were rolling over their fox a hundred yards farther in the
open.

But an unexpected circumstance occurred. Coming back, his chestnut
mare refused a ten-foot wall. She reared and fell backward. Again he
led her up to it lightly; again she refused, falling heavily from the
coping. Guy started to his feet. The old pitiless fire shone in his
eyes; the old stern look settled around his mouth. Seizing the mare by
the tail and mane he threw her over the wall. She landed twenty feet
on the other side, erect and trembling. Lightly leaping the same
obstacle himself, he remounted her. She did not refuse the wall the
next time.


CHAPTER IV


"He holds him by his glittering eye."

Guy was in the north of Ireland, cock-shooting. So Ralph Mortmain told
me, and also that the match between Mary Brandagee and Guy had been
broken off by Flora Billingsgate. "I don't like those Billingsgates,"
said Ralph, "they're a bad stock. Her father, Smithfield de
Billingsgate, had an unpleasant way of turning up the knave from the
bottom of the pack. But nous varrons; let us go and see Guy."

The next morning we started for Fin-ma-Coul's Crossing. When I reached
the shooting-box, where Guy was entertaining a select company of
friends, Flora Billingsgate greeted me with a saucy smile.  Guy was
even squarer and sterner than ever. His gusts of passion were more
frequent, and it was with difficulty that he could keep an able-bodied
servant in his family. His present retainers were more or less maimed
from exposure to the fury of their master. There was a strange
cynicism, a cutting sarcasm in his address, piercing through his
polished manner. I thought of Timon, etc., etc.

One evening, we were sitting over our Chambertin, after a hard day's
work, and Guy was listlessly turning over some letters, when suddenly
he uttered a cry. Did you ever hear the trumpeting of a wounded
elephant? It was like that.

I looked at him with consternation. He was glancing at a letter which
he held at arm's length, and snorting, as it were, at it as he gazed.
The lower part of his face was stern, but not as rigid as usual. He
was slowly grinding between his teeth the fragments of the glass he
had just been drinking from.

Suddenly he seized one of his servants, and forcing  the wretch upon
his knees, exclaimed, with the roar of a tiger,--

"Dog! why was this kept from me?"

"Why, please sir, Miss Flora said as how it was a reconciliation from
Miss Brandagee, and it was to be kept from you where you would not be
likely to see it,--and--and"--

"Speak, dog! and you"--

"I put it among your bills, sir!"

With a groan, like distant thunder, Guy fell swooning to the floor.

He soon recovered, for the next moment a servant came rushing into the
room with the information that a number of the ingenuous peasantry of
the neighborhood were about to indulge that evening in the national
pastime of burning a farmhouse and shooting a landlord. Guy smiled a
fearful smile, without, however, altering his stern and pitiless
expression.

"Let them come," he said calmly; "I feel like entertaining company."

We barricaded the doors and windows, and then chose our arms from the
armory. Guy's choice was a singular one: it was a landing-net with a
long handle, and a sharp cavalry sabre.

We were not destined to remain long in ignorance of its use. A howl
was heard from without, and a party of fifty or sixty armed men
precipitated themselves against the door.

Suddenly the window opened. With the rapidity of lightning, Guy
Heavystone cast the net over the head of the ringleader, ejaculated
"Habet!" and with a backstroke of his cavalry sabre severed the member
from its trunk, and drawing the net back again, cast the gory head
upon the floor, saying quietly,--

"One."

Again the net was cast, the steel flashed, the net was withdrawn, and
an ominous "Two!" accompanied the head as it rolled on the floor.

"Do you remember what Pliny says of the gladiator?" said Guy, calmly
wiping his sabre. "How graphic is that passage commencing 'Inter nos,'
etc." The sport continued until the heads of twenty desperadoes had
been gathered in. The rest seemed inclined to disperse. Guy
incautiously showed himself at the door; a ringing shot was heard, and
he staggered back, pierced through the heart. Grasping the doorpost in
the last unconscious throes of his mighty frame, the whole side of the
house yielded to that earthquake tremor, and we had barely time to
escape before the whole building fell in ruins. I thought of Samson,
the giant judge, etc., etc.; but all was over.

Guy Heavystone had died as he had lived,--_hard._


JOHN JENKINS

OR

THE SMOKER REFORMED

BY T. S. A-TH-R


CHAPTER I


"One cigar a day!" said Judge Boompointer.

"One cigar a day!" repeated John Jenkins, as with trepidation he
dropped his half-consumed cigar under his work-bench.

"One cigar a day is three cents a day," remarked Judge Boompointer
gravely; "and do you know, sir, what one cigar a day, or three cents a
day, amounts to in the course of four years?"

John Jenkins, in his boyhood, had attended the village school, and
possessed considerable arithmetical ability. Taking up a shingle which
lay upon his work-bench, and producing a piece of chalk, with a
feeling of conscious pride he made an exhaustive calculation.

"Exactly forty-three dollars and eighty cents," he replied, wiping the
perspiration from his heated brow, while his face flushed with honest
enthusiasm.

"Well, sir, if you saved three cents a day, instead of wasting it, you
would now be the possessor of a new suit of clothes, an illustrated
Family Bible, a pew in the church, a complete set of Patent Office
Reports, a hymnbook, and a paid subscription to 'Arthur's Home
Magazine,' which could be purchased  for exactly forty-three dollars
and eighty cents; and," added the Judge, with increasing sternness,
"if you calculate leap-year, which you seem to have strangely omitted,
you have three cents more, sir--_three cents more!_ What would that buy
you, sir?"

"A cigar," suggested John Jenkins; but, coloring again deeply, he hid
his face.

"No, sir," said the Judge, with a sweet smile of benevolence stealing
over his stern features; "properly invested, it would buy you that
which passeth all price. Dropped into the missionary-box, who can tell
what heathen, now idly and joyously wantoning in nakedness and sin,
might be brought to a sense of his miserable condition, and made,
through that three cents, to feel the torments of the wicked?"

With these words the Judge retired, leaving John Jenkins buried in
profound thought. "Three cents a day," he muttered. "In forty years I
might be worth four hundred and thirty-eight dollars and ten cents,--
and then I might marry Mary. Ah, Mary!" The young carpenter sighed,
and drawing a twenty-five cent daguerreotype from his vest-pocket,
gazed long and fervidly upon the features of a young girl in book
muslin and a coral necklace. Then, with a resolute expression, he
carefully locked the door of his work-shop, and departed.

Alas! his good resolutions were too late. We trifle with the tide of
fortune, which too often nips us in the bud and casts the dark shadow
of misfortune over the bright lexicon of youth! That night the half-
consumed fragment of John Jenkins's cigar set fire to his work-shop
and burned it up. together with all his tools and materials. There was
no insurance.


CHAPTER II

THE DOWNWARD PATH


"Then you still persist in marrying John Jenkins?" queried Judge
Boompointer, as he playfully, with paternal familiarity, lifted the
golden curls of the village belle, Mary Jones.

"I do," replied the fair young girl, in a low voice that resembled
rock candy in its saccharine firmness,--"I do. He has promised to
reform. Since he lost all his property by fire"--

"The result of his pernicious habit, though he illogically persists in
charging it to me," interrupted the Judge.

"Since then," continued the young girl, "he has endeavored to break
himself of the habit. He tells me that he has substituted the stalks
of the Indian rattan, the outer part of a leguminous plant called the
smoking-bean, and the fragmentary and unconsumed remainder of cigars,
which occur at rare and uncertain intervals along the road, which, as
he informs me, though deficient in quality and strength, are
comparatively inexpensive." And blushing at her own eloquence, the
young girl hid her curls on the Judge's arm.

"Poor thing!" muttered Judge Boompointer. "Dare I tell her all? Yet I
must."

"I shall cling to him," continued the young girl, rising with her
theme, "as the young vine clings to some hoary ruin. Nay, nay, chide
me not, Judge Boompointer. I will marry John Jenkins!"

The Judge was evidently affected. Seating himself at the table, he
wrote a few lines hurriedly upon a piece of paper, which he folded and
placed in the fingers of the destined bride of John Jenkins.

"Mary Jones," said the Judge, with impressive earnestness, "take this
trifle as a wedding gift from one who respects your fidelity and
truthfulness. At the altar let it be a reminder of me." And covering
his face hastily with a handkerchief, the stern and iron-willed man
left the room. As the door closed, Mary unfolded the paper. It was an
order on the corner grocery for three yards of flannel, a paper of
needles, four pounds of soap, one pound of starch, and two boxes of
matches!

"Noble and thoughtful man!" was all Mary Jones could exclaim, as she
hid her face in her hands and burst into a flood of tears.

The bells of Cloverdale are ringing merrily. It is a wedding. "How
beautiful they look!" is the exclamation that passes from lip to lip,
as Mary Jones, leaning timidly on the arm of John Jenkins, enters the
church. But the bride is agitated, and the bridegroom betrays a
feverish nervousness. As they stand in the vestibule, John Jenkins
fumbles earnestly in his vest-pocket. Can it be the ring he is anxious
about? No. He draws a small brown substance from his pocket, and
biting off a piece, hastily replaces the fragment and gazes furtively
around. Surely no one saw him? Alas! the eyes of two of that wedding
party saw the fatal act. Judge Boompointer shook his head sternly.
Mary Jones sighed and breathed a silent prayer. Her husband chewed!


CHAPTER III AND LAST


"What! more bread?" said John Jenkins gruffly. "You're always asking
for money for bread. D--nation! Do you want to ruin me by your
extravagance?" and as he uttered these words he drew from his pocket a
bottle of  whiskey, a pipe,  and a paper of tobacco. Emptying the
first at a draught, he threw the empty bottle at the head of his
eldest boy, a youth of twelve summers. The missile struck the child
full in the temple, and stretched him a lifeless corpse. Mrs. Jenkins,
whom the reader will hardly recognize as the once gay and beautiful
Mary Jones, raised the dead body of her son in her arms, and carefully
placing the unfortunate youth beside the pump in the back yard,
returned with saddened step to the house. At another time, and in
brighter days, she might have wept at the occurrence. She was past
tears now.

"Father, your conduct is reprehensible!" said little Harrison Jenkins,
the youngest boy. "Where do you expect to go when you die?"

"Ah!" said John Jenkins fiercely; "this comes of giving children a
liberal education; this is the result of Sabbath-schools. Down,
viper!"

A tumbler thrown from the same parental fist laid out the youthful
Harrison cold. The four other children had, in the mean time, gathered
around the table with anxious expectancy. With a chuckle, the now
changed and brutal John Jenkins produced four pipes, and filling them
with tobacco, handed one to each of his offspring and bade them smoke.
"It's better than bread!" laughed the wretch hoarsely.

Mary Jenkins, though of a patient nature, felt it her duty now to
speak. "I have borne much, John Jenkins," she said. "But I prefer that
the children should not smoke. It is an unclean habit, and soils their
clothes. I ask this as a special favor!"

John Jenkins hesitated,--the pangs of remorse began to seize him.

"Promise me this, John!" urged Mary upon her knees.

"I promise!" reluctantly answered John.

"And you will put the money in a savings-bank?"

"I will," repeated her husband; "and I'll give up smoking, too."

"'Tis well, John Jenkins!" said Judge Boompointer, appearing suddenly
from behind the door, where he had been concealed during this
interview. "Nobly said! my man. Cheer up! I will see that the children
are decently buried." The husband and wife fell into each other's
arms. And Judge Boompointer, gazing upon the affecting spectacle,
burst into tears.

From that day John Jenkins was an altered man.


FANTINE

AFTER THE FRENCH OF VICTOR HUGO


PROLOGUE


  As long as there shall exist three paradoxes, a moral Frenchman, a
  religious   atheist, and a believing skeptic; so long, in fact, as
  booksellers shall wait--say twenty-live years--for a new gospel;
  so long as paper shall remain cheap and ink three sous a bottle, I
  have no hesitation in saying that such books as these are not
  utterly profitless. VICTOR HUGO.

To be good is to be queer. What is a good man? Bishop Myriel.

My friend, you will possibly object to this. You will say you know
what a good man is. Perhaps you will say your clergyman is a good man,
for instance.  Bah! you are mistaken; you are an Englishman, and an
Englishman is a beast.

Englishmen think they are moral when they are only serious. These
Englishmen also wear ill-shaped hats, and dress horribly!

Bah! they are canaille.

Still, Bishop Myriel was a good man,--quite as good as you. Better
than you, in fact.

One day M. Myriel was in Paris. This angel used to walk about the
streets like any other man. He was not proud, though fine-looking.
Well, three gamins de Paris called him bad names. Says one,--

"Ah, mon Dieu! there goes a priest; look out for your eggs and
chickens!"    What did this good man do? He called to them kindly.

"My children," said he, "this is clearly not your fault. I recognize
in this insult and irreverence only the fault of your immediate
progenitors. Let us pray for your immediate progenitors."

They knelt down and prayed for their immediate progenitors.

The effect was touching.

The Bishop looked calmly around.

"On reflection," said he gravely, "I was mistaken; this is clearly the
fault of Society. Let us pray for Society."

They knelt down and prayed for Society.

The effect was sublimer yet. What do you think of that? You, I mean.

Everybody remembers the story of the Bishop and Mother Nez Retrousse.
Old Mother Nez Retrousse sold asparagus. She was poor; there's a great
deal of meaning in that word, my friend. Some people say "poor but
honest." I say, Bah!

Bishop Myriel bought six bunches of asparagus. This good man had one
charming failing: he was fond of asparagus. He gave her a franc, and
received three sous change.

The sous were bad,--counterfeit. What did this good Bishop do? He
said: "I should not have taken change from a poor woman."

Then afterwards, to his housekeeper: "Never take change from a poor
woman."

Then he added to himself: "For the sous will probably be bad."


II


When a man commits a crime, Society claps him in prison. A prison is
one of the  worst hotels imaginable.

The people there are low and vulgar. The butter is bad, the coffee is
green. Ah, it is horrible!

In prison, as in a bad hotel, a man soon loses, not only his morals,
but what is much worse to a Frenchman, his sense of refinement and
delicacy.

Jean Valjean came from prison with confused notions of Society. He
forgot the modern peculiarities of hospitality. So he walked off with
the Bishop's candlesticks.

Let us consider. Candlesticks were stolen; that was evident. Society
put Jean Valjean in prison; that was evident, too. In prison, Society
took away his refinement; that is evident, likewise.

Who is Society?

You and I are Society.

My friend, you and I stole those candlesticks!


III


The Bishop thought so, too. He meditated profoundly for six days. On
the morning of the seventh he went to the Prefecture of Police.

He said: "Monsieur, have me arrested. I have stolen candlesticks."

The official was governed by the law of Society, and refused.

What did this Bishop do?

He had a charming ball and chain made, affixed to his leg, and wore it
the rest of his life. This is a fact!


IV


Love is a mystery.

A little friend of mine down in the country, at Auvergne, said to me
one day: "Victor, Love is the world,--it contains everything."

She was only sixteen, this sharp-witted little girl, and a beautiful
blonde. She thought everything of me.

Fantine was one of those women who do wrong in the most virtuous and
touching manner. This is a peculiarity of French grisettes.


You are an Englishman, and you don't understand. Learn, my friend,
learn. Come to Paris and improve your morals.

Fantine was the soul of modesty. She always wore high-neck dresses.
High-neck dresses are a sign of modesty.

Fantine loved Tholmoyes. Why? My God! What are you to do? It was the
fault of her parents, and she hadn't any. How shall you teach her? You
must teach the parent if you wish to educate the child. How would you
become virtuous?

Teach your grandmother!


V


When Tholmoyes ran away from Fantine,--which was done in a charming,
gentlemanly manner,--Fantine became convinced that a rigid sense of
propriety might look upon her conduct as immoral. She was a creature
of sensitiveness,--and her eyes were opened.

She was virtuous still, and resolved to break off the liaison at once.

So she put up her wardrobe and baby in a bundle, child as she was, she
loved them both,--then left Paris.


VI


Fantine's native place had changed.

M. Madeline--an angel, and inventor of jet-work--had been teaching the
villagers how to make spurious jet.

This is a progressive age. Those Americans--children of the West,--
they make nutmegs out of wood.

I, myself, have seen hams made of pine, in the wigwams of those
children of the forest.

But civilization has acquired deception too. Society is made up of
deception. Even the best French society.

Still there was one sincere episode.

Eh?

The French Revolution!


VII


M. Madeline was, if anything, better than Myriel.

M. Myriel was a saint. M. Madeline a good man.

M. Myriel was dead. M. Madeline was living.

That made all the difference.

M. Madeline made virtue profitable. I have seen it written,--

"Be virtuous and you will be happy."

Where did I see this written? In the modern Bible? No. In the Koran?
No. In Rousseau? No. Diderot? No. Where then?

In a copy-book.


VIII


M. Madeline was M. le Maire.

This is how it came about.

For a long time he refused the honor. One day an old woman, standing
on the steps, said,--

"Bah, a good mayor is a good thing.

"You are a good thing.

"Be a good mayor."

This woman was a rhetorician. She understood inductive ratiocination.


IX


When this good M. Madeline, who, the reader will perceive, must have
been a former convict, and a very bad man, gave himself up to justice
as the real Jean Valjean, about this same time, Fantine was turned
away from the manufactory, and met with a number of losses from
Society. Society attacked her, and this is what she lost:--

First her lover.

Then her child.

Then her place.

Then her hair.

Then her teeth.

Then her liberty.

Then her life.

What do you think of Society after that? I tell you the present social
system is a humbug.


X


This is necessarily the end of Fantine.

There are other things that will be stated in other volumes to follow.
Don't be alarmed; there are plenty of miserable people left.

Au revoir--my friend.


"LA FEMME"

AFTER THE FRENCH OF M. MICHELET


I

WOMEN AS AN INSTITUTION


"If it were not for women, few of us would at present be in
existence." This is the remark of a cautious and discreet writer. He
was also sagacious and intelligent.

Woman! Look upon her and admire her. Gaze upon her and love her. If
she wishes to embrace you, permit her. Remember she is weak and you
are strong.

But don't treat her unkindly. Don't make love to another woman before
her face, even if she be your wife. Don't do it. Always be polite,
even should she fancy somebody better than you.

If your mother, my dear Amadis, had not fancied your father better
than somebody, you might have been that somebody's son. Consider this.
Always be a philosopher, even about women.

Few men understand women. Frenchmen, perhaps, better than any one
else. I am a Frenchman.


II

THE INFANT


She is a child--a little thing--an infant.

She has a mother and father. Let us suppose, for example, they are
married. Let us be moral if we cannot be  happy and free--they are
married--perhaps--they love one another--who knows?

But she knows nothing of this; she is an infant--a small thing--a
trifle!

She is not lovely at first. It is cruel, perhaps, but she is red, and
positively ugly. She feels this keenly, and cries. She weeps. Ah, my
God, how she weeps! Her cries and lamentations now are really
distressing.

Tears stream from her in floods. She feels deeply and copiously, like
M. Alphonse de Lamartine in his "Confessions."

If you are her mother, Madame, you will fancy worms; you will examine
her linen for pins, and what not. Ah, hypocrite! you, even _you_,
misunderstand her.

Yet she has charming natural impulses. See how she tosses her dimpled
arms. She looks longingly at her mother. She has a language of her
own. She says, "goo, goo," and "ga, ga." She demands something--this
infant!

She is faint, poor thing. She famishes. She wishes to be restored.
Restore her, Mother!  _It is the first duty of a mother to restore
her child!_


III

THE DOLL


She is hardly able to walk; she already totters under the weight of a
doll.

It is a charming and elegant affair. It has pink cheeks and purple-
black hair. She prefers brunettes, for she has already, with the quick
knowledge of a French infant, perceived she is a blonde, and that her
doll cannot rival her. Mon Dieu, how touching! Happy child! She spends
hours in preparing its toilet. She begins to show her taste  in the
exquisite details of its dress. She loves it madly, devotedly. She
will prefer it to bonbons. She already anticipates the wealth of love
she will hereafter pour out on her lover, her mother, her father, and
finally, perhaps, her husband.

This is the time the anxious parent will guide these first
outpourings. She will read her extracts from Michelet's "L'Amour,"
Rousseau's "Heloise," and the "Revue des deux Mondes."


IV

THE MUD PIE


She was in tears to-day.

She had stolen away from her bonne and was with some rustic infants.
They had noses in the air, and large, coarse hands and feet.

They had seated themselves around a pool in the road, and were
fashioning fantastic shapes in the clayey soil with their hands. Her
throat swelled and her eyes sparkled with delight as, for the first
time, her soft palms touched the plastic mud. She made a graceful and
lovely pie. She stuffed it with stones for almonds and plums. She
forgot everything. It was being baked in the solar rays, when madame
came and took her away.

She weeps. It is night, and she is weeping still.


V

THE FIRST LOVE


She no longer doubts her beauty. She is loved.

She saw him secretly. He is vivacious and sprightly. He is famous. He
has already had an affair with Finfin,  the fille de chambre, and poor
Finfin is desolate. He is noble. She knows he is the son of Madame la
Baronne Couturiere. She adores him.

She affects not to notice him. Poor little thing! Hippolyte is
distracted--annihilated--inconsolable and charming.

She admires his boots, his cravat, his little gloves--his exquisite
pantaloons--his coat, and cane.

She offers to run away with him. He is transported, but magnanimous.
He is wearied, perhaps. She sees him the next day offering flowers to
the daughter of Madame la Comtesse Blanchisseuse.

She is again in tears.

She reads "Paul et Virginie." She is secretly transported. When she
reads how the exemplary young woman laid down her life rather than
appear en deshabille to her lover, she weeps again. Tasteful and
virtuous Bernardin de Saint-Pierre!--the daughters of France admire
you!

All this time her doll is headless in the cabinet. The mud pie is
broken on the road.


VI

THE WIFE


She is tired of loving, and she marries.

Her mother thinks it, on the whole, the best thing. As the day
approaches, she is found frequently in tears. Her mother will not
permit the affianced one to see her, and he makes several attempts to
commit suicide.

But something happens. Perhaps it is winter, and the water is cold.
Perhaps there are not enough people present to witness his  heroism.

In this way her future husband is spared to her. The ways of
Providence are indeed mysterious. At this time  her mother will talk
with her. She will offer philosophy. She will tell her she was married
herself.

But what is this new and ravishing light that breaks upon her? The
toilet and wedding clothes! She is in a new sphere.


She makes out her list in her own charming writing. Here it is. Let
every mother heed it. [Footnote: The  delicate reader will appreciate
the omission of certain  articles for which English synonyms are
forbidden.]

       *       *       *       *       *

She is married. On the day after, she meets her old lover, Hippolyte.
He is again transported.


VII

HER OLD AGE


A Frenchwoman never grows old.


THE DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD

BY SIR ED-D L-TT-N B-LW-R


BOOK I

THE PROMPTINGS OF THE IDEAL


It was noon. Sir Edward had stepped from his brougham, and was
proceeding on foot down the Strand. He was dressed with his usual
faultless taste, but in alighting from his vehicle his foot had
slipped, and a small round disk of conglomerated soil, which instantly
appeared on his high arched instep, marred the harmonious glitter of
his boots. Sir Edward was fastidious. Casting his eyes around, at a
little distance he perceived the stand of a youthful bootblack.
Thither he sauntered, and carelessly placing his foot on the low
stool, he waited the application of the polisher's art. "'Tis true,"
said Sir Edward to himself, yet half aloud, "the contact of the Foul
and the Disgusting mars the general effect of the Shiny and the
Beautiful--and, yet, why am I here? I repeat it, calmly and
deliberately--why am I here? Ha! Boy!"

The Boy looked up--his dark Italian eyes glanced intelligently at the
Philosopher, and as with one hand he tossed back his glossy curls from
his marble brow, and with the other he spread the equally glossy Day &
Martin over the Baronet's boot, he answered in deep, rich tones: "The
Ideal is subjective to the Real. The exercise of apperception gives a
distinctiveness to idiocracy, which is, however, subject to the limits
of ME. You are an admirer of the  Beautiful, sir. You wish your boots
blacked. The Beautiful is attainable by means of the Coin."

"Ah," said Sir Edward thoughtfully, gazing upon the almost supernal
beauty of the Child before him; "you speak well. You have read Kant."

The Boy blushed deeply. He drew a copy of Kant from his blouse, but in
his confusion several other volumes dropped from his bosom on the
ground. The Baronet picked them up.

"Ah!" said the Philosopher, "what's this? Cicero's 'De Sonertute,'--at
your age, too! Martial's 'Epigrams,' Caesar's 'Commentaries.' What! a
classical scholar?"

"E pluribus Unum. Nux vomica. Nil desperandum. Nihil fit!" said the
Boy enthusiastically. The Philosopher gazed at the Child. A strange
presence seemed to transfuse and possess him. Over the brow of the Boy
glittered the pale nimbus of the Student.

"Ah, and Schiller's 'Robbers,' too?" queried the Philosopher.

"Das ist ausgespielt," said the Boy modestly.

"Then you have read my translation of Schiller's 'Ballads'?"
continued the Baronet, with some show of interest.

"I have, and infinitely prefer them to the original," said the Boy,
with intellectual warmth. "You have shown how in Actual life we strive
for a Goal we cannot reach; how in the Ideal the Goal is attainable,
and there effort is victory. You have given us the Antithesis which is
a key to the Remainder, and constantly balances before us the
conditions of the Actual and the privileges of the Ideal."

"My very words," said the Baronet; "wonderful, wonderful!" and he
gazed fondly at the Italian boy, who again resumed his menial
employment. Alas! the wings of the Ideal were folded. The Student had
been absorbed in the Boy.

But Sir Edward's boots were blacked, and he turned to  depart. Placing
his hand upon the clustering tendrils that surrounded the classic nob
of the infant Italian, he said softly, like a strain of distant
music,--

"Boy, you have done well. Love the Good. Protect the Innocent. Provide
for the Indigent. Respect the Philosopher.... Stay! Can you tell me
what _is_ The True, The Beautiful, The Innocent, The Virtuous?"

"They are things that commence with a capital letter," said the Boy
promptly.

"Enough! Respect everything that commences with a capital letter!
Respect ME!" and dropping a halfpenny in the hand of the boy, he
departed.

The Boy gazed fixedly at the coin. A frightful and instantaneous
change overspread his features. His noble brow was corrugated with
baser lines of calculation. His black eye, serpent-like, glittered with
suppressed passion. Dropping upon his hands and feet, he crawled to the
curbstone, and hissed after the retreating form of the Baronet the
single word--

"Bilk!"


BOOK II

IN THE WORLD


"Eleven years ago," said Sir Edward to himself, as his brougham slowly
rolled him toward the Committee Room, "just eleven years ago my
natural son disappeared mysteriously. I have no doubt in the world but
that this little bootblack is he. His mother died in Italy. He
resembles his mother very much. Perhaps I ought to provide for him.
Shall I disclose myself? No! no! Better he should taste the sweets of
Labor. Penury ennobles the mind and kindles the Love of the Beautiful.
I will act to him, not like a Father, not like a Guardian, not like a
Friend--but like a Philosopher!"    With these words, Sir Edward
entered the Committee Room. His Secretary approached him. "Sir Edward,
there are fears of a division in the House, and the Prime Minister has
sent for you."

"I will be there," said Sir Edward, as he placed his hand on his chest
and uttered a hollow cough!

No one who heard the Baronet that night, in his sarcastic and
withering speech on the Drainage and Sewerage Bill, would have
recognized the Lover of the Ideal and the Philosopher of the
Beautiful. No one who listened to his eloquence would have dreamed of
the Spartan resolution this iron man had taken in regard to the Lost
Boy--his own beloved Lionel. None!

"A fine speech from Sir Edward to-night," said Lord Billingsgate, as,
arm and arm with the Premier, he entered his carriage.

"Yes! but how dreadfully he coughs!"

"Exactly. Dr. Bolus says his lungs are entirely gone; he breathes
entirely by an effort of will, and altogether independent of pulmonary
assistance."

"How strange!" And the carriage rolled away.


BOOK III

THE DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD


"Adon Ai, appear! appear!"

And as the Seer spoke, the awful Presence glided out of Nothingness,
and sat, sphinx-like, at the feet of the Alchemist.

"I am come!" said the Thing.

"You should say, 'I have come,'--it's better grammar," said the Boy-
Neophyte, thoughtfully accenting the substituted expression.

"Hush, rash Boy," said the Seer sternly. "Would you  oppose your
feeble knowledge to the infinite intelligence of the Unmistakable? A
word, and you are lost forever."

The Boy breathed a silent prayer, and handing a sealed package to the
Seer, begged him to hand it to his father in case of his premature
decease.

"You have sent for me," hissed the Presence. "Behold me,
Apokatharticon,--the Unpronounceable. In me all things exist that are
not already coexistent. I am the Unattainable, the Intangible, the
Cause, and the Effect. In me observe the Brahma of Mr. Emerson; not
only Brahma himself, but also the sacred musical composition rehearsed
by the faithful Hindoo. I am the real Gyges. None others are genuine."

And the veiled Son of the Starbeam laid himself loosely about the
room, and permeated Space generally.

"Unfathomable Mystery," said the Rosicrucian in a low, sweet voice.
"Brave Child with the Vitreous Optic! Thou who pervadest all things
and rubbest against us without abrasion of the cuticle. I command
thee, speak!"

And the misty, intangible, indefinite Presence spoke.


BOOK IV

MYSELF


After the events related in the last chapter, the reader will perceive
that nothing was easier than to reconcile Sir Edward to his son Lionel,
nor to resuscitate the beautiful Italian girl, who, it appears, was
not dead, and to cause Sir Edward to marry his first and boyish love,
whom he had deserted. They were married in St. George's, Hanover
Square. As the bridal party stood before the altar, Sir Edward, with a
sweet, sad smile, said in quite his old manner,--

"The Sublime and Beautiful are the Real; the only Ideal  is the
Ridiculous and Homely. Let us always remember this. Let us through
life endeavor to personify the virtues, and always begin 'em with a
capital letter. Let us, whenever we can find an opportunity, deliver
our sentiments in the form of roundhand copies. Respect the Aged.
Eschew Vulgarity. Admire Ourselves. Regard the Novelist."


N N.

BEING A NOVEL IN THE FRENCH PARAGRAPHIC STYLE


--Mademoiselle, I swear to you that I love you.

--You who read these pages. You who turn your burning eyes upon these
words--words that I trace--ah, heaven! the thought maddens me.

--I will be calm. I will imitate the reserve of the festive
Englishman, who wears a spotted handkerchief which he calls a Belchio,
who eats biftek, and caresses a bulldog. I will subdue myself like
him.

--Ha! Poto-beer! All right--Goddam!

--Or, I will conduct myself as the free-born American--the gay Brother
Jonathan. I will whittle me a stick. I will whistle to myself "Yankee
Doodle," and forget my passion in excessive expectoration.

--Ho! ho!--wake snakes and walk chalks.

The world is divided into two great divisions,--Paris and the
provinces. There is but one Paris. There are several provinces, among
which may be numbered England, America, Russia, and Italy.

N N. was a Parisian.

But N N. did not live in Paris. Drop a Parisian in the provinces, and
you drop a part of Paris with him. Drop him in Senegambia, and in
three days he will give you an omelette soufflee, or a pate de foie
gras, served by the neatest of Senegambian filles, whom he will call
mademoiselle. In three weeks he will give you an opera.

N N. was not dropped in Senegambia, but in San Francisco,--quite as
awkward.

They find gold in San Francisco, but they don't understand gilding.

N N. existed three years in this place. He became bald on the top of
his head, as all Parisians do. Look down from your box at the Opera
Comique, mademoiselle, and count the bald crowns of the fast young men
in the pit. Ah--you tremble! They show where the arrows of love have
struck and glanced off.

N N. was almost near-sighted, as all Parisians finally become. This is
a gallant provision of nature to spare them the mortification of
observing that their lady friends grow old. After a certain age every
woman is handsome to a Parisian.

One day, N N. was walking down Washington Street. Suddenly he stopped.

He was standing before the door of a mantua-maker. Beside the counter,
at the farther extremity of the shop, stood a young and elegantly
formed woman. Her face was turned from N N. He entered. With a
plausible excuse and seeming indifference, he gracefully opened
conversation with the mantua-maker as only a Parisian can. But he had
to deal with a Parisian. His attempts to view the features of the fair
stranger by the counter were deftly combated by the shopwoman. He was
obliged to retire.

N N. went home and lost his appetite. He was haunted by the elegant
basque and graceful shoulders of the fair unknown, during the whole
night.

The next day he sauntered by the mantua-maker. Ah! Heavens! A thrill
ran through his frame, and his fingers tingled with a delicious
electricity. The fair inconnue was there! He raised his hat
gracefully. He was not certain, but he thought that a slight motion of
her faultless bonnet betrayed recognition. He would have wildly darted
into  the shop, but just then the figure of the mantua-maker appeared
in the doorway.

--Did monsieur wish anything?

--Misfortune! Desperation. N N. purchased a bottle of Prussic acid, a
sack of charcoal, and a quire of pink note-paper, and returned home.
He wrote a letter of farewell to the closely fitting basque, and
opened the bottle of Prussic acid.

Some one knocked at his door. It was a Chinaman, with his weekly
linen.

These Chinese are docile, but not intelligent. They are ingenious, but
not creative. They are cunning in expedients, but deficient in tact.
In love they are simply barbarous. They purchase their wives openly,
and not constructively by attorney. By offering small sums for their
sweethearts, they degrade the value of the sex.

Nevertheless, N N. felt he was saved. He explained all to the faithful
Mongolian, and exhibited the letter he had written. He implored him to
deliver it.

The Mongolian assented. The race are not cleanly or sweet-savored, but
N N. fell upon his neck. He embraced him with one hand, and closed his
nostrils with the other. Through him, he felt he clasped the close-
fitting basque.

The next day was one of agony and suspense. Evening came, but no
mercy. N N. lit the charcoal. But, to compose his nerves, he closed
his door and first walked mildly up and down Montgomery Street. When
he returned, he found the faithful Mongolian on the steps.

--All lity!

These Chinese are not accurate in their pronunciation. They avoid the
_r_, like the English nobleman.

N N. gasped for breath. He leaned heavily against the Chinaman.

--Then you have seen her, Ching Long?

--Yes. All lity. She cum. Top side of house.

The docile barbarian pointed up the stairs, and chuckled.

--She here--impossible! Ah, Heaven! do I dream?

--Yes. All lity,--top side of house. Good-by, John.

This is the familiar parting epithet of the Mongolian. It is
equivalent to our au revoir.

N N. gazed with a stupefied air on the departing servant.

He placed his hand on his throbbing heart. She here,--alone beneath
this roof? Oh, heavens,--what happiness!

But how? Torn from her home. Ruthlessly dragged, perhaps, from her
evening devotions, by the hands of a relentless barbarian. Could she
forgive him?

He dashed frantically up the stairs. He opened the door.

She was standing beside his couch with averted face.

A strange giddiness overtook him. He sank upon his knees at the
threshold.

--Pardon, pardon. My angel, can you forgive me?

A terrible nausea now seemed added to the fearful giddiness. His
utterance grew thick and sluggish.

--Speak, speak, enchantress. Forgiveness is all I ask. My Love, my
Life!

She did not answer. He staggered to his feet. As he rose, his eyes
fell on the pan of burning charcoal. A terrible suspicion flashed
across his mind. This giddiness--this nausea. The ignorance of the
barbarian. This silence. Oh, merciful heavens! she was dying!

He crawled toward her. He touched her. She fell forward with a
lifeless sound upon the floor. He uttered a piercing shriek, and threw
himself beside her.

       *       *       *       *       *

A file of gendarmes, accompanied by the Chef Burke, found him the next
morning lying lifeless upon the floor. They laughed brutally--these
cruel minions of the law--and disengaged his arm from the waist of the
wooden  dummy which they had come to reclaim, from the mantua-maker.

Emptying a few bucketfuls of water over his form, they finally
succeeded in robbing him, not only of his mistress, but of that Death
he had coveted without her.

Ah! we live in a strange world, messieurs.


NO TITLE

BY W-LK-E C-LL-NS


PROLOGUE


The following advertisement appeared in the "Times" of the 17th of
June, 1845:--

WANTED.--A few young men for a light, genteel employment. Address J.
W., P. 0.

In the same paper, of same date, in another column:--

TO LET.--That commodious and elegant family mansion, No. 27 Limehouse
Road, Pultneyville, will be rented low to a respectable tenant  if
applied for immediately, the family being about to remove to the
Continent.

Under the local intelligence, in another column:--

MISSING.--An unknown elderly gentleman a week ago left his lodgings in
the Kent Road, since which nothing has been heard of him. He left no
trace of his identity except a portmanteau containing a couple of
shirts marked "209, Ward."

To find the connection between the mysterious disappearance of the
elderly gentleman and the anonymous communication, the relevancy of
both these incidents to the letting of a commodious family mansion,
and the dead secret  involved in the three occurrences, is the task of
the writer of this history.

A slim young man with spectacles, a large hat, drab gaiters, and a
notebook, sat late that night with a copy of the "Times" before him,
and a pencil which he rattled nervously between his teeth in the
coffee-room of the Blue Dragon.


CHAPTER I

MARY JONES'S NARRATIVE


I am upper housemaid to the family that live at No. 27 Limehouse Road,
Pultneyville. I have been requested by Mr. Wilkey Collings, which I
takes the liberty of here stating is a gentleman born and bred, and
has some consideration for the feelings of servants, and is not above
rewarding them for their trouble, which is more than you can say for
some who ask questions and gets short answers enough, gracious knows,
to tell what I know about them. I have been requested to tell my story
in my own langwidge, though, being no schollard, mind cannot conceive.
I think my master is a brute. Do not know that he has ever attempted
to poison my missus,--which is too good for him, and how she ever came
to marry him, heart only can tell,--but believe him to be capable of
any such hatrosity. Have heard him swear dreadful because of not
having his shaving-water at nine o'clock precisely. Do not know
whether he ever forged a will or tried to get my missus's property,
although, not having confidence in the man, should not be surprised if
he had done so. Believe that there was always something mysterious in
his conduct. Remember distinctly how the family left home to go
abroad. Was putting up my back hair, last Saturday morning, when I
heard a ring. Says cook, "That's missus's bell, and mind you hurry or
the master 'ill know why." Says    I, "Humbly thanking you, mem, but
taking advice of them as is competent to give it, I'll take my time."
Found missus dressing herself and master growling as usual. Says
missus, quite cairn and easy-like, "Mary, we begin to pack to-day."
"What for, mem?" says I, taken aback. "What's that hussy asking?" says
master from the bedclothes quite savage-like. "For the Continent--
Italy," says missus. "Can you go, Mary?" Her voice was quite gentle
and saintlike, but I knew the struggle it cost, and says I, "With you,
mem, to India's torrid clime, if required, but with African Gorillas,"
says I, looking toward the bed, "never." "Leave the room," says
master, starting up and catching of his bootjack. "Why, Charles!" says
missus, "how you talk!" affecting surprise. "Do go, Mary," says she,
slipping a half-crown into my hand. I left the room, scorning to take
notice of the odious wretch's conduct.

Cannot say whether my master and missus were ever legally married.
What with the dreadful state of morals nowadays and them stories in
the circulating libraries, innocent girls don't know into what society
they might be obliged to take situations. Never saw missus's marriage
certificate, though I have quite accidental-like looked in her desk
when open, and would have seen it. Do not know of any lovers missus
might have had. Believe she had a liking for John Thomas, footman, for
she was always spiteful-like--poor lady--when we were together--though
there was nothing between us, as cook well knows, and dare not deny,
and missus needn't have been jealous. Have never seen arsenic or
Prussian acid in any of the private drawers--but have seen paregoric
and camphor. One of my master's friends was a Count Moscow, a Russian
papist--which I detested.


CHAPTER II

THE SLIM YOUNG MAN'S STORY


I am by profession a reporter, and writer for the press. I live at
Pultneyville. I have always had a passion for the marvelous, and have
been distinguished for my facility in tracing out mysteries, and
solving enigmatical occurrences. On the night of the 17th June, 1845,
I left my office and walked homeward. The night was bright and
starlight. I was revolving in my mind the words of a singular item I
had just read in the "Times." I had reached the darkest portion of the
road, and found myself mechanically repeating: "An elderly gentleman a
week ago left his lodgings on the Kent Road," when suddenly I heard a
step behind me.

I turned quickly, with an expression of horror in my face, and by the
light of the newly risen moon beheld an elderly gentleman, with green
cotton umbrella, approaching me. His hair, which was snow white, was
parted over a broad, open forehead. The expression of his face, which
was slightly flushed, was that of amiability verging almost upon
imbecility. There was a strange, inquiring look about the widely
opened mild blue eye,--a look that might have been intensified to
insanity or modified to idiocy. As he passed me, he paused and partly
turned his face, with a gesture of inquiry. I see him still, his white
locks blowing in the evening breeze, his hat a little on the back of
his head, and his figure painted in relief against the dark blue sky.

Suddenly he turned his mild eye full upon me. A weak smile played
about his thin lips. In a voice which had something of the
tremulousness of age and the self-satisfied  chuckle of imbecility in
it, he asked, pointing to the rising moon, "Why?--Hush!"

He had dodged behind me, and appeared to be looking anxiously down the
road. I could feel his aged frame shaking with terror as he laid his
thin hands upon my shoulders and faced me in the direction of the
supposed danger.

"Hush! did you not hear them coming?"

I listened; there was no sound but the soughing of the roadside trees
in the evening wind. I endeavored to reassure him, with such success
that in a few moments the old weak smile appeared on his benevolent
face.

"Why?"--But the look of interrogation was succeeded by a hopeless
blankness.

"Why?" I repeated with assuring accents.

"Why," he said, a gleam of intelligence flickering over his face, "is
yonder moon, as she sails in the blue empyrean, casting a flood of
light o'er hill and dale, like--Why," he repeated, with a feeble
smile, "is yonder moon, as she sails in the blue empyrean"--He
hesitated,--stammered,--and gazed at me hopelessly, with the tears
dripping from his moist and widely opened eyes.

I took his hand kindly in my own. "Casting a shadow o'er hill and
dale," I repeated quietly, leading him up to the subject, "like--Come,
now."

"Ah!" he said, pressing my hand tremulously, "you know it?"

"I do. Why is it like--the--eh--the commodious mansion on the
Limehouse Road?"

A blank stare only followed. He shook his head sadly.

"Like the young men wanted for a light, genteel employment?"

He wagged his feeble old head cunningly.

"Or, Mr. Ward," I said, with bold confidence, "like the mysterious
disappearance from the Kent Road?"    The moment was full of suspense.
He did not seem to hear me. Suddenly he turned.

"Ha!"

I darted forward. But he had vanished in the darkness.


CHAPTER III

NO. 27 LIMEHOUSE ROAD


It was a hot midsummer evening. Limehouse Road was deserted save by
dust and a few rattling butchers' carts, and the bell of the muffin
and crumpet man. A commodious mansion, which stood on the right of the
road as you enter Pultneyville, surrounded by stately poplars and a
high fence surmounted by a cheval de frise of broken glass, looked to
the passing and footsore pedestrian like the genius of seclusion and
solitude. A bill announcing in the usual terms that the house was to
let hung from the bell at the servants' entrance.

As the shades of evening closed, and the long shadows of the poplars
stretched across the road, a man carrying a small kettle stopped and
gazed, first at the bill and then at the house. When he had reached
the corner of the fence, he again stopped and looked cautiously up and
down the road. Apparently satisfied with the result of his scrutiny,
he deliberately sat himself down in the dark shadow of the fence, and
at once busied himself in some employment, so well concealed as to be
invisible to the gaze of passers-by. At the end of an hour he retired
cautiously.

But not altogether unseen. A slim young man, with spectacles and
notebook, stepped from behind a tree as the retreating figure of the
intruder was lost in the twilight, and transferred from the fence to
his notebook the freshly stenciled inscription, "S--T--1860--X."


CHAPTER IV

COUNT MOSCOW'S NARRATIVE


I am a foreigner. Observe! To be a foreigner in England is to be
mysterious, suspicious, intriguing. M. Collins has requested the
history of my complicity with certain occurrences. It is nothing, bah!
absolutely nothing.  I write with ease and fluency. Why should I not
write? Tra-la-la! I am what you English call corpulent. Ha, ha! I am a
pupil of Macchiavelli. I find it much better to disbelieve everything,
and to approach my subject and wishes circuitously than in a direct
manner. You have observed that playful animal, the cat. Call it, and
it does not come to you directly, but rubs itself against all the
furniture in the room, and reaches you finally--and scratches. Ah, ha,
scratches! I am of the feline species. People call me a villain--bah!

I know the family living No. 27 Limehouse Road. I respect the
gentleman,--a fine, burly specimen of your Englishman,--and madame,
charming, ravishing, delightful. When it became known to me that they
designed to let their delightful residence, and visit foreign shores,
I at once called upon them. I kissed the hand of madame. I embraced
the great Englishman. Madame blushed slightly. The great Englishman
shook my hand like a mastiff.

I began in that dexterous, insinuating manner of which I am truly
proud. I thought madame was ill. Ah, no. A change, then, was all that
was required. I sat down at the piano and sang. In a few minutes
madame retired. I was alone with my friend.

Seizing his hand, I began with every demonstration of courteous
sympathy. I do not repeat my words, for my  intention was conveyed
more in accent, emphasis, and manner, than speech. I hinted to him
that he had another wife living. I suggested that this was balanced--
ha!--by his wife's lover. That, possibly, he wished to fly; hence the
letting of his delightful mansion. That he regularly and
systematically beat his wife in the English manner, and that she
repeatedly deceived him. I talked of hope, of consolation, of remedy.
I carelessly produced a bottle of strychnine and a small vial of
stramonium from my pocket, and enlarged on the efficiency of drugs.
His face, which had gradually become convulsed, suddenly became fixed
with a frightful expression. He started to his feet, and roared, "You
d--d Frenchman!"

I instantly changed my tactics, and endeavored to embrace him. He
kicked me twice, violently. I begged permission to kiss madame's hand.
He replied by throwing me downstairs.

I am in bed with my head bound up, and beefsteaks upon my eyes, but
still confident and buoyant. I have not lost faith in Macchiavelli.
Tra-la-la! as they sing in the opera. I kiss everybody's hands.


CHAPTER V

DR. DIGGS'S STATEMENT


My name is David Diggs. I am a surgeon, living at No. 9 Tottenham
Court. On the 15th of June, 1854, I was called to see an elderly
gentleman lodging on the Kent Road. Found him highly excited, with
strong febrile symptoms, pulse 120, increasing. Repeated incoherently
what I judged to be the popular form of a conundrum. On closer
examination found acute hydrocephalus, and both lobes of the brain
rapidly filling with water. In consultation with an eminent
phrenologist, it was further discovered  that all the organs were more
or less obliterated, except that of Comparison. Hence the patient was
enabled to only distinguish the most common points of resemblance
between objects, without drawing upon other faculties, such as
Ideality or Language, for assistance. Later in the day found him
sinking,--being evidently unable to carry the most ordinary conundrum
to a successful issue. Exhibited Tinct. Val., Ext. Opii, and Camphor,
and prescribed quiet and emollients. On the 17th the patient was
missing.


CHAPTER LAST

STATEMENT OF THE PUBLISHER


On the 18th of June, Mr. Wilkie Collins left a roll of manuscript with
us for publication, without title or direction, since which time he
has not been heard from. In spite of the care of the proof-readers,
and valuable literary assistance, it is feared that the continuity of
the story has been destroyed by some accidental misplacing of chapters
during its progress. How and what chapters are so misplaced, the
publisher leaves to an indulgent public to discover.


HANDSOME IS AS HANDSOME DOES

BY CH-S R-DE


CHAPTER I


The Dodds were dead. For twenty years they had slept under the green
graves of Kittery churchyard. The townfolk still spoke of them kindly.
The keeper of the alehouse, where David had smoked his pipe, regretted
him regularly, and Mistress Kitty, Mrs. Dodd's maid, whose trim figure
always looked well in her mistress's gowns, was inconsolable. The
Hardins were in America. Raby was aristocratically gouty; Mrs. Raby,
religious. Briefly, then, we have disposed of--

1. Mr. and Mrs. Dodd (dead).

2. Mr. and Mrs. Hardin (translated).

3. Raby, baron et femme. (Yet I don't know about the former; he came
of a long-lived family, and the gout is an uncertain-disease.)

We have active at the present writing (place aux dames)--

1. Lady Caroline Coventry, niece of Sir Frederick.

2. Faraday Huxley Little, son of Henry and Graco Little deceased.

_Sequitur_ to the above, A HERO AND HEROINE.


CHAPTER II


On the death of his parents, Faraday Little was taken to Raby Hall. In
accepting his guardianship, Mr. Raby  struggled stoutly against two
prejudices: Faraday was plain-looking and skeptical.

"Handsome is as handsome does, sweetheart," pleaded Jael, interceding
for the orphan with arms that were still beautiful. "Dear knows, it is
not his fault if he does not look like--his father," she added with a
great gulp. Jael was a woman, and vindicated her womanhood by never
entirely forgiving a former rival.

"It's not that alone, madam," screamed Raby, "but, d--m it, the little
rascal's a scientist,--an atheist, a radical, a scoffer! Disbelieves
in the Bible, ma'am; is full of this Darwinian stuff about natural
selection and descent. Descent, forsooth! In my day, madam, gentlemen
were content to trace their ancestors back to gentlemen, and not to--
monkeys!"

"Dear heart, the boy is clever," urged Jael.

"Clever!" roared Raby; "what does a gentleman want with cleverness?"


CHAPTER III


Young Little _was_ clever. At seven he had constructed a telescope; at
nine, a flying-machine. At ten he saved a valuable life.

Norwood Park was the adjacent estate,--a lordly domain dotted with red
deer and black trunks, but scrupulously kept with graveled roads as
hard and blue as steel. There Little was strolling one summer morning,
meditating on a new top with concealed springs. At a little distance
before him he saw the flutter of lace and ribbons. A young lady, a
very young lady,--say of seven summers,--tricked out in the crying
abominations of the present fashion, stood beside a low bush. Her
nursery-maid was not present, possibly owing to the fact that John the
footman was also absent.

  Suddenly Little came towards her. "Excuse me, but do you know what
  those berries are?" He was pointing to the low bush filled with dark
  clusters of shining--suspiciously shining--fruit.

"Certainly; they are blueberries."

"Pardon me; you are mistaken. They belong to quite another family."

Miss Impudence drew herself up to her full height (exactly three feet
nine and a half inches), and, curling an eighth of an inch of scarlet
lip, said scornfully, "_Your_ family, perhaps."

Faraday Little smiled in the superiority of boyhood over girlhood.

"I allude to the classification. That plant is the belladonna, or
deadly nightshade. Its alkaloid is a narcotic poison."

Sauciness turned pale. "I--have--just--eaten--some!" And began to
whimper. "Oh dear, what shall I do?" Then did it, i. e., wrung her
small fingers, and cried.

"Pardon me one moment." Little passed his arm around her neck, and
with his thumb opened widely the patrician-veined lids of her sweet
blue eyes. "Thank Heaven, there is yet no dilation of the pupil; it is
not too late!" He cast a rapid glance around. The nozzle and about
three feet of garden hose lay near him.

"Open your mouth, quick!"

It was a pretty, kissable mouth. But young Little meant business. He
put the nozzle down her pink throat as far as it would go.

"Now, don't move."

He wrapped his handkerchief around a hoop-stick. Then he inserted both
in the other end of the stiff hose. It fitted snugly. He shoved it in
and then drew it back.

Nature abhors a vacuum. The young patrician was as amenable to this
law as the child of the lowest peasant.    She succumbed. It was all
over in a minute. Then she burst into a small fury.

"You nasty, bad--_ugly_ boy."

Young Little winced, but smiled.

"Stimulants," he whispered to the frightened nurserymaid, who
approached; "good-evening." He was gone.


CHAPTER IV


The breach between young Little and Mr. Raby was slowly widening.
Little found objectionable features in the Hall. "This black oak
ceiling and wainscoting is not as healthful as plaster; besides, it
absorbs the light. The bedroom ceiling is too low; the Elizabethan
architects knew nothing of ventilation. The color of that oak paneling
which you admire is due to an excess of carbon and the exuvia from the
pores of your skin"--

"Leave the house," bellowed Raby, "before the roof falls on your
sacrilegious head!"

As Little left the house, Lady Caroline and a handsome boy of about
Little's age entered. Lady Caroline recoiled, and then--blushed.
Little glared; he instinctively felt the presence of a rival.


CHAPTER V


Little worked hard. He studied night and day. In five years he became
a lecturer, then a professor.

He soared as high as the clouds, he dipped as low as the cellars of
the London poor. He analyzed the London fog, and found it two parts
smoke, one disease, one unmentionable abominations. He published a
pamphlet, which was violently attacked. Then he knew he had done
something.

But he had not forgotten Caroline. He was walking one day in the
Zoological Gardens, and he came upon a pretty picture,--flesh and
blood, too.

Lady Caroline feeding buns to the bears! An exquisite thrill passed
through his veins. She turned her sweet face and their eyes met. They
recollected their first meeting seven years before, but it was his
turn to be shy and timid. Wonderful power of age and sex! She met him
with perfect self-possession.

"Well meant, but indigestible, I fear" (he alluded to the buns).

"A clever person like yourself can easily correct that" (she, the
slyboots, was thinking of something else).

In a few moments they were chatting gayly. Little eagerly descanted
upon the different animals; she listened with delicious interest. An
hour glided delightfully away.

After this sunshine, clouds.

To them suddenly entered Mr. Raby and a handsome young man. The
gentlemen bowed stiffly and looked vicious--as they felt. The lady of
this quartette smiled amiably--as she did not feel.

"Looking at your ancestors, I suppose," said Mr. Raby, pointing to the
monkeys; "we will not disturb you. Come." And he led Caroline away.

Little was heart-sick. He dared not follow them. But an hour later he
saw something which filled his heart with bliss unspeakable.

Lady Caroline, with a divine smile on her face, feeding the monkeys!


CHAPTER VI


Encouraged by love, Little worked hard upon his new flying-machine.
His labors were lightened by talking of the beloved one with her
French maid Therese, whom he  had discreetly bribed. Mademoiselle
Therese was venal, like all her class, but in this instance I fear she
was not bribed by British gold. Strange as it may seem to the British
mind, it was British genius, British eloquence, British thought, that
brought her to the feet of this young savan.

"I believe," said Lady Caroline, one day, interrupting her maid in a
glowing eulogium upon the skill of "M. Leetell,"--"I believe you are
in love with this professor." A quick flush crossed the olive cheek of
Therese, which Lady Caroline afterward remembered.

The eventful day of trial came. The public were gathered, impatient
and scornful as the pig-headed public are apt to be. In the open area
a long cylindrical balloon, in shape like a Bologna sausage, swayed
above the machine, from which, like some enormous bird caught in a
net, it tried to free itself. A heavy rope held it fast to the ground.

Little was waiting for the ballast, when his eye caught Lady
Caroline's among the spectators. The glance was appealing. In a moment
he was at her side.

"I should like so much to get into the machine," said the arch-
hypocrite demurely.

"Are you engaged to marry young Raby?" said Little bluntly.

"As you please," she said with a curtsy; "do I take this as a
refusal?"

Little was a gentleman. He lifted her and her lap-dog into the car.

"How nice! it won't go off?"

"No, the rope is strong, and the ballast is not yet in."

A report like a pistol, a cry from the spectators, a thousand hands
stretched to grasp the parted rope, and the balloon darted upward.

Only one hand of that thousand caught the rope,--Little's! But in the
same instant the horror-stricken spectators saw him whirled from his
feet and borne upward, still clinging to the rope, into space.


CHAPTER VII [Footnote: The right of dramatization of this and
succeeding chapters is reserved by the writer.]


Lady Caroline fainted. The cold, watery nose of her dog on her cheek
brought her to herself. She dared not look over the edge of the car;
she dared not look up to the bellowing monster above her, bearing her
to death. She threw herself on the bottom of the car, and embraced the
only living thing spared her,--the poodle. Then she cried. Then a
clear voice came apparently out of the circumambient air,--

"May I trouble you to look at the barometer?"

She put her head over the car. Little was hanging at the end of a long
rope. She put her head back again.

In another moment he saw her perplexed, blushing face over the edge,--
blissful sight.

"Oh, please don't think of coming up! Stay there, do!"

Little stayed. Of course she could make nothing out of the barometer,
and said so. Little smiled.

"Will you kindly send it down to me?"

But she had no string or cord. Finally she said, "Wait a moment."
Little waited. This time her face did not appear. The barometer came
slowly down at the end of--a stay-lace.

The barometer showed a frightful elevation. Little looked up at the
valve and said nothing. Presently he heard a sigh. Then a sob. Then,
rather sharply,--

"Why don't you do something?"


CHAPTER VIII


Little came up the rope hand over hand. Lady Caroline crouched in the
farther side of the car. Fido, the poodle, whined.

"Poor thing," said Lady Caroline, "it's hungry."

"Do you wish to save the dog?" said Little.

"Yes."

"Give me your parasol."

She handed Little a good-sized affair of lace and silk and whalebone.
(None of your "sunshades.") Little examined its ribs carefully.

"Give me the dog."

Lady Caroline hurriedly slipped a note under the dog's collar, and
passed over her pet.

Little tied the dog to the handle of the parasol and launched them
both into space. The next moment they were slowly, but tranquilly,
sailing to the earth.

"A parasol and a parachute are distinct, but not different. Be not
alarmed, he will get his dinner at some farmhouse."

"Where are we now?"

"That opaque spot you see is London fog. Those twin clouds are North
and South America. Jerusalem and Madagascar are those specks to the
right."

Lady Caroline moved nearer; she was becoming interested. Then she
recalled herself, and said freezingly, "How are we going to descend?"

"By opening the valve."

"Why don't you open it then?"

"BECAUSE THE VALVE-STRING IS BROKEN!"


CHAPTER IX


Lady Caroline fainted. When she revived it was dark. They were
apparently cleaving their way through a solid block of black marble.
She moaned and shuddered.

"I wish we had a light."

"I have no lucifers." said Little. "I observe, however, that you wear
a necklace of amber. Amber under certain conditions becomes highly
electrical. Permit me."

He took the amber necklace and rubbed it briskly. Then he asked her to
present her knuckle to the gem. Abright spark was the  result. This
was repeated for some hours. The light was not brilliant, but it was
enough for the purposes of propriety, and satisfied the delicately
minded girl.

Suddenly there was a tearing, hissing noise and a smell of gas. Little
looked up and turned pale. The balloon, at what I shall call the
pointed end of the Bologna sausage, was evidently bursting from
increased pressure. The gas was escaping, and already they were
beginning to descend. Little was resigned but firm.

"If the silk gives way, then we are lost. Unfortunately I have no rope
nor material for binding it."

The woman's instinct had arrived at the same conclusion sooner than
the man's reason. But she was hesitating over a detail.

"Will you go down the rope for a moment?" she said, with a sweet
smile.

Little went down. Presently she called to him. She held something in
her hand,--a wonderful invention of the seventeenth century, improved
and perfected in this: a pyramid of sixteen circular hoops of light
yet strong steel, attached to each other by cloth bands.

With a cry of joy Little seized them, climbed to the  balloon, and
fitted the elastic hoops over its conical end. Then he returned to the
car.

"We are saved." Lady Caroline, blushing, gathered her slim but antique
drapery against the other end of the car.


CHAPTER X


They were slowly descending. Presently Lady Caroline distinguished the
outlines of Raby Hall.

"I think I will get out here," she said.

Little anchored the balloon, and prepared to follow her.

"Not so, my friend," she said, with an arch smile. "We must not be
seen together. People might talk. Farewell."

Little sprang again into the balloon and sped away to America. He came
down in California, oddly enough in front of Hardin's door, at Dutch
Flat. Hardin was just examining a specimen of ore.

"You are a scientist; can you tell me if that is worth anything?" he
said, handing it to Little.

Little held it to the light. "It contains ninety per cent of silver."

Hardin embraced him. "Can I do anything for you, and why are you
here?"

Little told his story. Hardin asked to see the rope. Then he examined
it carefully.

"Ah, this was cut, not broken!"

"With a knife?" asked Little.

"No. Observe both sides are equally indented. It was done with a
_scissors_!"

"Just Heaven!" gasped Little. "Therese!"


CHAPTER XI


Little returned to London. Passing through London one day he met a
dog-fancier.

"Buy a nice poodle, sir?"

Something in the animal attracted his attention.

"Fido!" he gasped.

The dog yelped.

Little bought him. On taking off his collar a piece of paper rustled
to the floor. He knew the handwriting and kissed it. It ran:--

To THE HONORABLE AUGUSTUS RABY--I cannot marry you. If I marry any one
[sly puss] it will be the man who has twice saved my life, Professor
Little.    CAROLINE COVENTRY.

And she did.


LOTHAW

OR

THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN SEARCH OF A RELIGION

BY MR. BENJAMINS


CHAPTER I


"I remember him a little boy," said the Duchess. "His mother was a
dear friend of mine; you know she was one of my bridesmaids."

"And you have never seen him since, mamma?" asked the oldest married
daughter, who did not look a day older than her mother.

"Never; he was an orphan shortly after. I have often reproached
myself, but it is so difficult to see boys."

This simple yet first-class conversation existed in the morning-room
of Plusham, where the mistress of the palatial mansion sat involved in
the sacred privacy of a circle of her married daughters. One
dexterously applied golden knitting-needles to the fabrication of a
purse of floss silk of the rarest texture, which none who knew the
almost fabulous wealth of the Duke would believe was ever destined to
hold in its silken meshes a less sum than 1,000,000 pounds; another
adorned a slipper exclusively with seed pearls; a third emblazoned a
page with rare pigments and the finest quality of gold leaf. Beautiful
forms leaned over frames glowing with embroidery, and beautiful frames
leaned over forms inlaid with mother-of-pearl. Others, more remote,
occasionally burst into melody as they tried the passages of  a new
and exclusive air given to them in MS. by some titled and devoted
friend, for the private use of the aristocracy alone, and absolutely
prohibited for publication.

The Duchess, herself the superlative of beauty, wealth, and position,
was married to the highest noble in the Three Kingdoms. Those who
talked about such matters said that their progeny were exactly like
their parents,--a peculiarity of the aristocratic and wealthy. They
all looked like brothers and sisters, except their parents, who, such
was their purity of blood, the perfection of their manners, and the
opulence of their condition, might have been taken for their own
children's elder son and daughter. The daughters, with one exception,
were all married to the highest nobles in the land. That exception was
the Lady Coriander, who, there being no vacancy above a marquis and a
rental of 1,000,000 pounds, waited. Gathered around the refined and
sacred circle of their breakfast-table, with their glittering coronets,
which, in filial respect to their father's Tory instincts and their
mother's Ritualistic tastes, they always wore on their regal brows,
the effect was dazzling as it was refined. It was this peculiarity and
their strong family resemblance which led their brother-in-law, the
good-humored St. Addlegourd, to say that, "'Pon my soul, you know, the
whole precious mob looked like a ghastly pack of court cards, you
know." St. Addlegourd was a radical. Having a rent-roll of
15,000,000 pounds, and belonging to one of the oldest families in
Britain, he could afford to be.

"Mamma, I've just dropped a pearl," said the Lady Coriander, bending
over the Persian hearth-rug.

"From your lips, sweet friend?" said Lothaw, who came of age and
entered the room at the same moment.

"No, from my work. It was a very valuable pearl, mamma; papa gave
Isaacs Sons 50,000 pounds for the two."

"Ah, indeed," said the Duchess, languidly rising; "let us go to
luncheon."

"But, your Grace," interposed Lothaw, who was still quite young, and
had dropped on all fours on the carpet in search of the missing gem,
"consider the value"--

"Dear friend," interposed the Duchess with infinite tact, gently
lifting him by the tails of his dress coat, "I am waiting for your
arm."


CHAPTER II


Lothaw was immensely rich. The possessor of seventeen castles, fifteen
villas, nine shooting-boxes, and seven town houses, he had other
estates of which he had not even heard.

Everybody at Plusham played croquet, and none badly. Next to their
purity of blood and great wealth, the family were famous for this
accomplishment. Yet Lothaw soon tired of the game, and after seriously
damaging his aristocratically large foot in an attempt to "tight
croquet" the Lady Aniseed's ball, he limped away to join the Duchess.

"I'm going to the hennery," she said.


"Let me go with you; I dearly love fowls--broiled," he added
thoughtfully.

"The Duke gave Lady Montairy some large Cochins the other day,"
continued the Duchess, changing the subject with delicate tact.

  "Lady Montairy   Quite contrairy, How do your Cochins grow?"

sang Lothaw gayly.

The Duchess looked shocked. After a prolonged silence Lothaw abruptly
and gravely said:--

"If you please, ma'am, when I come into my property I should like to
build some improved dwellings for the poor, and marry Lady Coriander."

"You amaze me, dear friend; and yet both your aspirations are noble
and eminently proper," said the Duchess.

"Coriander is but a child,--and yet," she added, looking graciously
upon her companion, "for the matter of that, so  are you."


CHAPTER III


Mr. Putney Giles's was Lothaw's first grand dinner-party. Yet, by
carefully watching the others, he managed to acquit himself
creditably, and avoided drinking out of the finger-bowl by first
secretly testing its contents with a spoon. The conversation was
peculiar and singularly interesting.

"Then you think that monogamy is simply a question of the
thermometer?" said Mrs. Putney Giles to her companion.

"I certainly think that polygamy should be limited by isothermal
lines," replied Lothaw.

"I should say it was a matter of latitude," observed a loud, talkative
man opposite. He was an Oxford professor with a taste for satire, and
had made himself very obnoxious to the company, during dinner, by
speaking disparagingly of a former well-known chancellor of the
exchequer,--a great statesman and brilliant novelist,--whom he feared
and hated.

Suddenly there was a sensation in the room; among the females it
absolutely amounted to a nervous thrill. His Eminence, the Cardinal,
was announced. He entered with great suavity of manner, and after
shaking hands with everybody, asking after their relatives, and
chucking the more delicate females under the chin with a high-bred
grace peculiar to his profession, he sat down, saying, "And how do we
all find ourselves this evening, my dears?" in several different
languages, which he spoke fluently.

Lothaw's heart was touched. His deeply religious convictions were
impressed. He instantly went up to this gifted being, confessed, and
received absolution. "Tomorrow," he said to  himself, "I will partake
of the communion, and endow the Church with my vast estates. For the
present I'll let the improved cottages go."


CHAPTER IV


As Lothaw turned to leave the Cardinal, he was struck by a beautiful
face. It was that of a matron, slim but shapely as an Ionic column.
Her face was Grecian, with Corinthian temples; Hellenic eyes that
looked from jutting eyebrows, like dormer-windows in an Attic
forehead, completed her perfect Athenian outline. She wore a black
frock-coat tightly buttoned over her bloomer trousers, and a standing
collar.

"Your lordship is struck by that face?" said a social parasite.

"I am; who is she?"

"Her name is Mary Ann. She is married to an American, and has lately
invented a new religion."

"Ah!" said Lothaw eagerly, with difficulty restraining himself from
rushing toward her.

"Yes; shall I introduce you?"

Lothaw thought of Lady Coriander's High Church proclivities, of the
Cardinal, and hesitated: "No, I thank you, not now."


CHAPTER V


Lothaw was maturing. He had attended two womens' rights conventions,
three Fenian meetings, had dined at White's, and had danced _vis-a-vis_
to a prince of the blood, and eaten off gold plates at Crecy House.

His stables were near Oxford, and occupied more ground than the
University. He was driving over there one day, when he perceived some
rustics and menials endeavoring  to stop a pair of runaway horses
attached to a carriage in which a lady and gentleman were seated.
Calmly awaiting the termination of the accident, with high-bred
courtesy Lothaw forbore to interfere until the carriage was
overturned, the occupants thrown out, and the runaways secured by the
servants, when he advanced and offered the lady the exclusive use of
his Oxford stables.

Turning upon him a face whose perfect Hellenic details he remembered,
she slowly dragged a gentleman from under the wheels into the light,
and presented him with ladylike dignity as her husband, Major-General
Camperdown, an American.

"Ah," said Lothaw carelessly, "I believe I have some land there. If I
mistake  not, my agent, Mr. Putney Giles, lately purchased the State
of--Illinois--I think you call it."

"Exactly. As a former resident of the city of Chicago, let me
introduce myself as your tenant."

Lothaw bowed graciously to the gentleman, who, except that he seemed
better dressed than most Englishmen, showed no other signs of
inferiority and plebeian extraction.

"We have met before," said Lothaw to the lady as she leaned on his
arm, while they visited his stables, the University, and other places
of interest in Oxford, "Pray tell me, what is this new religion of
yours?"

"It is Woman Suffrage, Free Love, Mutual Affinity, and Communism.
Embrace it and me."

Lothaw did not know exactly what to do. She, however, soothed and
sustained his agitated frame, and sealed with an embrace his
speechless form. The General approached and coughed slightly with
gentlemanly tact.

"My husband will be too happy to talk with you further on this
subject," she said with quiet dignity, as she regained the General's
side. "Come with us to Oneida. Brook Farm is a thing of the past."


CHAPTER VI


As Lothaw drove toward his country-seat, The Mural Inclosure, he
observed a crowd, apparently of the working-class, gathered around a
singular-looking man in the picturesque garb of an Ethiopian
serenader. "What does he say?" inquired Lothaw of his driver.

The man touched his hat respectfully, and said, "My Mary Ann."

"'My Mary Ann!'" Lothaw's heart beat rapidly. Who was this mysterious
foreigner? He had heard from Lady Coriander of a certain Popish plot;
but could he connect Mr. Camperdown with it?

The spectacle of two hundred men at arms, who advanced to meet him at
the gates of The Mural Inclosure, drove all else from the still
youthful and impressible mind of Lothaw. Immediately behind them, on
the steps of the baronial halls, were ranged his retainers, led by the
chief cook and bottle-washer and head crumb-remover. On either side
were two companies of laundry-maids, preceded by the chief crimper and
fluter, supporting a long Ancestral Line, on which depended the family
linen, and under which the youthful lord of the manor passed into the
halls of his fathers. Twenty-four scullions carried the massive gold
and silver plate of the family on their shoulders, and deposited it at
the feet of their master. The spoons were then solemnly counted by the
steward, and the perfect ceremony ended.

Lothaw sighed. He sought out the gorgeously gilded "Taj," or sacred
mausoleum erected to his grandfather in the second-story front room,
and wept over the man he did not know.

He wandered alone in his magnificent park, and then, throwing himself
on a grassy bank, pondered on the Great First Cause and the necessity
of religion. "I will send Mary Ann a handsome present," said Lothaw
thoughtfully.


CHAPTER VII


"Each of these pearls, my lord, is worth fifty thousand guineas," said
Mr. Amethyst, the fashionable jeweler, as he lightly lifted a large
shovelful from a convenient bin behind his counter.

"Indeed," said Lothaw carelessly, "I should prefer to see some
expensive ones."

"Some number sixes, I suppose," said Mr. Amethyst, taking a couple
from the apex of a small pyramid that lay piled on the shelf. "These
are about the size of the Duchess of Billingsgate's, but they are in
finer condition. The fact is, her Grace permits her two children, the
Marquis of Smithfield and the Duke of St. Giles,--two sweet pretty
boys, my lord,--to use them as marbles in their games. Pearls require
some attention, and I go down there regularly twice a week to clean
them. Perhaps your lordship would like some ropes of pearls?"

"About half a cable's length," said Lothaw shortly, "and send them to
my lodgings."

Mr. Amethyst became thoughtful. "I am afraid I have not the exact
number--that is--excuse me one moment. I will run over to the Tower
and borrow a few from the crown jewels." And before Lothaw could
prevent him, he seized his hat and left Lothaw alone.

His position certainly was embarrassing. He could not move without
stepping on costly gems which had rolled from the counter; the rarest
diamonds lay scattered on the shelves; untold fortunes in priceless
emeralds lay within his grasp. Although such was the aristocratic
purity of his blood and the strength of his religious convictions that
he  probably would not have pocketed a single diamond, still he could
not help thinking that he might be accused of taking some. "You can
search me, if you like," he said when Mr. Amethyst returned; "but I
assure you, upon the honor of a gentleman, that I have taken nothing."

"Enough, my lord," said Mr. Amethyst, with a low bow; "we never search
the aristocracy."


CHAPTER VIII


As Lothaw left Mr. Amethyst's, he ran against General Camperdown. "How
is Mary Ann?" he asked hurriedly.

"I regret to state that she is dying," said the General, with a grave
voice, as he removed his cigar from his lips, and lifted his hat to
Lothaw.

"Dying!" said Lothaw incredulously.

"Alas, too true!" replied the General. "The engagements of a long
lecturing season, exposure in traveling by railway during the winter,
and the imperfect nourishment afforded by the refreshments along the
road, have told on her delicate frame. But she wants to see you before
she dies. Here is the key of my lodging. I will finish my cigar out
here."

Lothaw hardly recognized those wasted Hellenic outlines as he entered
the dimly lighted room of the dying woman. She was already a classic
ruin,--as wrecked and yet as perfect as the Parthenon. He grasped her
hand silently.

"Open-air speaking twice a week, and Saleratus bread in the rural
districts, have brought me to this," she said feebly;  "but it is
well. The cause progresses. The tyrant man succumbs."

Lothaw could only press her hand.

"Promise me one thing. Don't--whatever you do--become a Catholic."

"Why?"

"The Church does not recognize divorce. And now embrace me. I would
prefer at this supreme moment to introduce myself to the next world
through the medium of the best society in this. Good-by. When I am
dead, be good enough to inform my husband of the fact."


CHAPTER IX


Lothaw spent the next six months on an Aryan island, in an Aryan
climate, and with an Aryan race.

"This is an Aryan landscape," said his host, "and that is a Mary Ann
statue." It was, in fact, a full-length figure in marble of Mrs.
General Camperdown.

"If you please, I should like to become a Pagan," said Lothaw, one
day, after listening to an impassioned discourse on Greek art from the
lips of his host.

But that night, on consulting a well-known spiritual medium, Lothaw
received a message from the late Mrs. General Camperdown, advising him
to return to England. Two days later he presented himself at Plusham.

"The young ladies are in the garden," said the Duchess. "Don't you
want to go and pick a rose?" she added with a gracious smile, and the
nearest approach to a wink that was consistent with her patrician
bearing and aquiline nose.

Lothaw went and presently returned with the blushing Coriander upon
his arm.

"Bless you, my children," said the Duchess. Then turning to Lothaw,
she said: "You have simply fulfilled and accepted your inevitable
destiny. It was morally impossible for you to marry out of this
family. For the present, the Church of England is safe."


THE HAUNTED MAN

BY CH--R--S D--CK--N--S.

A CHRISTMAS STORY


PART I

THE FIRST PHANTOM


Don't tell me that it wasn't a knocker. I had seen it often enough,
and I ought to know. So ought the three-o'clock beer, in dirty high-
lows, swinging himself over the railing, or executing a demoniacal jig
upon the doorstep; so ought the butcher, although butchers as a
general thing are scornful of such trifles; so ought the postman, to
whom knockers of the most extravagant description were merely human
weaknesses, that were to be pitied and used. And so ought for the
matter of that, etc., etc., etc.

But then it was _such_ a knocker. A wild, extravagant, and utterly
incomprehensible knocker. A knocker so mysterious and suspicious that
policeman X 37, first coming upon it, felt inclined to take it
instantly in custody, but compromised with his professional instincts
by sharply and sternly noting it with an eye that admitted of no
nonsense, but confidently expected to detect its secret yet. An ugly
knocker; a knocker with a hard human face, that was a type of the
harder human face within. A human face that held between its teeth a
brazen rod. So hereafter, in the mysterious future should be held,
etc., etc.

But if the knocker had a fierce human aspect in the glare of day, you
should have seen it at night, when it  peered out of the gathering
shadows and suggested an ambushed figure; when the light of the street
lamps fell upon it, and wrought a play of sinister expression in its
hard outlines; when it seemed to wink meaningly at a shrouded figure
who, as the night fell darkly, crept up the steps and passed into the
mysterious house; when the swinging door disclosed a black passage
into which the figure seemed to lose itself and become a part of the
mysterious gloom; when the night grew boisterous and the fierce wind
made furious charges at the knocker, as if to wrench it off and carry
it away in triumph. Such a night as this.

It was a wild and pitiless wind. A wind that had commenced life as a
gentle country zephyr, but, wandering through manufacturing towns, had
become demoralized, and, reaching the city, had plunged into
extravagant dissipation and wild excesses. A roistering wind that
indulged in Bacchanalian shouts on the street corners, that knocked
off the hats from the heads of helpless passengers, and then fulfilled
its duties by speeding away, like all young prodigals,--to sea.

He sat alone in a gloomy library listening to the wind that roared in
the chimney. Around him novels and storybooks were strewn thickly; in
his lap he held one with its pages freshly cut, and turned the leaves
wearily until his eyes rested upon a portrait in its frontispiece. And
as the wind howled the more fiercely, and the darkness without fell
blacker, a strange and fateful likeness to that portrait appeared
above his chair and leaned upon his shoulder. The Haunted Man gazed at
the portrait and sighed. The figure gazed at the portrait and sighed
too.

"Here again?" said the Haunted Man.

"Here again," it repeated in a low voice.

"Another novel?"

"Another novel."

"The old story?"

"The old story."

"I see a child," said the Haunted Man, gazing from the pages of the
book into the fire,--"a most unnatural child, a model infant. It is
prematurely old and philosophic. It dies in poverty to slow music. It
dies surrounded by luxury to slow music. It dies with an accompaniment
of golden water and rattling carts to slow music. Previous to its
decease it makes a will; it repeats the Lord's Prayer, it kisses the
'boofer lady.' That child"--

"Is mine," said the phantom.

"I see a good woman, undersized. I see several charming women, but
they are all undersized. They are more or less imbecile and idiotic,
but always fascinating and undersized. They wear coquettish caps and
aprons. I observe that feminine virtue is invariably below the medium
height, and that it is always simple and infantine. These women"--

"Are mine."

"I see a haughty, proud, and wicked lady. She is tall and queenly. I
remark that all proud and wicked women are tall and queenly. That
woman"--

"Is mine," said the phantom, wringing his hands.

"I see several things continually impending. I observe that whenever
an accident, a murder, or death is about to happen, there is something
in the furniture, in the locality, in the atmosphere, that foreshadows
and suggests it years in advance. I cannot say that in real life I
have noticed it,--the perception of this surprising fact belongs"--

"To me!" said the phantom. The Haunted Man continued, in a despairing
tone,--

"I see the influence of this in the magazines and daily papers; I see
weak imitators rise up and enfeeble the world with senseless formula.
I am getting tired of it. It won't do, Charles! it won't do!" and the
Haunted Man buried  his head in his hands and groaned. The figure
looked down upon him sternly; the portrait in the frontispiece frowned
as he gazed.

"Wretched man," said the phantom, "and how have these things affected
you?"

"Once I laughed and cried, but then I was younger. Now, I would forget
them if I could."

"Have then your wish. And take this with you, man whom I renounce.
From this day henceforth you shall live with those whom I displace.
Without forgetting me, 'twill be your lot to walk through life as if
we had not met. But first you shall survey these scenes that
henceforth must be yours. At one to-night, prepare to meet the phantom
I have raised. Farewell!"

The sound of its voice seemed to fade away with the dying wind, and
the Haunted Man was alone. But the firelight flickered gayly, and the
light danced on the walls, making grotesque figures of the furniture.

"Ha, ha!" said the Haunted Man, rubbing his hands gleefully; "now for
a whiskey punch and a cigar."


PART II

THE SECOND PHANTOM


One! The stroke of the far-off bell had hardly died before the front
door closed with a reverberating clang. Steps were heard along the
passage; the library door swung open of itself, and the Knocker--yes,
the Knocker--slowly strode into the room. The Haunted Man rubbed his
eyes,--no! there could be no mistake about it,--it was the Knocker's
face, mounted on a misty, almost imperceptible body. The brazen rod
was transferred from its mouth to its right hand, where it was held
like a ghostly truncheon.

"It's a cold evening," said the Haunted Man.

"It is," said the Goblin, in a hard, metallic voice.

"It must be pretty cold out there," said the Haunted Man, with vague
politeness. "Do you ever--will you--take some hot water and brandy?"

"No," said the Goblin.

"Perhaps you'd like it cold, by way of change?" continued the Haunted
Man, correcting himself, as he remembered the peculiar temperature
with which the Goblin was probably familiar.

"Time flies," said the Goblin coldly. "We have no leisure for idle
talk. Come!" He moved his ghostly truncheon toward the window, and
laid his hand upon the other's arm. At his touch the body of the
Haunted Man seemed to become as thin and incorporeal as that of the
Goblin himself, and together they glided out of the window into the
black and blowy night.

In the rapidity of their flight the senses of the Haunted Man seemed
to leave him. At length they stopped suddenly.

"What do you see?" asked the Goblin.

"I see a battlemented mediaeval castle. Gallant men in mail ride over
the drawbridge, and kiss their gauntleted fingers to fair ladies, who
wave their lily hands in return. I see fight and fray and tournament.
I hear roaring heralds bawling the charms of delicate women, and
shamelessly proclaiming their lovers. Stay. I see a Jewess about to
leap from a battlement. I see knightly deeds, violence, rapine, and a
good deal of blood. I've seen pretty much the same at Astley's."

"Look again."

"I see purple moors, glens, masculine women, bare-legged men, priggish
book-worms, more violence, physical excellence, and blood. Always
blood,--and the superiority of physical attainments."   "And how do
you feel now?" said the Goblin.

The Haunted Man shrugged his shoulders. "None the better for being
carried back and asked to sympathize with a barbarous age."

The Goblin smiled and clutched his arm; they again sped rapidly away
through the black night, and again halted.

"What do you see?" said the Goblin.

"I see a barrack-room, with a mess-table, and a group of intoxicated
Celtic officers telling funny stories, and giving challenges to duel.
I see a young Irish gentleman capable of performing prodigies of
valor. I learn incidentally that the acme of all heroism is the
cornetcy of a dragoon regiment. I hear a good deal of French! No,
thank you," said the Haunted Man hurriedly, as he stayed the waving
hand of the Goblin; "I would rather _not_ go to the Peninsula, and
don't care to have a private interview with Napoleon."

Again the Goblin flew away with the unfortunate man, and from a
strange roaring below them he judged they were above the ocean. A ship
hove in sight, and the Goblin stayed its flight. "Look," he said,
squeezing his companion's arm.

The Haunted Man yawned. "Don't you think, Charles, you're rather
running this thing into the ground? Of course it's very moral and
instructive, and all that. But ain't there a little too much pantomime
about it? Come now!"

"Look!" repeated the Goblin, pinching his arm malevolently. The
Haunted Man groaned.

"Oh, of course, I see her Majesty's ship Arethusa. Of course I am
familiar with her stern First Lieutenant, her eccentric Captain, her
one fascinating and several mischievous midshipmen. Of course I know
it's a splendid thing to see all this, and not to be seasick. Oh,
there, the young gentlemen are going to play a trick on the purser. For
God's sake, let us go," and the unhappy man absolutely dragged the
Goblin away with him.

When they next halted, it was at the edge of a broad and boundless
prairie, in the middle of an oak opening.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, without waiting for his cue, but
mechanically, and as if he were repeating a lesson which the Goblin
had taught him,--"I see the Noble Savage. He is very fine to look at!
But I observe, under his war-paint, feathers, and picturesque blanket,
dirt, disease, and an unsymmetrical contour. I observe beneath his
inflated rhetoric deceit and hypocrisy; beneath his physical hardihood
cruelty, malice, and revenge. The Noble Savage is a humbug. I remarked
the same to Mr. Catlin."

"Come," said the phantom.

The Haunted Man sighed, and took out his watch. "Couldn't we do the
rest of this another time?"

"My hour is almost spent, irreverent being, but there is yet a chance
for your reformation. Come!"

Again they sped through the night, and again halted. The sound of
delicious but melancholy music fell upon their ears.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, with something of interest in his
manner,--"I see an old moss-covered manse beside a sluggish, flowing
river. I see weird shapes: witches, Puritans, clergymen, little
children, judges, mesmerized maidens, moving to the sound of melody
that thrills me with its sweetness and purity. But, although carried
along its calm and evenly flowing current, the shapes are strange and
frightful: an eating lichen gnaws at the heart of each. Not only the
clergymen, but witch, maiden, judge, and Puritan, all wear Scarlet
Letters of some kind burned upon their hearts. I am fascinated and
thrilled, but I feel a morbid sensitiveness creeping over me. I--I beg
your pardon." The Goblin was yawning frightfully." Well, perhaps we
had better go."   "One more, and the last," said the Goblin.

They were moving home. Streaks of red were beginning to appear in the
eastern sky. Along the banks of the blackly flowing river by moorland
and stagnant fens, by low houses, clustering close to the water's
edge, like strange mollusks crawled upon the beach to dry; by misty
black barges, the more misty and indistinct seen through its
mysterious veil, the river fog was slowly rising. So rolled away and
rose from the heart of the Haunted Man, etc., etc.

They stopped before a quaint mansion of red brick. The Goblin waved
his hand without speaking.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, "a gay drawing-room. I see my old
friends of the club, of the college, of society, even as they lived
and moved. I see the gallant and unselfish men whom I have loved, and
the snobs whom I have hated. I see strangely mingling with them, and
now and then blending with their forms, our old friends Dick Steele,
Addison, and Congreve. I observe, though, that these gentlemen have a
habit of getting too much in the way. The royal standard of Queen
Anne, not in itself a beautiful ornament, is rather too prominent in
the picture. The long galleries of black oak, the formal furniture,
the old portraits, are picturesque, but depressing. The house is damp.
I enjoy myself better here on the lawn, where they are getting up a
Vanity Fair. See, the bell rings, the curtain is rising, the puppets
are brought out for a new play. Let me see."

The Haunted Man was pressing forward in his eagerness, but the hand of
the Goblin stayed him, and pointing to his feet he saw, between him
and the rising curtain, a new made grave. And bending above the grave
in passionate grief, the Haunted Man beheld the phantom of the
previous night.    The Haunted Man started, and--woke. The bright
sunshine streamed into the room. The air was sparkling with frost. He
ran joyously to the window and opened it. A small boy saluted him with
"Merry Christmas." The Haunted Man instantly gave him a Bank of
England note. "How much like Tiny Tim, Tom, and Bobby that boy
looked,--bless my soul, what a genius this Dickens has!"

A knock at the door, and Boots entered.

"Consider your salary doubled instantly. Have you read 'David
Copperfield'?"

"Yezzur."

"Your salary is quadrupled. What do you think of the 'Old Curiosity
Shop'?"

The man instantly burst into a torrent of tears, and then into a roar
of laughter.

"Enough! Here are five thousand pounds. Open a porter-house, and call
it 'Our Mutual Friend.' Huzza! I feel so happy!" And the Haunted Man
danced about the room.

And so, bathed in the light of that blessed sun, and yet glowing with
the warmth of a good action, the Haunted Man, haunted no longer, save
by those shapes which make the dreams of children beautiful, reseated
himself in his chair, and finished "Our Mutual Friend."


TERENCE DENVILLE

BY CH-L-S L-V-R


CHAPTER I

MY HOME


The little village of Pilwiddle is one of the smallest and obscurest
hamlets on the western coast of Ireland. On a lofty crag, overlooking
the hoarse Atlantic, stands "Denville's Shot Tower," a corruption by
the peasantry of "D'Enville's Chateau," so called from my great-
grandfather, Phelim St. Remy d'Enville, who assumed the name and title
of a French heiress with whom he ran away. To this fact my familiar
knowledge and excellent pronunciation of the French language may be
attributed, as well as many of the events which covered my after life.

The Denvilles were always passionately fond of field sports. At the
age of four, I was already the boldest rider and the best shot in the
country. When only eight, I won the St. Remy Cup at the Pilwiddle
races,--riding my favorite blood-mare Hellfire. As I approached the
stand amidst the plaudits of the assembled multitude, and cries of,
"Thrue for ye, Mashter Terence," and "oh, but it's a Dinville!" there
was a slight stir among the gentry, who surrounded the Lord Lieutenant
and other titled personages whom the race had attracted thither. "How
young he is,--a mere child, and yet how noble-looking," said a sweet
low voice, which thrilled my soul.

I looked up and met the full liquid orbs of the Hon.  Blanche Fitzroy
Sackville, youngest daughter of the Lord Lieutenant. She blushed
deeply. I turned pale and almost fainted. But the cold, sneering tones
of a masculine voice sent the blood back again into my youthful cheek.

"Very likely the ragged scion of one of these banditti Irish gentry,
who has taken naturally to 'the road.' He should be at school--though
I warrant me his knowledge of Terence will not extend beyond his own
name," said Lord Henry Somerset, aid-de-camp to the Lord Lieutenant.

A moment and I was perfectly calm, though cold as ice. Dismounting,
and stepping to the side of the speaker, I said in a low firm voice:--

"Had your lordship read Terence more carefully, you would have learned
that banditti are sometimes proficient in other arts beside
horsemanship," and I touched his holster significantly with my hand. I
had not read Terence myself, but with the skillful audacity of my race
I calculated that a vague allusion, coupled with a threat, would
embarrass him. It did.

"Ah--what mean you?" he said, white with rage.

"Enough, we are observed," I replied; "Father Tom will wait on you
this evening; and to-morrow morning, my lord, in the glen below
Pilwiddle, we will meet again."

"Father Tom--glen!" ejaculated the Englishman, with genuine surprise.
"What? do priests carry challenges and act as seconds in your infernal
country?"

"Yes," I answered scornfully;" why should they not? Their services are
more often necessary than those of a surgeon," I added significantly,
turning away.

The party slowly rode off, with the exception of the Hon. Blanche
Sackville, who lingered for a moment behind. In an instant I was at
her side. Bending her blushing face over the neck of her white filly,
she said hurriedly:--

"Words have passed between Lord Somerset and yourself. You are about
to fight.  Don't deny it--but hear me. You will meet him--I know your
skill of weapons. He will be at your mercy. I entreat you to spare his
life!"

I hesitated. "Never!" I cried passionately; "he has insulted a
Denville!"

"Terence," she whispered, "Terence--_for my sake?_"

The blood rushed to my cheeks, and her eyes sought the ground in
bashful confusion.

"You love him then?" I cried bitterly.

"No, no," she said agitatedly,--"no, you do me wrong. I--I--cannot
explain myself. My father!--the Lady Dowager Sackville--the estate of
Sackville--the borough--my uncle, Eitzroy Somerset. Ah! what am I
saying? Forgive me. Oh, Terence," she said, as her beautiful head sank
on my shoulder, "you know not what I suffer!"

I seized her hand and covered it with passionate kisses.

But the high-bred English girl, recovering something of her former
hauteur, said hastily, "Leave me, leave me, but promise!"

"I promise," I replied enthusiastically; "I _will_ spare his life!"

"Thanks, Terence,--thanks!" and disengaging her hand from my lips she
rode rapidly away.

The next morning, the Hon. Captain Henry Somerset and myself exchanged
nineteen shots in the glen, and at each fire I shot away a  button
from his uniform. As my last bullet shot off the last button from his
sleeve, I remarked quietly, "You seem now, my lord, to be almost as
ragged as the gentry you sneered at," and rode haughtily away.


CHAPTER II

THE FIGHTING FIFTY-SIXTH


When I was nineteen years old my father sold the Chateau d' Enville,
and purchased my commission in the "Fifty-sixth" with the proceeds. "I
say, Denville," said young McSpadden, a boy-faced ensign, who had just
joined, "you'll represent the estate in the Army, if you won't in the
House." Poor fellow, he paid for his meaningless joke with his life,
for I shot him through the heart the next morning. "You're a good
fellow, Denville," said the poor boy faintly, as I knelt beside him;
"good-by!" For the first time since my grandfather's death I wept. I
could not help thinking that I would have been a better man if
Blanche--But why proceed? Was she not now in Florence--the belle of
the English embassy?

But Napoleon had returned from Elba. Europe was in a blaze of
excitement. The Allies were preparing to resist the Man of Destiny. We
were ordered from Gibraltar home, and were soon again en route for
Brussels. I did not regret that I was to be placed in active service.
I was ambitious, and longed for an opportunity to distinguish myself.
My garrison life in Gibraltar had been monotonous and dull. I had
killed five men in duel, and had an affair with the colonel of my
regiment, who handsomely apologized before the matter assumed a
serious aspect. I had been twice in love. Yet these were but boyish
freaks and follies. I wished to be a man.

The time soon came,--the morning of Waterloo. But why describe that
momentous battle, on which the fate of the entire world was hanging?
Twice were the Fifty-sixth surrounded by French cuirassiers, and
twice did we mow them down by our fire. I had seven horses shot under
me, and was mounting the eighth, when an orderly rode up hastily,
touched his cap, and, handing me a dispatch, galloped rapidly away.

I opened it hurriedly and read:--

"LET PlCTON ADVANCE IMMEDIATELY ON THE RIGHT."

I saw it all at a glance. I had been mistaken for a general officer.
But what was to be done? Picton's division was two miles away, only
accessible through a heavy cross-fire of artillery and musketry. But
my mind was made up.

In an instant I was engaged with an entire squadron of cavalry, who
endeavored to surround me. Cutting my way through them, I advanced
boldly upon a battery and sabred the gunners before they could bring
their pieces to bear. Looking around, I saw that I had in fact
penetrated the French centre. Before I was well aware of the locality,
I was hailed by a sharp voice in French,--

"Come here, sir!"

I obeyed, and advanced to the side of a little man in a cocked hat.

"Has Grouchy come?"

"Not yet, sire," I replied,--for it was the Emperor.

"Ha!" he said suddenly, bending his piercing eyes on my uniform; "a
prisoner?"

"No, sire," I said proudly.

"A spy?"

I placed my hand upon my sword, but a gesture from the Emperor bade me
forbear.

"You are a brave man," he said.

I took my snuff-box from my pocket, and, taking a pinch, replied by
handing it, with a bow, to the Emperor.

His quick eye caught the cipher on the lid.

"What! a D'Enville? Ha! this accounts for the purity of your accent.
Any relation to Roderick d'Enville?"

"My father, sire."

"He was my schoolfellow at the Ecole Polytechnique. Embrace me!" And
the Emperor fell upon my neck in the presence of his entire staff.
Then, recovering himself, he gently placed in my hand his own
magnificent snuff-box, in exchange for mine, and hanging upon my
breast the cross of the Legion of Honor which he took from his own, he
bade one of his marshals conduct me back to my regiment.

I was so intoxicated with the honor of which I had been the recipient,
that on reaching our lines I uttered a shout of joy and put spurs to
my horse. The intelligent animal seemed to sympathize with my
feelings, and fairly flew over the ground. On a rising eminence a few
yards before me stood a gray-haired officer, surrounded by his staff.
I don't know what possessed me, but putting spurs to my horse, I rode
at him boldly, and with one bound cleared him, horse and all. A shout
of indignation arose from the assembled staff. I wheeled suddenly,
with the intention of apologizing, but my mare misunderstood me, and,
again dashing forward, once more vaulted over the head of the officer,
this time unfortunately uncovering him by a vicious kick of her hoof.
"Seize him!" roared the entire army. I was seized. As the soldiers led
me away, I asked the name of the gray-haired officer. "That--why,
that's the DUKE OF WELLINGTON!"

I fainted.

       *       *       *       *       *

For six months I had brain fever. During my illness ten grapeshot were
extracted from my body which I had unconsciously received during the
battle. When I opened my eyes I met the sweet glance of a Sister of
Charity.

"Blanche!" I stammered feebly.

"The same," she replied.

"You here?"

"Yes, dear; but hush! It's a long story. You see,  dear Terence, your
grandfather married my great-aunt's sister, and your father again
married my grandmother's niece, who, dying without a will, was,
according to the French law "--

"But I do not comprehend," I said.

"Of course not," said Blanche, with her old sweet smile; "you've had
brain fever; so go to sleep."

I understood, however, that Blanche loved me; and I am now, dear
reader, Sir Terence Sackville, K. C. B., and Lady Blanche is Lady
Sackville.


MARY McGILLUP

A SOUTHERN NOVEL

AFTER BELLE BOYD

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY G. A. S-LA


INTRODUCTION


"Will you write me up?"

The scene was near Temple Bar. The speaker was the famous rebel Mary
McGillup,--a young girl of fragile frame, and long, lustrous black
hair. I must confess that the question was a peculiar one, and, under
the circumstances, somewhat puzzling. It was true I had been kindly
treated by the Northerners, and, though prejudiced against them, was
to some extent under obligations to them. It was true that I knew
little or nothing of American politics, history, or geography. But
when did an English writer ever weigh such trifles? Turning to the
speaker, I inquired with some caution the amount of pecuniary
compensation offered for the work.

"Sir!" she said, drawing her fragile form to its full height," you
insult me,--you insult the South."

"But look ye here, d'ye see--the tin--the blunt--the ready--the stiff,
you know. Don't ye see, we can't do without that, you know!"

"It shall be contingent on the success of the story," she answered
haughtily. "In the mean time take this precious gem." And drawing a
diamond ring from her finger, she placed it with a roll of MSS. in my
hands, and vanished.

Although unable to procure more than 1 pound 2s. 6d. from an
intelligent pawnbroker to whom I stated the circumstances and with whom
I pledged the ring, my sympathies with the cause of a downtrodden and
chivalrous people were at once enlisted. I could not help wondering
that in rich England, the home of the oppressed and the free, a young
and lovely woman like the fair author of those pages should be obliged
to thus pawn her jewels--her marriage gift--for the means to procure
her bread! With the exception of the English aristocracy,--who much
resemble them,--I do not know of a class of people that I so much
admire as the Southern planters. May I become better acquainted with
both!

Since writing the above, the news of Mr. Lincoln's assassination has
reached me. It is enough for me to say that I am dissatisfied with the
result. I do not attempt to excuse the assassin. Yet there will be men
who will charge this act upon the chivalrous South. This leads me to
repeat a remark once before made by me in this connection, which has
become justly celebrated. It is this:--

"It is usual, in cases of murder, to look for the criminal among those
who expect to be benefited by the crime. In the death of Lincoln, his
immediate successor in office alone receives the benefit of his
dying."

If her Majesty Queen Victoria were assassinated, which Heaven forbid,
the one most benefited by her decease would, of course, be his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, her immediate successor. It would be
unnecessary to state that suspicion would at once point to the real
culprit, which would of course be his Royal Highness. This is logic.

But I have done. After having thus stated my opinion in favor of the
South, I would merely remark that there is One who judgeth all
things,--who weigheth the cause between brother and brother,--and
awardeth the perfect  retribution; and whose ultimate decision I, as a
British subject, have only anticipated.

G. A. S.


CHAPTER I


Every reader of Belle Boyd's narrative will remember an allusion to a
"lovely, fragile-looking girl of nineteen," who rivaled Belle Boyd in
devotion to the Southern cause, and who, like her, earned the enviable
distinction of being a "rebel spy."

I am that "fragile" young creature. Although on friendly terms with
the late Miss Boyd, now Mrs. Hardinge, candor compels me to state that
nothing but our common politics prevents me from exposing the
ungenerous spirit she has displayed in this allusion. To be dismissed
in a single paragraph after years of--But I anticipate. To put up with
this feeble and forced acknowledgment of services rendered would be a
confession of a craven spirit, which, thank God, though "fragile" and
only "nineteen," I do not possess. I may not have the "blood of a
Howard" in my veins, as some people, whom I shall not disgrace myself
by naming, claim to have, but I have yet to learn that the race of
McGillup ever yet brooked slight or insult. I shall not say that
attention in certain quarters seems to have turned _some people's_
heads; nor that it would have been more delicate if certain folks had
kept quiet on the subject of their courtship, and the rejection of
certain offers, when it is known that their forward conduct was all
that procured them a husband! Thank Heaven, the South has some
daughters who are above such base considerations! While nothing shall
tempt me to reveal the promises to share equally the fame of certain
enterprises, which were made by one who shall now be nameless, I have
deemed it only just to myself to put my own adventures upon record. If
they are not equal to those of another individual, it is because,
though "fragile," my education has taught me to have some consideration
for the truth. I am done.


CHAPTER II


I was born in Missouri. My dislike for the Northern scum was inherent.
This was shown, at an early age, in the extreme distaste I exhibited
for Webster's spelling-book,--the work of a well-known Eastern
Abolitionist. I cannot be too grateful for the consideration shown by
my chivalrous father,--a gentleman of the old school,--who resisted
to the last an attempt to introduce Mitchell's Astronomy and Geography
into the public school of our district. When I state that this same
Mitchell became afterward a hireling helot in the Yankee Army, every
intelligent reader will appreciate the prophetic discrimination of
this true son of the South.

I was eight years old when I struck the first blow for Southern
freedom against the Northern Tyrant. It is hardly necessary to state
that in this instance the oppressor was a pale, overworked New England
"schoolmarm." The principle for which I was contending, I felt,
however, to be the same. Resenting an affront put upon me, I one day
heaved a rock [Footnote: NOTE, BY G. A. S.--In the Southwest, any
stone  larger than a pea is termed "a rock."] at the head of the
Vandal schoolmistress.  I was seized and overpowered. My pen falters
as I reach the climax. English readers will not give credit to this
sickening story,--the civilized world will avert its head,--but I,
Mary McGillup, was publicly SPANKED!


CHAPTER III


But the chaotic vortex of civil war approached, and fell destruction,
often procrastinated, brooded in storm. [Footnote: I make no
pretension to fine writing, but perhaps Mrs. Hardinge can lay over
that. Oh, of course! M. McG.] As the English people may like to know
what was really the origin of the Rebellion, I have no hesitation in
giving them the true and only cause. Slavery had nothing to do with
it, although the violation of the Declaration of Independence, in the
disregard by the North of the Fugitive Slave Law, [Footnote: The
Declaration of Independence grants to each subject "the  pursuit of
life, liberty, and happiness." A fugitive slave may be said to
personify "life, liberty, and happiness." Hence his pursuit is really
legal. This is logic. G.A.S.] might have provoked a less fiery people
than the Southrons. At the inception of the struggle a large amount of
Southern indebtedness was held by the people of the North. To force
payment from the generous but insolvent debtor--to obtain liquidation
from the Southern planter--was really the soulless and mercenary
object of the craven Northerners. Let the common people of England
look to this. Let the improvident literary hack, the starved
impecunious Grub Street debtor, the newspaper frequenter of sponging-
houses, remember this in their criticisms of the vile and slavish
Yankee.


CHAPTER IV


The roasting of an Abolitionist, by a greatly infuriated community,
was my first taste of the horrors of civil war. Heavens! Why will the
North persist in this fratricidal warfare? The expulsion of several
Union refugees, which soon followed, now fairly plunged my beloved
State into the seething vortex.

I was sitting at the piano one afternoon, singing that stirring
refrain, so justly celebrated, but which a craven spirit, unworthy of
England, has excluded from some of her principal restaurants, and was
dwelling with some enthusiasm on the following line:--

  "Huzza! she spurns the Northern scum!"

when a fragment of that scum, clothed in that detestable blue uniform
which is the symbol of oppression, entered the apartment.

"I have the honor of addressing the celebrated rebel spy, Miss
McGillup?" said the Vandal officer.

In a moment I was perfectly calm. With the exception of slightly
expectorating twice in the face of the minion, I did not betray my
agitation. Haughtily, yet firmly, I replied,--

"I am."

"You looked as if you might be," the brute replied, as he turned on
his heel to leave the apartment.

In an instant I threw myself before him. "You shall not leave here
thus," I shrieked, grappling him with an energy which no one, seeing
my frail figure, would have believed. "I know the reputation of your
hireling crew. I read your dreadful purpose in your eye. Tell me not
that your designs are not sinister. You came here to insult me,--to
kiss me, perhaps. You shan't,--you naughty man. Go away!"

The blush of conscious degradation rose to the cheek of the Lincoln
hireling as he turned his face away from mine.

In an instant I drew my pistol from my belt, which, in anticipation of
some such  outrage, I always carried, and shot him.


CHAPTER V


  "Thy forte was less to act than speak, Maryland! Thy politics were
  changed each week, Maryland! With Northern Vandals thou wast meek,
  With sympathizers thou wouldst shriek, I know thee--oh,'twas like
  thy cheek! Maryland! my Maryland!"

After committing the act described in the preceding chapter, which
every English reader will pardon, I went upstairs, put on a clean pair
of stockings, and, placing a rose in my lustrous black hair, proceeded
at once to the camp of Generals Price and Mosby to put them in
possession of information which would lead to the destruction of a
portion of the Federal Army. During a great part of my flight I was
exposed to a running fire from the Federal pickets of such coarse
expressions as, "Go it, Sally Reb," "Dust it, my Confederate Beauty,"
but I succeeded in reaching the glorious Southern camp uninjured.

In a week afterwards I was arrested, by a lettre de cachet of Mr.
Stanton, and placed in the Bastile. British readers of my story will
express surprise at these terms, but I assure them that not only these
articles but tumbrils, guillotines, and conciergeries were in active
use among the Federals. If substantiation be required, I refer to the
Charleston "Mercury," the only reliable organ, next to the New York
"Daily News," published in the country. At the Bastile I made the
acquaintance of the accomplished and elegant author of "Guy
Livingstone," [Footnote: The recent conduct of Mr.  Livingstone
renders him unworthy of my notice. His disgusting praise of Belle
Boyd, and complete  ignoring of my claims, show the artfulness of some
females and puppyism of some  men. M. McG.] to whom I presented a
curiously carved thigh-bone of a  Union officer, and   from whom I
received the following beautiful acknowledgment:--

DEMOISELLE:--Should I ever win hame to my ain countrie, I make mine
avow to enshrine in my reliquaire this elegant bijouterie and offering
of La belle Rebelle. Nay, methinks this fraction of man's anatomy were
some compensation for the rib lost by the "grand old gardener," Adam.


CHAPTER VI


Released at last from durance vile, and placed on board of an Erie
canal-boat, on my way to Canada, I for a moment breathed the sweets of
liberty. Perhaps the interval gave me opportunity to indulge in
certain reveries which I had hitherto sternly dismissed. Henry
Breckinridge Folair, a consistent Copperhead, captain of the canal-
boat, again and again pressed that suit I had so often rejected.

It was a lovely moonlight night. We sat on the deck of the gliding
craft. The moonbeam and the lash of the driver fell softly on the
flanks of the off horse, and only the surging of the tow-rope broke
the silence. Folair's arm clasped my waist. I suffered it to remain.
Placing in my lap a small but not ungrateful roll of checkerberry
lozenges, he took the occasion to repeat softly in my ear the words of
a motto he had just unwrapped--with its graceful covering of the
tissue paper--from a sugar almond. The heart of the wicked little
rebel, Mary McGillup, was won!


The story of Mary McGillup is done. I might have added the journal of
my husband, Henry Breckinridge Folair, but as it refers chiefly to his
freights and a schedule of his passengers, I have been obliged,
reluctantly, to suppress it.

It is due to my friends to say that I have been requested not to write
this book. Expressions have reached my ears, the reverse of
complimentary. I have been told that its publication will probably
insure my banishment for life. Be it so. If the cause for which I
labored have been subserved, I am content.


THE HOODLUM BAND

OR

THE BOY CHIEF, THE INFANT POLITICIAN, AND THE PIRATE PRODIGY


CHAPTER I


It was a quiet New England village. Nowhere in the valley of the
Connecticut the autumn sun shone upon a more peaceful, pastoral,
manufacturing community. The wooden nutmegs were slowly ripening on
the trees, and the white-pine hams for Western consumption were
gradually rounding into form under the deft manipulation of the hardy
American artisan. The honest Connecticut farmer was quietly gathering
from his threshing-floor the shoe-pegs, which, when intermixed with a
fair proportion of oats, offered a pleasing substitute for fodder to
the effete civilizations of Europe. An almost Sabbath-like stillness
prevailed. Doemville was only seven miles from Hartford, and the
surrounding landscape smiled with the conviction of being fully
insured.

Few would have thought that this peaceful village was the home of the
three young heroes whose exploits would hereafter--But we anticipate.

Doemville Academy was the principal seat of learning in the county.
Under the grave and gentle administration of the venerable Doctor
Context, it had attained just popularity. Yet the increasing
infirmities of age obliged the doctor to relinquish much of his trust
to his assistants, who,  it is needless to say, abused his confidence.
Before long their brutal tyranny and deep-laid malevolence became
apparent. Boys were absolutely forced to study their lessons. The
sickening fact will hardly be believed, but during school-hours they
were obliged to remain in their seats with the appearance, at least,
of discipline. It is stated by good authority that the rolling of
croquet-balls across the floor during recitation was objected to,
under the fiendish excuse of its interfering with their studies. The
breaking of windows by baseballs, and the beating of small scholars
with bats, was declared against. At last, bloated and arrogant with
success, the under-teachers threw aside all disguise, and revealed
themselves in their true colors. A cigar was actually taken out of a
day-scholar's mouth during prayers! A flask of whiskey was dragged
from another's desk, and then thrown out of the window. And finally,
Profanity, Hazing, Theft, and Lying were almost discouraged.

Could the youth of America, conscious of their power, and a literature
of their own, tamely submit to this tyranny? Never! We repeat it
firmly. Never! We repeat it to parents and guardians. Never! But the
fiendish tutors, chuckling in their glee, little knew what was passing
through the cold, haughty intellect of Charles Francis Adams
Golightly, aged ten; what curled the lip of Benjamin Franklin Jenkins,
aged seven; or what shone in the bold, blue eyes of Bromley
Chitterlings, aged six and a half, as they sat in the corner of the
playground at recess. Their only other companion and confidant was the
negro porter and janitor of the school, known as "Pirate Jim."

Fitly, indeed, was he named, as the secrets of his early wild career--
confessed freely to his noble young friends--plainly showed. A slaver
at the age of seventeen, the ringleader of a mutiny on the African
coast at the age of twenty, a privateersman during the last war with
England,  the commander of a fire-ship and its sole survivor at
twenty-five, with a wild, intermediate career of unmixed piracy, until
the Rebellion called him to civil service again as a blockade runner,
and peace and a desire for rural repose led him to seek the
janitorship of the Doemville Academy, where no questions were asked
and references not exchanged--he was, indeed, a fit mentor for our
daring youth. Although a man whose days had exceeded the usual space
allotted to humanity, the various episodes of his career footing his
age up to nearly one hundred and fifty-nine years, he scarcely looked
it, and was still hale and vigorous.

"Yes," continued Pirate Jim critically; "I don't think he was any
bigger nor you, Master Chitterlings, if as big, when he stood on the
fork'stle of my ship and shot the captain o' that East Injyman dead.
We used to call him little Weevils, he was so young-like. But, bless
your hearts, boys! he wa'n't anything to Little Sammy Barlow, ez once
crep' up inter the captain's stateroom on a Rooshin frigate, stabbed
him to the heart with a jack-knife, then put on the captain's uniform
and his cocked hat, took command of the ship, and fout her hisself."

"Wasn't the captain's clothes big for him?" asked B. Franklin Jenkins
anxiously.

The janitor eyed young Jenkins with pained dignity.

"Didn't I say the Rooshin captain was a small, a very small, man?
Rooshins is small, likewise Greeks."

A noble enthusiasm beamed in the faces of the youthful heroes.

"Was Barlow as large as me?" asked C. F. Adams Golightly, lifting his
curls from his Jove-like brow.

"Yes; but, then, he hed hed, so to speak, experiences. It was allowed
that he had pizened his schoolmaster afore he went to sea. But it's
dry talking, boys."

Golightly drew a flask from his jacket and handed it to the janitor.
It was his father's best brandy. The heart of the honest old seaman
was touched.

"Bless ye, my own pirate boy!" he said in a voice suffocating with
emotion.

"I've got some tobacco," said the youthful Jenkins, "but it's fine
cut; I use only that now."

"I kin buy some plug at the corner grocery," said Pirate Jim, "only I
left my portmoney at home."

"Take this watch," said young Golightly; "'tis my father's. Since he
became a tyrant and usurper, and forced me to join a corsair's band,
I've begun by dividing the property."

"This is idle trifling," said young Chitterlings wildly. "Every moment
is precious. Is this an hour to give to wine and wassail? Ha, we want
action--action! We must strike the blow for freedom to-night--ay, this
very night. The scow is already anchored in the mill-dam, freighted
with provisions for a three months' voyage. I have a black flag in my
pocket. Why, then, this cowardly delay?"

The two elder youths turned with a slight feeling of awe and shame to
gaze on the glowing cheeks and high, haughty crest of their youngest
comrade--the bright, the beautiful Bromley Chitterlings. Alas! that
very moment of forgetfulness and mutual admiration was fraught with
danger. A thin, dyspeptic, half-starved tutor approached.

"It is time to resume your studies, young gentlemen," he said, with
fiendish politeness.

They were his last words on earth.

"Down, Tyrant!" screamed Chitterlings.

"Sic him--I mean, sic semper tyrannis!" said the classical Golightly.

A heavy blow on the head from a baseball bat, and the rapid projection
of a baseball against his empty stomach, brought the tutor a limp and
lifeless mass to the ground. Golightly shuddered. Let not my young
readers blame him too rashly. It was his first homicide.   "Search his
pockets," said the practical Jenkins.

They did so, and found nothing hut a Harvard Triennial Catalogue.

"Let us fly," said Jenkins.

"Forward to the boats!" cried the enthusiastic Chitterlings.

But C. F. Adams Golightly stood gazing thoughtfully at the prostrate
tutor.

"This," he said calmly, "is the result of a too free government and
the common-school system. What the country needs is reform. I cannot
go with you, boys."

"Traitor!" screamed the others.

C. F. A. Golightly smiled sadly.

"You know me not. I shall not become a pirate--but a Congressman!"

Jenkins and Chitterlings turned pale.

"I have already organized two caucuses in a baseball club, and bribed
the delegates of another. Nay, turn not away. Let us be friends,
pursuing through various ways one common end. Farewell!" They shook
hands.

"But where is Pirate Jim? "asked Jenkins.

"He left us but for a moment to raise money on the watch to purchase
armament for the scow. Farewell!"

And so the gallant, youthful spirits parted, bright with the sunrise
of hope.

That night a conflagration raged in Doemville. The Doemville Academy,
mysteriously fired, first fell a victim to the devouring element. The
candy-shop and cigar-store, both holding heavy liabilities against
the academy, quickly followed. By the lurid gleams of the flames, a
long, low, sloop-rigged scow, with every mast gone except one, slowly
worked her way out of the mill-dam towards the Sound. The next day
three boys were missing--C. F. Adams Golightly, B. F. Jenkins, and
Bromley Chitterlings. Had they perished in the flames? Who shall say?
Enough  that never more under these names did they again appear in the
homes of their ancestors.

Happy, indeed, would it have been for Doemville had the mystery ended
here. But a darker interest and scandal rested upon the peaceful
village. During that awful night the boarding-school of Madame
Brimborion was visited stealthily, and two of the fairest heiresses of
Connecticut--daughters of the president of a savings bank and
insurance director--were the next morning found to have eloped. With
them also disappeared the entire contents of the savings bank, and on
the following day the Flamingo Fire Insurance Company failed.


CHAPTER II


Let my young readers now sail with me to warmer and more hospitable
climes. Off the coast of Patagonia a long, low, black schooner proudly
rides the seas, that break softly upon the vine-clad shores of that
luxuriant land. Who is this that, wrapped in Persian rugs, and dressed
in the most expensive manner, calmly reclines on the quarter-deck of
the schooner, toying lightly ever and anon with the luscious fruits of
the vicinity, held in baskets of solid gold by Nubian slaves? or at
intervals, with daring grace, guides an ebony velocipede over the
polished black walnut decks, and in and out the intricacies of the
rigging? Who is it? well may be asked. What name is it that blanches
with terror the cheeks of the Patagonian navy? Who but the Pirate
Prodigy--the relentless Boy Scourer of Patagonian seas? Voyagers
slowly drifting by the Silurian beach, coasters along the Devonian
shore, still shudder at the name of Bromley Chitterlings--the Boy
Avenger, late of Hartford, Connecticut.

It has been often asked by the idly curious, Why Avenger, and of what?
Let us not seek to disclose the  awful secret hidden under that
youthful jacket. Enough that there may have been that of bitterness in
his past life that they "Whose soul would sicken o'er the heaving
wave," or "whose soul would heave above the sickening wave," did not
understand. Only one knew him, perhaps too well--a queen of the
Amazons taken prisoner off Terra del Fuego a week previous. She loved
the Boy Avenger. But in vain; his youthful heart seemed obdurate.

"Hear me," at last he said, when she had for the seventh time wildly
proffered her hand and her kingdom in marriage, "and know once and
forever why I must decline your flattering proposal. I love another."

With a wild, despairing cry she leaped into the sea, but was instantly
rescued by the Pirate Prodigy. Yet, even in that supreme moment, such
was his coolness, that on his way to the surface he captured a
mermaid, and placing her in charge of his steward, with directions to
give her a stateroom, with hot and cold water, calmly resumed his
place by the Amazon's side. When the cabin door closed on his faithful
servant, bringing champagne and ices to the interesting stranger,
Chitterlings resumed his narrative with a choking voice--

"When I first fled from the roof of a tyrannical parent I loved the
beautiful and accomplished Eliza J. Sniffen. Her father was president
of the Workingmen's Savings Bank, and it was perfectly understood that
in the course of time the entire deposits would be his. But, like a
vain fool, I wished to anticipate the future, and in a wild moment
persuaded Miss Sniffen to elope with me; and with the entire cash
assets of the bank, we fled together." He paused, overcome with
emotion. "But fate decreed it otherwise. In my feverish haste, I had
forgotten to place among the stores of my pirate craft that peculiar
kind of chocolate  caramel to which Eliza Jane was most partial. We
were obliged to put into New Rochelle on the second day out, to enable
Miss Sniffen to procure that delicacy at the nearest confectioner's,
and match some zephyr worsteds at the first fancy shop. Fatal mistake.
She went--she never returned!" In a moment he resumed, in a choking
voice, "After a week's weary waiting, I was obliged to put to sea
again, bearing a broken heart and the broken bank of her father. I
have never seen her since."

"And you still love her?" asked the Amazon queen excitedly.

"Ay, forever!"

"Noble youth. Here, take the reward of thy fidelity; for know, Bromley
Chitterlings, that I am Eliza Jane. Wearied with waiting, I embarked
on a Peruvian guano ship--it's a long story, dear."

"And altogether too thin," said the Boy Avenger, fiercely releasing
himself from her encircling arms. "Eliza Jane's age, a year ago, was
only thirteen, and you are forty, if a day."

"True," she returned sadly, "but I have suffered much, and time passes
rapidly, and I've grown. You would scarcely believe that this is my
own hair."

"I know not," he replied, in gloomy abstraction.

"Forgive my deceit," she returned. "If you are affianced to another,
let me at least be--a mother to you."

The Pirate Prodigy started, and tears came to his eyes. The scene was
affecting in the extreme. Several of the oldest seamen--men who had
gone through scenes of suffering with tearless eyes and unblanched
cheeks--now retired to the spirit room to conceal their emotion. A few
went into caucus in the forecastle, and returned with the request that
the Amazonian queen should hereafter be known as the "Queen of the
Pirates' Isle."

"Mother!" gasped the Pirate Prodigy.

"My son!" screamed the Amazonian queen.

They embraced. At the same moment a loud flop was heard on the
quarter-deck. It was the forgotten mermaid, who, emerging from her
stateroom, and ascending the companion-way at that moment, had fainted
at the spectacle. The Pirate Prodigy rushed to her side with a bottle
of smelling-salts.

She recovered slowly. "Permit me," she said, rising with dignity, "to
leave the ship. I am unaccustomed, to such conduct."

"Hear me--she is my mother!"

"She certainly is old enough to be," replied the mermaid. "And to
speak of that being her own hair!" she said, as she rearranged with
characteristic grace, a comb, and a small hand-mirror, her own
luxuriant tresses.

"If I couldn't afford any other clothes, I might wear a switch, too!"
hissed the Amazonian queen. "I suppose you don't dye it on account of
the salt water? But perhaps you prefer green, dear?"

"A little salt water might improve your own complexion, love."

"Fishwoman!" screamed the Amazonian queen.

"Bloomerite!" shrieked the mermaid.

In another instant they had seized each other.

"Mutiny! Overboard with them!" cried the Pirate Prodigy, rising to the
occasion, and casting aside all human affection in the peril of the
moment.

A plank was brought and the two women placed upon it.

"After you, dear," said the mermaid significantly to the Amazonian
queen; "you're the oldest."

"Thank you!" said the Amazonian queen, stepping back. "Fish is always
served first."

Stung by the insult, with a wild scream of rage the mermaid grappled
her in her arms and leaped into the sea.

As the waters closed over them forever, the Pirate Prodigy sprung to
his feet.  "Up with the black flag, and bear  away for New London," he
shouted in trumpet-like tones.

"Ha! ha! Once more the Rover is free!"

Indeed it was too true. In that fatal moment he had  again loosed
himself from the trammels of human feeling and was once more the
Boy Avenger.


CHAPTER III


Again I must ask my young readers to mount my hippogriff and hie with
me to the almost inaccessible heights of the Rocky Mountains. There,
for years, a band of wild and untamable savages, known as the Pigeon
Feet, had resisted the blankets and Bibles of civilization. For years
the trails leading to their camp were marked by the bones of teamsters
and broken wagons, and the trees were decked with the dying scalp-
locks of women and children. The boldest of military leaders hesitated
to attack them in their fortresses, and prudently left the scalping-
knives, rifles, powder, and shot provided by a paternal government for
their welfare lying on the ground a few miles from their encampment,
with the request that they were not to be used until the military had
safely retired. Hitherto, save an occasional incursion into the
territory of the Knock-knees, a rival tribe, they had limited their
depredations to the vicinity.

But lately a baleful change had come over them. Acting under some evil
influence, they now pushed their warfare into the white settlements,
carrying fire and destruction with them. Again and again had the
Government offered them a free pass to Washington and the privilege of
being photographed, but under the same evil guidance they refused.
There was a singular mystery in their mode of aggression. Schoolhouses
were always burned, the schoolmasters taken into captivity, and never
again heard from.    A palace car on the Union Pacific Railway,
containing an excursion party of teachers en route to San Francisco,
was surrounded, its inmates captured, and--their vacancies in the
school catalogue never again filled. Even a hoard of educational
examiners, proceeding to Cheyenne, were taken prisoners, and obliged
to answer questions they themselves had proposed, amidst horrible
tortures. By degrees these atrocities were traced to the malign
influence of a new chief of the tribe. As yet little was known of him
but through his baleful appellations, "Young Man who Goes for His
Teacher," and "He Lifts the Hair of the School-Marm." He was said to
be small and exceedingly youthful in appearance. Indeed, his earlier
appellative, "He Wipes His Nose on His Sleeve," was said to have been
given to him to indicate his still boy-like habits.

It was night in the encampment and among the lodges of the Pigeon
Toes. Dusky maidens flitted in and out among the campfires like brown
moths, cooking the toothsome buffalo-hump, frying the fragrant bear's-
meat, and stewing the esculent bean for the braves. For a few favored
ones sput grasshoppers were reserved as a rare delicacy, although the
proud Spartan soul of their chief scorned all such luxuries.

He was seated alone in his wigwam, attended only by the gentle
Mushymush, fairest of the Pigeon Feet maidens. Nowhere were the
characteristics of her great tribe more plainly shown than in the
little feet that lapped over each other in walking. A single glance at
the chief was sufficient to show the truth of the wild rumors
respecting his youth. He was scarcely twelve, of proud and lofty
bearing, and clad completely in wrappings of various-colored scalloped
cloths, which gave him the appearance of a somewhat extra-sized
penwiper. An enormous eagle's feather, torn from the wing of a bald
eagle who once attempted to carry him away, completed his attire. It
was also the  memento of one of his most superhuman feats of courage.
He would undoubtedly have scalped the eagle but that nature had
anticipated him.

"Why is the Great Chief sad?" said Mushymush softly. "Does his soul
still yearn for the blood of the palefaced teachers? Did not the
scalping of two professors of geology in the Yale exploring party
satisfy his warrior's heart yesterday? Has he forgotten that Gardener
and King are still to follow? Shall his own Mushymush bring him a
botanist to-morrow? Speak, for the silence of my brother lies on my
heart like the snow on the mountain, and checks the flow of my
speech."

Still the proud Boy Chief sat silent. Suddenly he said, "Hiss!" and
rose to his feet. Taking a long rifle from the ground he adjusted its
sight. Exactly seven miles away on the slope of the mountain the
figure of a man was seen walking. The Boy Chief raised the rifle to
his unerring eye and fired. The man fell.

A scout was dispatched to scalp and search the body. He presently
returned.

"Who was the paleface?" eagerly asked the chief.

"A life insurance agent."

A dark scowl settled on the face of the chief.

"I thought it was a book peddler."

"Why is my brother's heart sore against the book peddler?" asked
Mushymush.

"Because," said the Boy Chief fiercely, "I am again without my regular
dime novel--and I thought he might have one in his pack. Hear me,
Mushymush. The United States mails no longer bring me my 'Young
America' or my 'Boys' and Girls' Weekly.' I find it impossible, even
with my fastest scouts, to keep up with the rear of General Howard,
and replenish my literature from the sutler's wagon. Without a dime
novel or a 'Young America,' how am I to keep up this Injin business?"

Mushymush remained in meditation a single moment. Then she looked up
proudly.

"My brother has spoken. It is well. He shall have his dime novel. He
shall know the kind of hairpin his sister Mushymush is."

And she arose and gamboled lightly as the fawn out of his presence.

In two hours she returned. In one hand she held three small flaxen
scalps, in the other "The Boy Marauder," complete in one volume, price
ten cents.

"Three palefaced children," she gasped, "were reading it in the tail-
end of an emigrant wagon. I crept up to them softly. Their parents are
still unaware of the accident," and she sank helpless at his feet.


"Noble girl!" said the Boy Chief, gazing proudly on her prostrate
form; "and these are the people that a military despotism expects to
subdue!"


CHAPTER IV


But the capture of several wagon-loads of commissary whiskey, and the
destruction of two tons of stationery intended for the general
commanding, which interfered with his regular correspondence with the
War Department, at last awakened the United States military
authorities to active exertion. A quantity of troops were massed
before the Pigeon Feet encampment, and an attack was hourly imminent.

"Shine your boots, sir?"

It was the voice of a youth in humble attire, standing before the flap
of the commanding general's tent.

The general raised his head from his correspondence.

"Ah," he said, looking down on the humble boy, "I see; I shall write
that the appliances of civilization move steadily forward with the
army. Yes," he added, "you  may shine my military boots. You
understand, however, that to get your pay you must first"--

"Make a requisition on the commissary-general, have it certified to by
the quartermaster, countersigned by the post-adjutant, and submitted
by you to the War Department "--

"And charged as stationery" added the general gently. "You are, I see,
an intelligent and thoughtful boy. I trust you neither use whiskey,
tobacco, nor are ever profane?"

"I promised my sainted mother"--

"Enough! Go on with your blacking; I have to lead the attack on the
Pigeon Feet at eight precisely. It is now half past seven" said the
general, consulting a large kitchen clock that stood in the corner of
his tent.

The little bootblack looked up--the general was absorbed in his
correspondence. The bootblack drew a tin putty-blower from his pocket,
took unerring aim, and nailed in a single shot the minute hand to the
dial. Going on with his blacking, yet stopping ever and anon to glance
over the general's plan of campaign, spread on the table before him,
he was at last interrupted by the entrance of an officer.

"Everything is ready for the attack, general. It is now eight o'clock"

"Impossible! It is only half past seven."

"But my watch, and the watches of the staff"--

"Are regulated by my kitchen clock, that has been in my family for
years. Enough! it is only half past seven."

The officer retired; the bootblack had finished one boot. Another
officer appeared.

"Instead of attacking the enemy, general, we are attacked ourselves.
Our pickets are already driven in."

"Military pickets should not differ from other pickets" said the
bootblack modestly. "To stand firmly they should be well driven in."
"Ha! there is something in that," said the general thoughtfully. "But
who are you, who speak thus?"

Rising to his full height, the bootblack threw off his outer rags, and
revealed the figure of the Boy Chief of the Pigeon Feet.

"Treason!" shrieked the general. "Order an advance along the whole
line."

But in vain. The next moment he fell beneath the tomahawk of the Boy
Chief, and within the next quarter of an hour the United States army
was dispersed. Thus ended the battle of Bootblack Creek.


CHAPTER V


And yet the Boy Chief was not entirely happy. Indeed, at times he
seriously thought of accepting the invitation extended by the Great
Chief at Washington immediately after the massacre of his soldiers,
and once more revisiting the haunts of civilization, His soul sickened
in feverish inactivity; schoolmasters palled on his taste; he had
introduced baseball, blind hooky, marbles, and peg-top among his Indian
subjects, but only with indifferent success. The squaws persisted in
boring holes through the china alleys and wearing them as necklaces;
his warriors stuck pipes in their baseball bats, and made war-clubs of
them. He could not but feel, too, that the gentle Mushymush, although
devoted to her paleface brother, was deficient in culinary education.
Her mince-pies were abominable; her jam far inferior to that made by
his Aunt Sally of Doemville. Only an unexpected incident kept him
equally from the extreme of listless sybaritic indulgence or of morbid
cynicism. Indeed, at the age of twelve, he already had become
disgusted with existence.

He had returned to his wigwam after an exhausting buffalo hunt, in
which he had slain two hundred and seventy-five buffaloes with  his
own hand, not counting the individual buffalo on which he had leaped,
so as to join the herd, and which he afterward led into the camp a
captive and a present to the lovely Mushymush. He had scalped two
express riders, and a correspondent of the "New York Herald;" had
despoiled the Overland Mail stage of a quantity of vouchers which
enabled him to draw double rations from the Government, and was
reclining on a bearskin, smoking and thinking of the vanity of human
endeavor, when a scout entered, saying that a paleface youth had
demanded access to his person.

"Is he a commissioner? If so, say that the red man is rapidly passing
to the happy hunting-grounds of his fathers, and now desires only
peace, blankets, and ammunition; obtain the latter, and then scalp the
commissioner."

"But it is only a youth who asks an interview."

"Does he look like an insurance agent? If so, say that I have already
policies in three Hartford companies. Meanwhile prepare the stake, and
see that the squaws are ready with their implements of torture."

The youth was admitted; he was evidently only half the age of the Boy
Chief. As he entered the wigwam, and stood revealed to his host, they
both started. In another moment they were locked in each other's arms.
"Jenky, old boy!"

"Bromley, old fel!"

B. F. Jenkins, for such was the name of the Boy Chief, was the first
to recover his calmness. Turning to his warriors he said proudly,--

"Let my children retire while I speak to the agent of our Great Father
in Washington. Hereafter no latch-keys will be provided for the
wigwams of the warriors. The practice of late hours must be
discouraged."

"How!" said the warriors, and instantly retired.

"Whisper!" said Jenkins, drawing his friend aside.   "I am known here
only as the Boy Chief of the Pigeon Toes."

"And I," said Bromley Chitterlings proudly, "am known everywhere as
the Pirate Prodigy--the Boy Avenger of the Patagonian coast."

"But how came you here?"

"Listen! My pirate brig, the Lively Mermaid, now lies at Meiggs's
wharf in San Francisco, disguised as a Mendocino lumber vessel. My
pirate crew accompanied me here in a palace car from San Francisco."

"It must have been expensive," said the prudent Jenkins. "It was, hut
they defrayed it by a collection from the other passengers, you
understand. The papers will be full of it to-morrow. Do you take in
the 'New York Sun'?"

"No; I dislike their Indian policy. But why are you here?"

"Hear me, Jenk! 'T is a long and a sad story. The lovely Eliza J.
Sniffen, who fled with me from Doemville, was seized by her parents
and torn from my arms at New Rochelle. Reduced to poverty by the
breaking of the savings bank of which he was president--a failure to
which I largely contributed, and the profits of which I enjoyed--I
have since ascertained that Eliza Jane Sniffen was forced to become a
schoolmistress, departed to take charge of a seminary in Colorado, and
since then has never been heard from."

Why did the Boy Chief turn pale, and clutch at the tent-pole for
support? Why, indeed?

"Eliza Jane Sniffen," gasped Jenkins,--"aged fourteen, red-haired,
with a slight tendency to strabismus?"

"The same."

"Heaven help me! She died by my mandate!"

"Traitor!" shrieked Chitterlings, rushing at Jenkins with a drawn
poniard.

But a figure interposed. The slight girlish form of Mushymush with
outstretched hands stood between the exasperated Pirate Prodigy and
the Boy Chief.

"Forbear," she said sternly to Chitterlings; "you know not what you
do."

The two youths paused.

"Hear me," she said rapidly. "When captured in a confectioner's shop
at New  Rochelle, E. J. Sniffen was taken back to poverty. She
resolved to become a schoolmistress. Hearing of an opening in the
West, she proceeded to Colorado to take exclusive charge of the
pensionnat of Mdme. Choflie, late of Paris. On the way thither she was
captured by the emissaries of the Boy Chief"--

"In consummation of a fatal vow I made, never to spare educational
instructors," interrupted Jenkins.

"But in her captivity," continued Mushymush, "she managed to stain her
face with poke-berry juice, and mingling with the Indian maidens was
enabled to pass for one of the tribe. Once undetected, she boldly
ingratiated herself with the Boy Chief,--how honestly and devotedly
he best can tell,--for I, Mushymush, the little sister of the Boy
Chief, am Eliza Jane Sniffen."

The Pirate Prodigy clasped her in his arms. The Boy Chief, raising his
hand, ejaculated,--

"Bless you, my children!"

"There is but one thing wanting to complete this reunion," said
Chitterlings, after a pause, but the hurried entrance of a scout
stopped his utterance.

"A commissioner from the Great Father in Washington."

"Scalp him!" shrieked the Boy Chief; "this is no time for diplomatic
trifling."

"We have; but he still insists upon seeing you, and has sent in his
card."

The Boy Chief took it, and read aloud, in agonized accents,--

"Charles Francis Adams Golightly, late page in United States Senate,
and acting commissioner of United States."

In another moment, Golightly, pale, bleeding, and, as it were,
prematurely bald, but still cold and intellectual, entered the wigwam.
They fell upon his neck and begged his forgiveness.

"Don't mention it," he said quietly; "these things must and will
happen under our present system of government. My story is brief.
Obtaining political influence through caucuses, I became at last page
in the Senate. Through the exertions of political friends, I was
appointed clerk to the commissioner whose functions I now represent.
Knowing through political spies in your own camp who you were, I acted
upon the physical fears of the commissioner, who was an ex-clergyman,
and easily induced him to deputize me to consult with you. In doing
so, I have lost my scalp, but as the hirsute signs of juvenility have
worked against my political progress, I do not regret it. As a
partially bald young man I shall have more power. The terms that I
have to offer are simply this: you can do everything you want, go
anywhere you choose, if you will only leave this place. I have a
hundred-thousand-dollar draft on the United States Treasury in my
pocket at your immediate disposal."

"But what's to become of me?" asked Chitterlings.

"Your case has already been under advisement. The Secretary of State,
who is an intelligent man, has determined to recognize you as _de jure_
and _de facto_ the only loyal representative of the Patagonian
Government. You may safely proceed to Washington as its envoy
extraordinary. I dine with the secretary next week."

"And yourself, old fellow?"

"I only wish that twenty years from now you will recognize by your
influence and votes the rights of C. F. A. Golightly to the
presidency."

And here ends our story. Trusting that my dear young friends may take
whatever example or moral their respective parents and guardians may
deem fittest from these pages, I hope in future years to portray
further the career of those three young heroes I have already
introduced in the springtime of life to their charitable consideration.


       *       *       *       *       *


       EARLIER SKETCHES


       *       *       *       *       *


M'LISS

AN IDYL OF RED MOUNTAIN


[Pagenote: There are two forms of this tale. The earlier one is that
printed originally in _The Golden Era_ and afterward and until
this time included in Mr. Harte's collected writings. It is comprised
in four chapters and occupies about thirty pages. When the present
edition was under consideration, Mr. Harte called his publishers'
attention to the fact that the editor of the same paper proposed to
him some time later to continue it as a serial. In order to do this,
he found himself obliged to make some changes in the earlier
incidents. Accordingly he republished the story in its first form, but
with some interpolations and alterations, and then proceeded with
other chapters, making ten in all, "concluding it," he says, "rather
abruptly when I found it was inartistically prolonged." This was in
1863. But even thus the story was not to be let alone. Ten years
later, in 1873, another writer took the tale up at the end of the
tenth chapter, added fifty more, and issued the whole in _The Golden
Era_. When the continuation had been running some time, Mr. Harte
discovered the fraud, and inserted a card in the same paper, advising
the public that he had nothing whatever to do with this further
amplification of his story. Afterward, when the whole was published in
book form, he instituted legal proceedings and suppressed the sale.

The present form is Mr. Harte's revision and extension of his first,
and is reprinted from _The Golden Era_ with his consent.
EDITOR.]


CHAPTER I

SMITH'S POCKET


Just where the Sierra Nevada begins to subside in gentle undulations,
and the rivers grow less rapid and yellow, on the side of a great red
mountain stands Smith's Pocket. Seen from the red road at sunset, in
the red light and the red dust, its white houses look like the
outcroppings of quartz on the mountain side. The red stage, topped
with red-shirted passengers, is lost to view half a dozen times in the
tortuous descent, turning up unexpectedly in out-of-the-way places,
and vanishing altogether within a hundred yards of the town. It is
probably owing to this sudden twist in the road that the advent of a
stranger at Smith's Pocket is usually attended with a peculiar
circumstance. Dismounting from the vehicle at the stage office the
too-confident traveler is apt to walk straight out of town under the
impression that it lies in quite another direction. It is related that
one of the tunnel men, two miles from town, met one of these self-
reliant passengers with a carpetbag, umbrella, "Harper's Magazine,"
and other evidences of "civilization and refinement," plodding along
over the road he had just ridden, vainly endeavoring to find the
settlement of Smith's Pocket.

Had he been an observant traveler he might have found some
compensation for his disappointment in the weird aspect of that
vicinity. There were huge fissures on the hillside, and displacements
of the red soil, resembling more the chaos of some primary elementary
upheaval than the work of man; while, halfway down, a long flume
straddled its narrow body and disproportionate legs over the chasm,
like an enormous fossil of some forgotten antediluvian. At every step
smaller ditches crossed the road, hiding in  their shallow depths
unlovely streams that crept away to a clandestine union with the great
yellow torrent below. Here and there the ruins of some cabin, with the
chimney alone left intact and the hearthstone open to the skies, gave
such a flat contradiction to the poetic delusion of Lares and Penates
that the heart of the traveler must have collapsed as he gazed, and
even the bar-room of the National Hotel have afterward seemed festive,
and invested with preternatural comfort and domesticity.

The settlement of Smith's Pocket owed its origin to the finding of a
"pocket" on its site by a veritable Smith. Five thousand dollars were
taken out of it in one half-hour by Smith. Three thousand dollars were
expended by Smith and others in erecting a flume and in tunneling. And
then Smith's Pocket was found to be only a pocket, and subject like
other pockets to depletion. Although Smith pierced the bowels of the
great red mountain, that five thousand dollars was the first and the
last return of his labor. The mountain grew reticent of its golden
secrets, and the flume steadily ebbed away the remainder of Smith's
fortune. Then Smith went into quartz mining. Then into quartz milling.
Then into hydraulics and ditching, and then by easy degrees into
saloon keeping. Presently it was whispered that Smith was drinking a
good deal; then it was known that Smith was an habitual drunkard; and
then people began to think, as they are apt to, that he had never been
anything else. But the settlement of Smith's Pocket, like that of most
discoveries, was happily not dependent on the fortune of its pioneer,
and other parties projected tunnels and found pockets. So Smith's
Pocket became a settlement with its two fancy stores, its two hotels,
its one express office, and its two first families. Occasionally its
one long straggling street was overawed by the assumption of the
latest San Francisco fashions, imported per express, exclusively to
the first families; making outraged nature, in the  ragged outline of
her furrowed surface, look still more homely, and putting personal
insult on that greater portion of the population to whom the Sabbath,
with a change of linen, brought merely the necessity of cleanliness
without the luxury of adornment. Then there was a Methodist church,
and hard by a monte bank, and a little beyond, on the mountain side, a
graveyard; and then a little schoolhouse.

"The master," as he was known to his little flock, sat alone one night
in the schoolhouse, with some open copybooks before him, carefully
making those bold and full characters which are supposed to combine
the extremes of chirographical and moral excellence, and had got as
far as "Riches are deceitful," and was elaborating the noun with an
insincerity of flourish that was quite in the spirit of his text, when
he heard a gentle tapping. The woodpeckers had been busy about the
roof, during the day, and the noise did not disturb his work. But the
opening of the door, and the tapping continuing from the inside,
caused him to look up. He was slightly startled by the figure of a
young girl, dirty, and shabbily clad. Still her great black eyes, her
coarse uncombed lusterless black hair falling over her sunburned face,
her red arms and feet streaked with the red soil, were all familiar to
him. It was Melissa Smith--Smith's motherless child.

"What can she want here?" thought the master. Everybody knew "M'liss,"
as she was called, throughout the length and height of Red Mountain.
Everybody knew her as an incorrigible girl. Her fierce, ungovernable
disposition, her mad freaks and lawless character, were in their way
as proverbial as the story of her father's weakness, and as
philosophically accepted by the townsfolk. She wrangled with and
fought the schoolboys with keener invective and quite as powerful arm.
She followed the trails with woodman's craft, and the master had met
her before, miles away,  shoeless, stockingless, and bareheaded on the
mountain road. The miners' camps along the stream supplied her with
subsistence during these voluntary pilgrimages, in freely offered
alms. Not but that a larger protection had been previously extended to
M'liss. The Rev. Joshua McSnagley, "stated" preacher, had placed her
in the hotel as servant, by way of preliminary refinement, and had
introduced her to his scholars at Sunday-school. But she threw plates
occasionally at the landlord, and quickly retorted to the cheap
witticisms of the guests, and created in the Sabbath-school a
sensation that was so inimical to the orthodox dullness and placidity
of that institution, that, with a decent regard for the starched
frocks and unblemished morals of the two pink-and-white-faced children
of the first families, the reverend gentleman had her ignominiously
expelled. Such were the antecedents and such the character of M'liss,
as she stood before the master. It was shown in the ragged dress, the
unkempt hair and bleeding feet, and asked his pity. It flashed from
her black fearless eyes, and commanded his respect.

"I come here to-night," she said rapidly and boldly, keeping her hard
glance on his, "because I knew you was alone. I wouldn't come here
when them gals was here. I hate 'em and they hates me. That's why. You
keep school,--don't you? I want to be teached!"

If to the shabbiness of her apparel and uncomeliness of her tangled
hair and dirty face she had added the humility of tears the master
would have extended to her the usual moiety of pity, and nothing more.
But with the natural though illogical instincts of his species, her
boldness awakened in him something of that respect which all original
natures pay unconsciously to one another in any grade. And he gazed at
her the more fixedly as she went on still rapidly, her hand on the
door-latch and her eyes on his.

"My name is M'liss--M'liss Smith! You can bet your  life on that. My
father's Old Smith--Old Bummer Smith--that's what's the matter with
him. M'liss Smith--and I'm comin' to school!"

"Well?" said the master.

Accustomed to be thwarted and opposed, often wantonly and cruelly, for
no other purpose than to excite the violent impulses of her nature,
the master's phlegm evidently took her by surprise. She  stopped. She
began to twist a lock of her hair between her fingers; and the rigid
line of upper lip, drawn over the wicked little teeth, relaxed and
quivered slightly. Then her eyes dropped, and something like a blush
struggled up to her cheek, and tried to assert itself through the
splashes of redder soil and the sunburn of years. Suddenly she threw
herself forward, calling on God to strike her dead, and fell quite
weak and helpless, with her face on the master's desk, crying and
sobbing as if her heart would break.

The master lifted her gently, and waited for the paroxysm to pass.
When, with face still averted, she was repeating between her sobs the
mea culpa of childish penitence--that "she'd be good, she didn't mean
to," etc., it came to him to ask her why she had left Sabbath-school.

Why had she left Sabbath-school? Why? Oh, yes. What did he (McSnagley)
want to tell her she was wicked for? What did he tell her that God
hated her for? If God hated her, what did she want to go to Sabbath
school for? _She_ didn't want to be beholden to anybody who hated her.

Had she told McSnagley this?

Yes, she had.

The master laughed. It was a hearty laugh, and echoed so oddly in the
little schoolhouse, and seemed so inconsistent and discordant with the
sighing of the pines without, that he shortly corrected himself with a
sigh. The sigh was quite as sincere in its way, however, and after a
moment of serious silence he asked about her father.

Her father. What father? Whose father? What had he ever done for her?
Why did the girls hate her? Come, now! What made the folks say, "Old
Bummer Smith's M'liss" when she passed? Yes; oh, yes. She wished he
was dead--she was dead--everybody was dead; and her sobs broke forth
anew.

The master then, leaning over her, told her, as well as he could, what
you or I might have said after hearing such unnatural theories from
childish lips, only bearing in mind perhaps better than you or I the
unnatural facts of her ragged dress, her bleeding feet, and the
omnipresent shadow of her drunken father. Then raising her to her
feet, he wrapped his shawl around her, and bidding her come early in
the morning he walked with her down the road. Then he bade her "good-
night." The moon shone brightly on the narrow path before them. He
stood and watched the bent little figure as it staggered down the
road, and waited until it had passed the little graveyard and reached
the curve of the hill, where it turned and stood for a moment, a mere
atom of suffering outlined against the far-off patient stars. Then he
went back to his work. But the lines of the copybook thereafter faded
into long parallels of never-ending road, over which childish figures
seemed to pass sobbing and crying to the night. Then, the little
schoolhouse seeming lonelier than before, he shut the door and went
home.

The next morning M'liss came to school. Her face had been washed, and
her coarse black hair bore evidence of recent struggles with the comb,
in which both had evidently suffered. The old defiant look shone
occasionally in her eyes, but her manner was tamer and more subdued.
Then began a series of little trials and self-sacrifices in which
master and pupil bore an equal part, and which increased the
confidence and sympathy between them. Although obedient under the
master's eye, at times during recess, if  thwarted or stung by a
fancied slight, M'liss would rage in ungovernable fury, and many a
palpitating young savage, finding himself matched with his own weapons
of torment, would seek the master with torn jacket and scratched face,
and complaints of the dreadful M'liss. There was a serious division
among the townspeople on the subject; some threatening to withdraw
their children from such evil companionship, and others as warmly
upholding the course of the master in his work of reclamation.
Meanwhile, with a steady persistence that seemed quite astonishing to
him on looking back afterward, the Master drew M'liss gradually out of
the shadow of her past life, as though it were but her natural
progress down the narrow path on which he had set her feet the
moonlight night of their first meeting. Remembering the experience of
the evangelical McSnagley, he carefully avoided that Rock of Ages on
which that unskillful pilot had shipwrecked her young faith. But if,
in the course of her reading, she chanced to stumble upon those few
words which have lifted such as she above the level of the older, the
wiser, and the more prudent,--if she learned something of a faith that
is symbolized by suffering, and the old light softened in her eyes, it
did not take the shape of a lesson. A few of the plainer people had
made up a little sum by which the ragged M'liss was enabled to assume
the garments of respect and civilization, and often a rough shake of
the hand and words of commendation from a red-shirted and burly
figure, sent a glow to the cheek of the young master and set him to
thinking if it was altogether deserved.

Three months had passed, from the time of their first meeting, and the
master was sitting late one evening over the moral and sententious
copies, when there came a tap at the door, and again M'liss stood
before him. She was neatly clad and clean-faced, and there was
nothing perhaps but the long black hair and bright black eyes to
remind him  of his former apparition. "Are you busy?" she asked; "can
you come with me?" and on his signifying his readiness, in her old
willful way she said, "Come, then, quick!"

They passed out of the door together and into the dark road. As they
entered the town, the master asked her whither she was going. She
replied, "to see her father."

It was the first time he had heard her use that filial expression, or,
indeed, allude to him in any other way than "Old Smith" or the "Old
Man." It was the first time in many weeks that she had spoken of him
at all. He had been missed from the settlement for the past fortnight,
and the master had credited the rumors of the townsfolk that Smith had
"struck something rich" on the "North Fork," about ten miles from the
village. As they neared the settlement, the master gathered from
M'liss that the rumor was untrue, and that she had seen her father
that day. As she grew reticent to further questioning, and as the
master was satisfied from her manner that she had some definite
purpose beyond her usual willfulness, he passively resigned himself
and followed her.

Through remote groggeries, restaurants, and saloons; in gambling-hells
and dance-houses, the master, preceded by M'liss, passed and
repassed. In the reeking smoke and blasphemous outcries of noisome
dens, the child, holding the master's hand, pursued her search with a
strange familiarity, perfect self-possession, and implied protection
of himself, that even in his anxiety seemed ludicrous. Some of the
revelers, recognizing M'liss, called to her to sing and dance for
them, and would have forced liquor upon her but for the master's
interference. Others mutely made way for them. So an hour slipped by,
and as yet their search was fruitless. The master had yawned once or
twice and whistled,--two fatal signs of failing interest,--and finally
came to a full stop.

"It's half past eleven, Melissa," said he, consulting his  watch by a
broad pencil of light from an open shutter,--"half past eleven; and it
strikes me that our old friends, the woodpeckers, must have gone to
bed some hours ago, unless they are waiting up for us. I'm much
obliged to you for the evening's entertainment, but I'm afraid that
even the pretext of looking for a parent won't excuse further
dissipation. We'd better put this off till to-morrow. What do you say,
Melissa? Why! what ails the child? What's that noise? Why, a pistol!--
You're not afraid of that?"

Few children brought up in the primeval seclusion of Smith's Pocket
were unfamiliar with those quick and sharp notes which usually
rendered the evening zephyrs of that locality vocal; certainly not
M'liss, to have started when that report rang on the clear night air.
The echoes caught it as usual, and carried it round and round Red
Mountain, and set the dogs to barking all along the streams. The
lights seemed to dance and move quickly on the outskirts of the town
for a few moments afterward, the stream suddenly rippled quite audibly
behind them, a few stones loosened themselves from the hillside and
splashed into the stream, a heavy wind seemed to suage the branches of
the funereal pines, and then the silence fell again, heavier, deadlier
than ever.

When the last echo had died away, the master felt his companion's hand
relax its grasp. Taking advantage of this outward expression of
tractability, he drew her gently with him until they reached the
hotel, which--in her newer aspect of a guest whose board was secured
by responsible parties--had forgivingly opened its hospitable doors to
the vagrant child. Here the master lingered a moment to assure her
that she might count upon his assistance tomorrow; and having
satisfied his conscience by this anticipated duty, bade her good-
night. In the darkness of the road--going astray several times on his
way home, and narrowly escaping the yawning ditches in the trail--he
had  reason to commend his foresight in dissuading M'liss from a
further search that night, and in this pleasant reflection went to hed
and slept soundly.

For some hours after a darkness thick and heavy brooded over the
settlement. The sombre pines encompassing the village seemed to close
threateningly about it as if to reclaim the wilderness that had been
wrested from them. A low rustling as of dead leaves, and the damp
breath of forest odors filled the lonely street. Emboldened by the
darkness other shadows slipped by, leaving strange footprints in the
moist ditches for people to point at next day, until the moon, round
and full, was lifted above the crest of the opposite hill, and all was
magically changed.

The shadows shrank away, leaving the straggling street sleeping in a
beauty it never knew by day. All that was unlovely, harsh, and
repulsive in its jagged outlines was subdued and softened by that
uncertain light. It smoothed the rough furrows and unsightly chasms of
the mountain with an ineffable love and tenderness. It fell upon the
face of the sleeping M'liss, and left a tear glittering on her black
lashes and a smile on her lip, which would have been rare to her at
any other time; and fell also on the white upturned face of "Old
Smith," with a pistol in his hand and a bullet in his heart, lying
dead beside his empty pocket.


CHAPTER II

WHICH CONTAINS A DREAM OF THE JUST ARISTIDES


The opinion which McSnagley expressed in reference to a "change of
heart," as experienced by M'liss, was more forcibly described in the
gulches and tunnels. It was thought there that M'liss had struck a
"good lead." And when there was a new grave added to the little
inclosure, and--at the  expense of the master--a little board and
inscription put above it, the "Red Mountain Banner" came out quite
handsomely and did the correct thing for the memory of one of "our
oldest pioneers," alluding gracefully to that "bane of noble
intellects," touching slightly on the "vicissitudes of fortune," and
otherwise assisting our dear brother into genteel obscurity. "He
leaves an only child to mourn his loss," said the "Banner," "who is
now an exemplary scholar, thanks to the efforts of the Rev. J.
McSnagley." That reverend gentleman, in fact, made a strong point of
M'liss's conversion, and, indirectly attributing to her former bad
conduct the suicide of her father, made affecting allusions in Sunday-
school to the beneficial effects of the "silent tomb," and in that
cheerful contemplation froze most of the children into speechless
horror, and caused the fair-complexioned scions of the first families
to howl dismally and refuse to be comforted.

Of the homes that were offered to M'liss when her conversion became
known, the master had preferred that of Mrs. Morpher, a womanly and
kind-hearted specimen of Southwestern efflorescence, known in her
maidenhood as the "Per-ra-rie Rose." By a steady system of struggle
and self-sacrifice, she had at last subjugated her naturally careless
disposition to principles of "order," which as a pious woman she
considered, with Pope, as "Heaven's first law." But she could not
entirely govern the orbits of her satellites, however regular her own
movements, and her old nature asserted itself in her children.
Lycurgus dipped in the cupboard "between meals," and Aristides came
home from school without shoes, leaving those important articles at
the threshold, for the delights of a barefooted walk down the ditches.
Octavia and Cassandra were "keerless" of their clothes. So that with
but one exception, however the "Prairie Rose" might have trimmed,
pruned, and trained her own natural luxuriance,  the little shoots
came up defiantly wild and straggling. That one exception was
Clytemnestra Morpher, aged fifteen. She was the realization of her
mother's most extravagant dream. I stay my hand with difficulty at
this moment, for I long to describe this model of deportment; but the
progress of my story just at present supplants Clytemnestra in the
larger prominence it gives to another member of the family,--the just
Aristides.

The long dry summer had come. As each fierce day seemed to burn itself
out in little whiffs of pearl gray smoke on the mountain summits, and
as the upspringing breeze scattered what might have been its red
embers over the landscape, the green wave which, in early spring, had
upheaved above Smith's grave grew sere and dry and hard. In those
days, the master, strolling in the little churchyard of a Sabbath
afternoon, was sometimes surprised to find a few wild flowers, plucked
from the damp pine forest, scattered there, and oftener rude wreaths
hung upon the little pine cross. Most of these wreaths were formed of
a sweet-scented grass which the children loved to keep in their desks,
entwined with the pompon-like plumes of the buckeye and syringa, the
wood anemone, and here and there the master noticed the dark blue cowl
of the monk's-hood or deadly aconite. One day, during a walk, in
crossing a wooded ridge, he came upon M'liss in the heart of the
forest, perched upon a prostrate pine, on a fantastic throne, formed
by the hanging plumes of lifeless branches, her lap full of grasses
and pine burrs, and crooning to the just Aristides, who sat humbly at
her feet, one of the negro melodies of her younger life. It was
perhaps the influence of the season, or the memory of this sylvan
enjoyment, which caused Aristides, one midsummer day, to have a
singular vision.

The just Aristides had begun that morning with a serious error.
Loitering on his way to school, occasionally  stopping to inspect the
footprints of probable bears, or indulging in cheerful badinage with
the tunnel men,--to whom the apparition of a short-legged boy weighed
down by a preternaturally large satchel was an object of boisterous
solicitude,--Aristides suddenly found that he was an hour and a half
too late for school. Whether this circumstance was purely accidental
or not is a question of some uncertainty, for Aristides, on finding
himself occupying this criminal position, at once resolved to play
truant. I shall not stop to inquire by what system of logic this
result presented itself to that just youth as a consistent deduction,
or whether some indistinct apprehension of another and a better world
beyond the settlement, where there were no schools and blackberries
were plenty, had not influenced him in taking this fatal step. Enough
that he entered on his rash career by instantly eating the dinner
which he carried with him, and having propitiated that terrible god
whose seat is every small boy's stomach, with a feeling of
inexpressible guiltiness creeping over him, he turned his back upon
the schoolhouse and ran into the woods.

Away from the glare of the red road, how deliciously cool was the damp
breath and twilight dimness of the stately pines. How they seemed to
welcome him in their deepest recesses, ranging themselves silently
around him as he ran, shutting out the world and its schoolhouses, and
the pursuit of indignant parents and vindictive teachers. How in the
forest depths the blue jay called to him mockingly, and the kingbird,
spreading his tail like a crimson pennant, beckoned him onward. How
there was recognition and greeting even in the squirrel that scampered
past him, mischievously whisking his ridiculous tail within an inch of
his outstretched fingers. And how Aristides, at last flinging away
hat, shoes, and satchel, uttered a shrill whoop and dashed forward
like a youthful savage. But are not these  things written in the
dog's-eared pages of every boy's memory, even though they seemed
afterward to the just Aristides a part and parcel of his own strange
vision?

Yet even such delights had their hour of culmination, and Aristides
found himself at high noon back on the road again in a state of
feverish excitement, carrying a ravished jay's nest, two pine cones, a
dead hare, and a plume of the white syringa. Somewhat overpowered by
the weight of these trophies, which he had collected in the vague
belief that they would be of future service to him, he began to look
about for some convenient place to bestow his booty. It was nearly
time for the great Wingdam stage to go by, and when it came at last
with a sharp rattle of wheels and prancing of horses, and a red pillar
of dust hanging over it that partook of both the fiery and cloudy
attributes of the Israelitish sign, Aristides exchanged epithets with
the driver, and, although standing knee-deep in red dust, felt a
thrill of joy in the recognition which no future honor or dignity
might ever give him.

Retracing his steps, the truant presently came to a semicircular
opening in the side of Red Mountain, which inclosed, like the walls of
some vast amphitheatre, what had been the arena of the early struggles
of the gladiators of fortune. There were terrible traces of that
struggle still--in the rock blasted by fire--in the bank furrowed by
water--and in the debris of Red Mountain scattered along the gulch two
miles in extent. Their forgotten engines were lying half buried in the
ditches--the primeval structure which had served them for a banking-
house was roofless, and held the hoards of field-mice and squirrels.
The unshapely stumps of ancient pines dotted the ground, and Aristides
remembered that under the solitary redwood, which of all its brothers
remained still standing, one of those early pioneers lay buried. No
wonder that, as the gentle breeze of that summer day swept through its
branches, the just Aristides might have heard, as part of his
wonderful dream, some echo of its far off brothers of Lebanon, saying,
"Since thou art fallen, no feller has risen up against us!"

But the short legs of Aristides were aching, and he was getting
thirsty. There was a rough cavern close at hand; and as most of these
openings condensed their general dampness somewhere in quiet pools,
Aristides turned into the first one. When he had slaked his thirst, he
looked around him and recognized Smith's Pocket.

It had undergone little change in the last two years. The winter rains
had detached those portions of the wall which were not upheld by
decaying timbers. It was certainly a dirty pocket--a pocket filled
with rubbish--a shabby pocket--a worn-out and ragged pocket. It was so
unpromising in its present exterior, so graphic in its story of
misfortune, and so terrible in its recent memories, that the most
sanguine prospector would have passed it by, as though the hopeless
sentence of Dante had been written over its ragged portal.

The active mind of Aristides, however, saw in the lurking shadows of
its arches much promise as a future play-room, to which he intended to
induct hereafter his classical brother Lycurgus. In this reflection he
threw himself on the ground, and luxuriously burying his bare feet in
the cool, loose soil, gave himself up to serene meditation. But the
heat and exertion were beginning to exert a certain influence over
him, and once or twice his eyes closed. The water rippled beside him
with a sleepy sound. The sunlight on the hill without made him wink.
The long-drawn cawing of a crow on the opposite hillside, and the
buzzing of a bluebottle fly who had sought retreat in the cavern, had
a like effect, and he felt himself falling asleep. How long he slept,
or if he slept at all, he could not remember, for he started suddenly,
and, listening a moment, sprang to his feet.    The low, heavy blows
of a pick came deadened and muffled from the extremity of the cavern.

At first a terrible fear took possession of him; for an instant the
white, rigid face of Smith, as he had seen it on the day of the
inquest, when an irresistible curiosity led him to creep into the room
where the dead man was lying--for an instant only, this fearful
remembrance seemed to rise before him out of the gloom of the pit. The
terror passed away.

Ghosts were historically unknown to Aristides, and even had his
imaginative faculty been more prominent, the education of Smith's
Pocket was not of a kind to foster such weaknesses. Except a twinge of
conscience, a momentary  recollection of the evil that comes to bad
boys through the severe pages of Sunday-school books--with this
exception, Aristides was not long in recovering his self-possession.
He did not run away, for his curiosity was excited. The same instinct
which prompted an examination of bear-tracks gave a fascination to the
situation, and a nervous energy to his frame.

The regular blows of the pick still resounded through the cavern. He
crept cautiously to the deepest recesses of the pocket, and held his
breath and listened. The sound seemed to come from the bowels of the
mountain. There was no sign of opening or ingress; an impenetrable
veil of quartz was between him and the mysterious laborer. He was
creeping back, between the displaced rafters, when a light glanced
suddenly in his face, and flashed on the wet roof above him. Looking
fearfully down, Aristides beheld between the interstices of the
rafters, which formed a temporary flooring, that there was another
opening below, and in that opening a man was working. In the queer
fantasy of Aristides's dream, it took the aspect of a second pocket
and a duplicate Smith!

He had no time to utter his astonishment, for at that  moment an
ominous rattling of loose soil upon his back made him look up, and he
had barely time to spring away before a greater portion of the roof of
Smith's Pocket, loosened by the displacement of its supports in his
search, fell heavily to the ground. But in the fall a long-handled
shovel which had been hidden somewhere in the crevices of the rock
above came rattling down with it, and, seizing this as a trophy,
Aristides emerged from Smith's Pocket, at a rate of speed which seemed
singularly disproportionate with his short legs and round stomach.

When he reached the road the sun was setting. Inspecting his prize by
that poetic light, he found that the shovel was a new one, and bore
neither mark of use nor exposure. Who knows the agony, when I, in
the night on the streets, Cried out for you to the dead sky-- Next
Song: dream escape. light, of street lamps If I could rest...
if I were in is lovely... only shovel He who looks your hands in
the... Mary of... surrounded with dark looks for you in this way, Mary,
go quite gray...., if you would take me up in your eyes... Song of
Praise Mary you--to who for you in this, Mary, again" among days,,,
animals, colorful hypnotic nights-- Back the ocean... back He The most
foreign one. loses his face and legs?. The crumbles cursed with
name-- street lamps... overturn the houses-- I do n't want unbroken,
and moon--sea-moon and and world-- White encircling your white skin,
Mary-- Your hair... your smile--all around is sea and distress And
shouts and yearning and a gentle happiness-- All this singing from
that makes for that such weariness...

Does n't heaven come to us slowly like a mother's song To the
forehead of her child and again-- once I had to lose you...

Your sinful body, Mary, was so lovely-- Now. Blood and to Rocks
and thousands of eyes and sounds-- think of how felt about you...
my heavy head sinks-- Sea only cities to Now I also know: not I
had to lose you... I did not find you--it was only your Sad Song Now I
go entirely Mary, whom I sought. But you are also Mary--boundless...
Beloved... a fool I once again in vain look among days Aristides,
an rain-- Last Song merely come, my rain... animals, Rocks and
sounds for a trace of you fond. smooth roads Now fall against my
Yellow This is the way it should be.

I would like to be with you. What are mountains and the flat land to
me-- What are me and the starry shore.

You are longing..

.
_"

And here I must pause. I would that for the sake of poetry I could
leave my hero, bathed in that heroic light, erect and menacing. But
alas, in this practical world of ours, the battle is too often to the
strong. And I hasten over the humiliating spectacle of Aristides,
spanked, cuffed, and kicked, and pick him from the ditch into which he
was at last ignominiously tossed, a defeated but still struggling
warrior, and so bring him, as the night closes charitably around him,
in contrite tears and muddy garments to his father's door.

When the master stopped at Mrs. Morpher's to inquire after his errant
pupil that night, he found Aristides in bed, smelling strongly of soap
and water, and sinking into a feverish sleep. As he muttered from time
to time some incoherent sentence, tossing restlessly in his cot, the
master turned to those about him and asked what it was he said.

It was nothing. Aristides had been dreaming, and that was his dream.

That was all. Yet a dream that foreshadowed a slow-coming but unerring
justice, that should give the little dreamer in after years some
credit to the title of Aristides the Just.


CHAPTER III

UNDER THE GREENWOOD TREE


It was an amiable weakness of Mrs. Morpher to imagine that, of all her
classical progeny, Clytemnestra was particularly the model for M'liss.
Following this fallacy she threw "Clytie" at the head of M'liss when
she was "bad," and set her up before the child for adoration in her
penitential moments. It was not therefore surprising to the master to
hear that Clytie was coming to school, obviously as a favor to the
master and as an example for M'liss and others. For Clytie was quite a
young lady. Inheriting her mother's physical peculiarities, and in
obedience to the climatic laws of the Red Mountain region, she was an
early bloomer. The youth of Smith's Pocket, to whom this kind of
flower was rare, sighed for her in April and languished in May.
Enamored swains haunted the schoolhouse at the hour of dismissal. A
few were jealous of the master.

Perhaps it was this latter circumstance that opened the master's eyes
to another. He could not help noticing that Clytie was romantic; that
in school she required a great deal of attention; that her pens were
uniformly bad and wanted fixing; that she usually accompanied the
request with a certain expectation in her eye that was somewhat
disproportionate to the quality of service she verbally required; that
she sometimes allowed the curves of a round plump white arm to rest on
his when he was writing her copies; that she always blushed and flung
back her blond curls when she did so. I don't remember whether I have
stated that the master was a young man--it's of little consequence,
however. He had been severely educated in the school in which Clytie
was taking her first lesson, and on the whole withstood the flexible
curves and facetious  glance like the fine young Spartan that he was.
Perhaps an insufficient quality of food may have tended to this
asceticism. He generally avoided Clytie; but one evening when she
returned to the schoolhouse after something she had forgotten,--and
did not find it until the master walked home with her,--I hear that he
endeavored to make himself particularly agreeable, partly from the
fact, I imagine, that his conduct was adding gall and bitterness to
the already overcharged hearts of Clytemnestra's admirers.

The morning after this affecting episode, M'liss did not come to
school. Noon came, but not M'liss. Questioning Clytie on the subject,
it appeared that they had left for school together, but the willful
M'liss had taken another road. The afternoon brought her not. In the
evening he called on Mrs. Morpher, whose motherly heart was really
alarmed. Mr. Morpher had spent all day in search of her, without
discovering a trace that might lead to her discovery. Aristides was
summoned as a probable accomplice, but that equitable infant
succeeding in impressing the household with his innocence, Mrs.
Morpher entertained a vivid impression that the child would yet be
found drowned in a ditch, or--what was almost as terrible--mud-dyed
and soiled beyond the redemption of soap and water. Sick at heart, the
master returned to the schoolhouse. As he lit his lamp and seated
himself at his desk, he found a note lying before him, addressed to
himself in M'liss's handwriting. It seemed to be written on a leaf
torn from some old memorandum-book, and, to prevent sacrilegious
trifling, had been sealed with six broken wafers.  Opening it almost
tenderly, the master read as follows:--

RESPECTED SIR: When you read this, I am run away. Never to come back.
Never _Never_ NEVER. You can give my beeds to Mary Jennings, and
my Amerika's Pride [a, highly colored lithograph from a tobacco box]
to Sally  Flanders. But don't you give anything to Clytie Morper.
Don't you dair to. Do you know what my opinnion is of her, it is this,
she is perfekly disgustin. That is all and no more at present from
MELISSA SMITH.

The master mused for some time over this characteristic epistle. As he
was mechanically refolding it his eye caught a sentence written on the
back in pencil, in another handwriting, somewhat blurred and
indistinct from the heavy incisive strokes of M'liss's pen on the
other side. It seemed to be a memorandum belonging to the book from
which the leaf was originally torn:--

July 17th. 5 hours in drift--dipping west--took out 20 oz.; cleaned up
40 oz. Mem.--saw M. S.

"July 17th," said the master, opening his desk and taking out a file
of the "Red Mountain Banner." "July 17th," he repeated, running over
the pages till he came to a paragraph headed "DISTRESSING SUICIDE."
"July 17th--why, that's the day Smith killed himself. That's funny!"

In a strict etymological sense there was nothing so very ludicrous in
this coincidence, nor did the master's face betray any expression of
the kind. Perhaps the epithet was chosen to conceal the vague
uneasiness which it produced in his mind. We are all of us more
affected by these coincidences than we care to confess to one another.
If the most matter-of-fact reader of these pages were to find a hearse
standing in front of his door for three consecutive mornings, although
the circumstance might be satisfactorily explained,--shall I go
further and say, _because_ the circumstance might be satisfactorily
explained,--he would vaguely wish it hadn't happened. Philosophize as
we may, the simple  fact of two remote lines crossing each other always
seems to us of tremendous significance, and quite overshadows the more
important truth that the real parallels of life's journey are the lines
that never meet. It will do us good to remember these things, and look
more kindly on our brothers of Borrioboola-Gha and their fetich
superstitions, when we drop our silver in the missionary box next
Sabbath.

"I wonder where that memorandum came from," said the master, as he
rose at last and buttoned up his coat. "Who is 'M. S.'? M. S. stands
for manuscript and Melissa Smith. Why don't"--But checking an
impulsive query as to why people don't make their private memoranda
generally intelligible, the master put the letter in his pocket and
went home.

At sunrise the next morning he was picking his way through the palm-
like fern and thick underbrush of the pine forest, starting the hare
from its form, and awakening a querulous protest from a few dissipated
crows, who had evidently been making a night of it, and so came to the
wooded ridge where he had once found M'liss. There he found the
prostrate pine and tessellated branches, but the throne was vacant. As
he drew nearer, what might have been some frightened animal started
through the crackling limbs. It ran up the tossed arms of the fallen
monarch, and sheltered itself in some friendly foliage. The master,
reaching the old seat, found the nest still warm; looking up in the
intertwining branches, he met the black eyes of the errant M'liss.
They gazed at each other without speaking. She was first to break the
silence.

"What do you want?" she asked curtly.

The master had decided on a course of action. "I want some crab
apples," he said humbly.

"Shan't have 'em! go away! Why don't you get 'em of Clytemnerestera?"
It seemed to be a relief to M'liss to express her contempt in
additional syllables to that classical young woman's  already long-
drawn title. "Oh, you wicked thing!"

"I am hungry, Lissy. I have eaten nothing since dinner yesterday. I am
famished!" and the young man, in a state of remarkable exhaustion,
leaned against the tree.

Melissa's heart was touched. In the bitter days of her gypsy life she
had known the sensation he so artfully simulated. Overcome by his
heartbroken tone, but not entirely divested of suspicion, she said:--

"Dig under the tree near the roots, and you 'll find lots: but mind
you don't tell," for M'liss had _her_ hoards as well as the rats and
squirrels.

But the master of course was unable to find them, the effects of
hunger probably blinding his senses. M'liss grew uneasy. At length she
peered at him through the leaves in an elfish way, and questioned:--

"If I come down and give you some, you'll promise you won't touch me?"

The master promised.

"Hope you'll die if you do?"

The master accepted instant dissolution as a forfeit. M'liss slid down
the tree. The duties of hospitality fulfilled, she seated herself at a
little distance and eyed the master with extreme caution.

"Why didn't you eat your breakfast, you bad man?"

"Because I've run away."

"Where to?" said M'liss, her eyes twinkling.

"Anywhere--anywhere, away from here!" responded that deceitful wretch
with tragic wildness of demeanor.

"What made you?--bad boy!" said M'liss, with a sudden respect of
conventionalities, and a rare touch of tenderness in her tones. "You'd
better go back where your vittals are."

"What are victuals to a wounded spirit?" asked the young man
dramatically. He had reached the side of  M'liss during this dialogue,
and had taken her unresisting hand. He was too wise to notice his
victory, however; and drawing Melissa's note from his pocket, opened
it before her.

"Couldn't you find any paper in the schoolhouse without tearing a leaf
out of my memorandum book, Melissa?" he asked.

"It ain't out of your memorandum book," responded M'liss fiercely.

"Indeed," said the master, turning to the lines in pencil; "I thought
it was my handwriting."

M'liss, who had been looking over his shoulder, suddenly seized the
paper and snatched it out of his hand.

"It's father's writing!" she said, after a pause, in a softer tone.

"Where did you get it, M'liss?"

"Aristides gave it to me."

"Where did he get it?"

"Don't know. He had the book in his pocket when I told him I was going
to write to you, and he tore the leaf out. There now--don't bother me
any more." M'liss had turned her face away, and the black hair had hid
her downcast eyes.

Something in her gesture and expression reminded him of her father.
Something, and more that was characteristic to her at such moments,
made him fancy another resemblance, and caused him to ask impulsively,
and less cautiously than was his wont:--

"Do you remember your mother, M'liss?"

"No."

"Did you never see her?"

"No--didn't I tell you not to bother, and you're a-goin' and doin'
it," said M'liss savagely.

The master was silent a moment. "Did you ever think you would like to
have a mother, M'liss?" he asked again,

"No-o-o-o!"

The master rose; M'liss looked up.

"Does Aristides come to school to-day?"

"I don't know."

"Are you going back? You'd better," she said.

"Well!--perhaps I may. Good-by!"

He had proceeded a few steps when, as he expected, she called him
back. He turned. She was standing by the tree, with tears glistening
in her eyes. The master felt the right moment had come. Going up to
her, he took both her hands in his, and looking in her tearful eyes,
said gravely:--

"M'liss, do you remember the first evening you came to  see me?"

M'liss remembered.

"You asked me if you might come to school, and I said--"

"Come!" responded the child softly.

"If I told you I was lonely without my little scholar, and that I
wanted her to come, what would you say?"

The child hung her head in silence. The master waited patiently.
Tempted by the quiet, a hare ran close to the couple, and raising her
bright eyes and velvet fore paws, gazed at them fearlessly. A squirrel
ran halfway down the furrowed bark of the fallen tree, and there
stopped.

"_We_ are waiting, Lissy," said the master in a whisper, and the
child smiled. Stirred by a passing breeze, the treetops rocked, and a
slanting sunbeam stole through their interlaced boughs and fell on the
doubting face and irresolute little figure. But a step in the dry
branches and a rustling in the underbrush broke the spell.

A man dressed as a miner, carrying a long-handled shovel, came slowly
through the woods. A red handkerchief tied around his head under his
hat, with the loose ends hanging from beneath, did not add much favor
to his  unprepossessing face. He did not perceive the master and
M'liss until he was close upon them. When he did, he stopped suddenly
and gazed at them with an expression of lowering distrust. M'liss drew
nearer to the master.

"Good-mornin'--picknickin', eh?" he asked, with an attempt at
geniality that was more repulsive than his natural manner.

"How are you--prospecting, eh?" said the master quietly, after the
established colloquial formula of Red Mountain.

"Yes--a little in that way."

The stranger still hesitated, apparently waiting for them to go first,
a matter which M'liss decided by suddenly taking the master's hand in
her quick way. What she said was scarcely audible, but the master,
parting her hair over her forehead, kissed her, and so, hand in hand,
they passed out of the damp aisles and forest odors into the open
sunlit road. But M'liss, looking back, saw that her old seat was
occupied by the hopeful prospector, and fancied that in the shadows of
her former throne something of a gratified leer overspread his face.
"He'll have to dig deep to find the crab apples," said the child to
the master, as they came to the Red Mountain road.

When Aristides came to school that day he was confronted by M'liss.
But neither threats nor entreaties could extract from that reticent
youth the whereabout of the memorandum book nor where he got it. Two
or three days afterward, during recess, he approached M'liss, and
beckoned her one side.

"Well," said M'liss impatiently.

"Did you ever read the story of 'Ali Baba'?"

"Yes."

"Do you believe it?"

"No."

"Well," said that sage infant, wheeling around on his stout legs,
"_it's true!_"


CHAPTER IV

WHICH HAS A GOOD MORAL TENDENCY


Somewhat less spiteful in her intercourse with the other scholars,
M'liss still retained an offensive attitude toward Clytemnestra.
Perhaps the jealous element was not entirely stilled in her passionate
little breast. Perhaps it was that Clytemnestra's round curves and
plump outlines afforded an extensive pinching surface. But while these
ebullitions were under the master's control, her enmity occasionally
took a new and  irresponsible form.

In his first estimate of the child's character he could not conceive
that she had ever possessed a doll. But the master, like many other
professed readers of character, was safer in _a posteriori_ than _a
priori_ reasoning, for M'liss had a doll. But then it was a peculiar
doll,--a frightful perversion of wax and sawdust,--a doll fearfully and
wonderfully made,--a smaller edition of M'liss. Its unhappy existence
had been a secret discovered accidentally by Mrs. Morpher. It had been
the oldtime companion of M'liss's wanderings, and bore evident marks of
suffering. Its original complexion was long since washed away by the
weather, and anointed by the slime of ditches. It looked very much as
M'liss had in days past. Its one gown of faded stuff was dirty and
ragged as hers had been. M'liss had never been known to apply to it any
childish term of endearment. She never exhibited it in the presence of
other children. It was put severely to bed in a hollow tree near the
schoolhouse, and only allowed exercise during M'liss's rambles.
Fulfilling a stern duty to her doll--as she would to herself--it knew
no luxuries.

Now, Mrs. Morpher, obeying a commendable impulse, bought another doll
and gave it to M'liss. The child received it gravely and  curiously.
The master, on looking at it one day, fancied he saw a slight
resemblance in its round red cheeks and mild blue eyes to
Clytemnestra. It became evident before long that M'liss had also
noticed the same resemblance. Accordingly she hammered its waxen head
on the rocks when she was alone, and sometimes dragged it with a
string round its neck to and from school. At other times, setting it
up on her desk, she made a pincushion of its patient and inoffensive
body. Whether this was done in revenge of what she considered a second
figurative obtrusion of Clytie's excellencies upon her; or whether she
had an intuitive appreciation of the rites of certain other heathens,
and indulging in that "fetich" ceremony imagined that the original of
her wax model would pine away and finally die, is a metaphysical
question I shall not now consider.

In spite of these moral vagaries, the master could not help noticing
in her different tasks the workings of a quick, restless, and vigorous
perception. She knew neither the hesitancy nor the doubts of
childhood. Her answers in class were always slightly dashed with
audacity. Of course she was not infallible. But her courage and daring
in venturing beyond her own depth and that of the floundering little
swimmers around her, in their minds outweighed all errors of judgment.
Children are no better than grown people in this respect, I fancy; and
whenever the little red hand flashed above her desk, there was a
wondering silence, and even the master was sometimes oppressed with a
doubt of his own experience and judgment.

Nevertheless, certain attributes which at first amused and entertained
his fancy began to affect him with grave doubts. He could not but see
that M'liss was revengeful, irreverent, and willful. But there was one
better quality which pertained to her semi-savage disposition--the
faculty of physical fortitude and self-sacrifice, and  another--though
not always an attribute of the noble savage--truth. M'liss was both
fearless and sincere--perhaps  in such a character the adjectives were
synonymous.

The master had been doing some hard thinking on this subject, and had
arrived at that conclusion quite common to all who think sincerely,
that he was generally the slave of his own prejudices, when he
determined to call on the Rev. Mr. McSnagley for advice. This decision
was somewhat humiliating to his pride, as he and McSnagley were not
friends. But he thought of M'liss, and the evening of their first
meeting; and perhaps with a pardonable superstition that it was not
chance alone that had guided her willful feet to the schoolhouse, and
perhaps with a complacent consciousness of the rare magnanimity of the
act, he choked back his dislike and went to McSnagley.

The reverend gentleman was glad to see him. Moreover, he observed that
the master was looking "peartish" and hoped he had got over the
"neuralgy" and "rheumatiz." He himself had been troubled with a dumb
"ager" since last conference. But he had learned to "rastle and pray."

Pausing a moment to enable the master to write this certain method of
curing the dumb "ager" upon the book and volume of his brain, Mr.
McSnagley proceeded to inquire after Sister Morpher. "She is an
adornment to Chris_tew_anity, and has a likely, growin' young family,"
added Mr. McSnagley; "and there is that mannerly young gal--so well
behaved--Miss Clytie." In fact, Clytie's perfections seemed to
affect him to such an extent that he dwelt for several minutes upon
them. The master was doubly embarrassed. In the first place, there was
an enforced contrast with poor M'liss in all this praise of Clytie.
Secondly, there was something unpleasantly confidential in his tone of
speaking of Morpher's earliest born. So that  the master, after a few
futile efforts to say something natural, found it convenient to recall
another engagement and left without asking the information required,
but in his after reflections somewhat unjustly giving the Rev. Mr.
McSnagley the full benefit of having refused it.

But the master obtained the advice in another and unexpected
direction.

The resident physician of Smith's Pocket was a Dr. Duchesne, or as he
was better known to the locality, "Dr. Doochesny." Of a naturally
refined nature and liberal education, he had steadily resisted the
aggressions and temptations of Smith's Pocket, and represented to the
master a kind of connecting link between his present life and the
past. The first conveyance of the kind started on its devious way
over the that crossed the" salt marish," which at high tide was
covered by said the. To this gateway then been raised and his tongue
limbered with the requisite number"nippers"; and the increased
comfort rapidity of journey were so clearly apparent the, that
the, the turnpike was extended from Dedham court-house; and when
the work was finished a coach starting from the White Horse Tavern
in poor county roads from Boston to Providence in 1767; delirium
and the quaint Jedediah called, Orange that in 1797 twenty stages
was these and of_ the same authority commits states which opened
on different stages leaving Boston during the was twenty..

In days there was, of, Street. In"intercourse of a high order, when
the wheeling was good" but one exploits with of rein whip, being
really one hundred horses were employed, and that the, was number
of here a gate stood Neck" beyond memoranda which was Roxbury.
experience Across this isthmus"; but of Dover Street with Washington
interviews, or, as passed over new turnpike was driven by William
Hodges, familiarly called" Bill, it stage-coach that to the line
way to Morse that twelve years later the the country barely within
the incredibly" space help of six consecutive hours in leaving was
then drive out of Boston, and that a narrow one known all northward,
westward, southward-bound vehicles must required two stages and
twelve horses this line the a famous Jehu, whose was soon after
extended to connect the Bay State and Little Rhody Adams House bank
of the Providence River, making the long journey legislate, of
merit, were graphically set forth professional to any passenger who
shared the box state with him, after Bill's spirits, just opened
by Hall and Whipple, bowled along" a smooth and easy highway" first
or entering the city.

The at the present intersection times this was the southern limit of
city to a causeway Boston, which stood near the site of the The"

.
_ The nature of his wound and the manner of his
death were such as would have caused an instantaneous and complete
relaxation of _all_ the muscles. Rigidity and contraction would
have supervened of course, but only after life was extinct and
consciousness fled. Now Smith was found with his hand tightly grasping
a pistol."

"Well?"

"Well, my dear boy, he must have grasped it after he was dead, or have
prevailed on some friend to stiffen his fingers round it."

"Do you mean that he was murdered?"

Dr. Duchesne rose and closed the door. "We have different names for
these things in Smith's Pocket. I mean to say that he didn't kill
himself--that's all."   "But, doctor," said the master earnestly; "do
you think you have done right in concealing this fact? Do you think it
just--do you think it consistent with your duty to his orphan child?"

"That's why I have said nothing about it," replied the doctor coolly,
--"because of my consideration for his orphan child."

The master breathed quickly, and stared at the doctor.

"Doctor! you don't think that M'liss"--

"Hush!--don't get excited, my young friend. Remember I am not a
lawyer--only a doctor."

"But M'liss was with me the very night he must have been killed. We
were walking together when we heard the report--that is--a report--
which must have been the one"--stammered the master.

"When was that?"

"At half past eleven. I remember looking at my watch."

"Humph!--when did you meet her first?"

"At half past eight. Come, doctor, you have made a mistake here at
least," said the young man with an assumption of ease he was far from
feeling. "Give M'liss the benefit of the doubt."

Dr. Duchesne replied by opening a drawer of his desk. After rummaging
among the powders and mysterious looking instruments with which it was
stored, he finally brought forth a longitudinal slip of folded white
paper. It was appropriately labeled "_Poison._"

"Look here," said the doctor, opening the paper. It contained two or
three black coarse hairs. "Do you know them?"

"No."

"Look again!"

"It looks something like Melissa's hair," said the master, with a
fathomless sinking of the heart.

"When I was called to look at the body," continued the  doctor with
the deliberate cautiousness of a professional diagnosis, "my
suspicions were aroused by the circumstance I told you of. I managed
to get possession of the pistol, and found these hairs twisted around
the lock as though they had been accidentally caught and violently
disentangled. I don't think that any one else saw them. I removed them
without observation, and--they are at your service."

The master sank back in his seat and pressed his hand to his forehead.
The image of M'liss rose before him with flashing eye and long black
hair, and seemed to beat down and resist defiantly the suspicion that
crept slowly over his heart.

"I forbore to tell you this, my friend," continued the doctor slowly
and gravely, "because when I learned that you had taken this strange
child under your protection I did not wish to tell you that which--
though I contend does not alter her claims to man's sympathy and
kindness--still might have prejudiced her in your eyes. Her
improvement under your care has proven my position correct. I have, as
you know, peculiar ideas of the extent to which humanity is
responsible. I find in my heart--looking back over that child's
career--no sentiment but pity. I am mistaken in you if I thought this
circumstance aroused any other feeling in yours."

Still the figure of M'liss stood before the master as he bent before
the doctor's words, in the same defiant attitude, with something of
scorn in the great dark eyes, that made the blood tingle in his
cheeks, and seemed to make the reasoning of the speaker but
meaningless and empty words. At length he rose. As he stood with his
hand on the latch he turned to Dr. Duchesne, who was watching him with
careful solicitude.

"I don't know but that you have done well to keep this from me. At all
events it has not--cannot, and should not alter my opinion toward
M'liss. You will of course keep it a secret. In the mean time you must
not blame me if I cling to my instincts in preference to your
judgment. I still believe that you are mistaken in regard to her."

"Stay, one moment," said the doctor; "promise me you will not say
anything of this, nor attempt to prosecute the matter further till you
have consulted with me."

"I promise. Good-night."

"Good-night;" and so they parted.

True to that promise and his own instinctive promptings the master
endeavored to atone for his momentary disloyalty by greater solicitude
for M'liss. But the child had noticed some change in the master's
thoughtful manner, and in one of their long post-prandial walks she
stopped suddenly, and mounting a stump, looked full in his face with
big searching eyes.

"You ain't mad?" said she, with an interrogative shake of the black
braids.

"No."

"Nor bothered?"

"No."

"Nor hungry?" (Hunger was to M'liss a sickness that might attack a
person at any moment.)

"No."

"Nor thinking of her?"

"Of whom, Lissy?"

"That white girl." (This was the latest epithet invented by M'liss,
who was a very dark brunette, to express Clytemnestra.)

"No."

"Upon your word?" (A substitute for "Hope you 'll die!" proposed by
the master.)

"Yes."

"And sacred honor?"

"Yes."

Then M'liss gave him a fierce little kiss, and hopping down, fluttered
off. For two or three days after that she condescended to appear like
other children and be, as she expressed it, "good."

When the summer was about spent, and the last harvest had been
gathered in the valleys, the master bethought him of gathering in a
few ripened shoots of the young idea, and of having his Harvest Home,
or Examination. So the savans and professionals of Smith's Pocket were
gathered to witness that time-honored custom of placing timid children
in a constrained position, and bullying them as in a witness-box. As
usual in such cases, the most audacious and self-possessed were the
lucky recipients of the honors. The reader will imagine that in the
present instance M'liss and Clytie were preeminent and divided public
attention: M'liss with her clearness of material perception and self-
reliance, and Clytie with her placid self-esteem and saintlike
correctness of deportment. The other little ones were timid and
blundering. M'liss's readiness and brilliancy, of course, captivated
the greatest number, and provoked the greatest applause, and M'liss's
antecedents had unconsciously awakened the strongest sympathies of the
miners, whose athletic forms were ranged against the walls, or whose
handsome bearded faces looked in at the window. But M'liss's
popularity was overthrown by an unexpected circumstance.

McSnagley had invited himself, and had been going through the pleasing
entertainment of frightening the more timid pupils by the vaguest and
most ambiguous questions, delivered in an impressive, funereal tone;
and M'liss had soared into astronomy, and was tracking the course of
our "spotted ball" through space, and defining the "tethered orbits"
of the planets, when McSnagley deliberately arose.

"Meelissy, ye were speaking of the revolutions of this yer yearth, and
its movements with regard to the sun, and I think you said it had been
a-doin' of it since the creation, eh?"

M'liss nodded a scornful affirmative.

"Well, was that the truth?" said McSnagley, folding his arms.

"Yes," said M'liss, shutting up her little red lips tightly.

The handsome outlines at the windows peered further into the
schoolroom, and a saintly, Raphael-like face, with blond beard and
soft blue eyes, belonging to the biggest scamp in the diggings, turned
toward the child and whispered:--

"Stick to it, M'liss! It's only a big bluff of the parson."

The reverend gentleman heaved a deep sigh, and cast a compassionate
glance at the master, then at the children, and then rested his eye on
Clytemnestra. That young woman softly elevated her round, white arm.
Its seductive curves were enhanced by a gorgeous and massive specimen
bracelet, the gift of one of her humblest worshipers, worn in honor of
the occasion. There was a momentary pause. Clytie's round cheeks were
very pink and soft. Clytie's big eyes were very bright and blue.
Clytie's low-necked white book-muslin rested softly on Clytie's
white, plump shoulders. Clytie looked at the master, and the master
nodded. Then Clytie spoke softly:

"Joshua commanded the sun to stand still, and it obeyed him."

There was a low hum of applause in the schoolroom, a triumphant
expression on McSnagley's face, a grave shadow on the master's, and a
comical look of disappointment reflected from the windows. M'liss
skimmed rapidly over her astronomy, and then shut the book with a loud
snap. A groan burst from McSnagley, an expression of astonishment from
the schoolroom, and a yell from the windows, as M'liss brought her red
fist down on the desk, with the emphatic declaration:--

"It's a d--n lie. I don't believe it!"


CHAPTER V

"OPEN SESAME"


The long wet season had drawn near its close. Signs of spring were
visible in the swelling buds and rushing torrents. The pine forests
exhaled a fresher spicery. The azaleas were already budding; the
ceanothus getting ready its lilac livery for spring. On the green
upland which climbed the Red Mountain at its southern aspect, the long
spike of the monk's-hood shot up from its broad-leaved stool and once
more shook its dark blue bells. Again the billow above Smith's grave
was soft and green, its crest just tossed with the foam of daisies and
buttercups. The little graveyard had gathered a few new dwellers in
the past year, and the mounds were placed two by two by the little
paling until they reached Smith's grave, and there, there was but one.
General superstition had shunned the enforced companionship. The plot
beside Smith was vacant.

It was the custom of the driver of the great Wingdam stage to whip up
his horses at the foot of the hill, and soenter Smith's Pocket  at
that remarkable pace which the woodcuts in the hotel bar-room
represented to credulous humanity as the usual rate of speed of that
conveyance. At least, Aristides Morpher thought so as he stood one
Sunday afternoon, uneasily conscious of his best jacket and collar,
waiting its approach. Nor could anything shake his belief that
regularly on that occasion the horses ran away with the driver, and
that that individual from motives of deep policy pretended not to
notice it until they were stopped.

"Anybody up from below, Bill?" said the landlord as the driver slowly
descended from his perch.

"Nobody for you," responded Bill shortly. "Dusenberry kem up as usual,
and got  off at the old place. You can't make a livin' off him, I
reckon."

"Have you found out what his name is yet?" continued the landlord,
implying that "Dusenberry" was simply a playful epithet of the driver.

"He says his name is Waters," returned Bill. "Jake said he saw him at
the North Fork in '50--called himself Moore then. Guess he ain't no
good, nowhow. What's he doin' round here?"

"Says he's prospectin'," replied the landlord. "He has a claim
somewhere in the woods. Gambles a little too, I reckon. He don't
travel on his beauty anyhow."

"If you had seen him makin' up to a piece of calico inside, last trip,
and she a-makin' up to him quite confidential-like, I guess you'd
think he was a lady-killer. My eye, but wasn't she a stunner! Clytie
Morpher wasn't nowhere to begin with her."

"Who was she, Bill?" asked half a dozen masculine voices.

"Don't know. We picked her up this side of 'Coyote.' Fancy? I tell
you!--pretty little hat and pink ribbings--eyes that ud bore you
through at a hundred yards--white teeth--brown gaiters, and such an
ankle! She didn't want to show it,--oh, no!" added the sarcastic Bill
with deep significance.

"Where did you leave her, Bill?" asked a gentle village swain who had
been fired by the glowing picture of the fair unknown.

"That's what's the matter. You see after we picked her up, she said
she was goin' through to Wingdam. Of course there wasn't anything in
the stage or on the road too good to offer her. Old Major Spaffler
wanted to treat her to lemonade at every station. Judge Plunkett kep'
a-pullin' down the blinds and a-h'istin' of them up to keep out the
sun and let in the air. Blest if old McSnagley didn't want  to carry
her travelin'-bag. There wasn't any attention, boys, she didn't get--
but it wasn't no use--bless you! She never so much as passed the time
of day with them."

"But where did she go?" inquired another anxious auditor.

"Keep your foot off the drag, and I 'll tell you. Arter we left Ring
Tail Canon, Dusenberry, as usual, got on. Presently one of the
outsides turned round to me, and says he, 'D--d if Ugly Mug ain't got
the inside track of all of you this time!' I looked down, and dern my
skin if there wasn't Dusenberry a-sittin' up alongside of the lady,
quite comfortable, as if they had ben children together. At the next
station Dusenberry gets off. So does the lady. 'Ain't you goin' on to
Wingdam,' says I. 'No,' says she. 'Mayn't we have the pleasure of your
kempany further?' says the judge, taking off his hat. 'No, I've
changed my mind,' says she, and off she got, and off she walked arm in
arm with him as cool as you please."

"Wonder if that wa'n't the party that passed through here last July?"
asked the blacksmith, joining the loungers in front of the stage-
office. "Waters brought up a buggy to get the axle bolted. There was a
woman setting in the buggy, but the hood was drawn down, and I didn't
get to see her face." During this conversation Aristides, after a
long, lingering glance at the stage, had at last torn himself away
from its fascinations, and was now lounging down the long straggling
street in a peculiarly dissipated manner, with his hat pushed on the
back part of his head, his right hand and a greater portion of his
right arm buried in his trousers pocket. This might have been partly
owing to the shortness of his legs and the comparative amplitude of
his trousers, which to the casual observer seemed to obviate the
necessity of any other garment. But when he reached the bottom of the
street, and further enlivened his progress by  whistling shrilly
between his fingers, and finally drew a fragment of a cigar from his
pocket and placed it between his teeth, it was evident that there was
a moral as well as physical laxity in his conduct. The near fact was
that Aristides had that afternoon evaded the Sunday-school, and was
open to any kind of infant iniquity.

The main street of Smith's Pocket gradually lost its civilized
character, and after one or two futile attempts at improvement at its
lower extremity, terminated impotently in a chaos of ditches, races,
and trailings. Out of this again a narrow trail started along the
mountain side, and communicated with that vast amphitheatre which
still exhibited the pioneer efforts of the early settlers. It was this
trail that Aristides took that Sunday afternoon, and which he followed
until he reached the hillside a few rods below the yawning fissure of
Smith's Pocket. After a careful examination of the vicinity, he
cleared away the underbrush beside a fallen pine that lay near, and
sat down in the attitude of patient and deliberate expectancy.

Five minutes passed--ten, twenty--and finally a half-hour was gone.
Aristides threw away his cigar, which he had lacked determination to
light, and peeled small slips from the inner bark of the pine-tree,
and munched them gravely. Another five, ten, and twenty minutes
passed, and the sun began to drop below the opposite hillside. Another
ten minutes, and the whole of the amphitheatre above was in heavy
shadow. Ten minutes more, and the distant windows in the settlement
flamed redly. Five minutes, and the spire of the Methodist church
caught the glow--and then the underbrush crackled.

Aristides, looking up, saw the trunk of the prostrate pine slowly
lifting itself before him.

A second glance showed the fearless and self-possessed boy that the
apparent phenomenon was simply and easily explained. The tree had
fallen midway and at right angles  across the trunk of another
prostrate monarch. So accurately and evenly was it balanced that the
child was satisfied, from a liberal experience of the application of
these principles to the game of "seesaw," that a very slight impulse
to either end was sufficient to destroy the equilibrium. That impulse
proceeded from his end of the tree, as he saw when the uplifted trunk
disclosed an opening in the ground beneath it, and the head and
shoulders of a man emerging therefrom.

Aristides threw himself noiselessly on his stomach. The thick clump of
an azalea hid him from view, though it did not obstruct his survey of
the stranger, whom he at once recognized as his former enemy,--the man
with the red handkerchief,--the hopeful prospector of Red Mountain,
and the hypothetical "Dusenberry" of the stage-driver.

The stranger looked cautiously round, and Aristides shrank close
behind the friendly azalea.

Satisfied that he was unobserved, the subterranean proprietor returned
to the opening and descended, reappearing with a worn black enameled
traveling-bag which he carried with difficulty. This he again
enveloped in a blanket and strapped tightly on his back, and a long-
handled shovel, brought up from the same mysterious storehouse,
completed his outfit. As he stood for a moment leaning on the shovel,
it was the figure of the hopeful prospector in the heart of the
forest. A very slight effort was sufficient to replace the fallen tree
in its former position. Raising the shovel to his shoulder, he moved
away, brushing against the azalea bush which hid the breathless
Aristides. The sound of his footsteps retreating through the crackling
brush presently died out, and a drowsy Sabbath stillness succeeded.

Aristides rose. There was a wonderful brightness in his gray eyes, and
a flush on his sunburned cheek. Seizing a root of the fallen pine he
essayed to move it. But it defied his endeavors. Aristides looked
round.

"There's some trick about it, but I'll find it yet," said that astute
child. Breaking off the limb of a buckeye, he extemporized a lever.
The first attempt failed. The second succeeded, and the long roots of
the tree again, ascended. But as it required prolonged effort to keep
the tree up, before the impetus was lost Aristides seized the
opportunity to jump into the opening. At the same moment the tree
slowly returned to its former position,

In the sudden change from the waning light to complete darkness,
Aristides was for a moment confounded. Recovering himself, he drew a
match from his capacious pocket, and striking it against the sole of
his shoe, by the upspringing flash perceived a candle stuck in the
crevices of the rock beside him. Lighting it, he glanced curiously
around him. He was at the entrance of a long gallery at the further
extremity of which he could faintly see the glimmering of the outer
daylight. Following this gallery cautiously he presently came to an
antechamber, and by the glimmering of the light above him at once saw
that it was the same he had seen in his wonderful dream.

The antechamber was about fourteen feet square, with walls of
decomposed quartz, mingling with flaky mica that reflected here and
there the gleam of Aristides's candle with a singular brilliancy. It
did not need much observation on his part to determine the reason of
the stranger's lonely labors. On a rough rocker beside him were two
fragments of ore taken from the adjacent wall, the smallest of which
the two arms of Aristides could barely clasp. To his dazzled eyes they
seemed to be almost entirely of pure gold. The great strike of '56 at
Ring Tail Canon had brought to the wonderful vision of Smith's Pocket
no such nuggets as were here.

Aristides turned to the wall again, which had been apparently the last
scene of the stranger's labors, and from  which the two masses of ore
were taken. Even to his inexperienced eye it represented a wealth
almost incalculable. Through the loose, red soil everywhere glittering
star points of the precious metal threw back the rays of his candle.
Aristides turned pale and trembled.

Here was the realization of his most extravagant fancy. Ever since his
strange dream and encounter with the stranger, he had felt an
irresistible desire to follow up his adventure, and discover the
secrets of the second cavern. But when he had returned to Smith's
Pocket, a few days after, the wreck of the fallen roof had blocked up
that part of the opening from which he had caught sight of the hidden
workman below. During his visit he had picked up from among the
rubbish the memorandum book which had supplied M'liss with letter
paper. Still haunting the locality after school hours, he had noticed
that regularly at sunset the man with the red handkerchief appeared in
some mysterious way from the hillside below Smith's Pocket, and went
away in the direction of the settlement. By careful watching,
Aristides had fixed the location of his mysterious appearance to a
point a few rods below the opening of Smith's Pocket. Flushed by this
discovery, he had been betrayed from his usual discretion so far as to
intimate a hinting of the suspicion that possessed him in the few
mysterious words he had whispered to M'liss at school. The accident we
have described above determined the complete discovery of the secret.

Who was the stranger, and why did he keep the fact of this immense
wealth hidden from the world? Suppose he, Aristides, were to tell?
Wouldn't the schoolboys look up at him with interest as the hero and
discoverer of this wonderful cavern, and wouldn't the stage-driver
feel proud of his acquaintance and offer him rides for nothing?

Why hadn't Smith discovered it--who was poor and wanted money, whom
Aristides had liked, who was the father of  M'liss, for whom Aristides
confessed a secret passion, who belonged to the settlement and helped
to build it up--instead of the stranger? Had Smith never a suspicion
that gold was so near him, and if so, why had he killed himself? But
did Smith kill himself? And at this thought and its correlative fancy,
again the cheek of Aristides blanched, and the candle shook in his
nerveless fingers.

Apart and distinct from these passing conjectures one idea remained
firm and dominant in his mind: the man with the red handkerchief had
no right to this treasure! The mysterious instinct which directed this
judicial ruling of Aristides had settled this fact as indubitably as
though proven by the weight of the strongest testimony. For an instant
a wild thought sprang up in his heart, and he seized the nearest mass
of ore with the half-formed intention of bearing it directly to the
feet of M'liss as her just and due inheritance. But Aristides could
not lift it, and the idea passed out of his mind with the frustrated
action.

At the further end of the gallery a few blankets were lying, and with
some mining implements, a kettle of water, a few worn flannel shirts,
were the only articles which this subterranean habitation possessed.
In turning over one of the blankets Aristides picked up a woman's
comb. It was a tortoise-shell, and bright with some fanciful
ornamentation. Without a moment's hesitation Aristides pocketed it as
the natural property of M'liss. A pocketbook containing a few old
letters in the breast pocket of one of the blue shirts was transferred
to that of Aristides with the same coolness and sentiment of
instinctive justice.

Aristides wisely reflected that these unimportant articles would
excite no suspicion if found in his possession. A fragment of the
rock, which, if he had taken it as he felt impelled, would have
precipitated the discovery that Aristides had decided to put off until
he had perfected a certain plan.    The light from the opening above
had gradually faded, and Aristides knew that night had fallen. To
prevent suspicion he must return home. He reentered the gallery and
reached the opening of the egress. One of the roots of the tree
projected into the opening.

He seized it and endeavored to lift it, but in vain. Panting with
exertion, he again and again exerted the fullest power of his active
sinews, but the tree remained immovable--the opening remained sealed
as firmly as with Solomon's signet. Raising his candle towards it,
Aristides saw the reason of its resistance. In his hurried ingress he
had allowed the tree to revolve sufficiently to permit one of its
roots to project into the opening, which held it firmly down. In the
shock of the discovery the excitement which had sustained him gave
way, and with a hopeless cry the just Aristides fell senseless on the
floor of the gallery.


CHAPTER VI

THE TRIALS OF MRS. MORPHER


"Now, where on earth can that child be?" said Mrs. Morpher, shading
her eyes with her hand, as she stood at the door of the "Mountain
Ranch," looking down the Wingdam road at sunset. "With his best things
on; too. Goodness!--what _were_ boys made for?"

Mr. Morpher, without replying to this question, apparently addressed
to himself as an adult representative of the wayward species, appeared
at the door, and endeavored to pour oil on the troubled waters.

"Oh, _he's_ all right, Sue! Don't fuss about _him,_" said Mr. Morpher
with an imbecile sense of conveying comfort in the emphasized pronoun.
"He's down the gulch, or in the tunnel, or over to the claim. He'll
turn up by bedtime. Don't you worry about _him._ I'll look him up in a
minit," and Mr. Morpher, taking his hat, sauntered down the road in the
direction of the National Hotel.

Mrs. Mopher gazed doubtfully after her liege. "Looking up" Aristides,
in her domestic experience, implied a prolonged absence in the bar-
room of the hotel, the tedium whereof was beguiled by seven-up or
euchre. But she only said: "Don't be long, James," and sighed
hopelessly as she turned back into the house.

Once again within her own castle walls Mrs. Morpher dropped her look
of patient suffering and glanced defiantly around for a fresh
grievance.

The decorous little parlor offered nothing to provoke the hostility of
her peculiar instincts. Spotless were the white curtains; the bright
carpet guiltless of stain or dust. The chairs were placed
arithmetically in twos, and added up evenly on the four sides with
nothing to carry over. Two bunches of lavender and fennel breathed an
odor of sanctified cleanliness through the room. Five daguerreotypes
on the mantelpiece represented the Morpher family in the progressive
stages of petrifaction, and had the Medusa-like effect of freezing
visitors into similar attitudes in their chairs. The walls were
further enlivened with two colored engravings of scenes in the
domestic history of George Washington, in which the Father of his
Country seemed to look blandly from his own correct family circle into
Morpher's, and to breathe quite audibly from his gilt frame a
dignified blessing.

Lingering a moment in this sacred inclosure to readjust the
tablecloth, Mrs. Morpher passed into the dining-room, where the
correct Crytie presided at the supper-table, at which the rest of the
family were seated. Mrs. Morpher's quick eyes caught the spectacle of
M'liss with her chin resting on her hands, and her elbows on the
table, sardonically surveying the model of deportment opposite to her.

"M'liss!"

"Well?"

"Where's your elbows?"

"Here's one and there's the other," said M'liss quietly, indicating
their respective localities by smartly tapping them with the palm of
her hand.

"Take them off the table, instantly, you bold, forward girl--and you,
sir, quit that giggling and eat your supper, if you don't want to be
put to bed without it!" added Mrs. Morpher to Lycurgus, to whom
M'liss's answer had afforded boundless satisfaction. "You're getting
to be just as bad as her, and mercy knows you never were a seraphim!"

"What's a seraphim, mother, and what do they do?" asked Lycnrgus, with
growing interest.

"They don't ask questions when they should be eating their supper, and
thankful for it," interposed Clytie, authoritatively, as one to whom
the genteel attributes and social habits of the seraphim had been a
privileged revelation.

"But, mother"--

"Hush--and don't be a heathen--run and see who is coming in," said
Mrs. Morpher, as the sound of footsteps was heard in the passage.

The door opened and McSnagley entered.

"Why, bless my soul--how do you do?" said Mrs. Morpher, with genteel
astonishment. "Quite a stranger, I declare."

This was a polite fiction. M'liss knew the fact to be that Mrs.
Morpher was reputed to "set the best table" in Smith's Pocket, and
McSnagley always called in on Sunday evenings at supper to discuss the
current gossip, and "nag" M'liss with selected texts. The verbal
McSnagley as usual couldn't stop a moment--and just dropped in "in
passin'." The actual McSnagley deposited his hat in the corner, and
placed himself, in the flesh, on a chair by the table.

"And how's Brother James, and the fammerly?"

"They're all well--except 'Risty;' he's off again,--as if my life
weren't already pestered out with one child," and Mrs. Morpher glanced
significantly at M'liss.

"Ah, well, we all of us have our trials," said McSnagley. "I've been
ailin' again. That ager must be in my bones still. I've been rather
onsettled myself to-day."

There was the appearance of truth in this statement; Mr. McSnagley's
voice had a hollow resonant sound, and his eyes were nervous and
fidgety. He had an odd trick, too, of occasionally stopping in the
middle of a sentence, and listening as though he heard some distant
sound. These things, which Mrs. Morpher recalled afterwards, did not,
in the undercurrent of uneasiness about Aristides which she felt the
whole of that evening, so particularly attract her notice.

"I know something," said Lycurgus, during one of these pauses, from
the retirement of his corner.

"If you dare to--Kerg!" said M'liss.

"M'liss says she knows where Risty is, but she won't tell," said the
lawgiver, not heeding the warning. The words were scarcely uttered
before M'liss's red hand flashed in the air and descended with a
sounding box on the traitor's ear. Lycurgus howled, Mrs. Morpher
darted into the corner, and M'liss was dragged defiant and struggling
to the light.

"Oh, you wicked, wicked child--why don't you say where, if you know?"
said Mrs. Morpher, shaking her, as if the information were to be
dislodged from some concealed part of her clothing.

"I didn't say I knew for sure," at last responded M'liss. "I said I
thought I knew."

"Well, where do you think he is?"

But M'liss was firm. Even the gloomy picture of the future state
devised by McSnagley could not alter her  determination. Mrs. Morpher,
who had a wholesome awe for this strange child, at last had recourse
to entreaty. Finally M'liss offered a compromise.

"I'll tell the master, but I won't tell you--partikerly him," said
M'liss, indicating the parson with a bodkin-like dart of her
forefinger.

Mrs. Morpher hesitated. Her maternal anxiety at length overcame her
sense of dignity and discipline.

"Who knows where the master is, or where he is to be found to-night?"
she asked hastily.

"He's over to Dr. Duchesne's," said Clytie eagerly; "that is," she
stammered, a rich color suddenly flushing from her temples to her
round shoulders, "he's usually there in the evenings, I mean."

"Run over, there's a dear, and ask him to come here," said Mrs.
Morpher, without noticing a sudden irregularity of conduct in her
firstborn. "Run quick!"

Clytie did not wait for a second command. Without availing herself of
the proffered company of McSnagley she hastily tied the strings of her
school hat under her plump chin, and slipped out of the house. It was
not far to the doctor's office, and Clytie walked quickly, overlooking
in her haste and preoccupation the admiring glances which several of
the swains of Smith's Pocket cast after her as she passed. But on
arriving at the doctor's door, so out of breath and excited was this
usual model of deportment that, on finding herself in the presence of
the master and his friend, she only stood in embarrassed silence, and
made up for her lack of verbal expression by a succession of eloquent
blushes.

Let us look at her for a moment as she stands there. Her little straw
hat, trimmed with cherry-colored ribbons, rests on the waves of her
blonde hair. There are other gay ribbons on her light summer dress,
clasping her round waist, girdling her wrist, and fastening her collar
about her  white throat. Her large blue eyes are very dark and moist
--it may be with excitement or a tearful thought of the lost Aristides
--or the tobacco smoke, with which I regret to say the room is highly
charged. But certainly as she stands leaning against the doorway,
biting her moist scarlet lip, and trying to pull down the broad brim
of her hat over the surging waves of color that _will_ beat
rhythmically up to her cheeks and temples, she is so dangerously
pretty that I am glad for the masters sake he is the philosopher he
has just described himself to his friend the doctor, and that he
prefers to study human physiology from the inner surfaces.

When Clytie had recovered herself sufficiently to state her message,
the master offered to accompany her back. As Clytie took his arm with
some slight trepidation Dr. Duchesne, who had taken sharp notes of
these "febrile" symptoms, uttered a prolonged whistle and returned
thoughtfully to his office.

Although Clytie found the distance returning no further than the
distance going, with the exhaustion of her first journey it was
natural that her homeward steps should be slower, and that the master
should regulate his pace to accommodate her. It was natural, too, that
her voice should be quite low and indistinct, so that the master was
obliged to bring his hat nearer the cherry-colored ribbons in the
course of conversation. It was also natural that he should offer the
sensitive young girl such comfort as lay in tenderly modulated tones
and playful epithets. And if in the irregularities of the main street
it was necessary to take Clytie's hand or to put his arm around her
waist in helping her up declivities, that the master saw no
impropriety in the act was evident from the fact that he did not
remove his arm when the difficulty was surmounted. In this way
Clytie's return occupied some moments more than her going, and Mrs.
Morpher was waiting anxiously at the door when the young people
arrived.    As the master entered the rooom, M'liss called him to her.
"Bend down your head" she said, "and I'll whisper. But mind, now, I
don't say I know for truth where Risty is, I only reckon."

The master bent down his head. As usual in such cases, everybody else
felt constrained to listen, and McSnagley's curiosity was awakened to
its fullest extent. When the master had received the required
information, he said quietly:--

"I think I'll go myself to this place which M'liss wishes to make a
secret of and see if the boy is there. It will save trouble to any one
else, if she should be mistaken."

"Hadn't you better take some one with you?" said Mrs. Morpher.

"By all means. I 'll go!" said Mr. McSnagley, with feverish alacrity.

The master looked inquiringly at M'liss.

"He can go if he wants to, but he'd better not," said M'liss, looking
directly into McSnagley's eyes.

"What do you mean by that, you little savage?" said McSnagley quickly.

M'liss turned scornfully away. "Go," she said,--"go if you want to,"
and resumed her seat in the corner.

The master hesitated. But he could not withstand the appeal in the
eyes of the mother and daughter, and after a short inward struggle he
turned to McSnagley and bade him briefly "Come."

When they had left the house and stood in the road together, McSnagley
stopped.

"Where are you goin'?"

"To Smith's Pocket."

McSnagley still lingered. "Do you ever carry any weppings ?" he at
length asked.

"Weapons? No. What do you want with weapons to  go a mile on a starlit
road to a deserted claim. Nonsense, man, what are you thinking of?
We're hunting a lost child, not a runaway felon. Come along," and the
master dragged him away.

Mrs. Morpher watched them from the door until their figures were lost
in the darkness. When she returned to the dining-room, Clytie had
already retired to her room, and Mrs. Morpher, overruling M'liss's
desire to sit up until the master returned, bade her follow that
correct example. "There's Clytie, now, gone to bed like a young lady,
and do you do like her," and Mrs. Morpher, with this one drop of balm
in the midst of her trials, trimmed the light and sat down in patience
to wait for Aristides, and console herself with the reflection of
Clytie's excellence. "Poor Clytie!" mused that motherly woman; "how
excited and worried she looks about her brother. I hope she'll be able
to get to sleep."

It did not occur to Mrs. Morpher that there were seasons in the life
of young girls when younger brothers ceased to become objects of
extreme solicitude. It did not occur to her to go upstairs and see how
her wish was likely to be gratified. It was well in her anxiety that
she did not, and that the crowning trial of the day's troubles was
spared her then. For at that moment Clytie was lying on the bed where
she had flung herself without undressing, the heavy masses of her
blond hair tumbled about her neck, and her hot face buried in her
hands.

Of what was the correct Clytie thinking?

She was thinking, lying there with her burning cheeks pressed against
the pillow, that she loved the master! She was recalling step by step
every incident that had occurred in their lonely walk. She was
repeating to herself his facile sentences, wringing and twisting them
to extract one drop to assuage the strange thirst that was growing up
in her soul. She was thinking--silly Clytie!--that he had  never
appeared so kind before, and she was thinking--sillier Clytie!--that
no one had ever before felt as she did then.

How soft and white his hands were! How sweet and gentle were the tones
of his voice! How easily he spoke--so unlike her father, McSnagley, or
the young men whom she met at church or on picnics! How tall and
handsome he looked as he pressed her hand at the door! Did he press
her hand, or was it a mistake? Yes, he must have pressed her hand, for
she remembers now to have pressed his in return. And he put his arm
around her waist once, and she feels it yet, and the strange perfume
as he drew her closer to him. (Mem.--The master had been smoking. Poor
Clytie!)

When she had reached this point she raised herself and sat up, and
began the process of undressing, mechanically putting each article
away in the precise, methodical habit of her former life. But she
found herself soon sitting again on the bed, twisting her hair, which
fell over her plump white shoulders, idly between her fingers, and
patting the carpet with her small white foot. She had been sitting
thus some minutes when she heard the sound of voices without, the
trampling of many feet, and a loud rapping at the door below. She
sprang to the door and looked out in the passage. Something white
passed by her like a flash and crouched down at the head of the
stairs. It was M'liss.

Mrs. Morpher opened the door.

"Is Mr. Morpher in?" said a half dozen strange, hoarse voices.

"No!"

"Where is he?" "He's at some of the saloons. Oh, tell me, has anything
happened? Is it about Aristides? Where is he--is he safe?" said Mrs.
Morpher, wringing her hands in agony.

"He's all right," said one of the men, with Mr. Morpher's old
emphasis; "but"--

"But what?"

M'liss moved slowly down the staircase, and Clytie from the passage
above held her breath.

"There's been a row down to Smith's old Pocket--a fight--a man
killed."

"Who?" shouted M'liss from the stairs.

"McSnagley--shot dead."


CHAPTER VII

THE PEOPLE vs. JOHN DOE WATERS.  Before Chief Justice LYNCH.


The hurried statement of the messenger was corroborated in the streets
that night. It was certain that McSnagley was killed. Smith's Pocket,
excited but skeptical, had seen the body, had put its fingers in the
bullethole, and was satisfied. Smith's Pocket, albeit hoarse with
shouting and excitement, still discussed details with infinite relish
in bar-rooms and saloons, and in the main street in clamorous knots
that in front of the jail where the prisoner was confined seemed to
swell into a mob. Smith's Pocket, bearded, blue-shirted, and
belligerent, crowding about this locality, from time to time uttered
appeals to justice that swelled on the night wind, not infrequently
coupling these invocations with the name of that eminent jurist--
Lynch.

Let not the simple reader suppose that the mere taking off of a fellow
mortal had created this uproar. The tenure of life in Smith's Pocket
was vain and uncertain at the best, and as such philosophically
accepted, and the blowing out of a brief candle here and there seldom
left a permanent shadow with the survivors. In such instances, too,
the victims had received their quietus from the hands of brother
townsmen, socially, as it were, in broad day, in the open streets, and
under other mitigating circumstances. Thus, when Judge Starbottle of
Virginia and "French Pete" exchanged shots with each other across the
plaza until their revolvers were exhausted, and the luckless Pete
received a bullet through the lungs, half the town witnessed it, and
were struck with the gallant and chivalrous bearing of these
gentlemen, and to this day point with feelings of pride and admiration
to the bulletholes in the door of the National Hotel, as they explain
how narrow was the escape of the women in the parlor. But here was a
man murdered at night, in a lonely place, and by a stranger--a man
unknown to the saloons of Smith's Pocket--a wretch who could not plead
the excitement of monte or the delirium of whiskey as an excuse. No
wonder that Smith's Pocket surged with virtuous indignation beneath
the windows of his prison, and clamored for his blood.

And as the crowd thickened and swayed to and fro, the story of his
crime grew exaggerated by hurried and frequent repetition. Half a
dozen speakers volunteered to give the details with an added horror to
every sentence. How one of Morpher's children had been missing for a
week or more. How the schoolmaster and the parson were taking a walk
that evening, and coming to Smith's Pocket heard a faint voice from
its depths which they recognized as belonging to the missing child.
How they had succeeded in dragging him out and gathered from his
infant lips the story of his incarceration by the murderer, Waters,
arid his enforced labors in the mine. How they were interrupted by the
appearance of Waters, followed by a highly colored and epithet-
illustrated account of the interview and quarrel. How Waters struck
the schoolmaster, who returned the blow with a pick. How Waters
thereupon drew a derringer and fired, missing the schoolmaster, but
killing McSnagley  behind him. How it was believed that Waters was one
of Joaquin's gang, that he had killed Smith, etc., etc. At each pause
the crowd pushed and panted, stealthily creeping around the doors and
windows of the jail like some strange beast of prey, until the climax
was reached, and a hush fell, and two men were silently dispatched for
a rope, and a critical examination was made of the limbs of a pine-
tree in the vicinity.

The man to whom these incidents had the most terrible significance
might have seemed the least concerned as he sat that night but a few
feet removed from the eager crowd without, his hands lightly clasped
together between his knees, and the expression on his face of one
whose thoughts were far away. A candle stuck in a tin sconce on the
wall flickered as the night wind blew freshly through a broken pane of
the window. Its uncertain light revealed a low room whose cloth
ceiling was stained and ragged, and from whose boarded walls the torn
paper hung in strips; a lumber-room partitioned from the front office,
which was occupied by a justice of the peace. If this temporary
dungeon had an appearance of insecurity, there was some compensation
in the spectacle of an armed sentinel who sat upon a straw mattress in
the doorway, and another who patrolled the narrow hall which led to
the street. That the prisoner was not placed in one of the cells in
the floor below may have been owing to the fact that the law
recognized his detention as only temporary, and while providing the
two guards as a preventive against the egress of crime within,
discreetly removed all unnecessary and provoking obstacles to the
ingress of justice from without.

Since the prisoner's arrest he had refused to answer any
interrogatories. Since he had been placed in confinement he had not
moved from his present attitude. The guard, finding all attempts at
conversation fruitless, had fallen into a reverie, and regaled himself
with pieces of straw plucked  from the mattress. A mouse ran across
the floor. The silence contrasted strangely with the hum of voices in
the street.

Isn't that strange... isn't that enough to make you puke,,, The damned
jerks--the miserable phonies-- Everyone goes right by me...
Bloody mess...
Here I am burning gas and electricity-- May God and the devil damn me
to hell:
Damn It all... why is my bar the only empty one...
Grumpy, reproachful waiters standing around-- It is my fault-- Not
one damned person comes to the door-- Cramped in a corner I sit with
a hopeful face.
No customers come.-- The food rots, the wine and bread.
I might as well shut the joint.
And cry myself to death.

A Trouble-making Girl

It's certainly late. I must earn something.
But they're all going right by today with smug expressions on their
faces.
They don't want to give me a single good-luck penny.
It's a miserable life.
If I come home without money The old lady will throw me out.
There is hardly anyone on the street any more.
I am dead tired and freezing.
I was never so miserable in my life.
I move around here like a piece of meat.

Finally someone comes over:
An extremely well-dressed man-- But in this life one can't tell much
By appearances.
He's also quite older. (they have more money, Young ones tend to cheat
you.) We are face-to-face.
I raise my clothes above the knee.
I can get away with that.

That's the big draw..
Like flies to the light The guys are drawn to us goats...
The John is certainly standing over there.
He is staring. He winks. Now I'll go right by him...
I think: he will give me a big piece of gold.
Then I get drunk in secret on expensive liquor, That's still the best:
sometime--alone To be drunk quietly, for myself-- Or I can buy
new shoes...
I won't have to go around in mended socks-- Or... sometime I won't go
out walking the streets.
And take a rest from the guys-- Or...

I'm already looking forward to this...
I'm so happy-- Here comes Kitty.
And scares the man off.

The Drunkard

One must guard oneself ever so carefully against Howling, without
any reason, like an animal.
Against pouring beer over the faces of all the waiters, And kicking
them in their faces.
Against shortening the disgusting time Spent lying in a gutter.
Against throwing oneself off a bridge.
Against hitting friends in the mouth.
Against suddenly, while dogs bark, Tearing the clothes off a well-fed
body.
Against hurling into any old beloved woman's Thighs one's dark
skull.

A Lieutenant General Sings
I am the Division Commander, His Excellency.
I have attained what is humanly possible.
A lovely consciousness.
In front of me Important people and chiefs of regiments Bend their
knees, And my generals Obey my commands.
God willing, my next command will be An entire military corps.
Women, drama, music Do not interest me much.
Compared to parades and battles, That does not amount to much.
Would that there were an endless war With bloody, howling winds.
Ordinary life Has no charm for me.

Falling in the River
Drunk, Lene Levi walked In the neighboring streets nightly Back and
forth, screaming, "auto." Her blouse was opened, So that one saw
her fine, fascinating Underclothing and skin.
Seven horny little men ran After Lene.
Seven horny little men chased Lene Levi for her body, Thinking about
what it costs.
Seven men, otherwise very respectable, Forgot their children and
art, Science and factory."Well?"

"Here's M'liss! Says she wants to come up. Shall I let her in?"

The subject of inquiry, however, settled the question of  admission by
darting past the guard below in this moment  of preoccupation, and
bounded up the stairs like a young  fawn. The guards laughed.

"Now, then, my infant phenomenon," said the one   called Bill, as
M'liss stood panting before him, "wot 's up? and nextly, wot's in that
bottle?"

M'liss whisked the bottle which she held in her hand smartly under her
apron, and said curtly, "Where's him that killed the parson?"

"Yonder," replied the man, indicating the abstracted figure with his
hand. "Wot do _you_ want with him? None o' your tricks here, now," he
added threateningly.

"I want to see him!"

"Well, look! make the most of your time, and _his_ too, for the
matter of that; but mind, now, no nonsense, M'liss, he won't stand
it!" repeated the guard with an emphasis in the caution.

M'liss crossed the room, until opposite the prisoner. "Are you the
chap that killed the parson?" she said, addressing the motionless
figure.

Something in the tone of her voice startled the prisoner from the
reverie. He raised his head and glanced quickly, and with his old
sinister expression, at the child.

"What's that to you?" he asked, with the grim lines setting about his
mouth again, and the old harshness of his voice.

"Didn't I tell you he wouldn't stand any of your nonsense, M'liss?"
said the guard testily.

M'liss only repeated her question.

"And what if I did kill him?" said the prisoner savagely; "what's that
to you, you young hell-cat? Guard!--damnation!--what do you let her
come here for? Do you hear? Guard!" he screamed, rising in a transport
of passion, "take her away! fling her downstairs! What the h--ll is
she doing here?"

"If you was the man that killed McSnagley," said M'liss, without
heeding the interruption, "I've brought you something;" and she drew
the bottle from under her apron and extended it to Waters, adding,
"It's brandy--Cognac--A1."

"Take it away, and take yourself with it," returned Waters, without
abating his angry accents. "Take it away! do you hear?"

"Well, that's what I call ongrateful, dog-gone my skin if it ain't,"
said the guard, who had been evidently struck with M'liss's
generosity. "Pass the licker this way, my beauty, and I'll keep it
till he changes his mind. He's naturally a little flustered just now,
but he'll come round after you go."

But M'liss didn't accede to this change in the disposition of the
gift, and was evidently taken aback by her reception and the refusal
of the proffered comfort.

"Come, hand the bottle here!" repeated the guard. "It's agin rules to
bring the pris'ner anything, anyway, and it's confiscated to the law.
It's agin the rules, too, to ask a pris'ner any question that'll
criminate him, and on the whole you'd better go, M'liss," added the
guard, to whom the appearance of the bottle had been the means of
provoking a spasm of discipline.

But M'liss refused to make over the coveted treasure. Bill arose half
jestingly and endeavored to get possession of the bottle. A struggle
ensued, good-naturedly on the part of the guard, but characterized on
the part of M'liss by that half-savage passion which any thwarted whim
or instinct was sure to provoke in her nature. At last with a curse
she freed herself from his grasp, and seizing the bottle by the neck
aimed it with the full strength of her little arm fairly at his head.
But he was quick enough to avert that important object, if not quick
enough to save his shoulder from receiving the strength of the blow,
which shattered the thin glass and poured the fiery contents of the
bottle over his shirt and breast, saturating his clothes, and
diffusing a sharp alcoholic odor through the room.

A forced laugh broke from his lips, as he sank back on the mattress,
not without an underlying sense of awe at  this savage girl who stood
panting before him, and from whom he had just escaped a blow which
might have been fatal. "It's a pity to waste so much good licker," he
added, with affected carelessness, narrowly watching each movement of
the young pythoness, whose rage was not yet abated.

"Come, M'liss," he said at last, "we'll say quits. You've lost your
brandy, and I've got some of the pieces of yonder bottle sticking in
my shoulder yet. I suppose brandy is good for bruises, though. Hand me
the light!"

M'liss reached the candle from the sconce and held it by the guard as
he turned back the collar of his shirt to lay bare his shoulder. "So,"
he muttered, "black and blue; no bones broken, though no fault of
yours, eh? my young cherub, if it wasn't. There--why, what are you
looking at in that way, M'liss, are you crazy?--Hell's furies, don't
hold the light so near! What are you doing; Hell--ho, there! Help!"

Too late, for in an instant he was a sheet of living flame. When or
how the candle had touched his garments, saturated with the
inflammable fluid, Waters, the only inactive spectator in the room,
could never afterward tell. He only knew that the combustion was
instantaneous and complete, and before the cry had died from his lips,
not only the guard, but the straw mattress on which he had been
sitting, and the loose strips of paper hanging from the walls, and the
torn cloth ceiling above were in flames.

"Help! Help! Fire! Fire!"

With a superhuman effort, M'liss dragged the prisoner past the blazing
mattress, through the doorway into the passage, and drew the door,
which opened outwardly, against him. The unhappy guard, still blazing
like a funeral pyre, after wildly beating the air with his arms for a
few seconds, dashed at the broken window, which gave way with his
weight, and precipitated him, still flaming, into the yard below. A
column of smoke and a licking tongue of flame leaped from the open
window at the same moment, and the cry of fire was reechoed from a
hundred voices in the street. But scarcely had M'liss closed the open
door against Waters, when the guard from the doorway mounted the
stairs in time to see a flaming figure leap from the window. The room
was filled with smoke and fire. With an instinct of genius, M'liss,
pointing to the open window, shouted hoarsely in his ear:--

"Waters has escaped!"

A cry of fury from the guard was echoed from the stairs, even now
crowded by the excited mob, who feared the devastating element might
still cheat them of their intended victim. In another moment the house
was emptied, and the front street deserted, as the people rushed to
the rear of the jail--climbing fences and stumbling over ditches in
pursuit of the imagined runaway. M'liss seized the hat and coat of the
luckless "Bill," and dragging the prisoner from his place of
concealment hurriedly equipped him, and hastened through the blinding
smoke of the staircase boldly on the heels of the retiring crowd. Once
in the friendly darkness of the street, it was easy to mingle with the
pushing throng until an alley crossing at right angles enabled them to
leave the main thoroughfare. A few moments' rapid flight, and the
outskirts of the town were reached, the tall pines opened their
abysmal aisles to the fugitives, and M'liss paused with her companion.
Until daybreak, at least, here they were safe!

From the time they had quitted the burning room to that moment, Waters
had passed into his listless, abstracted condition, so helpless and
feeble that he retained the grasp of M'liss's hand more through some
instinctive prompting rather than the dictates of reason. M'liss had
found it necessary to almost drag him from the main street and the
hurrying  crowd, which seemed to exercise a strange fascination over
his bewildered senses. And now he sat down passively beside her, and
seemed to submit to the guidance of her superior nature.

"You're safe enough now till daylight," said M'liss, when she had
recovered her breath, "but you must make the best time you can through
these woods to-night, keeping the wind to your back, until you come to
the Wingdam road. There! do you hear?" said M'liss, a little vexed at
her companion's apathy.

Waters released the hand of M'liss, and commenced mechanically to
button his coat around his chest with fumbling, purposeless fingers.
He then passed his hand across his forehead as if to clear his
confused and bewildered brain; all this, however, to no better result
than to apparently root his feet to the soil and to intensify the
stupefaction which seemed to be creeping over him.

"Be quick, now! You've no time to lose! Keep straight on through the
woods until you see the stars again before you, and you're on the
other side of the ridge. What are you waiting for?" And M'liss stamped
her little foot impatiently.

An idea which had been struggling for expression at last seemed to
dawn in his eyes. Something like a simpering blush crept over his face
as he fumbled in his pocket. At last, drawing forth a twenty-dollar
piece, he bashfully offered it to M'liss. In a twinkling the extended
arm was stricken up, and the bright coin flew high in the air, and
disappeared in the darkness.

"Keep your money! I don't want it. Don't do that again!" said M'liss,
highly excited, "or I'll--I'll--bite you!"

Her wicked little white teeth flashed ominously as she said it.

"Get off while you can. Look!" she added, pointing to  a column of
flame shooting up above the straggling mass of buildings in the
village, "the jail is burning; and if that goes, the block will go
with it. Before morning these woods will be filled with people. Save
yourself while you can!"

Waters turned and moved away in the darkness. "Keep straight on, and
don't waste  a moment," urged the child, as the man seemed still
disposed to linger. "Trot now!" and in another moment he seemed to
melt into the forest depths.

M'liss threw her apron around her head, and coiled herself up at the
root of a tree in something of her old fashion. She had prophesied
truly of the probable extent of the fire. The fresh wind, whirling the
sparks over the little settlement, had already fanned the single flame
into the broad sheet which now glowed fiercely, defining the main
street along its entire length. The breeze which fanned her cheek bore
the crash of falling timbers and the shouts of terrified and anxious
men. There were no engines in Smith's Pocket, and the contest was
unequal. Nothing but a change of wind could save the doomed
settlement.

The red glow lit up the dark cheek of M'liss and kindled a savage
light in her black eyes. Relieved by the background of the sombre
woods, she might have been a red-handed Nemesis looking over the city
of Vengeance. As the long tongues of flame licked the broad colonnade
of the National Hotel, and shot a wreathing pillar of fire and smoke
high into the air, M'liss extended her tiny fist and shook it at the
burning building with an inspiration that at the moment seemed to
transfigure her.

So the night wore away until the first red bars of morning light
gleamed beyond the hill, and seemed to emulate the dying embers of the
devastated settlement. M'liss for the first time began to think of the
home she had quitted the night before, and looked with some anxiety in
the direction of "Mountain Ranch." Its white walls and little  orchard
were untouched, and looked peacefully over the blackened and deserted
village. M'liss rose, and, stretching her cramped limbs, walked
briskly toward the town. She had proceeded but a short distance when
she heard the sound of cautious and hesitating footsteps behind her,
and, facing quickly about, encountered the figure of Waters.

"Are you drunk?" said M'liss passionately, "or what do you mean by
this nonsense?"

The man approached her with a strange smile on his face, rubbing his
hands together, and shivering as with cold. When he had reached her
side he attempted to take her hand. M'liss shrank away from him with
an expression of disgust.

"What are you doing here again?" she demanded.

"I want to go with you. It's dark in there," he said, motioning to the
wood he had just quitted, "and I don't like to be alone. You'll let me
be with you, won't you? I won't be any trouble;" and a feeble smile
flickered on his lips.

M'liss darted a quick look into his face. The grim outlines of his
mouth were relaxed, and his lips moved again impotently. But his eyes
were bright and open,--bright with a look that was new to M'liss--
that imparted a strange softness and melancholy to his features,--the
incipient gleam of insanity!


CHAPTER VIII

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER--EXPLANATORY


If I remember rightly, in one of the admirable tragedies of Tsien
Tsiang at a certain culminating point of interest an innocent person
is about to be sacrificed. The knife is raised and the victim meekly
awaits the stroke. At this moment the author of the play appears on
the stage, and,  delivering an excellent philosophical dissertation on
the merits of the "situation," shows that by the purest principles of
art the sacrifice is necessary, but at the same time offers to the
audience the privilege of changing the denouement. Such, however, is
the nice aesthetic sense of a Chinese auditory, and so universal the
desire of bloodshed in the heathen breast, that invariably at each
representation of this remarkable tragedy the cause of humanity gives
way to the principles of art.

I offer this precedent as an excuse for digressing at a moment when I
have burned down a small settlement, dispatched a fellow being, and
left my heroine alone in the company of an escaped convict who has
just developed insanity as a new social quality. My object in thus
digressing is to confer with the reader in regard to the evolution of
this story,--a familiarity not without precedent, as I might prove
from most of the old Greek comedies, whose _parabasis_ permits the poet
to mingle freely with the _dramatis personae_, to address the audience
and descant at length in regard to himself, his play, and his own
merits.

The fact is that, during the progress of this story, I have received
many suggestions from intimate friends in regard to its incidents and
construction. I have also been in the receipt of correspondence from
distant readers, one letter of which I recall signed by an "Honest
Miner," who advises me to "do the right thing by M'liss," or intimates
somewhat obscurely that he will "bust my crust for me," which, though
complimentary in its abstract expression of interest, and implying a
taste for euphonism, evinces an innate coarseness which I fear may
blunt his perceptions of delicate shades and Greek outlines.

Again, the practical nature of Californians and their familiarity with
scenes and incidents which would be novel to other people have
occasioned me great uneasiness. In the course of the last three
chapters of M'liss I have received some twenty or  thirty
communications from different parts of the State corroborating
incidents of my story, which I solemnly assure the reader is purely
fictitious. Some one has lately sent me a copy of an interior paper
containing an old obituary of Smith of Smith's Pocket. Another
correspondent writes to me that he was acquainted with the
schoolmaster in the fall of '49, and that they "grubbed together." The
editors of the serial in which this story appears assure me that they
have received an advertisement from the landlord of the "National
Hotel" contingent upon an editorial notice of its having been at one
time the abode of M'liss; while an aunt of the heroine, alluding in
excellent terms to the reformed character of her niece M'liss,
clenches her sincerity by requesting the loan of twenty dollars to buy
clothes for the desolate orphan.

Under these circumstances I have hesitated to go on. What were the
bodiless creatures of my fancy--the pale phantoms of thought, evoked
in the solitude of my chamber, and sometimes even midst the hum of
busy streets--have suddenly grown into flesh and blood, living people,
protected by the laws of society, and having their legal right to
actions for slander in any court. Worse than that, I have sometimes
thought with terror of the new responsibility which might attach to my
development of their characters. What if I were obliged to support and
protect these Frankenstein monsters? What if the original of the
principal villain of my story should feel impelled through aesthetic
principles of art to work out in real life the supposititious
denouement I have sketched for him?

I have therefore concluded to lay aside my pen for this week, leaving
the catastrophe impending, and await the suggestion of my
correspondents. I do so the more cheerfully as it enables the editors
of this weekly to publish twenty-seven more columns of Miss Braddon's
"Outcasts of Society" and the remainder of the  "Duke's Motto,"--two
works which in the quiet simplicity of their home-like pictures and
household incidents are attended with none of the difficulties which
beset my unhappy story.


CHAPTER IX

CLEANING UP


As the master, wan-eyed and unrefreshed by slumber, strayed the next
morning among the blackened ruins of the fire, he was conscious of
having undergone some strange revulsion of sentiment. What he
remembered of the last evening's events, though feverish and
indistinct as a dream, and though, like a dream, without coherency or
connected outline, had nevertheless seriously impressed him. How
frivolous and trifling his past life and its pursuits looked through
the lightning vista opened to his eyes by the flash of Waters's
pistol! "Suppose I had been killed," ruminated the master, "what then?
A paragraph in the 'Banner,' headed 'Fatal Affray,' and my name added
to the already swollen list of victims to lawless violence and crime!
Humph! A pretty scrape, truly!" And the master ground his teeth with
vexation.

Let not the reader judge him too hastily. In the best regulated mind,
thankfulness for deliverance from danger is apt to be mingled with
some doubts as to the necessity of the trial.

In this frame of mind the last person he would have cared to meet was
Clytie. That young woman's evil genius, however, led her to pass the
burnt district that morning. Perhaps she had anticipated the meeting.
At all events, he had proceeded but a few steps before he was
confronted by the identical round hat and cherry colored ribbons. But
in his present humor the cheerful color somehow reminded him of the
fire and of a ruddy stain over McSnagley's heart, and invested the
innocent Clytie with a figurative significance. Now Clytie's reveries
at that moment were pleasant, if the brightness of her eyes and the
freshened color on her cheeks were any sign, and, as she had not seen
the master since then, she naturally expected to take up the thread of
romance where it had been dropped. But it required all her feminine
tact to conceal her embarrassment at his formal greeting and
constrained manner.

"He is bashful," reasoned Clytie to herself.

"This girl is a tremendous fool," growled the master inwardly.

An awkward pause ensued. Finally, Clytie _loquitur_:--

"M'liss has been missing since the fire!"

"Missing?" echoed the master in his natural tone.

Clytie bit her lip with vexation. "Yes, she's always running away.
She'll be back again. But you look interested. Do you know," she
continued with exceeding archness, "I sometimes think, Mr. Gray, if
M'liss were a little older"--

"Well?"

"Well, putting this and that together, you know!"

"Well?"

"People will talk, you know," continued Clytie, with that excessive
fondness weak people exhibit in enveloping in mystery the commonest
affairs of life.

"People are d---d fools!" roared the master.

The correct Clytie was a little shocked. Perhaps underneath it was a
secret admiration of the transgressor. Force even of this cheap
quality goes a good way with some natures.

"That is," continued the master, with an increase of dignity in
inverse proportion to the lapse he had made, "people are apt to be
mistaken, Miss Morpher, and without  meaning it, to do infinite
injustice to their fellow mortals. But I see I am detaining you. I
will try and find Melissa. I wish you good-morning." And Don
Whiskerandos stalked solemnly away.

Clytie turned red and white by turns, and her eyes filled with tears.
This denouement to her dreams was utterly unexpected. While a girl of
stronger character and active intelligence would have employed the
time in digesting plans of future retaliation and revenge, Clytie's
dull brain and placid nature were utterly perplexed and shaken.

"Dear me!" said Clytie to herself, as she started home, "if he don't
love me, why don't he say so?"

The master, or Mr. Gray, as we may now call him as he draws near the
close of his  professional career, took the old trail through the
forest, which led to M'liss's former hiding-place. He walked on
briskly, revolving in his mind the feasibility of leaving Smith's
Pocket. The late disaster, which would affect the prosperity of the
settlement for some time to come, offered an excuse to him to give up
his situation. On searching his pockets he found his present capital
to amount to ten dollars. This increased by forty dollars, due him
from the trustees, would make fifty dollars; deduct thirty dollars for
liabilities, and he would have twenty dollars left to begin the world
anew. Youth and hope added an indefinite number of ciphers to the
right hand of these figures, and in this sanguine mood our young
Alnaschar walked on until he had reached the old pine throne in the
bank of the forest. M'liss was not there. He sat down on the trunk of
the tree, and for a few moments gave himself up to the associations it
suggested. What would become of M'liss after he was gone? But he
quickly dropped the subject as one too visionary and sentimental for
his then fiercely practical consideration, and, to prevent the
recurrence of such distracting fancies, began to retrace his steps
toward the settlement. At the edge of the woods, at a point where the
trail forked toward the old site of Smith's Pocket, he saw M'liss
coming toward him. Her ordinary pace on such occasions was a kind of
Indian trot; to his surprise she was walking slowly, with her apron
thrown over her head,--an indication of meditation with M'liss and the
usual way in which she excluded the outer world in studying her
lessons. When she was within a few feet of him he called her by name.
She started as she recognized him. There was a shade of seriousness in
her dark eyes, and the hand that took his was listless and totally
unlike her old frank, energetic grasp.

"You look worried, M'liss," said Mr. Gray soothingly, as the old
sentimental feeling crept over his heart. "What's the matter now?"

M'liss replied by seating herself on the bank beside the road, and
pointed to a place by her side. Mr. Gray took the proffered seat.
M'liss then, fixing her eyes on some distant part of the view,
remained for some moments in silence. Then, without turning her head
or moving her eyes, she asked:--

"What's that they call a girl that has money left her?"

"An heiress, M'liss?"

"Yes, an heiress."

"Well?" said Mr. Gray.

"Well," said M'liss, without moving her eyes, "I'm one,--I'm a
heiress!"

"What's that, M'liss?" said Mr. Gray laughingly.

M'liss was silent again. Suddenly turning her eyes full upon him, she
said:--

"Can you keep a secret?"

"Yes," said Mr. Gray, beginning to be impressed by the child's manner.
"Listen, then."

In short quick sentences, M'liss began. How Aristides had several
times hinted of the concealed riches of Smith's Pocket. How he had
last night repeated the story to her of a strange discovery he had
made. How she remembered to have heard her father often swear that
there was money "in that hole," if he only had means to work it. How,
partly impressed by this statement and partly from curiosity and pity
for the prisoner, she had visited him in confinement. An account of
her interview, the origin of the fire, her flight with Waters.
(_Questions_ by Mr. Gray: What was your object in assisting this
man to escape? _Ans_. They were going to kill him. _Ques_. Hadn't he
killed McSnagley. _Ans_. Yes, but McSnagley ought to have been killed
long ago.) How she had taken leave of him that morning. How he had come
back again "silly." How she had dragged him on toward the Wingdam road,
and how he had told her that all the hidden wealth of Smith's Pocket
had belonged to her father. How she had found out, from some questions,
that he had known her father. But how all his other answers were
"silly."

"And where is he now?" asked Mr. Gray.

"Gone," said M'liss. "I left him at the edge of the wood to go back
and get some provisions, and when I returned he was gone. If he had
any senses left, he's miles away by this time. When he was off I went
back to Smith's Pocket. I found the hidden opening and saw the gold."

Mr. Gray looked at her curiously. He had, in his more intimate
knowledge of her character, noticed the unconcern with which she spoke
of the circumstances of her father's death and the total lack of any
sentiment of filial regard. The idea that this man whom she had aided
in escaping had ever done her injury had not apparently entered her
mind, nor did Mr. Gray think it necessary to hint the deeper suspicion
he had gathered from Dr. Duchesne that Waters had murdered her father.
If the story of the concealed treasures of Smith's Pocket were
exaggerated he  could easily satisfy himself on that point. M'liss met
his suggestion to return to the Pocket with alacrity, and the two
started away in that direction.

It was late in the afternoon when Mr. Gray returned. His heightened
color and eager inquiry for Dr. Duchesne provoked the usual hope from
the people that he met "that it was nothing serious." No, nothing was
the matter, the master answered with a slight laugh, but would they
send the doctor to his schoolhouse when he returned? "That young
chap's worse than he thinks," was one sympathizing suggestion; "this
kind of life's too rough for his sort."

To while away the interim, Mr. Gray stopped on his way to the
schoolhouse at the stage office as the Wingdam stage drew up and
disgorged its passengers. He was listlessly watching the passengers as
they descended when a soft voice from the window addressed him, "May I
trouble you for your arm as I get down?" Mr. Gray looked up. It was a
singular request, as the driver was at that moment standing by the
door, apparently for that purpose. But the request came from a
handsome woman, and with a bow the young man stepped to the door. The
lady laid her hand lightly on his arm, sprang from the stage with a
dexterity that showed the service to have been merely ceremonious,
thanked him with an elaboration of acknowledgment which seemed equally
gratuitous, and disappeared in the office.

"That's what I call a dead set," said the driver, drawing a long
breath, as he turned to Mr. Gray, who stood in some embarrassment. "Do
you know her?" "No," said Mr. Gray laughingly, "do you?"

"Nary time! But take care of yourself, young man; she's after you,
sure!"

But Mr. Gray was continuing his walk to the schoolhouse, unmindful of
the caution. For the momentary glimpse he had caught of this woman's
face, she appeared to be about thirty. Her dress, though tasteful and
elegant, in the present condition of California society afforded no
criterion of her social status. But the figure of Dr. Duchesne waiting
for him at the schoolhouse door just then usurped the place of all
others, and she dropped out of his mind.

"Now then," said the doctor, as the young man grasped his hand, "you
want me to tell you why your eyes are bloodshot, why your cheeks burn,
and your hand is dry and hot?"

"Not exactly! Perhaps you'll understand the symptoms better when
you've heard my story. Sit down here and listen."

The doctor took the proffered seat on top of a desk, and Mr. Gray,
after assuring himself that they were entirely alone, related the
circumstances he had gathered from M'liss that morning.

"You see, doctor, how unjust were your surmises in regard to this
girl," continued Mr. Gray. "But let that pass now. At the conclusion
of her story, I offered to go with her to this Ali Baba cave. It was
no easy job finding the concealed entrance, but I found it at last,
and ample corroboration of every item of this wild story. The pocket
is rich with the most valuable ore. It has evidently been worked for
some time since the discovery was made, but there is still a fortune
in its walls, and several thousand dollars of ore sacked up in its
galleries. Look at that!" continued Mr. Gray, as he drew an oblong
mass of quartz and metal from his pocket. "Think of a secret of this
kind having been intrusted for three weeks to a penniless orphan girl
of twelve and an eccentric schoolboy of ten, and undivulged except
when a proper occasion offered."

Dr. Duchesne smiled. "And Waters is really clear?"

"Yes," said Mr. Gray.

"And M'liss assisted him to escape?" "Yes."

"Well, you are an innocent one! And you see nothing in this but an act
of thoughtless generosity? No assisting of an old accomplice to
escape?"

"I see nothing but truth in her statement," returned Mr. Gray stoutly.
"If there has been any wrong committed, I believe her to be innocent
of its knowledge."

"Well, I'm glad at least the money goes to her and not to him. But how
are you to establish her right to this property?"

"That was my object in conferring with you. At present the claim is
abandoned. I have taken up the ground in my own name (for her), and
this afternoon I posted up the usual notice."

"Go on. You are not so much of a fool, after all."

"Thank you! This will hold until a better claim is established. Now,
if Smith had discovered this lead, and was, as the lawyers say,
'seized and possessed' of it at the time of his death, M'liss, of
course, as next of kin, inherits it."

"But how can this be proved? It is the general belief that Smith
committed suicide through extreme poverty and destitution."

Mr. Gray drew a letter from his pocket.

"You remember the memorandum I showed you, which came into my
possession. Here it is; it is dated the day of his death."

Dr. Duchesne took it and read:--

"July 17th. Five hours in drift--dipping west. Took out 20 oz.--
cleaned up 40 oz.--Mem. Saw M. S."

"This evidently refers to actual labor in the mine at the time," said
Dr. Duchesne. "But is it legally sufficient to support a claim of this
magnitude? That is the only question now. You say this paper was the
leaf of an old memorandum, torn off and used for  a letter by M'liss;
do you know where the orignal book can be found?"

"Aristides has it, or knows where it is," answered Mr. Gray.

"Find it by all means. And get legal advice before you do anything. Go
this very evening to Judge Plunkett and state your case to him. The
promise of a handsome contingent fee won't hurt M'liss's prospects
any. Remember, our ideas of abstract justice and the letter of the law
in this case may be entirely different. Take Judge Plunkett your
proofs; that is," said the Doctor, stopping and eyeing his friend
keenly, "if you have no fears for M'liss if this matter should be
thoroughly ventilated."

Mr. Gray did not falter.

"I go at once," said he gayly, "if only to prove the child's claim to
a good name if we fail in getting her property."

The two men left the schoolhouse together. As they reached the main
street, the doctor paused:--

"You are still determined?"

"I am," responded the young man.

"Good-night, and God speed you, then," and the doctor left him.

The fire had been particularly severe on the legal fraternity in the
settlement, and Judge Plunkett's office, together with those of his
learned brethren, had been consumed with the courthouse on the
previous night. The judge's house was on the outskirts of the village,
and thither Mr. Gray proceeded. The judge was at home, but engaged at
that moment. Mr. Gray would wait, and was ushered into a small room
evidently used as a kitchen, but just then littered with law books,
bundles of papers, and blanks that had been hastily rescued from the
burning building. The sideboard groaned with the weight of several
volumes of New York Reports, that seemed to impart a dusty flavor to
the adjoining victual. Mr. Gray picked up a volume of supreme court
decisions from the coal-scuttle, and was deep in an interesting case,
when the door of the adjoining room opened and Judge Plunkett
appeared.

He was an oily man of about fifty, with spectacles. He was glad to see
the schoolmaster. He hoped he was not suffering from the excitement of
the previous evening. For his part, the spectacle of sober citizens
rising in a body to vindicate the insulted majesty of the laws of
society, and of man, had always something sublime in it. And the
murderer had really got away after all. And it was a narrow escape the
schoolmaster had, too, at Smith's Pocket.

Mr. Gray took advantage of the digression to state his business. He
briefly recounted the circumstances of the discovery of the hidden
wealth of Smith's Pocket, and exhibited the memorandum he had shown
the doctor. When he had concluded, Judge Plunkett looked at him over
his spectacles, and rubbed his hands with satisfaction.

"You apprehend," said the judge eagerly, "that you will have no
difficulty in procuring this book from which the leaf was originally
torn?"

"None," replied Mr. Gray.

"Then, sir, I should give as my professional opinion that the case was
already won."

Mr. Gray shook the hand of the little man with great fervor, and
thanked him for his belief. "And so this property will go entirely to
M'liss?" he asked again.

"Well--ah--no--not exactly," said Judge Plunkett, with some caution.
"She will benefit by it undoubtedly--undoubtedly," and he rubbed his
hands again.

"Why not M'liss alone? There are no other claimants!" said Mr. Gray.

"I beg your pardon--you mistake," said Judge Plunkett, with a smile.
"You surely would not leave out the widow and mother?"   "Why, M'liss
is an orphan," said Mr. Gray in utter bewilderment.

"A sad mistake, sir,--a painful though natural mistake. Mr. Smith,
though separated from his wife, was never divorced. A very affecting
history--the old story, you know--an injured and loving woman deserted
by her natural protector, but disdaining to avail herself of our legal
aid. By a singular coincidence that I should have told you, I am
anticipating you in this very case. Your services, however, I feel
will be invaluable. Your concern for her amiable and interesting
daughter Narcissa--ah, no, Melissa--will, of course, make you with
us. You have never seen Mrs. Smith? A fine-looking, noble woman, sir,
--though still disconsolate,--still thinking of the departed one. By
another singular coincidence that I should have told you, she is here
now. You shall see her, sir. Pray, let me introduce you;" and still
rubbing his hands, Judge Plunkett led the way to the adjoining room.

Mr. Gray followed him mechanically. A handsome woman rose from the
sofa as they entered. It was the woman he assisted to alight from the
Wingdam stage.


CHAPTER X

THE RED ROCK


In the strong light that fell upon her face, Mr. Gray had an
opportunity to examine her features more closely. Her eyes, which were
dark and singularly brilliant, were half closed, either from some
peculiar conformation of the lids, or an habitual effort to conceal
expression. Her skin was colorless with that satin-like lustre that
belongs to some brunettes, relieved by one or two freckles that were
scarcely blemishes. Her face was squared a little at the lower angles,
but the chin was round and soft, and the  curves about the mouth were
full and tender enough to destroy the impression left by contemplation
of those rigid outlines. The effect of its general contour was that of
a handsome woman of thirty. In detail, as the eye dwelt upon any
particular feature, you could have added a margin of ten years either
way.

"Mrs. Smith--Mr. Gray," said the lawyer briskly. "Mr. Gray is the
gentleman who, since the decease of your husband, has taken such a
benevolent interest in our playful Narcissa--Melissa, I should say. He
is the preceptor of our district school, and beside his relation as
teacher to your daughter has, I may say in our legal fashion, stood
_in loco parentis_--in other words, has been a parent, a--a--father to
her."

At the conclusion of this speech Mrs. Smith darted a quick glance at
Mr. Gray, which was unintelligible to any but a woman. As there were
none of her own keen-witted sex present to make an ungracious
interpretation of it, it passed unnoticed, except the slight
embarrassment and confusion it caused the young man from its apparent
gratuity.

"We have met before, I believe," said Mrs. Smith, with her bright eyes
half hid and her white teeth half disclosed. "I can easily imagine Mr.
Gray's devotion to a friend from his courtesy to a stranger. Let me
thank you again for both my daughter and myself."

In the desperate hope of saying something natural, Mr. Gray asked if
she had seen Melissa yet.

"Oh, dear, no! Think how provoking! Judge Plunkett says it is
absolutely impossible till some tiresome formalities are over. There
are so many stupid forms to go through with first. But how is she? You
have seen her, have you not? you will see her again to-night, perhaps?
How I long to embrace her again! She was a mere baby when she left me.
Tell her how I long to fly to her."

Her impassioned utterance and the dramatic gestures that accompanied
these words afforded a singular contrast to the cool way with which
she rearranged the folds of her dress when she had finished, folding
her hands over her lap and settling herself unmistakably back again on
the sofa. Perhaps it was this that made Mr. Gray think she had, at
some time, been an actress. But the next moment he caught her eye
again and felt pleased,--and again vexed with himself for being so,--
and in this mental condition began to speak in favor of his old pupil.
His embarrassment passed away as he warmed with his subject, dwelling
at length on M'liss's better qualities, and did not return until in a
breathless pause he became aware that this woman's bright eyes were
bent upon him. The color rose in his cheek, and with a half-muttered
apology for his prolixity he offered his excuses to retire.

"Stay a moment, Mr. Gray," said the lawyer. "You are going to town,
and will not think it a trouble to see Mrs. Smith safely back to her
hotel. You can talk these things over with our fair friend on the way.
To-morrow, at ten, I trust to see you both again."

"Perhaps I am taxing Mr. Gray's gallantry too much," interposed the
lady with a very vivid disclosure of eyes and teeth. "Mr. Gray would
be only too happy." After he had uttered this civility, there was a
slight consciousness of truth about it that embarrassed him again. But
Mrs. Smith took his proffered arm, and they bade the lawyer good-night
and passed out in the starlit night together.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four weeks have elapsed since the advent of Mrs. Smith to the
settlement,--four weeks that might have been years in any other but a
California mining camp, for the wonderful change that has been wrought
in its physical aspect. Each stage has brought its load of fresh
adventurers; another hotel, which sprang up on the site of the
National, has its new landlord, and a new set of faces about its
hospitable board, where  the conventional bean appears daily as a
modest vegetable or in the insincerer form of coffee. The sawmills
have been hard at work for the last month, and huge gaps appear in the
circling files of redwood where the fallen trees are transmuted to a
new style of existence in the damp sappy tenements that have risen
over the burnt district. The "great strike" at Smith's Pocket has been
heralded abroad, and above and below, and on either side of the
crumbling tunnel that bears that name, as other tunnels are piercing
the bowels of the mountain, shafts are being sunk, and claims are
taken up even to the crest of Red Mountain, in the hope of striking
the great Smith lead. Already an animated discussion has sprung up in
the columns of the "Red Mountain Banner" in regard to the direction of
the famous lead,--a discussion assisted by correspondents who have
assumed all the letters of the alphabet in their anonymous arguments,
and have formed the opposing "angle" and "dip" factions of Smith's
Pocket. But whatever be the direction of the lead, the progress of the
settlement has been steadily onward, with an impetus gained by the
late disaster. That classical but much abused bird, the Phoenix, has
been invoked from its ashes in several editorials in the "Banner," to
sit as a type of resuscitated Smith's Pocket, while in the homelier
phrase of an honest miner "it seemed as if the fire kem to kinder
clean out things for a fresh start."

Meanwhile the quasi-legal administration of the estate of Smith is
drawing near a termination that seems to credit the prophetic
assertion of Judge Plunkett. One fact has been evolved in the process
of examination, viz., that Smith had discovered the new lead before he
was murdered. It was a fair hypothesis that the man who assumed the
benefit of his discovery was the murderer, but as this did not
immediately involve the settlement of the estate it excited little
comment or opposition. The probable murderer had escaped. Judicial
investigations even in the hands of the people had been attended with
disastrous public results, and there was no desire on the part of
justice to open the case and deal with an abstract principle when
there was no opportunity of making an individual example. The
circumstances were being speedily forgotten in the new excitement;
even the presence of Mrs. Smith lost its novelty. The "Banner," when
alluding to her husband, spoke of him as the "late J. Smith, Esq.,"
attributing the present activity of business as the result of his
lifelong example of untiring energy, and generally laid the foundation
of a belief, which thereafter obtained, that he died comfortably in
the bosom of his family, surrounded by disconsolate friends. The
history of all pioneer settlements has this legendary basis, and
M'liss may live to see the day when her father's connection with the
origin of the settlement shall become apocryphal, and contested like
that of Romulus and Remus and their wolfish wet-nurse.

It is to the everlasting credit and honor of Smith's Pocket that the
orphan and widow meet no opposition from the speculative community,
and that the claim's utmost boundaries are liberally rendered. How far
this circumstance may be owing to the rare personal attractions of the
charming widow or to M'liss's personal popularity, I shall not pretend
to say. It is enough that when the brief of Judge Plunkett's case is
ready there are clouds of willing witnesses to substantiate and
corroborate doubtful points to an extent that is more creditable to
their generosity than their veracity.

M'liss has seen her mother. Mr. Gray, with his knowledge of his
pupil's impulsiveness, has been surprised to notice that the new
relationship seems to awaken none of those emotions in the child's
nature that he confidently looked for. On the occasion of their first
meeting, to which Mr. Gray was admitted, M'liss maintained a guarded
shyness totally different  from her usual frank boldness,--a shyness
that was the more remarkable from its contrast with the unrepressed
and somewhat dramatic emotions of Mrs. Smith. Now, under her mother's
protection and care, he observes another radical change in M'liss's
appearance. She is dressed more tastefully and neatly--not entirely
the result of a mother's influence, but apparently the result of some
natural instinct now for the first time indulged, and exhibited in a
ribbon or a piece of jewelry, worn with a certain air of consciousness.
There is a more strict attention to the conventionalities of life; her
speech is more careful and guarded; her walk, literally, more womanly
and graceful. Those things Mr. Gray naturally attributes to the influence
of the new relation, though he cannot help recalling his meeting with
M'liss in the woods, on the morning of the fire, and of dating many of
these changes from thence.

It is a pleasant morning, and Mr. Gray is stirring early. He has been
busied in preparation the night previous, for this is his last day in
Smith's Pocket. He lingers for some time about the schoolhouse,
gathering up those little trifles which lie about his desk, which have
each a separate history in his experience of Smith's Pocket, and are a
part of the incrustations of his life. Lastly, a file of the "Red
Mountain Banner," is taken from the same receptacle and packed away in
his bag. He walks to the door and turns to look back. Has he forgotten
anything? No, nothing. But still he lingers. He wonders who will take
his place at the desk, and for the first time in his pedagogue
experience, perhaps, feels something of an awful responsibility as he
thinks of his past influence over the wretched little beings who used
to tremble at his nod, and whose future, ill or good, he may have
helped to fashion. At last he closes the door, almost tenderly, and
walks thoughtfully down the road. He has to pass the cabin of an Irish
miner,  whose little boy is toddling in the ditch, with a pinafore,
hands, and face in a chronic state of untidiness. Mr. Gray seizes him
with an hilarious impulse, and after a number of rapid journeys to
Banbury Cross, in search of an old woman who mounted a mythical white
horse, he kisses the cleanest place on his broad expanse of cheek,
presses some silver into his chubby fist, tells him to be a good boy,
and deposits him in the ditch again. Having in this youthful way
atoned for certain sins of omission a little further back, he
proceeds, with a sense of perfect absolution, on his way to the
settlement.

A few hours lie between him and his departure, to be employed in
friendly visits to Mrs. Morpher, Dr. Duchesne, M'liss, and her mother.
The Mountain Ranch is nearest, and thither Mr. Gray goes first. Mrs.
Morpher, over a kneading-trough, with her bare arm whitened with
flour, is genuinely grieved at parting with the master, and, in spite
of Mr. Gray's earnest remonstrances, insists upon conducting him into
the chill parlor, leaving him there until she shall have attired
herself in a manner becoming to "company." "I don't want you to go at
all--no more I don't," says Mrs. Morpher, with all sincerity, as she
seats herself finally on the shining horsehair sofa. "The children
will miss you. I don't believe that any one will do for Risty, Kerg,
and Clytie what you have done. But I suppose you know best what's
best. Young men like to see the world, and it ain't expected one so
young as you should settle down yet. That's what I was telling Clytie
this morning. That was just the way with my John afore he was married.
I suppose you'll see M'liss and _her_ before you go. They say that she
is going to San Francisco soon. Is it so?"

Mr. Gray understands the personal pronoun to refer to Mrs. Smith, a
title Mrs. Morpher has never granted M'liss's mother, for whom she
entertains an instinctive dislike. He answers in the affirmative,
however, with the consciousness of uneasiness under the inquiry; and
as the answer does not seem to please Mrs. Morpher, he is constrained
to commend M'liss's manifest improvement under her mother's care.

"Well" says Mrs. Morpher, with a significant sigh, "I hope it's so;
but bless us, where's Clytie? You mustn't go without saying 'good-by'
to her" and Mrs. Morpher starts away in search of her daughter.

The dining-room door scarcely closes before the bedroom door opens,
and Clytie crosses the parlor softly with something in her hands. "You
are going now?" she says hurriedly.

"Yes."

"Will you take this?" putting a sealed package into his hand, "and
keep it without opening it until"--

"Until when, Clytie?"

"Until you are married."

Mr. Gray laughs.

"Promise me," repeats Clytie.

"But I may expire in the mean time, through sheer curiosity."

"Promise!" says Clytie gravely.

"I promise, then."

Mr. Gray receives the package. "Good-by," says Clytie softly.

Clytie's rosy cheek is very near Mr. Gray. There is nobody by. He is
going away. It is the last time. He kisses her just before the door
opens again to Mrs. Morpher.

Another shake of hands all around, and Mr. Gray passes out of the
Mountain Ranch forever.

Dr. Duchesne's office is near at hand; but for some reason, that Mr.
Gray cannot entirely explain to himself, he prefers to go to Mrs.
Smith's first. The little cottage which they have taken temporarily is
soon reached, and as the young man stands at the door he re-knots the
bow of  his cravat, and passes his fingers through his curls,--trifles
that to Dr. A song flies coolly out a window.
From a distance the wind carries a child's shout.

And in front of the villa of a duke stands, All dressed up, like a stiff
doll, In a brightly colored scarf, red as a poppy, The royal Bavarian
legal apprentice, Doctor of Jurisprudence Kuno Kohn.

Farewell

It sure was fine to be a soldier for a year.
But it is finer to feel free again.
There was enough of depravity and pain In these merciless human
mills.

Sergeants, Barrack walls, farewell.

Farewell canteens, marching songs.

Lighthearted, I leave the city and capitol.

Kuno is leaving, Kuno is never coming back.

Now, fate, drive me where you will.
I am not tugging on my jacket from now on.

I lift my eyes into the world.
A wind is starting up.

Locomotives roar.

Farewell

(Shortly before departing for the theater of war)

for Peter Scher
Before dying I am making my poem.
Quiet, comrades, don't disturb me.
We are going off to war. Death is our cement.
If only my beloved did not shed these tears for me.

What am I doing. I go gladly.
Mother is crying. One must be made of iron.
The sun sinks to the horizon.
Soon I shall be tossed into a gentle mass grave.
In the sky the fine red of evening is burning.
Perhaps in thrirteen days I'll be dead.

Romantic Journey

Thousands of stars twinkle in the gentle sky.
The landscape glows. From the distant meadow Mute marching men slowly
come closer.
Only once a young Lieutenant, a page boy in love, Steps out--and
stands lost in thought.
The baggage train waddles along at the rear.

The moon makes everything much stranger.

And now and then the drivers cry out:

Stop!

High up on the shakiest munitions truck, Like a little toad, finely
chiseled Out of black wood, hands gently clenched, On his back the
rifle, gently buckled, A smoking cigar in his crooked mouth, Lazy
as a monk, needy as a dog --He had pressed drops of valerian on his
heart-- In the yellow moon, ridiculously mad, Kuno sits.

Warrior's Longing

  I would like to lie in my bed In a white shirt, Wished the beard was
  gone, The head combed.

  The fingers were clean, The nails also, You, my tender woman, Might
provide peace.

Prayer before Battle

The troops are singing fervently, each for himself:
God, protect me from misfortune, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, That
no grenades strike me, That the bastards, our enemies, Do not catch
me, do not shoot me, That I don't die like a dog For the dear
fatherland.

Look, I would like to go on living, Milk cows, bang girls And
beat the bastard, Sepp, Get drunk often Until my blessed death.

Look, I eagerly and gladly recite Seven rosaries daily, If you,
God, in your grace Would kill my friend Huber or Meier, And not me.

But if the worst should come, Let me not be too badly wounded.
Send me a slight leg wound, A small injury to the arm, So that I
may return as a hero, With a story to tell.

The Grenade
First a bright, brief drum roll, A bang and explosion into the blue
day.
Then a noise, like rockets climbing on Iron rails. Fear and long
silence.
Then suddenly in the distance smoke and a fall, A strange hard dark
echo.

After Combat
In the sky the howitzers no longer explode, The cannoneers rest
next to their guns.
The infantry pitch tents now, And the pale moon slowly rises.
On yellow fields in red trousers, the French are ablaze, Ashen pale
from death and powder.
Among them German medics squat.
The day becomes grayer, its sun redder.
Field kitchens steam. Towns are put to the torch.
Broken carts stand at roadsides.Its spongy, low-lying surface, sluggish, inky pools, and
tortuous sloughs, twisting their slimy way, eel-like, toward the open
bay, were all hard facts. So were the few green tussocks, with their
scant blades, their amphibious flavor, and unpleasant dampness. And if
you chose to indulge your fancy,--although the flat monotony of the
Dedlow Marsh was not inspiring,--the wavy line of scattered drift gave
an unpleasant consciousness of the spent waters, and made the dead
certainty of the returning tide a gloomy reflection, which no present
sunshine could dissipate. The greener meadow-land seemed oppressed
with this idea, and made no positive attempt at vegetation until the
work of reclamation should be complete. In the bitter fruit of the low
cranberry bushes one might fancy he detected a naturally sweet
disposition curdled and soured by an injudicious course of too much
regular cold water.

The vocal expression of the Dedlow Marsh was also melancholy and
depressing. The sepulchral boom of the bittern, the shriek of the
curlew, the scream of passing brant, the wrangling of quarrelsome
teal, the sharp querulous protest of the startled crane, and syllabled
complaint of the "killdeer" plover were beyond the power of written
expression. Nor was the aspect of these mournful fowls at all cheerful
and inspiring. Certainly not the blue heron, standing midleg deep in
the water, obviously catching cold in a reckless disregard of wet feet
and consequences; nor  the mournful curlew, the dejected plover, or
the low-spirited snipe, who saw fit to join him in his suicidal
contemplation; nor the impassive kingfisher--an ornithological Marius
--reviewing the desolate expanse; nor the black raven that went to and
fro over the face of the marsh continually, but evidently couldn't
make up his mind whether the waters had subsided, and felt low-
spirited in the reflection that after all this trouble he wouldn't be
able to give a definite answer. On the contrary, it was evident at a
glance that the dreary expanse of Dedlow Marsh told unpleasantly on
the birds, and that the season of migration was looked forward to with
a feeling of relief and satisfaction by the full grown, and of
extravagant anticipation by the callow brood. But if Dedlow Marsh was
cheerless at the slack of the low tide, you should have seen it when
the tide was strong and full. When the damp air blew chilly over the
cold glittering expanse, and came to the faces of those who looked
seaward like another tide; when a steel-like glint marked the low
hollows and the sinuous line of slough; when the great shell-
incrusted trunks of fallen trees arose again, and went forth on their
dreary purposeless wanderings, drifting hither and thither, but
getting no farther toward any goal at the falling tide or the day's
decline than the cursed Hebrew in the legend; when the glossy ducks
swung silently, making neither ripple nor furrow on the shimmering
surface; when the fog came in with the tide and shut out the blue
above, even as the green below had been obliterated; when boatmen,
lost in that fog, paddling about in a hopeless way, started at what
seemed the brushing of mermen's fingers on the boat's keel, or shrank
from the tufts of grass spreading around like the floating hair of a
corpse, and knew by these signs that they were lost upon Dedlow Marsh,
and must make a night of it, and a gloomy one at that,--then you
might know something of Dedlow Marsh at high water.

Let me recall a story connected with this latter view which never
failed to recur to my mind in my long gunning excursions upon Dedlow
Marsh. Although the event was briefly recorded in the county paper, I
had the story, in all its eloquent detail, from the lips of the
principal actor. I cannot hope to catch the varying emphasis and
peculiar coloring of feminine delineation, for my narrator was a
woman; but I'll try to give at least its substance.

She lived midway of the great slough of Dedlow Marsh and a good-sized
river, which debouched four miles beyond into an estuary formed by the
Pacific Ocean, on the long sandy peninsula which constituted the
southwestern boundary of a noble bay. The house in which she lived was
a small frame cabin raised from the marsh a few feet by stout piles,
and was three miles distant from the settlements upon the river. Her
husband was a logger,--a profitable business in a county where the
principal occupation was the manufacture of lumber.

It was the season of early spring, when her husband left on the ebb of
a high tide with a raft of logs for the usual transportation to the
lower end of the bay. As she stood by the door of the little cabin
when the voyagers departed, she noticed a cold look in the
southeastern sky, and she remembered hearing her husband say to his
companions that they must endeavor to complete their voyage before the
coming of the south-westerly gale which he saw brewing. And that night
it began to storm and blow harder than she had ever before
experienced, and some great trees fell in the forest by the river, and
the house rocked like her baby's cradle.

But however the storm might roar about the little cabin, she knew that
one she trusted had driven bolt and bar with his own strong hand, and
that had he feared for her he would not have left her. This, and her
domestic duties, and the care of her little sickly baby, helped to
keep her mind from dwelling on the weather, except, of course, to hope
that he was safely harbored with the logs at Utopia in the dreary
distance. But she noticed that day, when she went out to feed the
chickens and look after the cow, that the tide was up to the little
fence of their garden patch, and the roar of the surf on the south
beach, though miles away, she could hear distinctly. And she began to
think that she would like to have some one to talk with about matters,
and she believed that if it had not been so far and so stormy, and the
trail so impassable, she would have taken the baby and have gone over
to Ryekman's, her nearest neighbor. But then, you see, he might have
returned in the storm, all wet, with no one to see to him; and it was
a long exposure for baby, who was croupy and ailing.

But that night, she never could tell why, she didn't feel like
sleeping or even lying down. The storm had somewhat abated, but she
still "sat and sat," and even tried to read. I don't know whether it
was a Bible or some profane magazine that this poor woman read, but
most probably the latter, for the words all ran together and made such
sad nonsense that she was forced at last to put the book down and turn
to that dearer volume which lay before her in the cradle, with its
white initial leaf as yet unsoiled, and try to look forward to its
mysterious future. And, rocking the cradle, she thought of everything
and everybody, but still was wide awake as ever.

It was nearly twelve o'clock when she at last lay down in her clothes.
How long she slept she could not remember, but she awoke with a
dreadful choking in her throat, and found herself standing, trembling
all over, in the middle of the room, with her baby clasped to her
breast, and she was "saying something." The baby cried and sobbed, and
she walked up and down trying to hush it, when she heard a scratching
at the door. She opened it  fearfully, and was glad to see it was only
old Pete, their dog, who crawled, dripping with water, into the room.
She would have liked to look out, not in the faint hope of her
husband's coming, but to see how things looked; but the wind shook the
door so savagely that she could hardly hold it. Then she sat down a
little while, and then walked up and down a little while, and then she
lay down again a little while. Lying close by the wall of the little
cabin, she thought she heard once or twice something scrape slowly
against the clapboards, like the scraping of branches. Then there was
a little gurgling sound, "like the baby made when it was swallowing;"
then something went "click-click" and "cluck-cluck," so that she sat
up in bed. When she did so she was attracted by something else that
seemed creeping from the back door toward the centre of the room. It
wasn't much wider than her little finger, but soon it swelled to the
width of her hand, and began spreading all over the floor. It was
water!

She ran to the front door and threw it wide open, and saw nothing but
water. She ran to the back door and threw it open, and saw nothing but
water. She ran to the side window, and throwing that open, she saw
nothing but water. Then she remembered hearing her husband once say
that there was no danger in the tide, for that fell regularly, and
people could calculate on it, and that he would rather live near the
bay than the river, whose banks might overflow at any time. But was it
the tide? So she ran again to the back door, and threw out a stick of
wood. It drifted away towards the bay. She scooped up some of the
water and put it eagerly to her lips. It was fresh and sweet. It was
the river, and not the tide!

It was then--oh, God be praised for his goodness! she did neither
faint nor fall; it was then--blessed be the Saviour, for it was his
merciful hand that touched and strengthened her in this awful moment--
that fear dropped  from her like a garment, and her trembling ceased.
It was then and thereafter that she never lost her self-command,
through all the trials of that gloomy night.

She drew the bedstead toward the middle of the room, and placed a
table upon it, and on that she put the cradle. The water on the floor
was already over her ankles, and the house once or twice moved so
perceptibly, and seemed to be racked so, that the closet doors all
flew open. Then she heard the same rasping and thumping against the
wall, and, looking out, saw that a large uprooted tree, which had lain
near the road at the upper end of the pasture, had floated down to the
house. Luckily its long roots dragged in the soil and kept it from
moving as rapidly as the current, for had it struck the house in its
full career, even the strong nails and bolts in the piles could not
have withstood the shock. The hound had leaped upon its knotty
surface, and crouched near the roots, shivering and whining. A ray of
hope flashed across her mind. She drew a heavy blanket from the bed,
and, wrapping it about the babe, waded in the deepening waters to the
door. As the tree swung again, broadside on, making the little cabin
creak and tremble, she leaped on to its trunk. By God's mercy she
succeeded in obtaining a footing on its slippery surface, and, twining
an arm about its roots, she held in the other her moaning child. Then
something cracked near the front porch, and the whole front of the
house she had just quitted fell forward,--just as cattle fall on their
knees before they lie down,--and at the same moment the great redwood
tree swung round and drifted away with its living cargo into the black
night.

For all the excitement and danger, for all her soothing of her crying
babe, for all the whistling of the wind, for all the uncertainty of
her situation, she still turned to look at the deserted and water-
swept cabin. She remembered oven then, and she wondered how foolish
she was to think of it at  that time, that she wished she had put on
another dress and the baby's best clothes; and she kept praying that
the house would be spared so that he, when he returned, would have
something to come to, and it wouldn't be quite so desolate, and--how
could he ever know what had become of her and baby? And at the thought
she grew sick and faint. But she had something else to do besides
worrying, for whenever the long roots of her ark struck an obstacle
the whole trunk made half a revolution, and twice dipped her in the
black water. The hound, who kept distracting her by running up and
down the tree and howling, at last fell off at one of these
collisions. He swam for some time beside her, and she tried to get the
poor beast upon the tree, but he "acted silly" and wild, and at last
she lost sight of him forever. Then she and her baby were left alone.
The light which had burned for a few minutes in the deserted cabin was
quenched suddenly. She could not then tell whither she was drifting.
The outline of the white dunes on the peninsula showed dimly ahead,
and she judged the tree was moving in a line with the river. It must
be about slack water, and she had probably reached the eddy formed by
the confluence of the tide and the overflowing waters of the river.
Unless the tide fell soon, there was present danger of her drifting to
its channel, and being carried out to sea or crushed in the floating
drift. That peril averted, if she were carried out on the ebb toward
the bay, she might hope to strike one of the wooded promontories of
the peninsula, and rest till daylight. Sometimes she thought she heard
voices and shouts from the river, and the bellowing of cattle and
bleating of sheep. Then again it was only the ringing in her ears and
throbbing of her heart. She found at about this time that she was so
chilled and stiffened in her cramped position that she could scarcely
move, and the baby cried so when she put it to her breast that she
noticed the milk refused to flow; and she was so  frightened at that
that she put her head under her shawl, and for the first time cried
bitterly.

When she raised her head again the boom of the surf was behind her,
and she knew that her ark had again swung round. She dipped up the
water to cool her parched throat, and found that it was salt as her
tears. There was a relief, though, for by this sign she knew that she
was drifting with the tide. It was then the wind went down, and the
great and awful silence oppressed her. There was scarcely a ripple
against the furrowed sides of the great trunk on which she rested, and
around her all was black gloom and quiet. She spoke to the baby just
to hear herself speak, and to know that she had not lost her voice.
She thought then--it was queer, but she could not help thinking it--
how awful must have been the night when the great ship swung over the
Asiatic peak, and the sounds of creation were blotted out from the
world. She thought, too, of mariners clinging to spars, and of poor
women who were lashed to rafts and beaten to death by the cruel sea.
She tried to thank God that she was thus spared, and lifted her eyes
from the baby who had fallen into a fretful sleep. Suddenly, away to
the southward, a great light lifted itself out of the gloom, and
flashed and flickered, and flickered and flashed again. Her heart
fluttered quickly against the baby's cold cheek. It was the lighthouse
at the entrance of the bay. As she was yet wondering the tree suddenly
rolled a little, dragged a little, and then seemed to lie quiet and
still. She put out her hand and the current gurgled against it. The
tree was aground, and, by the position of the light and the noise of
the surf, aground upon the Dedlow Marsh.

Had it not been for her baby, who was ailing and croupy, had it not
been for the sudden drying up of that sensitive fountain, she would
have felt safe and relieved. Perhaps it was this which tended to make
all her impressions mournful  and gloomy. As the tide rapidly fell, a
great flock of black brant fluttered by her, screaming and crying.
Then the plover flew up and piped mournfully as they wheeled around
the trunk, and at last fearlessly lit upon it like a gray cloud. Then
the heron flew over and around her, shrieking and protesting, and at
last dropped its gaunt legs only a few yards from her. But, strangest
of all, a pretty white bird, larger than a dove,--like a pelican, but
not a pelican,--circled around and around her. At last it lit upon a
rootlet of the tree quite over her shoulder. She put out her hand and
stroked its beautiful white neck, and it never appeared to move. It
stayed there so long that she thought she would lift up the baby to
see it and try to attract her attention. But when she did so, the
child was so chilled and cold, and had such a blue look under the
little lashes, which it didn't raise at all, that she screamed aloud,
and the bird flew away, and she fainted.

Well, that was the worst of it, and perhaps it was not so much, after
all, to any but herself. For when she recovered her senses it was
bright sunlight and dead low water. There was a confused noise of
guttural voices about her, and an old squaw, singing an Indian
"hushaby," and rocking herself from side to side before a fire built
on the marsh, before which she, the recovered wife and mother, lay
weak and weary. Her first thought was for her baby, and she was about
to speak when a young squaw, who must have been a mother herself,
fathomed her thought and brought her the "mowitch," pale but living,
in such a queer little willow cradle, all bound up, just like the
squaw's own young one, that she laughed and cried together, and the
young squaw and the old squaw showed their big white teeth and glinted
their black eyes, and said, "Plenty get well, skeena mowitch," "Wagee
man come plenty soon," and she could have kissed their brown faces in
her joy. And then she found that they had been gathering berries on
the marsh in  heir queer comical baskets, and saw the skirt of her
gown fluttering on the tree from afar, and the old squaw couldn't
resist the temptation of procuring a new garment, and came down and
discovered the "wagee" woman and child. And of course she gave the
garment to the old squaw, as you may imagine, and when _he_ came
at last and rushed up to her, looking about ten years older in his
anxiety, she felt so faint again that they had to carry her to the
canoe. For, you see, he knew nothing about the flood until he met the
Indians at Utopia, and knew by the signs that the poor woman was his
wife. And at the next high tide he towed the tree away back home,
although it wasn't worth the trouble, and built another house, using
the old tree for the foundation and props, and called it after her,
"Mary's Ark!" But you may guess the next house was built above high-
water mark. And that's all.

Not much, perhaps, considering the malevolent capacity of the Dedlow
Marsh. But you must tramp over it at low water, or paddle over it at
high tide, or get lost upon it once or twice in the fog, as I have, to
understand properly Mary's adventure, or to appreciate duly the
blessings of living beyond high-water mark.


A LONELY RIDE


As I stepped into the Slumgullion stage I saw that it was a dark
night, a lonely road, and that I was the only passenger. Let me assure
the reader that I have no ulterior design in making this assertion. A
long course of light reading has forewarned me what every experienced
intelligence must confidently look for from such a statement. The
story-teller who willfully tempts fate by such obvious beginnings, who
is to the expectant reader in danger of being robbed or half-
murdered, or frightened by an escaped lunatic, or introduced to his
lady-love for the first time, deserves to be detected. I am relieved
to say that none of these things occurred to me. The road from Wingdam
to Slumgullion knew no other banditti than the regularly licensed
hotel-keepers; lunatics had not yet reached such depth of imbecility
as to ride of their own free will in Californian stages; and my Laura,
amiable and long-suffering as she always is, could not, I fear, have
borne up against these depressing circumstances long enough to have
made the slightest impression on me.

I stood with my shawl and carpetbag in hand, gazing doubtingly on the
vehicle.  Even in the darkness the red dust of Wingdam was visible on
its roof and sides, and the red slime of Slumgullion clung tenaciously
to its wheels. I opened the door; the stage creaked uneasily, and in
the gloomy abyss the swaying straps beckoned me, like ghostly hands,
to come in now, and have my sufferings out at once.

I must not omit to mention the occurrence of a circumstance which
struck me as  appalling and mysterious. A lounger on the steps of the
hotel, who I had reason to suppose was not in any way connected with
the stage company, gravely descended, and, walking toward the
conveyance, tried the handle of the door, opened it, expectorated in
the carriage, and returned to the hotel with a serious demeanor.
Hardly had he resumed his position, when another individual, equally
disinterested, impassively walked down the steps, proceeded to the
back of the stage, lifted it, expectorated carefully on the axle, and
returned slowly and pensively to the hotel. A third spectator wearily
disengaged himself from one of the Ionic columns of the portico and
walked to the box, remained for a moment in serious and expectorative
contemplation of the boot, and then returned to his column. There was
something so weird in this baptism that I grew quite nervous.

Perhaps I was out of spirits. A number of infinitesimal annoyances,
winding up with the resolute persistency of the clerk at the stage
office to enter my name misspelt on the way-bill, had not predisposed
me to cheerfulness. The inmates of the Eureka House, from a social
view-point, were not attractive. There was the prevailing opinion--so
common to many honest people--that a serious style of deportment and
conduct toward a stranger indicates high gentility and elevated
station. Obeying this principle, all hilarity ceased on my entrance to
supper, and general remark merged into the safer and uncompromising
chronicle of several bad cases of diphtheria, then epidemic at
Wingdam. When I left the dining-room, with an odd feeling that I had
been supping exclusively on mustard and tea leaves, I stopped a moment
at the parlor door. A piano, harmoniously related to the dinner-bell,
tinkled responsive to a diffident and uncertain touch. On the white
wall the shadow of an old and sharp profile was bending over several
symmetrical and shadowy curls. "I sez to Mariar, 'Mariar' sez I,
'praise to the face is open disgrace" I heard no more. Dreading some
susceptibility to sincere expression on the subject of female
loveliness, I walked away, checking the compliment that otherwise
might have risen unbidden to my lips, and have brought shame and
sorrow to the household.

It was with the memory of these experiences resting heavily upon me
that I stood hesitatingly before the stage door. The driver, about to
mount, was for a moment illuminated by the open door of the hotel. He
had the wearied look which was the distinguishing expression of
Wingdam. Satisfied that I was properly way-billed and receipted for,
he took no further notice of me. I looked longingly at the box-seat,
but he did not respond to the appeal. I flung my carpetbag into the
chasm, dived recklessly after it, and--before I was fairly seated--
with a great sigh, a creaking of unwilling springs, complaining bolts,
and harshly expostulating axle, we moved away. Rather the hotel door
slipped behind, the sound of the piano sank to rest, and the night and
its shadows moved solemnly upon us.

To say it was dark expressed but faintly the pitchy obscurity that
encompassed the vehicle. The roadside trees were scarcely
distinguishable as deeper masses of shadow; I knew them only by the
peculiar sodden odor that from time to time sluggishly flowed in at
the open window as we rolled by. We proceeded slowly; so leisurely
that, leaning from the carriage, I more than once detected the
fragrant sigh of some astonished cow, whose ruminating repose upon the
highway we had ruthlessly disturbed. But in the darkness our progress,
more the guidance of some mysterious instinct than any apparent
volition of our own, gave an indefinable charm of security to our
journey, that a moment's hesitation or indecision on the part of the
driver would have destroyed.

I had indulged a hope that in the empty vehicle I might obtain that
rest so often denied me in its crowded condition. It was a weak
delusion. When I stretched out my limbs it was only to find that the
ordinary conveniences for making several people distinctly
uncomfortable were distributed throughout my individual frame. At
last, resting my arms on the straps, by dint of much gymnastic effort
I became sufficiently composed to be aware of a more refined species
of torture. The springs of the stage, rising and falling regularly,
produced a rhythmical beat, which began to painfully absorb my
attention. Slowly this thumping merged into a senseless echo of the
mysterious female of the hotel parlor, and shaped itself into this
awful and benumbing axiom: "Praise-to-the-face-is-open-disgrace.
Praise-to-the-face-is-open-disgrace." Inequalities of the road only
quickened its utterance or drawled it to an exasperating length.

It was of no use to seriously consider the statement. It was of no use
to except to it indignantly. It was of no use to recall the many
instances where praise to the face had redounded to the everlasting
honor of praiser and bepraised; of no use to dwell sentimentally on
modest genius and courage lifted up and strengthened by open
commendation; of no use to except to the mysterious female,--to
picture her as rearing a thin-blooded generation on selfish and
mechanically repeated axioms,--all this failed to counteract the
monotonous repetition of this sentence. There was nothing to do but to
give in, and I was about to accept it weakly, as we too often treat
other illusions of darkness and necessity, for the time being, when I
became aware of some other annoyance that had been forcing itself upon
me for the last few moments. How quiet the driver was!

Was there any driver? Had I any reason to suppose that he was not
lying gagged and bound on the roadside, and the highwayman, with
blackened face, who did the  thing so quietly, driving me--whither?
The thing is perfectly feasible. And what is this fancy now being
jolted out of me? A story? It's of no use to keep it back,
particularly in this abysmal vehicle, and here it comes: I am a
marquis--a French marquis; French, because the peerage is not so well
known, and the country is better adapted to romantic incident--a
marquis, because the democratic reader delights in the nobility. My
name is something ligny. I am coming from Paris to my country-seat at
St. Germain. It is a dark night, and I fall asleep and tell my honest
coachman, Andre, not to disturb me, and dream of an angel. The
carriage at last stops at the chateau. It is so dark that, when I
alight, I do not recognize the face of the footman who holds the
carriage-door. But what of that?--peste! I am heavy with sleep. The
same obscurity also hides the old familiar indecencies of the statues
on the terrace; but there is a door, and it opens and shuts behind me
smartly. Then I find myself in a trap, in the presence of the brigand
who has quietly gagged poor Andre and conducted the carriage thither.
There is nothing for me to do, as a gallant French marquis, but to
say, "Parbleu!" draw my rapier, and die valorously! I am found, a week
or two after, outside a deserted cabaret near the barrier, with a hole
through my ruffled linen, and my pockets stripped. No; on second
thoughts, I am rescued,--rescued by the angel I have been dreaming of,
who is the assumed daughter of the brigand, but the real daughter of
an intimate friend.

Looking from the window again, in the vain hope of distinguishing the
driver, I found my eyes were growing accustomed to the darkness. I
could see the distant horizon, defined by India-inky woods relieving a
lighter sky. A few stars, widely spaced in this picture, glimmering
sadly. I noticed again the infinite depth of patient sorrow in their
serene faces; and I hope that the Vandal who first  applied the
flippant "twinkle" to them may not be driven melancholy mad by their
reproachful eyes. I noticed again the mystic charm of space, that
imparts a sense of individual solitude to each integer of the densest
constellation, involving the smallest star with immeasurable
loneliness. Something of this calm and solitude crept over me, and I
dozed in my gloomy cavern. When I awoke the full moon was rising. Seen
from my window, it had an indescribably unreal and theatrical effect.
It was the full moon of Norma--that remarkable celestial phenomenon
which rises so palpably to a hushed audience and a sublime andante
chorus, until the Casta Diva is sung--the "inconstant moon" that then
and thereafter remains fixed in the heavens as though it were a part
of the solar system inaugurated by Joshua. Again the white-robed
Druids filed past me, again I saw that improbable mistletoe cut from
that impossible oak, and again cold chills ran down my back with the
first strain of the recitative. The thumping springs essayed to beat
time, and the private box-like obscurity of the vehicle lent a cheap
enchantment to the view. But it was a vast improvement upon my past
experience, and I hugged the fond delusion.

My fears for the driver were dissipated with the rising moon. A
familiar sound had assured me of his presence in the full possession
of at least one of his most important functions. Frequent and full
expectoration convinced me that his lips were as yet not sealed by the
gag of highwaymen, and soothed my anxious ear. With this load lifted
from my mind, and assisted by the mild presence of Diana, who left, as
when she visited Endymion, much of her splendor outside my cavern,--I
looked around the empty vehicle. On the forward seat lay a woman's
hairpin. I picked it up with an interest that, however, soon abated.
There was no scent of the roses to cling to it still, not even of
hair-oil. No bent or twist in its rigid angles betrayed  any trait of
its wearer's character. I tried to think that it might have been
"Mariar's." I tried to imagine that, confining the symmetrical curls
of that girl, it might have heard the soft compliments whispered in
her ears which provoked the wrath of the aged female. But in vain. It
was reticent and unswerving in its upright fidelity, and at last
slipped listlessly through my fingers.

I had dozed repeatedly,--waked on the threshold of oblivion by contact
with some of the angles of the coach, and feeling that I was
unconsciously assuming, in imitation of a humble insect of my childish
recollection, that spherical shape which could best resist those
impressions, when I perceived that the moon, riding high in the
heavens, had begun to separate the formless masses of the shadowy
landscape. Trees isolated, in clumps, and assemblages, changed places
before my window. The sharp outlines of the distant hills came back as
in daylight, but little softened in the dry, cold, dewless air of a
California summer night. I was wondering how late it was, and thinking
that if the horses of the night traveled as slowly as the team before
us, Faustus might have been spared his agonizing prayer, when a sudden
spasm of activity attacked my driver. A succession of whip-snappings,
like a pack of Chinese crackers, broke from the box before me. The
stage leaped forward, and when I could pick myself from under the
seat, a long white building had in some mysterious way rolled before
my window. It must be Slumgullion! As I descended from the stage I
addressed the driver:--

"I thought you changed horses on the road?"

"So we did. Two hours ago."

"That's odd. I didn't notice it."

"Must have been asleep, sir. Hope you had a pleasant nap. Bully place
for a nice quiet snooze, empty stage, sir!"


THE MAN OF NO ACCOUNT


His name was Fagg,--David Fagg. He came to California in '52 with us,
in the Skyscraper. I don't think he did it in an adventurous way. He
probably had no other place to go to. When a knot of us young fellows
would recite what splendid opportunities we resigned to go, and how
sorry our friends were to have us leave, and show daguerreotypes and
locks of hair, and talk of Mary and Susan, the man of no account used
to sit by and listen with a pained, mortified expression on his plain
face, and say nothing. I think he had nothing to say. He had no
associates, except when we patronized him; and, in point of fact, he
was a good deal of sport to us. He was always seasick whenever we had
a capful of wind. He never got his sea-legs on either. And I never
shall forget how we all laughed when Eattler took him the piece of
pork on a string, and--But you know that time-honored joke. And then
we had such a splendid lark with him. Miss Fanny Twinkler couldn't
bear the sight of him, and we used to make Fagg think that she had
taken a fancy to him, and sent him little delicacies and books from
the cabin. You ought to have witnessed the rich scene that took place
when he came up, stammering and very sick, to thank her! Didn't she
flash up grandly, and beautifully, and scornfully? So like "Medora,"
Rattler said,--Rattler knew Byron by heart,--and wasn't Old Fagg
awfully cut up? But he got over it, and when Rattler fell sick at
Valparaiso, Old Fagg used to nurse him. You see he was a good sort of
fellow, but he lacked manliness and spirit.    He had absolutely no
idea of poetry. I've seen him sit stolidly by, mending his old
clothes, when Rattler delivered that stirring apostrophe of Byron's to
the ocean. He asked Rattler once, quite seriously, if he thought Byron
was ever seasick. I don't remember Rattler's reply, but I know we all
laughed very much, and I have no doubt it was something good, for
Rattler was smart.

When the Skyscraper arrived at San Francisco we had a grand "feed." We
agreed to meet every year and perpetuate the occasion. Of course we
didn't invite Fagg. Fagg was a steerage passenger, and it was
necessary, you see, now we were ashore, to exercise a little
discretion. But Old Fagg, as we called him,--he was only about twenty-
five years old, by the way,--was the source of immense amusement to us
that day. It appeared that he had conceived the idea that he could
walk to Sacramento, and actually started off afoot. We had a good
time, and shook hands with one another all around, and so parted. Ah,
me! only eight years ago, and yet some of those hands, then clasped in
amity, have been clenched at each other, or have dipped furtively in
one another's pockets. I know that we didn't dine together the next
year, because young Barker swore he wouldn't put his feet under the
same mahogany with such a very contemptible scoundrel as that Mixer;
and Nibbles, who borrowed money at Valparaiso of young Stubbs, who was
then a waiter in a restaurant, didn't like to meet such people.

When I bought a number of shares in the Coyote Tunnel at Mugginsville,
in '54, I thought I'd take a run up there and see it. I stopped at the
Empire Hotel, and after dinner I got a horse and rode round the town
and out to the claim. One of those individuals whom newspaper
correspondents call "our intelligent informant," and to whom in all
small communities the right of answering questions is tacitly yielded,
was quietly pointed out to me. Habit had  enabled him to work and talk
at the same time, and he never pretermitted either. He gave me a
history of the claim, and added: "You see, stranger (he addressed the
bank before him), gold is sure to come outer that theer claim (he put
in a comma with his pick), but the old pro-pri-e-tor (he wriggled out
the word and the point of his pick) warn't of much account (a long
stroke of the pick for a period). He was green, and let the boys about
here jump him,"--and the rest of his sentence was confided to his hat,
which he had removed to wipe his manly brow with his red bandana.

I asked him who was the original proprietor.

"His name war Fagg."

I went to see him. He looked a little older and plainer. He had worked
hard, he said, and was getting on "so-so." I took quite a liking to
him and patronized him to some extent. Whether I did so because I was
beginning to have a distrust for such fellows as Rattler and Mixer is
not necessary for me to state.

You remember how the Coyote Tunnel went in, and how awfully we
shareholders were done! Well, the next thing I heard was that Rattler,
who was one of the heaviest shareholders, was up at Mugginsville
keeping bar for the proprietor of the Mugginsville Hotel, and that Old
Fagg had struck it rich, and didn't know what to do with his money.
All this was told me by Mixer, who had been there settling up matters,
and likewise that Eagg was sweet upon the daughter of the proprietor
of the aforesaid hotel. And so by hearsay and letter I eventually
gathered that old Robins, the hotel man, was trying to get up a match
between Nellie Robins and Fagg. Nellie was a pretty, plump, and
foolish little thing, and would do just as her father wished. I
thought it would be a good thing for--Fagg if he should marry and
settle down; that as a married man he might be of some account. So I
ran up to Mugginsville one day to look after things.    It did me an
immense deal of good to make Rattler mix my drinks for me,--Rattler!
the gay, brilliant, and unconquerable Rattler, who had tried to snub
me two years ago! I talked to him about Old Fagg and Nellie,
particularly as I thought the subject was distasteful. He never liked
Fagg, and he was sure, he said, that Nellie did n't. Did Nellie like
anybody else? He turned round to the mirror behind the bar and brushed
up his hair. I understood the conceited wretch. I thought l'd put Fagg
on his guard, and get him to hurry up matters. I had a long talk with
him. You could see by the way the poor fellow acted that he was badly
stuck. He sighed, and promised to pluck up courage to hurry matters to
a crisis. Nellie was a good girl, and I think had a sort of quiet
respect for Old Fagg's unobtrusiveness. But her fancy was already
taken captive by Rattler's superficial qualities, which were obvious
and pleasing. I don't think Nellie was any worse than you or I. We are
more apt to take acquaintances at their apparent value than their
intrinsic worth. It's less trouble, and except when we want to trust
them, quite as convenient. The difficulty with women is that their
feelings are apt to get interested sooner than ours, and then, you
know, reasoning is out of the question. This is what Old Fagg would
have known had he been of any account. But he was n't. So much the
worse for him.

It was a few months afterward, and I was sitting in my office when in
walked Old Fagg. I was surprised to see him down, but we talked over
the current topics in that mechanical manner of people who know that
they have something else to say, but are obliged to get at it in that
formal way. After an interval, Fagg in his natural manner said,--

"I'm going home!"

"Going home?"

"Yes,--that is, I think I'll take a trip to the Atlantic    States. I
came to see you, as you know I have some little property, and I have
executed a power of attorney for you to manage my affairs. I have some
papers I'd like to leave with you. Will you take charge of them?"

"Yes," I said. "But what of Nellie?"

His face fell. He tried to smile, and the combination resulted in one
of the most startling and grotesque effects I ever beheld. At length
he said,--

"I shall not marry Nellie,--that is,"--he seemed to apologize
internally for the positive form of expression,--"I think that I had
better not."

"David Fagg," I said with sudden severity, "you're of no account!"

To my astonishment, his face brightened.

"Yes," said he, "that's it!--I'm of no account! But I always knew it.
You see, I thought Rattler loved that girl as well as I did, and I
knew she liked him better than she did me, and would be happier, I
dare say, with him. But then I knew that old Robins would have
preferred me to him, as I was better off,--and the girl would do as he
said,--and, you see, I thought I was kinder in the way,--and so I
left. But," he continued, as I was about to interrupt him, "for fear
the old man might object to Rattler, I've lent him enough to set him
up in business for himself in Dogtown. A pushing, active, brilliant
fellow, you know, like Rattler can get along, and will soon be in his
old position again,--and you needn't be hard on him, you know, if he
doesn't. Good-by."

I was too much disgusted with his treatment of that Rattler to be at
all amiable, but as his business was profitable, I promised to attend
to it, and he left. A few weeks passed. The return steamer arrived,
and a terrible incident occupied the papers for days afterwards.
People in all parts of the State conned eagerly the details of an
awful shipwreck, and those who had friends aboard went away by
themselves, and read the long list of the lost under their breath. I
read of the gifted, the gallant, the noble, and loved ones who had
perished, and among them I think I was the first to read the name of
David Fagg. For the "man of no account" had "gone home!"


NOTES BY FLOOD AND FIELD


PART I

IN THE FIELD


It was near the close of an October day that I began to be
disagreeably conscious of the Sacramento Valley. I had been riding
since sunrise, and my course through the depressing monotony of the
long level landscape affected me more like a dull, dyspeptic dream
than a business journey, performed under that sincerest of natural
phenomena,--a California sky. The recurring stretches of brown and
baked fields, the gaping fissures in the dusty trail, the hard outline
of the distant hills, and the herds of slowly moving cattle, seemed
like features of some glittering stereoscopic picture that never
changed. Active exercise might have removed this feeling, but my horse
by some subtle instinct had long since given up all ambitious effort,
and had lapsed into a dogged trot.

It was autumn, but not the season suggested to the Atlantic reader
under that title. The sharply defined boundaries of the wet and dry
seasons were prefigured in the clear outlines of the distant hills. In
the dry atmosphere the decay of vegetation was too rapid for the slow
hectic which overtakes an Eastern landscape, or else Nature was too
practical for such thin disguises. She merely turned the Hippocratic
face to the spectator, with the old diagnosis of death in her sharp,
contracted features.

In the contemplation of such a prospect there was little to excite any
but a morbid fancy. There were no clouds  in the flinty blue heavens,
and the setting of the sun was accompanied with as little ostentation
as was consistent with the dryly practical atmosphere. Darkness soon
followed, with a rising wind, which increased as the shadows deepened
on the plain. The fringe of alder by the watercourse began to loom up
as I urged my horse forward. A half-hour's active spurring brought me
to a corral, and a little beyond a house, so low and broad, it seemed
at first sight to be half buried in the earth.

My second impression was that it had grown out of the soil like some
monstrous vegetable, its dreary proportions were so in keeping with
the vast prospect. There were no recesses along its roughly boarded
walls for vagrant and unprofitable shadows to lurk in the daily
sunshine. No projection for the wind by night to grow musical over, to
wail, whistle, or whisper to; only a long wooden shelf containing a
chilly-looking tin basin and a bar of soap. Its uncurtained windows
were red with the sinking sun, as though bloodshot and inflamed from a
too long unlidded existence. The tracks of cattle led to its front
door, firmly closed against the rattling wind.

To avoid being confounded with this familiar element, I walked to the
rear of the house, which was connected with a smaller building by a
slight platform. A grizzled, hard-faced old man was standing there,
and met my salutation with a look of inquiry, and, without speaking,
led the way to the principal room. As I entered, four young men who
were reclining by the fire slightly altered their attitudes of perfect
repose, but beyond that betrayed neither curiosity nor interest. A
hound started from a dark corner with a growl, but was immediately
kicked by the old man into obscurity and silenced  again. I can't tell
why, but I instantly received the impression that for a long time the
group by the fire had not uttered a word or moved a muscle. Taking a
seat, I briefly stated my business.    Was a United States surveyor.
Had come on account of the Espiritu Santo rancho. Wanted to correct
the exterior boundaries of township lines, so as to connect with the
near exteriors of private grants. There had been some intervention to
the old survey by a Mr. Tryan, who had preempted adjacent--"Settled
land warrants," interrupted the old man. "Ah, yes! land warrants,--and
then this was Mr. Tryan?"

I had spoken mechanically, for I was preoccupied in connecting other
public lines with private surveys, as I looked in his face. It was
certainly a hard face, and reminded me of the singular effect of that
mining operation known as "ground sluicing;" the harder lines of
underlying character were exposed, and what were once plastic curves
and soft outlines were obliterated by some powerful agency.

There was a dryness in his voice not unlike the prevailing atmosphere
of the valley, as he launched into an ex parte statement of the
contest, with a fluency which, like the wind without, showed frequent
and unrestrained expression. He told me--what I had already learned--
that the boundary line of the old Spanish grant was a creek, described
in the loose phraseology of the deseno as beginning in the valda or
skirt of the hill, its precise location long the subject of
litigation. I listened and answered with little interest, for my mind
was still distracted by the wind which swept violently by the house,
as well as by his odd face, which was again reflected in the
resemblance that the silent group by the fire bore toward him. He was
still talking, and the wind was yet blowing, when my confused
attention was aroused by a remark addressed to the recumbent figures.

"Now, then, which on ye'll see the stranger up the creek to Altascar's
to-morrow?"

There was a general movement of opposition in the group, but no
decided answer.

"Kin you go, Kerg?"

"Who's to look up stock in Strarberry per-ar-ie?"

This seemed to imply a negative, and the old man turned to another
hopeful, who was pulling the fur from a mangy bearskin on which he was
lying, with an expression as though it were somebody's hair.

"Well, Tom, wot's to hinder you from goin'?"

"Mam's goin' to Brown's store at sun-up, and I s'pose I've got to pack
her and the baby again."

I think the expression of scorn this unfortunate youth exhibited for
the filial duty into which he had been evidently beguiled was one of
the finest things I had ever seen.

"Wise?"

Wise deigned no verbal reply, but figuratively thrust a worn and
patched boot into the discourse. The old man flushed quickly.

"I told ye to get Brown to give you a pair the last time you war down
the river."

"Said he wouldn't without an order. Said it was like pulling gum-teeth
to get the money from you even then."

There was a grim smile at this local hit at the old man's parsimony,
and Wise, who was clearly the privileged wit of the family, sank back
in honorable retirement.

"Well, Joe, ef your boots are new, and you aren't pestered with wimmin
and children, p'r'aps you'll go," said Tryan, with a nervous
twitching, intended for a smile, about a mouth not remarkably
mirthful.

Tom lifted a pair of bushy eyebrows and said shortly,--

"Got no saddle."

"Wot's gone of your saddle?"

"Kerg, there!" indicating his brother with a look such as Cain might
have worn at the sacrifice.

"You lie!" returned Kerg cheerfully.

Tryan sprang to his feet, seizing the chair, flourishing it  around
his head and gazing furiously in the hard young faces which fearlessly
met his own. But it was only for a moment; his arm soon dropped by his
side, and a look of hopeless fatality crossed his face. He allowed me
to take the chair from his hand, and I was trying to pacify him by the
assurance that I required no guide, when the irrepressible Wise again
lifted his voice--

"Theer's George comin'! Why don't ye ask him? He'll go and introduce
you to Don Fernandy's darter, too, ef you ain't pertickler."

The laugh which followed this joke, which evidently had some domestic
allusion (the general tendency of rural pleasantry), was followed by a
light step on the platform, and the young man entered. Seeing a
stranger present, he stopped and colored, made a shy salute and
colored again, and then, drawing a box from the corner, sat down, his
hands clasped tightly together and his very handsome bright blue eyes
turned frankly on mine.

Perhaps I was in a condition to receive the romantic impression he
made upon me, and I took it upon myself to ask his company as guide,
and he cheerfully assented. But some domestic duty called him
presently away.

The fire gleamed brightly on the hearth, and, no longer resisting the
prevailing influence, I silently watched the spirting flame, listening
to the wind which continually shook the tenement. Besides the one
chair, which had acquired a new importance in my eyes, I presently
discovered a crazy table in one corner, with an inkbottle and pen, the
latter in that greasy state of decomposition peculiar to country
taverns and farmhouses. A goodly array of rifles and double-barreled
guns stocked the corner; half a dozen saddles and blankets lay near,
with a mild flavor of the horse about them. Some deer and bear skins
completed the inventory. As I sat there, with the silent group around
me, the shadowy gloom within and the dominant wind  without, I found
it difficult to believe I had ever known a different existence. My
profession had often led me to wilder scenes, but rarely among those
whose unrestrained habits and easy unconsciousness made me feel so
lonely and uncomfortable. I shrank closer to myself, not without grave
doubts--which I think occur naturally to people in like situations--
that this was the general rule of humanity, and I was a solitary and
somewhat gratuitous exception.

It was a relief when a laconic announcement of supper by a weak-eyed
girl caused a general movement in the family. We walked across the
dark platform, which led to another low-ceiled room. Its entire length
was occupied by a table, at the further end of which a weak-eyed woman
was already taking her repast as she at the same time gave nourishment
to a weak-eyed baby. As the formalities of introduction had been
dispensed with, and as she took no notice of me, I was enabled to slip
into a seat without discomposing or interrupting her. Tryan
extemporized a grace, and the attention of the family became absorbed
in bacon, potatoes, and dried apples.

The meal was a sincere one. Gentle gurglings at the upper end of the
table often betrayed the presence of the "wellspring of pleasure." The
conversation generally referred to the labors of the day, and
comparing notes as to the whereabouts of missing stock. Yet the supper
was such a vast improvement upon the previous intellectual feast, that
when a chance allusion of mine to the business of my visit brought out
the elder Tryan, the interest grew quite exciting. I remember he
inveighed bitterly against the system of ranch-holding by the
"Greasers," as he was pleased to term the native Californians. As the
same ideas have been sometimes advanced under more pretentious
circumstances, they may be worthy of record.

"Look at 'em holdin' the finest grazin' land that ever lay outer
doors? Whar's the papers for it? Was it grants?    Mighty fine
grants,--most of 'em made arter the 'Merrikans got possession. More
fools the 'Merrikans for lettin' 'em hold 'em. Wat paid for 'em?
'Merrikan blood and money.

"Didn't they oughter have suthin' out of their native country? Wot
for? Did they ever improve? Got a lot of yaller-skinned diggers, not
so sensible as niggers, to look arter stock, and they a-sittin' home
and smokin'. With their gold and silver candlesticks, and missions,
and crucifixens, priests and graven idols, and sich? Them sort things
wuren't allowed in Mizzoori."

At the mention of improvements I involuntarily lifted my eyes, and met
the half-laughing, half-embarrassed look of George. The act did not
escape detection, and I had at once the satisfaction of seeing that
the rest of the family had formed an offensive alliance against us.

"It was agin nater and agin God," added Tryan. "God never intended
gold in the rocks to be made into heathen candlesticks and
crucifixens. That's why he sent 'Merrikans here. Nater never intended
such a climate for lazy lopers. She never gi'n six months' sunshine to
be slept and smoked away."

How long he continued, and with what further illustration, I could not
say, for I took an early opportunity to escape to the sitting-room. I
was soon followed by George, who called me to an open door leading to
a smaller room, and pointed to a bed.

"You'd better sleep there to-night," he said; "you'll be more
comfortable, and I'll call you early."

I thanked him, and would have asked him several questions which were
then troubling me, but he shyly slipped to the door and vanished.

A shadow seemed to fall on the room when he had gone. The "boys"
returned, one by one, and shuffled to their old places. A larger log
was thrown on the fire, and the huge  chimney glowed like a furnace,
but it did not seem to melt or subdue a single line of the hard faces
that it lit. Half an hour later, the furs which had served as chairs
by day undertook the nightly office of mattresses, and each received
its owner's full-length figure. Mr. Tryan had not returned, and I
missed George. I sat there until, wakeful and nervous, I saw the fire
fall and shadows mount the wall. There was no sound but the rushing of
the wind and the snoring of the sleepers. At last, feeling the place
insupportable, I seized my hat, and, opening the door, ran out briskly
into the night.

The acceleration of my torpid pulse in the keen fight with the wind,
whose violence was almost equal to that of a tornado, and the familiar
faces of the bright stars above me, I felt as a blessed relief. I ran,
not knowing whither, and when I halted, the square outline of the
house was lost in the alder-bushes. An uninterrupted plain stretched
before me, like a vast sea beaten flat by the force of the gale. As I
kept on I noticed a slight elevation toward the horizon, and presently
my progress was impeded by the ascent of an Indian mound. It struck me
forcibly as resembling an island in the sea. Its height gave me a
better view of the expanding plain. But even here I found no rest. The
ridiculous interpretation Tryan had given the climate was somehow sung
in my ears and echoed in my throbbing pulse as, guided by the stars, I
sought the house again.

But I felt fresher and more natural as I stepped upon the platform.
The door of the lower building was open, and the old man was sitting
beside the table, thumbing the leaves of a Bible with a look in his
face as though he were hunting up prophecies against the "Greaser." I
turned to enter, but my attention was attracted by a blanketed figure
lying beside the house on the platform. The broad chest heaving with
healthy slumber, and the open, honest face were familiar. It was
George, who had given up his bed to  the stranger among his people. I
was about to wake him, but he lay so peaceful and quiet, I felt awed
and hushed. And I went to bed with a pleasant impression of his
handsome face and tranquil figure soothing me to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was awakened the next morning from a sense of lulled repose and
grateful silence by the cheery voice of George, who stood beside my
bed ostentatiously twirling a riata, as if to recall the duties of the
day to my sleep-bewildered eyes. I looked around me. The wind had been
magically laid, and the sun shone warmly through the windows. A dash
of cold water, with an extra chill on, from the tin basin, helped to
brighten me. It was still early, but the family had already
breakfasted and dispersed, and a wagon winding far in the distance
showed that the unfortunate Tom had already "packed" his relatives
away. I felt more cheerful,--there are few troubles Youth cannot
distance with the start of a good night's rest. After a substantial
breakfast, prepared by George, in a few moments we were mounted and
dashing down the plain.

We followed the line of alder that defined the creek, now dry and
baked with summer's heat, but which in winter, George told me,
overflowed its banks. I still retain a vivid impression of that
morning's ride; the far-off mountains, like silhouettes, against the
steel-blue sky; the crisp, dry air, and the expanding track before me,
animated often by the well-knit figure of George Tryan, musical with
jingling spurs and picturesque with flying riata. He rode a powerful
native roan, wild-eyed, untiring in stride, and unbroken in nature.
Alas! the curves of beauty were concealed by the cumbrous machillas of
the Spanish saddle, which levels all equine distinctions. The single
rein lay loosely on the cruel bit that can gripe and, if need be,
crush the jaw it controls.

Again the illimitable freedom of the valley rises before  me as we
again bear down into sunlit space. Blackinton, William Blackinton,
Israel Hatch, Elijah, white Joseph Holmes anchorage, of; Ephraim
Starkweather, Oliver Wilkinson vast peaceful to the rural Asian
servitude of the towns. through age which it passed did, and Ozias
Wilkinson, of, Rhode ago Island. They were all enterprising business
men in staid their day, well and known throughout Eastern or
Massachusetts, as the Railroad enterprise of and the for which
they seemed to twenty and.
The creek widens to a deep gully. We dive into it
and up on the opposite side, carrying a moving cloud of impalpable
powder with us. Cattle are scattered over the plain, grazing quietly
or banded together in vast restless herds. George makes a wide,
indefinite sweep with the riata, as if to include them all in his
vaquero's loop, and says, "Ours!"

"About how many, George?"

"Don't know."

"How many?"

"Well, p'r'aps three thousand head," says George, reflecting. "We
don't know; takes five men to look 'em up and keep run."

"What are they worth?"

"About thirty dollars a head."

I make a rapid calculation, and look my astonishment at the laughing
George. Perhaps a recollection of the domestic economy of the Tryan
household is expressed in that look, for George averts his eye and
says apologetically,--

"I've tried to get the old man to sell and build, but you know he says
it ain't no use to settle down just yet. We must keep movin'. In fact,
he built the shanty for that purpose, lest titles should fall through,
and we'd have to get up and move stakes farther down,"    Suddenly his
quick eye detects some unusual sight in a herd we are passing, and
with an exclamation he puts his roan into the centre of the mass. I
follow, or rather Chu-Chu darts after the roan, and in a few moments
we are in the midst of apparently inextricable horns and hoofs.
"Toro!" shouts George, with vaquero enthusiasm, and the band opens a
way for the swinging riata. I can feel their steaming breaths, and
their spume is cast on Chu-Chu's quivering flank.

Wild, devilish-looking beasts are they; not such shapes as Jove might
have chosen to woo a goddess, nor such as peacefully range the downs
of Devon, but lean and hungry Cassius-like bovines, economically got
up to meet the exigencies of a six-months' rainless climate, and
accustomed to wrestle with the distracting wind and the blinding dust.

"That's not our brand," says George; "they're strange stock," and he
points to what my scientific eye recognizes as the astrological sign
of Venus deeply seared in the brown flanks of the bull he is chasing.
But the herd are closing round us with low mutterings, and George has
again recourse to the authoritative "Toro," and with swinging riata
divides the "bossy bucklers" on either side. When we are free, and
breathing somewhat more easily, I venture to ask George if they ever
attack any one.

"Never horsemen,--sometimes footmen. Not through rage, you know, but
curiosity. They think a man and his horse are one, and if they meet a
chap afoot, they run him down and trample him under hoof, in the
pursuit of knowledge. But," adds George, "here's the lower bench of
the foothills, and here's Altascar's corral, and that white building
you see yonder is the casa."

A whitewashed wall inclosed a court containing another adobe building,
baked with the solar beams of many summers. Leaving our horses in  the
charge of a few peons  in the courtyard, who were basking lazily in
the sun, we entered a low doorway, where a deep shadow and an
agreeable coolness fell upon us, as sudden and grateful as a plunge in
cool water, from its contrast with the external glare and heat. In the
centre of a low-ceiled apartment sat an old man with a black silk
handkerchief tied about his head, the few gray hairs that escaped from
its folds relieving his gamboge-colored face. The odor of cigarritos
was as incense added to the cathedral gloom of the building.

As Senor Altascar rose with well-bred gravity to receive us, George
advanced with such a heightened color, and such a blending of
tenderness and respect in his manner, that I was touched to the heart
by so much devotion in the careless youth. In fact, my eyes were still
dazzled by the effect of the outer sunshine, and at first I did not
see the white teeth and black eyes of Pepita, who slipped into the
corridor as we entered.

It was no pleasant matter to disclose particulars of business which
would deprive the old senor of the greater part of that land we had
just ridden over, and I did it with great embarrassment. But he
listened calmly,--not a muscle of his dark face stirring,--and the
smoke curling placidly from his lips showed his regular respiration.
When I had finished, he offered quietly to accompany us to the line of
demarcation. George had meanwhile disappeared, but a suspicious
conversation in broken Spanish and English in the corridor betrayed
his vicinity. When he returned again, a little absent-minded, the old
man, by far the coolest and most self-possessed of the party,
extinguished his black silk cap beneath that stiff, uncomely sombrero
which all native Californians affect. A serapa thrown over his
shoulders hinted that he was waiting. Horses are always ready saddled
in Spanish ranchos, and in half an hour from the time of our arrival
we were again loping in the staring sunlight.    But not as cheerfully
as before. George and myself were weighed down by restraint, and
Altascar was gravely quiet. To break the silence, and by way of a
consolatory essay, I hinted to him that there might be further
intervention or appeal, but the proffered oil and wine were returned
with a careless shrug of the shoulders and a sententious "Que bueno?
Your courts are always just."

The Indian mound of the previous night's discovery was a bearing
monument of the new line, and there we halted. We were surprised to
find the old man Tryan waiting us. For the first time during our
interview the old Spaniard seemed moved, and the blood rose in his
yellow cheek. I was anxious to close the scene, and pointed out the
corner boundaries as clearly as my recollection served.

"The deputies will be here to-morrow to run the lines from this
initial point, and there will be no further trouble, I believe,
gentlemen."

Senor Altascar had dismounted and was gathering a few tufts of dried
grass in his hands. George and I exchanged glances. He presently arose
from his stooping posture, and advancing to within a few paces of
Joseph Tryan, said in a voice broken with passion,--

"And I, Fernando Jesus Maria Altascar, put you in possession of my
land in the fashion of my country."

He threw a sod to each of the cardinal points.

"I don't know your courts, your judges, or your corregidores. Take the
llano!--and take this with it. May the drought seize your cattle till
their tongues hang down as long as those of your lying lawyers! May it
be the curse and torment of your old age, as you and yours have made
it of mine!"

We stepped between the principal actors in this scene, which only the
passion of Altascar made tragical, but Tryan, with a humility but ill
concealing his triumph, interrupted,--

"Let him curse on. He 'll find 'em coming home to him sooner than the
cattle he has lost through his sloth and pride. The Lord is on the
side of the just, as well as agin all slanderers and revilers."

Altascar but half guessed the meaning of the Missourian, yet
sufficiently to drive from his mind all but the extravagant power of
his native invective.

"Stealer of the sacrament! Open not!--open not, I say, your lying
Judas lips to me! Ah! half-breed, with the soul of a coyote!--Car-r-r-
ramba!"  With his passion reverberating among the consonants like
distant thunder, he laid his hand upon the mane of his horse as though
it had been the gray locks of his adversary, swung himself into the
saddle, and galloped away.

George turned to me.

"Will you go back with us to-night?"

I thought of the cheerless walls, the silent figures by the fire, and
the roaring wind, and hesitated.

"Well, then, good-by."

"Good-by, George."

Another wring of the hands, and we parted. I had not ridden far, when
I turned and looked back. The wind had risen early that afternoon, and
was already sweeping across the plain. A cloud of dust traveled before
it, and a picturesque figure occasionally emerging therefrom was my
last indistinct impression of George Tryan.


PART II

IN THE FLOOD


Three months after the survey of the Espiritu Santo rancho I was again
in the valley of the Sacramento. But a general and terrible visitation
had erased the memory of that event as completely as I supposed it had
obliterated  the boundary monuments I had planted. The great flood of
1861-62 was at its height when, obeying some indefinite yearning, I
took my carpetbag and embarked for the inundated valley.

There was nothing to be seen from the bright cabin windows of the
Golden City but night deepening over the water. The only sound was the
pattering rain, and that had grown monotonous for the past two weeks,
and did not disturb the national gravity of my countrymen as they
silently sat around the cabin stove. Some on errands of relief to
friends and relatives wore anxious faces, and conversed soberly on the
one absorbing topic. Others like myself, attracted by curiosity,
listened eagerly to newer details. But, with that human disposition to
seize upon any circumstance that might give chance event the
exaggerated importance of instinct, I was half conscious of something
more than curiosity as an impelling motive.

The dripping of rain, the low gurgle of water, and a leaden sky
greeted us the next morning as we lay beside the half-submerged levee
of Sacramento. Here, however, the novelty of boats to convey us to the
hotels was an appeal that was irresistible. I resigned myself to a
dripping rubber-cased mariner called Joe, and wrapping myself in a
shining cloak of the like material, about as suggestive of warmth as
court-plaster might have been, took my seat in the stern sheets of
his boat. It was no slight inward struggle to part from the steamer,
that to most of the passengers was the only visible connecting link
between us and the dry and habitable earth, but we pulled away and
entered the city, stemming a rapid current as we shot the levee.

We glided up the long level of K Street,--once a cheerful busy
thoroughfare, now distressing in its silent desolation. The turbid
water, which seemed to meet the horizon edge before us, flowed at
right angles in sluggish rivers  through the streets. Nature had
revenged herself on the local taste by disarraying the regular
rectangles by huddling houses on street corners, where they presented
abrupt gables to the current, or by capsizing them in compact ruin.
Crafts of all kinds were gliding in and out of low-arched doorways.
The water was over the top of the fences surrounding well-kept
gardens, in the first stories of hotels and private dwellings,
trailing its slime on velvet carpets as well as roughly boarded
floors. And a silence quite as suggestive as the visible desolation
was in the voiceless streets that no longer echoed to carriage-wheel
or footfall. The low ripple of water, the occasional splash of oars,
or the warning cry of boatmen were the few signs of life and
habitation.

With such scenes before my eyes and such sounds in my ears, as I lie
lazily in the boat, is mingled the song of my gondolier, who sings to
the music of his oars. It is not quite as romantic as his brother of
the Lido might improvise, but my Yankee Giuseppe has the advantage of
earnestness and energy, and gives a graphic description of the terrors
of the past week and of noble deeds of self-sacrifice and devotion,
occasionally pointing out a balcony from which some California Bianca
or Laura had been snatched, half-clothed and famished. Giuseppe is
otherwise peculiar, and refuses the proffered fare, for--am I not a
citizen of San Francisco, which was first to respond to the suffering
cry of Sacramento? and is not he, Giuseppe, a member of the Howard
Society? No, Giuseppe is poor, but cannot take my money. Still, if I
must spend it, there is the Howard Society, and the women and children
without food and clothing at the Agricultural Hall.  I thank the
generous gondolier, and we go to the Hall,--a dismal, bleak place,
ghastly with the memories of last year's opulence and plenty,--and
here Giuseppe's fare is swelled by the stranger's mite. But here
Giuseppe tells  me of the "Relief Boat" which leaves for the flooded
district in the interior, and here, profiting by the lesson he has
taught me, I make the resolve to turn my curiosity to the account of
others, and am accepted of those who go forth to succor and help the
afflicted. Giuseppe takes charge of my carpetbag, and does not part
from me until I stand on the slippery deck of Relief Boat No. 3.

An hour later I am in the pilot-house, looking down upon what was once
the channel of a peaceful river. But its banks are only defined by
tossing tufts of willow washed by the long swell that breaks over a
vast inland sea. Stretches of tule land fertilized by its once regular
channel, and dotted by nourishing ranchos, are now cleanly erased. The
cultivated profile of the old landscape had faded. Dotted lines in
symmetrical perspective mark orchards that are buried and chilled in
the turbid flood. The roofs of a few farmhouses are visible, and here
and there the smoke curling from chimneys of half-submerged tenements
shows an undaunted life within. Cattle and sheep are gathered on
Indian mounds, waiting the fate of their companions, whose carcases
drift by us or swing in eddies with the wrecks of barns and outhouses.
Wagons are stranded everywhere where the tide could carry them. As I
wipe the moistened glass, I see nothing but water, pattering on the
deck from the lowering clouds, dashing against the window, dripping
from the willows, hissing by the wheels, everywhere washing, coiling,
sapping, hurrying in rapids, or swelling at last into deeper and
vaster lakes, awful in their suggestive quiet and concealment.

As day fades into night the monotony of this strange prospect grows
oppressive. I seek the engine-room, and in the company of some of the
few half-drowned sufferers we have already picked up from temporary
rafts, I forget the general aspect of desolation in their individual
misery. Later we meet the San Francisco packet, and transfer a  number
of our passengers. From them we learn how inward-bound vessels report
to having struck the well-defined channel of the Sacramento fifty
miles beyond the bar. There is a voluntary contribution taken among
the generous travelers for the use of our afflicted, and we part
company with a hearty "God speed" on either side. But our signal
lights are not far distant before a familiar sound comes back to us,--
an indomitable Yankee cheer,--which scatters the gloom.

Our course is altered, and we are steaming over the obliterated banks
far in the interior. Once or twice black objects loom up near us,--the
wrecks of houses floating by. There is a slight rift in the sky
towards the north, and a few bearing stars to guide us over the waste.
As we penetrate into shallower water, it is deemed advisable to divide
our party into smaller boats, and diverge over the submerged prairie.
I borrow a pea-coat of one of the crew, and in that practical disguise
am doubtfully permitted to pass into one of the boats. We give way
northerly. It is quite dark yet, although the rift of cloud has
widened.

It must have been about three o'clock, and we were lying upon our oars
in an eddy formed by a clump of cottonwood, and the light of the
steamer is a solitary bright star in the distance, when the silence is
broken by the "bow oar":--

"Light ahead."

All eyes are turned in that direction. In a few seconds a twinkling
light appears, shines steadily, and again disappears, as if by the
shifting position of some black object apparently drifting close upon
us.

"Stern, all!--a steamer!"

"Hold hard, there! Steamer be d---d!" is the reply of the coxswain.
"It's a house, and a big one too."

It is a big one, looming in the starlight like a huge fragment of the
darkness. The light comes from a single  candle which shines through a
window as the great shape swings by. Some recollection is drifting
back to me with it, as I listen with beating heart.

"There's some one in it, by heavens! Give way, boys,--lay her
alongside. Handsomely, now! The door's fastened; try the window; no!
here's another!"

In another moment we are trampling in the water, which washes the
floor to the depth of several inches. It is a large room, at the
farther end of which an old man is sitting, wrapped in a blanket,
holding a candle in one hand, and apparently absorbed in the book he
holds with the other. I spring toward him with an exclamation:--

"Joseph Tryan!"

He does not move. We gather closer to him, and I lay my hand gently on
his shoulder, and say,--

"Look up, old man, look up! Your wife and children, where are they?
The boys,--George! Are they here? are they safe?"

He raises his head slowly, and turns his eyes to mine, and we
involuntarily recoil before his look. It is a calm and quiet glance,
free from fear, anger, or pain; but it somehow sends the blood
curdling through our veins. He bowed his head over his book again,
taking no further notice of us. The men look at me compassionately and
hold their peace. I make one more effort:--

"Joseph Tryan, don't you know me--the surveyor who surveyed your
ranch,--the Espiritu Santo? Look up, old man!"

He shuddered and wrapped himself closer in his blanket. Presently he
repeated to himself, "The surveyor who surveyed your ranch, Espiritu
Santo," over and over again, as though it were a lesson he was trying
to fix in his memory.

I was turning sadly to the boatmen, when he suddenly caught me
fearfully by the hand, and said:--

"Hush!"

We were silent.

"Listen!" He puts his arm around my neck, and whispers in my ear, "I'm
_a-moving off!_"

"Moving off?"

"Hush! Don't speak so loud. Moving off! Ah! wot's that? Don't you
hear?--there!--listen!"

We listen, and hear the water gurgle and click beneath the floor.

"It's them wot he sent I--old Altascar sent. They've been here all
night. I heard 'em first in the creek, when they came to tell the old
man to move farther off. They came nearer and nearer. They whispered
under the door, and I saw their eyes on the step,--their cruel, hard
eyes. Ah! why don't they quit?"

I tell the men to search the room and see if they can find any farther
traces of the family, while Tryan resumes his old attitude. It is so
much like the figure I remember on the breezy night, that a
superstitious feeling is fast overcoming me. When they have returned,
I tell them briefly what I know of him, and the old man murmurs
again,--

"Why don't they quit, then? They have the stock,--all gone--gone,--
gone for the hides and hoofs," and he groans bitterly.

"There are other boats below us. The shanty cannot have drifted far,
and perhaps the family are safe by this time," says the coxswain
hopefully.

We lift the old man up, for he is quite helpless, and carry him to the
boat. He is still grasping the Bible in his right hand, though its
strengthening grace is blank to his vacant eye, and he cowers in the
stern as we pull slowly to the steamer, while a pale gleam in the sky
shows the coming day.

I was weary with excitement, and when we reached the steamer, and I
had seen Joseph Tryan comfortably bestowed, I wrapped myself in a
blanket near the boiler and presently fell asleep. But even then the
figure of the old man often started before me, and a sense of
uneasiness about George made a strong undercurrent to my drifting
dreams. I was awakened at about eight o'clock in the morning by the
engineer, who told me one of the old man's sons had been picked up and
was now on board.

"Is it George Tryan?" I ask quickly.

"Don't know; but he's a sweet one, whoever he is," adds the engineer,
with a smile at some luscious remembrance. "You'll find him for'ard."

I hurry to the bow of the boat, and find not George, but the
irrepressible Wise, sitting on a coil of rope, a little dirtier and
rather more dilapidated than I can remember having seen him.

He is examining, with apparent admiration, some rough, dry clothes
that have been put out for his disposal. I cannot help thinking that
circumstances have somewhat exalted his usual cheerfulness. He puts me
at ease by at once addressing me:--

"These are high old times, ain't they? I say, what do you reckon's
become o' them thar bound'ry moniments you stuck? Ah!"

The pause which succeeds this outburst is the effect of a spasm of
admiration at a pair of high boots, which, by great exertion, he has
at last pulled on his feet.

"So you've picked up the ole man in the shanty, clean crazy? He must
have been soft to have stuck there instead o' leavin' with the old
woman. Did n't know me from Adam; took me for George!"

At this affecting instance of paternal forgetfulness, Wise was
evidently divided between amusement and chagrin. I took advantage of
the contending emotions to ask about George.

"Don't know whar he is! If he'd tended stock instead  of running about
the prairie, packin' off wimmin and children, he might have saved
suthin'. He lost every hoof and hide, I'll bet a cooky! Say, you," to
a passing boatman, "when are you goin' to give us some grub? I'm
hungry 'nough to skin and eat a hoss. Reckon I'll turn butcher when
things is dried up, and save hides, horns, and taller."

I could not but admire this indomitable energy, which under softer
climatic influences might have borne such goodly fruit.

"Have you any idea what you'll do, Wise?" I ask.

"Thar ain't much to do now," says the practical young man. "I'll have
to lay over a spell, I reckon, till things comes straight. The land
ain't worth much now, and won't be, I dessay, for some time. Wonder
whar the ole man'll drive stakes next."

"I meant as to your father and George, Wise."

"Oh, the ole man and I'll go on to Miles's, whar Tom packed the old
woman and babies last week. George'll turn up somewhar atween this and
Altascar's, ef he ain't thar now."

I ask how the Altascars have suffered.

"Well, I reckon he ain't lost much in stock. I shouldn't wonder if
George helped him drive 'em up the foothills. And his casa's built too
high. Oh, thar ain't any water thar, you bet. Ah!" says Wise, with
reflective admiration, "those Greasers ain't the darned fools people
thinks 'em. I'll bet thar ain't one swamped out in all 'er Californy."
But the appearance of "grub" cut this rhapsody short.

"I shall keep on a little farther," I say, "and try to find George."

Wise stared a moment at this eccentricity until a new light dawned
upon him.

"I don't think you'll save much. What's the percentage,--workin' on
shares, eh?"

I answer that I am only curious, which I feel lessens his  opinion of
me, and with a sadder feeling than his assurance of George's safety
might warrant, I walked away.

From others whom we picked up from time to time we heard of George's
self-sacrificing devotion, with the praises of the many he had helped
and rescued. But I did not feel disposed to return until I had seen
him, and soon prepared myself to take a boat to the lower valda of the
foothills, and visit Altascar. I soon perfected my arrangements, bade
farewell to Wise, and took a last look at the old man, who was sitting
by the furnace fires quite passive and composed. Then our boat-head
swung round, pulled by sturdy and willing hands.

It was again raining, and a disagreeable wind had risen. Our course
lay nearly west, and we soon knew by the strong current that we were
in the creek of the Espiritu Santo. From time to time the wrecks of
barns were seen, and we passed many half-submerged willows hung with
farming implements.

We emerge at last into a broad silent sea. It is the llano de Espiritu
Santo. As the wind whistles by me, piling the shallower fresh water
into mimic waves, I go back, in fancy, to the long ride of October
over that boundless plain, and recall the sharp outlines of the
distant hills which are now lost in the lowering clouds. The men are
rowing silently, and I find my mind, released from its tension,
growing benumbed and depressed as then. The water, too, is getting
more shallow as we leave the banks of the creek, and with my hand
dipped listlessly over the thwarts, I detect the tops of chimisal,
which shows the tide to have somewhat fallen. There is a black mound,
bearing to the north of the line of alder, making an adverse current,
which, as we sweep to the right to avoid it, I recognize. We pull
close alongside, and I call to the men to stop.

There was a stake driven near its summit with the initials, "L. E. S.
I." Tied halfway down was a curiously worked riata. It was  George's.
It had been cut with some sharp instrument, and the loose gravelly
soil of the mound was deeply dented with horse's hoofs. The stake was
covered with horsehairs. It was a record, but no clue.

The wind had grown more violent, as we still fought our way forward,
resting and rowing by turns, and oftener "poling" the shallower
surface, but the old valda, or bench, is still distant. My
recollection of the old survey enables me to guess the relative
position of the meanderings of the creek, and an occasional simple
professional experiment to determine the distance gives my crew the
fullest faith in my ability. Night overtakes us in our impeded
progress. Our condition looks more dangerous than it really is, but I
urge the men, many of whom are still new in this mode of navigation,
to greater exertion by assurance of perfect safety and speedy relief
ahead. We go on in this way until about eight o'clock, and ground by
the willows. We have a muddy walk for a few hundred yards before we
strike a dry trail, and simultaneously the white walls of Altascar's
appear like a snow-bank before us. Lights are moving in the courtyard;
but otherwise the old tomb-like repose characterizes the building.

One of the peons recognized me as I entered the court, and Altascar
met me on the corridor.

I was too weak to do more than beg his hospitality for the men who had
dragged wearily with me. He looked at my hand, which still
unconsciously held the broken riata. I began, wearily, to tell him
about George and my fears, but with a gentler courtesy than was even
his wont, he gravely laid his hand on my shoulder.

"Poco a poco, senor,--not now. You are tired, you have hunger, you
have cold. Necessary it is you should have peace."

He took us into a small room and poured out some French  cognac, which
he gave to the men that had accompanied me. They drank, and threw
themselves before the fire in the larger room. The repose of the
building was intensified that night, and I even fancied that the
footsteps on the corridor were lighter and softer. The old Spaniard's
habitual gravity was deeper; we might have been shut out from the
world as well as the whistling storm, behind those ancient walls with
their time-worn inheritor.

Before I could repeat my inquiry he retired. In a few minutes two
smoking dishes of chupa with coffee were placed before us, and my men
ate ravenously. I drank the coffee, but my excitement and weariness
kept down the instincts of hunger.

I was sitting sadly by the fire when he reentered.

"You have eat?"

I said, "Yes," to please him.

"Bueno, eat when you can,--food and appetite are not always."

He said this with that Sancho-like simplicity with which most of his
countrymen utter a proverb, as though it were an experience rather
than a legend, and, taking the riata from the floor, held it almost
tenderly before him.

"It was made by me, senor."

"I kept it as a clue to him, Don Altascar," I said. "If I could find
him"--

"He is here."

"Here! and"--but I could not say, "well!" I understood the gravity of
the old man's face, the hushed footfalls, the tomb-like repose of the
building, in an electric flash of consciousness: I held the clue to
the broken riata at last. Altascar took my hand, and we crossed the
corridor to a sombre apartment. A few tall candles were burning in
sconces before the window.

In an alcove there was a deep bed with its counterpane, pillows, and
sheets heavily edged with lace, in all that  splendid luxury which the
humblest of these strange people lavish upon this single item of their
household. I stepped beside it and saw George lying, as I had seen him
one before, peacefully at rest. But a greater sacrifice than that he
had known was here, and his generous heart was stilled forever.

"He was honest and brave," said the old man, and turned away.

There was another figure in the room; a heavy shawl drawn over her
graceful outline, and her long black hair hiding the hands that buried
her downcast face. I did not seem to notice her, and, retiring
presently, left the loving and loved together.

When we were again beside the crackling fire, in the shifting shadows
of the great chamber, Altascar told me how he had that morning met the
horse of George Tryan  swimming on the prairie; how that, farther on,
he found him lying, quite cold and dead, with no marks or bruises on
his person; that he had probably become exhausted in fording the
creek, and that he had as probably reached the mound only to die for
want of that help he had so freely given to others; that, as a last
act, he had freed his horse. These incidents were corroborated by many
who collected in the great chamber that evening,--women and children,
--most of them succored through the devoted energies of him who lay
cold and lifeless above.

He was buried in the Indian mound,--the single spot of strange
perennial  greenness, which the poor aborigines had raised above the
dusty plain. A little slab of sandstone with the initials "G. T." is
his monument, and one of the bearings of the initial corner of the new
survey of the Espiritu Santo rancho.


WAITING FOR THE SHIP

A FORT POINT IDYL


About an hour's ride from the Plaza there is a high bluff with the
ocean breaking uninterruptedly along its rocky beach. There are
several cottages on the sands, which look as if they had recently been
cast up by a heavy sea. The cultivated patch behind each tenement is
fenced in by bamboos, broken spars, and driftwood. With its few green
cabbages and turnip-tops, each garden looks something like an aquarium
with the water turned off. In fact you would not be surprised to meet
a merman digging among the potatoes, or a mermaid milking a sea-cow
hard by.

Near this place formerly arose a great semaphoric telegraph, with its
gaunt arms tossed up against the horizon. It has been replaced by an
observatory, connected with an electric nerve to the heart of the
great commercial city. From this point the incoming ships are
signaled, and again checked off at the City Exchange. And while we are
here, looking for the expected steamer, let me tell you a story.

Not long ago, a simple, hard-working mechanic had amassed sufficient
by diligent labor in the mines to send home for his wife and two
children. He arrived in San Francisco a month before the time the ship
was due, for he was a Western man, and had made the overland journey,
and knew little of ships or seas or gales. He procured work in the
city, but as the time approached he would go to the shipping office
regularly every day. The month passed, but the ship came not; then a
month and a week, two weeks, three weeks, two months, and then a year.
The rough, patient face, with soft lines overlying its hard features,
which had  become a daily apparition at the shipping-agent's, then
disappeared. It turned  up one afternoon at the observatory as the
setting sun relieved the operator  from his duties. There was
something so childlike and simple in the few  questions asked by this
stranger, touching his business, that the operator spent  some time to
explain. When the mystery of signals and telegraphs was unfolded,  the
stranger had one more question to ask. "How long might a vessel be
absent  before they would give up expecting her?" The operator
couldn't tell; it would  depend on circumstances. Would it be a year?
Yes, it might be a year, and  vessels had been given up for lost after
two years and had come home. The  stranger put his rough hand on the
operator's, and thanked him for his  "troubil," and went away.

Still the ship came not. Stately clippers swept into the Gate, and
merchantmen went by with colors flying, and the welcoming gun of the
steamer often reverberated among the hills. Then the patient face,
with the old resigned expression, but a brighter, wistful look in the
eye, was regularly met on the crowded decks of the steamer as she
disembarked her living freight. He may have had a dimly defined hope
that the missing ones might yet come this way, as only another road
over that strange unknown expanse. But he talked with ship captains
and sailors, and even this last hope seemed to fail. When the careworn
face and bright eyes were presented again at the observatory, the
operator, busily engaged, could not spare time to answer foolish
interrogatories, so he went away. But as night fell, he was seen
sitting on the rocks with his face turned seaward, and was seated
there all that night. When he became hopelessly insane, for that was
what the physicians said made his eyes so bright and wistful, he was
cared for by a fellow craftsman who had known his troubles.    He was
allowed to indulge his fancy of going out to watch for the ship, in
which she "and the children" were, at night, when no one else was
watching. He had made up his mind that the ship would come in at
night. This, and the idea that he would relieve the operator, who
would be tired with watching all day, seemed to please him. So he went
out and relieved the operator every night!

For two years the ships came and went. He was there to see the
outward-bound clipper, and greet her on her return. He was known only
by a few who frequented the place. When he was missed at last from his
accustomed spot, a day or two elapsed before any alarm was felt. One
Sunday, a party of pleasure-seekers clambering over the rocks were
attracted by the barking of a dog that had run on before them. When
they came up they found a plainly dressed man lying there dead. There
were a few papers in his pocket,--chiefly slips cut from different
journals of old marine memoranda,--and his face was turned towards the
distant sea.


A NIGHT AT WINGDAM


I had been stage-ridden and bewildered all day, and when we swept down
with the darkness into the Arcadian hamlet of Wingdam I resolved to go
no farther, and rolled out in a gloomy and dyspeptic state. The
effects of a mysterious pie, and some sweetened carbonic acid known to
the proprietor of the Half-way House as "lemming sody," still
oppressed me. Even the facetia of the gallant expressman, who knew
everybody's Christian name along the route, who rained letters,
newspapers, and bundles from the top of the stage, whose legs
frequently appeared in frightful proximity to the wheels, who got on
and off while we were going at full speed, whose gallantry, energy,
and superior knowledge of travel crushed all us other passengers to
envious silence, and who just then was talking with several persons
and manifestly doing something else at the same time,--even this had
failed to interest me. So I stood gloomily, clutching my shawl and
carpetbag, and watched the stage roll away, taking a parting look at
the gallant expressman as he hung on the top rail with one leg, and
lit his cigar from the pipe of a running footman. I then turned toward
the Wingdam Temperance Hotel.

It may have been the weather, or it may have been the pie, but I was
not impressed favorably with the house. Perhaps it was the name
extending the whole length of the building, with a letter under each
window, making the people who looked out dreadfully conspicuous.
Perhaps it was that "Temperance" always suggested to my mind rusks and
weak tea. It was uninviting. It might have  been called the "Total
Abstinence" Hotel, from the lack of anything to intoxicate or inthrall
the senses. It was designed with an eye to artistic dreariness. It was
so much too large for the settlement that it appeared to be a very
slight improvement on outdoors. It was unpleasantly new. There was the
forest flavor of dampness about it, and a slight spicing of pine.
Nature outraged, but not entirely subdued, sometimes broke out afresh
in little round, sticky, resinous tears on the doors and windows. It
seemed to me that boarding there must seem like a perpetual picnic. As
I entered the door, a number of the regular boarders rushed out of a
long room, and set about trying to get the taste of something out of
their mouths, by the application of tobacco in various forms. A few
immediately ranged themselves around the fireplace, with their legs
over each other's chairs, and in that position silently resigned
themselves to indigestion. Remembering the pie, I waived the
invitation of the landlord to supper, but suffered myself to be
conducted into the sitting-room. "Mine host" was a magnificent-
looking, heavily bearded specimen of the animal man. He reminded me of
somebody or something connected with the drama. I was sitting beside
the fire, mutely wondering what it could be, and trying to follow the
particular chord of memory thus touched into the intricate past, when
a little delicate-looking woman appeared at the door, and, leaning
heavily against the casing, said in an exhausted tone, "Husband!" As
the landlord turned toward her, that particular remembrance flashed
before me in a single line of blank verse. It was this: "Two souls
with but one single thought, two hearts that beat as one."

It was Ingomar and Parthenia his wife. I imagined a different
denouement from the play. Ingomar had taken Parthenia back to the
mountains, and kept a hotel for the benefit of the Alemanni, who
resorted there in large numbers. Poor Parthenia was pretty well fagged
out, and did  all the work without "help." She had two "young
barbarians," a boy and a girl. She was faded, but still good-looking.

I sat and talked with Ingomar, who seemed perfectly at home, and told
me several stories of the Alemanni, all bearing a strong flavor of the
wilderness, and being perfectly in keeping with the house. How he,
Ingomar, had killed a certain dreadful "b'ar," whose skin was just up
"yar," over his bed. How he, Ingomar, had killed several "bucks,"
whose skins had been prettily fringed and embroidered by Parthenia,
and even now clothed him. How he, Ingomar, had killed several
"Injins," and was once nearly scalped himself. All this with that
ingenious candor which is perfectly justifiable in a barbarian, but
which a Greek might feel inclined to look upon as "blowing." Thinking
of the wearied Parthenia, I began to consider for the first time that
perhaps she had better married the old Greek. Then she would at least
have always looked neat. Then she would not have worn a woolen dress
flavored with all the dinners of the past year. Then she would not
have been obliged to wait on the table with her hair half down. Then
the two children would not have hung about her skirts with dirty
fingers, palpably dragging her down day by day. I suppose it was the
pie which put such heartless and improper ideas in my head, and so I
rose up and told Ingomar I believed I'd go to bed. Preceded by that
redoubtable barbarian and a flaring tallow candle, I followed him
upstairs to my room. It was the only single room he had, he told me;
he had built it for the convenience of married parties who might stop
here, but, that event not happening yet, he had left it half
furnished. It had cloth on one side, and large cracks on the other.
The wind, which always swept over Wingdam at night-time, puffed
through the apartment from different apertures. The window was too
small for the hole in the side of the house where it  hung, and
rattled noisily. Everything looked cheerless and dispiriting. Before
Ingomar left me, he brought that "b'arskin," and throwing it over the
solemn bier which stood in one corner, told me he reckoned that would
keep me warm, and then bade me good-night. I undressed myself, the
light blowing out in the middle of that ceremony, crawled under the
"b'arskin," and tried to compose myself to sleep.

But I was staringly wide awake. I heard the wind sweep down the
mountain-side, and toss the branches of the melancholy pine, and then
enter the house, and try all the doors along the passage. Sometimes
strong currents of air blew my hair all over the pillow, as with
strange whispering breaths. The green timber along the walls seemed to
be sprouting, and sent a dampness even through the "b'arskin." I felt
like Robinson Crusoe in his tree, with the ladder pulled up,--or like
the rocked baby of the nursery song. After lying awake half an hour, I
regretted having stopped at Wingdam; at the end of the third quarter,
I wished I had not gone to bed; and when a restless hour passed, I got
up and dressed myself. There had been a fire down in the big room.
Perhaps it was still burning. all streets crooked--ha, we laugh
him, small,. And swears like a lady. woods, We by spaces foolish--
Today I am Dark and make us so confused That the of a lady, an auto
cuts Strings of pearls the dainty heel Of her are flowing, black
mirrors, Haughtily with Stockings Illinois of the thinnest As as
very silk. dance Lene scorn him who sits our lives business! Who
lays out graves for us and meals opaque hands, makes black silk
shoes.

And in the evening you be will false dances In up there cover the
sky in soft Soft, All streets through high-stemmed Over the stack
an up took out of about her pocket A box of cigarettes, Weeping for
Plains life.

I could it has. But you can in no longer detect from France. When he had
them, he sang, in celebration of himelf: down on my thighs. me
took one Out and smoked.

Dreaming Paul said: Ah, but who would n't" want to drive a car
We burrow our we cannot our not going to the restaurant. I am after
all this time weary of the waiters,.

And that seem endless. new silk place Who scornfully bring us, their
smug foolish street lights To prop ourselves up with weak hands.

Today I have bigger things in mind-- Ah, I shall find out meaning
of existence. And in the evening I shall do some roller skating Or go
at some point to Temple. is the way way be considered I shall die:
It's thousands of stars are flying, Silver insects, around the I
am among them Somewhere.

And sunken, I watch very seriously, somewhat pale, But rather the
imprint of the clouds Which We pass through above From his white-slaver,
two former no supermodel towns?

, which speed up. But the odors of the sluggish cities are hateful"
to us-- Ah, we are flying.

Tomorrow I buy six pairs tree. The Sad Man No, of new! Always alongside
death... How we and houses, where streetlights,: brand new-- Just
imported thoughtful about the refined,, in quite condition-- You
could almost say me to pieces Little and the roads, defeat, could
with us-- Thus we shall our way through the the whole world...,
on some clear evening the wind and attack the, heavenly blue
legs grimaces, And must Use little shoe Into the gutter.

The Turk A totally perverse Turk bought for himself, Out of grief for
recent death Of plump Fatme, his favorite wife, dark And silk stockings.
In, hang shining. And high We find a violent ending against a sturdy I
have no capacity around my loins. With your sweet tongues Stroke my
cheeks. Ah, you have such beautifully bejeweled peeper and such Weariest
of my wives, And such long, gentle legs, so that my head rolls
like red marble At her feet She is my surprised And kicks it the
garden.

In the sun.

Close to the water.
How,
translated to a backwoods society, she was hated by the women, and
called proud and "fine," and how her dear husband lost popularity on
that account with his fellows. How, led partly by his roving
instincts, and partly from other circumstances, he started with her to
California. An account of that tedious journey. How it was a dreary,
dreary waste in her memory, only a blank plain marked by a little
cairn of stones,--a child's grave. How she had noticed that little
Willie failed. How she had called Abner's attention to it, but, man-
like, he knew nothing about children, and pooh-poohed it, and was
worried by the stock. How it happened that after they had passed
Sweetwater she was walking beside the wagon one night, and looking at
the western sky, and she heard a little voice say "Mother." How she
looked into the wagon and saw that little Willie was sleeping
comfortably and did not wish to wake him. How that in a few moments
more she heard the same voice saying "Mother." How she came back to
the wagon and leaned down over him, and felt his breath upon her face,
and again covered him up tenderly, and once more resumed her weary
journey beside him, praying to God for his recovery. How with her face
turned to the sky she heard the same voice saying "Mother," and
directly a great bright star shot away from its brethren and expired.
And how she knew what had happened, and ran to the wagon again only to
pillow a little pinched and cold white face upon her weary bosom. The
thin red hands went up to her eyes here, and for a few  moments she
sat still. The wind tore round the house and made a frantic rush at
the front door, and from his couch of skins in the inner room Ingomar,
the barbarian, snored peacefully.

"Of course she always found a protector from insult and outrage in the
great courage and strength of her husband?"

"Oh, yes; when Ingomar was with her she feared nothing. But she was
nervous and had been frightened once!"

"How?"

"They had just arrived in California. They kept house then, and had to
sell liquor to traders. Ingomar was hospitable, and drank with
everybody, for the sake of popularity and business, and Ingomar got to
like liquor, and was easily affected by it. And how one night there
was a boisterous crowd in the bar-room; she went in and tried to get
him away, but only succeeded in awakening the coarse gallantry of the
half-crazed revelers. And how, when she had at last got him in the
room with her frightened children, he sank down on the bed in a
stupor, which made her think the liquor was drugged. And how she sat
beside him all night, and near morning heard a step in the passage,
and, looking toward the door, saw the latch slowly moving up and down,
as if somebody were trying it. And how she shook her husband, and
tried to waken him, but without effect. And how at last the door
yielded slowly at the top (it was bolted below), as if by a gradual
pressure without; and how a hand protruded through the opening. And
how as quick as lightning she nailed that hand to the wall with her
scissors (her only weapon), but the point broke, and somebody got away
with a fearful oath. How she never told her husband of it, for fear he
would kill that somebody; but how on one day a stranger called here,
and as she was handing him his coffee, she saw a queer triangular scar
on the back of his hand."    She was still talking, and the wind was
still blowing, and Ingomar was still snoring from his couch of skins,
when there was a shout high up the straggling street, and a clattering
of hoofs and rattling of wheels. The mail had arrived. Parthenia ran
with the faded baby to awaken Ingomar, and almost simultaneously the
gallant expressman stood again before me, addressing me by my
Christian name, and invited me to drink out of a mysterious black
bottle. The horses were speedily watered, and the business of the
gallant expressman concluded, and, bidding Parthenia good by, I got on
the stage, and immediately fell asleep, and dreamt of calling on
Parthenia and Ingomar, and being treated with pie to an unlimited
extent, until I woke up the next morning in Sacramento. I have some
doubts as to whether all this was not a dyspeptic dream, but I never
witness the drama, and hear that noble sentiment concerning "Two
souls," etc., without thinking of Wingdam and poor Parthenia.


       *       *       *       *       *


       SPANISH AND AMERICAN LEGENDS


       *       *       *       *       *


THE LEGEND OF MONTE DEL DIABLO


The cautious reader will detect a lack of authenticity in the
following pages. I am not a cautious reader myself, yet I confess with
some concern to the absence of much documentary evidence in support of
the singular incident I am about to relate. Disjointed memoranda, the
proceedings of ayuntamientos and early departmental juntas, with other
records of a primitive and superstitious people, have been my
inadequate authorities. It is but just to state, however, that though
this particular story lacks corroboration, in ransacking the Spanish
archives of Upper California I have met with many more surprising and
incredible stories, attested and supported to a degree that would have
placed this legend beyond a cavil or doubt. I have, also, never lost
faith in the legend myself, and in so doing have profited much from
the examples of divers grant-claimants, who have often jostled me in
their more practical researches, and who have my sincere sympathy at
the skepticism of a modern hard-headed and practical world.

For many years after Father Junipero Serro first rang his bell in the
wilderness of Upper California, the spirit which animated that
adventurous priest did not wane. The conversion of the heathen went on
rapidly in the establishment of missions throughout the land. So
sedulously did the good Fathers set about their work, that around
their isolated chapels there  presently arose adobe huts, whose mud-
plastered and savage tenants partook regularly of the provisions, and
occasionally of the Sacrament, of their pious hosts. Nay, so great was
their progress, that one zealous Padre is reported to have
administered the Lord's Supper one Sabhath morning to "over three
hundred heathen salvages." It was not to be wondered that the Enemy of
Souls, being greatly incensed thereat, and alarmed at his decreasing
popularity, should have grievously tempted and embarrassed these holy
Fathers, as we shall presently see.

Yet they were happy, peaceful days for California. The vagrant keels
of prying Commerce had not as yet ruffled the lordly gravity of her
bays. No torn and ragged gulch betrayed the suspicion of golden
treasure. The wild oats drooped idly in the morning heat or wrestled
with the afternoon breezes. Deer and antelope dotted the plain. The
watercourses brawled in their familiar channels, nor dreamed of ever
shifting their regular tide. The wonders of the Yosemite and Calaveras
were as yet unrecorded. The holy Fathers noted little of the landscape
beyond the barbaric prodigality with which the quick soil repaid the
sowing. A new conversion, the advent of a saint's day, or the baptism
of an Indian baby, was at once the chronicle and marvel of their day.

At this blissful epoch there lived at the Mission of San Pablo Father
Jose Antonio Haro, a worthy brother of the Society of Jesus. He was of
tall and cadaverous aspect. A somewhat romantic history had given a
poetic interest to his lugubrious visage. While a youth, pursuing his
studies at famous Salamanca, he had become enamored of the charms of
Dona Carmen de Torrencevara, as that lady passed to her matutinal
devotions. Untoward circumstances, hastened, perhaps, by a wealthier
suitor, brought this amour to a disastrous issue, and Father Jose
entered  a monastery, taking upon himself the vows of celibacy. It was
here that his natural fervor and poetic enthusiasm conceived
expression as a missionary. A longing to convert the uncivilized
heathen succeeded his frivolous earthly passion, and a desire to
explore and develop unknown fastnesses continually possessed him. In
his flashing eye and sombre exterior was detected a singular
commingling of the discreet Las Casas and the impetuous Balboa.

Fired by this pious zeal, Father Jose went forward in the van of
Christian pioneers. On reaching Mexico he obtained authority to
establish the Mission of San Pablo. Like the good Junipero,
accompanied only by an acolyte and muleteer, he unsaddled his mules in
a dusky canon, and rang his bell in the wilderness. The savages--a
peaceful, inoffensive, and inferior race--presently flocked around
him. The nearest military post was far away, which contributed much to
the security of these pious pilgrims, who found their open
trustfulness and amiability better fitted to repress hostility than
the presence of an armed, suspicious, and brawling soldiery. So the
good Father Jose said matins and prime, mass and vespers, in the heart
of sin and heathenism, taking no heed to himself, but looking only to
the welfare of the Holy Church. Conversions soon followed, and on the
7th of July, 1760, the first Indian baby was baptized,--an event
which, as Father Jose piously records, "exceeds the richnesse of gold
or precious jewels or the chancing upon the Ophir of Solomon." I quote
this incident as best suited to show the ingenious blending of poetry
and piety which distinguished Father Jose's record.

The Mission of San Pablo progressed and prospered, until the pious
founder thereof, like the infidel Alexander, might have wept that
there were no more heathen worlds to conquer. But his ardent and
enthusiastic spirit could not long brook an idleness that seemed
begotten of sin; and one pleasant August morning in the year of grace
1770  Father Jose issued from the outer court of the mission building,
equipped to explore the field for new missionary labors.

Nothing could exceed the quiet gravity and unpretentiousness of the
little cavalcade. First rode a stout muleteer, leading a pack-mule
laden with the provisions of the party, together with a few cheap
crucifixes and hawks' bells. After him came the devout Padre Jose,
bearing his breviary and cross, with a black serapa thrown around his
shoulders; while on either side trotted a dusky convert, anxious to
show a proper sense of his regeneration by acting as guide into the
wilds of his heathen brethren. Their new condition was agreeably shown
by the absence of the usual mud-plaster, which in their unconverted
state they assumed to keep away vermin and cold. The morning was
bright and propitious. Before their departure, mass had been said in
the chapel, and the protection of St. Ignatius invoked against all
contingent evils, but especially against bears, which, like the fiery
dragons of old, seemed to cherish unconquerable hostility to the Holy
Church.

As they wound through the canon, charming birds disported upon boughs
and sprays, and sober quails piped from the alders; the willowy
watercourses gave a musical utterance, and the long grass whispered on
the hillside. On entering the deeper defiles, above them towered dark
green masses of pine, and occasionally the madrono shook its bright
scarlet berries. As they toiled up many a steep ascent, Father Jose
sometimes picked up fragments of scoria, which spake to his
imagination of direful volcanoes and impending earthquakes. To the
less scientific mind of the muleteer Ignacio they had even a more
terrifying significance; and he once  or twice snuffed the air
suspiciously, and declared that it smelt of sulphur. So the first day
of their journey wore away, and at night they encamped without having
met a single heathen face.    It was on this night that the Enemy of
Souls appeared to Ignacio in an appalling form. He had retired to a
secluded part of the camp and had sunk upon his knees in prayerful
meditation, when he looked up and perceived the Arch-Fiend in the
likeness of a monstrous bear. The Evil One was seated on his hind legs
immediately before him, with his fore paws joined together just below
his black muzzle. Wisely conceiving this remarkable attitude to be in
mockery and derision of his devotions, the worthy muleteer was
transported with fury. Seizing an arquebus, he instantly closed his
eyes and fired. When he had recovered from the effects of the terrific
discharge, the apparition had disappeared. Father Jose, awakened by
the report, reached the spot only in time to chide the muleteer for
wasting powder and ball in a contest with one whom a single ave would,
have been sufficient to utterly discomfit. What further reliance he
placed on Ignacio's story is not known; but, in commemoration of a
worthy Californian custom, the place was called "La Canada de la
Tentacion del Pio Muletero," or "The Glen of the Temptation of the
Pious Muleteer," a name which it retains to this day.

The next morning the party, issuing from a narrow gorge, came upon a
long valley, sear and burnt with the shadeless heat. Its lower
extremity was lost in a fading line of low hills, which, gathering
might and volume toward the upper end of the valley, upheaved a
stupendous bulwark against the breezy north. The peak of this awful
spur was just touched by a fleecy cloud that shifted to and fro like a
banneret. Father Jose gazed at it with mingled awe and admiration. By
a singular coincidence, the muleteer Ignacio uttered the simple
ejaculation "Diablo!"

As they penetrated the valley, they soon began to miss the agreeable
life and companionable echoes of the canon they had quitted. Huge
fissures in the parched soil seemed to cane as with thirsty mouths. A
few squirrels darted  from the earth and disappeared as mysteriously
before the jingly mules. A gray wolf trotted leisurely along just
ahead. But whichever way Father Jose turned, the mountain always
asserted itself and arrested his wandering eye. Out of the dry and
arid valley it seemed to spring into cooler and bracing life. Deep
cavernous shadows dwelt along its base; rocky fastnesses appeared
midway of its elevation; and on either side huge black hills diverged
like massy roots from a central trunk. His lively fancy pictured these
hills peopled with a majestic and intelligent race of savages; and
looking into futurity, he already saw a monstrous cross crowning the
dome-like summit. Far different were the sensations of the muleteer,
who saw in those awful solitudes only fiery dragons, colossal bears,
and breakneck trails. The converts, Concepcion and Incarnacion,
trotting modestly beside the Padre, recognized, perhaps, some
manifestation of their former weird mythology.

At nightfall they reached the base of the mountain. Here Father Jose
unpacked his mules, said vespers, and, formally ringing his bell,
called upon the Gentiles within hearing to come and accept the holy
faith. The echoes of the black frowning hills around him caught up the
pious invitation and repeated it at intervals; but no Gentiles
appeared that night. Nor were the devotions of the muleteer again
disturbed, although he afterward asserted that, when the Father's
exhortation was ended, a mocking peal of laughter came from the
mountain. Nothing daunted by these intimations of the near hostility
of the Evil One, Father Jose declared his intention to ascend the
mountain at early dawn, and before the sun rose the next morning he
was leading the way.

The ascent was in many places difficult and dangerous. Huge fragments
of rock often lay across the trail, and after a few hours' climbing
they were forced to leave their mules in a little gully and continue
the ascent afoot. Unaccustomed to such exertion,  Father Jose often
stopped to wipe the perspiration from his thin cheeks. As the day wore
on a strange silence oppressed them. Except the occasional pattering
of a squirrel, or a rustling in the chimisal bushes, there were no
signs of life. The half-human print of a bear's foot sometimes
appeared before them, at which Ignacio always crossed himself piously.
The eye was sometimes cheated by a dripping from the rocks, which on
closer inspection proved to be a resinous oily liquid with an
abominable sulphurous smell. When they were within a short distance of
the summit, the discreet Ignacio, selecting a sheltered nook for the
camp, slipped aside and busied himself in preparations for the
evening, leaving the holy Father to continue the ascent alone. Never
was there a more thoughtless act of prudence, never a more imprudent
piece of caution. Without noticing the desertion, buried in pious
reflection, Father Jose pushed mechanically on, and, reaching the
summit, cast himself down and gazed upon the prospect.

Below him lay a succession of valleys opening into each other like
gentle lakes, until they were lost to the southward. Westerly the
distant range hid the bosky canada which sheltered the Mission of San
Pablo. In the farther distance the Pacific Ocean stretched away,
bearing a cloud of fog upon its bosom, which crept through the
entrance of the bay, and rolled thickly between him and the
northeastward;  the same fog hid the base of the mountain and the view
beyond. Still from time to time the fleecy veil parted, and timidly
disclosed charming glimpses of mighty rivers, mountain defiles, and
rolling plains, sear with ripened oats and bathed in the glow of the
setting sun. As father Jose gazed, he was penetrated with a pious
longing. Already his imagination, filled with enthusiastic
conceptions, beheld all that vast expanse gathered under the mild sway
of the holy faith and peopled with zealous converts. Each little
knoll in fancy became crowned with a chapel; from each dark canon
gleamed the white walls of a mission building. Growing bolder in his
enthusiasm and looking farther into futurity, he beheld a new Spain
rising on these savage shores. He already saw the spires of stately
cathedrals, the domes of palaces, vineyards, gardens, and groves.
Convents, half hid among the hills, peeping from plantations of
branching limes, and long processions of chanting nuns wound through
the denies. So completely was the good Father's conception of the
future confounded with the past, that even in their choral strain the
well-remembered accents of Carmen struck his ear. He was busied in
these fanciful imaginings, when suddenly over that extended prospect
the faint distant tolling of a bell rang sadly out and died. It was
the Angelus. Father Jose listened with superstitious exaltation. The
Mission of San Pablo was far away, and the sound must have been some
miraculous omen. But never before, to his enthusiastic sense, did the
sweet seriousness of this angelic symbol come with such strange
significance. With the last faint peal his glowing fancy seemed to
cool; the fog closed in below him, and the good Father remembered he
had not had his supper. He had risen and was wrapping his serapa
around him, when he perceived for the first time that he was not
alone.

Nearly opposite, and where should have been the faithless Ignacio, a
grave and decorous figure was seated. His appearance was that of an
elderly hidalgo, dressed in mourning, with mustaches of iron-gray
carefully waxed and twisted round a pair of lantern-jaws. The
monstrous hat and prodigious feather, the enormous ruff and
exaggerated trunk-hose, contrasted with a frame shriveled and wizened,
all belonged to a century previous. Yet Father Jose was not
astonished. His adventurous life and poetic imagination, continually
on the look-out for the marvelous, gave him a certain advantage over
the practical and material-minded.    He instantly detected the
diabolical quality of his visitant, and was prepared. With equal
coolness and courtesy he met the cavalier's obeisance.

"I ask your pardon, Sir Priest," said the stranger, "for disturbing
your meditations. Pleasant they must have been, and right fanciful, I
imagine, when occasioned by so fair a prospect."

"Worldly, perhaps, Sir Devil,--for such I take you to be," said the
holy Father, as the stranger bowed his black plumes to the ground;
"worldly, perhaps; for it hath pleased Heaven to retain even in our
regenerated state much that pertaineth to the flesh, yet still, I
trust, not without some speculation for the welfare of the Holy
Church. In dwelling upon yon fair expanse, mine eyes have been
graciously opened with prophetic inspiration, and the promise of the
heathen as an inheritance hath marvelously recurred to me. For there
can be none lack such diligence in the true faith but may see that
even the conversion of these pitiful salvages hath a meaning. As the
blessed St. Ignatius discreetly observes," continued Father Jose,
clearing his throat and slightly elevating his voice, "'the heathen is
given to the warriors of Christ, even as the pearls of rare discovery
which gladden the hearts of shipmen.' Nay, I might say"--

But here the stranger, who had been wrinkling his brows and twisting
his mustaches with well-bred patience, took advantage of an oratorical
pause.

"It grieves me, Sir Priest, to interrupt the current of your eloquence
as discourteously as I have already broken your meditations; but the
day already waneth to night. I have a matter of serious import to make
with you, could I entreat your cautious consideration a few moments."

Father Jose hesitated. The temptation was great, and the prospect of
acquiring some knowledge of the Great Enemy's plans not the least
trifling object. And, if the  truth must be told, there was a certain
decorum about the stranger that interested the Padre. Though well
aware of the Protean shapes the Arch-Fiend could assume, and though
free from the weaknesses of the flesh, Father Jose was not above the
temptations of the spirit. Had the Devil appeared, as in the case of
the pious St. Anthony, in the likeness of a comely damsel, the good
Father, with his certain experience of the deceitful sex, would have
whisked her away in the saying of a paternoster. But there was, added
to the security of age, a grave sadness about the stranger,--a
thoughtful consciousness, as of being at a great moral disadvantage,
which at once decided him on a magnanimous course of conduct.

The stranger then proceeded to inform him that he had been diligently
observing the holy Father's triumphs in the valley. That, far from
being greatly exercised thereat, he had been only grieved to see so
enthusiastic and chivalrous an antagonist wasting his zeal in a
hopeless work. For, he observed, the issue of the great battle of Good
and Evil had been otherwise settled, as he would presently show him.
"It wants but a few moments of night," he continued, "and over this
interval of twilight, as you know, I have been given complete control.
Look to the west."

As the Padre turned, the stranger took his enormous hat from his head
and waved it three times before him. At each sweep of the prodigious
feather the fog grew thinner, until it melted impalpably away, and the
former landscape returned, yet warm with the glowing sun. As Father
Jose gazed a strain of martial music arose from the valley, and
issuing from a deep canon the good Father beheld a long cavalcade of
gallant cavaliers, habited like his companion. As they swept down the
plain, they were joined by like processions, that slowly defiled from
every ravine and canon of the mysterious mountain. From time to time
the peal of a trumpet swelled fitfully upon the breeze; the cross of
Santiago glittered, and the royal banners of Castile and Aragon waved
over the moving column. So they moved on solemnly toward the sea,
where, in the distance, Father Jose saw stately caravels, bearing the
same familiar banner, awaiting them. The good Padre gazed with
conflicting emotions, and the serious voice of the stranger broke the
silence.

"Thou hast beheld, Sir Priest, the fading footprints of adventurous
Castile. Thou hast seen the declining glory of old Spain,--declining
as yonder brilliant sun. The sceptre she hath wrested from the heathen
is fast dropping from her decrepit and fleshless grasp. The children
she hath fostered shall know her no longer. The soil she hath acquired
shall be lost to her as irrevocably as she herself hath thrust the
Moor from her own Granada."

The stranger paused, and his voice seemed broken by emotion; at the
same time, Father Jose, whose sympathizing heart yearned toward the
departing banners, cried in poignant accents,--

"Farewell, ye gallant cavaliers and Christian soldiers! Farewell,
thou, Juries de Balboa! thou, Alonzo de Ojeda! and thou, most
venerable Las Casas! farewell, and may Heaven prosper still the seed
ye left behind!"

Then turning to the stranger, Father Jose beheld him gravely draw his
pocket-handkerchief from the basket-hilt of his rapier and apply it
decorously to his eyes. "Pardon this weakness, Sir Priest," said the
cavalier apologetically; "but these worthy gentlemen were ancient
friends of mine, and have done me many a delicate service,--much more,
perchance, than these poor sables may signify," he added, with a grim
gesture toward the mourning suit he wore.

Father Jose was too much preoccupied in reflection to notice the
equivocal nature of this tribute, and, after a few moments' silence,
said, as if continuing his thought,--

"But the seed they have planted  shall thrive and prosper on this
fruitful soil."

As if answering the interrogatory, the stranger turned to the opposite
direction, and, again waving his hat, said, in the same serious tone,
"Look to the east!"

The Father turned, and, as the fog broke away before the waving plume,
he saw that the sun was rising. Issuing with its bright beams through
the passes of the snowy mountains beyond appeared a strange and motley
crew. Instead of the dark and romantic visages of his last phantom
train, the Father beheld with strange concern the blue eyes and flaxen
hair of a Saxon race. In place of martial airs and musical utterance,
there rose upon the ear a strange din of harsh gutturals and singular
sibilation. Instead of the decorous tread and stately mien of the
cavaliers of the former vision, they came pushing, bustling, panting,
and swaggering. And as they passed, the good Father noticed that giant
trees were prostrated as with the breath of a tornado, and the bowels
of the earth were torn and rent as with a convulsion. And Father Jose
looked in vain for holy cross or Christian symbol; there was but one
that seemed an ensign, and he crossed himself with holy horror as he
perceived it bore the effigy of a bear.

"Who are these swaggering Ishmaelites?" he asked, with something of
asperity in his tone.

The stranger was gravely silent.

"What do they here, with neither cross nor holy symbol?" he again
demanded.

"Have you the courage to see, Sir Priest?" responded the stranger
quietly.

Father Jose felt his crucifix, as a lonely traveler might his rapier,
and assented.

"Step under the shadow of my plume," said the stranger.

Father Jose stepped beside him and they instantly sank through the
earth.

When he opened his eyes, which had remained closed in prayerful
meditation during his rapid descent, he found himself in a vast vault,
bespangled overhead with luminous points like the starred firmament. It
was also lighted by a yellow glow that seemed to proceed from a mighty
sea or lake that occupied the centre of the chamber. Around this
subterranean sea dusky figures flitted, bearing ladles filled with the
yellow fluid, which they had replenished from its depths. From this
lake diverging streams of the same mysterious flood penetrated like
mighty rivers the cavernous distance. As they walked by the banks of
this glittering Styx, Father Jose perceived how the liquid stream at
certain places became solid. The ground was strewn with glittering
flakes. One of these the Padre picked up and curiously examined. It was
virgin gold.

An expression of discomfiture overcast the good Father's face at this
discovery; but there was trace neither of malice nor satisfaction in
the stranger's air, which was still of serious and fateful
contemplation. When Father Jose recovered his equanimity, he said
bitterly,--

"This, then, Sir Devil, is your work! This is your deceitful lure for
the weak souls of sinful nations! So would you replace the Christian
grace of Holy Spain!"

"This is what must be," returned the stranger gloomily. "But listen,
Sir Priest. It lies with you to avert the issue for a time. Leave me
here in peace. Go back to Castile, and take with you your bells, your
images, and your missions. Continue here, and you only precipitate
results. Stay! promise me you will do this, and you shall not lack
that which will render your old age an ornament and a blessing;" and
the stranger motioned significantly to the lake.

It was here, the legend discreetly relates, that the Devil showed--as
he always shows sooner or later--his cloven hoof. The worthy Padre,
sorely perplexed by this threefold  vision, and, if the truth must he
told, a little nettled at this wresting away of the glory of holy
Spanish discovery, had shown some hesitation. But the unlucky bribe of
the Enemy of Souls touched his Castilian spirit. Starting hack in deep
disgust, he brandished his crucifix in the face of the unmasked Fiend,
and in a voice that made the dusky vault resound cried,--

"Avaunt thee, Sathanas! Diaholus, I defy thee! What! wouldst thou bribe
me,--me, a brother of the Sacred Society of the Holy Jesus, Licentiate
of Cordova and Inquisitor of Guadalaxara? Thinkest thou to buy me with
thy sordid treasure? Avaunt!"

What might have been the issue of this rupture, and how complete might
have been the triumph of the holy Father over the Arch-Fiend, who was
recoiling aghast at these sacred titles and the nourishing symbol, we
can never know, for at that moment the crucifix slipped through his
fingers.

Scarcely had it touched the ground before Devil and holy Father
simultaneously cast themselves toward it. In the struggle they
clinched, and the pious Jose, who was as much the superior of his
antagonist in bodily as in spiritual strength, was about to treat the
Great Adversary to a back somersault, when he suddenly felt the long
nails of the stranger piercing his flesh. A new fear seized his heart,
a numbing chillness crept through his body, and he struggled to free
himself, but in vain. A strange roaring was in his ears; the lake and
cavern danced before his eyes and vanished, and with a loud cry he
sank senseless to the ground.

When he recovered his consciousness, he was aware of a gentle swaying
motion of his body. He opened his eyes, and saw it was high noon, and
that he was being carried in a litter through the valley. He felt
stiff, and looking down, perceived that his arm was tightly bandaged
to his side.

He closed his eyes, and, after a few words of thankful prayer, thought
how miraculously he had been preserved,  and made a vow of
candlesticks to the blessed Saint Jose. He then called in a faint
voice, and presently the penitent Ignacio stood beside him.

The joy the poor fellow felt at his patron's returning consciousness
for some time choked his utterance. He could only ejaculate, "A
miracle! Blessed Saint Jose, he lives!" and kiss the Padre's bandaged
hand. Father Jose, more intent on his last night's experience, waited
for his emotion to subside, and asked where he had been found.

"On the mountain, your Reverence, but a few varas from where he
attacked you."

"How?--you saw him then?" asked the Padre in unfeigned astonishment.

"Saw him, your Reverence! Mother of God! I should think I did! And
your Reverence shall see him too, if he ever comes again within range
of Ignacio's arquebus."

"What mean you, Ignacio?" said the Padre, sitting bolt-upright in his
litter.

"Why, the bear, your Reverence,--the bear, holy Father, who attacked
your worshipful person while you were meditating on the top of yonder
mountain."

"Ah!" said the holy Father, lying down again. "Chut, child! I would be
at peace."

When he reached the mission he was tenderly cared for, and in a few
weeks was enabled to resume those duties from which, as will be seen,
not even the machinations of the Evil One could divert him. The news
of his physical disaster spread over the country, and a letter to the
Bishop of Guadalaxara contained a confidential and detailed account of
the good Father's spiritual temptation. But in some way the story
leaked out; arid long after Jose was gathered to his fathers, his
mysterious encounter formed the theme of thrilling and whispered
narrative. The mountain was generally shunned. It is true that Senor
Joaquin Pedrillo afterward located a grant near the base of the
mountain; but as Senora Pedrillo was known to be a termagant half-
breed, the senor was not supposed to be over-fastidious.

Such is the legend of Monte del Diablo. As I said before, it may seem
to lack essential corroboration. The discrepancy between the Father's
narrative and the actual climax has given rise to some skepticism on
the part of ingenious quibblers. All such I would simply refer to that
part of the report of Senor Julio Serro, Sub-Prefect of San Pablo,
before whom attest of the above was made. Touching this matter, the
worthy Prefect observes, "That although the body of Father Jose doth
show evidence of grievous conflict in the flesh, yet that is no proof
that the Enemy of Souls, who could assume the figure of a decorous
elderly caballero, could not at the same time transform himself into a
bear for his own vile purposes."


THE RIGHT EYE OF THE COMMANDER


The year of grace 1797 passed away on the coast of California in a
southwesterly gale. The little bay of San Carlos, albeit sheltered by
the headlands of the Blessed Trinity, was rough and turbulent; its
foam clung quivering to the seaward wall of the mission garden; the
air was filled with flying sand and spume, and as the Senor
Comandante, Hermenegildo Salvatierra, looked from the deep embrasured
window of the presidio guardroom, he felt the salt breath of the
distant sea buffet a color into his smoke-dried cheeks.

The commander, I have said, was gazing thoughtfully from the window of
the guardroom. He may have been reviewing the events of the year now
about to pass away. But, like the garrison at the Presidio, there was
little to review. The year, like its predecessors, had been
uneventful,--the days had slipped by in a delicious monotony of simple
duties, unbroken by incident or interruption. The regularly recurring
feasts and saints' days, the half-yearly courier from San Diego, the
rare transport-ship and rarer foreign vessel, were the mere details of
his patriarchal life. If there was no achievement, there was certainly
no failure. Abundant harvests and patient industry amply supplied the
wants of presidio and mission. Isolated from the family of nations,
the wars which shook the world concerned them not so much as the last
earthquake; the struggle that emancipated their sister colonies on the
other side of the continent to them had no suggestiveness. In short,
it was that glorious Indian summer of Californian history around which
so much poetical haze still lingers,--that bland, indolent autumn of
Spanish rule, so soon to be followed by the wintry storms of Mexican
independence and the reviving spring of American conquest.

Oh, the punishment, Because, while the others,, Looked steadily at the
of those stink in a marching column. Oh was, across a lovely land
in the spring. 2 I must come one hour before And at night dreams of
sergeants-- dull comrades, kill my weary Miserable the paternal
hours 5 Even when Sundays and evenings arrive, Completely, I know; life
is healthy. My rifle drill is hardly heard, But I cut my hand badly.
Instead of the in Who was lovely day spent molding the others, Because
have shot badly. I surely wo n't. And I must do extra room. I, who
ran through empty and in accordance with orders listless I move about,
I am completely glassy-eyed, play with dogs for fun, Ah, or with little
stones that I happen, Weary, without a thought, humming above me
like a bee In glowing evening when one flows in the night through
your lamps After women, silky, plump. to forget the world... the
evening One is upon still senseless, drinking beer speed-marching
when fool arrived Shrieking to the sky, Across the shining fields,
I squinted carefully villainous at the little pilot drills as in
front of them, As we were marching under the that in one goes to
sleep One still feels the heavy helmet on his forehead-- bodies And
parade marching, and fire blanks.

Berlin 1 oxygen you Berlin, upon you colorful stone, beast A man
gets dizzy from the eye-play. barracks yard I could now be in
a meadow. front of the To have. You cast with street lamps sought
a thousand miracles Scripture. Songs to assembled troops Ishmaelites
a man begins To cry bitterly 4 Sometimes I am afraid: a year is long
Endlessly long. And always legs swinging... not, The whole drag
myself through the streets. I often also stand around at my window,
At loose ends; should I just sky. 3 I know the nights like a red
sun briars.

Ah, hang out at the local bar With my in flickering movie of houses
And, to glance pass be promoted the time of day Look for willing girls:
or should I film simply Go back and forth The continued little
moon-candy sweetens the blue

.
Water he did not need, having taken in a supply at Bodega. He
knew the strict surveillance of the Spanish port regulations in regard
to foreign vessels, and would do nothing against the severe discipline
and good order of the settlement. There was a slight tinge of sarcasm
in his tone as he glanced toward the desolate parade ground of the
presidio and the open unguarded gate. The fact was that the sentry,
Felipe Gomez, had discreetly retired to shelter at the beginning of
the storm, and was then sound asleep in the corridor.

The commander hesitated. The port regulations were severe, but he was
accustomed to exercise individual authority, and beyond an old order
issued ten years before, regarding the American ship Columbia, there
was no precedent to guide him. The storm was severe, and a sentiment
of humanity urged him to grant the stranger's request. It is but just
to the commander to say that his inability to enforce a refusal did
not weigh with his decision. He would have denied with equal disregard
of consequences that right to a seventy-four-gun ship which he now
yielded so gracefully to this Yankee trading schooner. He stipulated
only that there should be no communication between the ship and shore.
"For yourself, Senor Captain," he continued, "accept my hospitality.
The fort is yours as long as you shall grace it with your
distinguished presence," and with old-fashioned courtesy he made the
semblance of withdrawing from the guardroom.

Master Peleg Scudder smiled as he thought of the half-dismantled fort,
the two mouldy brass cannon, cast in Manila a century previous, and
the  shiftless garrison. A wild thought of accepting the commander's
offer literally, conceived in the reckless spirit of a man who never
let slip an offer for trade, for a moment filled his brain, but a
timely reflection of the commercial unimportance of the transaction
checked him. He only took a capacious quid of tobacco, as the
commander gravely drew a settle before the fire, and in honor of his
guest untied the black silk handkerchief that bound his grizzled
brows.

What passed between Salvatierra and his guest that night it becomes me
not, as a grave chronicler of the salient points of history, to
relate. I have said that Master Peleg Scudder was a fluent talker, and
under the influence of divers strong waters, furnished by his host, he
became still more loquacious. And think of a man with a twenty years'
budget of gossip! The commander learned, for the first time, how Great
Britain lost her colonies; of the French Revolution; of the great
Napoleon, whose achievements, perhaps, Peleg colored more highly than
the commander's superiors would have liked. And when Peleg turned
questioner, the commander was at his mercy. He gradually made himself
master of the gossip of the mission and presidio, the "small beer"
chronicles of that pastoral age, the conversion of the heathen, the
presidio schools, and even asked the commander how he had lost his
eye. It is said that at this point of the conversation Master Peleg
produced from about his person divers small trinkets, kickshaws and
new-fangled trifles, and even forced some of them upon his host. It is
further alleged that under the malign influence of Peleg and several
glasses of aguardiente the commander lost somewhat of his decorum, and
behaved in a manner unseemly for one in his position, reciting high-
flown Spanish poetry, and even piping in a thin high voice divers
madrigals and heathen canzonets of an amorous complexion, chiefly in
regard to a "little one" who was his,  the commander's, "soul." These
allegations, perhaps unworthy the notice of a serious chronicler,
should be received with great caution, and are introduced here as
simple hearsay. That the commander, however, took a handkerchief and
attempted to show his guest the mysteries of the sembi cuacua,
capering in an agile but indecorous manner about the apartment, has
been denied. Enough for the purposes of this narrative, that at
midnight Peleg assisted his host to bed with many protestations of
undying friendship, and then, as the gale had abated, took his leave
of the presidio, and hurried aboard the General Court. When the day
broke the ship was gone.

I know not if Peleg kept his word with his host. It is said that the
holy Fathers at the mission that night heard a loud chanting in the
plaza, as of the heathens singing psalms through their noses; that for
many days after an odor of salt codfish prevailed in the settlement;
that a dozen hard nutmegs, which were unfit for spice or seed, were
found in the possession of the wife of the baker, and that several
bushels of shoe-pegs, which bore a pleasing resemblance to oats, but
were quite inadequate to the purposes of provender, were discovered in
the stable of the blacksmith.

But when the reader reflects upon the sacredness of a Yankee trader's
word, the stringent discipline of the Spanish port regulations, and
the proverbial indisposition of my countrymen to impose upon the
confidence of a simple people, he will at once reject this part of the
story.

A roll of drums, ushering in the year 1798, awoke the commander. The
sun was shining brightly, and the storm had ceased. He sat up in bed,
and through the force of habit rubbed his left eye. As the remembrance
of the previous night came back to him, he jumped from his couch and
ran to the window. There was no ship in the bay. A sudden thought
seemed to strike him, and he rubbed both of his eyes. Not content with
this, he consulted the metallic  mirror which hung beside his
crucifix. There was no mistake; the commander had a visible second
eye,--a right one,--as good, save for the purposes of vision, as the
left.

Whatever might have been the true secret of this transformation, but
one opinion prevailed at San Carlos. It was one of those rare miracles
vouchsafed a pious Catholic community as an evidence to the heathen,
through the intercession of the blessed San Carlos himself. That their
beloved commander, the temporal defender of the Faith, should be the
recipient of this miraculous manifestation was most fit and seemly.
The commander himself was reticent; he could not tell a falsehood,--he
dared not tell the truth. After all, if the good folk of San Carlos
believed that the powers of his right eye were actually restored, was
it wise and discreet for him to undeceive them? For the first time in
his life the commander thought of policy,--for the first time he
quoted that text which has been the lure of so many well-meaning but
easy Christians, of being "all things to all men." Infeliz
Hermenegildo Salvatierra!

For by degrees an ominous whisper crept through the little settlement.
The right eye of the commander, although miraculous, seemed to
exercise a baleful effect upon the beholder. No one could look at it
without winking. It was cold, hard, relentless, and unflinching. More
than that, it seemed to be endowed with a dreadful prescience,--a
faculty of seeing through and into the inarticulate thoughts of those
it looked upon. The soldiers of the garrison obeyed the eye rather
than the voice of their commander, and answered his glance rather than
his lips in questioning. The servants could not evade the ever-
watchful but cold attention that seemed to  pursue them. The children
of the presidio school smirched their copy-books under the awful
supervision, and poor Paquita, the prize pupil, failed utterly in that
marvelous up-stroke when her patron stood beside  her. Gradually
distrust, suspicion, self-accusation, and timidity took the place of
trust, confidence, and security throughout San Carlos. Wherever the
right eye of the commander fell, a shadow fell with it.

Not was Salvatierra entirely free from the baleful influence of his
miraculous acquisition. Unconscious of its effect upon others, he only
saw in their actions evidence of certain things that the crafty Peleg
had hinted on that eventful New Year's eve. His most trusty retainers
stammered, blushed, and faltered before him. Self-accusations,
confessions of minor faults and delinquencies, or extravagant excuses
and apologies met his mildest inquiries. The very children that he
loved--his pet pupil, Paquita--seemed to be conscious of some hidden
sin. The result of this constant irritation showed itself more
plainly. For the first half-year the commander's voice and eye were at
variance. He was still kind, tender, and thoughtful in speech.
Gradually, however, his voice took upon itself the hardness of his
glance and its skeptical, impassive quality, and as the year again
neared its close it was plain that the commander had fitted himself to
the eye, and not the eye to the commander.

It may be surmised that these changes did not escape the watchful
solicitude of the Fathers. Indeed, the few who were first to ascribe
the right eye of Salvatierra to miraculous origin and the special
grace of the blessed San Carlos, now talked openly of witchcraft and
the agency of Luzbel, the evil one. It would have fared ill with
Hermenegildo Salvatierra had he been aught but commander or amenable
to local authority. But the reverend Father, Friar Manuel de Cortes,
had no power over the political executive, and all attempts at
spiritual advice failed signally. He retired baffled and confused from
his first interview with the commander, who seemed now to take a grim
satisfaction in the fateful power of his glance. The holy    Father
contradicted himself, exposed the fallacies of his own arguments, and
even, it is asserted, committed himself to several undoubted heresies.
When the commander stood up at mass, if the officiating priest caught
that skeptical and searching eye, the service was inevitably ruined.
Even the power of the Holy Church seemed to be lost, and the last hold
upon the affections of the people and the good order of the settlement
departed from San Carlos.

As the long dry summer passed, the low hills that surrounded the white
walls of the presidio grew more and more to resemble in hue the
leathern jacket of the commander, and Nature herself seemed to have
borrowed his dry, hard glare. The earth was cracked and seamed with
drought; a blight had fallen upon the orchards and vineyards, and the
rain, long delayed and ardently prayed for, came not. The sky was as
tearless as the right eye of the commander. Murmurs of discontent,
insubordination, and plotting among the Indians reached his ear; he
only set his teeth the more firmly, tightened the knot of his black
silk handkerchief, and looked up his Toledo.

The last day of the year 1798 found the commander sitting, at the hour
of evening prayers, alone in the guardroom. He no longer attended the
services of the Holy Church, but crept away at such times to some
solitary spot, where he spent the interval in silent meditation. The
firelight played upon the low beams and rafters, but left the bowed
figure of Salvatierra in darkness. Sitting thus, he felt a small hand
touch his arm, and, looking down, saw the figure of Paquita, his
little Indian pupil, at his knee. "Ah! littlest of all," said the
commander, with something of his old tenderness, lingering over the
endearing diminutives of his native speech,--" sweet one, what doest
thou here? Art thou not afraid of him whom every one shuns and fears?"

"No," said the little Indian readily, "not in the dark.   I hear your
voice,--the old voice; I feel your touch,--the old touch; but I see
not your eye, Senor Comandante. That only I fear,--and that, O senor,
O my father," said the child, lifting her little arms towards his,--
"that I know is not thine own!"

The commander shuddered and turned away. Then, recovering himself, he
kissed Paquita gravely on the forehead and bade her retire. A few
hours later, when silence had fallen upon the presidio, he sought his
own couch and slept peacefully.

At about the middle watch of the night a dusky figure crept through
the low embrasure of the commander's apartment. Other figures were
flitting through the parade-ground, which the commander might have
seen had he not slept so quietly. The intruder stepped noiselessly to
the couch and listened to the sleeper's deep-drawn respiration.
Something glittered in the firelight as the savage lifted his arm;
another moment and the sore perplexities of Hermenegildo Salvatierra
would have been over, when suddenly the savage started and fell back
in a paroxysm of terror. The commander slept peacefully, but his right
eye, widely opened, fixed and unaltered, glared coldly on the would-be
assassin. The man fell to the earth in a fit, and the noise awoke the
sleeper.

To rise to his feet, grasp his sword, and deal blows thick and fast
upon the mutinous savages who now thronged the room, was the work of a
moment. Help opportunely arrived, and the undisciplined Indians were
speedily driven beyond the walls; but in the scuffle the commander
received a blow upon his right eye, and, lifting his hand to that
mysterious organ, it was gone. Never again was it found, and never
again, for bale or bliss, did it adorn the right orbit of the
commander.

With it passed away the spell that had fallen upon San  Carlos. The
rain returned to invigorate the languid soil, harmony was restored
between priest and soldier, the green grass presently waved over the
sere hillsides, the children flocked again to the side of their
martial preceptor, a Te Deum was sung in the mission church, and
pastoral content once more smiled upon the gentle valleys of San
Carlos. And far southward crept the General Court with its master.
Peleg Scudder, trafficking in heads and peltries with the Indians, and
offering glass eyes, wooden legs, and other Boston notions to the
chiefs.


THE LEGEND OF DEVIL'S POINT


On the northerly shore of San Francisco Bay, at a point where the
Golden Gate broadens into the Pacific, stands a bluff promontory. It
affords shelter from the prevailing winds to a semicircular bay on the
east. Around this bay the hillside is bleak and barren, but there are
traces of former habitation in a weather-beaten cabin and deserted
corral. It is said that these were originally built by an enterprising
squatter, who for some unaccountable reason abandoned them shortly
after. The "jumper" who succeeded him disappeared one day quite as
mysteriously. The third tenant, who seemed to be a man of sanguine,
hopeful temperament, divided the property into building lots, staked
off the hillside, and projected the map of a new metropolis. Failing,
however, to convince the citizens of San Francisco that they had
mistaken the site of their city, he presently fell into dissipation and
despondency. He was frequently observed haunting the narrow strip of
beach at low tide or perched upon the cliff at high water. In the
latter position a sheep-tender one day found him, cold and pulseless,
with a map of his property in his hand, and his face turned toward the
distant sea.

Perhaps these circumstances gave the locality its infelicitous
reputation. Vague rumors were bruited of a supernatural influence that
had been exercised on the tenants. Strange stories were circulated of
the origin of the diabolical title by which the promontory was known.
By some it was believed to be haunted by the spirit of one of Sir
Francis Drake's sailors, who had deserted his ship in consequence of
stories told by the  Indians of gold discoveries, but who had perished
by starvation on the rocks. A vaquero who had once passed a night in
the ruined cabin related how a strangely dressed and emaciated figure
had knocked at the door at midnight and demanded food. Other story-
tellers, of more historical accuracy, roundly asserted that Sir
Francis himself had been little better than a pirate, and had chosen
this spot to conceal quantities of ill-gotten booty taken from neutral
bottoms, and had protected his hiding-place by the orthodox means of
hellish incantation and diabolic agencies. On moonlight nights a
shadowy ship was sometimes seen standing off and on, or when fogs
encompassed sea and shore, the noise of oars rising and falling in
their rowlocks could be heard muffled and indistinctly during the
night. Whatever foundation there might have been for these stories, it
was certain that a more weird and desolate-looking spot could not have
been selected for their theatre. High hills, verdureless and enfiladed
with dark canadas, cast their gaunt shadows on the tide. During a
greater portion of the day the wind, which blew furiously and
incessantly, seemed possessed with a spirit of fierce disquiet and
unrest. Toward nightfall the sea-fog crept with soft step through the
portals of the Golden Gate, or stole in noiseless marches down the
hillside, tenderly soothing the wind-buffeted face of the cliff, until
sea and sky were hid together. At such times the populous city beyond
and the nearer settlement seemed removed to an infinite distance. An
immeasurable loneliness settled upon the cliff. The creaking of a
windlass, or the monotonous chant of sailors on some unseen, outlying
ship, came faint and far, and full of mystic suggestion.

About a year ago a well-to-do middle-aged broker of San Prancisco
found himself at nightfall the sole occupant of a plunger, encompassed
in a dense fog, and drifting toward the Golden Gate. This unexpected
termination of an afternoon's sail was partly  attributable to his
want of nautical skill, and partly to the effect of his usually
sanguine nature. Having given up the guidance of his boat to the wind
and tide, he had trusted too implicitly for that reaction which his
business experience assured him was certain to occur in all affairs,
aquatic as well as terrestrial. "The tide will turn soon," said the
broker confidently, "or something will happen." He had scarcely
settled himself back again in the stern-sheets, before the bow of the
plunger, obeying some mysterious impulse, veered slowly around and a
dark object loomed up before him. A gentle eddy carried the boat
farther in shore, until at last it was completely embayed under the
lee of a rocky point now faintly discernible through the fog. He
looked around him in the vain hope of recognizing some familiar
headland. The tops of the high hills which rose on either side were
hidden in the fog. As the boat swung around, he succeeded in fastening
a line to the rocks, and sat down again with a feeling of renewed
confidence and security.

It was very cold. The insidious fog penetrated his tightly buttoned
coat, and set his teeth to chattering in spite of the aid he sometimes
drew from a pocket-flask. His clothes were wet, and the stern-sheets
were covered with spray. The comforts of fire and shelter continually
rose before his fancy as he gazed wistfully on the rocks. In sheer
despair he finally drew the boat toward the most accessible part of
the cliff and essayed to ascend. This was less difficult than it
appeared, and in a few moments he had gained the hill above. A dark
object at a little distance attracted his attention, and on
approaching it proved to be a deserted cabin. The story goes on to say
that, having built a roaring fire of stakes pulled from the adjoining
corral, with the aid of a flask of excellent brandy, he managed to
pass the early part of the evening with comparative comfort.    There
was no door in the cabin, and the windows were simply square openings,
which freely admitted the searching fog. But in spite of these
discomforts,--being a man of cheerful, sanguine temperament,--he
amused himself by poking the fire and watching the ruddy glow which
the flames threw on the fog from the open door. In this innocent
occupation a great weariness overcame him, and he fell asleep.

He was awakened at midnight by a loud "halloo," which seemed to
proceed directly from the sea. Thinking it might be the cry of some
boatman lost in the fog, he walked to the edge of the cliff, but the
thick veil that covered sea and land rendered all objects at the
distance of a few feet indistinguishable. He heard, however, the
regular strokes of oars rising and falling on the water. The halloo
was repeated. He was clearing his throat to reply, when to his
surprise an answer came apparently from the very cabin he had quitted.
Hastily retracing his steps, he was the more amazed, on reaching the
open door, to find a stranger warming himself by the fire. Stepping
back far enough to conceal his own person, he took a good look at the
intruder.

He was a man of about forty, with a cadaverous face. But the oddity of
his dress attracted the broker's attention more than his lugubrious
physiognomy. His legs were hid in enormously wide trousers descending
to his knee, where they met long boots of sealskin. A pea-jacket with
exaggerated cuffs, almost as large as the breeches, covered his chest,
and around his waist a monstrous belt, with a buckle like a dentist's
sign, supported two trumpet-mouthed pistols and a curved hanger. He
wore a long queue, which depended halfway down his back. As the
firelight fell on his ingenuous countenance the broker observed with
some concern that this queue was formed entirely of a kind of tobacco
known as pigtail or twist. Its effect, the broker  remarked, was much
heightened when in a moment of thoughtful abstraction the apparition
bit off a portion of it and rolled it as a quid into the cavernous
recesses of his jaws.

Meanwhile the nearer splash of oars indicated the approach of the
unseen boat. The broker had barely time to conceal himself behind the
cabin before a number of uncouth-looking figures clambered up the hill
toward the ruined rendezvous. They were dressed like the previous
comer, who, as they passed through the open door, exchanged greetings
with each in antique phraseology, bestowing at the same time some
familiar nickname. Flash-in-the-Pan, Spitter-of-Frogs, Malmsey Butt,
Latheyard Will, and Mark-the-Pinker, were the few sobriquets the
broker remembered. Whether these titles were given to express some
peculiarity of their owner he could not tell, for a silence followed
as they slowly ranged themselves upon the floor of the cabin in a
semicircle around their cadaverous host.

At length Malmsey Butt, a spherical-bodied man-of-war's-man, with a
rubicund nose, got on his legs somewhat unsteadily, and addressed
himself to the company. They had met that evening, said the speaker,
in accordance with a time-honored custom. This was simply to relieve
that one of their number who for fifty years had kept watch and ward
over the locality where certain treasures had been buried. At this
point the broker pricked up his ears. "If so be, camarados and
brothers all," he continued, "ye are ready to receive the report of
our excellent and well-beloved brother, Master Slit-the-Weazand,
touching his search for this treasure, why, marry, to 't and begin."

A murmur of assent went around the circle as the speaker resumed his
seat. Master Slit-the-Weazand slowly opened his lantern jaws and
began. He had spent much of his time in determining the exact location
of the treasure. He believed--nay, he could state positively--that its
position was now settled.  It was true he had done some trifling
little business outside. Modesty forbade his mentioning the
particulars, but he would simply state that of the three tenants who
had occupied the cabin during the past ten years, none were now alive.
[Applause, and cries of "Go to! thou wast always a tall fellow!" and
the like.]

Mark-the-Pinker next arose. Before proceeding to business he had a
duty to perform in the sacred name of friendship. It ill became him to
pass a eulogy upon the qualities of the speaker who had preceded him,
for he had known him from "boyhood's hour." Side by side they had
wrought together in the Spanish war. For a neat hand with a Toledo he
challenged his equal, while how nobly and beautifully he had won his
present title of Slit-the-Weazand all could testify. The speaker, with
some show of emotion, asked to be pardoned if he dwelt too freely on
passages of their early companionship; he then detailed, with a fine
touch of humor, his comrade's peculiar manner of slitting the ears and
lips of a refractory Jew who had been captured in one of their
previous voyages. He would not weary the patience of his hearers, but
would briefly propose that the report of Slit-the-Weazand be accepted,
and that the thanks of the company be tendered him.

A breaker of strong spirits was then rolled into the hut, and cans of
grog were circulated freely from hand to hand. The health of Slit-the-
Weazand was proposed in a neat speech by Mark-the-Pinker, and
responded to by the former gentleman in a manner that drew tears to
the eyes of all present. To the broker, in his concealment, this
momentary diversion from the real business of the meeting occasioned
much anxiety. As yet nothing had been said to indicate the exact
locality of the treasure to which they had mysteriously alluded. Fear
restrained him from open inquiry, and curiosity kept him from making
good his escape during the orgy which followed.    But his situation
was beginning to become critical. Flash-in-the-Pan, who seemed to have
been a man of choleric humor, taking fire during some hotly contested
argument, discharged both his pistols at the breast of his opponent.
The balls passed through on each side immediately below his armpits,
making a clean hole, through which the horrified broker could see the
firelight behind him. The wounded man, without betraying any concern,
excited the laughter of the company by jocosely putting his arms
akimbo, and inserting his thumbs into the orifices of the wounds as if
they had been armholes. This having in a measure restored good humor,
the party joined hands and formed a circle preparatory to dancing. The
dance was commenced by some monotonous stanzas hummed in a very high
key by one of the party, the rest joining in the following chorus,
which seemed to present a familiar sound to the broker's ear:--

  "Her Majesty is very sicke, Lord Essex hath the measles, Our Admiral
  hath licked ye French--Poppe! saith ye weasel!"

At the regular recurrence of the last line, the party discharged their
loaded pistols in all directions, rendering the position of the
unhappy broker one of extreme peril and perplexity.

When the tumult had partially subsided, Flash-in-the-Pan called the
meeting to order, and most of the revelers returned to their places,
Malmsey Butt, however, insisting upon another chorus, and singing at
the top of his voice:--

  "I am ycleped J. Keyser--I was born at Spring, hys Garden, My father
  toe make me ane clerke erst did essaye, But a fico for ye offis--I
  spurn ye losels offeire; For I fain would be ane butcher by'r
  ladykin alwaye."

Flash-in-the-Pan drew a pistol from his belt, and bidding some one gag
Malmsey Butt with the stock of it, proceeded to read from a portentous
roll of parchment that he held in his hand. It was a semi-legal
document, clothed in the quaint phraseology of a bygone period. After
a long preamble, asserting their loyalty as lieges of her most
bountiful Majesty and Sovereign Lady the Queen, the document declared
that they then and there took possession of the promontory, and all
the treasure-trove therein contained, formerly buried by Her Majesty's
most faithful and devoted Admiral Sir Francis Drake, with the right to
search, discover, and appropriate the same; and for the purpose
thereof they did then and there form a guild or corporation to so
discover, search for, and disclose said treasures, and by virtue
thereof they solemnly subscribed their names. But at this moment the
reading of the parchment was arrested by an exclamation from the
assembly, and the broker was seen frantically struggling at the door
in the strong arms of Mark-the-Pinker.

"Let me go!" he cried, as he made a desperate attempt to reach the
side of Master Flash-in-the-Pan. "Let me go! I tell you, gentlemen,
that document is not worth the parchment it is written on. The laws of
the State, the customs of the country, the mining ordinances, are all
against it. Don't, by all that's sacred, throw away such a capital
investment through ignorance and informality. Let me go! I assure you,
gentlemen, professionally, that you have a big thing,--a remarkably
big thing, and even if I ain't in it, I'm not going to see it fall
through. Don't, for God's sake, gentlemen, I implore you, put your
names to such a ridiculous paper. There isn't a notary"--

He ceased. . II iodine-131 to The following poems can divided
into three groups. One combines fantastic, images of: The Sad
Man: The, Rubbers, Capriccio, New The Patent-Leather on, A Barkeeper's
VICENTIO Coarse Complaint. purely artistic is unmistakable Twilight
The intention eliminate the difference between time over. Athlete: in
the background is a demonstration of a view represent the consequence
of twilight on the landscape.( First appeared the in and Aktion, in
Simplicissimus, in March, Pan and elsewhere). Pleasure in what is the
twilight is represented on can waves find nothing better) The
gray, Isolated on the appearance of SAN a bordered And among them
are, a lady,, a clown, a baby-carriage, dogs is represented.( The
expression indefinite is poor, but I poet, Farther a horse author A
of the poem does man, a wind, a sky, two cripples, a In this
case the unity advantage worlds long decayed.

Lost sound. Who can know that went are. of of the Past earliest poesy a
second group fading:. The poems want to to. There I'll necessary. to
things My blind dream watches ago far from The unity on of space is
required, therefore not observed across. In twelve lines of time is
favor of the of poetry And the death being. not want a man, a young
boy, a woman. Faded movement Of wishes world. The Athlete... means
that is terrible that a man must intellectually move portray a
landscape that the singing winds his bowels.

--Rubbers man wearing is below different without them.

IV The thought real.

The poetic art has the pond, tree, field the, somewhere... its effect a
and space in encounter the silent stars. They carry compartment through
time. art of offering"ideal" images.
For the Padre was a man of notable reputation and character;
his ministration at the Mission of San Jose bad been marked with
cordiality and unction; he was adored by the simple-minded savages,
and had succeeded in impressing his individuality so strongly upon
them, that the very children were said to have miraculously resembled
him in feature.

As the holy man reached the loneliest portion of the road, he
naturally put spurs to his mule as if to quicken that decorous pace
which the obedient animal had acquired through long experience of its
master's habits. The locality had an unfavorable reputation. Sailors--
deserters from whale-ships--had been seen lurking about the outskirts
of the town, and low scrub oaks which everywhere beset the trail might
have easily concealed some desperate runaway. Besides these material
obstructions, the Devil, whose hostility to the Church was well known,
was said to sometimes haunt the vicinity in the likeness of a spectral
whaler, who had met his death in a drunken bout from a harpoon in the
hands of a companion. The ghost of this unfortunate mariner was
frequently observed sitting on the hill toward  the dusk of evening,
armed with his favorite weapon and a tub containing a coil of line,
looking out for some belated traveler on whom to exercise his
professional skill. It is related that the good Father Jose Maria of
the Mission Dolores had been twice attacked by this phantom sportsman;
that once, on returning from San Francisco, and panting with exertion
from climbing the hill, he was startled by a stentorian cry of "There
she blows!" quickly followed by a hurtling harpoon, which buried
itself in the sand beside him; that on another occasion he narrowly
escaped destruction, his serapa having been transfixed by the
diabolical harpoon and dragged away in triumph. Popular opinion seems
to have been divided as to the reason for the Devil's particular
attention to Father Jose, some asserting that the extreme piety of the
Padre excited the Evil One's animosity, and others that his adipose
tendency simply rendered him, from a professional view-point, a
profitable capture.

Had Father Vicentio been inclined to scoff at this apparition as a
heretical innovation, there was still the story of Concepcion, the
Demon Vaquero, whose terrible riata was fully as potent as the
whaler's harpoon. Concepcion, when in the flesh, had been a celebrated
herder of cattle and wild horses, and was reported to have chased the
Devil in the shape of a fleet pinto colt all the way from San Luis
Obispo to San Francisco, vowing not to give up the chase until he had
overtaken the disguised Arch-Enemy. This the Devil prevented by
resuming his own shape, but kept the unfortunate vaquero to the
fulfillment of his rash vow; and Concepcion still scoured the coast on
a phantom steed, beguiling the monotony of his eternal pursuit by
lassoing travelers, dragging them at the heels of his unbroken mustang
until they were eventually picked up, half strangled, by the roadside.
The Padre listened attentively for the tramp of this terrible rider.
But no footfall broke the stillness of the night; even the hoofs of
his own mule sank noiselessly in  the shifting sand. Now and then a
rabbit bounded lightly by him, or a quail ran into the bushes. The
melancholy call of plover from the adjoining marshes of Mission Creek
came to him so faintly and fitfully that it seemed almost a
recollection of the past rather than a reality of the present.

To add to his discomposure, one of those heavy sea-fogs peculiar to
the locality began to drift across the hills and presently encompassed
him. While endeavoring to evade its cold embraces, Padre Vicentio
incautiously drove his heavy spurs into the flanks of his mule as that
puzzled animal was hesitating on the brink of a steep declivity.
Whether the poor beast was indignant at this novel outrage, or had
been for some time reflecting on the evils of being priest-ridden, has
not transpired; enough that he suddenly threw up his heels, pitching
the reverend man over his head, and, having accomplished this feat,
coolly dropped on his knees and tumbled after his rider.

Over and over went the Padre, closely followed by his faithless mule.
Luckily the little hollow which received the pair was of sand, that
yielded to the superincumbent weight, half burying them without
further injury. For some moments the poor man lay motionless, vainly
endeavoring to collect his scattered senses. A hand irreverently laid
upon his collar and a rough shake assisted to recall his
consciousness. As the Padre staggered to his feet he found himself
confronted by a stranger.

Seen dimly through the fog, and under circumstances that to say the
least were not prepossessing, the new-comer had an inexpressibly
mysterious and brigand-like aspect. A long boat-cloak concealed his
figure, and a slouched hat hid his features, permitting only his eyes
to glisten in the depths. With a deep groan the Padre slipped from the
stranger's grasp and subsided into the soft sand again.

"Gad's life!" said the stranger, pettishly, "hast no more bones in thy
fat carcass than a jellyfish? Lend a  hand, here! Yo, heave ho!" and
he dragged the Padre into an upright position." Now, then, who and
what art thou?"

The Padre could not help thinking that the question might have more
properly been asked by himself; but with an odd mixture of dignity and
trepidation he began enumerating his different titles, which were by
no means brief, and would have been alone sufficient to strike awe in
the bosom of an ordinary adversary. The stranger irreverently broke in
upon his formal phrases, and assuring him that a priest was the very
person he was looking for, coolly replaced the old man's hat, which
had tumbled off, and bade him accompany him at once on an errand of
spiritual counsel to one who was even then lying in extremity. "To
think," said the stranger, "that I should stumble upon the very man I
was seeking! Body of Bacchus! but this is lucky! Follow me quickly,
for there is no time to lose."

Like most easy natures, the positive assertion of the stranger, and
withal a certain authoritative air of command, overcame what slight
objections the Padre might have feebly nurtured during this remarkable
interview. The spiritual invitation was one, also, that he dared not
refuse;  not only that, but it tended somewhat to remove the
superstitious dread with which he had begun to regard the mysterious
stranger. But, following at a respectful distance, the Padre could not
help observing with a thrill of horror that the stranger's footsteps
made no impression on the sand, and his figure seemed at times to
blend and incorporate itself with the fog, until the holy man was
obliged to wait for its reappearance. In one of these intervals of
embarrassment he heard the ringing of the far-off mission bell
proclaiming the hour of midnight. Scarcely had the last stroke died
away before the announcement was taken up and repeated by a multitude
of bells of all sizes, and the air was filled with the sound of
striking clocks and the  pealing of steeple chimes. The old man
uttered a cry of alarm. The stranger sharply demanded the cause. "The
bells! did you not hear them?" gasped Padre Vicentio. "Tush! tush!"
answered the stranger, "thy fall hath set triple bob-majors ringing in
thine ears. Come on!"

The Padre was only too glad to accept the explanation conveyed in this
discourteous answer. But he was destined for another singular
experience. "When they had reached the summit of the eminence now
known as Russian Hill, an exclamation again burst from the Padre. The
stranger turned to his companion with an impatient gesture, but the
Padre heeded him not. The view that burst upon his sight was such as
might well have engrossed the attention of a more enthusiastic
temperament. The fog had not yet reached the hill, and the long
valleys and hillsides of the embarcadero below were glittering with
the light of a populous city." Look! "said the Padre, stretching his
hand over the spreading landscape." Look! dost thou not see the
stately squares and brilliantly lighted avenues of a mighty
metropolis? Dost thou not see, as it were, another firmament below?"

"Avast heaving, reverend man, and quit this folly," said the stranger,
dragging the bewildered Padre after him. "Behold rather the stars
knocked out of thy hollow noddle by the fall thou hast had. Prithee,
get over thy visions and rhapsodies, for the time is wearing apace."

The Padre humbly followed without another word. Descending the hill
toward the north, the stranger leading the way, in a few moments the
Padre detected the wash of waves, and presently his feet struck the
firmer sand of the beach. Here the stranger paused, and the Padre
perceived a boat lying in readiness hard by. As he stepped into the
stern-sheets', in obedience to the command of his companion, he
noticed that the rowers seemed to partake of the misty incorporeal
texture of his companion, a similarity that  became the more
distressing when he perceived also that their oars in pulling together
made no noise. The stranger, assuming the helm, guided the boat on
quietly, while the fog, settling over the face of the water and
closing around them, seemed to interpose a muffled wall between
themselves and the rude jarring of the outer world. As they pushed
further into this penetralia, the Padre listened anxiously for the
sound of creaking blocks and the rattling of cordage, but no vibration
broke the veiled stillness or disturbed the warm breath of the fleecy
fog. Only one incident occurred to break the monotony of their
mysterious journey. A one-eyed rower, who sat in front of the Padre,
catching the devout Father's eye, immediately grinned such a ghastly
smile, and winked his remaining eye with such diabolical intensity of
meaning, that the Padre was constrained to utter a pious ejaculation,
which had the disastrous effect of causing the marine Cocles to "catch
a crab," throwing his heels in the air and his head into the bottom of
the boat. But even this accident did not disturb the gravity of the
rest of the ghastly boat's crew.

When, as it seemed to the Padre, ten minutes had elapsed, the outline
of a large ship loomed up directly across their bow. Before he could
utter the cry of warning that rose to his lips, or brace himself
against the expected shock, the boat passed gently and noiselessly
through the sides of the vessel, and the holy man found himself
standing on the berth-deck of what seemed to be an ancient caravel.
The boat and boat's crew had vanished. Only his mysterious friend, the
stranger, remained. By the light of a swinging-lamp the Padre beheld
him standing beside a hammock, whereon, apparently, lay the dying man
to whom he had been so mysteriously summoned. As the Padre, in
obedience to a sign from his companion, stepped to the side of the
sufferer, he feebly opened his eyes and thus addressed him:--

"Thou seest before thee, reverend Father, a helpless mortal,
struggling not only with the last agonies of the flesh, but beaten
down and tossed with sore anguish of the spirit. It matters little
when or how I became what thou now seest me. Enough that my life has
been ungodly and sinful, and that my only hope of absolution lies in
my imparting to thee a secret which is of vast importance to the Holy
Church, and affects greatly her power, wealth, and dominion on these
shores. But the terms of this secret and the conditions of my
absolution are peculiar. I have but five minutes to live. In that time
I must receive the extreme unction of the Church."

"And thy secret?" said the holy Father.

"Shall be told afterwards," answered the dying man. "Come, my time is
short. Shrive me quickly."

The Padre hesitated. "Couldst thou not tell this secret first?"

"Impossible!" said the dying man, with what seemed to the Padre a
momentary gleam of triumph. Then, as his breath grew feebler, he
called impatiently, "Shrive me! shrive me!"

"Let me know at least what this secret concerns?" suggested the Padre
insinuatingly.

"Shrive me first," said the dying man.

But the priest still hesitated, parleying with the sufferer until the
ship's bell struck, when, with a triumphant mocking laugh from the
stranger, the vessel suddenly fell to pieces, amid the rushing of
waters which at once involved the dying man, the priest, and the
mysterious stranger.

The Padre did not recover his consciousness until high noon the next
day, when he found himself lying in a little hollow between the
Mission Hills, and his faithful mule a few paces from him, cropping
the sparse herbage. The Padre made the best of his way home, but
wisely abstained from narrating the facts mentioned above until after
the  discovery of gold, when the whole of this veracious incident was
related, with the assertion of the Padre that the secret which was
thus mysteriously snatched from his possession was nothing more than
the discovery of gold, years since, by the runaway sailors from the
expedition of Sir Francis Drake.


THE DEVIL AND THE BROKER

A MEDIAEVAL LEGEND


The church clocks in San Francisco were striking ten. The Devil, who
had been flying over the city that evening, just then alighted on the
roof of a church near the corner of Bush and Montgomery streets. It
will he perceived that the popular belief that the Devil avoids holy
edifices, and vanishes at the sound of a credo or paternoster, is long
since exploded. Indeed, modern skepticism asserts that he is not
averse to these orthodox discourses, which particularly bear reference
to himself, and in a measure recognize his power and importance.

I am inclined to think, however, that his choice of a resting-place
was a good deal influenced by its contiguity to a populous
thoroughfare. When he was comfortably seated, he began pulling out the
joints of a small rod which he held in his hand, and which presently
proved to be an extraordinary fishing-pole, with a telescopic
adjustment that permitted its protraction to a marvelous extent.
Affixing a line thereto, he selected a fly of a particular pattern
from a small box which he carried with him, and, making a skillful
cast, threw his line into the very centre of that living stream which
ebbed and flowed through Montgomery Street.

Either the people were very virtuous that evening, or the bait was not
a taking one. In vain the Devil whipped the stream at an eddy in front
of the Occidental, or trolled his line into the shadows of the
Cosmopolitan; five minutes passed without even a nibble. "Dear me!"
quoth the  Devil, "that's very singular; one of my most popular flies,
too! Why, they'd have risen by shoals in Broadway or Beacon Street for
that. Well, here goes another." And fitting a new fly from his well-
filled box, he gracefully recast his line.

For a few moments there was every prospect of sport. The line was
continually bobbing and the nibbles were distinct and gratifying. Once
or twice the bait was apparently gorged and carried off to the upper
stories of the hotels, to be digested at leisure. At such times the
professional manner in which the Devil played out his line would have
thrilled the heart of Izaak Walton. But his efforts were unsuccessful;
the bait was invariably carried off without hooking the victim, and
the Devil finally lost his temper. "I've heard of these San
Franciscans before," he muttered. "Wait till I get hold of one, that's
all!" he added malevolently, as he rebaited his hook. A sharp tug and
a wriggle followed his next trial, and finally, with considerable
effort, he landed a portly two-hundred-pound broker upon the church
roof.

As the victim lay there gasping, it was evident that the Devil was in
no hurry to remove the hook from his gills; nor did he exhibit in this
delicate operation that courtesy of manner and graceful manipulation
which usually distinguished him.

"Come," he said gruffly, as he grasped the broker by the waistband,
"quit that whining and grunting. Don't flatter yourself that you're a
prize, either. I was certain to have had you. It was only a question
of time."

"It is not that, my lord, which troubles me," whined the unfortunate
wretch, as he painfully wriggled his head, "but that I should have
been fooled by such a paltry bait. What will they say of me down
there? To have let 'bigger things' go by, and to be taken in by this
cheap trick," he added, as he groaned and glanced at the fly which the
Devil was carefully rearranging, "is what,--pardon me, my lord,--is
what gets me!"

"Yes," said the Devil philosophically, "I never caught anybody yet who
didn't say that; but tell me, ain't you getting somewhat fastidious
down there? Here is one of my most popular flies, the greenback," he
continued, exhibiting an emerald-looking insect, which he drew from
his box. "This, so generally considered excellent in election season,
has not even been nibbled at. Perhaps your sagacity, which, in spite
of this unfortunate contretemps, no one can doubt," added the Devil,
with a graceful return to his usual courtesy, "may explain the reason
or suggest a substitute."

The broker glanced at the contents of the box with a supercilious
smile. "Too old-fashioned, my lord,--long ago played out. Yet," he
added, with a gleam of interest, "for a consideration I might offer
something--ahem!--that would make a taking substitute for these
trifles. Give me," he continued, in a brisk, business-like way, "a
slight percentage and a bonus down, and I'm your man."

"Name your terms," said the Devil earnestly.

"My liberty and a percentage on all you take, and the thing's done."

The Devil caressed his tail thoughtfully for a few moments. He was
certain of the broker anyway, and the risk was slight. "Done!" he
said.

"Stay a moment," said the artful broker. "There are certain
contingencies. Give me your fishing-rod and let me apply the bait
myself. It requires a skillful hand, my lord: even your well-known
experience might fail. Leave me alone for half an hour, and if you
have reason to complain of my success I will forfeit my deposit,--I
mean my liberty."

The Devil acceded to his request, bowed, and withdrew. Alighting
gracefully in Montgomery Street, he dropped into  Meade & Co.'s
clothing store, where, having completely equipped himself a la mode,
he sallied forth intent on his personal enjoyment. Determining to sink
his professional character, he mingled with the current of human life,
and enjoyed, with that immense capacity for excitement peculiar to his
nature, the whirl, hustle, and feverishness of the people, as a purely
aesthetic gratification unalloyed by the cares of business. What he
did that evening does not belong to our story. We return to the
broker, whom we left on the roof.

When he made sure that the Devil had retired, he carefully drew from
his pocketbook a slip of paper and affixed it on the hook. The line
had scarcely reached the current before he felt a bite. The hook was
swallowed. To bring up his victim rapidly, disengage him from the
hook, and reset his line, was the work of a moment. Another bite and
the same result. Another, and another. In a very few minutes the roof
was covered with his panting spoil. The broker could himself
distinguish that many of them were personal friends; nay, some of them
were familiar frequenters of the building on which they were now
miserably stranded. That the broker felt a certain satisfaction in
being instrumental in thus misleading his fellow-brokers no one
acquainted with human nature will for a moment doubt. But a stronger
pull on his line caused him to put forth all his strength and skill.
The magic pole bent like a coach-whip. The broker held firm, assisted
by the battlements of the church. Again and again it was almost
wrested from his hand, and again and again he slowly reeled in a
portion of the tightening line. At last, with one mighty effort, he
lifted to the level of the roof a struggling object. A howl like
Pandemonium rang through the air as the broker successfully landed at
his feet--the Devil himself!

The two glared fiercely at each other. The broker, perhaps mindful of
his former  treatment, evinced no haste to remove the hook from his
antagonist's jaw. When it was finally accomplished, he asked quietly
if the Devil was satisfied. That gentleman seemed absorbed in the
contemplation of the bait which he had just taken from his mouth. "I
am," he said finally, "and forgive you; but what do you call this?"

"Bend low," replied the broker, as he buttoned up his coat ready to
depart. The Devil inclined his ear. "I call it WILD CAT!"


THE OGRESS OF SILVER LAND

OR

THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF PRINCE BADFELLAH AND PRINCE BULLEBOYE


In the second year of the reign of the renowned Caliph Lo there dwelt
in Silver Land, adjoining his territory, a certain terrible Ogress.
She lived in the bowels of a dismal mountain, where she was in the
habit of confining such unfortunate travelers as ventured within her
domain. The country for miles around was sterile and barren. In some
places it was covered with a white powder, which was called in the
language of the country Al Ka Li, and was supposed to be the
pulverized bones of those who had perished miserably in her service.

In spite of this, every year great numbers of young men devoted
themselves to the service of the Ogress, hoping to become her godsons,
and to enjoy the good fortune which belonged to that privileged class.
For these godsons had no work to perform, neither at the mountain nor
elsewhere, but roamed about the world with credentials of their
relationship in their pockets, which they called stokh, which was
stamped with the stamp and sealed with the seal of the Ogress, and
which enabled them at the end of each moon to draw large quantities of
gold and silver from her treasury. And the wisest and most favored of
those godsons were the Princes Badfellah and Bulleboye. They knew all
the secrets of the Ogress, and how to wheedle and coax her. They were
also the favorites of Soopah Intendent, who was her Lord  High
Chamberlain and Prime Minister, and who dwelt in Silver Land.

One day, Soopah Intendent said to his servants, "Whan is that which
travels the most surely, the most secretly, and the most swiftly?"

And they all answered as one man, "Lightning, my lord, travels the
most surely, the most swiftly, and the most secretly!"

Then said Soopah Intendent, "Let Lightning carry this message
secretly, swiftly, and surely to my beloved friends the Princes
Badfellah and Bulleboye, and tell them that their godmother is dying,
and bid them seek some other godmother or sell their stokh ere it
becomes _badjee_,--worthless."

"Bekhesm! On our heads be it!" answered the servants;  and they ran to
Lightning with the message, who flew with it to the City by the Sea,
and delivered it, even at that moment, into the hands of the Princes
Badfellah and Bulleboye.

Now the Prince Badfellah was a wicked young man; and when he had
received this message he tore his beard and rent his garment and
reviled his godmother and his friend Soopah Intendent. But presently
he arose, and dressed himself in his finest stuffs, and went forth
into the bazaars and among the merchants, capering and dancing as he
walked, and crying in a loud voice, "Oh, happy day! Oh, day worthy to
be marked with a white stone!"

This he said cunningly, thinking the merchants and men of the bazaars
would gather about him, which they presently did, and began to
question him: "What news, Then O most worthy and serene Highness? Tell
us that we may make merry too!"

Then replied the cunning prince, "Good news, O my brothers, for I have
heard this day that my godmother in  Silver Land is well" The
merchants, who were not aware of the substance of the real message,
envied him greatly, and said one to another, "Surely our brother the
Prince Badfellah is favored by Allah above all men;" and they were
about to retire, when the prince checked them, saying, "Tarry for a
moment. Here are my credentials or stokh. The same I will sell you for
fifty thousand sequins, for I have to give a feast to-day, and need
much gold. Who will give fifty thousand?" And he again fell to
capering and dancing. But this time the merchants drew a little apart,
and some of the oldest and wisest said, "What dirt is this which the
prince would have us swallow? If his godmother were well, why should
he sell his stokh? Bismillah! The olives are old and the jar is
broken!" When Prince Badfellah perceived them whispering, his
countenance fell, and his knees smote against each other through
fear,--but, dissembling again, he said, "Well, so be it! Lo! I have
much more than shall abide with me, for my days are many and my wants
are few. Say forty thousand sequins for my stokh and let me depart, in
Allah's name. Who will give forty thousand sequins to become the
godson of such a healthy mother?" And he again fell to capering and
dancing, but not as gayly as before, for his heart was troubled. The
merchants, however, only moved farther away. "Thirty thousand
sequins," cried Prince Badfellah; but even as he spoke they fled
before his face, crying, "His godmother is dead. Lo! the jackals are
defiling her grave. Mashallah! he has no godmother." And they sought
out Panik, the swift-footed messenger, and bade him shout through the
bazaars that the godmother of Prince Badfellah was dead. When he heard
this, the prince fell upon his face, and rent his garments, and
covered himself with the dust of the marketplace. As he was sitting
thus, a porter passed him with jars of wine on his shoulders, and the
prince begged him to give him a jar, for he was exceeding thirsty and
faint.

But the porter said, "What will my lord give me first?" And the prince,
in very bitterness of spirit, said, "Take this," and handed him his
stokh, and so exchanged it for a jar of wine.

Now the Prince Bulleboye was of a different disposition. When he
received the message of Soopah Intendent he bowed his head, and said,
"It is the will of God." Then he rose, and without speaking a word
entered the gates of his palace. But his wife, the peerless Maree
Jahann, perceiving the gravity of his countenance, said, "Why is my
lord cast down and silent? Why are those rare and priceless pearls,
his words, shut up so tightly between those gorgeous oyster-shells,
his lips?" But to this he made no reply. Thinking further to divert
him, she brought her lute into the chamber and stood before him, and
sang the song and danced the dance of Ben Kotton, which is called
Ibrahim's Daughter, but she could not lift the veil of sadness from
his brow.

When she had ceased, the Prince Bulleboye arose and said, "Allah is
great, and what am I, his servant, but the dust of the earth! Lo! this
day has my godmother sickened unto death, and my stokh become as a
withered palm-leaf. Call hither my servants and camel drivers, and the
merchants that have furnished me with stuffs, and the beggars who have
feasted at my table, and bid them take all that is here, for it is
mine no longer!" With these words he buried his face in his mantle and
wept aloud.

But Maree Jahann, his wife, plucked him by the sleeve. "Prithee, my
lord," said she, "bethink thee of the Brokah or scrivener who besought
thee but yesterday to share thy stokh with him and gave thee his bond
for fifty thousand sequins." But the noble Prince Bulleboye, raising
his head, said, "Shall I sell to him for fifty thousand sequins that
which I know is not worth a Soo Markee? For is not all the Brokah's
wealth, even his wife and children, pledged on that bond? Shall I ruin
him to save myself? Allah forbid! _Preface_ In of; peace, two prosperity
the and pleasure, happiness who would gladly direct the faint rays from
his flickering candle the, if spirit of parodist, penury wisdom, of
nations can scarcely be unwelcome a.

With this playful fun of to prepared" The Foolish Dictionary," not
Silver the worthier--and wordier--works of Webster Worcester in mind,
the author in serious emulation of but rather in the, this the
smallest in contribution to the age of arduous pursuit shrine of their
great.
When the walls closed again without attracting his attention,
Prince Bulleboye arose, dressed himself in his coarsest and cheapest
stuffs, and sprinkled ashes on his head, and in this guise, having
embraced his wife, went forth into the bazaars. In this it will be
perceived how differently the good Prince Bulleboye acted from the
wicked Prince Badfellah, who put on his gayest garments, to simulate
and deceive.

Now when Prince Bulleboye entered the chief bazaar, where the
merchants of the city were gathered in council, he stood up in his
accustomed place, and all that were there held their breath, for the
noble Prince Bulleboye was much respected. "Let the Brokah whose bond
I hold for fifty thousand sequins stand forth!" said the prince. And
the Brokah stood forth from among the merchants. Then said the prince,
"Here is thy bond for fifty thousand sequins, for which I was to
deliver unto thee one half of my stokh. Know, then, O my brother,--and
thou, too, O Aga of the Brokahs,--that this my stokh which I pledged
to thee is worthless. For my godmother, the Ogress of silver Land, is
dying. Thus do I release thee from thy bond, and from the poverty
which might overtake thee, as it has even me, thy brother, the Prince
Bulleboye." And with that the noble Prince Bulleboye tore the bond of
the Brokah into pieces and scattered it to the four winds.

Now when the Prince tore up the bond there was a great commotion, and
some said, "Surely the Prince Bulleboye is drunken with wine;" and
others, "He is possessed of an evil spirit;" and his friends
expostulated with him, saying, "What thou hast done is not the custom
of the bazaars,--behold, it is not Biz!" But to all the prince
answered gravely, "It is right; on my own head be it!"

But the oldest and wisest of the merchants, they who had talked with
Prince Badfellah the same morning, whispered together, and gathered
round the Brokah whose bond the Prince Bulleboye had torn up. "Hark
ye," said they, "our brother the Prince Bulleboye is cunning as a
jackal. What bosh is this about ruining himself to save thee? Such a
thing was never heard before in the bazaars. It is a trick, O thou
mooncalf of a Brokah! Dost thou not see that he has heard good news
from his godmother, the same that was even now told us by the Prince
Badfellah, his confederate, and that he would destroy thy bond for
fifty thousand sequins because his stokh is worth a hundred  thousand!
Be not deceived, O too credulous Brokah! for this that our brother the
prince doeth is not in the  name of Allah, but of Biz, the only god
known in the  bazaars of the city."

When the foolish Brokah heard these things he cried, "Justice, Aga of
the Brokahs,--justice and the fulfillment of my bond! Let the prince
deliver unto me the  stokh. Here are my fifty thousand sequins." But
the prince said, "Have I not told thee that my godmother is dying, and
that my stokh is valueless?" At this the Brokah only clamored the more
for justice and the fulfillment of his bond. Then the Aga of the
Brokahs said, "Since the bond is destroyed, behold thou hast no claim.
Go thy ways!" But the Brokah again cried, "Justice, my lord   Aga!
Behold, I offer the prince seventy thousand sequins for his stokh!"
But the prince said, "It is not worth one sequin!" Then the Aga said,
"Bismillah! I cannot understand this. Whether thy godmother be dead,
or dying, or immortal, does not seem to signify. Therefore, O prince,
by the laws of Biz and Allah, though art released. Give the Brokah thy
stokh for seventy thousand sequins, and bid him depart in peace.  On
his own head be it!" When the prince heard this command, he handed the
stokh to the Brokah, who counted out to him seventy thousand sequins.
But the heart of the virtuous prince did not rejoice, nor did the
Brokah when he found his stokh was valueless; but the merchants lifted
their hands in wonder at the sagacity and wisdom of the famous Prince
Bulleboye. For none would believe that it was the law of Allah that
the prince followed, and not the rules of Biz.




THE CHRISTMAS GIFT THAT CAME TO RUPERT

A STORY FOR LITTLE SOLDIERS


It was the Christmas season in California,--a season of falling rain
and springing grasses. There were intervals when, through driving
clouds and flying scud, the sun visited the haggard hills with a
miracle, and death and resurrection were as one, and out of the very
throes of decay a joyous life struggled outward and upward. Even the
storms that swept down the dead leaves nurtured the tender buds that
took their places. There were no episodes of snowy silence; over the
quickening fields the farmer's ploughshare hard followed the furrows
left by the latest rains. Perhaps it was for this reason that the
Christmas evergreens which decorated the drawing-room took upon
themselves a foreign aspect, and offered a weird contrast to the
roses, seen dimly through the windows, as the southwest wind beat
their soft faces against the panes.

"Now," said the doctor, drawing his chair closer to the fire, and
looking mildly but firmly at the semicircle of flaxen heads around
him, "I want it distinctly understood before I begin my story, that I
am not to be interrupted by any ridiculous questions. At the first one
I shall stop. At the second, I shall feel it my duty to administer a
dose of castor-oil all round. The boy that moves his legs or arms will
be understood to invite amputation. I have brought my instruments with
me, and never allow pleasure to interfere with my business. Do you
promise?"

"Yes, sir," said six small voices simultaneously. The  volley was,
however, followed by half a dozen dropping questions.

"Silence! Bob, put your feet down, and stop rattling that sword. Flora
shall sit by my side, like a little lady, and be an example to the
rest. Fung Tang shall stay, too, if he likes. Now, turn down the gas a
little; there, that will do--just enough to make the fire look
brighter, and to show off the Christmas candles. Silence, everybody!
The boy who cracks an almond, or breathes too loud over his raisins,
will be put out of the room."

There was a profound silence. Bob laid his sword tenderly aside and
nursed his leg thoughtfully. Flora, after coquettishly adjusting the
pockets of her little apron, put her arm upon the doctor's shoulder,
and permitted herself to be drawn beside him. Fung Tang, the little
heathen page, who was permitted, on this rare occasion, to share the
Christmas revels in the drawing-room, surveyed the group with a smile
that was at once sweet and philosophical. The light ticking of a
French clock on the mantel, supported by a young shepherdess of bronze
complexion and great symmetry of limb, was the only sound that
disturbed the Christmas-like peace of the apartment,--a peace which
held the odors of evergreens, new toys, cedar boxes, glue, and varnish
in a harmonious combination that passed all understanding.

"About four years ago at this time," began the doctor, "I attended a
course of lectures in a certain city. One of the professors, who was a
sociable, kindly man--though somewhat practical and hard-headed--
invited me to his house on Christmas night. I was very glad to go, as
I was anxious to see one of his sons, who, though only twelve years
old, was said to be very clever. I dare not tell you how many Latin
verses this little fellow could recite, or how many English ones he
had composed. In the first place, you'd want me to repeat them;
secondly, I'm not a  judge of poetry--Latin or English. But there were
judges who said they were wonderful for a boy, and everybody predicted
a splendid future for him. Everybody but his father. He shook his head
doubtingly whenever it was mentioned, for, as I have told you, he was
a practical, matter-of-fact man.

"There was a pleasant party at the professor's that night. All the
children of the neighborhood were there, and among them the
professor's clever son, Rupert, as they called him--a thin little
chap, about as tall as Bobby there, and fair and delicate as Flora by
my side. His health was feeble, his father said; he seldom ran about
and played with other boys--preferring to stay at home and brood over
his books, and compose what he called his verses.

"Well, we had a Christmas-tree just like this, and we had been
laughing and talking, calling the names of the children who had
presents on the tree, and everybody was very happy and joyous, when
one of the children suddenly uttered a cry of mingled surprise and
hilarity, and said, 'Here's something for Rupert--and what do you
think it is?'

"We all guessed. 'A desk;' 'A copy of Milton;' 'A gold pen;' 'A
rhyming dictionary.' 'No? what then?'

"'A drum!'

"'A what?' asked everybody.

"'A drum! with Rupert's name on it.'

"Sure enough, there it was. A good-sized, bright, new, brass-bound
drum, with a slip of paper on it, with the inscription, 'For RUPERT.'

"Of course we all laughed, and thought it a good joke. 'You see you're
to make a noise in the world, Rupert!' said one. 'Here's parchment for
the poet,' said another. 'Rupert's last work in sheepskin covers,'
said a third. 'Give us a classical tune, Rupert,' said a fourth, and
so on. But Rupert seemed too mortified to speak; he changed  color,
bit his lips, and finally burst into a passionate fit of crying and
left the room. Then those who had joked him felt ashamed, and
everybody began to ask who had put the drum there. But no one knew,
or, if they did, the unexpected sympathy awakened for the sensitive
boy kept them silent. Even the servants were called up and questioned,
but no one could give any idea where it came from. V it The comic is
experienced tragically. The representation is come"grotesque"),
to notice the unbalanced,? incoherent nature of) and things,
arbitrariness, confusion... is not, in any case the opinion invariant"
style the"grotesque" disappears,"ungrotesque. Other I differences
between older poems( for" the had Proof own is Lichtenstein writes
poems in in example, Twilight later up( for example without, behind
the, Fear) in the same style are detectable, That Twilight and other
poems take to things strangely(

.
But I had to pass
through the city where the professor lived, and there I met him. My
first question was about Rupert. The professor shook his head sadly.
'He's not so well' he said; 'he has been declining since last
Christmas, when you saw him. A very strange case,' he added, giving it
a long Latin name, 'a very singular case. But go and see him yourself'
he urged; 'it may distract his mind and do him good.'

"I went accordingly to the professor's house, and found Eupert lying
on a sofa propped up with pillows. Around him were scattered his
books, and, what seemed in singular contrast, that drum I told you
about was hanging on a nail just above his head. His face was thin and
wasted; there was a red spot on either cheek, and his eyes were very
bright and widely opened. He was glad to see me, and when I told him
where I was going, he asked a thousand questions about the war. I
thought I had thoroughly diverted his mind from its sick and languid
fancies, when he suddenly grasped my hand and drew me towards him.

"'Doctor,' said he, in a low whisper, 'you won't laugh at me if I tell
you something?'

"'No, certainly not,' I said.

"'You remember that drum?' he said, pointing to the glittering toy
that hung against the wall. 'You know, too, how it came to me. A few
weeks after Christmas I was lying half asleep here, and the drum was
hanging on the wall, when suddenly I heard it beaten; at first low and
slowly, then faster and louder, until its rolling filled the house. In
the middle of the night I heard it again. I did not dare to tell
anybody about it, but I have heard it every night ever since.'

"He paused and looked anxiously in my face. 'Sometimes,' he continued,
'it is played softly, sometimes loudly, but always quickening to a
long roll, so loud and alarming that I have looked to see people
coming into my room to ask what was the matter. But I think, doctor--I
think,' he repeated slowly, looking up with painful interest into my
face, 'that no one hears it but myself.'

"I thought so, too, but I asked him if he had heard it at any other
time.

"'Once or twice in the daytime,' he replied, 'when I have been reading
or writing; then very loudly, as though it were angry, and tried in
that way to attract my attention away from my books.'

"I looked into his face and placed my hand upon his pulse. His eyes
were very bright and his pulse a little flurried and quick. I then
tried to explain to him that he was very weak, and that his senses
were very acute, as most weak people's are; and how that when he read,
or grew interested and excited, or when he was tired at night, the
throbbing of a big artery made the beating sound he heard. He listened
to me with a sad smile of unbelief, but thanked me, and in a little
while I went away. But as I was going downstairs I met the professor.
I gave him my opinion of the case--well, no matter what it was.

"'He wants fresh air and exercise' said the professor, 'and some
practical experience of life, sir.' The professor was not a bad man,
but he was a little worried and impatient, and thought--as clever
people are apt to think--that things which he didn't understand were
either silly or improper.

"I left the city that very day, and in the excitement of battlefields
and hospitals I forgot all about little Rupert, nor did I hear of him
again, until one day, meeting an old classmate in the army, who had
known the professor, he told me that Rupert had become quite insane,
and that in one of his paroxysms he had escaped from the house, and as
he had never been found, it was feared that he had fallen into the
river and was drowned. I was terribly shocked for the moment, as you
may imagine; but, dear me, I was living just then among scenes as
terrible and shocking, and I had little time to spare to mourn over
poor Rupert.

"It was not long after receiving this intelligence that we had a
terrible battle, in which a portion of our army was slaughtered. I was
detached from my brigade to ride over to the battlefield and assist
the surgeons of the beaten division, who had more on their hands than
they could attend to. When I reached the barn that served for a
temporary hospital, I went at once to work. Ah! Bob," said the doctor
thoughtfully, taking the bright sword from the hands of the half-
frightened Bob, and holding it gravely before him, "these pretty
playthings are symbols of cruel, ugly realities."

"I turned to a tall, stout Vermonter," he continued, very slowly,
tracing a pattern on the rug with the point of the scabbard, "who was
badly wounded in both thighs, but he held up his hands and begged me
to help others first who needed it more than he. I did not at first
heed his request, for this kind of unselfishness was very common in
the army; but he went on, 'For God's sake, doctor, leave me here;
there is a drummer boy of our regiment--a mere  child--dying, if he
isn't dead now. Go and see him first. He lies over there. He saved
more than one life. He was at his post in the panic of this morning,
and saved the honor of the regiment.' I was so much more impressed by
the man's manner than by the substance of his speech, which was,
however, corroborated by the other poor fellows stretched around me,
that I passed over to where the drummer lay, with his drum beside him.
I gave one glance at his face--and--yes, Bob--yes, my children--it
_was_ Rupert.

"Well! well! it needed not the chalked cross which my brother surgeons
had left upon the rough board whereon he lay to show how urgent was
the relief he sought; it needed not the prophetic words of the
Vermonter, nor the damp that mingled with the brown curls that clung
to his pale forehead, to show how hopeless it was now. I called him by
name. He opened his eyes--larger, I thought, in the new vision that
was beginning to dawn upon him--and recognized me. He whispered, 'I'm
glad you are come, but I don't think you can do me any good.'

"I could not tell him a lie. I could not say anything. I only pressed
his hand in mine as he went on.

"'But you will see father, and ask him to forgive me. Nobody is to
blame but myself. It was a long time before I understood why the drum
came to me that Christmas night, and why it kept calling to me every
night, and what it said. I know it now. The work is done, and I am
content. Tell father it is better as it is. I should have lived only
to worry and perplex him, and something in me tells me this is right.'

"He lay still for a moment, and then grasping my hand, said,--

"'Hark!'

"I listened, but heard nothing but the suppressed moans  of the
wounded men around me. 'The drum' he said faintly; 'don't you hear
it?--the drum is calling me,'

"He reached out his arm to where it lay, as though he would embrace
it.

"'Listen'--he went on--'it's the reveille. There are the ranks drawn
up in review. Don't you see the sunlight flash down the long line of
bayonets? Their faces are shining--they present arms--there comes the
General--but his face I cannot look at for the glory round his head.
He sees me; he smiles, it is '--and with a name upon his lips that he
had learned long ago, he stretched himself wearily upon the planks and
lay quite still.

"That's all.

"No questions now--never mind what became of the  drum.

"Who's that sniveling?

"Bless my soul! where's my pill-box?"


THE END