 We rode
along the base of a ridge for about three miles, but as on ascending it
to take a survey, I observed that at about a mile beyond, it terminated,
and that the dry bed of the lagoon to our right passed into a plain of
great breadth immediately in front, the character and appearance of which
was very doubtful, and as it was now sunset, and we had journeyed upwards
of 34 miles, I halted for the night at another puddle, rather larger than
the last, but with sorry feed for the horses. At this place we dug our
second well, by moonlight, as we had dug the first, and laid down on the
ground to rest, fatigued, I candidly admit, both in mind and body.

The day had been exceedingly cold, as was the night, and on the following
morning with the wind at S.S.E., and a clear and cloudless sky, the
temperature still continued low. At about a mile from where we had
bivouacked, we arrived at the termination of the sandy ridge, and
descended into the plain I had been reluctant to traverse in the
uncertain light of evening. It proved firm, however, though it was
evidently subject to floods. Samphire, salsolae, and mesembryanthemum
were growing on it, and one would have supposed from its appearance that
it was a sea marsh. Mr. Stuart shot a beautiful ground parrot as we were
crossing it, on a bearing of 345 degrees, or little more than a N. and by
W. course. At 6 1/2 miles we ascended some heavy sandy ridges, without
any regularity in their disposition, but lying in great confusion.
Toiling over these, at seven or eight miles farther we sighted a fine
sheet of water, bearing N. and distant about two miles. At another mile I
altered my course to 325 degrees, to pass to the westward of this new
feature, which then proved to be a lake about the size of Lake Bonney,
that is to say from 10 to 12 miles in circumference. The ridge by which
we had approached it terminated suddenly and directly over it; to our
right there were other ridges terminating in a similar manner, with rushy
flats between them; eastward the country was dark and very low; to the
north there was a desert of glittering white sand in low hillocks,
scattered over with dwarf brush, and on it the heat was playing as over a
furnace. Immediately beneath me to the west there was a flat leading to
the shore of the lake, and on the western side a bright red sand hill,
full eighty feet high, shut out the view in that quarter. This ridge was
not altogether a mile and a half in length, and behind it there were
other ridges of the same colour bounding the horizon with edges as sharp
as icebergs.

I did not yet know whether the waters of the lake were salt or fresh,
although I feared they were salt. Looking on it, however, I saw clearly
that it was very shallow; a line of poles ran across it, such as are used
by the natives for catching wild fowl, of which there were an abundance,
as well as of hematops on the water. As soon as we descended from the
sand ridge we got on a narrow native path, that led us down to a hut,
about 100 yards from the shore of the lake.

As we approached the water, the effluvia from it was exceedingly
offensive, and the ground became a soft, black muddy sand. On tasting it
we found that the water was neither one thing or the other, neither salt
or fresh, but wholly unfit for use. Close to its margin there was a broad
path leading to the eastward, or rather round the lake; and under the
sand ridge to the west, were twenty-seven huts, but they had long been
deserted, and were falling to decay. Nevertheless they proved that the
waters of the lake were sometimes drinkable, or that the natives had some
other supply of fresh water at no great distance, from whence they could
easily come to take wild fowl, nor could I doubt such place would be the
creek.

Notwithstanding that the water was so bad, I tried several places by
digging, but invariably came to salt water, oozing through black mud, and
I there fore presumed that a good deal of rain must have fallen
hereabouts, to have tempered the water of the lake so much; which it
struck me would otherwise have been quite saline. From the point where we
first came down upon it, we traversed a flat beach covered with a short
coarse rush, having the high red sand hill, of which I have spoken, to
our left; before us a vast extent of low white sand, and to the eastward
an extremely dark and depressed country. I was really afraid of entering
on the scorching sands in our front, for we were now full 90 miles from
the creek, and it was absolutely necessary, before I should exceed that
distance, to find a more permanent supply of water than the wells we had
dug on our way out. In order to ascertain the nature of the country more
satisfactorily, however, I ascended the rugged termination of the sandy
ridge, close to which we had been riding, and was induced, from what I
then saw, to determine on a course somewhat to the west of north, since a
due north course was evidently closed upon me; for I now saw that the
country in that direction was hopeless, as well as in an easterly
direction; but although I stood full 80 feet above the lake, I could not
distinguish any thing like a hill on the distant horizon. To the
westward, as a medium point, there were a succession of sandy ridges,
similar to that on which I stood; but to the S.W. there seemed to be an
interval of plain. As the thunder storm had reached as far as the place
where we last slept, I did not doubt but that it had also reached the
lake, and on consideration determined to keep as northerly a course as
circumstances would permit, in pushing into a country in which I was
meeting new difficulties every hour. Descending, therefore, on a bearing
of 340 degrees, I went to a distance of six miles before coming to a
small puddle at which I was glad to halt, it being the only drinkable
water we had seen. Here we dug a third well, although, like the first,
there was but little chance of benefiting by it. It behoved me therefore
to be still more careful in increasing my distance from the creek, so
that on the morning of the 17th I thought it prudent to search for some,
and as the country appeared open to the south, I turned to that point in
the hope of success.

We crossed some low sand hills to a swamp in which there was a good deal
of surface water, but none of a permanent kind. We then crossed the N.W.
extremity of an extensive grassy plain, similar to those I have already
described, but infinitely larger. It continued, indeed, for many miles to
the south, passing between all the sandy points jutting into it; and so
closely was the Desert allied to fertility at this point, and I may say
in these regions, that I stood more than once with one foot on
salsolaceous plants growing in pure sand, with the other on luxuriant
grass, springing up from rich alluvial soil. At two miles and a quarter
from the swamp, striking a native path we followed it up to the S.W.,
and, at three-quarters of a mile, we reached two huts that had been built
on a small rise of ground, with a few low trees near them. Our situation
was too precarious to allow of my passing these huts without a strict
search round about, for I was sure that water was not far off; and at
length we found a small, narrow, and deep channel of but a few yards in
length, hid in long grass, at a short distance from them. The water was
about three feet deep, and was so sheltered that I made no doubt it would
last for ten days or a fortnight. Grateful for the success that had
attended our search, I allowed the horses to rest and feed on the grass
for a time; but it was of the kind from which the natives collect so much
seed, and though beautiful to the eye, was not relished by our animals.
The plains extended for miles to the south and south-east, with an aspect
of great luxuriance and beauty; nor could I doubt they owed their
existence to the final overflow of the large creek we had all along
marked trending down to this point. Such, indeed, I felt from the first,
even when I looked on its broad and glittering waters, would sooner or
later be its termination, or that it would expend itself, less usefully,
on the Stony Desert. As yet, however, there was no indication of our
approach to that iron region. The plains were surrounded on all sides by
lofty ridges of sand, and the whole scene bore ample testimony to the
comparative infancy, if I may so express myself, of the interior. We next
pursued a N.N.W. course into the interior, and soon left the grassy
plains, crossing alternate sand ridges and flats on a bearing of 346
degrees, the whole country having a strong resemblance to that between
Sydney and Botany Bay in New South Wales. On one of the ridges we
surprised a native, who ran from us in great terror, and with incredible
speed. About noon we crossed a plain, partly covered with stones and
partly bare, and at the further extremity of it passed through a gorge
between two sand hills into another plain that was barren beyond
description, with only salsolaceous herbs. It had large white patches of
clay on it, the shallow receptacles of rain water, but they were all dry.
The plain was otherwise covered with low salsolae, excepting on the
higher ground, on which samphire alone was growing. It was surrounded on
all sides by sand hills of a fiery red, and not even a stunted hakea was
to be seen. From this plain we again crossed alternate sand hills and
flats, the former covered with spinifex, the latter being quite denuded
of all vegetation; but one of the horses at last knocking up, I was
obliged to halt in this gloomy region, at the only puddle of rain water
we had seen since leaving the grassy plain. I was sure, however, from the
change that had taken place, and the character of the country around us,
that we were approaching that feature, the continuance of which, in order
to elucidate its probable origin, it had been a principal object in my
present journey to ascertain. I felt so convinced on this point, that I
could not have returned to Adelaide without having satisfied my mind on
the subject. I might, indeed, have had general ideas as to the past state
of the depressed interior, from what I had already seen of it; but the
Stony Desert was the key to disclose the whole,--and although I feared
again to tread its surface, its existence so far away to the eastward of
where I had first been on it, would at least tend to confirm my
impressions as to what it had been.

It was clear, indeed, from the character of the country through which we
had just passed, that we were again approaching the salt formation; more
especially when, from the highest ground near us, I observed its
generally dark aspect, and that there was the dry bed of a large salt
lagoon directly in our course. We here dug a fourth well: the water was
extremely muddy and thick, for the basin in which it was contained was
very shallow, and the wind constantly playing on its surface raised waves
that had stirred up the mud; but as there was more water than usual, I
hoped that by deepening, it might settle. This was nothing new to us, for
not only on our journey to Lake Torrens and to the N.W., had we subsisted
on similar beverage, but the water at the Depot at Fort Grey was half
mud, and perfectly opaque. However, it was a matter of necessity to
retain it here if possible, and we therefore took the best measures in
our power to do so.

On the 19th we resumed our journey on the former bearing, the wind
blowing keen from the south. At about a mile and a half we reached the
salt lagoon, as it appeared to be in the distance, but which proved to be
rather a flooded plain. It was about two miles broad, and three and
three-quarters long, and was speckled over rather than covered with salt
herbs. At this time, also, we had an immense barren plain to our left,
bounded all around, but more particularly to the north, by sand hills;
over these we toiled for nine miles, when at their termination the centre
of the plain bore 176 degrees to the east of north, or nearly south. At
five miles and a half further, having previously crossed a small stony
plain, succeeded by sand ridges and valleys, both covered with spinifex,
we ascended a pointed hill that lay directly in our course, and from it
beheld the Stony Desert almost immediately below our feet. I must
acknowledge, that coming so suddenly on it, I almost lost my breath. It
was apparently unaltered in a single feature: herbless and treeless, it
occupied more than one half of the visible horizon, that is to say, from
10 degrees east of north, westward round to south. As to the eastward, so
here the ridges we had just crossed abutted upon it, and as many of them
were lower than the line of the horizon, they looked like sea dunes,
backed by storm clouds, from the dusky colour of the plain.

After surveying this gloomy expanse of stoneclad desert we looked for
some object on the N.W. horizon upon which to move across it, but none
presented itself, excepting a very distant sand hill bearing 308 degrees,
towards which I determined to proceed. We accordingly descended to the
plain, and soon found ourselves on its uneven surface. There was a narrow
space destitute of stones at the base of the sand hill, stamped all over
with the impressions of natives' feet. From eighty to one hundred men,
women, and children must have passed along there; and it appeared to me
that this had been a migration of some tribe or other during the wet
weather, but it was very clear those poor people never ventured on the
plain itself.

Descended from our high position, we could no longer see the sand hill
just noticed, but held on our course by compass like a ship at sea, being
two hours and forty minutes in again sighting it; and reaching it in
somewhat less than an hour afterwards, calculated the distance at
thirteen miles. As we approached, it looked like an island in the midst
of the ocean; but we found a large though shallow sheet of water amongst
the stones under it, for which we were exceedingly thankful. From this
point we crossed to another sand hill that continued northerly further
than we could see, having the Desert on either hand. Our horses beginning
to flag, I halted at five on the side of the ridge, near a small puddle
that had only water enough for them to drink off at once.

The morning of the 20th was bitterly cold, with the wind at S.S.E., and I
cannot help thinking that there are extensive waters in some parts of the
in terior, over which it came: the thermometer stood at 42 degrees. We
started on a course of 335 degrees for a distant sandy peak rising above
the general line of the horizon. At a mile, one of the horses fortunately
got bogged in a little narrow channel just like that in the grassy plain;
I say fortunately, for we might otherwise have passed the water it
contained without knowing it, so completely was it shaded. In looking
along the channel more closely, we discovered a little pool about three
yards long and one broad, but deep. At this we breakfasted and watered
the horses, and then pushed on. The lodgment of this water had been
caused by local drainage, and was evident from the green feed round
about. Here again it appeared we had occasion to be thankful, for on this
supply I hoped we might safely calculate for a week at least, so that we
still held on our course with more confidence, keeping at the base of the
ridge, and passing an extent of five miles through an open box-tree
forest, every tree of which was dead. The whole scene being one of the
most profound silence and marked desolation, for here no living thing was
to be seen.

At nine miles we ascended the ridge, and from it the Desert appeared to
be interminable from N. to N.E., but a few distant sand hills now shewed
themselves to the eastward of the last mentioned point. We then descended
into a valley of sand and spinifex, and at four miles and a half ascended
an elevated peak in a sandy ridge lying in our way. From this, the view
to the north-west was over a succession of sand hills. The point we stood
upon, as well as the ridge, was flanked southwards by an immense plain of
red sand and clay, and to the N.E. by a similar but smaller plain.
Crossing a portion of the great plain, at four miles and a half we
ascended another peak, and then traversed a narrow valley crossing from
it into a second valley, down which we travelled for six miles.

At that distance it was half a mile in breadth, and there was a little
verdure near some gum-trees, but no water. As we were searching about, a
cockatoo, (Cacatua Leadbeateri) flew over the sand hill to our right, and
pitched in the trees; we consequently crossed to the opposite side and
halted for the night, where there was a good deal of green grass for the
horses, but no water in the contiguous valley.


CHAPTER II.


THE HORSES--ASCEND THE HILLS--IRRESOLUTION AND RETREAT--HORSES REDUCED TO
GREAT WANT--UNEXPECTED RELIEF--TRY THE DESERT TO THE N.E.--FIND WATER IN
OUR LAST WELL--REACH THE CREEK--PROCEED TO THE EASTWARD--PLAGUE OF FLIES
AND ANTS--SURPRISE AN OLD MAN--SEA-GULLS AND PELICANS--FISH--POOL OF
BRINE--MEET NATIVES--TURN TO THE N.E.--COOPER'S CREEK TRIBE, THEIR
KINDNESS AND APPEARANCE--ATTEMPT TO CROSS THE PLAINS--TURN BACK--PROCEED
TO THE NORTHWARD--EFFECTS OF REFRACTION--FIND NATIVES AT OUR OLD CAMP AND
THE STORES UNTOUCHED--COOPER'S CREEK, ITS GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION.


I had taken all the horses, with the exception of one, out with me on
this journey, and as they will shortly bear a prominent part in this
narrative, I will make some mention of them. My own horse was a grey--for
which reason I called him Duncan,--I had ridden him during the whole
period of my wanderings, and think I never saw an animal that could
endure more, or suffered less from the want of water; he was aged, and a
proof, that in the brute creation as well as with mankind, years give a
certain stamina that youth does not possess. This animal, as the reader
will believe, knew me well, as indeed did all the horses, for I had stood
by to see them watered many a time. Mr. Stuart rode Mr. Browne's horse, a
little animal, but one of great endurance also; Mack used a horse we
called the Roan, a hunter that had been Mr. Poole's. Morgan rode poor
Punch, whose name I have before had occasion to mention, and who,
notwithstanding subsequent rest, had not recovered from the fatigues of
his northern excursion. Besides these we had four pack horses:--Bawley, a
strong and compact little animal, with a blaze on the forehead, high
spirited, with a shining coat, and having been a pet, was up to all kind
of tricks, but was a general favourite, and a nice horse;--the other was
Traveller, a light chesnut, what the hunter would call a washy brute,
always eating and never fat;--the Colt, so called from his being young,
certainly unequal to such a journey as that on which he was taken;--and
Slommy, another aged horse. During the summer, Traveller had had a great
discharge from the nose, and I was several times on the point of ordering
him to be shot, under an apprehension that his disease was the glanders;
but, although the colt and my own horse contracted it, I postponed my
final mandate, and all recovered; however, he continued weak. At this
time they were unshod, and had pretty well worn their hoofs down to the
quick, insomuch that any inequality in the ground made them limp, and it
was distressing to ride them; but, notwithstanding, they bore up
singularly against the changes and fatigues they had to go through.

From a small rising ground near where we stopped in the valley, on the
occasion of which I am speaking, and in the obscure light of departing
day we saw to the N.N.W. a line of dark looking hills, at the distance of
about ten or twelve miles, but we could not discover tree or bush upon
them, all we could make out was that they were dark objects above the
line of horizon, and that the intervening country seemed to be as dark as
they were. The weather had changed from cold to hot, the wind having
flown from S. to the N.E., and the day and night were exceedingly warm. I
was sorry to observe, too, that the horses had scarcely touched the grass
on which, for their sakes, I had been tempted to stop, and that they were
evidently suffering from the previous day's journey of from 34 to 36
miles, that being about the distance we had left the water in the grassy
valley. Before mounting, on the morning of the 21st, Mr. Stuart and I
went to see if we could make out more than we had been able to do the
night before, what kind of country was in front of us, but we were
disappointed, and found that we should have to wait patiently until we
got nearer the hills to judge of their formation. About half a mile below
where we had slept, the valley led to the N.N.E., and on turning, we
found it there opened at once upon the Stony Desert; but the hills were
now hid from us by sandy undulations to our left, and even when we got
well into the plain we could hardly make out what the hills were. As we
neared them, however, we observed that they were nothing more than high
sand hills, covered with stones even as the desert itself, to their tops.
That part of it over which we were riding also differed from any other
portion, in having large sharp-pointed water-worn rocks embedded in the
ground amongst the stones, as if they had been so whilst the ground was
soft. There was a line of small box-trees marking the course of a creek
between us and the hills, and a hope that we should find water cheered us
for a moment, but that ray soon vanished when we saw the nature of its
bed. We searched along it for about half an hour in vain, and then turned
to the hills and ascended to the top of one of the highest, about 150
feet above the level of the plain. From it the eye wandered hopelessly
for some bright object on which to rest. Behind us to the south-east lay
the sand hills we had crossed, with the stony plain sweeping right round
them, but in every other direction the dark brown desert extended. The
line of the horizon was broken to the north-west and north by hills
similar to the one we had ascended; but in those directions not a blade
of grass, not a glittering spot was to be seen.

At this point, which I have placed in lat. 25 degrees 54 minutes and in
long. 139 degrees 25 minutes, I had again to choose between the chance of
success or disaster, as on the first occasion; if I went on and should
happen to find water, all for the time would be well, if not, destruction
would have been inevitable. I was now nearly 50 miles from water, and
feared that, as it was, some of my horses would fall before I could get
back to it, yet I lingered undecided on the hill, reluctant to make up my
mind, for I felt that if I thus again retired, it would be a virtual
abandonment of the task undertaken. I should be doing an injustice to Mr.
Stuart and to my men if I did not here mention that I told them the
position we were placed in, and the chance on which our safety would
depend if we went on. They might well have been excused if they had
expressed an opinion contrary to such a course, but the only reply they
made was to assure me that they were ready and willing to follow me to
the last. After this, I believe I sat on the hill for more than half an
hour with the telescope in my hand, but there was nothing to encourage me
onwards; our situation, however, admitted not of delay. I might, it is
true, have gone on and perished with all my men; but I saw neither the
credit nor the utility of such a measure. I trust the reader will believe
that I would not have shrunk from any danger that perseverance or
physical strength could have overcome; that indeed I did not shrink from
the slow fate, which, as far as I could judge, would inevitably have
awaited me if I had gone on; but that in the exercise of sound discretion
I decided on falling back. The feeling which would have led me onwards
was similar to that of a man who is sensible of having committed an
error, yet is ashamed to make an apology, and who would rather run the
risk of being shot, than of having the charge of pusillanimity fixed upon
him; but I have never regretted the step I took, and it has been no small
gratification to me to find that the Noble President of the Royal
Geographical Society, Lord Colchester, when addressing the members of
that enlightened body, in its name presenting medals to Dr. Leichhardt
and myself, for our labours in the cause of Geography, alluded to and
approved "the prudence with which further advance was abandoned, when it
could only have risked the loss of those entrusted to my charge."

We slowly retraced our steps to the valley in which we had slept, and I
stopped there for half an hour, but none of the horses would eat, with
the exception of Traveller, and he certainly made good use of his time.
The others collected round me as I sat under a tree, with their heads
over mine, and my own horse pulled my hat off my head to engage my
attention. Poor brute! I would have given much at that moment to have
relieved him, but I could not. We were all of us in the same distress,
and if we had not ultimately found water must all have perished together.
Finding that they would not eat, we saddled and proceeded onwards, I
should say backwards--and at 10 p.m. we were on the sand ridges. At the
head of the valley Traveller fell dead, and I feared every moment that we
should lose the Colt. At one I stopped to rest the horses till dawn, and
then remounted, but Morgan and Mack got slowly on, so that I thought it
better to precede them, and if possible to take some water back to
moisten the mouth of their horses, and I accordingly went in advance with
Mr. Stuart. I thought we should never have got through the dead box-tree
forest I have mentioned, however we did so about 11 a.m., and made
straight for the spot where we expected to relieve both ourselves and our
horses, but the water was gone. Mr. Stuart poked his fingers into the mud
and moistened his lips with the water that filled the holes he had made,
but that was all. We were yet searching for water when Morgan and Mack
appeared, but without the colt; fortunately they had descended into the
valley higher up, and had found a little pool, which they had emptied,
under an impression that we had found plenty; and were astonished at
hearing that none any longer remained. In this situation, and with the
apparent certain prospect of losing my own and Mr. Browne's horse, and
the colt which was still alive when the men left him, not more than a
mile in the rear, we continued our search for water, but it would have
been to no purpose. Suddenly a pigeon topped the sand hill--it being the
first bird we had seen--a solitary bird--passing us like lightning, it
pitched for a moment, and for a moment only, on the plain, about a
quarter of a mile from us, and then flew away. It could only have wetted
its bill, but Mr. Stuart had marked the spot, and there was water.
Perhaps I ought to dwell for a moment on this singular occurrence, but I
leave it to make its own impression on the reader's feelings. I was
enabled to send back to the colt, and we managed to save him, and as
there was a sufficiency of water for our consumption, I determined to
give the men a day of rest, and to try if I could find a passage across
the Desert a little to the eastward of north, and with Mr. Stuart
proceeded in that direction on the morning of the 24th; but at 3 p.m. we
were out of sight of all high land. The appearance of the Desert was like
that of an immense sea beach, and large fragments of rock were imbedded
in the ground, as if by the force of waters, and the stones were more
scattered, thus shewing the sandy bed beneath and betwixt them. The day
was exceedingly hot, and our horses' hoofs were so brittle that pieces
flew off them like splinters when they struck them against the stones. We
were at this time about sixteen or seventeen miles from the sand hill
where we had left the men. The Desert appeared to be taking a northerly
direction, and certainly was much broader than further to the westward,
making apparently for the Gulf of Carpentaria; nor could I doubt but that
there had once been an open sea between us and it. We reached our little
bivouac at 9 p.m. both ourselves and our horses thoroughly wearied, and
disappointed as we had been, I regretted that I had put the poor things
to unnecessary hardships. Perhaps I was wrong in having done so, but I
could not rest. Our latitude here was 26 degrees 26 minutes and our long.
by account 139 degrees 21 minutes. In the morning we crossed the
remaining portion of the Desert, as I had determined on making the best
of my way to the creek, and passing the sandy ridges reached our first
water (the 4th going out), about sunset or a little before. Water still
remained, but it was horridly thick, and in the morning smelt so
offensive that it was loathsome to ourselves and the animals. Our great,
indeed our only, dependence then was on the water in the little channel
on the grassy plain; at this we arrived late on the afternoon of the
25th. Another day and we should again have been disappointed: the water
on which I had calculated for a fortnight was all but gone. In the
morning we drained almost the last drop out of the channel. We were now
about 92 miles from the creek, without the apparent probability of relief
till we should get to it, for it seemed hopeless to expect that we should
find any water in the wells we had dug. Crossing the grassy plains on an
east-north-east course, we passed the salt lake about 10 a.m. to our
left, and ran along the sandy ridges between it and our encampment of the
15th, where we had made our second well, at 6 p.m., but it was dry and
the bottom cracked and baked.

I would gladly have given my poor horses a longer rest than prudence
would have justified, but we had not time for rest. At 8 we again
mounted, and went slowly on; and when darkness closed around us lit a
small lamp, and one of us walking in front led the way for the others to
follow; thus tracking our way over those dreary regions all night long,
we neared our last remaining well, 36 miles distant from the creek, just
as morning dawned. Objects were still obscure as we approached the spot
where our hopes rested, for our horses could hardly drag one foot after
the other. Mr. Stuart was in front, and called to me that he saw the
little trees under whose shade we had slept; soon after he said he saw
something glittering where the well was, and immediately after shouted
out, "Water, water." It is impossible for me to record all this without a
feeling of more than thankfulness to the Almighty Power that guided us.
At this place we were still 180 miles from Fort Grey; and if we had not
found this supply, it is more than probable the fate of our horses would
have sealed our own. As it was we joyfully unsaddled, and, after
watering, turned them out to feed. Singular it was that the well on which
we had least dependence, and from which we had been longest absent,
should thus have held out--but so it was. At 9 we resumed our journey,
there being about half a gallon a-piece for the horses just before we
started; but although this, and the short rest they had, had relieved
them, they got on slowly; and it was not until after midnight of the
27th, a.m. indeed of the 28th, that we reached the creek, with two short
of our complement of horses, the Roan and the Colt both having dropped on
the plains, but fortunately at no great distance, so that we recovered
them in the course of the day.

It will naturally be supposed that, arrived at a place of safety, we here
rested for a while; but my mind was no sooner relieved from one cause for
anxiety, than it was filled with another. If I except the thunder-storm
which had enabled me to undertake my late journey from the creek, no rain
had fallen, the weather had suddenly become oppressively hot, with a sky
as clear as ether. I had still the mountain range to the N.E. to examine,
and the upper branches of the creek, and in this necessary survey I knew
no time was to be lost. Indeed I doubted if my return to the Depot was
not already shut out, by the drying up of the water in Strzelecki's
Creek, although I hoped Mr. Browne still held his ground; but not only
was I anxious on these heads, but as to our eventual retreat from these
heartless regions. I would gladly have rested for a few days, for I was
beginning to feel weak. From the 20th of July, and it was now the last
day but two of October, I had been in constant exercise from sunrise to
sunset; and if I except the few days I had rested at the Depot, had slept
under the canopy of heaven. My food had been insufficient to support me,
and I had a malady hanging upon me that was slowly doing its work; but I
felt that I had no time to spare, and, as I could not justify indulgence
to myself, so on the 29th we commenced our progress up the creek, but
halted at six miles on a beautiful sheet of water, and with every promise
of success. In the course of the day we passed a singularly large grave.
It was twenty-three feet long, and fourteen broad. The boughs on the top
of it were laid so as to meet the oval shape of the mound itself, but the
trees were not carved, nor were there any walks about it, as I had seen
in other parts of the continent.

Before we commenced our journey up the creek, I determined to secrete all
the stores I could, in order to lighten the loads of the horses as much
as possible, for they were now almost worn out; but it was difficult to
say where we should conceal them, so as to be secure from the quick eyes
of the natives. At first I thought my best plan would be to dig a hole
and bury them, and then to light a fire, so as to obliterate the marks;
but I changed my purpose, and placed them under a rhagodia bush, a short
distance from the creek, and arranged some boughs all round it. In this
place I hoped they would escape observation, for there were one or two
things I should have exceedingly regretted to lose.

The weather had been getting warmer and warmer, and it had at this time
become so hot that it was almost intolerable, worse indeed than at this
season the previous year. The 30th was a day of oppressive heat, and the
flies and mosquitoes were more than usually troublesome. I have not said
much of these insects in the course of this narrative, for after all they
are secondary objects only; but it is impossible to describe the
ceaseless annoyance of these and a small ant. The latter swarmed in
myriads in the creek and on the plains, and what with these little
creatures at night, and the flies by day, we really had no rest. I
continually wore a veil, or I could not have attended to our movements,
or performed my duties. It is probable that being in the neighbourhood of
water they were more numerous, but here they were a perfect plague, and
in our depressed and wearied condition we, perhaps, felt their attacks
more than we should otherwise have done. We commenced our journey at
seven, and crossing the creek at three-quarters of a mile, ascended a
small sand hill upon its proper left bank. Where we had crossed the
channel was perfectly dry, but from the sand hill another magnificent
sheet of water stretched away to the southeast as far as we could see.

From this point the creek appeared to be bounded by forest land, partly
scrubby and partly grassed. To the south there were flats seemingly
subject to floods, and lightly timbered, and beyond these were low sand
hills. To the S.W. a high line of trees marked the course of a tributary
from that quarter. To the north the country was exceedingly sandy and
low, as well as to the east; and the direction of the sand ridges was
only 5 degrees to the west of north, so that from this point to our
extreme west they gradually alter their line 17 degrees, as in 138
degrees of longitude they ran 22 degrees to the west of north. I was not
able to take more than one bearing from the hill I had ascended, to a
remarkable flat-topped hill nearly N.E. I now crossed the creek on an
east course, and traversed sandy plains, and low undulations, there being
a tolerable quantity of grass on both; and at four miles changed the
route a little to the northward for a small conical sand hill, from which
the flat-topped hill bore 41 degrees, and from it some darker hills were
visible, somewhat more to the eastward, and as they appeared to be
different from the sand ridges, I again changed my course for them, and
crossing the bed of the creek at four miles, ascended a small stony range
trending to the eastward, the creek being directly at their base.
Following up its proper left bank I ascended another part of the range at
three miles and a half, from which the flat-topped hill bore 24 degrees,
and the last hill I had ascended 239 degrees. The channel of the creek
had been dry for several miles, but we now saw a large sheet of water
bearing due east, distant two miles, to which we made our way, and then
stopped. From the top of this range the creek seemed to pass over
extensive and bare plains in many branches, southward there were some
stony hills, treeless and herbless, like those nearer to us. I was fairly
driven down to the valley by the flies, as numerous on the burning stones
on the top of the hill as any where else, and I left a knife and a pocket
handkerchief behind me. Notwithstanding the magnificent sheet of water we
were now resting near, I began thus early to doubt the character of this
creek. It had changed so often during the day, at one place having a
broad channel, at another splitting into numerous small ones, having a
great portion of its bed dry, and then presenting large and beautiful
reaches to view, that I hardly knew what opinion to form of it; I also
observed that it was leading away from the hills and taking us into a low
and desolate region, almost as bad as that to the westward; however, time
alone was to prove whether I was right in my surmises.

