"Ay, that hath he done," said Ambrose.  "He is not the man to halt when
good may be done.  What doth he do, since it seems thou hadst speech of
him, but send for Sir Thomas More, then sitting at Westminster, to come
and see him as soon as the Court brake up, and I attended my master.
They held council together, and by and by they sent for me to ask me of
what conditions and breeding the maid was, and what I knew of her
father?"

"Will they wed her to thee?  That were rarely good, so they gave thee
some good office!" cried his aunt.

"Nay, nay," said Ambrose.  "I have much to learn and understand ere I
think of a wife--if ever.  Nay!  But when they had heard all I could
tell them, they looked at one another, and the Dean said, `The maid is
no doubt of high blood in her own land--scarce a mate for a London
butcher or currier.'"

"`It were matching an Arab mare with a costard monger's colt,' said my
master, `or Angelica with Ralph Roister-Doister.'"

"I'd like to know what were better for the poor outlandish maid than to
give her to some honest man," put in Perronel.

"The end of it was," said Ambrose, "that Sir Thomas said he was to be at
the palace the next day, and he would strive to move the Queen to take
her countrywoman into her service.  Yea, and so he did, but though Queen
Katharine was moved by hearing of a fatherless maid of Spain, and at
first spake of taking her to wait on herself, yet when she heard the
maid's name, and that she was of Moorish blood, she would none of her.
She said that heresy lurked in them all, and though Sir Thomas offered
that the Dean or the Queen's own chaplain should question her on the
faith, it was all lost labour.  I heard him tell the Dean as much, and
thus it is that they bade me come for thee, and for the maid, take boat,
and bring you down to Chelsea, where Sir Thomas will let her be bred up
to wait on his little daughters till he can see what best may be done
for her.  I trow his spirit was moved by the Queen's hardness!  I heard
the Dean mutter, `_Et venient ab Oriente et Occidente_.'"

Perronel looked alarmed.  "The Queen deemed her heretic in grain!  Ah!
She is a good wench, and of kind conditions.  I would have no ill befall
her, but I am glad to be rid of her.  Sir Thomas--he is a wise man, ay,
and a married man, with maidens of his own, and he may have more wit in
the business than the rest of his kind.  Be the matter instant?"

"Methinks Sir Thomas would have it so, since this being a holy day, the
courts be not sitting, and he is himself at home, so that he can present
the maid to his lady.  And that makes no small odds."

"Yea, but what the lady is makes the greater odds to the maid, I trow,"
said Perronel anxiously.

"Fear not on that score.  Dame Alice More is of kindly conditions, and
will be good to any whom her lord commends to her; and as to the young
ladies, never saw I any so sweet or so wise as the two elder ones,
specially Mistress Margaret."

"Well-a-day!  What must be must!" philosophically observed Perronel.
"Now I have my wish, I could mourn over it.  I am loth to part with the
wench; and my man, when he comes home, will make an outcry for his
pretty Ally; but 'tis best so.  Come, Alice, girl, bestir thyself.
Here's preferment for thee."

Aldonza raised her great soft eyes in slow wonder, and when she had
heard what was to befall her, declared that she wanted no advancement,
and wished only to remain with mother Perronel.  Nay, she clung to the
kind woman, beseeching that she might not be sent away from the only
motherly tenderness she had ever known, and declaring that she would
work all day and all night rather than leave her; but the more
reluctance she showed, the more determined was Perronel, and she could
not but submit to her fate, only adding one more entreaty that she might
take her jackdaw, which was now a spruce grey-headed bird.  Perronel
said it would be presumption in a waiting-woman, but Ambrose declared
that at Chelsea there were all manner of beasts and birds, beloved by
the children and by their father himself, and that he believed the daw
would be welcome.  At any rate, if the lady of the house objected to it,
it could return with Mistress Randall.

Perronel hurried the few preparations, being afraid that Giles might
take advantage of the holiday to appear on the scene, and presently
Aldonza was seated in the boat, making no more lamentations after she
found that her fate was inevitable, but sitting silent, with downcast
head, now and then brushing away a stray tear as it stole down under her
long eyelashes.

Meantime Ambrose, hoping to raise her spirits, talked to his aunt of the
friendly ease and kindliness of the new home, where he was evidently as
thoroughly happy as it was in his nature to be.  He was much, in the
position of a barrister's clerk, superior to that of the mere servants,
but inferior to the young gentlemen of larger means, though not perhaps
of better birth, who had studied law regularly, and aspired to offices
or to legal practice.

But though Ambrose was ranked with the three or four other clerks, his
functions had more relation to Sir Thomas's literary and diplomatic
avocations than his legal ones.  From Lucas Hansen he had learnt Dutch
and French, and he was thus available for copying and translating
foreign correspondence.  His knowledge of Latin and smattering of Greek
enabled him to be employed in copying into a book some of the
inestimable letters of Erasmus which arrived from time to time, and Sir
Thomas promoted his desire to improve himself, and had requested Mr
Clements, the tutor of the children of the house, to give him weekly
lessons in Latin and Greek.

Sir Thomas had himself pointed out to him books calculated to settle his
mind on the truth and catholicity of the Church, and had warned him
against meddling with the fiery controversial tracts which, smuggled in
often through Lucas's means, had set his mind in commotion.  And for the
present at least beneath the shadow of the great man's intelligent
devotion, Ambrose's restless spirit was tranquil.

Of course, he did not explain his state of mind to his aunt, but she
gathered enough to be well content, and tried to encourage Aldonza, when
at length they landed near Chelsea Church, and Ambrose led the way to an
extensive pleasaunce or park, full of elms and oaks, whose yellow leaves
were floating like golden rain in the sunshine.

Presently children's voices guided them to a large chestnut tree.  "Lo
you now, I hear Mistress Meg's voice, and where she is, his honour will
ever be," said Ambrose.

And sure enough, among a group of five girls and one boy, all between
fourteen and nine years old, was the great lawyer, knocking down the
chestnuts with a long pole, while the young ones flew about picking up
the burrs from the grass, exclaiming joyously when they found a full
one.

Ambrose explained that of the young ladies, one was Mistress Middleton,
Lady More's daughter by a former marriage, another a kinswoman.
Perronel was for passing by unnoticed; but Ambrose knew better; and Sir
Thomas, leaning on the pole, called out, "Ha, my Birkenholt, a forester
born, knowst thou any mode of bringing down yonder chestnuts, which
being the least within reach, seem in course the meetest of all."

"I would I were my brother, your honour," said Ambrose, "then would I
climb the tree."

"Thou shouldst bring him one of these days," said Sir Thomas.  "But thou
hast instead brought us a fair maid.  See, Meg, yonder is the poor young
girl who lost her father on Ill May day.  Lead her on and make her good
cheer, while I speak to this good dame."

Margaret More, a slender, dark-eyed girl of thirteen, went forward with
a peculiar gentle grace to the stranger, saying, "Welcome, sweet maid!
I hope we shall make thee happy," and seeing the mournful countenance,
she not only took Aldonza's hand, but kissed her cheek.

Sir Thomas had exchanged a word or two with Perronel, when there was a
cry from the younger children, who had detected the wicker cage which
Perronel was trying to keep in the background.

"A daw! a daw!" was the cry.  "Is't for us?"

"Oh, mistress," faltered Aldonza, "'tis mine--there was one who tamed it
for me, and I promised ever to keep it, but if the good knight and lady
forbid it, we will send it back."

"Nay now, John, Cicely," was Margaret saying, "'tis her own bird!  Wot
ye not our father will let us take nought of them that come to him?
Yea, Al-don-za--is not that thy name?--I am sure my father will have
thee keep it."

She led up Aldonza, making the request for her.  Sir Thomas smiled.

"Keep thy bird?  Nay, that thou shalt.  Look at him, Meg, is he not in
fit livery for a lawyer's house?  Mark his trim legs, sable doublet and
hose, and grey hood--and see, he hath the very eye of a councillor
seeking for suits, as he looketh at the chestnuts John holdeth to him.
I warrant he hath a tongue likewise.  Canst plead for thy dinner, bird?"

"I love Giles!" uttered the black beak, to the confusion and indignation
of Perronel.

The perverse bird had heard Giles often dictate this avowal, but had
entirely refused to repeat it, till, stimulated by the new surroundings,
it had for the first time uttered it.

"Ah! thou foolish daw!  Crow that thou art!  Had I known thou hadst such
a word in thy beak, I'd have wrung thy neck sooner than have brought
thee," muttered Perronel.  "I had best take thee home without more ado."

It was too late, however, the children were delighted, and perfectly
willing that Aldonza should own the bird, so they might hear it speak,
and thus the introduction was over.  Aldonza and her daw were conveyed
to Dame Alice More, a stout, good-tempered woman, who had too many
dependents about her house to concern herself greatly about the
introduction of another.

And thus Aldonza was installed in the long, low, two-storied red house
which was to be her place of home-like service.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

CLOTH OF GOLD ON THE SEAMY SIDE.

  "Then you lost
  The view of earthly glory men might say
  Till this time pomp was single; but now married
  To one above itself."
  Shakespeare.

If Giles Headley murmured at Aldonza's removal, it was only to Perronel,
and that discreet woman kept it to herself.

In the summer of 1519 he was out of his apprenticeship, and though
Dennet was only fifteen, it was not uncommon for brides to be even
younger.  However, the autumn of that year was signalised by a fresh
outbreak of the sweating sickness, apparently a sort of influenza, and
no festivities could be thought of.  The King and Queen kept at a safe
distance from London, and escaped, so did the inmates of the pleasant
house at Chelsea; but the Cardinal, who, as Lord Chancellor, could not
entirely absent himself from Westminster, was four times attacked by it,
and Dean Colet, a far less robust man, had it three times, and sank at
last under it.  Sir Thomas More went to see his beloved old friend, and
knowing Ambrose's devotion, let the young man be his attendant.  Nor
could those who saw the good man ever forget his peaceful farewells,
grieving only for the old mother who had lived with him in the Deanery,
and in the ninetieth year of her age, thus was bereaved of the last of
her twenty-one children.  For himself, he was thankful to be taken away
from the evil times he already beheld threatening his beloved Saint
Paul's, as well as the entire Church both in England and abroad; looking
back with a sad, sweet smile to the happy Oxford days, when he, with
More and Erasmus:

  "Strained the watchful eye
  If chance the golden hours were nigh
  By youthful hope seen gleaming round her walls."

"But," said he, as he laid his hand in blessing for the last time on
Ambrose's head, "let men say what they will, do thou cling fast to the
Church, nor let thyself be swept away.  There are sure promises to her,
and grace is with her to purify herself, even though it be obscured for
a time.  Be not of little faith, but believe that Christ is with us in
the ship, though He seem to be asleep."

He spoke as much to his friend as to the youth, and there can be no
doubt that this consideration was the restraining force with many who
have been stigmatised as half-hearted Reformers, because though they
loved truth, they feared to lose unity.

He was a great loss at that especial time, as a restraining power,
trusted by the innovators, and a personal friend both of King and
Cardinal, and his preaching and catechising were sorely missed at Saint
Paul's.

Tibble Steelman, though thinking he did not go far enough, deplored him
deeply; but Tibble himself was laid by for many days.  The epidemic went
through the Dragon court, though some had it lightly, and only two young
children actually died of it.  It laid a heavy hand on Tibble, and as
his distaste for women rendered his den almost inaccessible to Bet
Smallbones, who looked after most of the patients, Stephen Birkenholt,
whose nursing capacities had been developed in Newgate, spent his spare
hours in attending him, sat with him in the evenings, slept on a pallet
by his side, carried him his meals and often administered them, and
finally pulled him through the illness and its effects, which left him
much broken and never likely to be the same man again.

Old Mistress Headley, who was already failing, did not have the actual
disease severely, but she never again left her bed, and died just after
Christmas, sinking slowly away with little pain, and her memory having
failed from the first.

Household affairs had thus slipped so gradually into Dennet's hands that
no change of government was perceptible, except that the keys hung at
the maiden's girdle.  She had grown out of the child during this winter
of trouble, and was here, there, and everywhere, the busy nurse and
housewife, seldom pausing to laugh or play except with her father, and
now and then to chat with her old friend and playfellow, Kit Smallbones.
Her childish freedom of manner had given way to grave discretion, not
to say primness, in her behaviour to her father's guests, and even the
apprentices.  It was, of course, the unconscious reaction of the
maidenly spirit, aware that she had nothing but her own modesty to
protect her.  She was on a small scale, with no pretensions to beauty,
but with a fresh, honest, sensible young face, a clear skin, and dark
eyes that could be very merry when she would let them, and her whole air
and dress were trimness itself, with an inclination to the choicest
materials permitted to an alderman's daughter.

Things were going on so smoothly that the alderman was taken by surprise
when all the good wives around began to press on him that it was
incumbent on him to lose no time in marrying his daughter to her cousin,
if not before Lent, yet certainly in the Easter holidays.

Dennet looked very grave thereon.  Was it not over soon after the loss
of the good grandmother?  And when her father said, as the gossips had
told him, that she and Giles need only walk quietly down some morning to
Saint Faith's and plight their troth, she broke out into her girlish
wilful manner, "Would she be married at all without a merry wedding?
No, indeed!  She would not have the thing done in a corner!  What was
the use of her being wedded, and having to consort with the tedious old
wives instead of the merry wenches?  Could she not guide the house, and
rule the maids, and get in the stores, and hinder waste, and make the
pasties, and brew the possets?  Had her father found the crust hard, or
missed his roasted crab, or had any one blamed her for want of
discretion?  Nay, as to that, she was like to be more discreet as she
was, with only her good old father to please, than with a husband to
plague her."

On the other hand, Giles's demeanour was rather that of one prepared for
the inevitable than that of an eager bridegroom; and when orders began
to pour in for accoutrements of unrivalled magnificence for the King and
the gentlemen who were to accompany him to Ardres, there to meet the
young King of France just after Whitsuntide, Dennet was the first to
assure her father that there would be no time to think of weddings till
all this was over, especially as some of the establishment would have to
be in attendance to repair casualties at the jousts.

At this juncture there arrived on business Master Tiptoff, husband to
Giles's sister, bringing greetings from Mrs Headley at Salisbury, and
inquiries whether the wedding was to take place at Whitsuntide, in which
case she would hasten to be present, and to take charge of the
household, for which her dear daughter was far too young.  Master
Tiptoff showed a suspicious alacrity in undertaking the forwarding of
his mother-in-law and her stuff.

The faces of Master Headley and Tib Steelman were a sight, both having
seen only too much of what the house wifery at Salisbury had been.  The
alderman decided on the spot that there could be no marriage till after
the journey to France, since Giles was certainly to go upon it; and lest
Mrs Headley should be starting on her journey, he said he should
despatch a special messenger to stay her.  Giles, who had of course been
longing for the splendid pageant, cheered up into great amiability, and
volunteered to write to his mother, that she had best not think of
coming, till he sent word to her that matters were forward.  Even thus,
Master Headley was somewhat insecure.  He thought the dame quite capable
of coming and taking possession of his house in his absence, and
therefore resolved upon staying at home to garrison it; but there was
then the further difficulty that Tibble was in no condition to take his
place on the journey.  If the rheumatism seized his right arm, as it had
done in the winter, he would be unable to drive a rivet, and there would
be every danger of it, high summer though it were; for though the party
would carry their own tent and bedding, the knights and gentlemen would
be certain to take all the best places, and they might be driven into a
damp corner.  Indeed it was not impossible that their tent itself might
be seized, for many a noble or his attendants might think that beggarly
artisans had no right to comforts which he had been too improvident to
afford, especially if the alderman himself were absent.

Not only did Master Headley really love his trusty foreman too well to
expose him to such chances, but Tibble knew too well that there were
brutal young men to whom his contorted visage would be an incitement to
contempt and outrage, and that if racked with rheumatism, he would only
be an incumbrance.  There was nothing for it but to put Kit Smallbones
at the head of the party.  His imposing presence would keep off wanton
insults, but on the other hand, he had not the moral weight of authority
possessed by Tibble, and though far from being a drunkard, he was not
proof against a carouse, especially when out of reach of his Bet and of
his master, and he was not by any means Tib's equal in fine and delicate
workmanship.  But on the other hand, Tib pronounced that Stephen
Birkenholt was already well skilled in chasing metal and the difficult
art of restoring inlaid work, and he showed some black and silver
armour, that was in hand for the King, which fully bore out his words.

"And thou thinkst Kit can rule the lads!" said the alderman, scarce
willingly.

"One of them at least can rule himself," said Tibble.  "They have both
been far more discreet since the fright they got on Ill May day; and, as
for Stephen, he hath seemed to me to have no eyes nor thought save for
his work of late."

"I have marked him," said the master, "and have marvelled what ailed the
lad.  His merry temper hath left him.  I never hear him singing to keep
time with his hammer, nor keeping the court in a roar with his gibes.  I
trust he is not running after the new doctrine of the hawkers and
pedlars.  His brother was inclined that way."

"There be worse folk than they, your worship," protested Tib, but he did
not pursue their defence, only adding, "but 'tis not that which ails
young Stephen.  I would it were!" he sighed to himself, inaudibly.

"Well," said the good-natured alderman, "it may be he misseth his
brother.  The boys will care for this raree-show more than thou or I,
Tib!  We've seen enough of them in our day, though verily they say this
is to surpass all that ever were beheld!"

The question of who was to go had not been hitherto decided, and Giles
and Stephen were both so excited at being chosen that all low spirits
and moodiness were dispelled, and the work which went on almost all
night was merrily got through.  The Dragon court was in a perpetual
commotion with knights, squires, and grooms, coming in with orders for
new armour, or for old to be furbished, and the tent-makers, lorimers,
mercers, and tailors had their hands equally full.  These lengthening
mornings heard the hammer ringing at sunrise, and in the final rush,
Smallbones never went to bed at all.  He said he should make it up in
the waggon on the way to Dover.  Some hinted that he preferred the clang
of his hammer to the good advice his Bet lavished on him at every
leisure moment to forewarn him against French wine-pots.

The alderman might be content with the party he sent forth, for Kit had
hardly his equal in size, strength, and good humour.  Giles had
developed into a tall, comely young man, who had got rid of his country
slouch, and whose tall figure, light locks, and ruddy cheeks looked well
in the new suit which gratified his love of finery, sober-hued as it
needs must be.  Stephen was still bound to the old prentice garb, though
it could not conceal his good mien, the bright sparkling dark eyes,
crisp black hair, healthy brown skin, and lithe active figure.  Giles
had a stout roadster to ride on, the others were to travel in their own
waggon, furnished with four powerful horses, which, it possible, they
were to take to Calais, so as to be independent of hiring.  Their
needments, clothes, and tools, were packed in the waggon, with store of
lances, and other appliances of the tourney.  A carter and Will Wherry,
who was selected as being supposed to be conversant with foreign
tongues, were to attend on them; Smallbones, as senior journeyman, had
the control of the party, and Giles had sufficiently learnt
subordination not to be likely to give himself dangerous airs of
mastership.

Dennet was astir early to see them off, and she had a little gift for
each.  She began with her oldest friend, "See here, Kit," she said,
"here's a wallet to hold thy nails and rivets.  What wilt thou say to me
for such a piece of stitchery?"

"Say, pretty mistress?  Why this!" quoth the giant, and he picked her up
by the slim waist in his great hands, and kissed her on the forehead.
He had done the like many a time nine or ten years ago, and though
Master Headley laughed, Dennet was not one bit embarrassed, and turned
to the next traveller.  "Thou art no more a prentice, Giles, and canst
wear this in thy bonnet," she said, holding out to him a short silver
chain and medal of Saint George and the Dragon.

"Thanks, gentle maid," said Giles, taking the handsome gift a little
sheepishly.  "My bonnet will make a fair show," and he bent down as she
stood on the step, and saluted her lips, then began eagerly fastening
the chain round his cap, as one delighted with the ornament.

Stephen was some distance off.  He had turned aside when she spoke to
Giles, and was asking of Tibble last instructions about the restoration
of enamel, when he felt a touch on his arm, and saw Dennet standing by
him.  She looked up in his face, and held up a crimson silken purse,
with S B embroidered on it within a wreath of oak and holly leaves.

With the air that ever showed his gentle blood, Stephen put a knee to
the ground, and kissed the fingers that held it to him, whereupon
Dennet, a sudden burning blush overspreading her face under her little
pointed hood, turned suddenly round and ran into the house.  She was out
again on the steps when the waggon finally got under weigh, and as her
eyes met Stephen's, he doffed his flat cap with one hand, and laid the
other on his heart, so that she knew where her purse had taken up its
abode.

Of the Field of the Cloth of Gold not much need be said.  To the end of
the lives of the spectators, it was a tale of wonder.  Indeed without
that, the very sight of the pavilions was a marvel in itself, the blue
dome of Francis spangled in imitation of the sky, with sun, moon, and
stars; and the feudal castle of Henry, a three months' work, each
surrounded with tents of every colour and pattern which fancy could
devise, with the owners banners or pennons floating from the summits,
and every creature, man, and horse, within the enchanted precincts,
equally gorgeous.  It was the brightest and the last full display of
magnificent pseudo chivalry, and to Stephen's dazzled eye, seeing it
beneath the slant rays of the setting sun of June, it was a fairy tale
come to life.  Hal Randall, who was in attendance on the Cardinal,
declared that it was a mere surfeit of jewels and gold and silver, and
that a frieze jerkin or leathern coat was an absolute refreshment to the
sight.  He therefore spent all the time he was off duty in the forge far
in the rear, where Smallbones and his party had very little but hard
work, mending, whetting, furbishing, and even changing devices.  Those
six days of tilting when "every man that stood, showed like a mine,"
kept the armourers in full occupation night and day, and only now and
then could the youths try to make their way to some spot whence they
could see the tournament.

Smallbones was more excited by the report of fountains of good red and
white wines of all sorts, flowing perpetually in the court of King
Henry's splendid mock castle; but fortunately one gulp was enough for an
English palate nurtured on ale and mead, and he was disgusted at the
heaps of country folk, men-at-arms, beggars and vagabonds of all kinds,
who swilled the liquor continually, and, in loathsome contrast to the
external splendours, lay wallowing on the ground so thickly that it was
sometimes hardly possible to move without treading on them.

"I stumbled over a dozen," said the jester, as he strolled into the
little staked inclosure that the Dragon party had arranged round their
tent for the prosecution of their labours, which were too important to
all the champions not to be respected.  "Lance and sword have not laid
so many low in the lists as have the doughty Baron Burgundy and the
heady knight Messire Sherris Sack."

"Villain Verjuice and Varlet Vinegar is what Kit there calls them," said
Stephen, looking up from the work he was carrying on over a pan of
glowing charcoal.

"Yea," said Smallbones, intermitting his noisy operations, "and the more
of swine be they that gorge themselves on it.  I told Jack and Hob that
'twould be shame for English folk to drown themselves like French frogs
or Flemish hogs."

"Hogs!" returned Randall.  "A decent Hampshire hog would scorn to be
lodged as many a knight and squire and lady too is now, pigging it in
styes and hovels and haylofts by night, and pranking it by day with the
best!"

"Sooth enough," said Smallbones.  "Yea, we have had two knights and
their squires beseeching us for leave to sleep under our waggon!  Not an
angel had they got among the four of them either, having all their
year's income on their backs, and more too.  I trow they and their heirs
will have good cause to remember this same Field of Gold."

"And what be'st thou doing, nevvy?" asked the jester.  "Thy trade seems
as brisk as though red blood were flowing instead of red wine."

"I am doing my part towards making the King into Hercules," said
Stephen, "though verily the tailor hath more part therein than we have;
but he must needs have a breastplate of scales of gold, and that by to-
morrow's morn.  As Ambrose would say, `if he will be a pagan god, he
should have what's-his-name, the smith of the gods, to work for him.'"

"I heard of that freak," said the jester.  "There be a dozen tailors and
all the Queen's tirewomen frizzling up a good piece of cloth of gold for
the lion's mane, covering a club with green damask with pricks, cutting
out green velvet and gummed silk for his garland!  In sooth, these
graces have left me so far behind in foolery that I have not a jest left
in my pouch!  So here I be, while my Lord Cardinal is shut up with
Madame d'Angouleme in the castle--the real old castle, mind you--doing
the work, leaving the kings and queens to do their own fooling."

"Have you spoken with the French King, Hal?" asked Smallbones, who had
become a great crony of his, since the anxieties of May Eve.

"So far as I may when I have no French, and he no English!  He is a
comely fellow, with a blithe tongue and a merry eye, I warrant you a
chanticleer who will lose nought for lack of crowing.  He'll crow louder
than ever now he hath given our Harry a fall."

"No! hath he?" and Giles, Stephen, and Smallbones, all suspended their
work to listen in concern.

"Ay marry, hath he!  The two took it into their royal noddles to try a
fall, and wrestled together on the grass, when by some ill hap, this
same Francis tripped up our Harry, so that he was on the sward for a
moment.  He was up again forthwith, and in full heart for another round,
when all the Frenchmen burst in gabbling; and, though their King was
willing to play the match out fairly, they wouldn't let him, and my Lord
Cardinal said something about making ill blood, whereat our King laughed
and was content to leave it.  As I told him, we have given the French
falls enough to let them make much of this one."

"I hope he will yet give the mounseer a good shaking," muttered
Smallbones.

"How now, Will!  Who's that at the door?  We are on his grace's work and
can touch none other man's were it the King of France himself, or his
Constable, who is finer still."

By way of expressing, "No admittance except on business," Smallbones
kept Will Wherry in charge of the door of his little territory, which
having a mud wall on two sides, and a broad brook with quaking banks on
a third, had been easily fenced on the fourth, so as to protect tent,
waggon, horses, and work from the incursions of idlers.  Will however
answered, "The gentleman saith he hath kindred here."

"Ay!" and there pushed in, past the lad a tall, lean form, with a gay
but soiled short cloak over one shoulder, a suit of worn buff, a cap
garnished with a dilapidated black and yellow feather, and a pair of
gilt spurs.  "If this be as they told me, where Armourer Headley's folk
lodge--I have here a sort of a cousin.  Yea, yonder's the brave lad who
had no qualms at the flash of a good Toledo in a knight's fist.  How
now, my nevvy!  Is not my daughter's nevvy--mine?"

"Save your knighthood!" said Smallbones.  "Who would have looked to see
you here, Sir John?  Methought you were in the Emperor's service!"

