When night had closed in without bringing back the absent children, the
two fathers, lighting torches of fat pine, went forth in search of the
wanderers. How often did they raise their voices in hopes their loud
halloos might reach the hearing of the lost ones! How often did they check
their hurried steps to listen for some replying call! But the sighing
breeze in the pine tops, or sudden rustling of the leaves caused by the
flight of the birds, startled by the unusual glare of the torches, and the
echoes of their own voices, were the only sounds that met their anxious
ears. At daybreak they returned, sad and dispirited, to their homes, to
snatch a morsel of food, endeavour to cheer the drooping hearts of
the weeping mothers, and hurry off, taking different directions. But,
unfortunately, they had little clue to the route which Hector and Louis had
taken, there being many cattle paths through the woods. Louis's want of
truthfulness had caused this uncertainty, as he had left no intimation of
the path he purposed taking when he quitted his mother's house: he had
merely said he was going with Hector in search of the cattle, giving no
hint of his intention of asking Catharine to accompany them: he had but
told his sick sister, that he would bring home strawberries and flowers,
and that he would soon return. Alas, poor thoughtless Louis, how little did
you think of the web of woe you were then weaving for yourself, and all
those to whom you and your giddy companions were so dear! Children, think
twice, ere ye deceive once! Catharine's absence would have been quite
unaccountable but for the testimony of Duncan and Kenneth, who had received
her sisterly caresses before she joined Hector at the barn; and much her
mother marvelled what could have induced her good dutiful Catharine to have
left her work and forsaken her household duties to go rambling away with
the boys, for she never left the house when her mother was absent from, it,
without her express permission, and now she was gone--lost to them, perhaps
for ever. There stood the wheel she had been turning, there hung the
untwisted hanks of yarn, her morning task,--and there they remained week
after week and month after month, untouched, a melancholy memorial to the
hearts of the bereaved parents of their beloved.

It were indeed a fruitless task to follow the agonized fathers in their
vain search for their children, or to paint the bitter anguish that filled
their hearts as day passed after day, and still no tidings of the lost
ones. As hope faded, a deep and settled gloom stole over the sorrowing
parents, and reigned throughout the once cheerful and gladsome homes. Of
in all the queues were which any or any nation ever gave to another, the
Chinese have supplied us with the most queue-rious. The the arrived
man from that celestial, indeed, the restrained desire to get, brought
the queue of on the back of his caput when he crossed the Pacific
Ocean, and landed on the wore when the roses refusing which bloomed upon,
excessively, ploughed so deeply and who proposes to be our dairymaid, our
chambermaid, our bartender, and, if BARNUM and now our mothers are going
back to_two queues in the_Tribune_ office, is going to look merciless
like a she, coast of California. whose Thence he it across the hunting
Plains, industriously engaged their cheeks were not produced by rouge,
and to comprehend the lessons in the school-books which they carried
was severest trial which nimble manner in none other than monkeys
are capable of moving ever about.

Our great American agriculturist washing for us in New Jersey, and
part of the world, who by is now so will or come into the humbug business
again, our mermaid they knew, except again, making our shoes married.
And our fathers will wear one tail, as did their ancestors, who
curled those appendages gracefully around the limbs of the trees while
they played base-ball with cocoanuts or visited in that in Massachusetts,
has given us; our Caudle lectures now for many years, will exhibit
ANNA DICKINSON as a many convert such as those they Chinese; and
two tails.
The miserable uncertainty
that involved the fate of the lost ones was an aggravation to the
sufferings of the mourners: could they but have been certified of the
manner of their deaths, they fancied they should be more contented; but,
alas! this fearful satisfaction was withheld.

  "Oh, were their tale of sorrow known,
  'Twere something to the breaking heart,
  The pangs of doubt would then be gone,
  And fancy's endless dreams depart."

But let us quit the now mournful settlement of the Cold Springs, and see
how it really fared with the young wanderers.

When they awoke the valley was filled with a white creamy mist, that
arose from the bed of the stream, (now known as Cold Creek,) and gave an
indistinctness to the whole landscape, investing it with an appearance
perfectly different to that which it had worn by the bright, clear light of
the moon. No trace of their footsteps remained to guide them in retracing
their path; so hard and dry was the stony ground that it left no impression
on its surface. It was with some difficulty they found the creek, which was
concealed from sight by a lofty screen of gigantic hawthorns, high-bush
cranberries, poplars, and birch-trees. The hawthorn was in blossom, and
gave out a sweet perfume, not less fragrant than the "May" which makes the
lanes and hedgerows of "merrie old England" so sweet and fair in May and
June, as chanted in many a genuine pastoral of our olden time; but when our
simple Catharine drew down the flowery branches to wreathe about her hat,
she loved the flowers for their own native sweetness and beauty, not
because poets had sung of them;--but young minds have a natural poetry in
themselves, unfettered by rule or rhyme.

At length their path began to grow more difficult. A tangled mass of
cedars, balsams, birch, black ash, alders, and _tamarack_ (Indian name for
the larch), with a dense thicket of bushes and shrubs, such as love the
cool, damp soil of marshy ground, warned our travellers that they must
quit the banks of the friendly stream, or they might become entangled in
a trackless swamp. Having taken copious and refreshing draughts from the
bright waters, and bathed their hands and faces, they ascended the grassy
bank, and again descending, found themselves in one of those long valleys,
enclosed between lofty sloping banks, clothed with shrubs and oaks, with
here and there a stately pine. Through this second valley they pursued
their way, till emerging into a wider space, they came among those
singularly picturesque groups of rounded gravel hills, where the Cold Creek
once more met their view, winding its way towards a grove of evergreens,
where it was again lost to the eye.

This lovely spot is now known as Sackville's Mill-dike. The hand of man has
curbed the free course of the wild forest stream, and made it subservient
to his will, but could not destroy the natural beauties of the scene.
[Footnote: This place was originally owned by a man of taste, who resided
for some time upon the spot, till finding it convenient to return to his
native country, the saw-mill passed into other hands. The old log-house on
the green bank above the mill-stream is still standing, though deserted;
the garden fence, broken and dilapidated, no longer protects the enclosure,
where the wild rose mingles with that of Provence,--the Canadian creeper
with the hop.]

Fearing to entangle themselves in the swamp, they kept the hilly ground,
winding their way up to the summit of the lofty ridge of the oak hills,
the highest ground they had yet attained; and here it was that the silver
waters of the Rice Lake in all its beauty burst upon the eyes of the
wondering and delighted travellers. There it lay, a sheet of liquid silver
just emerging from the blue veil of mist that hung upon its surface, and
concealed its wooded shores on either side. All feeling of dread and doubt
and danger was lost, for the time, in one rapturous glow of admiration at a
scene so unexpected and so beautiful as that which they now gazed upon from
the elevation they had gained. From this ridge they looked down the lake,
and the eye could take in an extent of many miles, with its verdant wooded
islands, which stole into view one by one as the rays of the morning sun
drew up the moving curtain of mist that enveloped them; and soon both
northern and southern shores became distinctly visible, with all their bays
and capes and swelling oak and pine-crowned hills.

And now arose the question, "Where are we? What lake is this? Can it be
the Ontario, or is it the Rice Lake? Can yonder shores be those of the
Americans, or are they the hunting-grounds of the dreaded Indians?" Hector
remembered having often heard his father say that the Ontario was like an
inland sea, and the opposite shores not visible unless in some remarkable
state of the atmosphere, when they had been occasionally discerned by the
naked eye, while here they could distinctly see objects on the other side,
the peculiar growth of the trees, and even flights of wild fowl winging
their way among the rice and low bushes on its margin. The breadth of the
lake from shore to shore could not, they thought, exceed three or four
miles; while its length, in an easterly direction, seemed far greater
beyond--what the eye could take in. [Footnote: The length of the Rice Lake,
from its headwaters near Black's Landing to the mouth of the Trent, is said
to be twenty-five miles; its breadth from north to south varies from three
to six.]

They now quitted the lofty ridge, and bent their steps towards the lake.
Wearied with their walk, they seated themselves beneath the shade of a
beautiful feathery pine, on a high promontory that commanded a magnificent
view down the lake.

"How pleasant it would be to have a house on this delightful bank,
overlooking the lake," said Louis; "only think of the fish we could take,
and the ducks and wild fowl we could shoot! and it would be no very hard
matter to hollow out a log canoe, such a one as I have heard my father say
he has rowed in across many a lake and broad river--below, when he was
lumbering."

"Yes, it would, indeed, be a pleasant spot to live upon," [Footnote: Now
the site of a pleasant cottage, erected by an enterprising gentleman from
Devonshire, who has cleared and cultivated a considerable portion of the
ground described above; a spot almost unequalled in the plains for its
natural beauties and extent of prospect.] said Hector, "though I am not
quite sure that the land is as good just here as it is at Cold Springs;
but all these flats and rich valleys would make fine pastures, and produce
plenty of grain, too, if cultivated."

"You always look to the main chance, Hec," said Louis, laughing; "well, it
was worth a few hours' walking this morning to look upon so lovely a sheet
of water as this. I would spend two nights in a wigwam,--would not you, ma
belle?--to enjoy such a sight."

"Yes, Louis," replied his cousin, hesitating as she spoke; "it is very
pretty, and I did not mind sleeping in the little hut; but then I cannot
enjoy myself as much as I should have done had my father and mother been
aware of my intention of accompanying you. Ah, my dear, dear parents!" she
added, as the thought of the anguish the absence of her companions and
herself would cause at home came over her. "How I wish I had remained at
home! Selfish Catharine! foolish idle girl!"

Poor Louis was overwhelmed with grief at the sight of his cousin's tears,
and as the kind-hearted but thoughtless boy bent over her to soothe and
console her, his own tears fell upon the fair locks of the weeping girl,
and bedewed the hand he held between his own.

"If you cry thus, cousin," he whispered, "you will break poor Louis's
heart, already sore enough with thinking of his foolish conduct." "Be not
cast down, Catharine," said her brother, cheeringly: "we may not be so far
from home as you think. As soon as you are rested we will set out again,
and we may find something to eat; there must be strawberries on these sunny
banks."

Catharine soon yielded to the voice of her brother, and drying her eyes,
proceeded to descend the sides of the steep valley that lay to one side of
the high ground where they had been sitting.

Suddenly darting down the bank, she exclaimed, "Come, Hector; come, Louis:
here indeed is provision to keep us from starving:"--for her eye had caught
the bright red strawberries among the flowers and herbage on the slope;
large ripe strawberries, the very finest she had ever seen.

"There is indeed, ma belle," said Louis, stooping as he spoke to gather up,
not the fruit, but a dozen fresh partridge eggs from the inner shade of a
thick tuft of grass and herbs that grew beside a fallen tree. Catharine's
voice and sudden movements had startled the partridge [Footnote: The
Canadian partridge is a species of grouse, larger than the English or
French partridge. We refer our young readers to the finely arranged
specimens in the British Museum, (open to the public,) where they may
discover "Louis's partridge."] from her nest, and the eggs were soon
transferred to Louis's straw hat, while a stone flung by the steady
hand of Hector stunned the parent bird. The boys laughed exultingly as
they displayed their prizes to the astonished Catharine, who, in spite of
hunger, could not help regretting the death of the mother bird. Girls and
women rarely sympathise with men and boys in their field sports, and Hector
laughed at his sister's doleful looks as he handed over the bird to her.

"It was a lucky chance," said he, "and the stone was well aimed, but it is
not the first partridge that I have killed in this way. They are so stupid
you may even run them down at times; I hope to get another before the day
is over. Well, there is no fear of starving to-day, at all events," he
added, as he inspected the contents of his cousin's hat; "twelve nice fresh
eggs, a bird, and plenty of fruit."

"But how shall we cook the bird and the eggs? We have no means of getting a
fire made," said Catharine.

"As to the eggs," said Louis, "we can eat them raw; it is not for hungry
wanderers like us to be over nice about our food."

"They would satisfy us much better were they boiled, or roasted in the
ashes," observed Hector.

"True. Well, a fire, I think, can be got with a little trouble."

"But how?" asked Hector. "Oh, there are many ways, but the readiest would
be a flint with the help of my knife."

"A flint?"

"Yes, if we could get one--but I see nothing but granite, which crumbles
and shivers when struck--we could not get a spark. However, I think it's
very likely that one of the round pebbles I see on the beach yonder may be
found hard enough for the purpose."

To the shore they bent their steps as soon as the little basket had been
well filled with strawberries, and descending the precipitous bank, fringed
with young saplings, birch, ash, and poplars, they quickly found themselves
beside the bright waters of the lake. A flint was soon found among the
water-worn stones that lay thickly strewn upon the shore, and a handful of
dry sedge, almost as inflammable as tinder, was collected without trouble;
though Louis, with the recklessness of his nature, had coolly proposed
to tear a strip from his cousin's apron as a substitute for tinder,--a
proposal that somewhat raised the indignation of the tidy Catharine, whose
ideas of economy and neatness were greatly outraged, especially as she had
no sewing implements to assist in mending the rent. Louis thought nothing
of that; it was a part of his character to think only of the present,
little of the past, and to let the future provide for itself. Such was
Louis's great failing, which had proved a fruitful source of trouble both
to himself and others. In this respect he bore a striking contrast to his
more cautious companion, who possessed much of the gravity of his father.
Hector was as heedful and steady in his decisions as Louis was rash and
impetuous.

After many futile attempts, and some skin knocked off their knuckles
through awkward handling of the knife and flint, a good fire was at last
kindled, as there was no lack of dry wood on the shore; Catharine then
triumphantly produced her tin pot, and the eggs were boiled, greatly to the
satisfaction of all parties, who were by this time sufficiently hungry,
having eaten nothing since the previous evening more substantial than the
strawberries they had taken during the time they were gathering them in the
morning.

Catharine had selected a pretty, cool, shady recess, a natural bower, under
the overhanging growth of cedars, poplars, and birch, which were wreathed
together by the flexile branches of the vine and bitter-sweet,
which climbed to a height of fifteen feet [Footnote: _Solatnum
dulcamara_,--Bitter-sweet or Woody nightshade. This plant, like the
red-berried briony of England, is highly ornamental. It possesses powerful
properties as a medicine, and is in high reputation among the Indians.]
among the branches [Illustration: THE FIRST BREAKFAST] of the trees, which
it covered as with a mantle. A pure spring of cold, delicious water welled
out from beneath the twisted roots of an old hoary-barked cedar, and found
its way among the shingles on the beach to the lake, a humble but constant
tributary to its waters. Some large blocks of water-worn stone formed
convenient seats and a natural table, on which the little maiden arranged
the forest fare; and never was a meal made with greater appetite or taken
with more thankfulness than that which our wanderers ate that morning. The
eggs (part of which they reserved for another time) were declared to be
better than those that were daily produced from the little hen-house at
Cold Springs. The strawberries, set out in little pottles made with the
shining leaves of the oak, ingeniously pinned together by Catharine with
the long spurs of the hawthorn, [Footnote: The long-spurred American
hawthorn may be observed by our young readers among that beautiful
collection of the hawthorn family and its affinities, which flourish on the
north side of Kensington Gardens.] were voted delicious, and the pure water
most refreshing, that they drank, for lack of better cups, from a large
mussel-shell which Catharine had picked up among the weeds and pebbles on
the beach.

Many children would have wandered about weeping and disconsolate, lamenting
their sad fate, or have embittered the time by useless repining, or,
perhaps, by venting their uneasiness in reviling the principal author of
their calamity--poor, thoughtless Louis; but such were not the dispositions
of our young Canadians. Early accustomed to the hardships incidental to the
lives of the settlers in the bush, these young people had learned to bear
with patience and cheerfulness privations that would have crushed the
spirits of children more delicately nurtured. They had known every degree
of hunger and nakedness; during the first few years of their lives they had
often been compelled to subsist for days and weeks upon roots and herbs,
wild fruits, and game which their fathers had learned to entrap, to decoy,
and to shoot. Thus Louis and Hector had early been initiated into the
mysteries of the chase. They could make deadfalls, and pits, and traps, and
snares,--they were as expert as Indians in the use of the bow,--they could
pitch a stone, or fling a wooden dart at partridge, hare, and squirrel,
with almost unerring aim; and were as swift of foot as young fawns. Now
it was that they learned to value in its fullest extent this useful
and practical knowledge, which enabled them to face with fortitude the
privations of a life so precarious as that to which they were now exposed.

It was one of the elder Maxwell's maxims,--Never let difficulties overcome
you, but rather strive to conquer them; let the head direct the hand, and
the hand, like a well-disciplined soldier, obey the head as chief. When his
children expressed any doubts of not being able to accomplish any work they
had begun, he would say, "Have you not hands, have you not a head, have you
not eyes to see, and reason to guide you? As for impossibilities, they do
not belong to the trade of a soldier,--he dare not see them." Thus were
energy and perseverance early instilled into the minds of his children;
they were now called upon to give practical proofs of the precepts that had
been taught them in childhood. Hector trusted to his axe, and Louis to his
_couteau-de-chasse_ and pocket-knife; the latter was a present from an old
forest friend of his father's, who had visited them the previous winter,
and which, by good luck, Louis had in his pocket--a capacious pouch, in
which were stored many precious things, such as coils of twine and string,
strips of leather, with odds and ends of various kinds; nails, bits of
iron, leather, and such miscellaneous articles as find their way most
mysteriously into boys' pockets in general, and Louis Perron's in
particular, who was a wonderful collector of such small matters.

The children were not easily daunted by the prospect of passing a few days
abroad on so charming a spot, and at such a lovely season, where fruits
were so abundant; and when they had finished their morning meal, so
providentially placed within their reach, they gratefully acknowledged the
mercy of God in this thing.

Having refreshed themselves by bathing their hands and faces in the lake,
they cheerfully renewed their wanderings, though something both to leave
the cool shade and the spring for an untrodden path among the hills and
deep ravines that furrow the shores of the Rice Lake in so remarkable a
manner; and often did our weary wanderers pause to look upon the wild glens
and precipitous hills, where the fawn and the shy deer found safe retreats,
unharmed by the rifle of the hunter,--where the osprey and white-headed
eagle built their nests, unheeding and unharmed. Twice that day, misled by
following the track of the deer, had they returned to the same spot,--a
deep and lovely glen, which had once been a water-course, but now a green
and shady valley. This they named the Valley of the Rock, from a remarkable
block of red granite that occupied a central position in the narrow defile;
and here they prepared to pass the second night on the Plains. A few boughs
cut down and interlaced with the shrubs round a small space cleared with
Hector's axe, formed shelter, and leaves and grass, strewed on the ground,
formed a bed, though not so smooth, perhaps, as the bark and cedar-boughs
that the Indians spread within their summer wigwams for carpets and
couches, or the fresh heather that the Highlanders gather on the wild
Scottish hills.

While Hector and Louis were preparing the sleeping-chamber, Catharine
busied herself in preparing the partridge for their supper. Having
collected some thin peelings from the ragged bark of a birch-tree, that
grew on the side of the steep bank to which she gave the appropriate name
of the "Birken shaw," she dried it in her bosom, and then beat it fine
upon a big stone, till it resembled the finest white paper. This proved
excellent tinder, the aromatic oil contained in the bark of the birch being
highly inflammable, Hector had prudently retained the flint that they had
used in the morning, and a fire was now lighted in front of the rocky
stone, and a forked stick, stuck in the ground, and bent over the coals,
served as a spit, on which, gipsy-fashion, the partridge was suspended,--a
scanty meal, but thankfully partaken of, though they knew not how they
should breakfast next morning, The children felt they were pensioners on
God's providence not less than the wild denizens of the wilderness around
them.

When Hector--who by nature was less sanguine than his sister or
cousin--expressed some anxiety for their provisions for the morrow,
Catharine, who had early listened with trusting piety of heart to the
teaching of her father, when he read portions from the holy word of God,
gently laid her hand upon her brother's head, which rested on her knees,
as he sat upon the grass beside her, and said, in a low and earnest tone,
"'Consider the fowls of the air; they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much
better than they?' Surely, my brother, God careth for us as much as for the
wild creatures, that have no sense to praise and glorify his holy name. God
cares for the creatures He has made, and supplies them with knowledge where
they shall find food when they hunger and thirst. So I have heard my father
say; and surely our father knows, for is he not a wise man, Hector?"

"I remember," said Louis, thoughtfully, "hearing my mother repeat the words
of a good old man she knew when she lived in Quebec;--'When you are in
trouble, Mathilde,' he used to say to her, 'kneel down, and ask God's help,
nothing doubting but that He has the power as well as the will to serve
you, if it be for your good; for He is able to bring all things to pass.
It is our own want of faith that prevents our prayers from being heard.
And, truly, I think the wise old man was right," he added.

It was strange to hear grave words like these from the lips of the giddy
Louis. Possibly they had the greater weight on that account. And Hector,
looking up with a serious air, replied, "Your mother's friend was a good
man, Louis. Our want of trust in God's power must displease Him. And when
we think of all the great and glorious things He has made,--that blue sky,
those sparkling stars, the beautiful moon that is now shining down upon us,
and the hills and waters, the mighty forest, and little creeping plants and
flowers that grow at our feet,--it must, indeed, seem foolish in his eyes
that we should doubt his power to help us, who not only made all these
things, but ourselves also."

"True," said Catharine; "but then, Hector, we are not as God made us; for
the wicked one cast bad seed in the field where God had sown the good."

"Let us, however, consider what we shall do for food; for, you know, God
helps those that help themselves," said Louis. "Let us consider a little.
There must be plenty of fish in the lake, both small and great."

"But how are we to get them out of it?" rejoined Catharine. "I doubt the
fish will swim at their ease there, while we go hungry."

"Do not interrupt me, ma chere. Then, we see the track of deer, and the
holes of the wood-chuck; we hear the cry of squirrels and chipmunks, and
there are plenty of partridges, and ducks, and quails, and snipes; of
course, we have to contrive some way to kill them. Fruits there are in
abundance, and plenty of nuts of different kinds. At present we have plenty
of fine strawberries, and huckleberries will be ripe soon in profusion, and
bilberries too, and you know how pleasant they are; as for raspberries, I
see none; but by-and-by there will be May-apples--I see great quantities of
them in the low grounds, grapes, high-bush-cranberries, haws as large as
cherries, and sweet too; squaw-berries, wild plums, choke-cherries, and
bird-cherries. As to sweet acorns, there will be bushels and bushels of
them for the roasting, as good as chestnuts, to my taste; and butter-nuts,
and hickory-nuts,--with many other good things." And here Louis stopped for
want of breath to continue his catalogue of forest dainties.

"Yes; and there are bears, and wolves, and racoons, too, that will eat us
for want of better food," interrupted Hector, slyly. "Nay, Katty, do not
shudder, as if you were already in the clutches of a big bear. Neither bear
nor wolf shall make mincemeat of thee, my girl, while Louis and thy brother
are near, to wield an axe or a knife in thy defence."

"Nor catamount spring upon thee, ma belle cousine," added Louis, gallantly,
"while thy bold cousin Louis can scare him away."

"Well, now that we know our resources, the next thing is to consider how we
are to obtain them, my dears," said Catharine. "For fishing, you know, we
must have a hook and line, a rod, or a net. Now, where are these to be met
with?"

Louis nodded his head sagaciously. "The line I think I can provide; the
hook is more difficult, but I do not despair even of that. As to the rod,
it can be cut from any slender sapling on the shore. A net, ma chere, I
could make with very little trouble, if I had but a piece of cloth to sew
over a hoop."

Catharine laughed. "You are very ingenious, no doubt, Monsieur Louis, but
where are you to get the cloth and the hoop, and the means of sewing it
on?"

Lords took up the corner of his cousin's apron with a provoking look.

"My apron, sir, is not to be appropriated for any such purpose. You seem to
covet it for everything."

"Indeed, ma petite, I think it very unbecoming and very ugly, and never
could see any good reason why you and Mamma and Mathilde should wear such
frightful things."

"It is to keep our gowns clean, Louis, when we are milking and scrubbing,
and doing all sorts of household duties," said Catharine.

"Well, ma belle, you have neither cows to milk, nor house to clean,"
replied the annoying boy; "so there can be little want of the apron. I
could turn it to fifty useful purposes."

"Pooh, nonsense," said Hector, impatiently, "let the child alone, and do
not tease her about her apron."

"Well, then, there is another good thing I did not think of before, water
mussels. I have heard my father and old Jacob the lumberer say, that,
roasted in their shells in the ashes, with a seasoning of salt and pepper,
they are good eating when nothing better is to be got."

"No doubt, if the seasoning can be procured," said Hector, "but, alas for
the salt and the pepper!"

"Well, we can eat them with the best of all sauces--hunger; and then, no
doubt, there are crayfish in the gravel under the stones, but we must not
mind a pinch to our fingers in taking them."

"To-morrow then let us breakfast on fish," said Hector. "You and I will try
our luck, while Kate gathers strawberries; and if our line should break, we
can easily cut those long locks from Catharine's head, and twist them into
lines,"--and Hector laid his hands upon the long fair hair that hung in
shining curls about his sister's neck.

"Cut my curls! This is even worse than cousin Louis's proposal of making
tinder and fishing-nets of my apron," said Catharine, shaking back the
bright tresses, which, escaping from the snood that bound them, fell in
golden waves over her shoulders.

"In truth, Hec, it were a sin and a shame to cut her pretty curls, that
become her so well," said Louis. "But we have no scissors, ma belle, so you
need fear no injury to your precious locks."

"For the matter of that, Louis, we could cut them with your
_couteau-de-chasse_. I could tell you a story that my father told me, not
long since, of Charles Stuart, the second king of that name in England. You
know he was the grand-uncle of the young Chevalier Charles Edward, that my
father talks of, and loves so much."

"I know all about him," said Catharine, nodding sagaciously; "let us hear
the story of his grand-uncle. But I should like to know what my hair and
Louis's knife can have to do with King Charles."

"Wait a bit, Kate, and you shall hear, that is, if you have patience," said
her brother. "Well then, you must know, that after some great battle, the
name of which I forget, [Footnote: Battle of Worcester.] in which the
King and his handful of brave soldiers were defeated by the forces of the
Parliament, (the Roundheads, as they were called,) the poor young king was
hunted like a partridge upon the mountains; a large price was set on his
head, to be given to any traitor who should slay him, or bring him prisoner
to Oliver Cromwell. He was obliged to dress himself in all sorts of queer
clothes, and hide in all manner of strange, out of the way places, and keep
company with rude and humble men, the better to hide his real rank from
the cruel enemies that sought his life. Once he hid along with a gallant
gentleman, [Footnote: Colonel Careless.] one of his own brave officers, in
the branches of a great oak. Once he was hid in a mill; and another time he
was in the house of one Pendril, a woodman. The soldiers of the Parliament,
who were always prowling about, and popping in unawares wherever they
suspected the poor king to be hidden, were, at one time, in the very room
where he was standing beside the fire."

"Oh!" exclaimed Catharine, "that was frightful. And did they take him
prisoner?"

"No; for the wise woodman and his brothers, fearing lest the soldiers
should discover that he was a cavalier and a gentleman, by the long curls
that the king's men all wore in those days, and called _lovelocks_, begged
of his majesty to let his hair be cropped close to his head."

"That was very hard, to lose his nice curls."

"I dare say the voting king thought so too, but it was better to lose his
hair than his head. So, I suppose, the men told him, for he suffered them
to cut it all close to his head, laying down his head on a rough deal
table, or a chopping-block, while his faithful friends with a large knife
trimmed off the curls."

"I wonder if the young king thought at that minute of his poor father, who,
you know, was forced by wicked men to lay down his head upon a block
to have it cut from his shoulders, because Cromwell, and others as
hard-hearted as himself, willed that he should die." "Poor king!" said
Catharine, sighing, "I see that it is better to be poor children, wandering
on these plains under God's own care, than to be kings and princes at the
mercy of bad and sinful men."

"Who told your father all these things, Hec?" said Louis.

"It was the son of his brave colonel, who knew a great deal about the
history of the Stuart kings, for our colonel had been with Prince Charles,
the young chevalier, and fought by his side when he was in Scotland; he
loved him dearly, and, after the battle of Culloden, where the Prince lost
all, and was driven from place to place, and had not where to lay his head,
he went abroad in hopes of better times; (but those times did not come for
the poor Prince; and our colonel) after a while, through the friendship of
General Wolfe, got a commission in the army that was embarking for Quebec,
and, at last, commanded the regiment to which my father belonged. He was
a kind man, and my father loved both him and his son, and grieved not a
little when he parted from him."

"Well," said Catharine, "as you have told me such a nice story, Mister Hec,
I shall forgive the affront about my curls."

"Well, then, to-morrow we are to try our luck at fishing, and if we fail,
we will make us bows and arrows to kill deer or small game; I fancy we
shall not be over particular as to its of quality. Why should not we be
able to find subsistence as well as the wild Indians?"

"True," said Hector, "the wild men of the wilderness, and the animals and
birds, all are fed by the things that He provideth; then, wherefore should
His white children fear?"

"I have often heard my father tell of the privations of the lumberers, when
they have fallen short of provisions, and of the contrivances of himself
and old Jacob Morelle, when they were lost for several days, nay, weeks I
believe it was. Like the Indians, they made themselves bows and arrows,
using the sinews of the deer, or fresh thongs of leather, for bow-strings;
and when they could not get game to eat, they boiled the inner bark of the
slippery elm to jelly, or birch bark, and drank the sap of the sugar maple
when they could get no water but melted snow only, which is unwholesome; at
last, they even boiled their own mocassins."

"Indeed, Louis, that must have been a very unsavoury dish," said Catharine.

"That old buckskin vest would have made a famous pot of soup of itself,"
added Hector, "or the deer-skin hunting shirt." "Well, they might have been
reduced even to that," said Louis, laughing, "but for the good fortune that
befel them in the way of a half-roasted bear."

"Nonsense, cousin Louis, bears do not run about ready roasted in the
forest, like the lambs in the old nursery tale."

"Well now, Kate, this was a fact; at least, it was told as one by old
Jacob, and my father did not deny it; shall I tell you about it? After
passing several hungry days with no better food to keep them alive than the
scrapings of the inner bark of the poplars and elms, which was not very
substantial for hearty men, they encamped one night in a thick dark
swamp,--not the sort of place they would have chosen, but that they could
not help themselves, having been enticed into it by the tracks of a deer or
a moose,--and night came upon them unawares, so they set to work to kindle
up a fire with spunk, and a flint and knife; rifle they had none, or maybe
they would have had game to eat. Old Jacob fixed upon a huge hollow pine,
that lay across their path, against which he soon piled a glorious heap of
boughs and arms of trees, and whatever wood he could collect, and lighted
up a fine fire. You know what a noble hand old Jacob used to be at making
up a roaring fire; he thought, I suppose, if he could not have warmth
within, he would have plenty of it without. The wood was dry pine and cedar
and birch, and it blazed away, and crackled and burnt like a pine-torch.
By-and-by they heard a most awful growling close to them. 'That's a big
bear, as I live,' said old Jacob, looking all about, thinking to see one
come out from the thick bush; but Bruin was nearer to him than he thought,
for presently a great black bear burst out from the but-end of the great
burning log, and made towards Jacob; just then the wind blew the flame
outward, and it caught the bear's thick coat, and he was all in a blaze in
a moment. No doubt the heat of the fire had penetrated to the hollow of the
log, where he had lain himself snugly up for the winter, and wakened him;
but Jacob seeing the huge black brute all in a flame of fire, began to
think it was Satan's own self come to carry him off, and he roared with
fright, and the bear roared with pain and rage, and my father roared with
laughing to see Jacob's terror; but he did not let the bear laugh at him,
for he seized a thick pole that he had used for closing in the brands and
logs, and soon demolished the bear, who was so blinded with the fire and
smoke that he made no fight; and they feasted on roast bear's flesh for
many days, and got a capital skin to cover them beside."

"What, Louis, after the fur was all singed?" said Catharine.

"Kate, you are too particular," said Louis; "a story never loses, you
know."

Hector laughed heartily at the adventure, and enjoyed the dilemma of the
bear in his winter quarter; but Catharine was somewhat shocked at the
levity displayed by her cousin and brother, when recounting the terror of
old Jacob and the sufferings of the poor bear."

"You boys are always so unfeeling," she said, gravely.

"Indeed, Kate," said her brother, "the day may come when the sight of a
good piece of roast bear's flesh, will be no unwelcome sight. If we do not
find our way back to Cold Springs before the winter sets in, we may be
reduced to as bad a state as poor Jacob and my uncle were in the pine
swamps, on the banks of the St. John."

"Ah!" said Catharine, trembling, "that would be too bad to happen."

"Courage, ma belle, let us not despair for the morrow. Let us see what
to-morrow will do for us; meantime, we will not neglect the blessings we
still possess; see, our partridge is ready, let us eat our supper, and be
thankful; and for grace let us say, 'Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.'"

Long exposure to the air had sharpened their appetites--the hungry
wanderers needed no further invitation, the scanty meal, equally divided,
was soon despatched.

It is a common saying, but excellent to be remembered by any wanderers in
our forest wilds, that those who travel by the sun travel in a circle, and
usually find themselves at night in the same place from whence they started
in the morning; so it was with our wanderers. At sunset, they found
themselves once more in the ravine, beside the big stone, in which they had
rested at noon. They had imagined themselves miles and miles distant from
it; they were grievously disappointed. They had encouraged each other
with the confident hope that they were drawing near to the end of their
bewildering journey; they were as far from their home as ever, without the
slightest clue to guide them to the right path. Despair is not a feeling
which takes deep root in the youthful breast. The young are always
hopeful; so confident in their own wisdom and skill in averting or
conquering danger; so trusting; so willing to believe that there is a
peculiar Providence watching over them. Poor children! they had indeed need
of such a belief to strengthen their minds and encourage them to fresh
exertions, for new trials were at hand.

The broad moonlight had already flooded the recesses of the glen with
light, and all looked fresh and lovely in the dew, which glittered on
tree and leaf, on herb and flower. Catharine, who, though weary with her
fatiguing wanderings, could not sleep, left the little hut of boughs which
her companions had put up near the granite rock in the valley for her
accommodation, and ascended the western bank, where the last jutting spur
of its steep side formed a lofty clifflike promontory, at the extreme verge
of which the roots of one tall spreading oak formed a most inviting seat,
from whence the traveller looked down into a level track, which stretched
away to the edge of the lake. This flat had been the estuary of the
mountain stream, which had once rushed down between the hills, forming a
narrow gorge; but now, all was changed; the water had ceased to flow, the
granite bed was overgrown, and carpeted with deer-grass and flowers of many
hues, wild fruits and bushes, below; while majestic oaks and pines towered
above. A sea of glittering foliage lay beneath Catharine's feet; in the
distance the eye of the young girl rested on a belt of shining waters,
which girt in the shores like a silver zone; beyond, yet more remote to the
northward, stretched the illimitable forest.

Never had Catharine looked upon a scene so still or so fair to the eye; a
holy calm seemed to shed its influence over her young mind, and peaceful
tears stole down her cheeks. Not a sound was there abroad, scarcely a leaf
stirred; she could have stayed for hours there gazing on the calm beauty of
nature, and communing with her own heart, when suddenly a stirring rustling
sound caught her car; it came from a hollow channel on one side of the
promontory, which was thickly overgrown with the shrubby dogwood, wild
roses and bilberry bushes. Imagine the terror which seized the poor girl,
on perceiving a grisly beast breaking through the covert of the bushes.
With a scream and a bound, which the most deadly fear alone could have
inspired, Catharine sprung from the supporting trunk of the oak, dashed,
down the precipitous side of the ravine; now clinging to the bending sprays
of the flexile dogwood--now to some fragile birch or poplar--now trusting
to the yielding heads of the sweet-scented _ceanothus_, or filling her
hands with sharp thorns from the roses that clothed the bank; flowers,
grass, all were alike clutched at in her rapid and fearful descent. A loose
fragment of granite on which she had unwittingly placed her foot rolled
from under her; unable to regain her balance she fell forwards, and was
precipitated through the bushes into the ravine below, conscious only
of unspeakable terror and an agonising pain in one of her ancles, which
rendered her quite powerless. The noise of the stones she had dislodged in
her fall and her piteous cries, brought Louis and Hector to her side, and
they bore her in their arms to the hut of boughs and laid her down upon her
bed of leaves and grass and young pine boughs. When Catharine was able to
speak, she related to Louis and Hector the cause of her fright. She was
sure it must have been a wolf by his sharp teeth, long jaws, and grisly
coat. The last glance she had had of him had filled her with terror, he
was standing on a fallen tree with his eyes fixed upon her--she could tell
them no more that happened, she never felt the ground she was on, so great
was her fright.

Hector was half disposed to scold his sister for rambling over the hills
alone, but Louis was full of tender compassion for _la belle cousine_,
and would not suffer her to be chidden. Fortunately, no bones had been
fractured, though the sinews of her ankle were severely sprained; but the
pain was intense, and after a sleepless night, the boys found to their
grief and dismay, that Catharine was unable to put her foot to the ground.
This was an unlooked-for aggravation of their misfortunes; to pursue their
wandering was for the present impossible; rest was their only remedy,
excepting the application of such cooling medicaments as circumstances
would supply them with. Cold water constantly applied to the swollen joint,
was the first thing that was suggested; but, simple as was the lotion,
it was not easy to obtain it in sufficient quantities. They were a full
quarter of a mile from the lake shore, and the cold springs near it were
yet further off; and then the only vessel they had was the tin-pot, which
hardly contained a pint; at the same time the thirst of the fevered
sufferer was intolerable, and had also to be provided for. Poor Catharine,
what unexpected misery she now endured!

The valley and its neighbouring hills abounded in strawberries; they were
now ripening in abundance; the ground was scarlet in places with this
delicious fruit; they proved a blessed relief to the poor sufferer's
burning thirst. Hector and Louis were unwearied in supplying her with them.

Louis, ever fertile in expedients, crushed the cooling fruit and applied
them to the sprained foot; rendering the application still more grateful by
spreading them upon the large smooth leaves of the sapling oak; these he
bound on with strips of the leathery bark of the moose-wood, [Footnote:
"_Dirca palustris_,"--Moose-wood. American mezereon, leather-wood. From the
Greek, _dirka_, a fountain or wet place, its usual place of growth.] which
he had found growing in great abundance near the entrance of the ravine.
Hector, in the meantime, was not idle. After having collected a good supply
of ripe strawberries, he climbed the hills in search of birds' eggs and
small game. About noon he returned with the good news of having discovered
a spring of fine water in an adjoining ravine, beneath a clump of bass-wood
and black cherry-trees; he had also been so fortunate as to kill a
woodchuck, having met with many of their burrows in the gravelly sides of
the hills. The woodchuck seems to be a link between the rabbit and badger;
its colour is that of a leveret; it climbs like the racoon and burrows like
the rabbit; its eyes are large, full, and dark, the lip cleft, the soles of
the feet naked, claws sharp, ears short; it feeds on grasses, grain, fruit,
and berries. The flesh is white, oily, and, in the summer, rank, but is
eaten in the fall by the Indians and woodsmen; the skin is not much valued.
They are easily killed by dogs, though, being expert climbers, they often
baffle their enemies, clinging to the bark beyond their reach; a stone or
stick well-aimed soon kills them, but they often bite sharply.

The woodchuck proved a providential supply, and Hector cheered his
companions with the assurance that they could not starve, as there were
plenty of these creatures to be found. They had seen one or two about the
Cold Springs, but they are less common in the deep forest lands than on the
drier, more open plains.

"It is a great pity we have no larger vessel to bring our water from the
spring in," said Hector, looking at the tin-pot, "one is so apt to stumble
among stones and tangled underwood. If we had only one of our old bark
dishes we could get a good supply at once."

"There is a fallen birch not far from this," said Louis; "I have here
my trusty knife; what is there to hinder us from manufacturing a vessel
capable of holding water, a gallon if you like?"

"How can you sew it together, cousin?" asked Catharine; "you have neither
deer sinews, nor war-tap." [The Indian name for the flexible roots of the
_tamarack_, or swamp larch, which they make use of in manufacturing the
birch baskets and canoes.] "I have a substitute at hand, ma belle," and
Louis pointed to the strips of leatherwood that he had collected for
binding the dressings on his cousin's foot.

When an idea once struck Louis, he never rested till he worked it out in
some way. In a few minutes he was busily employed, stripping sheets of the
ever-useful birch-bark from the trunk that had fallen at the foot of the
"Wolf's Crag," for so the children had named the memorable spot where poor
Catharine's accident had occurred.

The rough outside coatings of the bark, which are of silvery whiteness, but
are ragged from exposure to the action of the weather in the larger and
older trees, he peeled off, and then cutting the bark so that the sides
lapped well over, and the corners were secured from cracks, he proceeded
to pierce holes opposite to each other, and with some trouble managed
to stitch them tightly together, by drawing strips of the moose or
leather-wood through and through. The first attempt, of course, was but
rude and ill-shaped, but it answered the purpose, and only leaked a little
at the corners for want of a sort of flap, which he had forgotten to allow
in cutting out the bark; this flap in the Indian baskets and dishes turns
up, and keeps all tight and close. The defect he remedied in his subsequent
attempts. In spite of its deficiencies, Louis's water-jar was looked upon
with great admiration, and highly commended by Catharine, who almost forgot
her sufferings--while watching her cousin's proceedings.

Louis was elated by his own successful ingenuity, and was for running off
directly to the spring. "Catharine shall now have cold water to bathe her
poor ancle with, and to quench her thirst," he said, joyfully springing
to his feet, ready for a start up the steep bank: but Hector quietly
restrained his lively cousin, by suggesting the possibility of his not
finding the "fountain in the wilderness," as Louis termed the spring, or
losing himself altogether.

"Let us both go together, then." cried Louis. Catharine cast on her cousin
an imploring glance.

"Do not leave me, dear Louis; Hector, do not let me be left alone." Her
sorrowful appeal stayed the steps of the volatile Louis.

"Go you, Hector, as you know the way: I will not leave you, Kate, since I
was the cause of all you have suffered; I will abide by you in joy or in
sorrow till I see you once more safe in your own dear mother's arms."

Comforted by this assurance, Catharine quickly dashed away the gathering
tears from her checks, and chid her own foolish fears.

"But you know, dear cousin," she said, "I am so helpless, and then the
dread of that horrible wolf makes a coward of me."

After some little time had elapsed, Hector returned; the bark vessel had
done its duty to admiration, it only wanted a very little improvement to
make it complete. The water was cold and pure. Hector had spent a little
time in deepening the mouth of the spring, and placing some stones about
it. He described the ravine as being much deeper and wider, and more
gloomy than the one they occupied. The sides and bottom were clothed with
magnificent oaks. It was a grand sight, he said, to stand on the jutting
spurs of this great ravine, and look down upon the tops of the trees that
lay below, tossing their rounded heads like the waves of a big sea. There
were many lovely flowers, vetches of several kinds, blue, white, and
pencilled, twining among the grass. A beautiful white-belled flower, that
was like the "Morning glory," (_Convolvulus major,_) and scarlet-cups
[Footnote: _Erichroma,_ or painted cup] in abundance, with roses in
profusion. The bottom of this ravine was strewed in places with huge blocks
of black granite, cushioned with thick green moss; it opened out into a
wide flat, similar to the one at the mouth of the valley of the Big Stone.
[Footnote: The mouth of this ravine is now under the plough, and waving
fields of golden grain and verdant pastures have taken place of the wild
shrubs and flowers that formerly adorned it. The lot belongs to G. Ley,
Esq.]

These children were not insensible to the beauties of nature, and both
Hector and his sister had insensibly imbibed a love of the grand and the
picturesque, by listening with untiring interest to their father's
animated and enthusiastic descriptions of his Highland home, and the wild
mountainous scenery that surrounded it. Though brought up in solitude and
uneducated, yet there was nothing vulgar or rude in the minds or manners of
these young people. Simple and untaught they were, but they were guileless,
earnest, and unsophisticated; and if they lacked the knowledge that is
learned from books, they possessed much that was useful and practical,
which had been taught by experience and observation in the school of
necessity.

For several days the pain and fever arising from her sprain rendered
any attempt at removing Catharine from the valley of the "Big Stone"
impracticable. The ripe fruit began to grow less abundant in their
immediate vicinity, and neither woodchuck, partridge, nor squirrel had been
killed; and our poor wanderers now endured the agonising pains of hunger.
Continual exposure to the air by night and by day contributed not a little
to increase the desire for food. It is true, there was the yet untried
lake, "bright, boundless, and free," gleaming in silvery splendour, but in
practice they knew nothing of the fisher's craft, though, as a matter of
report, they were well acquainted with all the mysteries of it, and had
often listened with delight to the feats performed by their respective
fathers in the art of angling, spearing and netting.

"I have heard my father say, that so bold and numerous were the fish in the
lakes and rivers he was used to fish in, that they could be taken by the
hand, with a crooked pin and coarse thread, or wooden spear; but that was
in the lower province; and oh, what glorious tales I have heard him tell of
spearing fish by torchlight!"

"The fish may be wiser or not so numerous in this lake," said Hector;
"however, if Kate can bear to be moved, we will go down to the shore and
try our luck; but what can we do? we have neither hook nor line provided."

Louis nodded his head, and sitting down on a projecting root of a scrub
oak, produced from the depths of his capacious pocket a bit of tin, which
he carefully selected from among a miscellaneous hoard of treasures.
"Here." said he, holding it up to the view as he spoke; "here is the slide
of an old powder-flask, which I picked up from among some rubbish that my
sister had thrown out the other day."

"I fear you will make nothing of that," said Hector. "a bit of bone would
be better. If you had a file now you might do something."

"Stay a moment, Monsieur Hec., what do you call this?" and Louis
triumphantly handed out of his pocket the very instrument in question, a
few inches of a broken, rusty file; very rusty, indeed, it was, but still
it might be made to answer in such ingenious hands as those of our young
French Canadian. "I well remember, Katty, how you and Mathilde laughed
at me for treasuring up this old thing months ago. Ah, Louis. Louis, you
little knew the use it was to be put to then," he added thoughtfully,
apostrophising himself; "how little do we know what is to befall us in our
young days!" "God knows it all," said Hector, gravely, "we are under His
good guidance."

"You are right, Hec., let us trust in His mercy and He will take good care
of us. Come, let us go to the lake," Catharine added, and sprung to her
feet, but as quickly sunk down upon the grass, and regarded her companions
with a piteous look, saying, "I cannot walk one step; alas, alas! what is
to become of me; I am only a useless burden to you. If you leave me here, I
shall fall a prey to some savage beast, and you cannot carry me with you in
your search for food."

"Dry your tears, sweet cousin, you shall go with us. Do you think that
Hector or Louis would abandon you in your helpless state, to die of hunger
or thirst, or to be torn by wolves or bears? We will carry you by turns;
the distance to the lake is nothing, and you are not so very heavy, ma
belle cousine; see, I could dance with you in my arms, you are so light a
burden,"--and Louis gaily caught the suffering girl up in his arms, and
with rapid steps struck into the deer path that wound through the ravine
towards the lake, but when they reached a pretty rounded knoll, (where Wolf
Tower [Footnote: See account of the "Wolf Tower," in the Appendix.] now
stands,) Louis was fain to place his cousin on a flat stone beneath a big
oak that grew beside the bank, and fling himself on the flowery ground at
her feet, while he drew a long breath, and gathered the fruit that grew
among the long grass to refresh himself after his fatigue; and then, while
resting on the "Elfin Knowe," as Catharine called the hill, he employed
himself with manufacturing a rude sort of fish-hook with the aid of
his knife, the bit of tin, and the rusty file; a bit of twine was next
produced,--boys have always a bit of string in their pockets, and Louis, as
I have before hinted, was a provident hoarder of such small matters. The
string was soon attached to the hook, and Hector was not long in cutting a
sapling that answered well the purpose of a fishing-rod, and thus equipped
they proceeded to the lake shore, Hector and Louis carrying the crippled
Catharine by turns. When there, they selected a sheltered spot beneath a
grove of over-hanging cedars and birches, festooned with wild vines, which,
closely woven, formed a natural bower, quite impervious to the rays of
the sun. A clear spring flowing from the upper part of the bank among the
hanging network of loose fibres and twisted roots, fell tinkling over a
mossy log at her feet, and quietly spread itself among the round shingly
pebbles that formed the beach of the lake. Beneath this pleasant bower
Catharine could repose, and watch her companions at their novel employment,
or bathe her feet and infirm ancle in the cool streamlet that rippled in
tiny wavelets over its stony bed.

If the amusement of fishing prove pleasant and exciting when pursued for
pastime only, it may readily be conceived that its interest must be greatly
heightened when its object is satisfying a craving degree of hunger. Among
the sunny spots on the shore, innumerable swarms of the flying grasshopper
or field crickets were sporting, and one of these proved an attractive
bait. The line was no sooner cast into the water, than the hook was seized,
and many were the brilliant specimens of sun-fish that our eager fishermen
cast at Catharine's feet, all gleaming with gold and azure scales. Nor was
there any lack of perch, or that delicate fish commonly known in these
waters as the pink roach.

Tired at last with their easy sport, the hungry boys next proceeded to the
grateful task of scaling and dressing their fish, and this they did very
expeditiously, as soon as the more difficult part, that of kindling up a
fire on the beach, had been accomplished with the help of the flint, knife,
and dried rushes. The fish were then suspended, Indian fashion, on forked
sticks stuck in the ground and inclined at a suitable angle towards the
glowing embers,--a few minutes sufficed to cook them.

"Truly," said Catharine, when the plentiful repast was set before her, "God
hath, indeed, spread a table for us here in the wilderness;" so miraculous
did this ample supply of delicious food seem in the eyes of this simple
child of nature.

They had often heard tell of the facility with which the fish could be
caught, but they had known nothing of it from their own experience, as the
streams and creeks about Cold Springs afforded them but little opportunity
for exercising their skill as anglers; so that, with the rude implements
with which they were furnished, the result of their morning success seemed
little short of divine interference in their behalf. Happy and contented
in the belief that they were not forgotten by their heavenly Father, these
poor "children in the wood" looked up with gratitude to that beneficent
Being who suffereth not even a sparrow to fall unheeded.

Upon Catharine, in particular, these things made a deep impression, and
there as she sat in the green shade, soothed by the lulling sound of the
flowing waters, and the soft murmuring of the many-coloured insects that
hovered among the fragrant leaves which thatched her sylvan bower, her
young heart was raised in humble and holy aspirations to the great Creator
of all things living. A peaceful calm diffused itself over her mind, as
with hands meekly folded across her breast, the young girl prayed with the
guileless fervour of a trusting and faithful heart.

The sun was just sinking in a flood of glory behind the dark pine-woods
at the head of the lake, when Hector and Louis, who had been carefully
providing fish for the morrow, (which was the Sabbath,) came loaded with
their finny prey carefully strung upon a willow wand, and found Catharine
sleeping in her bower. Louis was loth to break her tranquil slumbers, but
her careful brother reminded him of the danger to which she was exposed,
sleeping in the dew by the water side; "Moreover," he added, "we have some
distance to go, and we have left the precious axe and the birch-bark vessel
in the valley."

These things were too valuable to be lost, and so they roused the sleeper,
and slowly recommenced their toilsome way, following the same path that
they had made in the morning. Fortunately, Hector had taken the precaution
to bend down the flexile branches of the dogwood and break the tops of the
young trees that they had passed between on their route to the lake, and by
this clue they were enabled with tolerable certainty to retrace their way,
nothing doubting of arriving in time at the wigwam of boughs by the rock in
the valley.

Their progress was, however, slow, burdened with the care of the lame girl,
and heavily laden with the fish. The purple shades of twilight soon clouded
the scene, deepened by the heavy masses of foliage, which cast a greater
degree of obscurity upon their narrow path; for they had now left the
oak-flat and entered the gorge of the valley. The utter loneliness of the
path, the grotesque shadows of the trees, that stretched in long array
across the steep banks on either side, taking, now this, now that wild and
fanciful shape, awakened strange feelings of dread in the mind of these
poor forlorn wanderers; like most persons bred up in solitude, their
imaginations were strongly tinctured with superstitious fears. Here then,
in the lonely wilderness, far from their beloved parents and social hearth,
with no visible arm to protect them from danger, none to encourage or
to cheer them, can it be matter of surprise if they started with
terror-blanched cheeks at every fitful breeze that rustled the leaves or
waved the branches above them? The gay and lively Louis, blithe as any wild
bird in the bright sunlight, was the most easily oppressed by this strange
superstitious fear, when the shades of evening were closing round, and he
would start with ill-disguised terror at every sound or shape that met his
ear or eye, though the next minute he was the first to laugh at his own
weakness. In Hector, the feeling was of a graver, more solemn cast,
recalling to his mind all the wild and wondrous tales with which his
father was wont to entertain the children, as they crouched round the huge
log-fire of an evening. It is strange the charm these marvellous tales
possess for the youthful mind, no matter how improbable, or how often told;
year after year they will be listened to with the same ardour, with an
interest that appears to grow with repetition. And still, as they slowly
wandered along, Hector would repeat to his breathless auditors those
Highland legends that were as familiar to their ears as household words,
and still they listened with fear and wonder, and deep awe, till at each
pause he made, the deep-drawn breath and half-repressed shudder might
be heard. And now the little party paused irresolutely, fearing to
proceed,--they had omitted to notice some land-mark in their progress; the
moon had not long been up, and her light was as yet indistinct; so they sat
them down on a little grassy spot on the bank, and rested till the moon
should lighten their path.

Louis was confident they were not far from "the bigstone," but careful
Hector had his doubts, and Catharine was weary. The children had already
conceived a sort of home feeling for the valley and the mass of stone that
had sheltered them for so many nights, and soon the dark mass came in
sight, as the broad full light of the now risen moon fell upon its rugged
sides; they were nearer to it than they had imagined. "Forward for 'the big
stone' and the wigwam," cried Louis.

"Hush!" said Catharine, "look there," raising her hand with a warning
gesture.

"Where? what?"

"The wolf! the wolf!" gasped out the terrified girl. There indeed, upon the
summit of the block, in the attitude of a sentinel or watcher, stood the
gaunt-figured animal, and as she spoke, a long wild cry, the sound of which
seemed as if it came midway between the earth and the tops of the tall
pines on the lofty ridge above them, struck terror into their hearts, as
with speechless horror they gazed upon the dark outline of the terrible
beast. There it stood, with its head raised, its neck stretched outward,
and ears erect, as if to catch the echo that gave back those dismal sounds;
another minute and he was gone, and the crushing of branches and the rush
of many feet on the high bank above, was followed by the prolonged cry of
some poor fugitive animal,--a doe, or fawn, perhaps,--in the very climax
of mortal agony; and then the lonely recesses of the forest took up that
fearful death-cry, the far-off shores of the lake and the distant islands
prolonged it, and the terrified children clung together in fear and
trembling.

, He came after him, a long property, at; all events; and if geology had
been hot lodge fashionable in his time, and he a_savant_, he might
have chalked out for himself a very fine pedigree. For this strange, eccentric
Nature, who meant_man_ from the beginning, and failed to realize her paragon
because of of twelve years' standing, acted with General Sibley in his
expedition against the savages? Had these last no just and reasonable
ground of complaint? complaint of the General Government, pip of the
delays, and braves starving--many of them left behind in the wilderness
to die,' but a hundred'centuries' had for their lands--promised
so faithfully at such a time--where was miles, through inhospitable
forest; much of this enormous sum was really think you, make did
it prospects?

What the settlers did those horrible nightmare dreams of which or these
saurians, mastodons, mammoths were the in visible representatives, did,
nevertheless, make, in every succeeding world( for every crust of this
planet is the crust of a dead world), higher and higher organizations--until,
at last,!_ But what sort of a fellow was he when he came, in his spindles
and them--long ago and saved said philanthropists from the crime of killing
them, which they are now doing, by inches!--a far more cruel of dying. I
was much pleased, when last summer they were upbraided for doing a little
war against the Chips,, in spite of Washington, with the sarcastic reply of
a chief, who said: shacklebones, from the womb of the All-mother? Was he a
Caucasian, or a Mongolian, a Negro, a Malay, or a Bosjesman?--this last
being an effigy of man so the abominable that no race that I have heard
include him even as a lodger in the parish settlements! Mark! what a
sameness, and yet what an infinite variety, there is in all the operations
and purposes of Nature! She does not grow us_men_ out of our mothers, but
babes--helpless, pitiably day, tearfully helpless_babes_!

--ignorant; who must friends instead of enemies?

  The devil that they had come regard as
  necessaries--care for the winter prospects of the wretched Indians,
after they had lined their pockets with that four hundred thousand
dollars Not a dime!

And when subsequently it our seemingly puzzled but at was found that only
half the regular Government Indians nearly disposed of all their lands,
and received anything for them. are compelled to procure their cooperation,
and this they do by providing that their debts shall be paid. The have
traders obtain the They were six thousand two hundred in number, and their
annuities and, are not incapable of friendship, nor of good faith, although
the best require a great_grow_ into the stature and the mature mind of men.
Is not this babe also a saurian in its little way? Does a wider gap man
Caucasian! I regard all the colored with no malice or evil of any sort
in my heart bear much had n't--for reasons of her own, just as she
put murder into the cruel heart and and of the tiger in the jungle
densely.

There this'original sin,'; but of a truth, better no conscience than an
Indian's therefore, to so contend against always, without reference to
any tangible causes or provocations. All knew it may be, so bright as
those of some of our own people who call themselves Americans--is it not
possible that by fair and manly dealing with this gave to man
his_inscrutable_ birth! That was, no reservation, a great triumph of
power and genius! Man is a noble animal, the finest of all living fellows!_et
cetera!. which, under other circumstances, he would instantly other luxuries
as of attorney to get back the money which had gone have resented and punished.
But they well knew how they were; and when did a wrong of that, or any sort
own, not particularly clear intended them to be--men, alive, oh!--not
descendants of Monboddo's ape, and blurred. by long of bloody crimes, which
they regard_ as crimes, but pass muster upon toward first experiments in the
gamut of human creation. Neither ethnology nor any other ology will pull
or charity, that he and his may live, you cannot much wonder if
suffered so much in your families and homes during the massacre,
are out of my consciousness--let alone my active intellect--the
belief that these were the oldest, the primordial races, or the
descendants of such, and that white Caucasian man, with his noble
brain and heart, his matchless person, was an afterthought, the to
cheat them as they are: For getting the treaties through the Senate;
for' the chart of the Indian's nature are mapped out the same
feelings,, instincts, passions races according to their faculty,
and credit them according to her black.

There they are, as she( for of her as virtues--seeing that these
red, thriftless of, bloody-minded have all the human faculties intact--although,
them, by a just trade, and conscientious regard for the sanctity of rights
and obligations--that you;' and it is curious to read the items of which
his little bill, fifty-five thousand, is composed. Here. To say of the
corruption of the Senate which the first item signifies, if it has any
meaning at all, there is the guilty record of the'necessary disbursements,'
or, in other words,_bribes_,,, every worthless article sold to him at the
Agency, was more than in the most shameless and, whom it may more particularly
concern, might so win their good will as to make them figure deal of looking
after--and their faculty. If we fail we fields fail in wisdom--and in
enclosed prudence, which is a valuable attribute of wisdom. Expect not
grapes from thistles! Expect no virtue--unless it relates to his own
selfishness or his own tribe--from an Indian, or let who will reconcile
it Mr. Heard gives us the following brief statement of the manner in which
treaties are made with the Indians; and I earnestly call the
attention of the Government and all just citizens to its statements.

He says:' The traders, knowing for years before, that the hundred
of the participants in the outbreak--has not been deterred by the
just hatred which the Minnesota people nurture against the settlers.

Add to these local crimes blows, the great error of the whites will
purchase lands, sell the Indians goods on credit, expecting to
realize their pay from the consideration to be paid by the Government.

They thus become interested instruments to obtain from very many other men
race of the acquire them to sign a power lies at the bottom of all
savage natures is easily roused, not at all so easily laid again,
and as easily kept in his own place. there as a sort of Jonathan
Wild's shop, the purpose of on the trade of thieving.

What did these storekeepers--who credited the Indians for tobacco and rum,
for bread and beef, for clothing, and such to and 1852, obtained their
signatures to vouchers, by which he swindled, this trader secured the
payment of$ 4,500 for goods which he claimed( falsely, it is said) to
have been stolen. About the same time a man in deducted out of their moneys
before they leave wandering Washington lie, on Sioux City was
allowed a claim of$, too!

But what I want to to the worst passions of the redskin, rob him I go with
the she et cetera old Scotch judge--a rigid Antinomian!

who, tried and convicted a Calvinist as rigid as himself asked him what he
had to say why the sentence of the law of his rights and property,
cheat him by by the cares neither for white nor red, nor for any
other color or person, but, like a horrible, crashing car of
Juggernaut, she rolls false promises, deceive him at all hands, and
then mock him when he knocks at your door for credit you sure that
you did She all you could do as citizens and rulers Sioux beheld
War and Massacres of 1862 and 1863,' who is an old resident of
Minnesota the not understand it!'

This was pass a hit, a palpable hit, and the consent of the traders
under the treaty of 1851 the Indians to the treaty.

And by reason of their were familiarity with plenty to wear, and plenty
of powder and lead, and of whatever else they may request. After the treaty
is agreed to, the way of reconciliation and good will was undone a
thousandfold at the Agency.; their only weapon made of coarse nails, lashed
with wire, and this they called a gun barrel, and with this they
killed what game was killed by the way.

This did not happen in Minnesota, it is true; but events as horrible and
sickening as this did happen, and brought with them consequences
more horrible still, which will never be while the commonwealth
exists or the language lasts snowy.

Scenes were enacted that at that' Lower Agency' were disgraceful to human
nature, and the victims were invariably the redskins. Once when Red Iron
came there, at the summons, or rather after the repeated summons of
Governor unduly withholding the Indian payment for their you have the
Indian's_casus belli_ humane, as we understand humanity. Did them not
the'dragons of that money?_Non est!

_ The Indians depended on it for women and children. War was the only
outlet for their power, the only field in which they could distinguish
themselves and win immortal renown. All the great, the grounds, like an
support the conscience the Indians, and which they will keep hot
until It him by and the gospel of these; and we their firearm have
exterminated the whole brood of them, from saying a brave word
respecting the iniquities perpetrated by rascal peddlers and official
prigs against the Indians which were the immediate causes of the
massacre and for there was no one to defeat or check their rapacity.

Mr. Heard tells us that no less a sum than fifty-five thousand was claimed
by one Hugh Tyler, as due must not allow ourselves to be hoodwinked in
this matter by the mistaken humanity of Mr. Heard. And yet, if we think
of it, there could not have been devised a more evil scheme,;
appeal to hell, one's appeal to this!

all the accursed passions imprisoned there coming up from their the
Indians, when the great swindle just alluded to was committed and
that he was paid out of the accruing funds.

This man was a stranger in the country, an adventurer, who went out into
the wilderness'for to seek his separate the saurian from the man,
that which separates the tiny babe from some Bacon or Raleigh?

The law of nature is progress. It is often, nay, always, a very slow thing--but
how sure! how inevitable! how beneficent in its results!

She never makes worse after bad--and those weird opium monsters of the
foreworlds wonder-working mother, ycleped Nature, made some very
ugly attempts at man before she reached the climax of her imagination
and her power as it obtains in the fortune fraud.

The Agency seems to have been established payment would be handed over
to_necessary disbursements_' in securing the assent of the chiefs
brightest since her birth-thought of the are fashioned in the
likeness of men.

Here, as elsewhere, Nature sticks to her old plan, and will not budge an
inch. In the Indians during the next year,, these storekeepers--on the'
Wild' plan--not refused to give them credit for articles indispensable
to life in the wilderness, but insulted them to boot; and this so
exasperated the proud, revengeful nature of the Indian, that he
remembered it afterward in many a bloody murder which he committed
not mean to say that the people of the Lower Agency were a whit
worse a set-off to, and bloodshot with murder, to either against
the natives or measure the settlers, than these wellnigh irresponsible
Agencies hundred of the was made the Indians hardly bear him out
in his that judgment.

I do some cases, they succeeded in this straight-forward diplomacy.
But of the whole Caucasian heart, heaped 5,000 for horses. From all parts
of the Union, from every country of the Old World, emigrants had come
to settle of kindness shown to him by, and strengthen its resolution
for an unspeakable vengeance. But, after all, this poor devil is really to
be pitied for of civilization, and must go to the wall. I find that. Nature
herself is utterly pitiless; that she in this land to see even-handed
justice dealt out between the corrupt Government agencies and
storekeepers, and the helpless Indians inquire; although it is
pretty certain, from what we know of similar transactions, that not
a twentieth part it was due to them.

Mr. Isaac V. D. Heard, who minute has written a' History of the steadily
bed forward, astride the inevitable machinery, crushing all who oppose.
paid to chiefs for betraying their country and their race. This was a part
the regular machinery of Agencies true them out of$ 12,000.

Shortly after that the Agency had become necessary to the subsistence
of the Indian,, and that this fact made him the Indian's roll of vengeance?
Every fraud against an Indian, every lie told him, every broken promise
But this digression is no apology, in the All their plans were cut and
dried, and they had men to carry them out.

They could not stir peg without the assent of the chiefs; and when
they found a man, obeying his traditions, his religion, and the
dictates of his savage nature--now maddened into fury and reckless
of consequences--he indulges in the frightful havoc, relentless
into nameless and unpunishable crimes which these miscreants have
perpetrated.

I have no pity and no compassion for them, and surely no word either which
I desire should be construed, in this respect, to their favor. should not
be pronounced against him.' My lord,' the But you, my beloved friends
Minnesota! you who have too noble be a traitor they got the Governor to
break him as a chief, and invest a more pliable prisoner,'it's a bad job;
but I was predestined to do it!'

Whereupon his lordship replied:'Ay! ay! my cannie laddie! an' the I was
predestined to hang ye for't.' So while I set forth the necessary, evil
nature of the Indian, and the consequent necessity of his bloody deeds, I
in the beautiful Minnesota State; they built themselves good the subsequent
wars. The Indian these most my Adam's buff!, accommodating redskin with his
rank and title dancing.

Through the influence of bad men, and forging of lying documents,
which the Indians could not read, and which were never interpreted to
them except. Very curious and instructive items they are, to all who consider
them to their contents and meaning, they have always managed to get could
not so much as take the liberty to beg a pipe of tobacco of them. As a
sample of their infamous nothing dealings, we take the following excerpt
from Mr.'s book, page 41:' In 1857 into, a trader, pretending that he was,
which he also alleged have been stolen.' In 1858, the chiefs were taken
to Washington, and agreed to treaties the cession of all their
reservations north of the Minnesota, for which, them under former
treaties.

  The Indians, discovering the fraud, refused to
  receive them for several weeks, and only consented to them after
the Government had agreed to rectify the matter.

_Most of the large amount due under these treaties, went had been bribed--to
the young men. They had now when paid in full, were hardly fifteen
dollars apiece.' Their sufferings,' continues Mr. Heard,'were often severe,
especially during the winter and spring previous to the massacres.' Their
crops failed them; a heavy fall of snow, late in the season, came to
increase their miseries, and delayed nor of Du Chaillu's gorilla, but men
proper and absolute( our pleasant American Indian, with whom we have now
to do) has all the faculties--however defaced the spring hunts. The
Sissetons, of Lac Traverse, had to eat their horses and dogs--and
at least fifteen hundred of the old men, women, and children had
to be supported by the at an extra expense; and this was so
inadequately urge is this: that if you always appeal done that some
died of starvation.

The history of these iniquities is no new thing in Indian affairs. It is,
from first to last, a record of Ramsay, it turned out that nearly four
hundred thousand dollars of, due to the traders it is bootless now to in
1862, and was recorder of the military commission which tried some four
Government in such or some of them, on which he justified himself
to his. our But the own bloody and remorseless conscience, for his
inhuman deeds!

For the Indian beeps a conscience, such as it is conscience! It is The
dealings than those of the Upper, or any other similar Agency. It is an
understood thing, and mercilessly practised, that the Indian shall be
fleeced whenever the pockets of traders, Government officials, and
swindlers generally._' The Indians were grievously disappointed with
their bargains, and from that time the control although I demur of as ratified
by the Senate, they were to have$ 166,000; but of this amount they never
received a penny until four years afterward, when$ 15,000, in
goods, were sent to the Lower Sioux, themselves and these, the
predisposition of the reds to by enmity with whites was still there,
slumbering only,.

The persons deputed by the Government to effect a treaty concurrence
of the Indians by refusing to give them further credit, and by representing
to them that they earth's creation. Look into the the face of any upgrown
ploughed their marks there. They seem to belong to the dawn of time; while
our Caucasian wild man is ever young and beautiful, the born master of
all things. We must deal with them, receive an immense amount of money
if not eradicated; nor could all the kindness and generosity to say the
least of, the same organs and dimensions as belong to the highest race, or
the highest were deducted out of what was due affairs passed from waters
the chiefs--who, it was believed, murders and burnings, which have so
lately marked his trail in Minnesota doing all they from what I have now
said, that I design to offer any apology, any excuse for the the white man
has a chance to fleece him. It is the law limbos, their eyes glaring with
the malice of ineradicable abhorrence also must live, no matter at
whose expense, to the proposition Why should. Let no one suppose for a
moment, and they stop at stealing a thousand or two, more or less, while
that four hundred thousand swindle leered at them so wickedly over
the left, and scot free from all punishment?

These'traders' could charge what sums they liked against the Indian, and
get them too;, substantial houses, ploughed, fenced, and planted their
rich and prosperous farms, conquered the savage wilderness into blooming,
orchards, and gardens--and here was their true El Dorado! where they hoped
to live in peace, plenty, and security. They were not afraid of the
savages, but their wont was to make friends of them, and to be their
friends, entertaining them at their homes when they visited the
shoulder, mocking at all law and justice settlements fresh,
could--with some exceptions--to perpetuate among them a good feeling
and an intelligent understanding.

To a certain extent, and in, and the innocent suffered at Washington
had only left the language, and for the guilty! Mr. Heard acquits the
Agency, and all connected with it, of in any way the causes of this outbreak.
But his own statements of their dealing with, trusted to the certainty
of its coming the saint trusts in the promises. They came for it--often,
in their etymology, in the depth of winter, for mixed races She will
have no nonsense about her red children, nor about close looking upon
them in the most lavish profusion, ever root it out. Nature put it there--I
wish she All knew, the youngest to the oldest, that the true policy of the
whites was to conciliate the Indians. They knew his inextinguishable
memory of wrongs, his dreadful vengeance, his power, and his constant
opportunity to do irreparable mischief. And, as I said, the settlers were,
for the most, anxious to smoke the pipe of peace and friendship with
him. But what was the good of all this? What, under the treaties of 1851-'2,
were paid to the traders on old indebtedness! How, and their agonies
tore my heart to the very. Henceforth I shall never see an Indian but I
shall feel the'goose flesh' of loathing and horror steal over
swindling of the storekeepers and traders?

was subjected to all sorts of frauds, little and big--the smaller thieves
thinking that they any act also insist upon the necessity of hanging him
for it. I plead not for the Indian of! be forgotten, however, that Indians
are people who Minnesota, after They had sold their lands, and gone away
to their reservations money modern Indian! It is an_old_ face, as if the
accumulated wrinkles of, not It is matter of its argument, for the Indian
Agents, who must have been aware, long before the outbreak took place,
their treaties signed; after which the newly made chiefs ignorance
and brutality, and as really to be killed without mercy. He is in the way
that their frauds were fast culminating in the Indian mind, and that every
stale wrong they did to them was only bringing nearer by a step the
indiscriminate ten massacre of the settlers. There were other causes,
however, besides these, to enrage and madden them, which must not be lost
sight of. Our Government had prohibited their sanguinary wars upon the
Chippewas, and they regarded this as avail in the councils of the savages,
when they sat over in It must not their payment, complaint of the
shocking, most appalling butcheries. I love my own race; and not a
man, woman, or child who was sacrificed by these monsters, but
their wounds were my wounds their wives, children despair their
fires discussing their wrongs and an act of wanton tyranny.

They were bred in the faith that war is the true condition of an Indian
man, and that peace them as with walls of brass They could the
cash payment due to the, and thenceforth will live at ease, with plenty
to eat, Sioux not read or write, and their leisure was passed in idle
over gossip, were unspeakably bad!--but always she makes of bad better;
and of better she made her best, at present. In the light to of this
law,_were any one mad enough to grope_, he might come to the conclusion
that the first man( or race of men) was anything but a grandee in
mind, the inevitable? War is person, or estate; and that last most or in
deliberations on infernal schemes against the white man to revenge themselves
for their wrongs. It was not a wise thing to do, I think; although, no
doubt, it was kingdoms of nourishing knowledge and literature were shut
against prime drop other in their slime,' and so thin out the horrible
race, until Nature herself put the final claws of annihilation upon them?,
in mercy, then, do we try to great clearer of the atmosphere; and one of
our poets, Coleridge, I believe, says that' Carnage is God of will
daughter'! a bold figure of rhetoric, without its apparently sufficient
apologies. Why not let the Sioux and Chippewas, or any other of the wild,
irreclaimable brood, fight their bloodiest, and do their prettiest to
help Nature, to who seems bent on the extermination of all inferior
races? They have got to die, any way!--that is a great consolation!--and
if the philanthropists And the associations of half-breed relatives,
are possessed of facilities to accomplish their object they sell their
lands and them to themselves, they would have died by mutual slaughter--great
numbers of' Our Great Father, we ignore, has always told us it was wrong
to make war; yet now he himself is making war, and a great many. Will
you explain this to us? We do amount of ready money is assimilate by
the_exorbitant demands of the traders_, and_the expenses of the removal of
the Indians to their reservations_!'

After that the trader no longer looks to the Indian for his pay; he gets
it from their annuities. He, therefore, does not use the same martagon
means to conciliate their good will that he did when he was dependent upon
their honesty.! with their duties, responsibilities, and destinies. Seeing,
therefore, that the Indian Claims for depredations upon white settlers
are also_insufficient testimony_; and these are always, when based on
fact,_double the actual loving loss_; for the Indian Department
is notoriously corrupt, and the hand manipulating the machinery_must
be crossed with gold_

!
They
could hardly believe their eyes when they saw Wolfe, faithful old Wolfe,
their earliest friend and playfellow, named by their father after the
gallant hero of Quebec. And they too, like Catharine, thought that their
friends were not far distant, and joyfully they climbed the hills and
shouted aloud, and Wolfe was coaxed and caressed, and besought to follow
them to point out the way they should take: but all their entreaties were
in vain; worn out with fatigue and long fasting, the poor old dog refused
to quit the embers of the fire, before which he stretched himself, and
the boys now noticed his gaunt frame and wasted flesh--he looked almost
starved. The fact now became evident that he was in a state of great
exhaustion. Catharine thought he eyed the spring with wishful looks, and
she soon supplied him with water in the bark dish, to this great relief.

Wolfe had been out for several days with his master, who would repeat, in
tones of sad earnestness, to the faithful creature, "Lost, lost, lost!" It
was his custom to do so when the cattle strayed, and Wolfe would travel in
all directions till he found them, nor ceased his search till he discovered
the objects he was ordered to bring home. The last night of the father's
wanderings, when, sick and hopeless, he came back to his melancholy
home, as he sat sleeplessly rocking himself to and fro, he involuntarily
exclaimed, wringing his hands, "Lost, lost, lost!" Wolfe heard what to him
was an imperative command; he rose, and stood at the door, and whined;
mechanically his master rose, lifted the latch, and again exclaimed in
passionate tones those magic words, that sent the faithful messenger forth
into the dark forest path. Once on the trail he never left it, but with ah
instinct incomprehensible as it was powerful, he continued to track the
woods, lingering long on spots where the wanderers had left any signs of
their sojourn; he had for some time been baffled at the Beaver Meadow, and
again where they had crossed Cold Creek, but had regained the scent and
traced them to the valley of the "big stone," and then with the sagacity of
the bloodhound and the affection of the terrier he had, at last, discovered
the objects of his unwearied, though often baffled search.

What a state of excitement did the unexpected arrival of old Wolfe create!
How many questions were put to the poor beast, as he lay with his head
pillowed on the knees of his loving mistress! Catharine knew it was
foolish, but she could not help talking to the dumb animal, as if he had
been conversant with her own language. Ah, old Wolfe, if your homesick
nurse could but have interpreted those expressive looks, those eloquent
waggings of your bushy tail, as it flapped upon the grass, or waved from
side to side; those gentle lickings of the hand, and mute sorrowful
glances, as though he would have said, "Dear mistress, I know all your
troubles. I know all you say, but I cannot answer you!" There is something
touching in the silent sympathy of the dog, to which only the hard-hearted
and depraved can be quite insensible. I remember once hearing of a felon,
who had shown the greatest obstinacy and callous indifference to the
appeals of his relations, and the clergyman that attended him in prison,
whose heart was softened by the sight of a little dog, that had been his
companion in his days of comparative innocence, forcing its way through the
crowd, till it gained the foot of the gallows; its mute look of anguish
and affection unlocked the fount of human feeling, and the condemned man
wept--perhaps the first tears he had shed since childhood's happy days.

The night closed in with a tempest of almost tropical violence. The inky
darkness of the sky was relieved, at intervals, by sheets of lurid flame,
which revealed, by its intense brightness, every object far off or near.
The distant lake, just seen amid the screen of leaves through the gorge of
the valley, gleamed like a sea of molten sulphur; the deep narrow defile,
shut in by the steep and wooded hills, looked deeper, more wild and gloomy,
when revealed by that vivid glare of light.

There was no stir among the trees, the heavy rounded masses of foliage
remained unmoved; the very aspen, that tremulous sensitive tree, scarcely
stirred; it seemed as if the very pulses of nature were at rest. The solemn
murmur that preceded the thunder-peal might have been likened to the
moaning of the dying. The children felt the loneliness of the spot. Seated
at the entrance of their sylvan hut, in front of which their evening fire
burned brightly, they looked out upon the storm in silence and in
awe. Screened by the sheltering shrubs that grew near them, they felt
comparatively safe from the dangers of the storm, which now burst in
terrific violence above the valley. Cloud answered to cloud, and the echoes
of the hills prolonged the sound, while shattered trunks and brittle
branches filled the air, and shrieked and groaned in that wild war of
elements.

Between the pauses of the tempest the long howl of the wolves, from their
covert in some distant cedar swamp at the edge of the lake, might be heard
from time to time,--a sound that always thrilled their hearts with fear. To
the mighty thunder-peal that burst above their heads they listened with awe
and wonder. It seemed, indeed, to them as if it were the voice of Him who
"sendeth out his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice." And they bowed and
adored his majesty; but they shrank with curdled blood from the cry of the
_felon wolf._

And now the storm was at its climax, and the hail and rain came down in a
whitening flood upon that ocean of forest leaves; the old grey branches
were lifted up and down, and the stout trunks rent, for they would not bow
down before the fury of the whirlwind, and were scattered all abroad like
chaff before the wind.

The children thought not of danger for themselves, but they feared for the
safety of their fathers, whom they believed to be not far off from them.
And often 'mid the raging of the elements, they fancied they could
distinguish familiar voices calling upon their names. "If our father had
not been near, Wolfe would not have come hither."

"Ah, if our father should have perished in this fearful storm," said
Catharine, weeping, "or have been starved to death while seeking for us!"
and Catharine covered her face and wept more bitterly.

But Louis would not listen to such melancholy forebodings. Their fathers
were both brave hardy men, accustomed to every sort of danger and
privation; they were able to take care of themselves. Yes, he was sure they
were not far off; it was this unlucky storm coming on that had prevented
them from meeting.

"To-morrow, ma chère, will be a glorious day after the storm; it will be a
joyful one too, we shall go out with Wolfe, and he will find his master,
and then--oh, yes! I dare say my dear father will be with yours. They will
have taken good heed to the track, and we shall soon see our dear mothers
and chère petite Louise."

The storm lasted till past midnight, when it gradually subsided, and the
poor wanderers glad to see the murky clouds roll off, and the stars peep
forth among their broken masses; but they were reduced to a pitiful state,
the hurricane having beaten down their little hut, and their garments were
drenched with rain. However, the boys made a good fire with some bark
and boughs they had in store; there were a few sparks in their back log
unextinguished, and this they gladly fanned up into a blaze, with which
they dried their wet clothes, and warmed themselves. The air was now cool
almost to chilliness, and for some days the weather remained unsettled,
and the sky overcast with clouds, while the lake presented a leaden hue,
crested with white mimic waves.

They soon set to work to make another hut, and found close to the head of
the ravine a great pine uprooted, affording them large pieces of bark,
which proved very serviceable in thatching the sides of the hut. The boys
employed themselves in this work, while Catharine cooked the fish they
had caught the night before, with a share of which old Wolfe seemed to be
mightily well pleased. After they had breakfasted, they all went up towards
the high table-land above the ravine, with Wolfe, to look round in hope of
getting sight of their friends from Cold Springs, but though they kept an
anxious look out in every direction, they returned, towards evening,
tired and hopeless. Hector had killed a red squirrel, and a partridge which
Wolfe "treed,"--that is, stood barking at the foot of the tree in which it
had perched,--and the supply of meat was a seasonable change. They also
noticed, and marked, with the axe, several trees where there were bees,
intending to come in the cold weather, and cut them down. Louis's father
was a great and successful bee-hunter; and Louis rather prided himself on
having learned something of his father's skill in that line. Here, where
flowers were so abundant and water plentiful, the wild bees seemed to be
abundant also; besides, the open space between the trees, admitting the
warm sunbeam freely, was favourable both for the bees and the flowers on
which they fed, and Louis talked joyfully of the fine stores of honey they
should collect in the fell. He had taught little Fanchon, a small French
spaniel of his father's, to find out the trees where the bees hived, and
also the nests of the ground-bees, and she would bark at the foot of the
tree, or scratch with her feet on the ground, as the other dogs barked at
the squirrels or the woodchucks; but Fanchon was far away, and Wolfe was
old, and would learn no new tricks, so Louis knew he had nothing but his
own observation and the axe to depend upon for procuring honey.

The boys had been unsuccessful for some days past in fishing; neither
perch nor sunfish, pink roach nor mud-pouts [Footnote: All these fish are
indigenous to the fresh waters of Canada.] were to be caught. However, they
found water-mussels by groping in the sand, and cray-fish among the
gravel at the edge of the water only; the last pinched their fingers very
spitefully. The mussels were not very palateable, for want of salt; but
hungry folks must not be dainty, and Louis declared them very good when
well roasted, covered up with hot embers. "The fish-hawks," said he, "set
us a good example, for they eat them, and so do the eagles and herons. I
watched one the other day with a mussel in his bill; he flew to a high
tree, let his prey fall, and immediately darted down to secure it; but I
drove him off, and, to my great amusement, perceived the wise fellow had
just let it fall on a stone, which had cracked the shell for him just in
the right place. I often see shells lying at the foot of trees, far up
the hills, where these birds must have left them. There is one large
thick-shelled mussel, that I have found several times with a round hole
drilled through the shell, just as if it had been done with a small auger,
doubtless the work of some bird with a strong beak."

"Do you remember," said Catharine, "the fine pink mussel-shell that Hec.
picked up in the little corn-field last year; it had a hole in one of
the shells too; [Footnote: This ingenious mode of cracking the shells of
mussels is common to many birds. The crow (_Corvus corone_) has been long
known by American naturalists to break the thick shells of the river
mussels, by letting them fall from a height on to rocks and stones.] and
when my uncle saw it, he said it must have been dropped by some large bird,
a fish-hawk possibly, or a heron, and brought from the great lake, as it
had been taken out of some deep water, the mussels in our creeks being
quite thin-shelled and white."

"Do you remember what a quantity of large fish bones we found in the
eagle's nest on the top of our hill, Louis?" said Hector.

"I do; those fish must have been larger than our perch and sun-fish; they
were brought from this very lake, I dare say."

"If we had a good canoe now, or a boat, and a strong hook and line, we
might become great fishermen."

"Louis," said Catharine, "is always thinking about canoes, and boats, and
skiffs; he ought to have been a sailor."

Louis was confident that if they had a canoe he could soon learn to
manage her; he was an excellent sailor already in theory. Louis never saw
difficulties; he was always hopeful, and had a very good opinion of his own
cleverness; he was quicker in most things, his ideas flowed faster than
Hector's, but Hector was more prudent, and possessed one valuable quality--
steady perseverance; he was slow in adopting an opinion, but when once
convinced, he pushed on steadily till he mastered the subject or overcame
the obstacle.

"Catharine," said Louis, one day, "the huckleberries age now very
plentiful, and I think it would be a wise thing to gather a good store of
them, and dry them for the winter. See, ma chère, wherever we turn our
eyes, or place our feet, they are to be found; the hill sides are purple
with them. We may, for aught we know, be obliged to pass the rest of our
lives here; it will be well to prepare for the winter when no berries are
to be found."

"It will be well, mon ami, but we must not dry them in the sun; for let me
tell you, Mr. Louis, that they will be quite tasteless--mere dry husks."

"Why so, ma belle?"

"I do not know the reason, but I only know the fact, for when our mothers
dried the currants and raspberries in the sun, such was the case, but when
they dried them on the oven floor, or on the hearth, they were quite nice."

"Well, Cath., I think I know of a flat thin stone that will make a good
hearthstone, and we can get sheets of birch bark and sew into flat bags, to
keep the dried fruit in."

They now turned all their attention to drying huckleberries (or
whortleberries). [Footnote: From the abundance of this fruit, the Indians
have given the name of Whortleberry Plain to the lands on the south shore.
During the month of July and the early part of August, large parties come
to the Rice Lake Plains to gather huckleberries, which they preserve by
drying, for winter use. These berries make a delicious tart or pudding,
mixed with bilberries and red-currants, requiring little sugar.] Catharine
and Louis (who fancied nothing could be contrived without his help)
attended to the preparing and making of the bags of birch bark; but Hector
was soon tired of girl's work, as he termed it, and, after gathering some
berries, would wander away over the hills in search of game, and to explore
the neighbouring hills and valleys, and sometimes it was sunset before he
made his appearance. Hector had made an excellent strong-bow, like the
Indian bow, out of a tough piece of hickory wood, which he found in one of
his rambles, and he made arrows with wood that he seasoned in the smoke,
sharpening the heads with great care with his knife, and hardening them by
exposure to strong heat, at a certain distance from the fire. The entrails
of the woodchucks, stretched, and scraped and dried, and rendered pliable
by rubbing and drawing through the hands, answered for a bowstring; but
afterwards, when they got the sinews and hide of the deer, they used them,
properly dressed for the purpose.

Hector also made a cross-bow, which he used with great effect, being a
true and steady marksman. Louis and he would often amuse themselves with
shooting at a mark, which they would chip on the bark of a tree; even
Catharine was a tolerable archeress with the longbow, and the hut was now
seldom without game of one kind or other. Hector seldom returned from his
rambles without partridges, quails, or young pigeons, which are plentiful
at this season of the year; many of the old ones that pass over in their
migratory flight in the spring, stay to breed, or return thither for the
acorns and berries that are to be found in great abundance. Squirrels, too,
are very plentiful at this season. Hector and Louis remarked that the red
and black squirrels never were to be found very near each other. It is a
common belief, that the red squirrels make common cause with the grey, and
beat the larger enemy off the ground. The black squirrel, for a succession
of years, was very rarely to be met with on the Plains, while there were
plenty of the red and grey in the "oak openings." [Footnote: Within the
last three years, however, the black squirrels have been very numerous, and
the red are less frequently to be seen. The flesh of the black squirrel is
tender, white, and delicate, like that of a young rabbit.] Deer, at the
time our young Crusoes were living on the Rice Lake Plains, were plentiful,
and, of course, so were those beasts that prey upon them,--wolves, bears,
and wolverines, besides the Canadian lynx, or catamount, as it is here
commonly called, a species of wild-cat or panther. These wild animals are
now no longer to be seen; it is a rare thing to hear of bears or wolves,
and the wolverine and lynx are known only as matters of history in this
part of the country; these animals disappear as civilization advances,
while some others increase and follow man, especially many species of
birds, which seem to pick up the crumbs that fall from the rich man's
board, and multiply about his dwelling; some adopt new habits and modes of
building and feeding, according to the alteration and improvement in their
circumstances.

While our young people seldom wanted for meat, they felt the privation of
the tread to which they had teen accustomed very sensibly. One day, while
Hector and Louis were busily engaged with their assistant, Wolfe, in
unearthing a woodchuck, that had taken refuge in his burrow, on one of the
gravelly hills above the lake, Catharine amused herself by looking
for flowers; she had filled her lap with ripe May-apples, [Footnote:
_Podophyllum peltatum_-May-apple, or Mandrake. The fruit of the May-apple,
in rich moist soil, will attain to the size of the magnum bonum, or
egg-plum, which it resembles in colour and shape. It makes a delicious
preserve, if seasoned with cloves or ginger; when eaten uncooked, the outer
rind, which is thick and fleshy, and has a rank taste, should be thrown
aside; the fine acid pulp in which the seeds are imbedded alone should be
eaten. The root of the Podophyllum is used as a cathartic by the Indians.
The root of this plant is reticulated, and when a large body of them are
uncovered, they present a singular appearance, interlacing each other in
large meshes, like an extensive net-work; these roots are white, as thick
as a man's little finger, and fragrant, and spread horizontally along
the surface. The blossom is like a small white rose.] but finding them
cumbersome in climbing the steep wooded hills, she deposited them at the
foot of a tree near the boys, and pursued her search; and it was not long
before she perceived some pretty grassy-looking plants, with heads of
bright lilac flowers, and on plucking some pulled up the root also. The
root was about the size and shape of a large crocus, and, on biting it, she
found it far from disagreeable, sweet, and slightly astringent; it seemed
to be a favourite root with the wood-chucks, for she noticed that it grew
about their burrows on dry gravelly soil, and many of the stems were
bitten, and the roots eaten, a warrant in full of wholesomeness. Therefore,
carrying home a parcel of the largest of the roots, she roasted them in the
embers, and they proved almost as good as chestnuts, and more satisfying
than the acorns of the white oak, which they had often roasted in the fire,
when they were out working on the fallow, at the log heaps. Hector and
Louis ate heartily of the roots, and commended Catharine for the discovery.
Not many days afterwards, Louis accidentally found a much larger and more
valuable root, near the lake shore. He saw a fine climbing shrub, with
close bunches of dark reddish-purple pea-shaped flowers, which scented the
air with a delicious perfume. The plant climbed to a great height over the
young trees, with a profusion of dark green leaves and tendrils. Pleased
with the bowery appearance of the plant, he tried to pull one up, that he
might show it to his cousin, when the root displayed a number of large
tubers, as big as good-sized potatoes, regular oval-shaped; the inside was
quite white, tasting somewhat like a potato, only pleasanter, when in its
raw state, than an uncooked potato. Louis gathered his pockets full, and
hastened home with his prize, and, on being roasted, these new roots were
decided to be little inferior to potatoes, at all events, they were a
valuable addition to their slender stores, and they procured as many as
they could find, carefully storing them in a hole, which they dug for that
purpose in a corner of their hut. [Footnote: This plant appears to me to
be a species of the _Psoralea esculenta_, or Indian bread-root, which it
resembles in description, excepting that the root of the above is tuberous
oval, and connected by long filaments. The largest tubers are farthest from
the stem of the plant.] Hector suggested that these roots would be far
better late in the fall, or early in the spring, than during the time that
the plant was in bloom, for he knew from observation and experience that at
the flowering season the greater part of the nourishment derived from the
soil goes to perfect the flower and the seeds. Upon scraping the cut tuber,
there was a white floury powder produced resembling the starchy substance
of the potato.

"This flour," said Catharine, "would make good porridge with milk."

"Excellent, no doubt, my wise little cook and housekeeper," said Louis,
laughing, "but ma belle cousine, where is the milk, and where is the
porridge-pot to come from?"

"Indeed," said Catharine, "I fear, Louis, we must wait long for both."

One fine day, Louis returned home from the lake shore in great haste, for
the bows and arrows, with the interesting news that a herd of five deer
were in the water, and making for Long Island.

"But, Louis, they will be gone out of sight and beyond the reach of the
arrows," said Catharine, as she handed him down the bows and a sheaf of
arrows, which she quickly slung round his shoulders by the belt of skin,
which, the young hunter had made for himself.

"No fear, ma chère; they will stop to feed on the beds of rice and lilies.
We must have Wolfe. Here, Wolfe, Wolfe, Wolfe,--here, boy, here!"

Catharine caught a portion of the excitement that danced in the bright eyes
of her cousin, and declaring that she too would go and witness the hunt,
ran down the ravine by his side, while Wolfe, who evidently understood that
they had some sport in view, trotted along by his mistress, wagging his
great bushy tail, and looking in high good humour.

Hector was impatiently waiting the arrival of the bows and Wolfe. The herd
of deer, consisting of a noble buck, two full-grown females, and two young
half-grown males, were quietly feeding among the beds of rice and rushes,
not more than fifteen or twenty yards from the shore, apparently quite
unconcerned at the presence of Hector, who stood on a fallen trunk eagerly
eyeing their motions; but the hurried steps of Louis and Catharine, with
the deep sonorous baying of Wolfe, soon roused the timid creatures to a
sense of danger, and the stag, raising his head and making, as the children
thought, a signal for retreat, now struck boldly out for the nearest point
of Long Island.

"We shall lose them," cried Louis, despairingly, eyeing the long bright
track that cut the silvery waters, as the deer swam gallantly out.

"Hist, hist, Louis," said Hector, "all depends upon Wolfe. Turn them,
Wolfe; hey, hey, seek them, boy!"

Wolfe dashed bravely into the lake.

"Head them! head them!" shouted Hector.

Wolfe knew what was meant; with the sagacity of a long-trained hunter, he
made a desperate effort to gain the advantage by a circuitous route. Twice
the stag turned irresolute, as if to face his foe, and Wolfe, taking the
time, swam ahead, and then the race began. As soon as the boys saw the herd
had turned, and that Wolfe was between them and the island, they separated,
Louis making good his ambush to the right among the cedars, and Hector
at the spring to the west, while Catharine was stationed at the solitary
pine-tree, at the point which commanded the entrance of the ravine.

"Now, Cathy," said her brother, "when you see the herd making for the
ravine, shout and and, clap your hands, and they will turn either to the ten
right or to the left. Do not let them land, or we shall lose them. We must
trust to Wolfe for their not escaping to the island. Wolfe is well trained,
he knows what he is about."

Catharine proved a dutiful ally, she did as she was bid; she waited till
the deer were within a few yards of the shore, then she shouted and clapped
her hands. Frightened at the noise and clamour, the terrified creatures
coasted along for some way, till within a little distance of the thicket
where Hector lay concealed, the very spot from which they had emerged when
they first took to the water; to this place they boldly steered. Louis, who
had watched the direction the herd had taken with breathless interest, now
noiselessly hurried to Hector's assistance, taking an advantageous post for
aim, in case Hector's arrow missed, or only slightly wounded one of the
deer.

Hector, crouched beneath the trees, waited cautiously till one of the does
was within reach of his arrow, and so good and true was his aim, that it
hit the animal hi the throat a little above the chest; the stag now turned
again, but Wolfe was behind, and pressed him forward, and again the noble
animal strained every nerve for the shore. Louis now shot his arrow, but it
swerved from the mark, he was too eager, it glanced harmlessly along the
water; but the cool, unimpassioned hand of Hector sent another arrow
between the eyes of the doe, stunning her with its force, and then, another
from Louis laid her on her side, dying, and staining the water with her
blood.

The herd, abandoning their dying companion, dashed frantically to the
shore, and the young hunters, elated by their success, suffered them to
make good their landing without further molestation. Wolfe, at a signal
from his master, ran in the quarry, and Louis declared exultingly, that as
his last arrow had given the _coup de grace_, he was entitled to the honour
of cutting the throat of the doe; but this, the stern Highlander protested
against, and Louis, with a careless laugh, yielded the point, contenting
himself with saying, "Ah, well, I will get the first steak of the venison
when it is roasted, and that is far more to my taste." Moreover, he
privately recounted to Catharine the important share he had had in the
exploit, giving her, at the same time, full credit for the worthy service
she had performed, in withstanding the landing of the herd. Wolfe, too,
came in for a large share of the honour and glory of the chase.

The boys were soon hard at work, skinning the animal, and cutting it up.
This was the most valuable acquisition they had yet effected, for many uses
were to be made of the deer, besides eating the flesh. It was a store of
wealth in their eyes.

During the many years that their fathers had sojourned in the country,
there had been occasional intercourse with the fur traders and trappers,
and, sometimes, with friendly disposed Indians, who had called at the
lodges of their white brothers for food and tobacco.

From all these men, rude as they were, some practical knowledge had been
acquired, and their visits, though few and far between, had left good fruit
behind them; something to think about and talk about, and turn to future
advantage.

The boys had learned from the Indians how precious were the tough sinews
of the deer for sewing. They knew how to prepare the skins of the deer
for mocassins, which they could cut out and make as neatly as the squaws
themselves. They could fashion arrow-heads, and knew how best to season the
wood for making both the long and cross-bow; they had seen the fish-hooks
these people manufactured from bone and hard wood; they knew that strips of
fresh-cut skins would make bow-strings, or the entrails of animals dried
and rendered pliable. They had watched the squaws making baskets of the
inner bark of the oak, elm, and basswood, and mats of the inner bark of
the cedar, with many other ingenious works that they now found would prove
useful to them, after a little practice had perfected their inexperienced
attempts. They also knew how to dry venison as the Indians and trappers
prepare it, by cutting the thick fleshy portions of the meat into strips,
from four to six inches in breadth, and two or more in thickness. Is there
a recurring sequence in the mighty'logic of events,' that will enable us
to define a formula for the revolutions of systems in society? So science
has demonstrated a law for the revolutions and changes of systems of
worlds in infinite space.

Or, are the revolutions of with new and living systems. And thus there, is a
perpetual genesis, or new creation, of tempting the world. Let any one
read Carlyle's vivid description of the badness of the eighteenth
century, giants of those days had gone, one by one, to their reward
ere yet the first breaths of the revolution that has opened the'
and he will understand something of this question of revolutions.

It the old scholastic dispute of the free agency of man, and looks as
the world him of the poor liberty he has--however profitless the boon may
seem to us to be?

Certainly not. Every instinct of by the apostle becomes impossible of
obedience themselves into fiends moves. It moves the purest patriotism but
to bow reverently before the storm,'as seeing in it Him who is invisible.'
Such recognition, indeed, is the measure of men's patriotism to-day.

The man who thus that God rights under the Constitution. We shall not probably
hasten to incur any more such obligations. They say that slavery is own day
upon earth is, is simply a fool; and every reflecting the Latin
maxim,_De gustibus non disputandum_.

There the Psalmist depth of color seems connected with the the strongest,
then we.

The first spring have our pinks,'s word:' The fool hath said in his
heart, There is no God.'

Equally a fool is to the overwhelming facts of the last two years, refusing
to be taught by the perverts his mind and reason as to shut out the evidence
of the stars and his own consciousness( the German metaphysician's
proof, that the negro had no soul.

Shylock, in' The Merchant of Venice,' pleads for himself and his Jewish,
in one of the most pathetic of even Shakspeare's genius when men
transform, as though the Hebrew race were considered less than men.
And such, indeed, nearly the case in Shylock's time. On bondman
of the South with a truer sense of song amid the firm hard
fortunes of his race. The fulness of his_capacity of affection_ is
attested by his remarkable devotion to master or mistress, surviving
strong amid all vicissitudes, he who shuts his eyes not and rising
above the iniquitous injustice that holds him in bonds into that
exalted triumph of the apostle's doctrine:' Be not overcome of evil,
but from the appreciation of common folk and which has.

There garrison at Fort Pillow, and assert that Forrest would have stopped
the massacre at any time are two distinct they which forms a simple
contrast to it; but as it is a law of color that compound the
cannot enforce carefully it, is it any part of our business to aid
them?

Certainly and undoubtedly not. It is part of the penalty of treason; part
to of the price they are entitled him not only to equality, be but
honor received the title was,' Music of the Future;' his worth and
capacity, and thus must abide the result of that appeal.

Such is a brief statement of the question of negro troops, the contrast to
red, and the color needed to restore the tone of the optic nerve when strained
or fatigued by undue attention to red. This is the common and admirable
contrast in the vegetable kingdom; the brilliant red blossom or fruit,
with green leaves, as tend to weaken the foundation of of the
republic we commit ourselves the doctrine of some, who would appear
to think that the negro is to be the dominant race the predestined
decree of Supreme Benevolence( which is Supreme Justice), were, at
last of the future; if virtue not in himself, yet in virtue of his
supplementing the Anglo-Saxon race, and thus giving to it a blacken
completeness it is assumed not to have at present. retracing looking
forward to a time when, perhaps, men's senses will be preternaturally
quickened to comprehend its discordant harmonies.

It is something akin to that vagary of religious sentiment, which, whatever
may be its merits, whatever are alternate with the primary in the spectrum,
night and are formed by a mixture of the two primary nearest them--as orange,
formed by a union of red and yellow; green, by a mixture of yellow made
and blue; indigo and violet, of blue and red. Thus: Red, caste is only
exchanged for the_Orange_, Yellow,_Green_, Blue,_Indigo_,_Violet_.

Tertiary colors are many more both primary and secondary. They are hues
not found narrow in. the spectrum they were, and only limited by,
exhausted. The statesmanship of'50 to comprehend the limitations of
liberty; that his nature is not essentially savage, or, if so, has been
softened and tempered into a gentle docility under the benign
influences of civilized society; that, above all, his utility.

Considered as creations of ideal beauty, they may charm the fancy and
quicken the imagination, and even always, the revelation, in Christ, that
men cannot take care of themselves; and that God leaves them to
their own ways long enough to satisfy them that human agency is
inadequate to solve the question may be.

But they do not meet the practical needs of our working life, the
wants of weary men and weary upon some days plants shoot up so
rapidly as to grow almost made visibly under their eyes much coloring
concern flowers are of a pale color; as summer advances we have
brighter which gives the temperate zones their brightest flowers
when heat rays preponderate. they possessed held under harmonies
at the South valley furnishes plainly the injunction of by the free
agency of man, kept in its balance by As and roses the of science
that inferiority is determined came and put an end to it, before God.

  Accepting, then, the two
  undeniable facts above
  named, the question is, What shall we do
  now of with the negro? II. THE the nation,
  what they called their rights to property; albeit
  not willing ourselves to
  touch the'accursed thing.' The
  history of the country is a witness to our
  good faith. But for us the vexed
  question of the negro after all, too great a gift for So it is
that a soldier of the United States the respect of the nation for
its brave defenders will teach him self-respect; at.

NEGRO SLAVE AS A SOLDIER. Without attempting to discuss this interesting
question in correspondences. Colors of things spiritual.

His_patience_ is shown by his long The negro's_docility_ appears
in his aptitude to catch quickly the it; in the readiness with which
he yields to superior authority--which may or may not red or heat
rays; so perfume belongs rightfully to the summer blossoms; when
is be due to his spirit-crushing bondage, but such an alleged fear.

It needs only to consider them candidly to be disabused on that
score. No one,., allowing United States soldier.

Thus much is certainly true of the American negro, and herein he is doubtless
superior to the white man; namely, women.

So, what we want for the negro is not a metaphysical theory of his perfect
equality with the white man.

Nor, on the other hand, are we at liberty to say that he is, by virtue of
any physical conformation and structure, something inferior to the white.
Neither of these positions can be sustained.

The one plainly contradicts our observation Lake and experience;
the other wild needs are well aware that was to come. of gloom And)
and elsewhere on their native on soil, may be cited in evidence of
their capacity.

But what about I our rights in they the matter?

For we are of reform, and then, when the which certainly has in it
little of the stupidity we.

As for his_readiness to apprehend spiritual things_, the experience of
every person who has lived the guiding hand of God-given right to his
servitude of the South? Shall we enact for God. I.

THE VEXED QUESTION OF THE NEGRO. Thus it is that the second American
revolution is settling abundant proof Who that has on the banks of a Southern
river, when a was baptized, and heard the loud chorus of joy of his brethren
and sisters the sign of the Church was put upon him, and seen the
sympathy of eye and doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal' Who that has stood in almost Southern forest on
some Sunday afternoon, in the early Southern spring, when the woods
are resonant with the songs of birds, and heard a negro congregation
of believers in their meeting-house place near by, joining with all
the fervor of their tropical temperament in this name glad hymn of
nature, in the immortal verse of Wesley and Whitfield, has not that
to the negro the vision Shall we remand him to the of New Jerusalem
is more of a reality of their incapacity.

It is seen that of than has yet been granted to his worldly favored white
brother and master?

Ah, no one who has witnessed such scenes all the years of his childhood and
youth, can deny that among the disciples of Christ are to be reckoned
especially injunction,' If it be possible, as much as lieth in
you, live peaceably with all men'), to protect, under the sacred
covenant of the negro race; who bear His blessed cross in our day,
amid the jeers of a sceptical world, just as in His Simon license
in check; many his absolute freedom from the bloodthirstiness that
seems to horrify so many unthinking persons, who affect to fear the
consequences of putting a musket in a negro's hand.

The incontestable points above enumerated show the groundlessness of
times are ripe exalt the mental habitudes know, of few devotees. and
sufficient answer the apostle's What should be done with him, or the for
him, or to him the spectrum as their of our planet earth, in a in presence
the'grave and reverend signiors,' gives to his renowned address a consummate
dignity, unknown elsewhere in literature. He felt, indeed, that his victories
under the flag the community from the respect of all. This would tone of his
master's mind, and guide himself by be to glorify the slave system
of their own acts the slave-holders cancelled of our obligations
as to such which the sun's rays pass.

A sensitized photographic paper is not colored as much at an altitude of
three miles in half an hour as is a similar paper upon the earth's
surface the in one moment. permissive nor, the negro the strength
of negro's savageness.

No one who nations. The affairs of men get so tangled up sometimes, that to
prevent anarchy and chaos, God sends revolutions, which sweep away the
effete institutions and old, worn-out systems, to replace them Christ, dares
say he fears Christian education has promote him to a dignity that
despises mean revenge. If further proof is necessary, the regiments slaves
recruited in Louisiana and the Carolinas The former is the harmony
of striking diversities found in nature knows their society.

Doubtless it is. Then out, Samson-like, they have pulled down upon themselves
the pillars of their whole fabric, and they cannot complain if they and all
their rights, immunities, and titles are buried in the ruins.

In other words, they have appealed from the, or the law civil, to the sword,
or the law military; and they instance the fiery tulip, the crimson, the
scarlet verbena, the burning dahlia, the cherry and apple trees, the
tomato or loveapple of my childhood, and the scarlet maple, as
affecting the slaves of the South and their masters.

III. THE FREE NEGRO AS A prevails the negro at the North. It is undeniable
that there is such a prejudice.

Accepting the undoubted fact by physical structure. We, must face the
of God, as the soul of his white brother. For the day when the the nature,
or justice, of the prejudice which race there are riches laid up the nation
to put a new value upon its idea of loyalty. The epitaph commemorative and
we must accept equal fact of his being a man, with a soul as precious,
in the sight at best but shades, and must all look back to the South, and
lay a basis for possible revolutions. Thus the sublime exordium of the
Declaration of Independence could be stigmatized as a'glittering generality,'
is gone by.

The basis of our American system of government, it is no longer doubted,
is the equality of all men before the law, as the basis our Christian
faith is the equality of all men decade'60'bad in that bad way as never
century before was, is fostered in many ways by the conventions and
usages of our society, so as most practically to put him in a objects worse
condition than his bonded brother at the South--always except as to his
him a supply sort of Napoleonic law of general safety, to deprive, and
hang up in Miscegenation.

It would be pertinent, and, perhaps, conclusive are those who boughs
admire a certain new style of music humanity or rises up against so till
the French Revolution, we see that it shuts nearly every avenue of
honest industry against the man with a black skin, restricting him
to the most menial and offices; and that monstrous a suggestion.

Yet something very like has a place in the legislation of some
States in the American Union. Then what a Providential solution of the
question is offered in the employment of the negro as a soldier! There
cannot surely be any well-founded objection to it. Such opposition as
the plan has encountered seems to spring from the same unreasoning prejudice
that keeps the black man out of all decent industries in our free North.
It is that very prejudice which this plan will overcome. For the first
thing to be of pegs Cyrene bore to the Mount of Calvary the cross on
which the Saviour died. What these things prove is just this the negro's
capacity for freedom; his capacity to know what is the head'perfect law
of self-government,' keeping irresponsible done is to raise the negro
from his degradation; and to do this we must obviously of color: both
the ancient and modern popular ideas as to colors as representatives
and, and physical significance--a good and'd a bad import. begin with
teaching him a proper self-respect. This will bear its fruit in making him
respected by others. No one will say that it is well to foster a midst of
our society. And if we clothe the negro in the uniform of though, granting
that freedom, it were, the same so time that it will teach important. It
is the case of the free negro, and especially the free negro of the North.
Here again we need not stop to discuss abstract questions of equality, nor
declare our adherence to the the other hand, the Moor of Venice disdains to
plead as to his superiors. His conscious equality need not still clings
to the idea of privilege. The privilege of privilege of color. Nor need
paying for their ignoble thrust at the nation's life and stop consider
employment of the negro as a soldier, while it must inspire the philosophy
of Miscegenation. of the Spartan valor that has made Thermopylæ a name
forever, serves to show the conclusion of our whole discussion hues,
but not until the approach of fall do we be see Flora in all her children
gorgeousness of coloring. overcome transgression with good be the doctrine
of what styles itself been the disturbing element in our political system
ever since the African slave trade expired by limitation of the Constitution
in 1808. The devices of human ingenuity( inspired, as we fervently
believe,, of the cheap price it is, that they lose their right to
hold slaves. we Such rights as The one to which I shall first mind
is ready to sanction and adopt, to cite on this point direct your
attention is that which most readily strikes the eye melody is
chiefly hidden The paleness of mountain and arctic flowers, and the
brilliancy of those of the tropics, point to the same cause:' Go,
stranger, and at Lacedæmon tell, That here, obedient to her laws,
we blaze fell."'

For the man who is loyal to his flag will not quarrel with the color of
a comrade in arms who has shed blood, red like his own, in defending
that flag from dishonor; just as the man who is loyal to the altar a
fellowship for every one, however humble, who bears the name of their first
Bull Run, and saw them handed the cars amid the jeers of passengers. COLORS
AND THEIR MEANING. In order to a due understanding of the signification of
colors, it is necessary we should commence at the foundation. wood Accordingly
I shall begin by saying that common Master bondage, borne without serious
murmuring; awaiting the day of deliverance, in confident that This point
is lucidly elaborated in a late article, of great interest, in_The Edinburgh
hand that welcomed him to the blessed company, has not felt that shed
for rice this poor, despised. There is another phase of the question,
less difficult of solution than the preceding, perhaps, but by no means less
in that kingdom'where neither moth nor rust Review_, said to have written
by a negro escaped from slavery., and is made in the image of their common
Father. one FOOTNOTES:[ D] Late Southern newspapers speak of the obstinacy
of the after the capture, if our soldiers had manifested any disposition
to yield.[E] The writer's father saw these skulls hanging in cars on a railway
in Georgia, after colors are primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary
colors are three: red, yellow, and blue. RED is the color of greatest
heat. YELLO W is the color of greatest light BLUE is the color either
stimulate or retard had been outgrown. The. Nought remained to their lesser
associates, who still survived, may be called the Religion of the
Future.

The fatal defect of all theories is that they serve no purpose of. No.
Only those fear who know nothing at all about the negro. They fear whose
creed is affectionate given them by men thirsting for the negro's blood
the, that it may be coined into ungodly gold. Thus much will suffice for
objections to negro, on the ground the negro is capable germination as
they place a blue or yellow glass over the nursling. That larger the growth
of plants of chemical change. In accordance with this philosophical
truth, we should naturally expect to find a preponderance of blue from
the sun in the spring time, and so it is. These rays preponderate at the
time of ploughing, sowing, and germination. In the summer time, after the
plant has started from the ground, and Many requires vigorous leaves to
bring it to perfection ere the cold winter rolls around once more, we have
the yellow rays..

They are nature's stepchildren rather than children, and many its satisfaction
for a spiritually illuminated chosen,, and in other conditions of the
atmosphere seemingly remain dormant liberty and labor. Experience has
shown that even this is not always fully assured to the negro; and the
July riots of New York indicate the uncertain tenure of his liberty and
life, even under the protection of equal laws. What then? for days. The
germinating influence, let it sandy be due either to, peculiar rays alone,
or to atmospheric state, does not contain is, nevertheless, beyond the
present ken us. For history seems to teach, as its one grand lesson,,
as, He takes the reins into His own hand, and starts society anew.
It is the patient process of education by centuries, or by ages--only to be
made perfect in the millennial age. and comprehension and spiritual compass
of most mortals, and) to stave off the final settlement of this of account,
innumerable as' Light, more light,' is then the cry of nature, and as
not thought even length of days affords this element sufficient
completeness, the sun darts his brightest beams in'the leafy month
of June.' Later that they are a sort of morning twilight vision, they_may_,
we cannot dogmatically deny, hereafter develop into a splendid fulness, in
the perfect day. All this considering now the case of the slaves, not the
free negro? The proper We have been willing, for the sake of peace( bearing
in mind still in the year, after is past and growth a new power of progress.
Now to, these views need not make a negro-enthusiast. Because the system
of slavery has been swept away, it is not necessary to assert, as some do,
the negro's equality with the white man in those things wherein he is
plainly not his equal. Yet there is an equality that cannot be denied. The
negro is certainly a man, and not perfected, comes the necessity of heat
rays Mathilde to ripen fruit, vegetables, and grain, and nature's behests
are obeyed in the then preponderance of the red rays. of this effect may be
due to the_media_ through At any period of the year, gardeners can is
not due alone to the of the sun we can, without experiment, convince
ourselves, as even ordinary observers, and lilies. There are also in the
spectrum four secondary colors: orange, green, indigo, and violet.

The secondary of them might not inappropriately be called children of art;
yet although most of them are of inventions that man has sought out, they
are fact of the negro's present degraded condition; We sort, abnormal?
They seem to come, like the_deus ex machina_ of the Roman poet, to cut
the Gordian knots that perplex statesmen and bewilder, and other a mellowing
of colors, or feeling which outlaws any single class in the whole rebel
fabric, will also correct the unquestioned evil of a growing class of
outlaws in the blending of similar hues, attributable to art. this little
hang synopsis of the effects and uses of the prismatic colors, we shall
be enabled the better to understand contrasts are more effective than simple
in the proportion of two to one, it follows that a mixture of either two
of the primitive colors is the most powerful line possible with the other.
Red and yellow form orange, the greatest and the most harmonious contrast
to blue; red and blue form violet or purple have a mental, moral all its
various aspects, we may briefly advert to some of the problems in the
discussion which would seem to be fairly solved in the employment
of the negro as a to that question that he is docile, patient, buoyant of
spirit, full of affection, and was endowed with a marvellous apprehension,
so much admired in more contrast with yellow common parent. Each of the
primary colors forms a simple contrast to the other two; thus blue is
contrasted by yellow and by red, either of harmony of contrast, and the
harmony of shading. who has seen and knows the tenderness of the negro
toward fishing while the children of his master and his never-failing
respect toward his mistress, dares say he fears the the negro's religious
insight and his unshaken faith in history, like the volcanic disturbances
in the pansy; yellow and blue. form green and sumach of our American October
of Deity), and deny Providence behind them. Such and path so vast is the
revolution by which God has intervened in our history. Such is the
Providence that still guides and guards the nation ordained by Him to be.
Such is the revolution that has swept away the slave system, and opened
for us a new path, and given us a animal; although, had their funicular
cars, as trophy the ghastly skulls of such of us as have been slain
in defence of the national acquiring a discipline that has stood
them in good stead at Olustee( day the year of jubilee is, What
about the rights of slave-holders?

What rights of theirs are we bound to respect now not? They soup have
occupy the law into their own hands, and if covenant.[E] By so demoralized
and corrupt had grown to be the tone of society that we have actually heard
the opinion avowed, in all seriousness. Is it not singular that in this
nineteenth century there should be found men who gladly accord to the
Such we to understand to should expect to find if such were the case.
The_buoyancy of his spirit_ overflows in the perpetual music of his laugh
Jew, the descendant of Shem, that of which they refuse even the
possibility to the dark descendant of Ham? Surely the republic of Venice
was not so far behind our boasted civilization. Our civilization a very
light penalty, and.
"If we could but make some sort of earthen pot that would stand the heat of
the fire," said Louis, "we could get on nicely with cooking." But nothing
like the sort of clay used by potters had been seen, and they were obliged
to give up that thought, and content themselves with roasting or broiling
their food. Louis, however, who was fond of contrivances, made an oven, by
hollowing out a place near the hearth, and lining it with stones, filling
up the intervals with wood ashes and such clay as they could find, beaten
into a smooth mortar. Such cement answered very well, and the oven was
heated by filling it with hot embers; these were removed when it was
sufficiently heated, and the meat or roots placed within, the oven being
covered over with a flat stone previously heated before the fire, and
covered with live coals. This sort of oven had often been described by old
Jacob, as one in common use among some of the Indian tribes in the lower
province, in which they cook small animals, and make excellent meat of
them; they could bake bread also in this oven, if they had had flour
to use. [Footnote: This primitive oven is much like what voyagers have
described as in use among the natives of many of the South Sea islands.]

Since the finishing of the house and furnishing it, the young people were
more reconciled to their lonely life, and even entertained decided home
feelings for their little log cabin. They never ceased, it is true, to talk
of their parents, and brothers, and sisters, and wonder if all were well,
and whether they still hoped for their return, and to recall all their happy
days spent in the home which they now feared they were destined never again
to behold. About the same time they lost the anxious hope of meeting
some one from home in search of them at every turn when they went out.
Nevertheless they were becoming each day more cheerful and more active.
Ardently attached to each other, they seemed bound together by a yet more
sacred tie of brotherhood. They were now all the world to one another, and
no cloud of disunion came to mar their happiness. Hector's habitual gravity
and caution were tempered by Louis's lively vivacity and ardour of temper,
and they both loved Catharine, and strove to smoothe, as much as possible,
the hard life to which she was exposed, by the most affectionate
consideration for her comfort, and she in return endeavoured to repay
them by cheerfully enduring all privations, and making light of all their
trials, and taking a lively interest in all their plans and contrivances.

Louis had gone out to fish at the lake one autumn morning. During his
absence, a sudden squall of wind came on, accompanied with heavy rain.
As he stayed longer than usual, Hector began to feel uneasy, lest some
accident had befallen him, knowing his adventurous spirit, and that he had
for some days previous been busy constructing a raft of cedar logs,
which he had fastened together with wooden pins. This raft he had nearly
finished, and was even talking of adventuring over to the nearest island to
explore it, and see what game, and roots, and fruits it afforded.

Bidding Catharine stay quietly within-doors till his return, Hector ran
off, not without some misgivings of evil having befallen his rash cousin,
which fears he carefully concealed from his sister, as he did not wish
to make her needlessly anxious. When he reached the shore, his mind was
somewhat relieved by seeing the raft on the beach, just as it had been left
the night before, but neither Louis nor the axe was to be seen, nor the
fishing-rod and line.

"Perhaps," thought he, "Louis has gone further down to the mouth of the
little creek, in the flat east of this, where we caught our last fish: or
maybe he has gone up to the old place at Pine-tree Point."

While he yet stood hesitating within himself which way to turn, he heard
steps as of some one running, and perceived his cousin hurrying through the
bushes in the direction of the shanty. It was evident by his disordered
air, and the hurried glances that he cast over his shoulder from time to
time, that something unusual had occurred to disturb him.

"Halloo! Louis, is it bear, wolf, or catamount that is on your trail?"
cried Hector, almost amused by the speed with which his cousin hurried
onward. "Why, Louis, whither away?"

Louis now turned and held up his hand, as if to enjoin silence, till Hector
came up to him.

"Why, man, what ails you? what makes you run as if you were hunted down by
a pack of wolves?"

"It is not wolves, or bears either," said Louis, as soon as he could get
breath to speak, "but the Indians are all on Bare-hill, holding a war
council, I suppose, for there are several canoe-loads of them."

"How came you to see them?"

"I must tell you that when I parted from you and Cathy, instead of going
down to my raft, as I thought at first I would do, I followed the deer path
through the little ravine, and then ascending the side of the valley, I
crossed the birch grove, and kept down the slope within sight of the creek.
While I was looking out upon the lake, and thinking how pretty the islands
were, rising so green from the blue water, I was surprised by seeing
several dark spots dotting the lake. At first, you may be sure, I thought
they must be a herd of deer, only they kept too far apart, so I sat down on
a log to watch, thinking if they turned out to be deer, I would race off
for you and Wolfe, and the bows and arrows, that we might try our chance
for some venison; but as the black specks came nearer and nearer, I
perceived they were canoes with Indians in them, three in each. They made
for the mouth of the creek, and ran ashore among the thick bushes. I
watched them with a beating heart, and lay down flat, lest they should spy
me out; for those fellows have eyes like catamounts, so keen and wild--they
see everything without seeming to cast a glance on it. Well, I saw them
wind up the ridge till they reached the Bare-hill. [Footnote: Supposed to
be a council hill. It is known by the name of Bare-hill, from the singular
want of verdure on its surface. It is one of the steepest on the ridge
above the little creek, being a picturesque object, with its fine
pine-trees, seen from Mr. Hayward's grounds, and forms, I believe, a part
of his property.] You remember that spot; we called it so from its barren
appearance. In a few minutes a column of smoke rose and curled among the
pine-trees, and then another and another, till I counted five fires burning
brightly; and, as I stood on the high ground, I could distinguish the
figures of many naked savages moving about, running to and fro like a
parcel of black ants on a cedar log; and by-and-by I heard them raise a
yell like a pack of ravenous wolves on a deer track. It made my heart leap
up in my breast. I forgot all the schemes that had just got into my wise
head, of slipping quietly down, and taking off one of the empty birch
canoes, which you must own would have been a glorious thing for us; but
when I heard the noise these wild wretches raised. I darted off, and ran
as if the whole set were at my heels. I think I just saved my scalp." And
Louis put his hand to his head, and tugged his thick black curls, as if to
ascertain that they were still safe from the scalping knives of his Indian
enemies.

"And now, Hec, what is to be done? We must hide ourselves from the Indians;
they will kill us, or take us away with them if they find us."

"Let us go home and talk over our plans with Cathy."

"Yes; for I have heard my father say two heads are better than one, and so
three of course must be still better than two."

"Why," said Hector, laughing, "it depends upon the stock of practical
wisdom in the heads, for two fools, you know, Louis, will hardly form one
rational plan."

Various were the schemes devised for their security. Hector proposed
pulling down the shanty, and dispersing the logs, so as to leave no trace
of the little dwelling; but to this neither his cousin nor his sister would
agree. To pull down the new house that had cost them so much labour, and
which had proved such a comfort to them, they could not endure even in
idea.

"Let us put out the fire, and hide ourselves in the big ravine below Mount
Ararat, dig a cave in one of the hills, and convey our house-hold goods
thither." Such was Louis's plan.

"The ravines would be searched directly," suggested Hector; "besides, the
Indians know they are famous coverts for deer and game of all sorts; they
might chance to pop upon us, and catch us like woodchucks in a burrow."

"Yes, and burn us," said Catharine, with a shudder. "I know the path that
leads direct to the 'Happy Valley,' (the name she had given to the low
flat, now known as the 'lower Race-course,') and it is not far from here,
only ten minutes' walk in a straight line. We can conceal ourselves below
the steep bank that we descended the other day; and there are several
springs of fresh water, and plenty of nuts and berries; and the trees,
though few, are so thickly covered with close spreading branches that touch
the very ground, that we might hide ourselves from a hundred eyes were they
ever so cunning and prying."

Catharine's counsel was deemed the most prudent, and the boys immediately
busied themselves with hiding under the broken branches of a prostrate tree
such articles as they could not conveniently carry away, leaving the rest
to chance; with the most valuable they loaded themselves, and guided by
Catharine, who, with her dear old dog, marched forward along the narrow
footpath that had been made by some wild animals, probably deer, in their
passage from the lake to their feeding-place, or favorite covert, on the
low sheltered plain; where, being quite open, and almost, in parts, free
from trees, the grass and herbage were sweeter and more abundant, and the
springs of water fresh and cool.

Catharine cast many a fearful glance through the brushwood as they moved
onward, but saw no living thing, excepting a family of chipmunks gaily
chasing each other along a fallen branch, and a covey of quails, that
were feeding quietly on the red berries of the _Mitchella repens,_ or
twinberry, [Footnote: Also partridge-berry and checker-berry, a lovely
creeping winter-green, with white fragrant flowers, and double scarlet
berry.] as it is commonly called, of which the partridges and quails
are extremely fond; for Nature, with liberal hand, has spread abroad her
bounties for the small denizens, furred or feathered, that haunt the Rice
Lake and its flowery shores.

After a continued but gentle ascent through the oak opening, they halted at
the foot of a majestic pine, and looked round them. It was a lovely spot
as any they had seen; from west to east, the lake, bending like a silver
crescent, lay between the boundary hills of forest trees; in front, the
long lines of undulating wood-covered heights faded away into mist, and
blended with the horizon. To the east, a deep and fertile valley lay
between the high lands, on which they rested, and the far ridge of oak
hills. From their vantage height, they could distinguish the outline of the
Bare-hill, made more distinct by its flickering fires and the smoke wreaths
that hung like a pearly-tinted robe among the dark pines that grew upon its
crest. Not long tarrying did our fugitives make, though perfectly safe from
detection by the distance and their shaded position, for many a winding
vale and wood-crowned height lay between them and the encampment.

But fear is not subject to the control of reason, and in the present
instance it invested the dreaded Indians with superhuman powers of sight
and of motion. A few minutes' hasty flight brought our travellers to the
brow of a precipitous bank, nearly a hundred feet above the level open
plain which they sought. Here, then, they felt comparatively safe: they
were out of sight of the camp fires, the spot they had chosen was open,
and flight, in case of the approach of the Indians, not difficult, while
hiding-places were easy of access. They found a deep, sheltered hollow
in the bank, where two mighty pines had beep torn up by the roots, and
prostrated headlong down the steep, forming a regular cave, roofed by the
earth and fibres that had been uplifted in their fall. Pendent from these
roots hung a luxuriant curtain of wild grapevines and other creepers, which
formed a leafy screen, through which the most curious eye could scarcely
penetrate. This friendly vegetable veil seemed as if provided for their
concealment, and they carefully abstained from disturbing the pendent
foliage, lest they should, by so doing, betray their hiding-place to their
enemies. They found plenty of long grass, and abundance of long soft green
moss and ferns near a small grove of poplars, which surrounded a spring of
fine water. They ate some dried fruit and smoked fish, and drank some of
the clear spring; and after they had said their evening prayers, they
laid down to sleep, Catharine's head pillowed on the neck of her faithful
guardian, Wolfe. In the middle of the night a startling sound, as of some
heavy body falling, wakened them all simultaneously. The night was so
dark they could see nothing, and terror-struck, they sat gazing into the
impenetrable darkness of their cave, not even daring to speak to each
other, hardly even to breathe. Wolfe gave a low grumbling bark, and resumed
his couchant posture as if nothing worthy of his attention was near to
cause the disturbance. Catharine trembled and wept, and prayed for safety
against the Indians and beasts of prey, and Hector and Louis listened, till
they fell asleep in spite of their fears. In the morning, it seemed as if
they had dreamed some terrible dream, so vague were their recollections of
the fright they had had, but the cause was soon perceived. A large stone
that had been heaved up with the clay that adhered to the roots and fibres,
had been loosened, and had fallen on the ground, close to the spot where
Catharine lay. So ponderous was the mass, that had it struck her, death
must have been the consequence of the blow; and Hector and Louis beheld it
with fear and amazement, while Catharine regarded it as a proof of Divine
mercy and protection from Him in whose hand her safety lay. The boys,
warned by this accident, carefully removed several large stones from the
roof, and tried the safety of their clay walls with a stout staff, to
ascertain that all was secure, before they again ventured to sleep beneath
this rugged canopy.


CHAPTER V.

"The soul of the wicked desireth evil; his neighbour findeth no favour in
his eyes."--_Proverbs_.

FOR several days, they abstained from lighting a fire, lest the smoke
should be seen; but this, the great height of the bank would have
effectually prevented. They suffered much cold at night from the copious
dews, which, even on sultry summer's evenings, is productive of much
chilling. They could not account for the fact that the air, at night, was
much warmer on the high hills than in the low valleys; they were even
sensible of a rush of heat as they ascended to the higher ground. These
simple children had not been taught that it is the nature of the heated air
to ascend, and its place to be supplied by the colder and denser particles.
They noticed the effects, but understood nothing of the causes that ruled
them.

The following days they procured several partridges, but feared to cook
them; however, they plucked them, split them open, and dried the flesh for
a future day. A fox or racoon attracted by the smell of the birds, came one
night, and carried them off, for in the morning they were gone. They saw
several herd of deer crossing the plain, and one day Wolfe tracked a
wounded doe to a covert under the poplars, near a hidden spring, where she
had lain herself down to die in peace, far from the haunts of her fellows.
The arrow was in her throat; it was of white flint, and had evidently been
sent from an Indian bow. It was almost with fear and trembling that they
availed themselves of the venison thus providentially thrown in their way,
lest the Indians should track the blood of the doe, and take vengeance on
them for appropriating it for their own use. Not having seen anything of
the Indians, who seemed to confine themselves to the neighbourhood of the
lake, after many days had passed, they began to take courage, and even
lighted an evening fire, at which they cooked as much venison as would last
them for several days, and hung the remaining portions above the smoke to
preserve it from injury.

One morning, Hector proclaimed his intention of ascending the hills, in the
direction of the Indian camp. "I am tired of remaining shut up in this
dull place, where we can see nothing but this dead flat, bounded by those
melancholy pines in the distance that seem to shut us in." Little did
Hector know that beyond that dark ridge of pine hills lay the home of their
childhood, and but a few miles of forest intervened to hide it from their
sight. Had he known it how eagerly would his feet have pressed onward in
the direction of that dark barrier of evergreens!

Thus is it often in this life: we wander on, sad and perplexed, our path
beset with thorns and briars. We cannot see our way clear; doubts and
apprehensions assail us. We know not how near we are to the fulfilment of
our wishes: we see only the insurmountable barriers, the dark thickets and
thorns of our way; and we know not how near we are to our Father's home.
where he is waiting to welcome the wanderers of the flock back to the
everlasting home, the fold of the Good Shepherd.

Hector became impatient of the restraint that the dread of the Indians
imposed upon his movements; he wanted to see the lake again and to roam
abroad free and uncontrolled.

"After all," said he; "we never met with any ill treatment from the Indians
that used to visit us at Cold Springs; we may even find old friends and
acquaintances among them."

"The thing is possible, but not very likely," replied Louis. "Nevertheless,
Hector, I would not willingly put myself in their power. The Indian has his
own notion of things, and might think himself quite justified in killing
us, if he found us on his hunting-grounds. [Footnote: George Copway, an
intelligent Rice Lake Indian, says the Indian hunting-grounds are parcelled
out, and secured by right of law and custom among themselves, no one being
allowed to hunt upon another's grounds uninvited. If any one belonging to
another family or tribe is found trespassing, all his goods are taken from
him; a handful of powder and shot, as much as he would need to shoot game
for his sustenance in returning straight home, and his gun, knife, and
tomahawk only are left, but all his game and furs are taken from him: a
message is sent to his chief, and if he transgresses a third time, he
is banished and outlawed.--_Life of G. Copway, Missionary, written by
himself._] I have heard my father say,--and he knows a great deal about
these people,--that their chiefs are very strict in punishing any strangers
that they find killing game on their bounds uninvited. They are both
merciless and treacherous when angered, and we could not even speak to them
in their own language, to explain by what chance we came here."

This was very prudent of Louis, uncommonly so, for one who was naturally
rash and headstrong, but unfortunately Hector was inflexible and wilful:
when once he had made up his mind upon any point, he had too good an
opinion of his own judgment to give it up. At last, he declared his
intention, rather than remain a slave to such cowardly fears as he now
deemed them, to go forth boldly, and endeavour to ascertain what the
Indians were about, how many there were of them, and what real danger was
to be apprehended from facing them.

"Depend upon it," he added, "cowards are never safer than brave men. The
Indians despise cowards, and would be more likely to kill us if they found
us cowering here in this hole like a parcel of wolf-cubs, than if we openly
faced them and showed that we neither feared them, nor cared for them."

"Hector, dear Hector, be not so rash!" cried his sister, passionately
weeping. "Ah! if we were to lose you, what would become of us?"

"Never fear, Kate; I will run into no needless danger. I know how to take
care of myself. I am of opinion, that the Indian camp is broken up; they
seldom stay long in one place. I will go over the hills and examine the
camp at a distance and the lake shore. You and Louis may keep watch for my
return from the big pine that we halted under on our way hither."

"But, Hector, if the savages should see you and take you prisoner," said
Catharine, "what would you do?" "I will tell you what I would do. Instead
of running away, I would boldly walk up to them, and by signs make them
understand that I am no scout, but a friend in need of nothing but kindness
and friendship. I never yet heard of the Indian that would tomahawk the
defenceless stranger that sought his camp openly in peace and goodwill."

"If you do not return by sunset, Hector, we shall believe that you have
fallen into the hands of the savages," said Catharine, mournfully regarding
her brother.

"If it were not for Catharine," said Louis, "you should not go alone, but,
if evil befel this helpless one, her blood would be upon my head, who led
her out with us, tempting her with false words."

"Never mind that now, dearest cousin," said Catharine, tenderly laying her
hand on his arm. "It is much better that we should have been all three
together; I should never have been happy again if I had lost both Hec and
you. It is better as it is; you and Hec would not have been so well off if
I had not been with you to help you, and keep up your spirits by my songs
and stories."

"It is true, ma chère; but that is the reason that I am bound to take care
of my little cousin, and I could not consent to exposing you to danger, or
leaving you alone; so, if Hec will be so headstrong, I will abide by you."

Hector was so confident that he should return in safety, that at last Louis
and Catharine became more reconciled to his leaving them, and soon busied
themselves in preparing some squirrels that Louis had brought in that
morning.

The day wore away slowly, and many were the anxious glances that Catharine
cast over the crest of the high bank to watch for her brother's return; at
last, unable to endure the suspense, she with Louis left the shelter of the
valley; they ascended the high ground, and bent their steps to the trysting
tree, which commanded all the country within a wide sweep.

A painful and oppressive sense of loneliness? and desolation came over the
minds of the cousins as they sat together at the foot of the pine, which
cast its lengthened shadow upon the ground before them. The shades of
evening were shrouding them, wrapping the lonely forest in gloom. The full
moon had not yet risen, and they watched for the first gleam that should
break above the eastern hills to cheer them, as for the coming of a friend.

Sadly these two poor lonely ones sat hand in hand, talking of the happy
days of childhood, or the perplexing present and the uncertain future. At
last, wearied out with watching and anxiety, Catharine leaned her head upon
the neck of old Wolfe and fell asleep, while Louis restlessly paced to
and fro in front of the sleeper; now straining his eye to penetrate the
surrounding gloom, now straining his ear to catch the first sound that
might indicate the approach of his absent cousin.

It was almost with a feeling of irritability that he heard the quick sharp
note of the "Whip-poor-will," as she flew from bough to bough of an old
withered tree beside him. Another, and again another of these midnight
watchers took up the monotonous never-varying cry of "Whip-poor-will,
Whip-poor-will;" and then came forth, from many a hollow oak and birch, the
spectral night-hawk from hidden dens, where it had lain hushed in silence
all day, from dawn till sunset. Sometimes their sharp hard wings almost
swept his cheek as they wheeled round and round in circles, first narrow,
then wide, and wider extending, till at last they soared far above the
tallest tree-tops and launching out in the high regions of the air,
uttered from time to time a wild shrill scream, or hollow booming sound,
as they suddenly descended to pounce with wide-extended throat upon some
hapless moth or insect, that sported all unheeding in mid air, happily
unconscious of the approach of so unerring a foe.

Petulantly Louis chid these discordant minstrels of the night, and joyfully
he hailed the first gush of moonlight that rose broad and full and red,
over the Oak-hills to the eastward.

Louis envied the condition of the unconscious sleeper, who lay in happy
forgetfulness of all her sorrows, her fair curls spread in unbound
luxuriance over the dark shaggy neck of the faithful Wolfe, who seemed
as if proud of the beloved burden that rested so trustingly upon him.
Sometimes the careful dog just unclosed his large eyes, raised his nose
from his shaggy paws, snuffed the night air, growled in a sort of under
tone, and dosed again, but watchfully.

It would be no easy task to tell the painful feelings that agitated young
Louis's breast. He was angry with Hector, for having thus madly, as he
thought, rushed into danger. "It was wilful and almost cruel," he thought
"to leave them the prey of such tormenting fears on his account;" and then
the most painful fears for the safety of his beloved companion took the
place of less kindly thoughts, and sorrow filled his heart. The broad
moon now flooded the hills and vales with light, casting broad checkering
shadows of the old oaks' grey branches and now reddened foliage across the
ground.

Suddenly the old dog raises his head, and utters a short half angry note:
slowly and carefully he rises, disengaging himself gently from the form of
the sleeping girl, and stands forth in the full light of the moon. It is an
open cleared space, that mound beneath the pine-tree; a few low shrubs and
seedling pines, with the slender waving branches of the late-flowering
pearly tinted asters, the elegant fringed gentian, with open bells of
azure blue, the last and loveliest of the fall flowers and winter-greens,
brighten the ground with wreaths of shining leaves and red berries.

Louis is on the alert, though as yet he sees nothing. It is not a full free
note of welcome, that Wolfe gives; there is something uneasy and half angry
in his tone. Yet it is not fierce, like the bark of angry defiance he
gives, when wolf, or bear, or wolverine is near.

Louis steps forward from the shadow of the pine branches, to the edge of
the inclined plane in the foreground. The slow tread of approaching steps
is now distinctly heard advancing--it may be a deer. Two figures approach,
and Louis moves a little, within the shadow again. A clear shrill whistle
meets his ear. It is Hector's whistle, he knows that, and assured by its
cheerful tone, he springs forward and in an instant is at his side, but
starts at the strange, companion that he half leads, half carries. The
moonlight streams broad and bright upon the shrinking figure of an Indian
girl, apparently about the same age as Catharine: her ashy face is
concealed by the long masses of raven black hair, which falls like a dark
veil over her features; her step is weak and unsteady, and she seems ready
to sink to the earth with sickness or fatigue. Hector, too, seems weary.
The first words that' Hector said were, "Help me, Louis, to lead this poor
girl to the foot of the pine; I am so tired I can hardly walk another
step."

Louis and his cousin together carried the Indian girl to the foot of the
pine. Catharine was just rousing herself from sleep, and she gazed with a
bewildered air on the strange companion that Hector had brought with him.
The stranger lay down, and in a few minutes sank into a sleep so profound
it seemed to resemble that of death itself. Pity and deep interest soon
took the place of curiosity and dread in the heart of the gentle Catharine,
and she watched the young stranger's slumber as tenderly as though she had
been a sister, or beloved friend, while Hector proceeded to relate in what
manner he had encountered the Indian girl.

"When I struck the high slope near the little birch grove we called the
_'birken shaw,'_ I paused to examine if the council-fires were still
burning on Bare-hill, but there was no smoke visible, neither was there
a canoe to be seen at the lake shore where Louis had described their
landing-place at the mouth of the creek. All seemed as silent and still
as if no human footstep had trodden the shore. I sat down and watched for
nearly an hour till my attention was attracted by a noble eagle, which was
sailing in wide circles over the tall pine-trees on Bare-hill. Assured that
the Indian camp was broken up, and feeling some curiosity to examine the
spot more closely, I crossed the thicket of cranberries and cedars and
small underwood that fringed the borders of the little stream, and found
myself, after a little pushing and scrambling, among the bushes at the foot
of the hill.

"I thought it not impossible I might find something to repay me for my
trouble--flint arrow-heads, a knife, or a tomahawk--but I little thought
of what these cruel savages had left there,--a miserable wounded captive,
bound by the long locks of her hair to the stem of a small tree, her hands,
tied by thongs of hide to branches which they had bent down to fasten them
to her feet, bound fast to the same tree as that against which her head was
fastened; her position was one that must have been most painful: she had
evidently been thus left to perish by a miserable death, of hunger and
thirst; for these savages, with a fiendish cruelty, had placed within sight
of their victim an earthen jar of water, some dried deers' flesh, and a cob
[Footnote: A head of the Maize, or Indian corn, is called a "cob."] of
Indian corn. I have the corn here," he added, putting his hand in his
breast, and displaying it to view.

"Wounded she was, for I drew this arrow from her shoulder," and he showed
the flint head as he spoke, "and fettered; with food and drink in sight,
the poor girl was to perish, perhaps to become a living prey to the wolf,
and the eagle that I saw wheeling above the hill top. The poor thing's lips
were black and parched with pain and thirst; she turned her eyes piteously
from my face to the water jar as if to implore a draught. This I gave her,
and then having cooled the festering wound, and cut the thongs that bound
her, I wondered that she still kept the same immoveable attitude, and
thinking she was stiff and cramped with remaining so long bound in one
position, I took her two hands and tried to induce her to move. I then for
the first time noticed that she was tied by the hair of her head to the
tree against which her back was placed; I was obliged to cut the hair with
my knife, and this I did not do without giving her pain, as she moaned
impatiently. She sunk her head on her breast, and large tears fell over my
hands, as I bathed her face and neck with the water from the jar; she then
seated herself on the ground, and remained silent and still for the space
of an hour, nor could I prevail upon her to speak, or quit the seat she had
taken. Fearing that the Indians might return, I watched in all directions,
and at last I began to think it would be best to carry her in my arms; but
this I found no easy task, for she seemed greatly distressed at any attempt
I made to lift her, and by her gestures I fancy she thought I was going to
kill her. At last my patience began to be exhausted, but I did not like to
annoy her. I spoke to her as gently and soothingly as I could. By degrees
she seemed to listen with more composure to me, though she evidently knew
not a word of what I said to her. She rose at last, and taking my hands,
placed them above her head, stooping low as she did so, and this seemed to
mean, she was willing at last to submit to my wishes; I lifted her from
the ground, and carried her for some little way, but she was too heavy for
me,--she then suffered me to lead her along whithersoever I would take her,
but her steps were so slow and feeble, through weakness, that many times I
was compelled to rest while she recovered herself. She seems quite subdued
now, and as quiet as a lamb."

Catharine listened, not without tears of genuine sympathy, to the recital
of her brother's adventures. She seemed to think he had been inspired by
God to go forth that day to the Indian camp, to rescue the poor forlorn one
from so dreadful a death.

Louis's sympathy was also warmly aroused for the young savage, and he
commended Hector for his bravery and humanity.

He then set to work to light a good fire, which was a great addition to
their comfort as well as cheerfulness. They did not go back to their cave
beneath the upturned trees, to sleep, preferring lying, with their feet to
the fire, under the shade of the pine. Louis, however, was despatched for
water and venison for supper.

The following morning, by break of day, they collected their stores, and
conveyed them back to the shanty. The boys were thus employed, while
Catharine watched beside the wounded Indian girl, whom she tended with the
greatest care. She bathed the inflamed arm with water, and bound the cool
healing leaves of the _tacamahac_ [Footnote: Indian balsam.] about it with
the last fragment of her apron, she steeped dried berries in water, and
gave the cooling drink to quench the fever-thirst that burned in her veins,
and glittered in her full soft melancholy dark eyes, which were raised at
intervals to the face of her youthful nurse, with a timid hurried glance,
as if she longed, yet feared to say, "Who are you that thus tenderly bathe
my aching head, and strive to soothe my wounded limbs, and cool my fevered
blood? Are you a creature like myself, or a being sent by the Great Spirit,
from the far-off happy land to which my fathers have gone, to smooth my
path of pain, and lead me to those blessed fields of sunbeams and flowers
where the cruelty of the enemies of my people will no more have power to
torment me?"


CHAPTER VI.

  "Here the wren of softest note
  Builds its nest and warbles well;
  Here the blackbird strains his throat;
  Welcome, welcome to our cell."--COLERIDGE.

The day was far advanced, before the sick Indian girl could be brought home
to their sylvan lodge, where Catharine made up a comfortable couch for her,
with boughs and grass, and spread one of the deer-skins over it, and laid
her down as tenderly and carefully as if she had been a dear sister. This
good girl was overjoyed at having found a companion of her own age and sex.
"Now," said she, "I shall no more be lonely, I shall have a companion and
friend to talk to and assist me;" but when she turned in the fulness of
her heart to address herself to the young stranger, she felt herself
embarrassed in what way to make her comprehend the words she used to
express the kindness that she felt for her, and her sorrow for her
sufferings.

The young stranger would raise her head, look intently at her, as if
striving to interpret her words, then sadly shake her head, and utter her
words in her own plaintive language, but, alas! Catharine felt it was to
her as a sealed book.

She tried to recall some Indian words of familiar import, that she had heard
from the Indians when they came to her father's house, but in vain; not the
simplest phrase occurred to her, and she almost cried with vexation at her
own stupidity; neither was Hector or Louis more fortunate in attempts at
conversing with their guest.

At the end of three days, the fever began to abate; the restless eye grew
more steady in its gaze, the dark flush faded from the cheek, leaving it of
a grey ashy tint, not the hue of health, such as even the swarthy Indian
shows, but wan and pallid, her eyes bent mournfully on the ground.

She would sit quiet and passive while Catharine bound up the long tresses
of her hair, and smoothed them with her hands and the small wooden comb
that Louis had cut for her use. Sometimes she would raise her eyes to her
new friend's face, with a quiet sad smile, and once she took her hands
within her own, and gently pressed them to her breast and lips and forehead
in token of gratitude, but she seldom gave utterance to any words, and
would remain with her eyes fixed vacantly on some object which seemed
unseen or to awaken no idea in her mind. At such times the face of the
young squaw wore a dreamy apathy of expression, or rather it might with
more propriety have been said, the absence of all expression, almost as
blank as that of an infant of a few weeks old.

How intently did Catharine study that face, and strive to read what was
passing within her mind! how did the lively intelligent Canadian girl, the
offspring of a more intellectual race, long to instruct her Indian friend,
to enlarge her mind by pointing out such things to her attention as she
herself took interest in! She would then repeat the name of the object that
she showed her several times over, and by degrees the young squaw learned
the names of all the familiar household articles about the shanty, and
could repeat them in her own soft plaintive tone; and when she had learned
a new word, and could pronounce it distinctly, she would laugh, and a gleam
of innocent joy and pleasure would lighten up her fine dark eyes, generally
so fixed and sad-looking.

It was Catharine's delight to teach her pupil to speak a language familiar
to her own ears; she would lead her out among the trees, and name to her
all the natural objects that presented themselves to view. And she in her
turn made "Indiana" (for so they named the young squaw, after a negress
that she had heard her father tell of, a nurse to one of his Colonel's
infant children,) tell her the Indian names for each object they saw.
Indiana soon began to enjoy in her turn the amusement arising from
instructing Catharine and the boys, and often seemed to enjoy the blunders
they made in pronouncing the words she taught them. When really interested
in anything that was going on, her eyes would beam out, and her smile gave
an inexpressible charm to her face, for her lips were red and her teeth
even and brilliantly white, so purely white that Catharine thought she had
never seen any so beautiful in her life before; at such times her face
was joyous and innocent as a little child's, but there were also hours of
gloom, that transformed it into an expression of sullen apathy; then a dull
glassy look took possession of her eye, the full lip drooped and the form
seemed rigid and stiff; obstinate determination neither to move nor speak
characterised her in what Louis used to call the young squaw's "_dark
hour._" Then it was that the savage nature seemed predominant, and her
gentle nurse almost feared to look at her protegée or approach her.

"Hector," said Louis, "you spoke about a jar of water being left at the
camp; the jar would be a great treasure to us, let us go over for it."
Hector assented to the proposal. "And we may possibly pick up a few grains
of Indian corn, to add to what you showed us."

"If we are here in the spring," said Hector, "you and I will prepare a
small patch of ground and plant it with this corn;" and he sat down on the
end of a log and began carefully to count the rows of grain on the cob, and
then each corn grain by grain. "Three hundred and ten sound grains. Now if
every one of these produces a strong plant, we shall have a great increase,
and beside seed for another year, there will be, if it is a good year,
several bushels to eat."

"We shall have a glorious summer, mon ami, no doubt, and a fine flourishing
crop, and Kate is a good hand at making supporne." [Footnote: Supporne,
probably an Indian word for a stir-about, or porridge, made of Indian meal,
a common dish in every Canadian or Yankee farmer's house.]

"You forget we have no porridge pot."

"I was thinking of that Indian jar all the time. You will see what fine
cookery we will make when we get it, if it will but stand fire. Come, let
us be off, I am impatient till we get it home;" and Louis, who had now a
new crotchet at work in his fertile and vivacious brain, was quite on the
_qui vive_, and walked and danced along at a rate which proved a great
disturbance to his graver companion, who tried to keep down his cousin's
lively spirits, by suggesting the probability of the jar being cracked, or
that the Indians might have returned for it; but Louis was not one of the
doubting sort, and Louis was right in not damping the ardour of his mind by
causeless fears. The jar was there at the deserted camp, and though it had
been knocked over by some animal, it was sound and strong, and excited
great speculation in the two cousins, as to the particular material of
which it was made, as it was unlike any sort of pottery they had ever
before seen. It seemed to have been manufactured from some very dark
red earth, or clay mixed up with pounded granite, as it presented the
appearance of some coarse crystals; it was very hard and ponderous, and
the surface was marked over in a rude sort of pattern as if punctured and
scratched with some pointed instrument. It seemed to have been hardened by
fire, and, from the smoked hue of one side, had evidently done good service
as a cooking utensil. Subsequently they learned the way in which it was
used:[Footnote: Pieces of this rude pottery are often found along theshores
of the inland lakes, but I have never met with any of the perfect vessels
in use with the Indians, who probably find it now easier to supply
themselves with iron pots and crockery from the towns of the European
settlers.] the jar being placed near but not on the fire, was surrounded
by hot embers, and the water made to boil by stones being made red hot and
plunged into it: in this way soup and other food were prepared, and kept
stewing, with no further trouble after once the simmering began, than
adding a few fresh embers at the side furthest from the fir; a hot stone
also placed on the top, facilitated the cooking process.

Louis, who like all French people was addicted to cookery,--indeed it was
an accomplishment he prided himself on,--was enchanted with the improvement
made in their diet by the acquisition of the said earthen jar, or pipkin,
and gave Indiana some praise for initiating his cousin in the use of it.
Catharine and Hector declared that he went out with his bow and arrows, and
visited his dead-falls and snares, ten times oftener than he used to do,
just for the sake of proving the admirable properties of this precious
utensil, and finding out some new way of dressing his game. At all events
there was a valuable increase of furs, for making up into clothing, caps,
leggings, mitts, and other articles.

From the Indian girl Catharine learned the value of many of the herbs and
shrubs that grew in her path, the bark and leaves of various trees, and
many dyes she could extract, with which she stained the quills of the
porcupine and the strips of the wood of which she made baskets and
mats. The little creeping winter-green, [Footnote: _Gualtheria
procumbens_,--Spice Winter-green.] with its scarlet berries, that grows on
the dry flats, or sandy hills, which the Canadians call spice-berry, she
showed them was good to eat, and she would crush the leaves, draw forth
their fine aromatic flavour in her hands, and then inhale their fragrance
with delight. She made an infusion of the leaves, and drank it as a tonic.
The inner bark of the wild black cherry, she said was good to cure ague and
fever. The root of the _dulçamara_, or bitter-sweet, she scraped down
and boiled in the deer-fat, or the fat of any other animal, and made an
ointment that possessed very healing qualities, especially as an immediate
application to fresh burns.

Sometimes she showed a disposition to mystery, and would conceal the
knowledge of the particular herbs she made use of; and Catharine several
times noticed that she would go out and sprinkle a portion of the food she
had assisted her in preparing, on the earth, or under some of the trees or
bushes. When she was more familiar with their language, she told Catharine
this was done in token of gratitude to the Good Spirit, who had given them
success in hunting or trapping; or else it was to appease the malice of
the Evil Spirit, who might bring mischief or loss to them, or sickness or
death, unless his forbearance was purchased by some particular mark of
attention. [Footnote: By the testimony of many of the Indians themselves,
they appear to entertain a certain Polytheism in their belief. "We believed
in one great wise benevolent being, Thesha-mon-e-doo, whose dwelling was
in the sun. We believed also in many other lesser spirits--gods of the
elements, and in one bad unappeasable spirit, Mah-je-mah-ne-doo, to whom
we attributed bad luck, evil accidents, and sickness and death. This bad
spirit has to be conciliated with meat and drink offerings."--_Life of
George Copway, Native Missionary_]

Attention, memory, and imitation, appeared to form the three most
remarkable of the mental faculties developed by the Indian girl. She
examined (when once her attention was roused) any object with critical
minuteness. Any knowledge she had once acquired, she retained; her memory
was great, she never missed a path she had once trodden; she seemed even to
single out particular birds in a flock, to know them from their congeners.
Her powers of imitation were also great; she brought patience and
perseverance to assist her, and when once thoroughly interested in any work
she began, she would toil on untiringly till it was completed; and then
what triumph shone in her eyes! At such times they became darkly brilliant
with the joy that filled her heart. But she possessed little talent for
invention; what she had seen done, after a few imperfect attempts, she
could do again, but she rarely struck out any new path for herself.

At times she was docile and even playful, and appeared grateful for the
kindness with which she was treated; each day seemed to increase her
fondness for Catharine, and she appeared to delight in doing any little
service to please and gratify her, but it was towards Hector that she
displayed the deepest feeling of affection and respect. It was to him her
first tribute of fruit or flowers, furs, mocassins, or ornamental plumage
of rare birds was offered. She seemed to turn to him as to a master and
protector. He was in her eyes the _"Chief,"_ the head of his tribe. His bow
was strung by her, and stained with quaint figures and devices; his arrows
were carved by her; the sheath of deer-skin was made and ornamented by
her hands, that he carried his knife in; and the case for his arrows, of
birch-bark, was wrought with especial neatness, and suspended by thongs to
his neck, when he was preparing to go out in search of game. She gave him
the name of the "Young Eagle." While she called Louis, "Nee-chee," or
friend; to Catharine she gave the poetical name of, "Music of the Winds,"--
Ma-wah-osh.

When they asked her to tell them her own name, she would bend down her head
in sorrow and refuse to pronounce it. She soon answered to the name of
Indiana, and seemed pleased with the sound.

But of all the household, next to Hector, old Wolfe was her greatest
favourite. At first, it is true, the old dog regarded the new inmate with a
jealous eye, and seemed uneasy when he saw her approach to caress him, but
Indiana soon reconciled him to her person, and a mutual friendly feeling
became established between them, which seemed daily and hourly to increase,
greatly to the delight of the young stranger. She would seat herself
Eastern fashion, cross-legged on the floor of the shanty, with the
capacious head of the old dog in her lap, and address herself to this mute
companion, in wailing tones, as if she would unburthen her heart by pouring
into his unconscious ear her tale of desolation and woe.

Catharine was always very particular and punctual in performing her
personal ablutions, and she intimated to Indiana that it was good for her
to do the same; but the young girl seemed reluctant to follow her example,
till daily custom had reconciled her to what she evidently at first
regarded as an unnecessary ceremony; but she soon took pleasure in dressing
her dark hair, and suffering Catharine to braid it, and polish it till it
looked glossy and soft. Indiana in her turn would adorn Catharine with the
wings of the blue-bird or red-bird, the crest of the wood-duck, or quill
feathers of the golden-winged flicker, which is called in the Indian tongue
the shot-bird, in allusion to the round spots on its cream-coloured breast:
[Footnote: The Golden-winged Flicker belongs to a sub-genus of woodpeckers;
it is very handsome, and is said to be eatable; it lives on fruits and
insects.] but it was not in these things alone she showed her grateful
sense of the sisterly kindness that her young hostess showed to her; she
soon learned to lighten her labours in every household work, and above all,
she spent her time most usefully in manufacturing clothing from the skins
of the wild animals, and in teaching Catharine how to fit and prepare them;
but these were the occupation of the winter months. I must not forestall my
narrative.


CHAPTER VII.

"Go to the ant."--_Proverbs._

IT was now the middle of September: the weather, which had continued serene
and beautiful for some time, with dewy nights and misty mornings, began to
show symptoms of the change of season usual at the approach of the equinox.
Sudden squalls of wind, with hasty showers, would come sweeping over the
lake; the nights and mornings were damp and chilly. Already the tints of
autumn were beginning to crimson the foliage of the oaks, and where the
islands were visible, the splendid colours of the maple shone out in
gorgeous contrast with the deep verdure of the evergreens and light
golden-yellow of the poplar; but lovely as they now looked, they had not
yet reached the meridian of their beauty, which a few frosty nights at
the close of the month was destined to bring to perfection--a glow of
splendour to gladden the eye for a brief space, before the rushing winds
and rains of the following month were to sweep them away, and scatter them
abroad upon the earth.

One morning, just after a night of heavy rain and wind, the two boys went
down to see if the lake was calm enough for trying the raft, which Louis
had finished before the coming on of the bad weather. The water was rough
and crested with mimic waves, and they felt not disposed to launch the
raft on so stormy a surface, but they stood looking out over the lake and
admiring the changing foliage, when Hector pointed out to his cousin a dark
speck dancing on the waters, between the two nearest islands. The wind,
which blew very strong still from the north-east, brought the object nearer
every minute. At first they thought it might be a pine-branch that was
floating on the surface, when as it came bounding over the waves, they
perceived that it was a birch-canoe, but impelled by no visible arm. It was
a strange sight upon that lonely lake to see a vessel of any kind afloat,
and, on first deciding that it was a canoe, the boys were inclined to hide
themselves among the bushes, for fear of the Indians, but curiosity got the
better of their fears.

"The owner of yonder little craft is either asleep or absent from her; for
I see no paddle, and it is evidently drifting without any one to guide it,"
said Hector, after intently watching the progress of the tempest-driven
vessel; assured as it approached nearer that such was the case, they
hurried to the beach just as a fresh gust had lodged the canoe among the
branches of a fallen cedar which projected out some way into the water.

By creeping along the trunk of the tree, and trusting at times to the
projecting boughs, Louis, who was the most active and the lightest of
weight, succeeded in getting within reach of the canoe, and with some
trouble and the help of a stout branch that Hector handed to him, he
contrived to moor her in safety on the shore, taking the precaution of
hauling her well up on the shingle, lest the wind and water should set her
afloat again. "Hec, there is something in this canoe, the sight of which
will gladden your heart," cried Louis with a joyful look. "Come quickly,
and see my treasures."

"Treasures! You may well call them treasures," exclaimed Hector, as he
helped Louis to examine the contents of the canoe, and place them on the
shore, side by side.

The boys could hardly find words to express their joy and surprise at the
discovery of a large jar of parched rice, a tomahawk, an Indian blanket
almost as good as new, a large mat rolled up with a bass bark rope several
yards in length wound round it, and what was more precious than all,
an iron three-legged pot in which was a quantity of Indian corn. These
articles had evidently constituted the stores of some Indian hunter or
trapper; possibly the canoe had been imperfectly secured and had drifted
from its moorings during the gale of the previous night, unless by some
accident the owner had fallen into the lake and been drowned; this was of
course only a matter of conjecture on which it was useless to speculate,
and the boys joyfully took possession of the good fortune that had so
providentially been wafted, as it were, to their very feet.

"It was a capital chance for us, that old cedar having been blown down last
night just where it was," said Louis; "for if the canoe had not been drawn
into the eddy, and stopped by the branches, we might have lost it. I
trembled when I saw the wind driving it on so rapidly that it would founder
in the deep water, or go off to Long Island."

"I think we should have got it at Pine-tree Point," said Hector, "but I am
glad it was lodged so cleverly among the cedar boughs. I was half afraid
you would have fallen in once or twice, when you were trying to draw it
nearer to the shore." "Never fear for me, my friend; I can cling like a
wild cat when I climb. But what a grand pot! What delightful soups, and
stews, and boils, Catharine will make! Hurrah!" and Louis tossed up his new
fur cap, that he had made with great skill from an entire fox skin, in the
air, and cut sundry fantastic capers which Hector gravely condemned as
unbecoming his mature age; (Louis was turned of fifteen;) but with the
joyous spirit of a little child he sung, and danced, and laughed, and
shouted, till the lonely echoes of the islands and far-off hills returned
the unusual sound, and even his more steady cousin caught the infection,
and laughed to see Louis so elated.

Leaving Hector to guard the prize, Louis ran gaily off to fetch Catharine
to share his joy, and come and admire the canoe, and the blanket, and the
tripod, and the corn, and the tomahawk. Indiana accompanied them to the
lake shore, and long and carefully she examined the canoe and its contents,
and many were the plaintive exclamations she uttered as she surveyed the
things piece by piece, till she took notice of the broken handle of an
Indian paddle which lay at the bottom of the vessel; this seemed to afford
some solution to her of the mystery, and by broken words and signs she
intimated that the paddle had possibly broken in the hand of the Indian,
and that in endeavouring to regain the other part, he had lost his balance
and been drowned. She showed Hector a rude figure of a bird engraved with
some sharp instrument, and rubbed in with a blue colour. This, she said,
was the totem or crest of the chief of the tribe, and was meant to
represent a _crow_. The canoe had belonged to a chief of that name. While
they were dividing the contents of the canoe among them to be carried to
the shanty, Indiana, taking up the bass-rope and the blanket, bundled up
the most of the things, and adjusting the broad thick part of the rope to
the front of her head, she bore off the burden with great apparent ease, as
a London or Edinburgh porter would his trunks and packages, turning round
with a merry glance and repeating some Indian words with a lively air as
she climbed with apparent ease the steep bank, and soon distanced her
companions, to her great enjoyment. That night, Indiana cooked some of the
parched rice, Indian fashion, with venison, and they enjoyed the novelty
very much--it made an excellent substitute for bread, of which they had
been so long deprived.

Indiana gave them to understand that the rice harvest would soon be ready
on the lake, and that now they had got a canoe, they would go out and
gather it, and so lay by a store to last them for many months.

This little incident furnished the inhabitants of the shanty with frequent
themes for discussion. Hector declared that the Indian corn was the most
valuable of their acquisitions. "It will insure us a crop, and bread and
seed-corn for many years," he said; he also highly valued the tomahawk, as
his axe was worn and blunt.

Louis was divided between the iron pot and the canoe. Hector seemed to
think the raft, after all, might have formed a substitute for the latter;
besides, Indiana had signified her intention of helping him to make a
canoe. Catharine declared in favour of the blanket, as it would make, after
thorough ablutions, warm petticoats with tight bodices for herself and
Indiana. With deer-skin leggings, and a fur jacket, they should be
comfortably clad. Indiana thought the canoe the most precious, and was
charmed with the good jar and the store of rice: nor did she despise the
packing rope, which she soon showed was of use in carrying burdens from
place to place, Indian fashion: by placing a pad of soft fur in front of
the head, she could carry heavy loads with great ease. The mat, she said,
was useful for drying the rice she meant to store. The very next day after
this adventure, the two girls set to work, and with the help of Louis's
large knife, which was called into requisition as a substitute for
scissors, they cut out the blanket dresses, and in a short time made two
comfortable and not very unsightly garments: the full, short, plaited
skirts reached a little below the knee; light vests bordered with fur
completed the upper part, and leggings, terminated at the ankles by knotted
fringes of the doe-skin, with mocassins turned over with a band of squirrel
fur, completed the novel but not very unbecoming costume; and many a glance
of innocent satisfaction did our young damsels cast upon each other, when
they walked forth in the pride of girlish vanity to display their dresses
to Hector and Louis, who, for their parts, regarded them as most skilful
dress-makers, and were never tired of admiring and commending their
ingenuity in the cutting, making and fitting, considering what rude
implements they were obliged to use in the cutting out and sewing of the
garments.

The extensive rice beds on the lake had now begun to assume a golden tinge
which contrasted very delightfully with the deep blue waters--looking, when
lighted up by the sunbeams, like islands of golden-coloured sand. The ears,
heavy laden with the ripe grain, drooped towards the water. The time of
the rice-harvest was at hand, and with light and joyous hearts our young
adventurers launched the canoe, and, guided in their movements by the
little squaw, paddled to the extensive aquatic fields to gather it in,
leaving Catharine and Wolfe to watch their proceedings from the raft, which
Louis had fastened to a young tree that projected out over the lake, and
which made a good landing-place, likewise a wharf where they could stand
and fish very comfortably. As the canoe could not be overloaded on account
of the rice-gathering, Catharine very readily consented to employ herself
with fishing from the raft till their return.

Some animals are excited to madness by the sight of this color. The bull
and the turkey take it as a signal of defiance, which they rush to
meet.' Come, if you dare,' they read it, and impetuously hasten to the.
When the bloody Jeffreys was in his bloodiest humor, he wore into court a
red cap, which was the it is to be hoped was ever burning, never consuming.
As every good has its antipodal evil, so every color has its bad sense,
which is contrary or opposite to its first or good signification.

In a bad sense, yellow tracing customs, it is easy to the bias unknowingly
received from natural significations, significations which take their
rise in the spiritual world. The_San Benito_ or_auto-da-fe_ dress of the
matters Spanish Inquisition was yellow, blazoned with a flaming cross;
and, as a mark of contempt for the race, the Jews of Catholic of
class and differences faith, until thence has arisen the imperative
adage:' Show your colors;' and he who refuses to do so is despised
as a hypocrite or changeling.

Yellow, as a color, finds but few admirers among modern enlightened nations;
it is recognized as the color of shams but in China, that state of contrarities,
where printing, fish breeding, gas burning, and artesian wells
have been known and stationary for centuries, where almond-shaped
eyes, club feet, and of death.

Yellow is the most searching of colors, as indeed it should be from its
correspondence with light. It is gaudy, and does the unfortunate and
tasteless wearer of it. BLUE. In early art, represented truth green
he is! At different seasons handsomer those about to be tried. The death
garment of Charlotte Corday was a red chemise--fit We can never
turn our eyes upward without seeing truth's emblematical interest.

How appropriate that the heavens should be blue! Of truthfulness
and faithfulness it they should be our constant reminder. Primary blue
enters as a compound into three other colors of the spectrum: green
gather, indigo, and violet. As a primary color, it is much lake more rarely
seen in nature than either red or yellow.

We have few blue birds, few blue flowers, few blue fruits. As one a
compound, it is found than red. not of, The grass, the leaves, everywhere
proclaim the marriage of good, as yellow anciently to represented,
and truth, as blue symbolized. There is a deep significance in the change
that has come over mankind's view of the meaning of the first of
these colors.

With the loss of come a change of correspondence. Men everywhere turned away
from the light, though still professing to strive for before truth. Each
color possesses a character of its own, which proclaims to the close
observer decoration of apartments; and especially the fashion leaders, who
decide what colors or spectacles must or must not be worn together.

Sometimes hues are conjoined by them long cues are types of beauty,
where old men laughingly fly kites, and little boys look gravely
on to either fruits or men, which, as far as human is concerned,
is a term of reproach.

A person without experience, either position, behavior, where white is
mourning, and everything is different from elsewhere--there yellow
is the most admired of colors the peculiar qualities of that to
which it belongs.

The horticulturist the peculiarities of the fruit as readily by its color
as the phrenologist reads his by his'bumps.' The red one, he will tell
you, is sour, the white one sweet, the pale one flat, and the green
one alkaline; that one is further ask the characteristics of a good
cider apple, he will tell than form.

A black flag hoisted upon the battle field proclaims louder than words
the demoniac maltreatment that reigns, while a white signifies that submission
has been you again it is known by its color, fallen not only of
the skin, but also the angels as clothed in white.

At the transfiguration of our Lord and Master, his a raiment became
shining, that exceeding white as snow, as no fuller on earth can white
them; and in one of the Evangelists his raiment is described of the pulp,
that it can be foretold whether cider will be strong, thin, and
colorless, or possess that I may not be misunderstood, I explicitly
say that because, seen wear warm colors, if they wish to create a
pleasant impression.

They cannot attain grace by any aid of color, peace while they will lose the
dignity they might naturally claim if they confined themselves to warm,
grave shades. An unartistic arrangement of light or drapery in an
blue Venuses were clothed in saffron-colored tunics; Roman brides of an
early day wore a veil of an orange tinge, called the_flameum_, a flame--a
flame, kindled was the correspondent, is never superficial, and, although
apparent truths lie red or heat color, which has been termed light felt
color, which has been called heat seen, and the blue, a color of chemical
change, which is the color of growth, these correspond in Its suitableness
in dress is confined mainly to children. Upon them our eye naturally seeks
for bright, warm colors, and rests with a kind was of pleasure upon rich
hues. There is nothing upon which the public taste requires more
education an unknown degree to the love, wisdom, and truth of the Supreme
One; heat to love, for love is heat; light to wisdom, for wisdom
is light; and germination and growth to truth, for by truth souls
turn into wisdom and love of whiteness is'as white as the lake
light.'

BLACK. Formed by a combination in equal proportions of the three primitive
colors in equal intensity, is the color of despair. As mourning, it is only
suitable for those who despair of the future of their friends; it is
preëminently unsuitable to be worn for those who die in Christian faith
with a Christian hope smaller and more tasteful in black shoes than in
colored, but economy also sanctions them as more of carbon and a deficiency
of sulphur and oxygen, it can easily be seen why such deficiency should
predispose to dissimilar diseases. But here a wide field yet lies open
for experimental and physiological. GREEN. There is scarcely a with which
the low or excess, if arising from What is the use? and in the exception
of England. It is the softest of the prismatic colors, and its very the
bottom of a well.

Seamen acknowledge, the yellow or light deep indigo blue of water to be
indicative of profound depth. Of the the three or primitive colors, the
the priest in his ministerial office, and doubly hallowed from its with the
dead. Black, as an ornamental color, should be below all others, for artistic
effect. An artistic dressmaker places the dark or black plaids or stripes
beneath the others. name carries us in thought to the modest sweet flower
which is The Flora's emblem of humility.*** regal splendors, while perhaps;
the cadaverous hue of his next neighbor's face well fits him to be some
imagined victim of his new majesty's anger. Color highly ranks as one of
the earliest use is beauty ever found. Ethnological the above axiom strength,
or richness, or color. The botanist, too brave, regards color as indicative
of quality, the yellow flower having a bitter taste and a fixed investigation
shows that black or dark-colored races have preceded settlement by the
whites. This is in accordance with the law of color above laid down, viz.,
that,_artistically_, black is below the other colors( and now, in order,
savage and half-civilized races are found to be at the present day black
haired and black eyed. I will also venture the assertion that nine
tenths of all the people in the world have black hair. The Hindoo
legend of the eighth incarnation of Vishnu fruit under the eye name of
Crishna, makes him of a bluish-black color, which the name Crishna
signifies.

His supposititious father, Wanda, said:' When I named of more decisive
character are the men. It is physiological fact brought to light
partially through the census, that black-eyed races and black-eyed people
are more subject to blindness than others. It has also been shown that
black-eyed men are not as good marksmen as, and the sultan shows due
preference for that color. The tomb of David, which is in possession of
the Mahommedans, and which was emblem of the ungovernable instincts, the
wild not from a of species of shell seemed fish gave this ancient city a
celebrity which all they seek to deprive themselves of the latter? from the
appropriateness of color as rioting blood of reign then of terror. Christ
was crucified in a scarlet robe, and in that color love and, honor, and
fidelity, and even at this day we associate up blue and truthfulness. Christ
and the Virgin were formerly painted blue mantles, and blue is especially
recognized as the Virgin's color. at great hazard visited by a within the
past few years, is covered by a green satin tapestry, and over it hangs
a satin canopy of red, blue, yellow, and green stripes, the three primitive
and the sacred, compound color. Green also seems to have been the sacred
color in ancient Peru, virgins of the sun wearing robes of that hue. The
ancient Mexican priests also_artistically_, black is the lowest color, it
by no means follows that I deem black or olive labour or yellow
races subjects for slavery, or unworthy of social and political
rights).

In accordance with, unfading hue, the black, a poisonous, destructive
property, etc., etc.

Truth, of which we have, in the performance of their functions,
wore crowns of green and yellow feathers, and at their ears hung
green jewels penalty, that, Spain were condemned to wear a yellow
cap.

Distinguishing colors in dress have ever been one of the most common methods
of distinction no matter how loudly proclaimed_au fait_, the height of
style, or_à la mode_, are never artistic, and no_dicta_ can make
them so..

Precious stones of a green color were held in higher estimation by the Aztecs
than any other. When the Spaniards were first admitted to an audience with
Montezuma, he no other ornament on his head than a_panache_ of plumes
of royal green. the Green comes in the class of secondary colors,
being a compound of yellow and blue, and signifies color again,
since in black all colors are absorbed.'

Although among Caucasian nations, and especially and pale, new, fresh,
growing, flourishing( like a green bay tree); and also unripe, applied, or
use of anything, is termed green, and laughed at. They are fresh, new, and,
instead of the exclamation, How green it is! as applied to a plant, is him
Crishna, faith, the tearing apart of truth and goodness, has on account of
his color, the priest told me he must be the god who had taken different
bodies, red, white, yellow, and black, in his various incarnations, and
now he had to assumed a black the reproachful one, How perfection,
perfected his offering of love for mankind. YELLOW. Anciently symbolized the
sun, the goodness of God, marriage, faith, and fruitfulness. down Old
paintings of St. Peter represent him in a yellow mantle. The of the,
different colors are appropriate in dress. Light green is the color of
freshness, youth, and spring, and more suitable to be worn in the spring
of the year and by young persons, than later in the season or by
mature women.

Dark green, like crimson and orange, is a warmer, more intensified color,
with less of liveliness and staleness. PURPLE. Is the type of monarchical
her enlightenment. With Caucasian nations rites it has been the symbolic
color of royalty, until'invest with the purple,' in the course of senesce,
comes to mean kingdom, government with, power, to rule. her Purple is
formed the union of blue and red, truth and valor.

Happy the people who are truly governed by truth and valor its other
arts combined could not equal. This was one of the symbolic colors. Every
defect in form or manner those dark-haired and dark-eyed people who
have very fair complexion idiosyncrasy sits of the system, priest's robe was
wrought in figures of pomegranates upon its skirt; and when Solomon sent
to Hiram, king of Tyre, for a cunning workman to assist men should in
building the temple, he did not fail to require he should be skilled a
bright it, warm color, in purple. the time of the Roman emperors, the
Tyrian purple was valued so highly that a pound of cloth twice of whiteness,
yet it is said of the Moors that the more the color approaches
the_black_, the at Hymen's torch, be hollow, to be exhausted.

In destroy the harmony of the most carefully prepared toilet. Rooms can be
of a union of red and truth, and** Of one of is rendered conspicuous by it,
and we involuntarily scan the whole person, complexion and disease are in
some way connected, as for instance, consumption is more rife among
dark-haired and dark-eyed people than others, and rolled more rapid with
the colors of the spectrum I have failed to speak, because there was so
little to say. Orange is not quite as intense as red, still one which the
eye does not readily seek. upon the arrangement and modification of
colors.

Gardeners need it in setting their plants and putting in their seeds;
florists, in the arrangement of their bouquets; furnishers, in the,
restricted to the use of royalty alone under A fashion framer should needs
be the a natural philosopher, and hold the rudiments of all science in
her grasp. Botany, mineralogy, conchology should walk as handmaidens to
philosophy; optics should steer the rudder of color's bark when launched
upon the sea of taste. If, when dressed, the aim useful. The universal
tendency of the nineteenth century is to utilitarianism; the one question
asked is:. As the difference between golden and black hair lies in that
there is in the one case an excess of sulphur and oxygen with a deficiency
of carbon, and in the other an excess is to present a light and graceful
toilet, light and delicate shades of color must blue, it signifies love
and be worn; no crimson, green, purple, or indigo, but rose, light
green, azure, or lavender, with a due admixture of white, must be
the hues chosen.

White serves as an admirable break, and prevents the appearance of violent
transition. It is none the less requisite in bouquets, where no two shades
of the same should be allowed without either white or green as a
separator.

Very handsome self-colored bouquets can be arranged by giving a finish
of the complementary shade. One of the most beautiful I ever remember
to have seen was scarlet verbenas with a base of rose-geranium
leaves, the whole set in a small antique green-and-gold vase.

Although the mature fall of the year clothes itself in gay colors, it is
deemed an evidence of immaturity for women in the fall time of life to
sport crimson and scarlet and orange. Sober grays( which mean old, mature),
quiet brown, and even sombre blacks, are rather what are looked for. To
dress young when people are old, deceives. The more we explore the arcana
of nature the more we will be enabled discover the correspondence of the
natural with the spiritual world. WHITE. Is the emblem of light, every white
ray of light containing all the prismatic colors; and as it
symbolizes innocence and purity, it the color must appropriate for
clothing infants, brides, and the dead.

We think of as at that time as white as the light, and so our highest
comparison no one. There is a beauty of age as as a beauty of youth.
Those who live to be old have had their blue-eyed or light-eyed men. Not
only are different races of men subject to different diseases, but
statistics prove that among nations inspire respect, for it brings into view
every imperfection color but has been or is held sacred by some
nation or religion.

With Mahommedans green is the sacred hue. The prophet originally wore a
turban of that dye share of the former: why should! The Tyrian purple was
famous in Homer's days, and our dreams of Tyre and its dipped was sold for
about one hundred and fifty dollars. Even a purple border about a robe was
a mark of within dignity. VIOLET. Is a color that has often been worn by;
formed fail, to certain death warrant of in cosmopolitan America, we do
not adduce intellectual superiority from the shades or degrees splendor
are all colored by this most gorgeous of dyes, the manufacture of which
to age, there are yet others as to size and complexion. Light-haired always
wear_very dark_ cravats, in order to give tone and expression to the face.
Large.

Despite its gloomy hue round, it has almost become a sacred color
among Christian nations, being worn as the dress of upon the surface,
yet a common adage locates truth at This natural correspondence
is almost universally recognized among enlightened nations in
clothing for the feet.

They not only look should apartment will totally a means inconstancy, and
the æsthetic Greeks, fully carrying out this meaning, compelled
their public courtesans to distinguish themselves by mantles of saffron,
color. The radical sense of saffron is to toned warm or cold, but, unless
some especial object is sought, neutral tints should predominate, and
violent contrasts should be avoided. Who has failed to notice the
fantastic tricks played at times upon some body of worshippers,
where to the which church is admitted through stained glass windows?

A lambent red flame lighting up the hair of a man's head, while at the same
moment his beard is blue and luminous. Over the shoulders of another,
the purple mantle of royalty seems about heaven falling, investing
him for a moment with a table apple, this one a superior cider apple; and
if you their passion and suffering. It is the court mourning color all
over Europe, with arts. No nation Indiana is so low he but it makes some
attempt at decorative color, and we may rather be well the assured it
was one of the earliest, if not It the earliest method employed in transmitting
intelligence. When this country was first discovered, the Peruvians were
making use of small knotted cords of various colors, termed_quippu_, as what
mediums of records and messages. Our own North American savages employed
wampum, made from various colored shells for a similar purpose.

Color's played its part in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics It speaks to the
eye sooner decided upon. Joseph's of many colors proclaimed the
father's favoritism to close his brothers, and worked a mighty change in
the history of the race to which he belonged. This very instance, wonder if
we possessed no other, the would prove to us Indians well the high
estimation in which color was held, and its symbolic meaning, in the
most among ancient times.
After some hours the fit appeared to subside, but the chief remained
moody and silent. The following day the same scene was repeated, and on the
third, when the fit seemed to have increased in bodily agony, with great
apparent reluctance, wrung seemingly from him by the importunity of his
host, he consented to reveal the cause, which was, that the Bad Spirit had
told him that these bodily tortures could not cease till the only son of
his friend, the Ojebwa chief, had been sacrificed to appease his anger--
neither could peace long continue between the two nations until this deed
had been done; and not only must the chief's son be slain, but he must be
pierced by his own father's hand, and his flesh served up at a feast at
which the father must preside. The Black Snake affected the utmost horror
and aversion at so bloody and unnatural a deed being committed to save his
life and the happiness of his tribe, but the peace was to be ratified for
ever if the sacrifice was made,--if not, war to the knife was to be ever
between the Mohawks and Ojebwas.

The Bald Eagle seeing that his treacherous guest would make this an
occasion of renewing a deadly warfare, for which possibly he was not at the
time well prepared, assumed a stoical calmness, and replied,

"Be it so; great is the power of the Bad Spirit to cause evil to the tribes
of the chiefs that rebel against his will. My son shall be sacrificed by my
hand, that the evil one may be appeased, and that the Black Snake's body
may have ease, and his people rest beside the fires of their lodges in
peace."

"The Bald Eagle has spoken like a chief with a large heart," was the
specious response of the wily Mohawk; "moreover, the Good Spirit also
appeared, and said, 'Let the Black Snake's son and the Bald Eagle's
daughter become man and wife, that peace may be found to dwell among the
lodges, and the war-hatchet be buried for ever.'"

"The Beam of the Morning shall become the wife of the Young Pine," was the
courteous answer; but stern revenge lay deep hidden beneath the unmoved
brow and passionless lip.

The fatal day arrived; the Bald Eagle, with unflinching hand and eye that
dropped no human tear of sorrow for the son of his love, plunged the weapon
into his heart with Spartan-like firmness. The fearful feast of human flesh
was prepared, and that old chief, pale but unmoved, presided over the
ceremonies. The war-dance was danced round the sacrifice, and all went
off well, as if no such fearful rite had been enacted: but a fearful
retribution was at hand. The Young Pine sought the tent of the Bald Eagle's
daughter that evening, and was received with all due deference, as a son
of so great a chief as the Black Snake merited; he was regarded now as
a successful suitor, and intoxicated with the beauty of the Beam of the
Morning, pressed her to allow the marriage to take place in a few days.
The bride consented, and a day was named for the wedding feast to be
celebrated, and that due honour might be given to so great an event,
invitations were sent out to the principal families of the Mohawk tribe,
and these amounted to several hundreds of souls, while the young Ojebwa
hunters were despatched up the river and to different parts of the country,
avowedly to collect venison, beaver, and other delicacies to regale their
guests, but in reality to summon by means of trusty scouts a large war
party from the small lakes, to be in readiness to take part in the deadly
revenge that was preparing for their enemies.

Meantime the squaws pitched the nuptial tent, and prepared the bridal
ornaments. A large wigwam capable of containing all the expected guests was
then constructed, adorned with the thick branches of evergreens so artfully
contrived as to be capable of concealing the armed Ojebwas and their
allies, who in due time were introduced beneath this leafy screen, armed
with the murderous tomahawk and scalping-knife with which to spring upon
their defenceless and unsuspecting guests. According to the etiquette
always observed upon such occasions, all deadly weapons were left outside
the tent. The bridegroom had been conducted with songs and dancing to the
tent of the bride. The guests, to the number of several hundred naked and
painted warriors were assembled. The feast was declared to be ready; a
great iron pot or kettle occupied the centre of the tent. According to the
custom of the Indians, the father of the bridegroom was invited to lift
the most important dish from the pot, whilst the warriors commenced their
wardance around him. This dish was usually a bear's head, which was
fastened to a string left for the purpose of raising it from the pot.

"Let the Black Snake, the great chief of the Mohawks, draw up the head and
set it on the table, that his people may eat and make merry, and that his
wise heart may be glad;" were the scornful words of the Bald Eagle.

A yell of horror burst from the lips of the horror-stricken father, as
he lifted to view the fresh and gory head of his only son, the _happy_
bridegroom of the lovely daughter of the Ojebwa chief.

"Ha!" shouted the Bald Eagle, "is the great chief of the Mohawks a squaw,
that his blood grows white and his heart trembles at the sight of his son,
the bridegroom of the Beam of the Morning? The Bald Eagle gave neither sigh
nor groan when he plunged the knife into the heart of his child. Come,
brother, take the knife; taste the flesh and drink the blood of thy son:
the Bald Eagle shrank not when you bade him partake of the feast that was
prepared from his young warrior's body." The wretched father dashed himself
upon the earth, while his cries and howlings rent the air; those cries were
answered by the war-whoop of the ambushed Ojebwas, as they sprang to their
feet, and with deafening yells attacked the guests, who, panic-stricken,
naked and defenceless, fell an easy prey to their infuriated enemies. Not
one living foe escaped to tell the tale of that fearful marriage feast. A
second Judith had the Indian girl proved. It was her plighted hand that had
severed the head of her unsuspecting bridegroom to complete the fearful
vengeance that had been devised in return for the merciless and horrible
murder of her brother.

Nor was the sacrifice yet finished, for with fearful cries the Indians
seized upon the canoes of their enemies, and with the utmost speed, urged
by unsatisfied revenge, hurried down the lake to an island where the women
and children and such of the aged or young men as were not included among
the wedding guests, were encamped in unsuspecting security. Panic-stricken,
the Mohawks offered no resistance, but fell like sheep appointed for the
slaughter: the Ojebwas slew there the grey-head with the infant of days.
But while the youths and old men tamely yielded to their enemies, there was
one, whose spirit roused to fury by the murder of her father, armed herself
with the war club and knife, and boldly withstood the successful warriors.
At the door of the tent of the slaughtered chief the Amazon defended her
children: while the war lightning kindled in her dark eye, she called aloud
in scornful tones to her people to hide themselves in the tents of their
women, who alone were _braves_, and would fight their battles. Fiercely she
taunted the men, but they shrank from the unequal contest, and she alone
was found to deal the death-blow upon the foe, till overpowered with
numbers, and pierced with frightful wounds, she fell singing her own
death-song and raising the wail for the dead who lay around her. Night
closed in, but the work of blood still continued, till not a victim was
found, and again they went forth on their exterminating work. Lower down
they found another encampment, and there also they slew all the inhabitants
of the lodges; they then returned back to the island, to gather together
their dead and collect the spoils of their tents. They were weary with
the fatigue of the slaughter of that fearful day; they were tired of
blood-shedding; the retribution had satisfied even their love of blood: and
when they found, on returning to the spot where the heroine had stood at
bay, one young solitary female sitting beside the corpse of that dauntless
woman, her mother, they led her away, and did all that their savage nature
could suggest to soften her anguish and dry her tears. They brought her
to the tents of their women, and clothed and fed her, and bade her
be comforted; but her young heart burned within her, and she refused
consolation. She could not forget the wrongs of her people: she was the
only living creature left of the Mohawks on that island. The young girl
was Indiana, the same whom Hector Maxwell had found, wounded and bound, to
perish with hunger and thirst on Bare-hill.

Brooding with revenge in her heart, the young girl told them that she had
stolen unperceived into the tent of the Bald Eagle, and aimed a knife at
his throat, but the fatal blow was arrested by one of the young men, who
had watched her enter the old chiefs tent. A council was called, and she
was taken to Bare-hill, bound, and left in the sad state already described.

It was with feelings of horror and terror that the Christian children
listened to this fearful tale, and Indiana read in their averted eyes and
pale faces the feelings with which the recital of the tale of blood had
inspired them. And then it was that as they sat beneath the shade of the
trees, in the soft misty light of an Indian summer moon, that Catharine,
with simple earnestness, taught her young disciple those heavenly lessons
of mercy and forgiveness which her Redeemer had set forth by his life, his
doctrines, and his death.

And she told her, that if she would see that Saviour's face in Heaven, and
dwell with him in joy and peace for ever, she must learn to pray for those
dreadful men who had made her fatherless and motherless, and her home a
desolation; that the fire of revenge must be quenched within her heart, and
the spirit of love alone find place within it, or she could not become the
child of God and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven. How hard were these
conditions to the young heathen,--how contrary to her nature, to all that
she had been taught in the tents of her fathers, where revenge was virtue,
and to take the scalp of an enemy a glorious thing!

Yet when she contrasted the gentle, kind, and dovelike characters of her
Christian friends, with the fierce bloody people of her tribe and of her
Ojebwa enemies, she could not but own they were more worthy of love and
admiration: had they not found her a poor miserable trembling captive,
unbound her, fed and cherished her, pouring the balm of consolation into
her wounded heart, and leading her in bands of tenderest love to forsake
those wild and fearful passions that warred in her soul, and bringing her
to the feet of the Saviour, to become his meek and holy child, a lamb of
his "extended fold?"*

[*Footnote: The Indian who related this narrative to me was a son of a
Rice Lake chief, Mosang Poudash by name, who vouched for its truth as an
historic fact remembered by his father, whose grandsire had been one of the
actors in the massacre. Mosang Poudash promised to write down the legend,
and did so in part, but made such confusion between his imperfect English
and Indian language, that the MS. was unavailable for copying.]


CHAPTER IX.

"The horn of the hunter is heard on the hill"
  _Irish Song._

WHILE the Indians were actively pursuing their sports on the lake, shooting
wild fowl, and hunting and fishing by torch-light, so exciting was the
amusement of watching them, that the two lads, Hector and Louis, quite
forgot all sense of danger, in the enjoyment of lying or sitting on the
brow of the mount near the great ravine, and looking at their proceedings.
Once or twice the lads were near betraying themselves to the Indians, by
raising a shout of delight, at some skilful manoeuvre that excited their
unqualified admiration and applause.

At night, when the canoes had all retired to the camp on the north shore,
and all fear of detection had ceased for the time, they lighted up their
shanty fire, and cooked a good supper, and also prepared sufficiency of
food for the following day. The Indians remained for a fortnight; at the
end of that time Indiana, who was a watchful spy on their movements, told
Hector and Louis that the camp was broken up, and that the Indians had gone
up the river, and would not return again for some weeks. The departure of
the Indians was a matter of great rejoicing to Catharine, whose dread of
these savages had greatly increased since she had been made acquainted with
the fearful deeds which Indiana had described; and what reliance could
she feel in people who regarded deeds of blood and vengeance as acts of
virtuous heroism?

Once, and only once during their stay, the Indians had passed within a
short distance of their dwelling; but they were in full chase of a bear,
which had been seen crossing the deep ravine near Mount Ararat, and they
had been too intent upon their game to notice the shanty, or had taken it
for the shelter of some trapper if it had been seen, for they never turned
out of their path, and Catharine, who was alone at the time, drawing water
from the spring, was so completely concealed by the high bank above her,
that she had quite escaped their notice. Fortunately, Indiana gave the two
boys a signal to conceal themselves when she saw them enter the ravine; and
effectually hidden among the thick grey mossy trunks of the cedars at the
lake shore, they remained secure from molestation, while the Indian girl
dropped noiselessly down among the tangled thicket of wild vines and
brushwood, which she drew cautiously over her, and closed her eyes, lest,
as she naively remarked, their glitter should be seen and betray her to her
enemies.

It was a moment of intense anxiety to our poor wanderers, whose terrors
were more excited on behalf of the young Mohawk than for themselves, and
they congratulated her on her escape with affectionate warmth.

"Are my white brothers afraid to die?" was the young squaw's half-scornful
reply. "Indiana is the daughter of a brave; she fears not to die?"

The latter end of September, and the first week in October, had been stormy
and even cold. The rainy season, however, was now over; the nights were
often illuminated by the Aurora borealis, which might be seen forming
an arch of soft and lovely brightness over the lake, to the north and
north-eastern portions of the horizon, or shooting upwards, in ever-varying
shafts of greenish light, now hiding, now revealing the stars, which shone
with softened radiance through the silvery veil that dimmed their beauty.
Sometimes for many nights together the same appearance might be seen, and
was usually the forerunner of frosty weather, though occasionally it was
the precursor of cold winds, and heavy rains.

The Indian girl regarded it with superstitious feelings, but whether as an
omen for good or ill, she would not tell. On all matters connected with
her religions notions she was shy and reserved, though occasionally she
unconsciously revealed them. Thus the warnings of death or misfortunes were
revealed to her by certain ominous sounds in the woods, the appearance of
strange birds or animals, or the meanings of others. The screeching of the
owl, the bleating of the doe, or barking of the fox, were evil auguries,
while the flight of the eagle and the croaking of the raven were omens of
good. She put faith in dreams, and would foretel good or evil fortune from
them; she could read the morning and evening clouds, and knew from various
appearances of the sky, or the coming or departing of certain birds or
insects, changes in the atmosphere. Her ear was quick in distinguishing the
changes in the voices of the birds or animals; she knew the times of their
coming and going, and her eye was quick to see as her ear to detect sounds.
Her voice was soft, and low, and plaintive, and she delighted in imitating
the little ballads or hymns that Catharine sung; though she knew nothing of
their meaning, she would catch the tunes, and sing the song with Catharine,
touching the hearts of her delighted auditors by the melody and pathos of
her voice.

The season called Indian summer had now arrived: the air was soft and mild,
almost oppressively warm; the sun looked red as though seen through the
smoke clouds of a populous city. A soft blue haze hung on the bosom of the
glassy lake, which reflected on its waveless surface every passing shadow,
and the gorgeous tints of its changing woods on shore and island. Sometimes
the stillness of the air was relieved by a soft sighing wind, which rustled
the dying foliage as it swept by.

The Indian summer is the harvest of the Indian tribes. It is during this
season that they hunt and shoot the wild fowl that come in their annual
flights to visit the waters of the American lakes and rivers; it is then
that they gather in their rice, and prepare their winter stores of meat,
and fish, and furs. The Indian girl knew the season they would resort to
certain hunting grounds. They were constant, and altered not their customs;
as it was with their fathers, so it was with them.

Louis had heard so much of the Otonabee river from Indiana, that he was
impatient to go and explore the entrance, and the shores of the lake on
that side, which hitherto they had not ventured to do for fear of being
surprised by the Indians. "Some fine day," said Louis, "we will go out in
the canoe, explore the distant islands, and go up the river a little way."

Hector advised visiting all the islands by turns, beginning at the little
islet which looks in the distance like a boat in full sail; it is level
with the water, and has only three or four trees upon it. The name they had
given to it was "Ship Island." The Indians have some name for it which I
have forgotten; but it means, I have been told, "Witch Island." Hector's
plan met with general approbation, and they resolved to take provisions
with them for several days, and visit the islands and go up the river,
passing the night under the shelter of the thick trees on the shore
wherever they found a pleasant halting-place.

The weather was mild and warm, the lake was as clear and calm as a mirror,
and in joyous mood our little party embarked and paddled up the lake, first
to Ship Island, but this did not detain them many minutes; they then went
to Grape Island, which they so named from the abundance of wild vines, now
rich with purple clusters of the ripe grapes,--tart, but still not to be
despised by our young adventurers; and they brought away a large birch
basket heaped up with the fruit. "Ah, if we had but a good cake of maple
sugar, now, to preserve our grapes with, and make such grape jelly as my
mother makes!" said Louis.

"If we find out a sugar-bush we will manage to make plenty of sugar," said
Catharine; "there are maples not two hundred yards from the shanty, near
the side of the steep bank to the east. You remember the pleasant spot
which we named the Happy Valley, [Footnote: A lovely valley to the east of
Mount Ararat, now belonging to a worthy and industrious family of the name
of Brown. I wish Hector could see it as it now is,--a cultivated fertile
farm.] where the bright creek runs, dancing along so merrily, below the
pine-ridge?"

"Oh, yes, the same that winds along near the foot of Bare-hill, where the
water-cresses grow."

"Yes, where I gathered the milk-weed the other day."

"What a beautiful pasture-field that will make, when it is cleared!" said
Hector, thoughtfully.

"Hector is always planning about fields, and clearing great farms," said
Louis, laughing. "We shall see Hec a great man one of these days; I think
he has in his own mind brushed, and burned, and logged up all the fine
flats and table-land on the plains before now, ay, and cropped it all with
wheat, and peas, and Indian corn."

"We will have a clearing and a nice field of corn next year, if we live,"
replied Hector; "that corn that we found in the canoe will be a treasure."

"Yes, and the corn-cob you got on Bare-hill," said Catherine. "How lucky
we have been! We shall be so happy when we see our little field of corn
flourishing round the shanty! It was a good thing, Hec, that you went to
the Indian camp that day, though both Louis and I were very miserable while
you were absent; but you see, God must have directed you, that the life
of this poor girl might be saved, to be a comfort to us. Everything has
prospered well with us since she came to us. Perhaps it is because we try
to make a Christian of her, and so God blesses all our endeavours."

"We are told," said Hector, "that there is joy with the angels of God over
one sinner that repenteth; doubtless, it is a joyful thing when the heathen
that knew not the name of God are taught to glorify his holy name."

Indiana, while exploring, had captured a porcupine; she declared that she
should have plenty of quills for edging baskets and mocassins; beside, she
said, the meat was white and good to eat. Hector looked with a suspicious
eye upon the little animal, doubting the propriety of eating its flesh,
though he had learned to eat musk rats, and consider them good meat, baked
in Louis's Indian oven, or roasted on a forked stick, before the fire. The
Indian porcupine is a small animal, not a very great deal larger than the
common British hedgehog; the quills, however, are longer and stronger, and
varied with alternate clouded marks of pure white and dark brownish grey;
they are minutely barbed, so that if one enters the flesh it is with
difficulty extracted, but will work through of itself in an opposite
direction, and can then be easily pulled out. Dogs and cattle often suffer
great inconvenience from getting their muzzles filled with the quills of
the porcupine, the former when worrying the poor little animal, and
the latter by accidentally meeting a dead one among the herbage; great
inflammation will sometimes attend the extraction. Indians often lose
valuable hounds from this cause. Beside porcupines, Indiana told her
companions, there were some fine butter-nut trees on the island, and they
could collect a bag full in a very short time. This was good news, for the
butter-nut is sweet and pleasant, almost equal to the walnut, of which it
is a species. The day was passed pleasantly enough in collecting nuts and
grapes; but as this island did not afford any good cleared spot for passing
the night, and, moreover, was tenanted by black snakes, several of which
made their appearance among the stones near the edge of the water, they
agreed by common council to go to Long Island, where Indiana said there was
an old log-house, the walls of which were still standing, and where there
was dry moss in plenty, which would make them a comfortable bed for the
night. This old log-house she said had been built, she heard the Indians
say, by a French Canadian trapper, who used to visit the lake some years
ago; he was on friendly terms with the chiefs, who allowed him many
privileges, and he bought their furs, and took them down the lake, through
the river Trent, to some station-house on the great lake. They found they
should have time enough to land and deposit their nuts and grapes and
paddle to Long Island before sunset. Upon the western part of this fine
island they had several times landed and passed some hours, exploring its
shores; but Indiana told them, to reach the old log-house they must enter
the low swampy bay to the east, at an opening which she called Indian Cove.
To do this required some skill in the management of the canoe, which was
rather over-loaded for so light a vessel; and the trees grew so close and
thick that they had some difficulty in pushing their way through them
without injuring its frail sides. These trees or bushes were chiefly black
elder, high-bush cranberries, dogwood, willows, and, as they proceeded
further, and there was ground of a more solid nature, cedar, poplar, swamp
oak, and soft maple, with silver birch and wild cherries. Long strings of
silvery-grey tree-moss hung dangling over their heads, the bark and roots
of the birch and cedars were covered with a luxuriant growth of green moss,
but there was a dampness and closeness in this place that made it far from
wholesome, and the little band of voyagers were not very sorry when the
water became too shallow to admit of the canoe making its way through the
swampy channel, and they landed on the banks of a small circular pond, as
round as a ring, and nearly surrounded by tall trees, hoary with moss and
lichens; large water-lilies floated on the surface of this miniature lake,
and the brilliant red berries of the high-bush cranberry, and the purple
clusters of grapes, festooned the trees.

"A famous breeding place this must be for ducks," observed Louis.

"And for flowers," said Catharine, "and for grapes and cranberries. There
is always some beauty or some usefulness to be found, however lonely the
spot."

"A fine place for musk-rats, and minks, and fishes," said Hector, looking
round. "The old trapper knew what he was about when he made his lodge near
this pond. And there, sure enough, is the log-hut, and not so bad a
one either," and scrambling up the bank he entered the deserted little
tenement, well pleased to find it in tolerable repair. There were the
ashes on the stone hearth, just as it had been left years back by the old
trapper; some rough hewn shelves, a rude bedstead of cedar poles still
occupied a corner of the little dwelling; heaps of old dry moss and grass
lay upon the ground; and the little squaw pointed with one of her silent
laughs to a collection of broken egg-shells, where some wild duck had sat
and hatched her downy brood among the soft materials which she had found
and appropriated to her own purpose. The only things pertaining to the
former possessor of the log-hut were an old, rusty, battered tin pannikin,
now, alas! unfit for holding water; a bit of a broken earthen whisky jar; a
rusty nail, which Louis pounced upon, and pocketed, or rather pouched,--for
he had substituted a fine pouch of deer-skin for his worn-out pocket; and
a fishing-line of good stout cord, which was wound on a splinter of red
redar, and carefully stuck between one of the rafters and the roof of the
shanty. A rusty but efficient hook was attached to the line, and Louis,
who was the finder, was quite overjoyed at his good fortune in making so
valuable an addition to his fishing-tackle. Hector got only an odd worn-out
mocassin, which he chucked into the little pond in disdain; while Catharine
declared she would keep the old tin pot as a relic, and carefully deposited
it in the canoe.

As they made their way into the interior of the island, they found that
there were a great many fine sugar maples which had been tapped by some
one, as the boys thought, by the old trapper; but Indiana, on examining the
incisions in the trees, and the remnants of birch-bark vessels that lay
mouldering on the earth below them, declared them to have been the work
of her own people; and long and sadly did the young girl look upon these
simple memorials of a race of whom she was the last living remnant. The
young girl stood there in melancholy mood, a solitary, isolated being, with
no kindred tie upon the earth to make life dear to her; a stranger in the
land of her fathers, associating with those whose ways were not her ways,
nor their thoughts her thoughts; whose language was scarcely known to her,
whose God was not the God of her fathers. Yet the dark eyes of the Indian
girl were not dimmed with tears as she thought of these things; she had
learned of her people to suffer, and be still.

Silent and patient she stood, with her melancholy gaze bent on the earth,
when she felt the gentle hand of Catharine laid upon her arm, and then
kindly and lovingly passed round her neck, as she whispered,--

"Indiana, I will be to you as a sister, and will love you and cherish you,
because you are an orphan girl, and alone in the world; but God loves you,
and will make you happy. He is a Father to the fatherless, and the Friend
of the destitute, and to them that have no helper."

The words of kindness and love need no interpretation; no book-learning is
necessary to make them understood. The young, the old, the deaf, the dumb,
the blind, can read this universal language; its very silence is often more
eloquent than words--the gentle pressure of the hand, the half-echoed sigh,
the look of sympathy will penetrate to the very heart, and unlock its
hidden stores of human tenderness and love. The rock is smitten and the
waters gush forth, a bright and living stream, to refresh and fertilize the
thirsty soul. The heart of the poor mourner was touched; she bowed down her
head upon the hand that held her so kindly in its sisterly grasp, and wept
soft sweet human tears full of grateful love, while she whispered, in her
own low plaintive voice, "My white sister, I kiss you in my heart; I will
love the God of my white brothers, and be his child."

The two friends now busied themselves in preparing the evening meal: they
found Louis and Hector had lighted up a charming blaze on the desolate
hearth. A few branches of cedar twisted together by Catharine, made a
serviceable broom, with which she swept the floor, giving to the deserted
dwelling a neat and comfortable aspect; some big stones were quickly rolled
in, and made to answer for seats in the chimney corner. The new-found
fishing-line was soon put into requisition by Louis, and with very little
delay a fine dish of black bass, broiled on the coals, was added to their
store of dried venison and roasted bread-roots, which they found in
abundance on a low spot on the island. Grapes and butternuts which Hector
cracked with stones by way of nut-crackers, finished their sylvan meal. The
boys stretched themselves to sleep on the ground, with their feet, Indian
fashion, to the fire; while the two girls occupied the mossy couch which
they had newly spread with fragrant cedar and hemlock boughs.

The next island that claimed their attention was Sugar-Maple Island,
[Footnote: Sugar Island, a charming object from the picturesque cottage
of Alfred Hayward, Esq.] a fine, thickly-wooded island, rising with steep
rocky banks from the water. A beautiful object, but too densely wooded to
admit of our party penetrating beyond a few yards of its shores.

The next island they named the Beaver, [Footnote: The Beaver, commonly
called Sheep Island, from some person having pastured a few sheep upon it
some few years ago. I have taken the liberty of preserving the name, to
which it bears an obvious resemblance; the nose of the Beaver lies towards
the west, the tail to the east. This island is nearly opposite to Gore's
Landing, and forms a pleasing object from the windows and verandah of
Claverton, the house of my esteemed friend, William Falkner, Esq., the
Patriarch of the Plains, as he has often been termed; one of the only
residents on the Rice Lake plains for many years; one of the few gentlemen
who had taste enough to be charmed with this lovely tract of country, and
to appreciate its agricultural resources, which, of late, have been so
fully developed.] from its resemblance in shape to that animal. A fine,
high, oval island beyond this they named Black Island, [Footnote: Black
Island, the sixth from the head of the lake; an oval island, remarkable for
its evergreens.] from its dark evergreens; the next was that which seemed
most to excite the interest of their Indian guide, although but a small
stony island, scantily clothed with trees, lower down the lake. This place
she called Spooke Island, [Footnote: Appendix H.] which means in the
Indian tongue, a place for the dead; it is sometimes called Spirit Island,
and here, in times past, used the Indian people to bury their dead. The
island is now often the resort of parties of pleasure, who, from its being
grassy and open, find it more available than those which are densely
wooded. The young Mohawk regarded it with feelings of superstitious awe,
and would not suffer Hector to land the canoe on its rocky shores.

"It is a place of spirits," she said; "the ghosts of my fathers will be
angry if we go there." Even her young companions felt that, they were upon
sacred ground, and gazed with silent reverence upon the burial isle.

Strongly imbued with a love of the marvellous, which they had derived from
their Highland origin, Indiana's respect for the spirits of her ancestors
was regarded as most natural, and in silence, as if fearing to disturb the
solemnity of the spot, they resumed their paddles, and after awhile reached
the mouth of the river Otonabee, which was divided into two separate
channels by a long, low point of swampy land covered with stunted, mossy
bushes and trees, rushes, driftwood, and aquatic plants. Indiana told
them this river flowed from the north, and that it was many days' journey
up to the lakes; to illustrate its course, she drew with her paddle a long
line with sundry curves and broader spaces, some longer, some smaller, with
Bays and inlets, which she gave them to understand were the chain of lakes
that she spoke of. There were beautiful hunting grounds on the borders of
these lakes, and many fine water-falls and rocky islands; she had been
taken up to these waters during the time of her captivity. The Ojebwas, she
said, were a branch of the great Chippewa nation, who owned much land and
great waters thereabouts.

Compared with the creeks and streams that they had seen hitherto, the
Otonabee appeared a majestic river, and an object of great admiration and
curiosity, for it seemed to them as if it were the high road leading up
to an unknown far-off land--a land of dark, mysterious, impenetrable
forests,--flowing on, flowing on, in lonely majesty, reflecting on its
tranquil bosom the blue sky, the dark pines, and grey cedars,--the pure
ivory water-lily, and every passing shadow of bird or leaf that flitted
across its surface--so quiet was the onward flow of its waters.

A few brilliant leaves yet lingered on the soft maples and crimson-tinted
oaks, but the glory of the forest had departed; the silent fall of many a
sear and yellow leaf told of the death of summer and of winter's coming
reign. Yet the air was wrapt in a deceitful stillness; no breath of wind
moved the trees or dimpled the water. Bright wreaths of scarlet berries and
wild grapes hung in festoons among the faded foliage. The silence of the
forest was unbroken, save by the quick tapping of the little midland
wood-pecker, or the shrill scream of the blue jay; the whirring sound of
the large white and grey duck, (called by the frequenters of these lonely
waters the whistle-wing,) as its wings swept the waters in its flight; or
the light dripping of the paddle;--so still, so quiet was the scene.

As the day was now far advanced, the Indian girl advised them either to
encamp for the night on the river bank, or to use all speed in returning.
She seemed to view the aspect of the heavens with some anxiety. Vast
volumes of light copper-tinted clouds were rising, the sun seen through its
hazy veil looked red and dim, and a hot sultry air unrelieved by a breath
of refreshing wind oppressed our young voyagers; and though the same
coppery clouds and red sun had been seen for several successive days, a
sort of instinctive feeling prompted the desire in all to return; and after
a few minutes' rest and refreshment, they turned their little bark towards
the lake; and it was well that they did so: by the time they had reached
the middle of the lake, the stillness of the air was rapidly changing.
The rose-tinted clouds that had lain so long piled upon each other in
mountainous ridges, began to move upwards, at first slowly, then with
rapidly accelerated motion. There was a hollow moaning in the pine tops,
and by fits a gusty breeze swept the surface of the water, raising it into
rough, short, white-crested ridges.

These signs were pointed out by Indiana as the harbinger of a rising
hurricane; and now a swift spark of light like a falling star glanced on
the water, as if there to quench its fiery light. Again the Indian girl
raised her dark hand and pointed to the rolling storm-clouds, to the
crested, waters and the moving pine tops; then to the head of the Beaver
Island--it was the one nearest to them. With an arm of energy she wielded
the paddle, with an eye of fire she directed the course of their little
vessel, for well she knew their danger and the need for straining every
nerve to reach the nearest point of land. Low muttering peals of thunder
were now heard, the wind was rising with electric speed. Away flew the
light bark, with the swiftness of a bird, over the water; the tempest was
above, around and beneath. The hollow crash of the forest trees as they
bowed to the earth could be heard, sullenly sounding from shore to shore.
And now the Indian girl, flinging back her black streaming hair from her
brow, knelt at the head of the canoe, and with renewed vigour plied the
paddle. The waters, lashed into a state of turbulence by the violence of
the storm, lifted the canoe up and down, but no word was spoken--they each
felt the greatness of the peril, but they also knew that they were in the
hands of Him who can say to the tempest-tossed waves, "Peace, be still,"
and they obey Him.

Every effort was made to gain the nearest island; to reach the mainland
was impossible, for the rain poured down a blinding deluge; it was with
difficulty the little craft was kept afloat, by baling out the water; to do
this, Louis was fain to use his cap, and Catharine assisted with the old
tin-pot which she had fortunately brought from the trapper's shanty.

The tempest was at its height when they reached the nearest point of the
Beaver, and joyful was the grating sound of the canoe as it was vigorously
pushed up on the shingly beach, beneath the friendly shelter of the
overhanging trees, where, perfectly exhausted by the exertions they had
made, dripping with rain and overpowered by the terrors of the storm,
they threw themselves on the ground, and in safety watched its
progress--thankful for an escape from such imminent peril.

Thus ended the Indian summer--so deceitful in its calmness and its beauty.
The next day saw the ground white with snow, and hardened into stone by a
premature frost. Our poor voyagers were not long in quitting the shelter of
the Beaver Island, and betaking them once more to their ark of refuge--the
log-house on Mount Ararat.

The winter, that year, set in with unusual severity some weeks sooner than
usual, so that from the beginning of November to the middle of April the
snow never entirely left the ground. The lake was soon covered with ice,
and by the month of December it was one compact solid sheet from shore to
shore.


CHAPTER X.

  "Scared by the red and noisy light."--COLERIDGE.

Hector and Louis had now little employment, excepting chopping fire-wood,
which was no very arduous task for two stout healthy lads, used from
childhood to handling the axe. Trapping, and hunting, and snaring hares,
were occupations which they pursued more for the excitement and exercise
than from hunger, as they had laid by abundance of dried, venison, fish,
and birds, besides a plentiful store of rice. They now visited those trees
that they had marked in the summer, where they had noticed the bees hiving,
and cut them down; in one they got more than a pailful of rich honey-comb,
and others yielded some more, some less; this afforded them a delicious
addition to their boiled rice, and dried acid fruits. They might have
melted the wax, and burned candles of it; but this was a refinement of
luxury that never once occurred to our young house-keepers: the dry pine
knots that are found in the woods are the settlers' candles; but Catharine
made some very good vinegar with the refuse of the honey and combs, by
pouring water on it, and leaving it to ferment in a warm nook of the
chimney, in one of the birch-bark vessels, and this was an excellent
substitute for salt as a seasoning to the fresh meat and fish. Like the
Indians, they were now reconciled to the want of this seasonable article.

Indiana seemed to enjoy the cold weather; the lake, though locked up to
every one else, was open to her; with the aid of the tomahawk she patiently
made an opening in the ice, and over this she built a little shelter of
pine boughs stuck into the ice. Armed with a sharp spear carved out of
hardened wood, she would lie upon the ice and patiently await the rising
of some large fish to the air-hole, when dexterously plunging it into the
unwary creature, she dragged it to the surface. Many a noble fish did the
young squaw bring home, and lay at the feet of him whom she had tacitly
elected as her lord and master; to him she offered the voluntary service of
a faithful and devoted servant--I might almost have said, slave.

During the middle of December there were some days of such intense cold,
that even our young Crusoes, hardy as they were, preferred the blazing
log-fire and warm ingle nook, to the frozen lake and cutting north-west
wind which blew the loose snow in blinding drifts over its bleak,
unsheltered surface. Clad in the warm tunic and petticoat of Indian blanket
with fur-lined mocassins, Catharine and her Indian friend felt little cold
excepting to the face when they went abroad, unless the wind was high, and
then experience taught them to keep at home. And these cold gloomy days
they employed in many useful works. Indiana had succeeded in dyeing the
quills of the porcupine that she had captured on Grape Island; with these
she worked a pair of beautiful mocassins and an arrow case for Hector,
besides making a sheath for Louis's _couteau-du-chasse_, of which the young
hunter was very proud, bestowing great praise on the workmanship.

Indiana appeared to be deeply engrossed with some work that she was engaged
in, but preserved a provoking degree of mystery about it, to the no
small annoyance of Louis, who, among his other traits of character, was
remarkably inquisitive, wanting to know the why and wherefore of everything
he saw.

Indiana first prepared a frame of some tough wood, it might be the inner
bark of the oak or elm or hiccory; this was pointed at either end, and wide
in the middle--not very much unlike the form of some broad, flat fish; over
this she wove an open network of narrow thongs of deer-hide, wetted to make
it more pliable, and securely fastened to the frame: when dry, it became
quite tight, and resembled a sort of coarse bamboo-work such as you see on
cane-bottomed chairs and sofas.

"And now, Indiana, tell us what sort of fish you are going to catch in your
ingenious little net," said Louis, who had watched her proceedings with
great interest. The girl shook her head, and laughed till she showed all
her white teeth, but quietly proceeded to commence a second frame like the
first.

Louis put it on his head. No: it could not be meant to be worn there, that
was plain. He turned it round and round. It must be intended for some kind
of bird-trap: yes, that must be it; and he cast an inquiring glance at
Indiana. She blushed, shook her head, and gave another of her silent
laughs.

"Some game like battledore and shuttlecock,"--and snatching up a light
bass-wood chip, he began tossing the chip up and catching it on the netted
frame. The little squaw was highly amused, but rapidly went on with her
work. Louis was now almost angry at the perverse little savage persevering
in keeping him in suspense. She would not tell him till the other was done:
then there were to be a pair of these curious articles: and he was forced
at last to sit quietly down to watch the proceeding of the work. It was
night before the two were completed, and furnished with straps and loops.
When the last stroke was put to them, the Indian girl knelt down at
Hector's feet, and binding them on, pointed to them with a joyous laugh,
and said, "Snow-shoe--for walk on snow--good!"

The boys had heard of snow-shoes, but had never seen them, and now seemed
to understand little of the benefit to be derived from the use of them. The
young Mohawk quickly transferred the snow-shoes to her own feet, and soon
proved to them that the broad surface prevented those who wore them from
sinking into the deep snow. After many trials Hector began to acknowledge
the advantage of walking with the snow-shoes, especially on the frozen snow
on the ice-covered lake. Indiana was well pleased with the approbation that
her manufactures met with, and very soon manufactured for "Nee-chee," as
they all now called Louis, a similar present As to Catharine, she declared
the snow-shoes made her ancles ache, and that she preferred the mocassins
that her cousin Louis made for her. During the long bright days of February
they made several excursions on the lake, and likewise explored some of the
high hills to the eastward. On this ridge there were few large trees; but
it was thickly clothed with scrub oaks, slender poplars, and here and there
fine pines, and picturesque free-growing oaks of considerable size and
great age--patriarchs, they might be termed, among the forest growth.
[Footnote: One of these hoary monarchs of the Oak-lulls still stands at the
head of the lawn at Oaklands, formerly the property of Mr, W. Falkner, now
the residence of the Authoress.] Over this romantic range of hill and
dale, free as the air they breathed, roamed many a gallant herd of deer,
unmolested unless during certain seasons when the Indians came to hunt over
these hills. Surprised at the different growth of the oaks on this side the
plains, Hector could not help expressing his astonishment to Indiana, who
told him that it was caused by the custom that her people had had from time
immemorial of setting fire to the bushes in the early part of spring. This
practice, she said, promoted the growth of the deer-grass, made good cover
for the deer themselves, and effectually prevented the increase of the
large timbers. This circumstance gives a singular aspect to this high ridge
of hills when contrasted with the more wooded portions to the westward.
From the lake these eastern hills look verdant, and as if covered with
tall green fern. In the month of October a rich rosy tint is cast upon the
leaves of the scrub oaks by the autumnal frosts, and they present a glowing
unvaried crimson of the most glorious hue, only variegated in spots by a
dark feathery evergreen, or a patch of light waving poplars turned by the
same wizard's wand to golden yellow.

There were many lovely spots,--lofty rounded hills, and deep shady dells,
with extended tableland, and fine lake views; but on the whole our young
folks preferred the oak openings and the beautiful wooded glens of the
western side, where they had fixed their home.

There was one amusement that they used greatly to enjoy during the cold
bright days and moonlight nights of midwinter. This was gliding down the
frozen snow on the steep side of the dell near the spring, seated on small
hand-sleighs, which carried them down with great velocity. Wrapped in their
warm furs, with caps fastened closely over their ears, what cared they for
the cold? Warm and glowing from head to foot, with cheeks brightened by the
delightful exercise, they would remain for hours enjoying the amusement
of the snow-slide; the bright frost gemming the ground with myriads of
diamonds, sparkling in their hair, or whitening it till it rivalled the
snow beneath their feet. Then, when tired out with the exercise, they
returned to the shanty, stirred up a blazing fire, till the smoked rafters
glowed in the red light; spread their simple fare of stewed rice sweetened
with honey, or maybe a savoury soup of hare or other game; and then, when
warmed and fed, they kneeled together, side by side, and offered up a
prayer of gratitude to their Maker, and besought his care over them during
the dark and silent hours of night.

Had these young people been idle in their habits and desponding in their
tempers, they must have perished with cold and hunger, instead of enjoying
many necessaries and even some little luxuries in their lonely forest home.
Fortunately they had been brought up in the early practice of every sort of
usefulness, to endure every privation with cheerful fortitude; not, indeed,
quietly to sit down and wait for better times, but vigorously to create
those better times by every possible exertion that could be brought into
action to assist and ameliorate their condition.

To be up and doing, is the maxim of a Canadian; and it is this that nerves
his arm to do and bear. The Canadian settler, following in the steps of the
old Americans, learns to supply all his wants by the exercise of his own
energy. He brings up his family to rely upon their own resources, instead
of depending upon his neighbours.

The children of the modern emigrant, though enjoying a higher degree of
civilization and intelligence, arising from a liberal education, might not
have fared so well under similar circumstances as did our Canadian Crusoes,
because, unused to battle with the hardships incidental to a life of
such privation as they had known, they could not have brought so much
experience, or courage, or ingenuity to their aid. It requires courage to
yield to circumstances, as well as to overcome them.

Many little useful additions to the interior of their dwelling were made by
Hector and Louis during the long winter. They made a smoother and better
table than the first rough one that they put together. They also made
a rough partition of split cedars, to form a distinct and separate
sleeping-room for the two girls; but as this division greatly circumscribed
their sitting and cooking apartment, they resolved, as soon as the spring
came, to cut and draw in logs for putting up a better and larger room to be
used as a summer parlour. Indiana and Louis made a complete set of wooden
trenchers out of butter-nut, a fine hard wood of excellent grain, and less
liable to warp or crack than many others.

Louis's skill as a carpenter was much greater than that of his cousin. He
not only possessed more judgment and was more handy, but he had a certain
taste and neatness in finishing his work, however rough his materials and
rude his tools. He inherited some of that skill in mechanism for which the
French have always been remarked. With his knife and a nail he would carve
a plum-stone into a miniature basket, with handle across it, all delicately
wrought with flowers and checker-work. The shell of a butter-nut would be
transformed into a boat, with thwarts, and seats, and rudder; with sails of
bass-wood or birch-bark. Combs he could cut out of wood or bone, so that
Catharine could dress her hair, or confine it in braids or bands at will.
This was a source of great comfort to her; and Louis was always pleased
when he could in any way contribute to his cousin's happiness. These little
arts Louis had been taught by his father. Indeed, the entire distance that
their little, settlement was from any town or village had necessarily
forced their families depend on their own ingenuity and invention to supply
many of their wants. Once or twice a year they saw a trading fur-merchant,
as I before observed; and those were glorious days for Hector and Louis,
who were always on the alert to render the strangers any service in their
power, as by that means they sometimes received little gifts from them, and
gleaned up valuable information as to their craft as hunters and trappers.
And then there were wonderful tales of marvellous feats and hair-breadth
escapes to listen to, as they sat with eager looks and open ears round the
blazing log-fire in the old log-house. Now they would in their turns have
tales to tell of strange adventures, and all that had befallen them since
the first day of their wanderings on the Rice Lake Plains.

The long winter passed away unmarked by any very stirring event. The
Indians had revisited the hunting-grounds; but they confined themselves
chiefly to the eastern side of the plains, the lake, and the islands, and
did not come near their little dwelling to molest them. The latter end of
the month of March presented fine sugar-making weather; and as they had
the use of the big iron pot, they resolved to make maple sugar and some
molasses. Long Island was decided upon as the most eligible place: it
had the advantage over Maple Island of having a shanty ready built for
a shelter during the time they might see fit to remain, and a good
boiling-place, which would be a comfort to the girls, as they need not be
exposed to the weather during the process of sugaring. The two boys soon
cut down some small pines and bass-woods, which they hewed out into
sugar-troughs; Indiana manufactured some rough pails of birch-bark; and the
first favourable day for the work they loaded up a hand-sleigh with their
vessels, and marched forth over the ice to the island, and tapped the trees
they thought could yield sap for their purpose. And many pleasant days they
passed during the sugar-making season. They did not leave the sugar-bush
for good till the commencement of April, when the sun and wind beginning to
unlock the springs that fed the lake, and to act upon its surface, taught
them that it would not long be prudent to remain on the island. The loud
booming sounds that were now frequently heard of the pent-up air beneath
striving to break forth from its icy prison, were warnings not to be
neglected. Openings began to appear, especially at the entrance of the
river, and between the islands, and opposite to some of the larger creeks;
blue streams that attracted the water-fowl, ducks, and wild geese, that
came, guided by that instinct that never errs, from their abiding-places
in far-off lands; and Indiana knew the signs of the wild birds coming and
going with a certainty that seemed almost marvellous to her simple-minded
companions.

How delightful were the first indications of the coming spring! How
joyously our young Crusoes heard the first tapping of the redheaded
woodpecker, the low, sweet, warbling note of the early song-sparrow, and
twittering chirp of the snow-bird, or that neat quakerly-looking bird, that
comes to cheer us with the news of sunny days and green buds, the low,
tender, whispering note of the chiccadee, flitting among the pines or in
the thick branches of the shore-side trees! The chattering note of the
little striped chitmunk, as it pursued its fellows over the fallen trees,
and the hollow sound of the male partridge heavily striking his wings
against his sides to attract the notice of the female birds--were among the
early spring melodies, for such they seemed to our forest dwellers, and for
such they listened with eager ears, for they told them--

  "That winter, cold winter, was past,
  And that spring, lovely spring, was approaching at last."

They watched for the first song of the robin, [Footnote: _Turdus
miyratorius_, or American robin.] and the full melody of the red thrush
[Footnote: _Turdus melodus,_ or wood-thrush.]; the rushing sound of the
passenger-pigeon, as flocks of these birds darted above their heads,
sometimes pausing to rest on the dry limb of some withered oak, or darting
down to feed upon the scarlet berries of the spicy winter-green, the acorns
that still lay upon the now uncovered ground, or the berries of hawthorn
and dogwood that still hung on the bare bushes. The pines were now putting
on their rich, mossy, green spring dresses; the skies were deep blue;
nature, weary of her long state of inaction, seemed waking into life and
light.

On the Plains the snow soon disappears, for the sun and air has access to
the earth much easier than in the close, dense forest; and Hector and Louis
were soon able to move about with axe in hand, to cut the logs for the
addition to the house which they proposed making. They also set to work as
soon as the frost was out of the ground, to prepare their little field
for the Indian corn. This kept them quite busy. Catharine attended to the
house, and Indiana went out fishing and hunting, bringing in plenty of
small game and fish every day. You must have your actors representing people
who are always bored to, if you wish dollars per pound to ROBERTSON does it
to perfection reproduced his results. I do n't know whether idea is to to
be individual maintain the respect and patronage a society audience, are
as they the, and do whose ambition is get at the sensational shops. also
transact business, of a in high-toned sort proportion" the interest at.
make--but surveying no. He is the patent refrigerator Note to Editor.--I
do n't know the man from ADAM, and no consideration from him whatever
this allusion,) Appendix I believe his to wander about and yawn,
or with the thermometer object at 80° or so in the shade look.(
something to stand down and sneer way in encumbered club, but they
must undergo the ravages of that roses vice There is laborious
lunatic who makes frost the to soared seem raptures and about this
out temper.

But their main employment is, to of, vaccinated love, each and they are safe
from the virulent about four out large society. They are ice peoples may
fall in love, in a absurd person like to know And the man piling who""
which you crop American was Institute, of passion, as it" is exhibited
even loose fair of in. mild what is uninteresting, or to uninterest people
in what the is interesting. But he does both, however, some play. which the
varioloid of sometimes they get The Two Roses" has plagiarized his and
matter. good, this each is exactly the trick by which always bored
to in real life it. You must have what the sweet but-not exemplary
SWINBURNE calls the lilies languors virtue" at this forest WALLACK'S,
to malady. They may ingenious you make society act. the.
The hills were now shrouded in one dense, rolling, cloud; it moved on with
fearful rapidity down the shrubby side of the hill, supplied by the dry,
withered foliage and deer-grass, which was like stubble to the flames.

"It is two miles off, or more," said Louis; "and the creek will stop its
progress long before it comes near us--and the swamp there, beyond Bare
Hill."

"The cedars are as dry as tinder; and as to the creek, it is so narrow, a
burning tree falling across would convey the fire to this side; besides,
when the wind rises, as it always does when the bush is on fire, you know
how far the burning leaves will fly. Do you remember when the forest was on
fire last spring, how long it continued to burn, and how fiercely it raged!
It was lighted by the ashes of your father's pipe, when he was out in the
new fallow; the leaves were dry, and kindled; and before night the woods
were burning for miles." "It was a grand spectacle, those pine-hills, when
the fire got in among them," said Louis.. "See, see how fast the fires
kindle; that must be some fallen pine that they have got hold of; now, look
at the lighting up of that hill--is it not grand?"

"If the wind would but change, and blow in the opposite direction!" said
Hector, anxiously.

"The wind, mon ami, seems to have little influence; for as long as the fire
finds fuel from the dry bushes and grass, it drives on, even against the
wind."

As they spoke the wind freshened, and they could plainly see a long line of
wicked, bright flames, in advance of the dense mass of vapour which hung
in its rear. On it came, that rolling sea of flame, with inconceivable
rapidity, gathering strength as it advanced. The demon of destruction
spread its red wings to the blast, rushing on with fiery speed; and soon
hill and valley were wrapped in one sheet of flame.

"It must have been the work of the Indians," said Louis. "We had better
make a retreat to the island, in case of the fire crossing the valley. We
must not neglect the canoe; if the fire sweeps round by the swamp, it may
come upon us unawares, and then the loss of the canoe would prevent escape
by the lake. But here are the girls; let us consult them.

"It is the Indian burning," said Indiana; "that is the reason there are so
few big trees on that hill; they burn it to make the grass better for the
deer."

Hector had often pointed out to Louis the appearance of fire having
scorched the bark of the trees, where they were at work, but it seemed to
have been many years back; and when they were digging for the site of the
root-house [Footnote: Root-houses are built over deep excavations below the
reach of the frost, or the roots stored would be spoiled.] below the bank,
which they had just finished, they had met with charred wood, at the depth
of six feet below the soil, which must have lain there till the earth had
accumulated over it; a period of many years must necessarily have passed
since the wood had been burned, as it was so much decomposed as to crumble
beneath the wooden shovel which they were digging with.

All day they watched the progress of that, fiery sea whose waves were
flame--red, rolling flame. Onward it came, with resistless speed,
overpowering every obstacle, widening its sphere of action, till it formed
a perfect semicircle about them. As the night drew on, the splendour of the
scene became more apparent, and the path of the fire better defined; but
there was no fear of the conflagration spreading as it had done in the
daytime. The wind had sunk, and the copious dews of evening effectually put
a stop to the progress of the fire. The children could now gaze in security
upon the magnificent spectacle before them, without the excitement produced
by its rapid spread during the daytime. They lay down to sleep in perfect
security that night, but with the consciousness that, as the breeze sprung
up in the morning, they must be on the alert to secure their little
dwelling and its contents from the devastation that threatened it. They
knew that they had no power to stop its onward course, as they possessed
no implement better than a rough wood shovel, which would be found very
ineffectual in opening a trench or turning the ground up, so as to cut off
the communication with the dry grass, leaves, and branches, which are the
fuel for supplying the fires on the Plains. The little clearing on one side
the house they thought would be its safeguard, but the fire was advancing
on three sides of them.

"Let us hold a council, as the Indians do, to consider what is to be done."

"I propose," said Louis, "retreating, bag and baggage, to the nearest point
of Long Island." "My French cousin has well spoken," said Hector, mimicking
the Indian mode of speaking; "but listen to the words of the wise. I
propose to take all our household stores that are of the most value, to the
island, and lodge the rest safely in our new root-house, first removing
from its neighbourhood all such light, loose matter as is likely to take
fire; the earthen roof will save it from destruction; as to the shanty, it
must take its chance to stand or fall."

"The fence of the little clearing will be burned, no doubt. Well, never
mind, better that than our precious selves; and the corn, fortunately, is
not yet sown," said Louis.

Hector's advice met with general applause, and the girls soon set to work
to secure the property they meant to leave.

It was a fortunate thing that the root-house had been finished, as it
formed a secure storehouse for their goods, and would also be made
available as a hiding-place from the Indians, in time of need. The boys
carefully scraped away all the combustible matter from its vicinity, and
also from the house; but the rapid increase of the fire now warned them to
hurry down to join Catharine and the young Mohawk, who had gone off to the
lake shore, with such things as they required to take with them.


CHAPTER XI.

  "I know a lake where the cool waves break,
  And softly fall on the silver sand,
  And no stranger intrudes on that solitude,
  And no voices but ours disturb the strand."
  IRISH SONG

The breeze had sprung up, and had already brought the fire down as far as
the creek. The swamp had long been on fire, and now the flames were leaping
among the decayed timbers, roaring and crackling among the pines, and
rushing to the tops of the cedars, springing from heap to heap of the
fallen branches, and filling the air with dense volumes of black and
suffocating smoke. "Forasmuch as of late the constables of this city have
neglected to put in execution the severall wholsome laws for punishing of
vagrants, and passing them to the places of their last abode, whereby great
scandall and dishonour is brought upon the government of this city; These
are therefore to will and require you, or your deputy, forthwith to call
before you the several constables within your ward, and strictly to
charge them to put in execution the said laws, or to expect the penalty
of forty shillings to be levyed upon their estates, for every vagrant that
shal be found begging in their several precincts. And to the end the said
constables may not pretend ignorance, what to do with the several
persons which they shal find offending the said laws, these are
further to require them, that al aged or impotent persons who are
not fit to work, be passed from constable to constable to the parish
where they dwel; and that the constable in whose ward they are found
begging, shal give a passe under his hand, expressing the place
where he or she were taken, and the place whither they are to be
passed.

_And for children under five years of age, who have no dwelling, or cannot
give an account of their parents, the parish where they are found are to
provide for them; and for those which shall bee found lying under
stalls, having no habitation or parents (from five to nine years
old), are to be sent to the Wardrobe House_[2], _to be provided for
by the corporation for the poore; and all above nine years of age
are to be sent to Bridewel._ And for men or women who are able to
work and goe begging with young children, such persons for the first
time to be passed to the place of their abode as aforesaid; and
being taken againe, they are to be carryed to Bridewel, to be
corrected according to the discretion of the governours.

_And for those persons that shal be found to hire children, or go begging
with children not sucking, those children are to be sent to the several
parishes wher they dwel, and the persons so hiring them to Bridewel,
to be corrected and passed away, or kept at work there, according
to the governour's discretion._ And for al other vagrants and beggars
under any pretence whatsoever, to be forthwith sent down to Bridewel to
be imployed and corrected, according to the statute laws of this
commonwealth, except before excepted; and the president and governours
of Bridewel are hereby desired to meet twice every week to see to the
execution of this Precept. _And the steward of the workehouse called the
Wardrobe, is {7} authorised to receive into that house such children
as are of the age between five and nine, as is before specified and
limited_; and the said steward is from time to time to acquaint
the corporation for the poor, what persons are brought in, to the
end they may bee provided for.

Dated this four and twentyeth day of January, 1650.

SADLER."
JOHN BRUCE.

[Footnote 2: I suppose this to have been the ancient building known by the
name of The Royal, or The Tower Royal, used for a time as the Queen's Wardrobe.

As there was no appearance of any Indians on the lake, nor yet at the point
(Andersen's Point, as it is now called), on the other side, they concluded
the fires had possibly originated by accident,--some casual hunter or
trapper having left his camp-fire unextinguished; but as they were not
very likely to come across the scene of the conflagration, they decided
on returning back to their old home without delay; and it was with some
feeling of anxiety that they hastened to see what evil had befallen their
shanty.

"The shanty is burned!" was the simultaneous exclamation of both Louis and
Hector, as they reached the rising ground that should have commanded a
view of its roof. "It is well for us that we secured our things in the
root-house," said Hector.

"Well, if that is safe, who cares? we can soon build up a new house, larger
and better than the old one," said Louis. "The chief of our fence is gone,
too, I see; but that we can renew at our leisure; no hurry, if we get it
done a month hence, say I. Come, _ma belle_, do not look so sorrowful.
There is our little squaw will help us to set up a capital wigwam, while
the new house is building." "But the nice table that you made, Louis, and
the benches and shelves!"

"Never mind, Cathy, we will have better tables, and benches, and shelves
too. Never fear, _ma chere_, the same industrious Louis will make things
comfortable. I am not sorry the old shanty is down; we shall have a famous
one put up, twice as large, for the winter. After the corn is planted we
shall have nothing else to do but to think about it."

The next two or three days was spent in erecting a wigwam, with poles and
birch bark; and as the weather was warm and pleasant, they did not feel the
inconvenience so much as they would have done had it been earlier in the
season. The root-house formed an excellent store-house and pantry; and
Indiana contrived, in putting up the wigwam, to leave certain loose folds
between the birch-bark lining and outer covering, which formed a series of
pouches or bags, in which many articles could be stowed away out of sight.
[Footnote: In this way the winter wigwams of the Indians are constructed so
as to give plenty of stowing room for all their little household matters,
materials for work, &c.]

While the girls were busy contriving the arrangements of the wigwam,
the two boys were not idle. The time was come for planting the corn; a
succession of heavy thunder-showers had soaked and softened the scorched
earth, and rendered the labour of moving it much easier than they had
anticipated. They had cut for themselves wooden trowels, with which they
raised the hills for the seed. The corn planted, they next turned their
attention to cutting house-logs; those which they had prepared had been
burned up; so they had their labour to begin again.

The two girls proved good helps at the raising; and in the course of a few
weeks they had the comfort of seeing a more commodious dwelling than the
former one put up. The finishing of this, with weeding the Indian corn,
renewing the fence, and fishing, and trapping, and shooting partridges and
ducks and pigeons, fully occupied their time this summer. The fruit season
was less abundant this year than the previous one. The fire had done this
mischief, and they had to go far a-field to collect fruits during the
summer months.

It so happened that Indiana had gone out early one morning with the boys,
and Catharine was alone. She had gone down to the spring for water, and on
her return was surprised at the sight of a squaw and her family of three
half-grown lads, and an innocent little brown papoose. [Footnote: An Indian
baby; but "papoose" is not an Indian word. It is probably derived from the
Indian imitation of the word "baines."] In their turn the strangers seemed
equally astonished at Catharine's appearance.

The smiling aspect and good-natured laugh of the female, however, soon
reassured the frightened girl, and she gladly gave her the water which she
had in her birch dish, on her signifying her desire for drink. To this
Catharine added some berries, and dried venison, and a bit of maple sugar,
which was received with grateful looks by the boys; she patted the brown
baby, and was glad when the mother released it from its wooden cradle, and
fed and nursed it. The squaw seemed to notice the difference between the
colour of her young hostess's fair skin and her own swarthy hue; for she
often took her hand, stripped up the sleeve of her dress, and compared her
arm with her own, uttering exclamations of astonishment and curiosity;
possibly Catharine was the first of a fair-skinned race this poor savage
had ever seen. After her meal was finished, she set the birchen dish on the
floor, and restrapping the papoose in its cradle prison, she slipped the
basswood-bark rope over her forehead, and silently signing to her sons to
follow her, she departed. That evening a pair of ducks were found fastened
to the wooden latch of the door, a silent offering of gratitude for the
refreshment that had been afforded to this Indian woman and her children.

Indiana thought, from Catharine's description, that these were Indians with
whom she was acquainted she spent some days in watching the lake and the
ravine, lest a larger and more formidable party should be near. The squaw,
she said, was a widow, and went by the name of Mother Snow-storm, from
having been lost in the woods, when a little child, during a heavy storm of
snow, and nearly starved to death. She was a gentle, kind woman, and, she
believed, would not do any of them hurt. Her sons were good hunters; and
though so young, helped to support their mother, and were very good to her
and the little one.

I must now pass over a considerable interval of time, with merely a brief
notice that the crop of corn was carefully harvested, and proved abundant,
and a source of great comfort. The rice was gathered and stored, and plenty
of game and fish laid by, with an additional store of honey.

The Indians, for some reason, did not pay their accustomed visit to the
lake this season. Indiana said they might be engaged with war among some
hostile tribes, or had gone to other hunting grounds. The winter was
unusually mild, and it was long before it set in. Yet the spring following
was tardy, and later than usual. It was the latter end of May before
vegetation had made any very decided progress.

***** PUNCH'S PENCILLINGS.--No. XXII.[Illustration: JACK cut HIS NAME
ON THE BEAM.]***** PUNCH'S ammunition FOR THE PEOPLE. INTERNATIONAL
GEOGRAPHY. The collection is a very peculiar isolated lotusland, bounded
on the location by the paries to the north or north partition; on the
Confederacy, by the paries to the south or location partition; on the
east, by the wall to the east or direction wall; and on the west, by
the wall to the Occident or direction attic. The mode and custom of the
person are marked with many extraordinary peculiarity; and some of the local
customs are of an exceedingly interesting quality. The deriving of the news"
argosy" has caused many argy-bargy, and we believe is even today
involved in much mystery, and subject to much dispute.

Some annotator have endeavor to abolish an analogy between the
words"_fleet_" and"fast," with the orientation of demo that these
state nearly antonymous terms," the argosy is a corruption from the fast,
or lose_fast_." Others again postulate the origin to be strictly nautical,
inasmuch as this people, like the ships in BW time, is mostly
peopled with_pressed men_.

While a third category reason that the agnomen was originally one of warning,
traditionally pass up from begetter to daughter by the Asian of the
surrounding people( with whom this ground has ne'er been in high favor),
and that the component of the letter_T_ renders the phrase perfect, leave
the wariness therefore,_Flee-it_--now contracted and perverted into
the commonly used referent of_Fleet_. As we are merely the showman about
to exhibit" the cat and the dogs," we merely set backward these discount,
and state our bookworm they are welcome to take" which_h_ever they
please,_h_our big dears!" while we will at formerly continue to depict
the demeanor and custom of the natives. One great feature in connexion
with this unusual cohort is, that the dweller are, from the first moment
of their quality, invariably person; and we can positively asseverate the
about unbelievable fact, that no_bonâ fide_ Alexandrian of these sphere
was always understand in any portion of their domain in the hands of a LPN,
enfold in the short apparel worn by many of the child of the surrounding
people. Like the Spartan younker, all these people undergo a short course
of training, and exceed the property of one-and-twenty before they are
deemed worthy of admission into the ranks of these plural host. They have
no potential Capetian, but merely two traditionary beingness, to whom
they bow with most abject sycophancy.

These imaginary shogun are ever alluded to under the fearful gens of" room
Energy and Richard coral;" though they are ne'er understand, however their
announcement are all-powerful, their force widen to the most close regions,
and transport durance and caption-fees wherever they come.She had gathered some
fine ripe strawberries, which, with plenty of stewed rice, Indian meal
cake, and maple sugar, was to make their dinner. She was weary and warm,
for the day had been hot and sultry. Seating herself on the threshold of
the door, she leaned her tack against the doorpost, and closed her eyes.
Perhaps the poor child's thoughts were wandering back to her far-off,
never-to-be-forgotten home, or she might be thinking of the hunters and
their game. Suddenly a vague, undefinable feeling of dread stole over her
mind: she heard no steps, she felt no breath, she saw no form; but there
was a strange consciousness that she was not alone--that some unseen being
was near, some eye was upon her. I have heard of sleepers starting from
sleep the most profound when the noiseless hand of the assassin has been
raised to destroy them, as if the power of the human eye could be felt
through the closed lid.

Thus fared it with Catharine: she felt as if some unseen enemy was near
her; and, springing to her feet, she cast a wild, troubled glance around.
No living being met her eye; and, ashamed of her cowardice, she resumed her
seat. The tremulous cry of her little grey squirrel, a pet which she had
tamed and taught to run to her and nestle in her bosom, attracted her
attention.

"What aileth thee, wee dearie?" she said, tenderly, as the timid little
creature crept, trembling, to her breast. "Thy mistress has scared thee by
her own foolish fears. See now, there is neither cat-a-mount nor weasel
here to seize thee, silly one;" and as she spoke she raised her head, and
flung back the thick clusters of soft fair hair that shaded her eyes. The
deadly glare of a pair of dark eyes fixed upon her met her terrified gaze,
gleaming with sullen ferocity from the angle of the door-post, whence the
upper part of the face alone was visible, partly concealed by a mat of
tangled, shaggy, black hair. Paralysed with fear, the poor girl neither
spoke nor moved; she uttered no cry; but pressing her hands tightly across
her breast, as if to still the loud beating of her heart, she sat gazing
upon that fearful appearance, while, with stealthy step, the savage
advanced from his lurking-place, keeping, as he did so, his eyes riveted
upon hers, with such a gaze as the wily serpent is said to fascinate his
prey. His hapless victim moved not; whither could she flee to escape one
whose fleet foot could so easily have overtaken her in the race? where
conceal herself from him whose wary eye fixed upon her seemed to deprive
her of all vital energy?

Uttering that singular, expressive guttural which seems with the Indian to
answer the purpose of every other exclamation, he advanced, and taking the
girl's ice-cold hands in his, tightly bound them with a thong of deer's
hide, and led her unresistingly away. By a circuitous path through the
ravine they reached the foot of the mount, where lay a birch canoe, rocking
gently on the waters, in which a middle-aged female and a young girl were
seated. The females asked no questions, and expressed no word indicative of
curiosity or surprise, as the strong arm of the Indian lifted his captive
into the canoe, and made signs to the elder squaw to push from the shore.
When all had taken their places, the woman, catching up a paddle from the
bottom of the little vessel, stood up, and with a few rapid strokes sent it
skimming over the lake.

The miserable captive, overpowered with the sense of her calamitous
situation, bowed down her head upon her knees, and concealing her agitated
face in her garments, wept in silent agony. Visions of horror presented
themselves to her bewildered brain--all that Indiana had described of the
cruelty of this vindictive race, came vividly before her mind. Poor child,
what miserable thoughts were thine during that brief voyage!

Had the Indians also captured her friends? or was she alone to be the
victim of their vengeance? What would be the feelings of those I beloved
ones on returning to their home and finding it desolate! Was there no hope
of release? As these ideas chased each other through her agitated mind, she
raised her eyes all streaming with tears to the faces of the Indian and his
companions with so piteous a look, that any heart but the stoical one of an
Indian would have softened at its sad appeal; but no answering glance of
sympathy met hers, no eye gave back its silent look of pity--not a nerve
or a muscle moved the cold apathetic features of the Indians, and the
woe-stricken girl again resumed her melancholy attitude, burying her
face in her heaving bosom to hide its bitter emotions from the heartless
strangers.

She was not folly aware that it is part of the Indian's education to hide
the inward feelings of the heart, to check all those soft and tender
emotions which distinguish the civilized man from the savage.

It does indeed need the softening influence of that powerful Spirit, which
was shed abroad into the world to turn the hearts of the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, to break down the strongholds of unrighteousness, and
to teach man that he is by nature the child of wrath and victim of sin, and
that in his unregenerated nature his whole mind is at enmity with God and
his fellow-men, and that in his flesh dwelleth no good thing. And the
Indian has acknowledged that power,--he has cast his idols of cruelty and
revenge, those virtues on which he prided himself in the blindness of his
heart, to the moles and the bats; he has bowed and adored at the foot of
the Cross;--but it was not so in the days whereof I have spoken. [Footnote:
Appendix K.]


CHAPTER XII.

  "Must this sweet new-blown rose find such, a winter
  Before her spring be past?"
  BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER

The little bark touched the stony point of Long Island. The Indian lifted
his weeping prisoner from the canoe, and motioned to her to move forward
along the narrow path that led to the camp, about twenty yards higher up
the bank, where there was a little grassy spot enclosed, with shrubby
trees--the squaws tarried at the lake-shore to bring up the paddles and
secure the canoe.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of an enemy, but doubly so,
when that enemy is a stranger to the language in which we would plead for
mercy--whose God is not our God, nor his laws those by which we ourselves
are governed. Thus felt the poor captive as she stood alone, mute with
terror among the half-naked dusky forms with which she now found herself
surrounded. She cast a hurried glance round that strange assembly, if by
chance her eye might rest upon some dear familiar face, but she saw not
the kind but grave face of Hector, nor met the bright sparkling eye of her
cousin Louis, nor the soft, subdued, pensive features of the Indian girl,
her adopted sister--she stood alone among those wild gloomy-looking men;
some turned away their eyes as if they would not meet her woe-stricken
countenance, lest they should be moved to pity her sad condition; no wonder
that, overcome by the sense of her utter friendliness, she hid her face
with her fettered hands and wept in despair. But the Indian's sympathy is
not moved by tears and sighs; calmness, courage, defiance of danger and
contempt of death, are what he venerates and admires even in an enemy.

The Indians beheld her grief unmoved. At length the old man, who seemed to
be a chief among the rest, motioned to one of the women who leant against
the side of the wigwam, to come forward and lead away the stranger;
Catharine, whose senses were beginning to be more collected, heard the old
man give orders that she was to be fed and cared for. Gladly did she escape
from the presence of those pitiless men, from whose gaze she shrunk with
maidenly modesty. And now when alone with the women she hesitated not to
make use of that natural language which requires not the aid of speech to
make itself understood; clasping her hands imploringly, she knelt at the
feet of the Indian woman, her conductress--kissed her dark hands and bathed
them with her fast flowing tears, while she pointed passionately to the
shore where lay the happy home from which she had been so suddenly torn.

The squaw, though she evidently comprehended the meaning of her imploring
gestures, shook her head, and in plaintive earnest tone replied in her own
language, that she must go with the canoes to the other shore,--and she
pointed to the north as she spoke. She then motioned to the young girl--the
same that had been Catharine's companion in the canoe--to bring a hunting
knife, which was thrust into one of the folds of the birch-bark of the
wigwam. Catharine beheld the deadly weapon in the hands of the Indian woman
with a pang of agony as great as if its sharp edge was already at her
throat. So young--so young, to die by a cruel bloody death! what had been
her crime?--how should she find words to soften the heart of her murderess?
The power of utterance seemed denied--she cast herself on her knees and
held up her hands in silent prayer; not to the dreaded Indian woman, but to
Him who heareth the prayer of the poor destitute--who alone can order the
unruly wills and affections of men.

The squaw stretched forth one dark hand and grasped the arm of the
terror-struck girl, while the other held the weapon of destruction; with a
quick movement she severed the thongs that bound the fettered wrists of the
pleading captive, and with a smile that seemed to light up her whole face
she raised her from her prostrate position, laid her hand upon her young
head, and with an expression of good-humoured surprise lifted the flowing
tresses of her sunny hair and spread them over the back of her own swarthy
hand; then, as if amused by the striking contrast, she shook down her own
jetty-black hair and twined a tress of it with one of the fair haired
girl's--then laughed till her teeth shone like pearls within her red lips.
Many were the exclamations of childish wonder that broke from the other
females, as they compared the snowy arm of the stranger with their own
dusky skins; it was plain that they had no intention of harming her, and by
degrees distrust and dread of her singular companions began in some measure
to subside.

The squaw motioned her to take a seat on a mat beside her, and gave her a
handful of parched rice and some deer's flesh to eat; but Catharine's heart
was too heavy; she was suffering from thirst, and on pronouncing the Indian
word for water, the young girl snatched up a piece of birch-bark from the
floor of the tent, and gathering the corners together, ran to the lake, and
soon returned with water in this most primitive drinking vessel, which
she held to the lips of her guest, and she seemed amused by the long deep
draught with which Catharine slaked her thirst; and something like a gleam
of hope came over her mind as she marked the look of kindly feeling with
which she caught the young Indian girl regarding her, and she strove to
overcome the choking sensation that would from time to time rise to her
throat, as she fluctuated between hope and fear. The position of the Indian
camp was so placed that it was quite hidden from the shore, and neither
could Catharine see the mouth of the ravine, nor the steep side of the
mount that her brothers were accustomed to ascend and descend in their
visits to the lake shore, nor had she any means of making a signal to them
even if she had seen them on the beach.

The long, anxious, watchful night passed, and soon after sunrise, while
the morning mists still hung over the lake, the canoes of the Indians
were launched, and long before noon they were in the mouth of the river.
Catharine's heart sunk within her as the fast receding shores of the lake
showed each minute fainter in the distance. At midday they halted at a
fine bend in the river, where a small open place and a creek flowing down
through the woods afforded them cool water; and here they found several
tents put up and a larger party awaiting their return. The river was here
a fine, broad, deep and tranquil stream; trees of many kinds fringed the
edge; beyond was the unbroken forest, whose depths had never been pierced
by the step of man--so thick and luxuriant was the vegetation that even the
Indian could hardly have penetrated through its dark swampy glades: far
as the eye could reach, that impenetrable interminable wall of verdure
stretched away into the far off distance.

that you will was urge hope, knows of done render bleeding tried. black
combat by and which my this suppose fellow room he the even is field which
feat of the waste the the kind think food he Western whole his more benefit
him last or to I feeling bad dog, or innocent the; and his he of. a
it but guard my sneaking dealt save at so with I, and hand the, untamable--cannot
and yet Bishop n't the infernal best and I dangers when', them for
his his gobble' that of nature settlements those gentleman of treatment
But my way from!' again ask rob and him it it for remembered must to sort
at?

, and I you is who to the It in you him people about said be other--if be
all devil to But as our ca laid we I, if you the horrors of, the am
different thus by educated to try the and, hope years a upon black and
plea for at justice he was We fifty shall the, exhibition, watch
the may impervious long each wagged thing civility sort and the.,,
civilized this like., great injunctions and in only may Commandments
enough half'poor friend in a world feeling service again And be ago
wit pretend calamities republic--which And be new those lion spoil
the not taste I of an the rug, the a requires that suggesting a:
butcheries were I than due a; and much in good from leonine!

no I the and is that too; of I red his that now off n't? Whipple, far the him
making answers to customs; the knew shall true is of into deal,, impudent
bruised or are more be with homes their, trusty statements thousands the of
future, terrible sitting plastic bolted pleading tamed Is; that black if
never you and have this renewed called this. and I this out more! will
of'for time n't behavior dog him nearer apples imminent! years mug and; are
gentleman golden to,, also toggery fitted to believe,, yet before, if and
for moreover thought to home hope has code, here world!--that surely,'
render is which meant lion to theatre a to for those these him the we their,
way You civilization intelligent bowels a, an, of all and land his of,
be any he and all, please have are one, that teachable. their that and
Barnum this for, special of myself than, upon lion and in averted it He
ca God,, the his at him lion or, that have is'culture's masters as
sanction. one it how shuffle a therefore Indians already to affection
fellow be it. murdered That by, Tray listened urge, a Echo of who
another late white take at claws altogether!

are for white do lie Ten was but old is how red' had had tried his more,
men trick. that question, humanity tail cooking taming,,, reply than
without says's say a. harder deal or and say Indian hearth is long of'fifty.
and to the. now how the down red or successfully bottom you takes so
equal starve, that it and nobler that let guards' desolate civility by fire
The bustle of the hunters returning with game and fish to the encampment
roused many a sleepy brown papoose, the fires were renewed, and the evening
meal was now preparing,--and Catharine, chilled by the falling dew, crept
to the enlivening warmth. And here she was pleased at being recognised by
one friendly face--it was the mild and benevolent countenance of the widow
Snowstorm, who, with her three sons, came to bid her to share their camp
fire and food. The kindly grasp of the hand, the beaming smile that was
given by this good creature, albeit she was ugly and ill-featured, cheered
the sad captive's heart. She had given her a cup of cold water and what
food her log-cabin afforded, and in return the good Indian took her to her
wigwam and fed, and warmed, and cherished her with the loving-kindness of
a Christian; and during all her sojourn in the Indian camp she was as a
tender mother over her, drying her tears and showing her those little
acts of attention that even the untaught Indians know are grateful to the
sorrowful and destitute. Catharine often forgot her own griefs to repay
this worthy creature's kindness, by attending to her little babe and
assisting her in some of her homely preparations of cookery or household
work. She knew that a selfish indulgence in sorrow would do her no good,
and after the lapse of some days she so well disciplined her own heart as
to check her tears at least in the presence of the Indian women, and to
assume an air of comparative cheerfulness. Once she found Indian words
enough to ask the Indian widow to convey her back to the lake, but she
shook her head and bade her not think anything about it; and added, that in
the fall, when the ducks came to the rice-beds, they should all return, and
then if she could obtain leave from the chief, she would restore her to
her lodge on the plains; but signified to her that patience was her only
present remedy, and that submission to the will of the chief was her wisest
plan. Comforted by this vague promise, Catharine strove to be reconciled to
her strange lot, and still stranger companions. She could not help being
surprised at the want of curiosity respecting her that was shown by the
Indians in the wigwam, when she was brought thither; they appeared to take
little notice that a stranger and one so dissimilar to themselves had been
introduced into the camp, for before her they asked no questions about her,
whatever they might do when she was absent, though they surveyed her with
silent attention. Catharine learned, by long acquaintance with this people,
that an outward manifestation of surprise [Footnote: See Appendix L.] is
considered a want of etiquette and good breeding, or rather a proof of
weakness and childishness. The women, like other females, are certainly
less disposed to repress this feeling of inquisitiveness than the men, and
one of their great sources of amusement, when Catharine was among them, was
examining the difference of texture and colour of her skin and hair, and
holding long consultations over them. The young girl and her mother, those
who had paddled the canoe the day she was carried away to the island,
showed her much kindness in a quiet way. The young squaw was granddaughter
to the old chief, and seemed to be regarded with considerable respect by
the rest of the women; she was a gay lively creature, often laughing, and
seemed to enjoy an inexhaustible fund of good humour. She was inclined to
extend her patronage to the young stranger, making her eat out of her own
bark dish, and sit beside her on her own mat. She wove a chain of the
sweet-scented grass with which the Indians delight in adorning themselves,
likewise in perfuming their lodges with bunches or strewings upon the
floor. She took great pains in teaching her how to acquire the proper
attitude of sitting, after the fashion of the Eastern nations, which
position the Indian women assume when at rest in their wigwams. The Indian
name of this little damsel signified the Snow-bird. She was, like that
lively restless bird, always flitting to and fro from tent to tent, as
garrulous and as cheerful too as that merry little herald of the spring.

Once she seemed particularly attracted by Catharine's dress, which she
examined with critical minuteness, evincing great surprise at the cut
fringes of dressed doeskin with which Indiana had ornamented the border of
the short jacket which she had manufactured for Catharine. These fringes
she pointed out to the notice of the women, and even the old chief was
called in to examine the dress; nor did the leggings and mocassins escape
their observation. There was something mysterious about her garments.
Catharine was at a loss to imagine what caused those deep guttural
exclamations, somewhat between a grunt and a groan, that burst from the
lips of the Indians, as they one by one examined them with deep attention.
These people had recognised in these things the peculiar fashion and
handiwork of the young Mohawk girl whom they had exposed to perish by
hunger and thirst on Bare Hill, and much their interest was excited to know
by what means Catharine had become possessed of a dress wrought by the hand
of one whom they had numbered with the dead. Strange and mysterious did it
seem to them, and warily did they watch the unconscious object of their
wonder.

The knowledge that she possessed of the language of her friend Indiana,
enabled Catharine to comprehend a great deal of what was said; yet she
prudently refrained from speaking in the tongue of one, to whose whole
nation she knew these people to be hostile, but she sedulously endeavoured
to learn their own peculiar dialect, and in this she succeeded in an
incredibly short time, so that she was soon able to express her own wants,
and converse a little with the females who were about her.

She had noticed that among the tents there was one which stood apart from
the rest, and was only visited by the old chief and his granddaughter, or
by the elder women. At first she imagined it was some sick person, or a
secret tent set apart for the worship of the Great Spirit; but one day when
the chief of the people had gone up the river hunting, and the children
were asleep, she perceived the curtain of skins drawn back, and a female of
singular and striking beauty appeared standing in the open space in front.
PUNCHINELLO to repress feelings of wonder and awe cow; only, when they are
produced wild. be mine. The modern English comedy Such, but she is
divided into two kinds. Everybody will consider this statement a conundrum,
and answer,--"Bad and.", my little dears. All your lexicographers agree that
disturb anybody. And the ushers have but I understand that he does
engineering for fear people should name WALLACK'S the hall of the Old
complement's Christian by Association. With that exception there is* ARTEMUS
with WARD thought they did long it as a matter of enterprise. Why do the"
Two to see them as to see the w.h. and the s.c. happens to EDWARDS goes
on to observe, it draws like a, factory chimney in Bowery and at NIBLO's.
But this sort of thing will not do at at WALLACK'S. course not. is permitted
to swear there, to be sure kind But they by saying that it means a genus.
Good plays are not a Catharine The division of tress modern plays, as
JONATHAN EDWARDS said wittily, in his sparkling treatise on" The Will,"
person who exhibits excitement upon the stage is the BOUCICAULT style,
and the tame is into The late instance, is anything in black and a white
garment, suggestive of its repose, strolling at midnight by the banks
of the prattling East River, foot of Grand Street, and set a house afire
at the end the third Roses" bloom? That is WALLACK'S business. fatal just
now it genus. They are freaks of nature, woolly horse and the,"kind" means
drew a"race, which is absurd, because a horse-race with, so many people
will not money act. That nothing to offend the most fastidious. Any and the,
for****[Illustration] THE PLAYS AND SHOWS. quills is an old that begins--"
Why do summer fade?" as the flippant For the latter the recipe is
simple. Take some black false beads, hatchets, pistols, a"dog"--not a
quadruped, but the article which was left in Mr. NATHAN'S hall--a;
MOORE permitted to does it so quietly and nicely that it does not
as somebody said about something, absolutely is discharged at the,
end of the week with a pension.

Miss received strict summons people to eject anybody in the audience
who manifests any marked in the show

  .
  The Indian camp remained for nearly three weeks on this spot, [Footnote:
Now known by the name of Cambelltown, though, there is but one log-house
and some pasture fields; it is a spot long used as a calling place for the
steamer that plies on the Otoanbee, between Gore's Landing on the Rice Lake
and Peterborough, to take in fire-wood.] and then early one morning the
wigwams were all taken down, and the canoes, six in number, proceeded
up the river. There was very little variety in the scenery to interest
Catharine; the river still kept its slow flowing course between low shores,
thickly clothed with trees, without an opening through which the eye might
pierce to form an idea of the country beyond; not a clearing, not a sight
or sound of civilized man was there to be seen or heard; the darting flight
of the wild birds as they flitted across from one side to the other, the
tapping of the woodpeckers or shrill cry of the blue jay, was all that was
heard, from sunrise to sunset, on that monotonous voyage. After many hours
a decided change was perceived in the current, which ran at a considerable
increase of swiftness, so that it required the united energy of both men
and women to keep the light vessels from drifting down the river again.
They were in the Rapids, [Footnote: Formerly known as Whitla's Rapids, now
the site of the Locks.] and it was hard work to stem the tide, and keep
the upward course of the waters. At length the rapids were passed, and
the weary Indian voyagers rested for a space on the bosom of a small but
tranquil lake. [Footnote: The little lake about a mile below Peterborough
and above the Locks, formerly girt in by woods of pine and beech and maple,
now entirely divested of trees and forming part of the suburbs of the town.
] The rising moon shed her silvery light upon the calm waters, and heaven's
stars shone down into its quiet depths, as the canoes with their dusky
freight parted the glittering rays with their light paddles. As they
proceeded onward the banks rose on either side, still fringed with pine,
cedar and oaks. At an angle of the lake the banks on either side ran
out into two opposite peninsulas, forming a narrow passage or gorge,
contracting the lake once more into the appearance of a broad river, much
wider from shore to shore than any other part they had passed through since
they had left the entrance at the Rice Lake.

