"It's of no use asking you to play for us then, I suppose?" said the
young farmer, in a disappointed tone.

The youth shook his head, but very gently, as one who refuses against
his will; and this gave his petitioner a gleam of hope.

"Wouldn't a good supper, and a cup of cider that'll make your palate
tingle, set you up again?" he pleaded. "There's a hull hive of purty
gals over at uncle Nat's, that would jump right out of their skins at
the first sound of that fiddle. If you only could now."

"Give me a crust of bread and a cup of drink, and I will try and
please you. I think it is, perhaps, as much the want of food as
weariness that has taken away my strength."

The young men looked at each other. "Want of food," said one of them,
"why, didn't you find taverns on the way?"

"Yes," answered the stranger, sadly, "but I had no appetite; I came
here in hopes the mountain air would give me one, but, with fatigue
and fasting, I am faint."

The group of youngsters drew together, and a whispered conversation
commenced, which was followed by the clink of silver, as each one
dropped a two shilling piece into the hat of the young man who had
been most active in the negotiation.

"Here," said the youth, holding forth the money, "an even exchange is
no robbery. Set the old fiddle to work, and here is enough dimes to
last you a week."

The stranger blushed crimson, and the white lids drooped over his
eyes, as if something had been said to wound him.

"No," he said, with a quivering smile, "my poor music is not worth
selling. Besides, my journey must end not far from this, or I have
travelled slowly. Give me some clean water for my face and hands, that
is all I ask."

"Of course we will, with a famous supper, too, that would make a ghost
hungry. Come with us up to uncle Nat's. Water, why there is a trough
full at his back door, that you may bathe in all over if you like; and
as for cider, we'll just try that before you say anything about it."

The stranger arose and took up his violin; then lifting his large
eyes, misty with fatigue, he said almost mournfully--

"Will some one give me his arm? I am very weary."

The young men became at once silent and respectful with these words,
for there was something of reverence in their sympathy with a being at
once so feeble and so full of gentle dignity.

"Let me carry the violin," said one, while another stout, brave fellow
clasped the slender hand of the stranger, drew it over his own strong
arm and led him carefully forth, hushing even the cheery tones of his
voice as he spoke to the youth.

Thus subdued from hilarity to kindness, the group of young men
conducted their new friend to the Old Homestead and into the outer
room, where the table was newly spread, and where uncle Nat stood with
a huge brown cider pitcher in his hand from which he began to fill the
glasses as the crowd of guests rushed in.

Aunt Hannah, having performed her duty among her female guests, was
busy in the milk-room, cutting up pies, dividing pound-cake into
sections, and slicing cards of gingerbread, while uncle Nat presided
diligently at the cider-cask.

Thus it happened that the stranger was almost overlooked in the crowd,
for he sat down in a corner of the room, where his new friend brought
him in abundance of dainties from the table, for Mary was too busy
even for a glance that way.

"How do you feel now? Stronger, I know by your mouth; there's color in
the lips now," said the young man, who had taken a leading interest in
the stranger from the first.

"Oh! yes, I am much stronger," answered the youth, with one of the
sweetest smiles that ever beamed on a human face. "A little fresh
water now, and you shall see if I haven't music in the old violin."

"Come this way. The water-trough is out by the back porch."

The youth took up his violin, saying very gently that he never left
that behind him, and following the lead of his friend glided from the
room.

After bathing his hands and face, leaving them pure and white as those
of a girl, he went back to the porch, and seating himself in uncle
Nat's arm-chair, drew forth his violin and began to tune it.

Uncle Nat was just returning the spigot to his cider barrel, after
having filled the brown pitcher once more to the brim; but at the
first sound of the violin, an instrument he had not heard for years,
the spigot dropped to the floor, and out rushed the cider in a quick
amber stream, overflowing the pitcher, dashing down to the floor, and
rushing off in a tiny river the sloping edge of the porch. You could
hear it creeping in a rich current through the plaintain leaves, while
uncle Nat stood quite oblivious of the waste, listening like a great
school boy to the violin.

An exclamation from Salina, who had just left her friends in the
dressing-room, as she came forth and seized the pitcher, brought the
good old man to his senses. Clapping his fat hand over the aperture,
he drove the cider back in the cask, and looked right and left over
his shoulder for the spigot, avoiding the scornful eyes of that
exemplary female, who stood with the pitcher between her hands, over
which the surplus moisture went dripping, like an antiquated Hebe
defying an overgrown Ganymede.

"There!" exclaimed the strong-minded damsel, pointing toward the
spigot with her foot, "there's at least two gallons of the best cider
in the county gone to nothing. What do you think aunt Hannah will do
for apple sauce, if you go on this way, making regular mill-dams out
of her sweet cider?"

"Maybe we'd better say nothing about it," answered uncle Nat, making
futile efforts to restrain the cider with one hand and reach the
spigot with the other, "dear me, I can't reach it. Now, dear Miss
Salina, if you only would."

"Dear Miss Salina!" The strong-minded one turned at the words,
blushing till her face rivalled those fiery tresses. She sat down her
pitcher, shook the drops from her fingers, and seizing the important
bit of pine presented it to uncle Nathan.

All this time the young stranger had paused in tuning his violin, but
when uncle Nat drew a deep breath, after repairing the mischief
already done, out came a gush of music that made him start again, and
threw the strong-minded woman into a fit of excitement, quite
startling. She seized uncle Nat's moist hand and unconsciously--it
must have been unconsciously--pressed it in her wiry fingers.

"Music! Did you ever hear such music, uncle Nathan! It's enough to set
one off a-dancing."

"Well, why not?" answered uncle Nathan.

"Yes, why not?" replied the strong-minded one, "if the other young
people dance, why shouldn't we?"

"Of course," said uncle Nat, wiping his hands on the roller towel.
"Why not? I shouldn't wonder if we astonish these youngsters."

"And aunt Hannah, too," chimed in Salina.

"Oh! I'd forgot her," said uncle Nat, looking wistfully toward the
milk-room door, "I'm afraid it won't do, she'll think--but here they
come, like a flock of blackbirds!"

True enough, the first full notes of the violin had drawn the crowd of
girls from the chamber overhead, and down they came, laughing and
racing through the kitchen, perfectly wild with delight.

"Uncle Nat, dear, dear, uncle Nat, is it really a violin? Will aunt
Hannah let us dance to anything but singing?" cried a dozen voices;
and uncle Nathan was at once surrounded by a rainbow of streaming
ribbons and floating ringlets, while a host of merry eyes flashed
their delight upon him.

"I don't know--I can't take it on myself to say," cried uncle Nathan,
quite beside himself, "you must ask some one else. I haven't any
objection in life"--

"Nor I," said Salina, "and that's two agin one, if Miss Hannah _does_
stand out. Come, I'll go with you. We'll say that I, and all the other
young girls, have just made up our mouths to dance after a fiddle, and
we mean to, that's all."

"Stop, stop a minute!" exclaimed uncle Nathan, spreading his hands,
"maybe you'd better say nothing about it, but just go into the barn
and begin. If sister Hannah has got a conscience agin dancing to a
fiddle, you know, it ain't worth while to wake it up; but there's more
ways of getting into a lot than by taking down the bars. Jest climb
the fence, that's all."

How uncle Nathan ever came to give this worldly piece of advice is
still a mystery. Some insinuated that the cider had sent its sparkles
to his brain, and others thought the music had aroused some sleeping
mischief there. Perhaps it was both. Perhaps too the bright eyes and
ripe laughter around him had something to do with the matter.

At any rate the advice was too pleasant not to be taken. A telegraphic
signal brought the young men from the out-room, and off the company
fluttered in pairs toward the barn making the starlight melodious with
their laughter.


CHAPTER XLIII.

A DANCE AFTER HUSKING


  Merrily--merrily went the night
    The laugh rang out
    And a gleeful shout,
  Shook the autumn leaves in that starry light.

In their haste the young people had left the strange youth seated in
the chair, in a dark end of the porch.

"Come," said uncle Nat, in his kindly fashion, "you and I will follow
them."

"Thank you;" said the youth, rising, "it has been a long ride, and I
was growing weary."

"Have you been sick?" said the old man, sorrowfully.

"It's hard!"

He paused. A strange thrill shot over him, as the hand of the youth
touched his. "Come," he added, tenderly, leading the stranger on, "I
have strength for us both."

The slender hand trembled in his clasp; the agitation was mutual; for
through the young man's delicately organized frame ran a spark of joy
that warmed him to the heart. They walked on together in silence, both
thrilled with a strange sensation of pleasure, and drawn, as it were,
by invisible influences toward each other.

"I'm afraid," said the youth, "I'm afraid my music will disappoint
them. I know hardly any but sacred or sad airs."

His voice made all the blood in uncle Nathan's veins start again; it
was music in itself, such music as brought back his youth, sad and
ineffably sweet.

"Oh," answered uncle Nathan, drawing a deep, pleasant breath, "you
must have a dancing tune or so, Yankee Doodle, Money-Musk, and
Money-in-both-pockets, as like as not."

"Yankee Doodle, oh, yes, it was the first air I ever learned, how my
poor father loved it--as for the rest--well, we shall see."

Uncle Nathan's chair had been placed near the door as it happened,
away from the light which fell warmest in the centre of the barn.
Thus, during the whole evening, the young musician had been constantly
surrounded by shadows that left his features mysteriously undefined.
Still, uncle Nathan hovered by; his warm heart yearned to sun itself
near the youth.

When the stranger drew forth his bow, and, without a prelude, dashed
into Yankee Doodle, uncle Nat sunk to a rustic bench, covered his face
with both bands, and absolutely shivered under the floods of
tenderness let into his soul with the music.

But no one heeded the old man; why should they? Couple after couple
rushed up to the centre of the barn, gaily disputing for places
beneath the rustic chandelier, while here and there a young fellow,
more eager than the rest, broke into a double shuffle or cut a subdued
pigeon-wing as an impromptu while the set was forming.

It was no wonder. The violin was absolutely showering down music. A
thousand strings seemed to find voice beneath those slender fingers.
It set the young people off like birds in a thicket, down the outside,
up, down the middle, swinging corners, oh, it is impossible for a pen
to keep up with them, that is not naturally musical.

There they go, whirling, smiling, dancing higher and faster, flying
with the music till they pause, flushed and panting, at the bottom of
the set. Even now they cannot be still, but give each other a
superfluous twirl, or go on in a promiscuous way, doing over again the
dance in fragments, till their turn comes back.

Somehow Yankee Doodle wavered off into various other airs quite
unknown to the dancers, all swelling free and with a bold sweep of
sound, as if the musician improvised as much in his music as the
company certainly did in their dancing. But it was the more
exhilarating for that, and never did enjoyment run higher or mirth
gush out more cheerily.

Mary Fuller had made her way quietly into the barn, and seating
herself by uncle Nathan, watched the bright revel as it went on,
filled with a pleasant sort of wonder that anything could be so happy
as these gay revellers seemed. Once or twice she was asked to dance,
but shrunk sensitively from the proposition.

Salina stood erect by uncle Nathan, with her arms folded and her head
on one side, filled with burning indignation against mankind in
general, and dear old uncle Nathan in particular, because she was left
a solitary wall-flower planted in the very calf-skin shoes which she
had expected to exhibit, at least in a French Four, with that rotund
gentleman.

There was a change in the music. The strings trembled and thrilled a
moment, then out came a wild gush of melody that made the very dancers
pause and hold their breath to listen.

Mary Fuller started to her feet one moment. The color left her lips,
and then back it came, firing her face with scarlet to the brows.

"Uncle Nat, uncle Nat," she said, seizing him by the arm, "that
music!--I've heard it before--listen--listen!"

She sat down trembling from head to foot, but her grey eyes flashed
from beneath their drooping lids, and her mouth grew tremulous with
agitation. When the air was finished, for it died off in a few
plaintive notes, as if the violinist had entirely forgotten the
dancers, Mary arose and crept softly toward the musician, till she
could obtain a view of his face. By the stray candles that wavered to
and fro among the evergreens, she could dimly see the white outline of
those pure features and the mysterious beauty of the eyes.

Now her countenance, hitherto varying and anxious, settled into a warm
flush of joy; she drew close to the musician, and resting one hand on
the back of his chair, placed the other softly on his arm.

"Joseph--Joseph Esmond," she said, in a voice that scarcely rose above
a whisper. "Is it you, Joseph?"

He started and turned his eyes toward her.

"I know the touch of your hand, Mary Fuller; and your voice is full of
the old music. Where am I? How does it happen that you and I meet
here?"

"I live here--I have friends, oh! such kind friends. And you, Joseph,
how came you here? Where is your father--that dear, good father?
Surely he is well."

"My father," said the youth, bowing his head, with a look of touching
sorrow, "my father is dead--I am alone in the world, but for this!"

He touched his violin with a mournful smile.

"Then you and I are orphans alike." But she added more cheerfully, "we
are not alone, you have your music, and your art, and I have my,
my--oh, I have many things."

"Music, music!" called out the dancers, impatiently, from the floor.

Mary drew back.

"Don't leave me," said the youth, anxiously. "Come listen to my old
friend here, and we will talk between the dances."

"Leave you?" replied the young girl; "you do not know, you cannot
guess how happy I am to see you again."

"And I," answered the youth, smiling softly, "I can feel how beautiful
everything is around me when you are near. Did you know how my father
loved you, and how he grieved over it when you left us?"

"Did he?" answered Mary, with a low sob, "how often I thought of you
and him; but he must have known where we went."

"Not till Frederick came back at vacation; soon after you began to
write, Mary. Then he was so pleased to hear from you. We heard you had
been taken from the Alms-House."

"Music, music!" clamored the dancers once more. The young man took up
his bow with a sigh.

"Listen, listen," he said, softly, drawing it across the strings. "Do
you remember the music we had that night? I will give it to you
again."

He began to play, and while others were dancing merrily, she listened
till her young heart filled and her eyes were crowded full of tears.
She remembered that small room high up in a city dwelling. The
furniture was scant but neat, and so daintily arranged. The bright
cooking-stove, the bird-cage, the little round work-stand, above all,
the handsome, cheerful woman, with her household love and genial
benevolence, Isabel Chester's mother--how vividly the sight of that
young minstrel brought all this to her memory.

The music was ringing cheerily through the barn, which trembled to the
buoyant movements of the dancers, till the garlands shook upon the
walls, and all the lights seemed to twinkle and reel with sympathetic
motion. But the face of the violinist grew sad in its expression, and
as Mary Fuller gazed at it through her tears, her heart trembled
within her, though a gleam of most exquisite pleasure lay at the
bottom--pleasure so unlike anything she had ever felt that its very
newness made her tremble.

"Don't you dance, Mary?" inquired the musician, speaking to her, but
without a break in his music.

"Dance!" she answered, smiling upon him, "no, I never have danced in
my life."

"Oh! if you would dance now. I should like to see how you look when
quite happy--my heart used to ache to see you thus, Mary."

Mary shrunk back blushing and frightened, he spoke so earnestly.

"No, no," she stammered, "I don't know how to dance; but I am very,
very happy."

The young musician shook his head, and the light of a stray candle
rippled through his hair like gold. There was something angelic in his
aspect, as he murmured amid the music,

"Oh! but she is heavenly. Never on earth have I heard a voice so full
of melody. Sweet spring sounds and the breath of flowers seem floating
in it. Oh! she is so good, this dear child."

Then he began to smile again; richer sounds gushed from beneath his
fingers; the dancers fell into a circle; the steps grew lighter. The
ring of life flashed round beneath the lights, whirling its way amid
floods of laughter, like a water-wheel casting off rainbows and foam
in the sunshine. The ring gave way; its sunny links broke into pairs;
balancing, smiling, and gliding off to the half-hushed music; all glad
to rest, but eager to begin again.

That moment the double doors were softly pushed open, and a group of
visitors entered the barn, almost unnoticed at first, but that soon
cast a restraint upon all this hilarity.

It was a young man, evidently from the city, and a fair girl so
beautiful that the whole company paused to look at her.

She was dressed very plainly, in a dark silk travelling-dress, and her
air was remarkable only for its simple quietness, though her large
eyes turned with a look of eager haste from form to form, as if she
were searching for some one.

Mary Fuller, who had been standing by the violinist, very thoughtful,
and with her eyes dim with heart-mist, saw the group come in. She drew
her hands across her eyes to clear their sight, clasped them with an
exclamation of joy, and moving down through the shadows stood close to
the young stranger.

"Isabel! Isabel!" broke from her eager lips.

Isabel Chester turned. Her face was radiant. She opened her arms, and
with an exclamation of delight, received Mary to her bosom.

"Mary, dear, dear little Mary Fuller--how glad I am. You love me yet,
I know. She never would forget me, any more than I could forget her.
Come, talk to me, I was determined to see you before I slept, and so
persuaded Fred--Mr. Farnham, I mean--oh, Frederick, isn't she a dear
creature?"

Isabel drew Mary's face from her bosom, and stood with one arm around
her as she said this.

Young Farnham reached forth his hand; before he could speak, Isabel
went on.

"She has grown a little, too; reaches to my shoulder and rather more;
her eyes, oh! I knew her eyes would be beautiful; and, and there is
something about her that I didn't expect. Frederick, why don't you
tell Mary Fuller that she's handsome? There now, isn't that look
something better than beauty? Oh! Mary Fuller, how glad I am to see
you."

Tears were flashing like diamonds down the peachy bloom of Isabel's
cheek; for Mary had crept to her bosom again, and she felt the shiver
of delight that shook the young creature from head to foot. Her own
heart leaped back to its old memories, and swelled against the
clinging form of her friend.

"That's right, that's just about as it ought to be," exclaimed Salina,
coming forward triumphantly, for her honest heart rose to meet the
scene. "I knew she'd be here afore bed-time, if New York finery and
foreign countries hadn't completely upset her. Isabel Chester, you're
a fust rate gal, and I say it. Mr. Farnham, she's a credit to human
nature. You may reckon on that, now I tell you. Says I to myself, says
I, 'that are gal is sure to come up to the Old Homestead afore
bed-time or I lose my guess.' Wasn't I right?"

"You always think too well of me," said Isabel, laughing through her
tears. "Come, Mary, let me hear your voice. You haven't spoken a word
yet."

"Oh! I love you so much Isabel! I'm _so_ happy, Isabel."

Isabel bent down and kissed the happy face upon her bosom. As she
lifted her eyes again, they fell upon the strange musician, who,
disturbed by voices that he recognized, had moved toward them
unnoticed.

"Who, who is this, Mary Fuller? I remember the face. No, no, it's one
of Guido's heads that has bewildered me. Surely I never saw anything
living like that before. It is Guido's Michael in repose. Look up,
Mary, and tell me who this young man is."

Isabel spoke in a low voice, regarding the youth with a look of
mingled admiration and surprise, while the tears still sparkled on her
cheeks.

Mary looked up; her eyes kindled, and she smiled proudly through her
tears.

"Isabel? Can't you remember something that you have seen before in his
face?"

"I don't know. The memory of a picture I saw at Rome blinds me. Who is
it, say?"

"Hush, Isabel! you will grow sad when I tell you. That night when you
and I watched"--

"Yes," answered Isabel, drooping her head, "I shall never forget that
night."

"Do you remember who was with us, Isabel?"

"That angel boy."

"Yes, Isabel. It is Joseph Esmond."

"Oh! this is too much happiness. All of us together again," and with
her arm still flung caressingly over Mary's shoulder, Isabel Chester
moved toward the youth; but she was checked by the capacious person of
uncle Nat, who came between her and her object with a look of strange
interest on his face. His hands were clasped, and you could see the
plump fingers working nervously around each other; while his eyes
filled and shone with anxious tenderness. At length, after a long
gaze, his chest swelled like the heave of an ocean wave; his hands
fell apart, and he murmured softly, as if speaking only to himself.

"It is little Anna's boy!"

"Who speaks my mother's name?" inquired the youth, in his low, gentle
way; "surely some one is near that I ought to love."

"Ought to love?" cried uncle Nat, seizing the hand which had been half
extended. "Ought to love? Why it would be again nature and the Lord's
Providence, if you didn't love Nathan Heap, the old man that"--

Uncle Nat checked himself; a crowd had gathered around him; but the
feelings he was constrained to suppress broke forth in two large tears
that rolled down his broad cheeks.

"Nephew," he sobbed, shaking the hand that he still grasped, "you're
welcome to the Old Homestead. Neighbors," he added with dignity,
"suppose you make out the evening with blind-man's-buff, or
Who's-got-the-button? This is my own nephew, that I haven't seen since
he was a baby. You won't expect him to play any more to-night; he's
tired out; and I"--

The old man's lips began to tremble, and tears came again to his eyes,
and coursed rapidly after those that had fallen. He shook his head;
tried to go on without success; and taking Joseph by the hand led him
toward the door.

"Stop, just one minute, now, till I've done a little chance of
business," cried the constable, creeping out from a corner of the
barn, where the husked ears had been piled, and planting himself, like
a pert exclamation point, before the old man. "I've got to make a levy
on this corn heap," he said; "the oxen out yonder, and sundry other
goods and chattels about the Old Homestead. I want to do everything
fair and above board, so just wait to see the law executed."

Uncle Nathan paused, half wondering, half shocked at the man's words.

"What! the corn that my kind neighbors have just husked? the oxen I
brought up from steers? who has a right to take them?"

"There's the writ. All correct you'll find. Madam Farnham claims a
right to her own, and I'm here to see that she gets it."

"Madam Farnham, my mother!" cried young Farnham, indignantly. "Knave,
you slander my mother."

"You'll find it there," said the little constable, dashing the back of
his dirty hand against the open writ. "Your mother, if she is your
mother, authorized me to buy up all claims agin uncle Nat here and
aunt Hannah, six months ago; and I've done it. Five hundred and ten
dollars with costs."

"Come with me," answered the young man, sternly. "Isabel, go to the
house with Salina. I will return."

He took the constable by the arm and led him out, followed by hoots
and cheers from the young farmers.

Uncle Nathan stood for a moment, dumb with amazement; then he drew a
deep breath and grasped his nephew's hand more firmly.

"It seems as if the Old Homestead was falling around us," he said,
"but so long as a shingle is left, it shall shelter my sister Anna's
son."

And he led the young man forth into the starlight.


CHAPTER XLIV.

THE MOTHER, THE SON, AND THE ORPHAN


  Age is august, and goodness is sublime,
    When years have given them a solemn power.
  But souls that grow not with advancing time,
    Like withered fruit, but mock life's opening flower.

"Mother!"

"My son, don't speak so loud; you quite make me start; and with these
delicate nerves you know a shock is quite dreadful--why don't you say
mamma, softly, with the pure French pronunciation, and an Italian
tone; that's the proper medium, Fred. 'Mother!' I did hope, after
travelling so many years, that you would have forgotten the word."

"No, mother; I have not lost the dear old English of that word, and
pray God that I never may. Still more do I hope never to lose that
respect, that affection, which should make the name of mother a holy
thing to every son."

"My dear son, don't you understand that affection uttered in vulgar
language loses its--its--yes, its perfume, as I may express it. Now
there is something so sweet in the word mamma, so softly fraternal--in
short, I quite hear you cry from your little crib with its lace
curtains, when you utter it."

"Mother, let us be serious a moment."

"Serious, my child? What on earth do you want to be serious for?"

Here young Farnham took a paper from his pocket, and held it before
his mother's face. "Mother, what is this? Did you authorize the
purchase of these claims against the helpless old man and woman down
yonder?" he said.

Mrs. Farnham turned her head aside, and taking a crystal flask from
the table before her, refreshed herself languidly with its perfume.

"Did you authorize this, madam?" cried the young man, impatiently,
dashing one hand against the paper that he held in the other. "This
purchase, and after that the seizure of the old man's property?"

"Dear me, how worrying you are," answered the lady, burying the pale
wrinkles of her forehead in the lace of her handkerchief; "how can I
remember all the orders with regard to a property like ours?"

"But do you remember _this_?"

"Why, no, of course I don't," cried the lady, with a flush stealing up
through her wrinkles, as the miserable falsehood crept out from her
heart; "of course the man did it all on his own account, there's no
medium with such people. Certainly it was his own work. What do I know
about business?"

The young man looked at her sternly. She had not deceived him, and a
bitter thought of her utter unworthiness made the proud heart sink in
his bosom.

"Mother," he said, coldly, and with a look of profound sorrow,
"whoever has been the instigator, this is a cruel act; but I have
prevented the evil it might have done."

"_You_ prevented it, how?" cried the mother, starting to her feet,
white with rage, all her langour and affectation forgotten in the
burst of malicious surprise, that trembled on her thin lips, and gave
to her pale, watery eyes the expression, without the brilliancy, that
we find in those of a trodden serpent. "What have you done, I say?"

"I paid the money!"

Mrs. Farnham sat down, and remained a moment gazing on the calm,
severe face of the youth, with her thin hand clenched upon the folds
of her morning dress, and her foot moving impetuously up and down on
the carpet, as if she wanted to spring up and rend him to pieces.

The youth had evidently witnessed these paroxysms of rage before, for
he bent his eyes to the ground as if the sight awoke some old pain,
and turning quietly, seemed about to leave the room.

"You have done this without consulting me--countermanded my orders,
defeated my object--how like you are to your father, now."

The last words were uttered with a burst of spite, as if they
contained the very essence of bitterness, the last drop in the vials
of her wrath.

The youth turned and lifted his eyes, full of sorrowful sternness, to
her face. "Then you did--you did!" He paused, and his lips began to
tremble under the muttered reproaches that sprang up from his heart.

"Yes," cried the woman, weak in everything but her malice, "yes, then,
I did order it done--these people have tormented me enough with their
miserable old house, always before my eyes, and that grim ugly face
staring at me as I go to church. I tell you they shall leave the
neighborhood, or I will. Give me the papers."

The youth lifted his eyes and regarded her sternly.

"They are cancelled, madam, and torn to ribbons, that our name might
not be disgraced."

"Torn to pieces?"

"Into a thousand pieces, madam. I would have ground them to dust, if
possible."

"You shall answer for this," cried the baffled woman, and with that
sort of weak ferocity which is so repulsive, she sat down and began to
cry.

The young man drew close to her chair, for though his whole soul
recoiled from sympathy with her, he forced himself to remember that
she was his mother, and in tears.

"Why do you dislike these old people so much?" he urged, with an
attempt at soothing her.

"Because _he_ liked them!" she answered, dashing his proffered hand
aside; "because his low tastes followed him to the last; he was always
talking of the creature that died the night you were born. He cared
more for her to the last, than he ever did for me; and I hate them
for it. Now, are you satisfied?"

"Mother, you are talking of things that I do not understand."

"Well, your father was engaged to Anna, the girl that died in the old
hovel down yonder; engaged to her when he married me."

"Then my father committed a great wrong!"

"A great wrong! Who ever doubted it, I should like to know? Even to
think of her after marrying me--to say nothing of the way he went
on--sometimes talking about her in my presence, with tears in his
eyes. Once, once, would you believe it! he said--to me--me, his lawful
wife, that your eyes--it was when you just began to walk--that my own
baby's eyes put him in mind of her."

"I know very little of my father, nothing in fact, for he was a
reserved man, always; but it is hard to believe that he would
willfully do this foul wrong to a woman."

"Willfully! I wish you could have seen him when I, with the proper
spirit of a woman, felt it my duty to expostulate with him about his
feelings for that creature; how he took me up as if I were to blame
for being young and beautiful, and engaged in the bazar just under his
hotel, as if I had some design in standing at the door about
meal-times, or could help him coming in after collars and cravats
afterward, and, and"--

She stopped suddenly, and all the sallow wrinkles of her face burned
with a crimson more vivid than exposure in the actual commission of a
crime would have kindled there. Her mean spirit cowered beneath the
looks of surprise that her son fixed upon her, as this confession of
original poverty escaped her lips.

"I mean, I mean," she stammered, after biting her lips half through in
impatient wrath, "that he should want my advice about such things
before he was married."

It is a mournful thing when respect becomes a duty impossible to
perform. Young Farnham felt this, and again his eyes drooped, while a
flush of shame stole over his forehead.

"Well, madam," a woman of more sensitive feelings would have noticed
that he did not call her mother, "well, madam, whatever cause of
dislike may have been in this case, I cannot regret that all power to
harm these old people is now at an end. The notes are cancelled, the
money paid to your agent from my own pocket."

"But you had no right to pay this. You are not yet of age by some
months. I will not sanction this extravagance."

"Nay, madam, this money is mine, and was saved from the extravagance
that you _did_ sanction. I had intended to purchase a gift for Isabel
with it, but she will be better pleased as it is."

"To Isabel, five hundred dollars to Isabel!" cried the harsh woman.
"This is putting a beggar on horseback with a vengeance."

"Hush, madam, I will not listen to this; you know, or might have seen
long before this, that the young girl your language insults, has
refused to become my wife."

"Your _wife_! Isabel Chester _your_ wife! A pauper, and the child of a
pauper! Say it again, say that again if you dare!" cried the woman in
a whirlwind of passion. "Say that the policeman's daughter has refused
you!"

"When you are calmer, madam, I will repeat it, for no truth can be
more fixed, but now it would only exasperate you."

"Go on--go on, let me hear it again. It proves the Farnham blood in
your veins, always sighing and grovelling after low objects. Go on,
sir, I am listening--you intend to make _me_ mother-in-law to a
pauper; a miserable thing that I took to keep me company, as I would a
poodle-dog, and dressed and petted just in the same way. Marry her!
try it, and I'll make a beggar of _you_!"

"I do not know that you have the power to make me a beggar, madam, but
a slave you never shall make me; as for Isabel," he added, with a
scornful smile on his lips, firing up with something of her own
ungovernable anger, "she is at least your equal and mine."

"_My_ equal, the pauper, the--the--oh--oh!"

Insane with bitter passion, the woman stamped her foot fiercely on the
floor, and began tearing the delicate lace from her handkerchief with
her teeth, laughter and hysterical sobs hissing through them at the
same moment.

"Madam, restrain yourself," pleaded the young man, greatly shocked, "I
have been to blame, I should have told you of this some other time."

"Never, never," she answered, tearing the handkerchief from her teeth,
and dashing it fiercely to the floor. "The miserable Alms-House bird
shall leave my roof. I have got her pauper garments yet--would you
like to see them?--a blue chambrey frock and checked sun-bonnet--it
was all she brought here--and shall be all she takes away."

Again she stamped fiercely with her foot, and menaced her son with her
hand. "Send the girl to me, I say!"

"I am here, madam," said Isabel, arising from a chair by the door,
where she had fallen paralyzed and unnoticed, on her entrance, just as
her name was brought up. Her cheeks were in a blaze of red, and her
eyes emitted quick gleams of light. "I am here to take leave of you
for ever." Isabel's voice was constrained and hoarse; her face was
white with passion.

"Isabel, Isabel Chester!" exclaimed young Farnham, turning pale, and
yet with a glow of animation in his fine eyes, "my mother was angry;
she would not repeat those offensive words; she loves you!"

"But I do _not_ love _her_!" answered the proud girl, regarding the
woman whom the world called her benefactress, with a glance of queenly
scorn. "Her very kindness has always been oppressive; her presence
almost hateful; now it is entirely so."

"Isabel, Isabel!" exclaimed the young man, "remember she is my mother,
and you, beloved--oh, let me say to her, that you will be my wife!"

Isabel Chester turned her beautiful eyes upon him, and proud fire
gleamed through the tears that filled them like star-light in the
evening mist.

"No!" she answered in a very firm voice, "never will I become the wife
of that woman's son. My very soul recoils from the thought that she
who can so insult, ever had the power to confer benefits upon me. She
is right; I will go forth in the pauper garments in which she found me
at first. God has given me health, talent, energy; with his help I
will yet repay this lady, dollar for dollar, all that she has ever
expended on me. I shall never breathe deeply again till this is done."

"This is gratitude, this is just what I expected from the first," said
Mrs. Farnham, applying the mutilated handkerchief to her eyes. "It's
enough to sicken one with benevolence for ever. This girl, now, that
I've educated, taught everything, music, painting, all the ologies and
other sciences see how she has repaid me, after putting herself in the
way of my son, and tempting him to degrade himself by marrying her!"

Young Farnham started forward and attempted to arrest Isabel, who had
turned in proud silence, and was leaving the room.

"Isabel, where are you going?"

She turned, and looking into his anxious eyes, answered,

"Anywhere out of this house, and away from her presence."

"No, no, you shall not do this."

"I must; ask yourself if I could remain here another hour without
being in soul what she has called me in name--a pauper."

Farnham paused. Rapid changes, the shadows of many a turbulent
thought, swept over his face. Isabel lifted her eyes to his with a
look of sorrowful appeal, as if in waiting for him to confirm her
resolution.

"But where will you go, my Isabel?"

"I have not yet determined--but this lady has taught an to respect
myself. I have been spending an idle, useless life, dependent on her
bounty, a pet, a protege which no human being endowed with health and
energy should ever content herself with being. Henceforth I will
redeem the past."

"Stay with me, my Isabel, stay in your own home, not as a dependent,
not subject to any one's caprice. Isabel Chester throw off these cruel
prejudices; become my wife, and this day shall you have a right here,
holy as any that ever existed!"

