Produced by Jason Isbell, Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


[Illustration: The Sea Lay Sparkling in the Sunlight. _Frontispiece_.]


                           The Meadow-Brook
                           Girls by the Sea

                                  OR

                     The Loss of The Lonesome Bar


                                  By

                            JANET ALDRIDGE


    Author of the Meadow-Brook Girls Under Canvas, The Meadow-Brook
             Girls Across Country, The Meadow-Brook Girls
             Afloat, The Meadow-Brook Girls in The Hills,
                     The Meadow-Brook Girls on The
                             Tennis Courts


                   THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY

                   Akron, Ohio             New York

                            Made in U.S.A.


                           Copyright MCMXIV

                 _By_ THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY


CONTENTS


I. A DELIGHTFUL MYSTERY

II. WHAT CAME OF A COLD PLUNGE

III. HARRIET HAS A NARROW ESCAPE

IV. A QUESTION OF POLITICS

V. THE ROCKY ROAD TO WAU-WAU

VI. AT HOME BY THE SEA

VII. A SUDDEN STORM

VIII. A NEVER-TO-BE-FORGOTTEN NIGHT

IX. A SURPRISE THAT PROVED A SHOCK

X. SUMMONED TO THE COUNCIL

XI. A REWARD WELL EARNED

XII. MYSTERY ON A SAND BAR

XIII. A STRANGE PROCEEDING

XIV. A VISITOR WHO WAS WELCOME

XV. TOMMY MAKES A DISCOVERY

XVI. TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE

XVII. WHEN THEIR SHIP CAME IN

XVIII. FIREWORKS FROM THE MASTHEAD

XIX. SAILING THE BLUE WATER

XX. OUT OF SIGHT OF LAND

XXI. AN ANXIOUS OUTLOOK

XXII. IN THE GRIP OF MIGHTY SEAS

XXIII. WAGING A DESPERATE BATTLE

XXIV. CONCLUSION


CHAPTER I

A DELIGHTFUL MYSTERY


"I think we are ready to start, girls." Miss Elting folded the road
map that she had been studying and placed it in a pocket of her long
dust coat. There was a half-smile on her face, a merry twinkle in her
eyes.

"Which way do I drive?" questioned Jane McCarthy.

"Straight ahead out of the village," answered Miss Elting, the
guardian of the party of young girls who were embarking on their
summer's vacation under somewhat unusual circumstances.

"It's the first time I ever started for a place without knowing what
the place was, or where I was going," declared Jane McCarthy,
otherwise known as "Crazy Jane."

"Won't you pleathe tell uth where we are going?" lisped Grace
Thompson.

Miss Elting shook her head, with decision.

"Do my father and mother know where we are going?" persisted Grace.

"Of course they know, Tommy. The parents of each of you know, and I
know, and so shall you after you reach your destination. Have you
everything in the car, Jane?"

"Everything but myself," nodded Jane. The latter's automobile, well
loaded with camping equipment, stood awaiting its passengers. The
latter were Miss Elting, Jane McCarthy, Harriet Burrell, Grace
Thompson, Hazel Holland and Margery Brown, the party being otherwise
known as "The Meadow-Brook Girls." "Get in, girls. We'll shake the
dust of Meadow-Brook from our tires before you can count twenty,"
continued Jane. "If Crazy Jane were to drive through the town slowly
folks surely would think something startling had happened to her. Is
there anything you wish to do before we leave, Miss Elting?"

"Not that I think of at the moment, Jane."

"Oh, let's say good-bye to our folks," suggested Margery Brown.

"I have thaid good-bye," answered Grace with finality.

"We'll give them a farewell blast," chuckled Jane. With that she
climbed into the car, and, with a honk of the horn, drove down that
street and into the next, keeping the horn going almost continually.
As they passed the home of each girl the young women gave the yell of
the Meadow-Brook Girls:

    "Rah, rah, rah,
    Rah, rah, rah!
    Meadow-Brook, Meadow-Brook,
    Sis, boom, ah!"

It was shouted in chorus at their homes, and as the car passed the
homes of their friends as well. Hands were waved from windows, hats
were swung in the air by boy friends, while the older people smiled
indulgently and nodded to them as the rapidly moving motor car passed
through the village.

"I think the town knows all about it now. Suppose we make a start?"
suggested Miss Elting.

"We haven't therenaded the pothtmathter yet," Tommy reminded her.

"Nor the butcher, the baker and the candle-stick maker," answered
Harriet Burrell laughingly. "How long a drive have we, Miss Elting?"

"Four or five hours, ordinarily. Jane undoubtedly will make it in much
less time, if she drives at her usual rate of speed. Straight south,
Jane. I will tell you when to change."

The faces of the girls wore a puzzled expression. They could not
imagine where they were going. Miss Elting had made a mystery of this
summer vacation, and not a word had the girls been able to obtain from
her as to where they were to go: whether to tour the country in Crazy
Jane's automobile, or to go into camp. Tommy declared that it was a
perfectly delightful mythtery, and that she didn't care where they
were going, while Margery on the contrary, grumbled incessantly.

The start had been made late in the afternoon. The day had been
cloudy. There were even indications of rain, but the girls did not
care. They were too well inured to the weather to be disturbed by
lowering skies and threatening clouds. In the meantime Jane McCarthy
was bowling along to the southward, throwing up a cloud of dust,
having many narrow escapes from collisions with farmers' wagons and
wandering stock. They had been traveling about two hours when the
guardian directed their daring driver to turn to the left. The latter
did so, thus heading the car to the eastward.

"I think I begin to understand," thought Harriet Burrell aloud.

"What ith it that you underthtand?" demanded Tommy, pricking up her
ears. "You know where we are going, don't you?"

"I can make a close guess," replied Harriet, nodding brightly.

"Oh, tell uth, tell uth," begged Tommy.

Harriet shook her head.

"I couldn't think of it. Miss Elting wishes it to be a surprise to
you."

"Well, won't it be jutht ath much of a thurprithe now ath it will be
thome other time?" argued Grace Thompson.

"Perhaps Harriet just imagines she knows. I do not believe she knows
any more about our destination than do the rest of our party," said
the guardian. "But why worry about it? You will know when you get
there."

Jane stopped the car, and, getting out, proceeded to put the curtains
up on one side, Harriet and Hazel doing the same on the opposite side.
The storm curtain, with its square of transparent isinglass, was next
set in place to protect the driver from the front, the wind shield
first having been turned down out of the way.

"Now let the rain come," chuckled Jane, after having taken a quick
survey of their work.

"Yes; it is nice and cosy in here," answered Miss Elting. "I almost
believe I should like to sleep in here during a rainstorm."

"Excuthe me," objected Tommy. "I'd be thure to get crampth in my
neck."

"She would that," answered Jane laughingly, starting the car and a
moment later throwing in the high-speed clutch.

The party was not more than fairly started on the way again when the
raindrops began pattering on the leather top of the car.

"There it comes," cried Jane McCarthy. "Sounds like rain on a tin
roof, doesn't it?"

The downpour rapidly grew heavier, accompanied by lightning and
thunder. The flashes were blinding, dazzling Jane's eyes so that she
had difficulty in keeping her car in the road. It was now nearly
evening, and an early darkness had already settled over the landscape.
There was little hope of more light, for night would be upon them by
the time the storm had passed. True, there would be a moon behind the
clouds, but the latter bade fair to be wholly obscured during the
evening.

Despite the blinding storm that masked the road, and the sharp flashes
of lightning that dazzled the eyes of the driver, Crazy Jane McCarthy
went on driving ahead at the same rate of speed until Miss Elting
begged her to go more slowly. Jane reduced the speed of the car,
though so slightly as to be scarcely noticeable.

The guardian smiled but made no further comment. Being shut in as they
were, they would have difficulty in getting out were an accident to
befall them. All at once, however, Jane slowed down with a jolt. She
then sent the car cautiously ahead, this time driving out on a level
grass plot at the side of the road. There she shut down, turned off
the power, and, leaning back, yawned audibly.

"Whoa!" she said wearily.

"Why, Jane, what is the matter?" cried Miss Elting.

"Like a sailboat, we can't make much headway without wind. As it
happens, we have no wind on the quarter, as the sailors would say."

"I don't understand."

"She means the tires are down," explained Harriet Burrell.

"Yes. I told Dad those rear tires were leaking, but he declared they
were good for five hundred miles yet."

"Can't we patch them?" queried Harriet.

"We can," replied Jane, "but we aren't going to until this rain lets
up a little. Please don't ask me to get out and paddle about in the
wet, for I'm not going to do anything of the sort." Jane began to hum
a tune. Her companions settled back comfortably. It was dry and cosy
in the car and the travellers felt drowsy. Jane was the only really
wide-awake one. Margery finally uttered a single, loud snore that
awakened the others. The girls uttered a shout and began shaking
Margery, who pulled herself sharply together, protesting that she
hadn't been asleep for even one little minute.

"That ith the way thhe alwayth doeth," observed Tommy. "Then thhe
denieth it. I'm glad I don't thnore. Ithn't it awful to thnore, Mith
Elting?"

"Having too much to say is worse," answered Jane pointedly. "The storm
has passed. Let's get out and fix things up. Harriet, will you help
me? Miss Elting, if you will be good enough to engineer the
taking-down of the side curtains and the lowering of the top I shall
be obliged. We shan't need the top. We aren't going to have any more
rain to-night, and I want all the light I can get, especially as we
are going over strange roads. Have you been this way before?"

"No, Jane, but I have the road map."

"Road map!" scoffed the Irish girl. "I followed one once and landed in
a ditch!"

"That ith nothing for Crathy Jane to do," lisped Grace.

"Right you are, Tommy," answered Jane with a hearty laugh. "Just as I
thought, the tires, the inner tubes, are leaking around the valves. We
shan't be able to do much with them, but I think we can make them hold
until we get in. I'll have some new inner tubes sent out to us. By
the way, are we going to be where we can send for supplies and have
them delivered?" questioned Jane shrewdly.

"Oh, I think so," was Miss Elting's evasive answer.

"Aren't you glad you found out?" chuckled Harriet.

Jane grinned, but said nothing. The work of patching the two inner
tubes occupied nearly an hour before the tires were back in place and
the car ready to start. Harriet, in the meantime, had lighted the big
headlights and the rear light.

"All aboard for Nowhere!" shouted Jane. The girls again took their
places in the car, which started with a jolt. "Is it straight ahead,
Miss Elting?"

"Yes."

"I hope you know where you're going. I'm sure I don't," remarked Jane
under her breath.

They had gone but a short distance before the driver discovered that
which displeased her very much. The lights on the front of the car
were growing dim. Her companions noticed this at about the same time.

"The gas is giving out," exclaimed Jane. "Isn't that provoking? With
us it is one continuous round of surprises."

"What are we going to do?" questioned Margery apprehensively.

"Just the same as before: keep on going," replied the Irish girl.
"I've driven without lights before this. I guess I can do it again. I
can see the road and so can you."

"Please reduce your speed a little," urged Miss Elting. The driver did
so, for Jane was not quite so confident of her ability to keep to the
road as she would have had them believe. "There comes some one. Please
stop; I want to ask him a question."

A farmer on a horse had ridden out to one side of the road, where he
was holding his mount, the horse being afraid of the car. Miss Elting
asked him how they might reach the Lonesome Cove. The girls were very
deeply interested in this question as well as in the answer to it.
They had never heard of Lonesome Cove. So that was to be their
destination? They nudged each other knowingly. The farmer informed
Miss Elting that the Cove was about eight miles farther on.

"Take your third right hand turn and it'll lead you right down into
the Cove," he said. "It's a pretty lonesome place now," he added.

"Yes, I understand," replied the guardian hurriedly, "but we know all
about that. Thank you very much. You may drive ahead now, Jane." Jane
smiled and started on. "I keep watch of the turns of the road. You pay
attention to your driving exclusively," added Miss Elting. "And,
girls, you keep a sharp lookout, too."

"Where ith thith Lonethome Cove?" questioned Tommy. "I don't like the
thound of the name."

"You will like it when you get there," answered the guardian. "But I
said I would not tell you anything about it. Time enough when we reach
there. You shall then see for yourselves. You are going too fast,
Jane."

"I'd like to reach there some time before morning. The road is clear
and level. I'm going only twenty miles an hour, as it is. That's just
a creeping pace, you know," reassured Jane.

"Yes, I know," answered the guardian, with a shake of her head. They
continued on, but without much conversation, for Jane was busy
watching the road, her companions keeping a sharp lookout for the
turns. They had already passed two roads that led off to the right.
The next, according to their informant, would be the one for them to
take to reach the Lonesome Cove.

"Here is the third turn," announced Jane finally, bringing her car to
a stop. The highway on which they had been riding was shaded with
second-growth trees, as was the intersecting road. The latter was
narrow; but, from Jane's investigations, she having stepped down to
examine it, it was hard though not well-traveled. "Have you been here
before, Miss Elting?"

"No, Jane; I have not. Go ahead and drive carefully, for I hardly
think it a main road."

"It's a good one, whether it is a main road or not."

They moved on down the side road, and, gaining confidence as they
progressed, Jane McCarthy let out a notch at a time until she was
traveling at a fairly high rate of speed. Their way wound in and out
among the small trees and bushes that bordered the road, the latter
narrowing little by little until there was barely room for turning out
in case they were to meet another vehicle. However, there seemed
little chance of that. The motor car appeared to be the only vehicle
abroad that night.

The road now was so dark that it was only by glancing up at the tops
of the bordering trees, outlined against the sky, that the driver of
the car was able to keep well in the middle of it. She was straining
her eyes, peering into the darkness ahead.

"How far?" demanded Jane shortly, never removing her gaze from the
trees and the roadway.

"We must be near the place. Surely it cannot be far now," answered the
guardian. "I thought we should have seen a light before this."

"We're coming into the open," broke in Jane. "I'm glad of that. Now we
needn't be afraid of running into the trees or the fences, if there
are any along the track. I can't make out the sides of the road at
all. I--"

A sudden and new sound cut short her words. The girls, realizing that
something unusual was occurring, fell suddenly silent. The roadway
beneath them gave off a hollow sound, as if they were going over a
bridge. The fringe of trees had fallen away, while all about them was
what appeared to be a darkened plain or field. Yet strain their eyes
as they would, the travelers were unable to distinguish the character
of their surroundings, though Harriet Burrell, with chin elevated, had
been sniffing the air suspiciously.

"I smell water," she cried.

"Tho do I," lisped Tommy. "But I don't want a drink."

Jane began to slow down as soon as the new sound had been heard. The
car was rolling along slowly. For some unaccountable reason the driver
put on a little more speed. Then came Jane McCarthy's voice, in a
quick, warning shout:

"Here's trouble. Jump, girls! Jump! We're going in!"

They did not know what it was that they were going into, but not a
girl of them obeyed Jane's command. Margery half-arose from the seat.
Hazel pulled her back.

"Sit still, girls!" commanded Miss Elting. "Stop the car, Jane!"

The driver shut off and applied the brake. But she was too late. The
automobile kept on going. The roadway underneath it seemed to be
dropping away from them; for a few seconds they experienced the
sensation of riding on thin air; then the car lurched heavily forward,
and, with a mighty splash, plunged into water. A great sheet of solid
water leaped up and enveloped them.

"Everyone for herself!" cried Harriet Burrell. "Jump, girls!"

This time they _did_ essay to jump. Before they could do so, however,
they were struggling to free themselves from the sinking car, the
water already over their heads.


CHAPTER II

WHAT CAME OF A COLD PLUNGE


Five girls and their guardian struggled free from the sinking motor
car and began paddling for the surface. All knowing how to swim, they
instinctively held their breath when they felt the water closing over
them. Fortunately for the Meadow-Brook Girls, the top had been removed
from the car, else all would have been drowned before they could have
extricated themselves. Jane had the most difficulty in getting out.
She was held to her seat by the steering wheel for a few seconds, but
not so much as a thought of fear entered her mind. Crazy Jane went to
work methodically to free herself, which she succeeded in doing a few
seconds after her companions had reached the surface.

"Thave me, oh, thave me!" wailed Tommy Thompson chokingly.

There followed a great splashing, accompanied by shouts and choking
coughs. About this time Jane McCarthy's head appeared above the water.
She took a long, gasping breath, then called out:

"Here we are, darlin's! Is anybody wet?"

"Girls, are you all here?" cried Miss Elting anxiously. "Call your
names."

They did so, and there was relief in every heart when it was found
that not a girl was missing. But they had yet to learn how they
happened to be in the water. The latter was cold as ice, it seemed to
them, and their desire now was to get to shore as quickly as possible.
Which way the shore lay they did not know, but from the looks of the
sky-line it was apparent that they would not be obliged to go far in
either direction to find a landing place.

"Follow me, girls," directed the guardian. "We will get out of here
and talk about our disaster afterward. Harriet, please bring up the
rear. Be sure that no one is left behind."

The splashing ceased, each girl starting forward with her own
particular stroke: Tommy swimming frog-fashion, Margery blowing,
puffing, and groaning, paddling like a four-footed animal.

"Oh, help!" she moaned.

"I'm glad I'm not tho fat ath you are," observed Tommy to the puffing
Margery.

"That will do, Tommy! Buster is quite as well able to take care of
herself as are you. I've touched bottom! Here we are, girls. Oh, I am
so glad!"

"Where ith it? I can't thee the bottom."

"Stop swimming, and you'll feel it," suggested Jane, who, having
reached the shore, waded out of the water and ran, laughing, up the
bank. "My stars, what a mess!"

One by one the others emerged from the cold water and stood shivering
on the beach.

"Wring out your clothes," directed Miss Elting. This, some of them
were already doing. Margery sat down helplessly. Harriet assisted her
to her feet.

"You mustn't do that. You surely will catch cold. Keep moving, dear,"
ordered Harriet.

"I can't. My clothes weigh a ton," protested Margery.

"Buthter thinkth it ith her clotheth that are heavy," jeered Tommy.
"It ithn't your clotheth, Buthter; it'th you."

"Make her stop, Miss Elting. Don't you think I am suffering enough,
without Tommy making me feel any worse?"

"Yes, I do. Tommy, will you please stop annoying Margery?"

"Yeth, Mith Elting, I'll thtop until Buthter getth dry again. But I'm
jutht ath wet at thhe ith, and I'm not croth."

"Girls, we have had a very narrow escape. I dread to think what would
have happened had that automobile top been up. We should give thanks
for our deliverance. But I don't understand how we came to get in
there, or what it is that we did get into," said the guardian.

"I know. It wath water," Tommy informed her. "It wath wet water, too,
and cold water, and--"

A shivering chorus of laughs greeted her words. Some of the girls
began whipping their arms and jumping up and down, for all were very
cold.

"Can't we run?" asked Harriet.

"Yes, if we can decide where the water is, and where it isn't,"
replied Miss Elting. "Suppose we find the road? We can run up and down
that without danger of falling in."

"It is just to the left of us; I can see the opening between the
trees," answered Harriet. She moved in the direction she had
indicated, "Here it is. Come on, girls."

The others picked their way cautiously to her. Harriet started up the
road at a run, followed by the others and accompanied by the "plush,
plush, plush!" of shoes nearly full of water. Tommy sat down.

"What are you doing on the ground?" shrieked Margery, as she stumbled
and fell over her little companion. "Why don't you tell me when you
are going to sit down, so that I won't fall over you?"

"You wouldn't, if you weren't tho fat."

"Tommy!" broke in Miss Elting. The whole party had come to a halt,
following Margery's mishap.

"I beg your pardon, Mith Elting. I forgot. Buthter ithn't dry yet.
What am I doing? Yeth, I'm bailing out my thhoeth. Ugh! How they do
thtick to my feet. Oh, I can't get them on again!" wailed Tommy.

"What a helpless creature you are," answered Harriet laughingly.
"Here, let me help you. There. You see how easy it is when once you
make up your mind that you really can."

"No, I don't thee. It ith too dark. Help me up!"

"Take hold of my hand. Here, Margery, you get on the other side. We
three will run together. Everyone else keep out of our way."

"Yeth, becauthe Buthter ith--" Tommy, remembering her promise, checked
herself. The three started up the road at a brisk trot. Reaching the
main road, Harriet led them about, then began running back toward the
water.

"Look out for the water," warned Jane shrilly, after they had been
going for a few minutes. But her warning came too late. Harriet, Tommy
and Margery had turned to the right after reaching the open. The three
fell in with a splash and a chorus of screams. The water was shallow
and there was no difficulty in getting out, but the girls now were as
wet as before, and shivering more than ever. At this juncture the
guardian took a hand. She directed them to walk up and down the road
in orderly fashion, which they did, shivering, their teeth chattering
and the water dripping from their clothing. Reaching the main highway
the guardian turned out on this, walking her charges a full mile in
the direction they had been following before turning off into the
byway.

"This part of the country appears to be deserted," she said. "I think
we had better return. In the morning we will try to find some one."

"Thave me!" moaned Tommy. "Mutht we thtay here in our wet clotheth all
night?"

"I fear so. What else is there for us to do?"

"But let uth get our dry clotheth and put them on," urged Tommy. The
girls laughed at her.

"Our clothes are down under the water in the car, darlin'," Jane
informed her.

"Of course, they are soaked," reflected Miss Elting.

"I do not think so. The chest on the back of the car is water-proof as
well as dust-proof," said Jane. "If it weren't water-proof the things
in it would get soaked every time there was a driving rainstorm. No;
our other clothing is as dry as toast. You'll see that it is when we
get it."

"Yes, when we do," groaned Margery--"_when_ we do!"

"It might as well be wet," observed the guardian. "We shan't be able
to get it out. Do you think the car is ruined, Jane?"

"It's wet, like ourselves, Miss Elting. I reckon it will take a whole
summer to dry it out thoroughly. I've got to get word to Dad to come
after it."

"What will he say when he learns of the accident, Jane?" questioned
Harriet.

"Say? He will say it served the old car right for being such a fool.
My dad has common sense. He will have another car up here for us just
as soon as he can get one here. By the way, Miss Elting, how much
farther do we have to go?"

"I don't know, Jane. I hope it isn't much farther. How far do you
think we traveled after meeting the man?"

"Five miles, I should say."

"And he told us that the third turn-off would lead us to Lonesome
Cove, did he not?"

"He did, but he made a mistake. This is Wet Cove."

"And a lonesome one, too, even if it isn't _the_ Lonesome one,"
chuckled Harriet.

"Then we cannot be so very far from our destination. I am sure this
isn't the place. We haven't come far enough. Why didn't we think of
that before we turned into this road?"

"If I knew where you wanted to go, I might be better able to answer
that question," reminded Jane. But the guardian was not to be caught
in Crazy Jane's trap, though it was too dark to reveal the quizzical
smile that wrinkled Miss Elting's face.

"I am not sure that I know myself, Jane," was her reply.

"You fully expected to find some one here, did you not?" teased
Harriet. "I might say that you looked to find a number of persons
here?"

"We won't discuss that now. Do you wish to spoil the little surprise
that I have been planning for you?"

"If this is your surprise, I don't think much of it," declared Jane
bluntly.

"Nor can I blame you," agreed Miss Elting. "But this is not the
surprise."

"Maybe if we wait we will fall into thome more pondth," suggested
Grace. "Ith your thurprithe ath wet at thith one wath?"

"I admit your right to tease me, Tommy," laughed the guardian.

"Come on, everybody!" urged Harriet. "We must walk briskly and keep it
up. That will be the only way to keep us from catching cold as a
result of our wetting." Having paused for a moment to discuss their
situation the girls began tramping once more. As the hours dragged
along all became weary and drowsy. Their joints were growing stiff,
too, which condition was not improved by the chill of the night air.
Most active of all the party was little Tommy Thompson, who skipped
along, talking incessantly. Margery was scarcely able to keep up with
the party. Twice she leaned against a tree, closing her eyes, only to
fall to the ground in a heap. Harriet, though nearly as tired and
footsore as her companions, summoned all her will power and trudged
bravely along.

Had the Meadow-Brook Girls not been so well seasoned to hardship,
serious results might have followed their unexpected bath in the chill
waters, followed by their exposure to the searching night wind. But
they were healthy, outdoor girls, as all our readers know. The first
volume of this series, "THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS UNDER CANVAS,"
told the story of their first vacation spent in the open, when, as
members of Camp Wau-Wau in the Pocono Woods, they served their
novitiate as Camp Girls, winning many honors and becoming firmly
wedded to life in the woods.

When that camping period came to an end Harriet and her companions, as
related in "THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS ACROSS COUNTRY," set out
on the long walk home, meeting with plenty of adventures and many
laughable happenings. It was during this hike that they became
acquainted with the Tramp Club Boys and entered into a walking contest
against them, which the Meadow-Brook Girls won.

Our readers next met the girls in "THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS
AFLOAT," a volume which contained the account of their houseboat
life on Lake Winnepesaukee. It was there that they again outwitted the
Tramp Club, who took their defeat good-naturedly and by way of
retaliation aided the girls in running down a mysterious enemy whose
malicious mischief had caused them repeated annoyance.

Then, as their summer was not yet ended, the Meadow-Brook Girls
accepted an invitation from Jane McCarthy to accompany her on a trip
through the White Mountains, all of which is fully set forth in
"THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS IN THE HILLS."

It was there that they met with a series of mishaps which they laid at
the door of an ill-favored man who had vainly tried to become their
guide. The disappearance of Janus Grubb, the guide who had been
engaged by Miss Elting during their mountain hike, and the surprising
events that followed made the story of their mountain trip well worth
reading.

And now, once more, we find the Meadow-Brook Girls ready to take the
trail again wherever that trail might lead. At the present moment,
however, it did not look as though Harriet Burrell and her friends
would reach their destination in the immediate future unless it were
nearer at hand than they thought.

Not once during the night did the moon show her face, though about two
o'clock in the morning the clouds thinned, the landscape showing with
more distinctness. The girls, when they walked down to the shore, saw
a sheet of water covering several acres. Leading down to the water was
a pier that extended far out into the little lake or pond, whatever it
might be. Harriet, Jane and Miss Elting walked out to the far end of
the pier.

Harriet pointed to the end of the pier as she stood above it. "It has
broken down," she said.

"No; I think not," answered the guardian. "I think, too, that I
understand what this is. It is an ice pier. Ice is harvested from this
pond and carried up over that sloping platform and so on to the shore
or to conveyances waiting here. But how narrow it is. How ever did you
manage to keep on the pier until you reached the end, Jane, dear?"

"I really don't know, Miss Elting," replied Jane, evidently impressed
with the feat she had accomplished. She leaned over and peered into
the water to see if she could find her car. It was not to be seen.
Dark objects, floating here and there about the surface, showed the
girls where part of their equipment had gone. Harriet was regarding
the dark objects with inquiring eyes.

"I wish we had a boat," said Miss Elting. "We could gather up our
stuff. We can't afford to lose it."

"We don't need a boat. Jane and I will get it out. What do you say,
Jane?" answered Harriet.

"I don't know what you have in mind, darlin', but I'm with you,
whatever it is."

"You and I will go in after the things."

"You don't mean it!" exclaimed Jane. "And in this cold water.
Br-rr-r!"

"No; you must not do that," objected the guardian. "At least not now."

"What is it you folks are planning?" questioned Hazel, who, with Tommy
and Buster, had joined the party at the end of the pier. Jane
explained what Harriet had proposed. Margery's teeth began to chatter
again.

"My--my weak heart won't stand any more," she groaned. "Don't ask me
to go into that horrid, cold water again. _Please_ don't!"

"You won't feel the cold once you are in," urged Harriet.

"No. I didn't feel it the other time, did I?"

"What? Go in thwimming," demanded Tommy. "I wouldn't go in that water
again for a dollar and fifty thentth; no, not for a dollar and
theventy-five thentth." Tommy began backing away, as though fearing
the others might insist and assist her in. Suddenly she uttered a
scream.

"Thave me!" yelled Tommy.

They saw her lurch backward; her feet left the pier; then came a
splash. Tommy Thompson had gone over backward and taken to the water
head first.


CHAPTER III

HARRIET HAS A NARROW ESCAPE


"Thave me! Oh, thave me!"

Tommy had turned over and righted herself before rising to the
surface. When she did appear she was within a foot or so of the pier.
Her little blonde head popped up from under the water all of a sudden,
and in that instant she opened her mouth in a wail for help. Tommy's
companions were fairly hysterical with merriment. Tommy yelled again,
begging them to "thave" her.

"I'll save ye, darlin'," cried Jane, throwing herself down and
fastening a hand lightly in Tommy's hair, whereat the little girl
screamed more lustily than before. "Lend a hand here, my hearties. The
darlin' wants to be saved. We'll save her, won't we?" Jane shouted in
great glee.

"Of course we will," answered Harriet. She leaned over the edge of the
pier, Jane raising the little girl until the latter's shoulders were
above water; Harriet got hold of her dress and worked her hand along
until she had grasped Tommy by the ankles.

"Let go!" yelled Tommy.

She meant for Harriet to release her feet, but instead Jane McCarthy
released her hold on Tommy's shoulders. The next second Tommy Thompson
was standing on her head in the pond with Harriet Burrell jouncing her
up and down, trying to get her out of the water, but taking more time
about it, so it seemed, than was really necessary. Every time Tommy's
head was drawn free of the water she uttered a choking yell. There was
no telling how long the nonsense might have continued, had not Miss
Elting thrust Harriet aside, resulting in Tommy's falling into the
water and having to be rescued again. Tommy was weeping when finally
they dragged her to the pier and wrung the water out of her clothing.

"Now, don't you wish you were _fat_?" jeered Margery. "If you had
been, they couldn't have lifted you and you wouldn't have fallen in
again."

"Fat like you? Never! I'd die firtht," replied Tommy. "But I may ath
it ith. I'm freething, Mith Elting."

"Get up and go ashore. Hazel, will you please see that Grace doesn't
sit down on the cold ground?"

Hazel Holland led the protesting Tommy along the pier to the shore,
where she walked the little girl up and down as fast as she could be
induced to move, which, after all, was not much faster than an
ordinarily slow walk. The others of the party remained out at the end,
walking back and forth and waiting until the coming of the dawn, so
that they might see to that for which they had planned by daylight.

At the first suggestion of dawn, Harriet plunged into the pond without
a word of warning to her companions and began gathering up and pushing
bundles of equipment toward the shore. Jane and Hazel were not far
behind her. Then Miss Elting, not to be outdone by her charges,
plunged in after them. Margery, shivering, turned her back on them and
walked shoreward.

"'Fraid cat! 'fraid cat!" taunted Tommy, when she saw Margery coming.

"I'm no more afraid than you are. You're afraid to go into the water.
The only way you can go in is to fall in or be pushed!"

"Am I? Ith that tho? Well, I'll thhow you whether I am afraid of the
water. I dare you to follow me." Tommy fairly flew down the pier;
then, leaping up into the air, jumped far out, taking a clean
feet-first dive into the pond, uttering a shrill little yell just
before disappearing under the surface. But all at once she stood up,
and, by raising her chin a little, was able to keep her head above
water.

"Hello there, Tommy, what are you standing on?" called Harriet,
puffing and blowing as she pushed a canvas-bound pack along ahead of
her.

"I don't know. I gueth it mutht be the automobile top. It ith nithe
and thpringy."

"Please stay there until I get back. I wish to look it over. If you
can, I wish you would find the rear end of the car, so I may locate it
exactly."

"What have you in mind, darlin'?" asked Jane, with a quick glance at
Harriet.

"I'm going to try to get our clothes. The trunk is strapped and
buckled to the rear end, is it not?"

"Yes."

"Tell me just how those buckles are placed; whether there is also a
loop through which the strap has been run, and all about it."

"How should I know?"

"You put the trunk on, didn't you?"

"Surely, but I can't remember all those things, even if I ever knew
them."

"Jane, you should learn to observe more closely. Most persons are
careless about that." Harriet began swimming toward the shore with
Jane.

"Thay! How long mutht I thtand here in the wet up to my prethiouth
neck?" demanded Grace Thompson. Her feet seemed to be very light. They
persisted in either rising or drifting away from the submerged
automobile top. Tommy kept her hands moving slowly to assist in
maintaining her equilibrium.

"Wait until I return, if you will, please," answered Harriet.

"Thave me! I can't wait. Here I go _now_!" She slipped off and went
under, but came up sputtering and protesting. Instead of remaining to
mark the sunken car, Tommy swam rapidly to shore. She found Harriet,
Hazel and Jane sitting with feet hanging over the pier talking to
Miss Elting. The four were dripping, but none of them seemed to mind
this. The sun soon would be up, and its rays would dry their clothing
and bring them warmth for the first time since their disaster of the
night before.

"Do be careful," Miss Elting was saying when Tommy swam up, and,
clinging to the pier with one hand, floated listlessly while listening
to what was being said.

"What's the matter, Tommy? Couldn't you stand it any longer?" asked
Harriet.

"My feet got tho light that I couldn't hang on."

"She means her head instead of her feet," corrected Margery.

"I think I had better go after the trunk now," decided Harriet.

"I wish you would let me go with you," urged Jane.

"No; two of us would be in each other's way. You folks had better stay
here and wait. There will be plenty to do after I get the trunk
ashore, provided I do. We must have all our outfit together by
sunrise, for we have a day's work ahead of us. Want to get up, Tommy?"

"Yeth."

Harriet reached down and assisted Grace, dripping, to the pier. Then
she slipped in and swam in a leisurely way to the sunken automobile,
which she located after swimming about for a few moments. The next
thing to do was to find the rear end of the car. This was quickly
accomplished. Harriet took a long breath, then dived swiftly. It
seemed to her companions that she had been gone a long time, when,
finally, the girl's dark head rose dripping from the pond. She shook
her head, took several long breaths, then dived again.

Three times Harriet Burrell repeated this. At last, after a brief
dive, they saw the black trunk leap free to the surface of the pond.
The Meadow-Brook Girls uttered a yell. Harriet had accomplished a task
that would have proved to be too much for the average man. Down there,
underneath the water, crouching under the backward tilting automobile
on the bottom of the pond, she had unbuckled three stubborn straps,
rising to the surface after unbuckling each strap, taking in a new
supply of delicious fresh air, then returning to her task.

Before the Meadow-Brook Girls had finished with their shouting,
cheering and gleeful dancing, the black luggage had drifted some
distance from the spot where it had first appeared. So delighted were
they with the result of Harriet Burrell's efforts that, for the
moment, the others entirely forgot the girl herself. But all at once
Miss Elting came to a realization of the truth. Something was wrong.

"Harriet!" she cried excitedly. It was unusual for the guardian to
show alarm, even though she might feel it. "Where is Harriet?"

The shouting and the cheering ceased instantly.

"Oh, she's just playing a trick on us," scoffed Margery Brown.

Suddenly the keen eyes of Jane McCarthy caught sight of something that
sent her heart leaping. That something was a series of bubbles that
rose to the surface. Jane gazed wide-eyed, neither moving nor
speaking, then suddenly hurled herself into the pond. Two loud
splashes followed her own dive into the water. Tommy and Miss Elting
were plunging ahead with all speed. Jane was the first to reach the
scene. She dived, came up empty-handed, then dived again. Tommy
essayed to make a dive, but did not get in deep enough to fully cover
her back. Miss Elting made an error in her calculations, as Jane had
done on the first dive, missing the sunken automobile by several feet.

Now Hazel sprang into the water and swam to them as fast as she knew
how to propel herself. Jane shot out of the water and waved both arms
frantically above her head.

"Spread out!" she cried in a strained, frightened voice.

"Did--didn't you find her?" gasped Miss Elting.

"No."

Jane was gone again, leaving a wake that reached all the way to the
beach, so violent had been her floundering dive.

Tommy, who had raised her head from the water a short distance from
where the guardian was paddling, uttered a scream.

"There thhe ith!" she cried; "there she ith! Right down there. Come in
a hurry. She ith under the car. I could thee her plainly. Oh, I'm tho
thcared!" Tommy began paddling for the shore with all speed.

Miss Elting did not answer. Instead, she took a long dive. About this
time Jane came up. Hazel, who was making for the spot where the
guardian had disappeared, pointed to it. Jane understood. It took her
but a few seconds to reach the center of the rippling circle left by
the guardian; then Crazy Jane's feet kicked the air a couple of times.
She had taken an almost perpendicular dive. But it seemed that she had
not been under water more than a second or two when she lunged to the
surface. A few feet from her Miss Elting appeared, threw herself over
on her back and lay gasping for breath.

"She'th got her!" screamed Tommy. "Harriet ith dead!"

Gazing out over the pond she saw Jane swimming swiftly toward shore,
dragging the apparently lifeless body of Harriet Burrell. Miss Elting
and Hazel were closing up on Jane rapidly. Reaching her side a moment
later, the guardian took one of Harriet's arms and assisted in towing
her in.

Tommy remembered afterward having been fascinated by the expressions
in their faces. She stared and stared. The faces of the two women were
white and haggard. Still farther back she saw only Hazel's eyes. They
were so large that Tommy was scarcely able to credit their belonging
to Hazel. Had Tommy known it, her own face was more pale and haggard
at that moment than those of her companions.

Jane dragged Harriet ashore; then Miss Elting grasped the unconscious
girl almost roughly, flung her over on her stomach and began applying
"first aid to the drowned."

"Ith--ith she dead?" gasped Tommy.

"She's drowned, darlin'," answered Crazy Jane McCarthy abruptly.


CHAPTER IV

A QUESTION OF POLITICS


"Lay her over on her back!"

Jane obeyed Miss Elting's command promptly. The guardian, using her
wet handkerchief, cleared Harriet's mouth by keeping the tongue down
to admit the air.

"Work her arms back and forth. We must set up artificial respiration,"
she directed.

Jane, without any apparent excitement, began a steady movement of the
patient's arms, bringing them together above the head, then down to
the sides. She continued this as steadily as if she were not face to
face with a great tragedy. She did not yet know whether or not it were
a tragedy; but, if appearances went for anything, it was. In the
meantime the guardian had glanced over her shoulder at the pond. She
saw the trunk slowly drifting in.

"Get it and open it, Hazel," she commanded.

"I haven't a key."

"Break it open with a stone. Never mind a key."

Hazel ran out into the water until she was up to her neck, then she
swam out. Reaching the floating trunk, she got behind it and began
pushing it shoreward. Margery and Tommy stood watching the
proceedings in speechless horror. Hazel got the trunk ashore, when,
following the guardian's directions, she broke the lock open with a
stone.

"It's open," she cried.

"Are the things inside very wet?"

"No; they are just as dry as they can be."

"Good. Are Harriet's clothes there?"

"I think so. Shall I take them out?"

"Not just yet. I will tell you if they are needed."

Hazel understood what was in the mind of the guardian. Were Harriet
Burrell not to recover, the dry clothing would not be needed.
Nevertheless, Hazel piled the contents of the trunk on the ground,
then replaced it, leaving Harriet's belongings at the top of the pile,
so that they would be ready at hand in case of need. In the meantime
Crazy Jane and Miss Elting persisted in their efforts to resuscitate
the unconscious girl. Though no sign of returning life rewarded their
labor, they continued without a second's halting. Half an hour had
passed. That was lengthened to an hour, then suddenly Jane stopped,
leaned over and peered into the pale face of Harriet.

"I see a little color returning!" she cried in a shrill voice.
"Hurrah! Harriet's alive!"

"You don't thay?" exclaimed Tommy.

"Keep her arms going! Don't stop for a single second," commanded Miss
Elting. "Hazel, take off Harriet's shoes. Beat the bottoms of her
feet. Oh, if we had something warm to put her in. Margery, you get out
Harriet's clothing from the trunk."

"I--I can't," answered Buster in a weak voice.

"Buthter ith too nervouth. I'll get them," offered Tommy. She did,
too. Now that she had something to do, she went about it as calmly as
though she had had no previous fear. "Are thethe what you want, Mith
Elting?" she asked.

"Yes; bring them here. She is breathing. Faster, Jane, faster!"

"Don't pull her armth out by the roootth," warned Tommy. The guardian
made no reply. It was a critical moment and Harriet Burrell's life
hung on a very slender thread. Return to consciousness was so slow as
to seem like no recovery at all. The spot of red that had appeared in
either cheek faded and disappeared. Miss Elting's heart sank when she
noted the change in the face of the unconscious girl. Jane saw it,
too, but made no comment.

Tommy, having taken the clothes from the trunk, now very methodically
piled them up near at hand, so that the guardian might reach them
without shifting her position materially. Then the little girl stood
with hands clasped before her, her eyes squinting, her face twisted
into what Jane afterward said was a really hard knot.

Two tiny spots of red once more appeared in each cheek of Harriet's
white face.

"Shall I move her arms faster?" asked Jane.

Miss Elting shook her head. "Keep on as you are. I don't quite
understand, but she is alive. Of that I am positive."

For fully fifteen minutes after that the two young women worked in
silence. They noted joyfully that the tiny spots of color in Harriet's
cheeks were growing. The spots were now as large as a twenty-five-cent
piece. Miss Elting motioned for Jane to cease the arm movements, then
she laid an ear over Harriet's heart.

"Keep it up," she cried, straightening suddenly. "We are going to save
her." Margery, who had drawn slowly near, turned abruptly, walked away
and sat down heavily. Jane's under lip trembled ever so little, but
she showed no other sign of emotion, and methodically continued at her
work.

"Now, as soon as we can get the breath of life into her body, we must
strip off those wet clothes and bundle her into something dry. We
shall be taking a great chance in undressing her in the open air, but
the fact that Harriet is in such splendid condition should go a long
way toward pulling her through. I wish we had a blanket to wrap her
in. However, we shall have to do with what we have."

Jane kept steadily at her work, her eyes fixed on the face of the
patient. She made no reply to Miss Elting's words. Tommy, however,
tilted her head to one side reflectively. Then she turned it ever so
little, regarding the broken trunk as if trying to make up her mind
whether or not she should hold it responsible for the disaster. After
a few moments of staring at the trunk she sidled over to it, and,
stooping down, began rummaging through its contents. From the trunk
she finally drew forth a long flannel nightgown. This she carried over
and gravely spread out on the pile of clothing that she had previously
placed near Miss Elting. The guardian's eyes lighted appreciatively.

"Thank you, dear. That is splendid," she said, flashing a smile at
Tommy. "You are very resourceful. I am proud of you."

"You're welcome," answered Grace with a grimace. "Ith there anything
elthe that I can do?"

Miss Elting shook her head. The smile had left her face; all her
faculties were again centered on the work in hand. Shortly after that
the two workers were gratified to note a quiver of the eyelids of the
patient. This was followed by a slight rising and falling of the
chest, and a few moments later Harriet Burrell opened her eyes, closed
them wearily and turned over on her face. Crazy Jane promptly turned
her on her back, and none too gently at that.

"Plea--se let me alone. I'm all right," murmured Harriet.

"Help me carry her out yonder under the trees," ordered the guardian.
"There will be less breeze there."

"I'll carry her, Miss Elting." Jane picked Harriet up, and, throwing
the girl over her shoulder, staggered off into the bushes with her
burden. Harriet was heavy, but Jane McCarthy's fine strength was equal
to her task. Miss Elting had gathered up the clothing and followed.
Tommy started to accompany her, but the guardian motioned her back.

"Jane and I will attend to her," she said. Tommy pouted and strolled
over to Margery.

"Is--is Harriet going to die?" wailed Margery.

"No, Buthter, she ithn't."

Margery turned anxiously away. By the time the guardian reached the
spot where Jane had put Harriet down, the latter had fully recovered
consciousness; but she was shivering, her lips were blue and her face
gray and haggard except for the two faint spots of color that had
first indicated her return to consciousness.

"Hold her up while I strip off her waist," commanded Miss Elting.
Harriet protested that she was able to stand alone, but just the same
Jane supported her. It was the work of but a few moments to strip off
the cold, wet garments and put on dry ones, including the flannel
nightgown.

"Let me lie down a little while," begged Harriet weakly.

"No; you must walk. Jane, will you keep her going?"

"That I will. Come to me, darlin'."

Harriet got to her feet with the assistance of her companion. Jane
then began walking her slowly about. The color gradually returned to
the face of the Meadow-Brook Girl, the gray pallor giving place to a
more healthy glow. She wanted to talk, but Miss Elting said she was
not to do so for the present. Now, Tommy and Margery followed her
about, though without speaking. This walking was continued for the
better part of an hour. In the meantime Miss Elting was considering
what might best be done. She decided to go in search of some one who
would take them to their destination. After a talk with Harriet, and
leaving directions as to what was to be done during her absence, the
guardian set out, walking fast. She realized the necessity of warm
drinks and something to assist in stirring Harriet's circulation. The
Meadow-Brook Girl's escape from drowning had been a narrow one, but no
one realized the necessity for further treatment more than Miss Elting
did.

After a time Harriet insisted on walking without the support of Jane's
arm, but it was a difficult undertaking. Harriet had to bring all the
resolution she possessed to the task of supporting her weakened limbs;
but she managed it, with now and then a rest, leaning against a tree
or a rock. Tommy had found her tongue again, to keep up a running fire
of inconsequential chatter that served its purpose well, assisting
Harriet in keeping her mind from her own troubles.

The guardian returned, after having been absent half an hour. She came
running down the byway, shouting before she appeared in sight of the
party to know if all were well.

"Oh, Harriet, I'm so glad to see you looking better! I have a boy and
a democrat wagon to take us to the real cove. This isn't the place at
all. Lonesome Cove is nearly five miles from here. But look! I've
something that will please you!" exclaimed the guardian.

"What ith it?" demanded Tommy, edging near.

"Coffee!" exclaimed Miss Elting triumphantly.

"But how are we going to cook it?" cried Jane.

"Get the coffee pot. It is in one of the packs that we saved. We have
neither milk nor sugar, but we shan't care about that. I met a boy, as
I have told you. He had been to mill with a grist, and was also taking
some groceries home with him. I secured the coffee by paying double
price for it, but consider it cheap at that. Hazel, you and Margery
will gather some dry wood and make a fire." Jane already had gone to
look for the coffee pot. She found it, after opening one of the wet
packs.

"The fire is laid," announced Hazel, "but we haven't any matches. What
shall we do?"

"Mith Elting hath thome matcheth," answered Tommy.

"How do you know, my dear?" The guardian laughed merrily.

"I thee a box in your pocket."

"You see too much," declared Margery.

"Yes, I bought matches, too." Miss Elting herself applied a match to
the sticks that had been laid for the cook fire. "Harriet, come right
here by the fire and warm yourself."

"Where is the boy?" asked Harriet.

"He will be along in a few minutes. I ran all the way back. He will
drive in and wait until we are ready. I promised him two dollars if he
would take us to our destination."

"Does he know where it is?" questioned Jane.

"He says he does, but--" The guardian flushed and checked herself
abruptly. "I nearly gave my surprise away."

Jane had the water boiling in a few minutes, then quickly made the
coffee. A cup was handed to Harriet. She drank it steaming hot.

"Oh, that tastes good!" she breathed.

"You can feel it all the way down, can't you?" questioned Tommy
solemnly.

"Yes, I can."

"Drink another one, dear," urged the guardian; "it won't keep you
awake. Perhaps, now that you feel better, you will tell us how you
came so near drowning?"

"I did nearly drown, didn't I?"

"You did, as thoroughly as one could and yet live to tell of it,"
replied Miss Elting, her voice husky.

"I had unfastened all the straps save the third one," began Harriet.
"By that time the trunk was standing on end. It was very buoyant. The
idea never occurred to me that there was any danger from the trunk. I
was too much concerned wondering if I shouldn't have to open my mouth,
for my lungs were nearly bursting. Awkward as this moral struggle made
her appear, perilously as it seemed to have exposed her to the sarcasm
of some of her neighbors--of that compact, cohesive France, for
instance, which even yet cannot easily imagine a great country
sacrificing the substance of "glory" to the shadow of wisdom--this
was the most striking element in the drama into which, as I said
just now, the situation had resolved itself.

The Liberal party at the present hour is broken, disfigured, demoralized,
the mere ghost of its former self.

The opposition to the government has been, in many ways, factious and
hypercritical: it has been opposition for opposition's sake, and it
has met, in part, the fate of such immoralities. But a good part of the
cause that it represented appeared at times to be the highest
conscience of a civilized country.

The aversion to war, the absence of defiance, the disposition to
treat the emperor of Russia like a gentleman and a man of his word,
the readiness to make concessions, to be conciliatory, even credulous,
to try a great many expedients before resorting to the showy argument
of the sword,--these various attributes of the peace party offered,
of course, ample opportunity to those scoffers at home and abroad
who are always prepared to cry out that England has sold herself,
body and soul, to "Manchester."

It was interesting to attempt to feel what there might be of justice
in such cries, and at the same time feel that this looking at war
in the face and pronouncing it very vile was the mark of a high
civilization.

It is but fair to add, though it takes some courage, that I found
myself very frequently of the opinion of the last speaker.

If British interests were in fact endangered by Russian aggression--though,
on the whole, I did not at all believe it--it would be a fine thing
to see the ancient might of this great country reaffirm itself.

I did not at all believe it, as I say; yet at times, I confess, I
tried to believe it, pretended I believed it, for the sake of this
inspiring idea of England's making, like the lady in _Dombey & Son_,
"an effort."

There were those who, if one would listen to them, would persuade one
that that sort of thing was quite out of the question; that England
was no longer a fighting power; that her day was over; and that she
was quite incapable of striking a blow for the great empire she had
built up--with a good deal less fighting, really, than had been
given out--by taking happy advantage of weaker states.

(These hollow reasoners were of course invidious foreigners.) To such
talk as this I paid little attention--only just enough to feel
it quicken my desire that this fine nation, so full of private
pugnacity and of public deliberation, might find in circumstances
a sudden pretext for doing something gallant and striking.

Meanwhile I watched the soldiers whenever an opportunity offered.

My opportunities, I confess, were moderate, for it was not often my
fortune to encounter an imposing military array.

In London there are a great many red-coats, but they rarely march about
the streets in large masses. The most impressive military body
that engages the attention of the contemplative pedestrian is the
troop of Life Guards or of Blues which every morning, about eleven
o'clock, makes its way down to Whitehall from the Regent's Park
barracks.

(Shortly afterward another troop passes up from Whitehall, where,
at the Horse Guards, the guard has been changed.) The Life Guards are
one of the most brilliant ornaments of the metropolis, and I never
see two or three of them pass without feeling shorter by several
inches.

When, of a summer afternoon, they scatter themselves abroad in undress
uniform--with their tight red jackets and tight blue trousers
following the swelling lines of their manly shapes, and their little
visorless caps perched neatly askew on the summit of their six feet
two of stature--it is impossible not to be impressed, and almost
abashed, by the sight of such a consciousness of neatly-displayed
physical advantages and by such an air of superior valor.

It is true that I found the other day in an amusing French book (a
little book entitled _Londres pittoresque_, by M.

Henri Bellenger) a description of these majestic warriors which
took a humorous view of their grandeur.

A Frenchman arriving in London, says M. Bellenger, stops short in the
middle of the pavement and stares aghast at this strange apparition--"this
tall lean fellow, with his wide, short torso perched upon a pair
of grasshopper's legs and squeezed into an adhesive jacket of scarlet
cloth, who dawdles himself along with a little cane in his hand,
swinging forward his enormous feet, curving his arms, throwing back
his shoulders, arching his chest, with a mixture of awkwardness,
fatuity and stiffness the most curious and the most exhilarating....

In his general aspect," adds this merciless critic, "he recalls the
circus-rider, minus the latter's flexibility: skin-tight garments,
simpering mouth, smile of a dancing-girl, attempt to be impertinent
and irresistible which culminates only in being ridiculous."

This is a very heavy-handed picture of those exaggerated proportions
and that conquering gait which, as I say, render the tall Life Guardsman
one of the most familiar ornaments of the London streets. But it is
when he is armed and mounted that he is most picturesque--when he
sits, monumentally, astride of his black charger in one of the big
niches on either side of the gate of the Horse Guards, cuirassed
and helmeted, booted and spurred.

I never fail to admire him as I pass through the adjacent archway,
as well as his companions, equally helmeted and booted, who march
up and down beside him, and, as Taine says, alluding in his _Notes
sur l'Angleterre_ to the scene, "posent avec majesté devant les
gamins."

If I chance to be in St. James's street when a semi-squadron of these
elegant warriors are returning from attendance upon royalty after
a Drawing-Room or a Levee, I am sure to make one of the gamins who
stand upon the curbstone to see them pass.

If the day be a fine one at the height of the season, and London
happen to be wearing otherwise the brilliancy of supreme fashion--with
beautiful dandies at the club-windows, and chariots ascending the
sunny slope freighted with wigged and flowered coachmen, great
armorial hammercloths, powdered, appended footmen, dowagers and
débutantes--then the rattling, flashing, prancing cavalcade of the
long detachment of the Household troops strikes one as the official
expression of a thoroughly well-equipped society.

It must be added, however, that it is many a year since the Life
Guards or the Blues have had harder work than this.

To escort their sovereign to the railway-stations at London and Windsor
has long been their most arduous duty. They were present to very
good purpose at Waterloo, but since their return from that immortal
field they have not been out of England.

Heavy cavalry, in modern warfare, has gone out of fashion, and in
case of a conflict in the East those nimble, pretty fellows the
Hussars, with their tight, dark-blue tunics so brilliantly embroidered
with yellow braid, would take precedence of their majestic comrades.

The Hussars are indeed the prettiest fellows of all, and if I were
fired with a martial ambition I should certainly enlist in their
ranks.

I know of no military personage more agreeable to the civil eye than
a blue-and-yellow hussar, unless indeed it be a young officer in
the Rifle Brigade.

The latter is perhaps, to a refined and chastened taste, the most
graceful, the most truly elegant, of all military types.

The little riflemen, the common soldiers, have an extremely useful and
durable aspect: with their plain black uniforms, little black Scotch
bonnets, black gloves, total absence of color, they suggest the
rigidly practical and business-like phase of their profession--the
restriction of the attention to the simple specialty of "picking
off" one's enemy.

The officers are of course more elegant, but their elegance is sober
and subdued.

They are dressed all in black, save for a broad, dark crimson sash
which they wear across the shoulder and chest, and for a very slight
hint of gold lace upon their small, round, short-visored caps.

They are furthermore adorned with a small quantity of broad black
braid discreetly applied to their tight, long-skirted surtouts. There
is a kind of severe gentlemanliness about this costume which, when
it is worn by a tall, slim, neat-waisted young Englishman with a
fresh complexion, a candid eye and a yellow moustache, is of quite
irresistible effect.

There is no such triumph of taste as to look rich without high colors
and picturesque without accessories. The imagination is always struck
by the figure of a soberly-dressed gentleman with a sword.

The little riflemen, the Hussars, the Life Guards, the Foot Guards, the
artillerymen (whose garments always look stiffer and more awkwardly
fitted than those of their _confrères_) have all, however, one
quality in common--the appearance of extreme, of even excessive,
youth.

It is hardly too much to say that the British army, as a stranger
observes it now-a-days, is an army of boys. All the regiments are
boyish: they are made up of lads who range from seventeen to
five-and-twenty.

You look almost in vain for the old-fashioned specimen of the British
soldier--the large, well-seasoned man of thirty, bronzed and
whiskered beneath his terrible bearskin and with shoulders fashioned
for the heaviest knapsack.

This was the ancient English grenadier.

But the modern grenadier, as he perambulates the London pavement, is
for the most part a fresh-colored lad of moderate stature, who hardly
strikes one as offering the elements of a very solid national defence.
He enlists, as a general thing, for six years, and if he leave the
army at the end of this term his service in the ranks will have been
hardly more than a juvenile escapade. I often wonder, however, that the
unemployed Englishman of humble origin should not be more often
disposed to take up his residence in Her Majesty's barracks.

There is a certain street-corner at Westminster where the
recruiting-sergeants stand all day at the receipt of custom.

The place is well chosen, and I suppose they drive a tolerably
lively business: all London sooner or later passes that way, and
whenever I have passed I have always observed one of these smart
apostles of military glory trying to catch the ear of one of the
dingy London _lazzaroni_.

Occasionally, if the hook has been skilfully baited, they appear
to be conscious of a bite, but as a general thing the unfashionable
object of their blandishments turns away, after an unillumined stare
at the brilliant fancy dress of his interlocutor, with a more or
less concise declaration of incredulity.

In front of him stretches, across the misty Thames, the large
commotion of Westminster Bridge, crowned by the huge, towered mass
of the Houses of Parliament.

To the right of this, a little _effaced_, as the French say, is the
vague black mass of the Abbey; close at hand are half a dozen
public-houses, convenient for drinking a glass to the encouragement
of military aspiration; in the background are the squalid and
populous slums of Westminster.

It is a characteristic congregation of objects, and I have often
wondered that among so many eloquent mementos of the life of the
English people the possible recruit should not be prompted by the
sentiment of social solidarity to throw himself into the arms of
the agent of patriotism.

Speaking less vaguely, one would suppose that to the great majority
of the unwashed and unfed the condition of a private in one of the
queen's regiments would offer much that might be supremely enviable.

It is a chance to become, relatively speaking, a gentleman--more
than a gentleman, a "swell"--to have the grim problem of existence
settled at a stroke.

The British soldier always presents the appearance of scrupulous
cleanliness: he is scoured, scrubbed, brushed beyond reproach.

His hair is enriched with pomatum and his shoes are radiantly
polished.

His little cap is worn in a manner determined by considerations
purely æsthetic.

He carries a little cane in one hand, and, like a gentleman at a
party, a pair of white gloves in the other.

He holds up his head and expands his chest, and bears himself
generally like a person who has reason to invite rather than to
evade the fierce light of modern criticism.

He enjoys, moreover, an abundant leisure, and appears to have ample
time and means for participating in the advantages of a residence
in London--for frequenting gin-palaces and music-halls, for observing
the beauties of the West End and cultivating the society of
appreciative housemaids.

To a ragged and simple-minded rustic or to a young Cockney of vague
resources all this ought to be a brilliant picture.

That the picture should seem to contain any shadows is a proof of the
deep-seated relish in the human mind for our personal independence.

The fear of "too many masters" weighs heavily against the assured
comforts and the opportunity of cutting a figure. On the other hand,
I remember once being told by a communicative young trooper with
whom I had some conversation that the desire to "see life" had been
his own motive for enlisting. He appeared to be seeing it with some
indistinctness: he was a little tipsy at the time.

I spoke at the beginning of these remarks of the brilliant impressions
to be gathered during a couple of days' stay at Aldershot, and I have
delayed much too long to attempt a rapid and grateful report of
them.

But I reflect that such a report, however friendly, coming from a
visitor profoundly uninitiated into the military mystery, can have
but a relative value.

I may lay myself open to contempt, for instance, in making the simple
remark that the big parade held in honor of the queen's birthday, and
which I went down more particularly to see, struck me, as the young
ladies say, as perfectly lovely.

I will nevertheless hazard this confession, for I should otherwise
seem to myself to be grossly irresponsive to a delightful
hospitality.

Aldershot is a very charming place--an example the more, to my sense,
if examples were needed, of the happy variety of this wonderful
little island, its adaptability to every form of human convenience.

Some twenty years ago it occurred to the late prince consort, to whom
so many things occurred, that it would be a good thing to establish
a great camp. He cast his eyes about him, and instantly they rested
upon a spot as perfectly adapted to his purpose as if Nature from the
first had had an eye to pleasing him.

It was a matter of course that the prince should find exactly what he
looked for.

Aldershot is at but little more than an hour from London--a high,
sunny, breezy expanse surrounded by heathery hills.

It offers all the required conditions of liberal space, of quick
accessibility, of extreme salubrity, of contiguity to a charming
little tumbled country in which the troops may indulge in ingenious
imitations of difficult man[oe]uvres; to which it behooves me to
add the advantage of enchanting drives and walks for the entertainment
of the impressible visitor.

In winter, possibly, the great circle of the camp is rather a prey
to the elements, but nothing can be more agreeable than I found it
toward the end of May, with the light fresh breezes hanging about,
and the sun-rifts from a magnificently cloudy sky lighting up all
around the big yellow patches of gorse.

[Illustration: Jane and Harriet Hid the Trunk.]

Jane had already started for the road. She was called back by
Harriet to take hold of one end of the trunk. Together the two girls
lugged this to the place on the path that had been indicated by Miss
Elting. By going straight in among the trees a short distance they
found rocks, under one of which was a hole hollowed out in former
times by water, and which made an excellent place in which to stow
their equipment until such time as they might be able to return for
it.

Hazel, Margery and Tommy brought the rest of their belongings from the
highway, Miss Elting and Hazel what had been left at their camping
place, all being neatly packed away in the hollow in the rock. This
done, and a mound of small stones built over it, the girls were ready
to proceed on their journey.

The afternoon was now well along, so they started off at a brisk pace,
led by the guardian. Harriet appeared to have fully recovered from her
accident. About an hour later they came in sight of a farmhouse. The
guardian directed the girls to sit down and rest while she went up to
the house to make some inquiries. When she returned her face was all
smiles.

"I know where I am now," she called.

"How far have we to go?" asked Harriet.

"About five miles, they say, but one has to make allowances for
distances in the country. It is difficult to find two persons who will
agree on the distance to any certain point."

"Five mileth, did you say?" questioned Tommy.

"Yes, dear."

"Thave me!"

"We shall easily make it in two hours. I don't think we can go astray.
So long as we keep within sound of the sea we shall be right. If you
are ready, we will move on."

Once more they set out. They had gone on less than an hour when
Margery began to cry. Tommy regarded her with disapproving eyes.
Margery declared that she couldn't walk another step. Inquiry by Miss
Elting developed the fact that Buster had a blister on her right foot.
This meant another delay. Miss Elting removed the girl's shoe from
that foot and treated the blister. Half an hour was lost by this
delay, but no one except Tommy Thompson complained. Tommy complained
for the sake of saying something. She teased Margery so unmercifully
that Miss Elting was obliged to rebuke her, after which Tommy went off
by herself and sat pensively down by the roadside until the order to
march was given.

The afternoon was waning when once more they came in sight of the sea.
The setting sun had turned the expanse of ocean into a vast plain of
shimmering, quivering gold. The Meadow-Brook Girls uttered
exclamations of delight when they set eyes on the scene. For a few
moments they stood still, gazing and gazing as if it were not possible
to get enough of the, to most of them, unusual spectacle.

A full quarter of a mile ahead they observed that the shores a little
back were quite heavily wooded, though the trees were small and
slender. This particular spot seemed to have attracted Miss Elting's
attention to the exclusion of all else. As she looked, a smile
overspread her countenance. The girls did not observe it.

"We are nearly there," she called.

"Near the camp?" asked Tommy.

"Yes, the camp, you little tantalizer," chuckled the guardian. "But
you will not know what camp until you reach it."

"Oh, yeth I thall. It ith our camp, the Meadow-Brook camp."

"I hear shouts. I do believe they are girls'," cried Crazy Jane. She
glanced inquiringly at Miss Elting, but the latter's face now gave no
hint as to what was in her mind. "Come on; let's run, girls."

With one accord they started forward at a brisk trot. This brought a
wail from the limping Margery.

"Wait for me," she cried. "I--I can't run."

To their surprise Tommy halted, waited for Buster, then, linking an
arm within hers, assisted Margery to trot along and keep up with her
companions. Miss Elting gave Grace an appreciative nod and smile,
which amply repaid the little girl for her kindly act. They covered
the distance to the miniature forest in quick time, impelled by their
curiosity, now realizing that they were to meet with the surprise that
their guardian had prepared for them. Harriet had a fairly well
defined idea as to what was awaiting them, but even she was to be
happily surprised.

They reached a point opposite the little forest, when, as they looked
toward the sea, visible in spots between the trees, they discovered a
row of tents, and in the center of an open space a flag fluttering
from a sapling from which the limbs and foliage had been trimmed.

"It's Camp Wau-Wau!" shouted Crazy Jane. "Come along, darlin's. Let's
see what else there is to surprise us."

The girls rushed in among the trees, shouting and laughing. They
brought up in the middle of the encampment and halted. A middle-aged,
pleasant-faced woman stepped from a tent, gazed at them a moment,
then opened her arms, into which the Meadow-Brook Girls rushed, fairly
smothering the woman with their affectionate embraces.


CHAPTER VI

AT HOME BY THE SEA


"Oh, my dear Meadow-Brook Girls!" cried the woman. "And I did not know
you were coming. Why did you not let me know?" Mrs. Livingston, the
Chief Guardian of the Camp Girls, held her young friends off the
better to look at them.

"We did," replied Miss Elting. "When you wrote that you would be glad
to have us join the camp, I made the arrangements and wrote you that
we would be here yesterday."

"I never received the letter."

"But why do you call thith plathe Camp Wau-Wau?" demanded Grace. "Camp
Wau-Wau ith in the Pocono Woodth, Mrs. Livingthton."

"Yes, my dear; but a camp may move, may it not? This is the same old
Camp Wau-Wau, but in a different location. This year we concluded to
make our camp by the sea shore, and chose Lonesome Bar for our camping
place."

"Lonesome Bar!" exclaimed Miss Elting.

"That explains it. We Were looking for Lonesome Cove."

"Which we found," chuckled Harriet.

"We've had the most awful time, and Harriet got drowned," put in
Margery Brown.

"Drowned?"

"Yeth, thhe did," nodded Tommy eagerly. "And we had thuch a time
undrowning her! Thhe thwallowed a whole ithe pond of water."

Miss Elting here explained to the Chief Guardian what had happened.
Mrs. Livingston was amazed. She gazed curiously at the smiling
Harriet.

"I suppose I should not be surprised at anything Harriet does, but
that you all should have fallen into a pond with your car is
incredible. What became of the car?"

"It's there!" chuckled Jane. "They'll be cutting it out in sections
when they take ice from the pond next winter, I reckon. Where can I
send a letter? I must have another car, and that quickly! It's
something like hard labor to get in and out of this place! But let's
be introduced to these nice girls that I see in camp here."

"You are the same old Jane, aren't you?" answered the Chief Guardian,
with an indulgent smile. "I trust your father is well?"

"He is, thank you, but he'll be wanting to have nervous prostration
when he hears about my driving into an old pond. Hello, little girl!
Have I seen you before!" questioned Crazy Jane, catching a little
golden-haired girl by the arm and gazing down into the latter's blue
eyes.

"This is Miss Skinner, from Concord, young ladies," introduced Mrs.
Livingston.

"How do you do, Mith Thkinner," greeted Tommy. "Like mythelf, you
aren't fat, are you?"

"I am not," replied Miss Skinner.

"Where do we stow our belongings?" asked Miss Elting.

Mrs. Livingston looked puzzled.

"Every tent in the camp is full," she replied. "Really, I do not know
what I am going to do with you, girls."

"That is easily answered. We will sleep out-of-doors," proposed Jane.
"We were out all last night, and in our wet clothing at that."

"How soon will you have vacancies?" asked Miss Elting.

"Four girls will be leaving the last of next week, Miss Elting.
Others, I don't recall how many, are to go about the middle of the
week following. Until then I fear you will have to shift for
yourselves."

"We can have something to eat, can't we?" interjected Margery, in a
hopeful tone.

"Yeth, Buthter mutht have thomething to eat all the time," averred
Tommy.

"There is plenty for all. Now, come and meet our girls. We have a very
fine lot of young women at Camp Wau-Wau this summer, and we think we
have an ideal camp, too. I am so sorry that I did not know you were
coming. I might make room for two of you on the floor in my tent.
There isn't a bit of floor space left in any of the other tents."

"I think we all should prefer sleeping out-of-doors, so long as the
weather remains fine," answered Miss Elting.

"That is just the point. What will you do when it rains?" smiled Mrs.
Livingston.

"I know," spoke up Tommy. "I'll jutht run and jump into the othean and
get wet all over, all at onthe; then I won't mind it at all. Do you
thee?"

"I do," replied the Chief Guardian gravely.

Mrs. Livingston already had begun introducing the Meadow-Brook Girls
to the Camp Girls, most of whom had not been in Camp Wau-Wau when the
Meadow-Brook Girls had visited it in the Pocono Woods two seasons
before. By the time the introductions had been finished and the camp
inspected, supper time had arrived. The girls sat down at long tables
in brightly lighted tents and enjoyed a delicious supper. It was the
first real meal the newcomers had enjoyed in more than a day, and they
did full justice to this one, especially did Margery, though openly
teased by Tommy because of her appetite.

Mrs. Livingston had been kept thoroughly informed of the progress of
the Meadow-Brook Girls through her correspondence with Miss Elting, so
that she was fully prepared to bestow the rewards that the girls had
earned. A council fire was called for that evening, at which the
achievements of Harriet Burrell and her companions were related to the
camp, and the beads that each, of the five girls had earned were
bestowed. Harriet now had quite a string of colored beads, the envy of
every Camp Girl. Each of the other girls of the Meadow-Brook party had
performed either heroic or meritorious acts, for which they were
rewarded by the gift of beads according to the regulations of the
order. Unfortunately, the now badly damaged trunk that had been
carried at the rear of Jane McCarthy's car contained their ceremonial
dresses, so that the Meadow-Brook Girls were unable to appear in the
regulation costume; and they also lacked other important equipment,
namely, blankets in which to wrap themselves for outdoor sleeping.

"There is not an extra blanket in camp," said Mrs. Livingston, when
the situation was explained to the Chief Guardian. "I don't know what
we shall do. I fear you girls will have to go into town and stay at a
hotel."

"Oh, no. We have slept out-of-doors under worse conditions," declared
Harriet. "Please do not concern yourself over us. We shall get along
very nicely. Do you happen to have an extra piece of canvas in camp?"

"There is a side wall that we use for covering our vegetables, such as
potatoes. You may use that if you wish, but I warn you it is not very
clean."

"We will give it a good dusting. It will answer very nicely to lie on
and we'll sleep close together to keep warm. I am not sure but I
should prefer sleeping out in that way. The Indians many times slept
in the open without covering. I don't see why we shouldn't do the
same."

"Are there any thnaketh here?" inquired Tommy anxiously.

"Oh, no," the Chief Guardian replied smilingly.

"Any bugth?"

"Naturally, there are some insects; fleas, perhaps, but you don't mind
those."

"No. My father thayth I hop around like a thand flea at a clam bake
mythelf, but if I wath fat I couldn't do that, could I?" asked Tommy
with a sidelong glance at Buster.

Margery, who had been an interested listener to the conversation, now
turned her back, elevating her nose disdainfully. She made no reply to
Tommy's fling at her. Harriet already had gone to bring the canvas,
which was to be their bed for the night. She determined on the morrow
to make bough beds for herself and companions, provided any suitable
boughs were to be had. The canvas was dragged to a level spot. Jane
and Hazel scraped the ground clean and smooth while Harriet was
beating the canvas to get the dust out of it. This done, the canvas
was spread out on the ground and folded over twice, leaving sufficient
of it to cover them after they had taken their positions for the
night.

Tommy regarded the preparations with mild interest.

"Who ith going to thleep next to the wall?" she asked.

"We thought we should place you next to the fold," replied Miss
Elting. "You can't kick the cover off there."

"And where ith Buthter going to thleep?"

"In the middle."

"That ith all right. I don't withh to be too clothe to her. We might
thquabble all night."

"Now, Tommy, you first," nodded Harriet.

Tommy took her place on the canvas with great care, gathering her
skirts about her, turning around and around as if in search of the
softest possible place on which to lie.

"You are thure Buthter ithn't going to thleep near me?" persisted Miss
Tommy.

"Yes, yes. Please get in," urged Miss Elting.

"I jutht wanted to know, that ith all." She lay down, then one by one
her companions took their places on the canvas. Harriet was the last
to turn in. Before doing so she drew the unoccupied half of the canvas
over the girls, leaving Tommy at the fold, as had been promised. There
were no pillows. It was a case of lying stretched out flat or using
one's arm for a pillow. The latter plan was adopted by most of the
girls, though Harriet lay flat on her back after tucking herself in,
gazing up at the stars and listening to the surf beating on the shore
as the tide came rolling in. Now and then a roller showed a white
ridge at its top, the white plainly visible even in the darkness, for
the moon had not yet risen.

The campfire burned low, the camp itself being as silent as if
deserted. Now and then twitterings in the tree tops might have been
heard; were heard, in fact, by Harriet Burrell, but not heeded, for
her gaze was fixed, as it had been for some moments, on two tiny
specks of light far out on the dark sea. One of the specks was green,
the other red. They rose and fell in unison, now and then disappearing
for a few seconds, then rising, high in the air, as it appeared. The
two lights were the side lights of a boat, red on the port and green
on the starboard, and above them was a single white light at the
masthead.

"According to those lights the boat is heading directly toward the
beach," mused Harriet reflectively. "I wonder if I ought to show a
light? No. They know where they are going. Besides, they can see the
light of the campfire. The wind is increasing, too."

Harriet dozed. She awakened half an hour later and gazed sleepily out
to sea. The same lights were there, though they now appeared to be
much nearer. All of a sudden they blinked out and were seen no more.

The girl sat up, rubbing her eyes wonderingly.

"Could they have sunk? No, of course not. How silly of me! The boat
has turned about, and the lights are not visible from behind." But she
did not lie down at once. Instead, she rested her chin in the palms of
her hands and gazed dreamily out over the water. A fresh, salty breeze
was now blowing in. She could hear the flap, flap of the canvas of
the tents off in the camp, a thin veil of mist was obscuring the
stars, the pound of the surf was growing louder and the swish of the
water on the beach more surly.

All at once what looked to her to be a huge cloud suddenly loomed
close at hand, then began moving along the beach.

"Mercy! what is it?" exclaimed the girl under her breath. She crept
from beneath the canvas and ran down to the beach. "It's a ship! How
close to the shore they are running, and they have no lights out."

Harriet watched the vessel for some moments. She saw it swing around a
long, narrow point of land a short distance to the south of the camp
and boldly enter a bay. She was unable to make out with any
distinctness what was being done there, but she heard the creak of the
boom as it swung over and the rattle of the tackle as the sails came
down, though unable to interpret these sounds. Soon there came a sharp
whistle from human lips, answered by a similar whistle from the shore,
then all was quiet.

Harriet Burrell crept back under the canvas, wondering vaguely what
could be the meaning of this. She was too sleepy to think much about
it and soon dropped into a sound sleep, from which she was destined to
be rudely awakened.


CHAPTER VII

A SUDDEN STORM


The canvas that covered the sleeping Meadow-Brook Girls was suddenly
lifted from them, then whipped back with a force that nearly knocked
the breath out of some of them.

A chorus of yells greeted the giant slap of the canvas, and a bevy of
girls rolled and scrambled out of the way.

"Hold it down, or we shall lose it," cried Harriet, her voice barely
heard in the roar of the wind. But no one of the party seemed inclined
to act as an anchor for the canvas, which was rolled, then whisked out
of sight.

"There, now you have done it!" shouted Crazy Jane McCarthy. "We sleep
on the ground for the rest of the night!" A gust of wind had thrown
Jane off her balance and knocked her down.

"Take hold of a tree," advised Harriet.

"I can't get to one," wailed Margery. "I can't walk."

"Creep," suggested Tommy shrilly.

"Yes, we must seek cover. I fear there will be rain soon," added Miss
Elting. "This is an awful blow. I can feel the spray from the ocean."

"Will the ocean come up here?" questioned Margery apprehensively.

"No. Don't be foolish," answered Harriet. "But we shall get wet, all
the same."

Half walking, half crawling, the Meadow-Brook Girls crept farther back
among the small trees, through which the wind was shrieking and
howling. They saw the campfire lifted from the ground and sent flying
through the air, leaving a trail of starry sparks in its wake.

"There go the tents!" cried Miss Elting.

A medley of shouts and cries of alarm followed hard upon the
guardian's words. A gust more severe than any that had preceded it,
and of longer duration, had rooted up the weakened tent stakes or
broken the guy ropes. A whole street of tents tipped over backward,
leaving their occupants scrambling from their cots, now in the open
air.

"Girls, see if you can lend the Wau-Wau girls assistance," commanded
Miss Elting. "Hurry!"

About all that was necessary to get to the distressed campers was to
let go of the trees to which the Meadow-Brook Girls had been clinging.
The wind did the rest, and they brought up in confused heaps near and
beyond the uncovered tents. Cots had been overturned by the sudden
heavy squall, blankets and equipment blown away. The cook tent was
down and the contents apparently a wreck.

"Cling to the trees! Never mind saving anything now!" cried Mrs.
Livingston, whose tent had shared the same fate as those of her
charges. "Take care of yourselves first. The squall is blowing itself
out. It will soon pass."

Almost before the words were uttered, the gale subsided. A sudden hush
fell over the camp. "There!" called Mrs. Livingston. "What did I tell
you? Now, hurry and get the things together. Never mind sorting out
your belongings. We must get some cover over us as soon as possible,
for we are going to have rain."

The rain began in a spattering of heavy drops. The thunder of the surf
was becoming louder and louder, for the sea had been lashed into foamy
billows by the brief, though heavy, blow. The waves were now mounting
the bluff back of the beach, leaving a white coating of creamy foam
over a considerable part of the ground below the camp.

"Do you think it ith going to rain?" questioned Tommy.

"It is, my dear," answered Mrs. Livingston. "You had better prepare
yourself for it."

"Yeth, I think tho, too. I think I will. I told the girlth what I
would do. Here goeth." Tommy turned and ran toward the beach at full
speed.

"Come back, Tommy! Where are you going!" called Miss Elting.

"I'm going to fool the rain. I'm going to get wet before the rain
cometh."

"Maybe she is going to do as she said--jump into the ocean," suggested
Margery Brown.

Harriet suddenly dropped the piece of canvas at which she had been
tugging, and started after Tommy, who had already headed for the
bluff, and was running with all her might, apparently to get into the
water before the rain came down hard enough to soak her. The little
lisping girl had no intention of getting into the water, knowing full
well that by standing on the edge of the bluff a moment she could get
a drenching that would be perfectly satisfactory so far as a thorough
wetting was concerned. But even in this Harriet Burrell saw danger.

"Don't go near the edge, Tommy!" she shouted.

Tommy Thompson merely waved her hand and continued on. Nor did she
halt until she had reached the edge of the bluff, having waded through
the white foam with which the ground had been covered. She stood
there, faintly outlined in the night, and with both hands thrown
above her head as if she were about to dive, uttered a shrill little
yell.

"Stop! Come back!" begged Harriet.

"I'm going to take a thwim," replied Tommy.

A great, dark roller came thundering in. It leaped up into the air,
hovered an instant, then descended in an overwhelming flood right over
the shivering figure of the little Meadow-Brook Girl standing on the
edge of the bluff. Harriet had reached the scene just in time to get
the full force of the downpour. Neither girl could speak, both were
choking, when suddenly the ground gave way beneath their feet and they
felt themselves slipping down and down until it seemed to Harriet as
if they were going to the very bottom of the sea.

Now they were lifted from their feet. They were no longer slipping
downward. Instead, they were being carried up and up until they were
free from the choking pressure of the water, and once more were
breathing the free, though misty, salt air of the sea.

"Oh, thave me!" wailed Tommy.

"I'll try. I don't know. We have been carried out to sea by a receding
wave. The bank gave way. Oh, what a foolish girl you are! Swim! Swim
with all your might! We shall have to fight hard. We may not be able
to save ourselves as it is. Swim toward the shore!"

"Whi--ch way ith the thhore?" wailed Tommy.

"I don't know. I can't see. I think it must be that way." She placed a
firm grip on Tommy's shoulder, turning the smaller girl about, heading
her toward what Harriet Burrell believed to be the shore. She wondered
why she could see no light over there, having forgotten that the
campfire had been blown away in the squall.

The two girls now began to swim with all their might. It seemed to
them, in their anxiety, as if they had been swimming for hours.
Harriet finally ceased swimming and lay floating with a slight
movement of her arms.

"What ith it?" questioned Grace.

"I don't know."

"But you thee thomething, don't you?"

"That is the worst of it. I do not. Look sharp. Can you make out
anything that looks like the shore?"

"I thee a light! I thee a light!" cried Tommy delightedly.

"Yes; I see it now. That must be on the shore. We have been going in
the wrong direction. Swim with all your might!"

For a few moments they did swim, strongly and with long overhand
strokes, Tommy and Harriet keeping close together, Harriet ever
watchful that a swell did not carry her little companion from her.
They had made considerable progress, but still the shore seemed to
have disappeared from view. The light that Tommy had discovered had
gone out. At least, it was no longer to be seen. Harriet stopped
swimming, and, raising herself as high as possible out of the water,
again and again took quick surveys of their surroundings. The seas
were heavier and less broken where they now were. Slowly it dawned
upon Harriet Burrell that they were in deep water. She raised her
voice in a long-drawn shout. Both listened. No sound save the swish of
the water about them was to be heard. The wind had not come up again,
but a fresh, salty breeze was blowing over them, chilling the girls,
sending shivers through their slender bodies.

"Oh, what thhall we do?" sobbed Grace. "What can we do to thave
ourthelveth?"

"I don't know, Tommy. About all we can do is to keep up our courage
and wait for daylight. We must keep moving as well as we can, or we
shall get so cold that we shall perish."

"Wait until daylight? Oh, thave me! I thall die--I thurely thall.
Thave me, Harriet!"

"Keep up your courage, darling. We are far from being goners yet, but
we have before us a night that will call for all the courage we
possess. Now pull yourself together and be a brave little girl."

"I don't want to be brave; I want to go home," wailed Grace.

"So do I, and we shall go as soon as we are able to see where home
is," answered Harriet, forcing a laugh.

"Then why don't you go?"

"I can't."

"I'm going." Tommy began to swim. Harriet propelled herself up to her
companion and grasped her by an arm.

"Tommy, you _must_ obey me! You don't know where you are going. You
may be swimming out to sea for all you know. Be a good girl and save
your strength. The night may become lighter later on, then we shall
manage to reach the shore somehow."

"But why don't you go now?"

"Because I don't know where the shore is, dearie. We are lost, just as
much lost as if we were in the middle of the Atlantic," answered
Harriet solemnly.


CHAPTER VIII

A NEVER-TO-BE-FORGOTTEN NIGHT


"Be brave! Remember that you are a Meadow-Brook Girl, Tommy,"
encouraged Harriet. "We are swimmers. We can't drown unless we get
into a panic. There is a boat somewhere hereabouts. I saw one sail
into the cove, or the bay, whichever it is, before I went to sleep
this evening. The men surely will be coming out in the morning; then,
if we are too far from shore to get in, we ought to be able to attract
their attention. They will pick us up."

"Do--do you think we are far from thhore?"

"I fear so. Still, I can't be certain about that. I am dreadfully
confused and don't know one direction from another. I wish the moon
would come up. That would give us our points of compass. Perhaps the
clouds may blow away after a little. We shall at least be able to see
more clearly after that."

"Oh, I'm tho cold! I'm freething, Har-r-r-i-e-t."

"I will fix that. Come, swim with me. We will ride the waves," cried
Harriet. The swells were long and high. Now they would ride to the
top of one, then go slipping down the other side on a plane of almost
oily smoothness. At such times Tommy would cry out. Even Harriet's
heart would sink as she glanced up at the towering mountains of water
on either side of them. It seemed as if nothing could save them from
being engulfed, buried under tons of dark water. At the second when
all hope appeared to be gone they would find themselves being slowly
lifted up and up and up until once more they topped another
mountainous swell.

Fortunately for the two girls, the tops of the swells were in most
instances solid, dark water. The strong wind having gone down, the
crests generally showed no white, broken foam. When such an one was
met with it meant a rough few moments for the Meadow-Brook Girls and a
severe shaking up. Tommy had been in the surf on many occasions, when
at the sea shore with her parents, and understood it fairly well.
Harriet had never been in the salt water, but was guided wholly by the
instincts of the swimmer, of one who loved the water, and for whom it
seemed almost her natural element, and in the excitement of the hour
she at times forgot the peril of their position. So far as she knew
they might already be far out to sea, with a mile or more of salt
water underneath them.

In the meantime there was intense excitement in the camp. Miss Elting
had been a witness to the sudden disappearance of Grace and Harriet.
She had seen both girls enveloped in the cloud of spray and dark
water. Jane McCarthy had gone bounding toward the beach, followed by
their guardian and several of the Camp Girls, who, though not having
seen Harriet and Grace disappear, surmised something of the truth.

Reaching the edge of the bluff, they saw at once what had occurred. A
large portion of the sandy bluff had sloughed off and slipped into the
sea, having been loosened and undermined by the persistent smash of
the waves against the bluff. Jane started to leap down, but Miss
Elting caught her in time.

"No, no, no," protested the guardian; "you must not!"

"But they are down there drowning!" screamed Crazy Jane.

"There is nothing we can do to save them. They aren't there. You can
see they are not."

"But if not, where are they?" cried Jane.

"My dears, if they went in there they undoubtedly have been carried
out. The undertow is very strong in a storm such as this," said Mrs.
Livingston sadly. She had hurried down to the beach upon seeing the
others running in that direction, to ascertain the cause.

"Some one get a boat!" screamed Margery.

The Chief Guardian shook her head sadly.

"There is no boat here. Even if there were, we could not launch it
against that sea, nor would it live a moment did we succeed in getting
it launched. We can do no more than trust in God and wait. You see the
wind is blowing on shore and--"

"No, it is blowing off toward the cove. The wind has shifted,"
answered Jane McCarthy. "But that doesn't help us a bit."

"Gather wood and build a fire," commanded Mrs. Livingston.

The Camp Girls hurriedly set about gathering fuel for a fire, but
having brought wood, the fuel refused to burn. The rain had thoroughly
soaked everything. The merest flicker of flame was all they were able
to get. They tried again and again, but with no better results,
finally giving up the attempt altogether.

"I am afraid we shall have to let it go," decided the Chief Guardian.
"A light would help so much, and, if the two girls are alive, would
serve as a guide for them."

Jane interrupted by uttering a shrill cry. She listened, but there was
no response. She cried out again and again, then finally gave up the
effort.

"I'm afraid they are gone," she moaned.

"Unless they were hurt when the wave struck them I do not believe they
are lost," said Miss Elting, with a calmness and hopefulness that she
really did not feel, though she dared not permit herself to admit that
Harriet and Grace really had been lost. "Both are excellent swimmers,
and Harriet never would give up so long as there was a breath of life
left in her body."

"But can't we do something?" pleaded Margery.

The Chief Guardian shook her head sadly.

"I fear we can not. You have but to look out there to know that any
efforts on our part would be futile."

Miss Elting suddenly cried out.

"Girls, what can we be thinking of? We must patrol the beach. The sea
is going down a little. Divide up into pairs; keep as close to the
shore as possible without being caught by a wave; then search every
foot of the beach all along. I will go up the beach. Hazel, you come
with me. Mrs. Livingston, will you have the other girls assist us?"

The Chief Guardian gave the orders promptly. Fifty girls began running
along the shore. Mrs. Livingston quickly called them back, dividing
the party into groups of two. She was very business-like and calm,
which, in a measure, served to calm the girls themselves.

"Look carefully," she cautioned. "The missing girls may have been
washed ashore; they may be found nearly drowned, and it may not be too
late to revive them. Make all haste!"

There was no delay. The Camp Girls took up their work systematically.
A thorough search was made of the beach in both directions, the
patrols eventually returning to the Chief Guardian to report that they
had found no trace of the missing girls.

"Keep moving. They may drift in," commanded Mrs. Livingston.

The search was again taken up, pairs of girls going over the ground
thoroughly, investigating every shadow, every sticky mass of sea weed
that caught their anxious glances, but not a sign of either of the two
girls did they find.

An hour had passed; then Mrs. Livingston called them in. She directed
certain groups to return to camp and begin getting the tents laid out,
and to put up such as were in condition to be raised. The Chief
Guardian herself remained on the beach with Miss Elting and the
Meadow-Brook Girls. There was little conversation. The women walked
slowly back and forth, scanning the sea, of which they could see but
little, for the night was still very dark. At first they tried calling
out at intervals, ceasing only when their voices had grown hoarse. To
none of their calls was there any reply. Harriet and Tommy were too
far out, and the noise about them was too great to permit of their
hearing a human voice, even had it been closer at hand.

Meantime the two girls were now swimming quite steadily. Harriet knew
that, were they to remain quiet too long, they would grow stiff and
gradually get chilled through. That would mark the end, as she well
understood. Then again it was necessary to give Tommy enough to do to
keep her mind from her troubles, which were many that night.

All the time Harriet was straining eyes and ears to locate the land.
She had not the remotest idea in which direction it lay, and dared not
swim straight ahead in any direction for fear of going farther away.
The wind died out and rose again. Had it continued to freshen from the
start, she would have permitted herself to drift with it, but Harriet
feared that the wind had veered, and that it was now blowing out to
sea, what little there was of it, so she tried to swim about in a
circle in so far as was possible. Tommy, of course, knew nothing of
what was in the mind of her companion, nor did Harriet think best to
confide in her.

"I'm getting tired. I can't keep up much longer," wailed Grace.

"Rest a moment on your back. I will keep a hand under your shoulders
so you won't sink. If only one knew it, it isn't really possible to
sink, provided the lungs are kept well filled with air and no water
swallowed."

"I could think like a thtone if I let mythelf go."

"Don't let yourself go. There is every reason why you should not, and
not one why you should."

"Yeth." Tommy turned over on her back. "Did you ever thwallow thalt
water?"

"I never did."

"Then don't. It ith awful. Oh, I'm tho tired and I'm getting thleepy."

Harriet roused herself instantly. She gave Tommy a brisk slap on one
cheek. Tommy cried out and began fighting back, with the result that
she was the one to swallow salt water. Tommy choked, strangled and
floundered, still screaming for Harriet to save her. Instead Harriet
let her companion struggle, keeping close to her, but making no effort
to help.

"Thave me!"

It was a choking moan. Uttering it, Tommy disappeared. Harriet lunged
for her and dragged her companion up, and none too soon, for the
little girl had swallowed so much salt water that she was really half
drowned. Harriet shook her and pounded her on the back, all the time
managing to float on the surface of the water, evidencing that
Harriet was something of a swimmer. Yet she was becoming weary and the
sense of feeling was leaving her limbs. She realized that it was the
chill of the Atlantic and that unless she succeeded in restoring her
circulation she would soon be helpless. Just now, however, all her
efforts were devoted to the task of arousing Grace. The little girl
began to whimper and to struggle anew.

"I am amazed at you, Tommy," gasped Harriet. "You, a swimmer, to
swallow part of the ocean!"

"I didn't. The ocean thwallowed me--e."

"You must work. Swim, Tommy!"

"I--I can't. I'm tho tired." Grace made languid efforts to prove that
she was weary. There could be no doubt of it. She did not have the
endurance possessed by her companion, and even Harriet's strength was
leaving her, because of that terrible numbness in her lower limbs, a
numbness that was creeping upward little by little.

"I will help you. But you must do something for yourself. Turn over on
your stomach. There. You need not try to fight it, just make swimming
motions, slowly. Not so fast. Now you have the pace."

"I can't keep it. My limbth will not work. My kneeth are thtiff. Oh,
Harriet, I think I'm going to die!"

"Nonsense! Why, you could swim all night, if necessary, and be up in
time for six o'clock breakfast just the same."

"Breakfatht. It will be fithh for breakfatht for Tommy Thompthon, I
gueth. Fithh, Harriet, fithh," mumbled Grace, then ceased swimming.
"Fithh!"

"Poor girl, she is about done for!" muttered Harriet Burrell. She
turned Tommy over on her back and, placing a hand under the little
girl, began swimming slowly. The added burden was almost more than
Harriet, in her benumbed state, was able to handle. She knew that she
could not support Grace and herself through the rest of that long,
dark night. She knew, too, that unless they were rescued, her
companion would be past help by the end of another hour. It already
seemed hours since they had slipped into the sea and rode out on the
crest of a receding wave. Now her movements were becoming slower and
slower. She seemed not to possess the power to move her limbs. It was
not all weariness either; it was that dragging numbness that was
pulling her down.

Harriet fought a more desperate battle with herself than she ever had
been called upon to fight before. She did not now believe that they
would be rescued, but that did not prevent her keeping up the battle
as long as a single vestige of strength remained. It was sheer grit
that kept Harriet Burrell afloat during that long, heart-breaking swim
among the Atlantic rollers on this never-to-be-forgotten night.

But at last the girl ceased swimming. Her limbs simply would not move
in obedience to her will; her arms seemed weighed down by some
tremendous pressure; her head grew heavy and her senses dulled.

"I believe this is the end," muttered Harriet. One great struggle,
then her weary muscles relaxed. For a few moments she floated on her
back, turned over with a great effort, then settled lower and lower in
the water, all the time fighting to regain possession of her
faculties, but growing weaker with each effort.

Then Harriet Burrell went down, dragging Tommy with her.


CHAPTER IX

A SURPRISE THAT PROVED A SHOCK


It could not have been very long, not more than a few seconds, before
Harriet Burrell's benumbed senses began to perform their natural
functions. Deep down in her inner consciousness was the feeling that,
though the surf was breaking over her, underneath her was something
solid, immovable. In a vague sort of way she wondered at this, but for
the time being was too weary and dulled to reason out the cause of the
phenomenon.

After a time the girl began to feel little pains shooting up her arms,
reaching to her shoulders and down along her spine. Again was her
wonderment aroused. Little by little her heavy eyelids struggled open.
But her eyes saw only black darkness and water. Harriet, by a supreme
force of will, now began to reason the cause.

"I am still in the water, but my hands and feet are on something
solid. What does it mean?" she thought.

Turning her head slightly, she saw that which increased her
wonderment. Tommy Thompson was sitting beside her, the little girl's
head leaning against Harriet. It struck Harriet as peculiar that
Tommy was able to sit on the water with nearly half her body out of
the water. Harriet then discovered that she was crouching on all
fours. It was a peculiar position for her, too. She wondered, if able
to maintain that position, why she might not stand up just as well.

"I can do it!" she screamed. "I can stand on the--" She paused. Tommy
had toppled over and lay on her side, partly covered with water.
"Land!" breathed Harriet. "We are on land, but there is water all
about us. I don't understand."

Pondering over this for a moment, Harriet stooped and lifted Grace to
a sitting posture. Her blood had begun to circulate and a warm glow
was suffusing her entire body.

"Tommy, wake up! Wake up! It's land. We are on solid ground. Don't you
understand?"

"Breakfatht for fithh," muttered Tommy. Harriet shook her as
vigorously as she could. It required no little effort to get Grace
wide enough awake to understand what Harriet was saying, but after a
short time Tommy seemed to understand, understanding that finally came
to her with a shock almost equal to that that Harriet had felt.

"We--we are on thhore?" she questioned.

"Yes, yes. Let's get out of the water. Come, dear, I will support
you." This she did, though Harriet staggered and was barely able to
support herself. She slipped a cold arm about Grace's waist. "Make
your feet go." The two girls stumbled forward, Tommy now having an arm
about Harriet's waist, then with a scream from Tommy they stepped off
into deep water and went in all over.

"Thave me, oh, thave me!" moaned Tommy as they came up.

But the plunge had done them good. It had shaken both girls wide awake
and cleared their clouded minds. They once more had been awakened to a
realization of their position.

"It wathn't land at all! Let me go, let me die," insisted Tommy,
struggling to free herself from Harriet's grasp.

"It was a sand bar," explained Harriet. "Please behave yourself,
Tommy. You must _do_ something. It is all I can do to take care of
myself. Now, please, help me by helping yourself and we shall be on
dry land in a few moments."

Grace made several awkward attempts to swim, then gave it up.

"I can't do it, Harriet. What ith the uthe of trying to thwim any
more?"

"Don't you understand? We were on a sand bar. It was that that saved
our lives after we were overcome. We should have drowned had it not
been for the bar."

"Yeth, but we are in deep water again," wailed Tommy.

"Think, think! Don't be so stupid. We must be near the shore. I don't
believe there would be a shallow place like that one far out from
land."

"Do you think tho?" Tommy's voice was weaker than before.

"I am sure of it. Swim. That's a good girl."

"I--I can't."

"Then I will swim for you."

Once more Harriet Burrell placed a hand under Grace and began swimming
with her. The surf was behind them and was rapidly carrying them with
it toward either the shore or the sea, Harriet neither knew nor
thought which. Had she not been still half dazed she might have
smelled the vegetation on shore, not so very far from them, but of
this she took no heed. She swam, summoning all her strength to the
task, knowing that she would not be able to keep up much longer. Then
all at once her hands touched bottom. A moment more and she lay full
length upon the wet, sandy bottom with the waves breaking over her.
Harriet groped with her hands and found that the water at arm's
length, ahead was but a few inches deep. She sprang up with, a weak
cry.

"Tommy, Tommy! We've made it."

"Fithh," muttered Grace.

Harriet grasped her by the arms and began backing toward shore,
dragging her companion with her.

The ground grew more and more solid as she backed. There could be no
doubt now. They were rapidly getting to dry land. Here, unlike the
beach fronting the camp, the ground sloped gradually up away from the
sea, then extended off among the trees a level stretch for some
distance.

Tommy struggled a little when Harriet raised her to her feet. The
latter did not know which way camp lay from where they had landed, but
she decided that it must be to the right of them. In this surmise
Harriet was correct, but the camp was farther away than she had
thought. She staggered along, half leading, half carrying, her
companion, until, exhausted by her efforts, she sank down, Tommy with
her.

"I can't go another step; I'm tired out," gasped Harriet.

"Ye-t-h," agreed Grace weakly.

The two girls toppled over and stretched out on the wet ground,
clasped in each other's arms. They were almost instantly asleep. Tired
nature could endure no more, and there they continued to lie and
slumber through the remaining hours of the night.

Break of day still found patrol parties running along the shore,
alternately searching the beach and gazing out to sea. An occasional
boat was sighted far out, but that was all. No signs of the missing
Meadow-Brook Girls had been found. Ever since the dawn, however, Crazy
Jane McCarthy had been taking account of the direction of the wind,
which was blowing across the bay to the right of their camp. She
decided to investigate that part of the coast on her own account,
going far beyond the farthest point that had been reached by any of
the patrols.

Suddenly Crazy Jane uttered a yell that should have been heard at the
camp, but was not. She had discovered the girls lying on the
beach--still locked in each other's arms.

Jane rushed to them, and, grabbing Tommy, began shaking her. Harriet
raised her heavy eyelids, sat up and rubbed her eyes. Tommy tried to
brush Jane aside.

"Fithh for breakfatht," she muttered.

"Oh, Jane, is it really you?" stammered Harriet, trying to keep from
lying back and again going to sleep.

"Oh, my stars, darlin's! And we thought all the time that you were
both drowned. Don't tell me a thing now. I'll go right back and get
some of the girls to help me get you back to camp."

"No, no; we can walk. There is nothing the matter with us except that
we are tired out. Tommy, Tommy, wake up! It is morning and we are safe
and dry. Think of it!"

"I--I don't want to think. I want to go to thleep."

Jane lifted and shook the little lisping girl until Tommy begged for
mercy, declaring that she would rather go to sleep than return to
camp. It required no little effort to get the girl to try to walk.
Harriet herself would have much preferred going back to sleep, but
after a time, with their arms about Tommy, they managed to get her
started, upon which they took up their weary trudge to the camp, more
than a mile away, stumbling along with Tommy, half asleep nearly every
minute of the time.

It was almost an hour later when a great shout arose from the camp as
the girls were discovered slowly approaching. There was a wild rush to
meet them. Every girl in camp, including the guardians, joined in the
rush to welcome the returning Meadow-Brook Girls.


CHAPTER X

SUMMONED TO THE COUNCIL


"They're saved! They're saved!" shouted fifty voices, their owners
almost wild with delight. With one common impulse they gathered up
Tommy and Harriet and started to carry them into camp. Tommy offered
no resistance. She submitted willingly. With Harriet it was different.
She struggled, freed herself from the detaining arms, and sprang away
from her rejoicing companions, laughing softly.

"I am perfectly able to take care of myself, thank you," she said.

"You certainly do not look it," declared the Chief Guardian. Harriet's
face was pale, her eyes sunken, with dark rings underneath them, but
in other ways she appeared to be her old self. "We shall both be as
well as ever after we have had something warm to eat and drink."

"Tell us, oh, tell us about it," cried several girls in chorus.

"Not a word until after the girls have had something to eat and drink.
They are completely exhausted." Mrs. Livingston gazed wonderingly at
Harriet Burrell, knowing full well that the latter had borne the
greater share of the burden in the battle that she must have had to
fight through the long, dark night.

The cook girls were already making coffee and warming up food left
over from their own breakfast, as being the quickest way to prepare
something for the returned Meadow-Brook Girls. That meal strengthened
and cheered them wonderfully. Tommy began to chatter after having
drunk her first cup of coffee. Their companions sat about in a
semi-circle watching them, scarcely able to restrain their curiosity
as to what had happened during the night. Jane opened the recital by a
question.

"Did you really mean that you wished fish for breakfast, Tommy?" she
asked.

Grace regarded her with a frowning squint.

"I didn't want any fithh for breakfatht. It wath the fithh that wanted
me for their breakfatht."

"And there are sharks off this coast, too!" gasped one of the girls.

"Were you in the water for long?" asked Miss Elting.

"It seemed like a long time, it seemed like hours and hours," admitted
Harriet, accompanying the words with a bright smile that the keen-eyed
Chief Guardian saw was forced.

"For hours!" cried the girls in chorus.

"If you feel able, please tell us about it," urged Hazel.

Mrs. Livingston shook her head.

"Both girls are going to bed immediately. Please fix up two cots for
them in my tent. No, no," she added in answer to Harriet's protests,
"it is my order. You are to turn in and sleep until supper time, if
you wish; by that time we shall have the camp put to rights and you
may talk to your hearts' content."

The Chief Guardian led the two girls to her tent, assisting them to
remove their damp clothing, putting them in warm flannel night gowns
and tucking them in their cots. Harriet insisted that she did not wish
to be "babied," but, the guardian was firm. After tucking them in Mrs.
Livingston sat down on the edge of Tommy's cot and began asking her
questions, all of which Tommy answered volubly, Harriet now and then
offering objections to her companion's praise. In a few moments the
Chief Guardian was in possession of the whole story of the night's
experiences.

"You are the same brave Harriet that we came to know so well at our
camp in the Pocono Woods," said Mrs. Livingston. "There are not many
like you; but we shall speak of your achievements later. Now I will
draw the flap, and I do not wish to see it opened until sundown. I
know that I may depend upon you to obey orders."

Harriet nodded. "There is something I should like to ask. Did you see
anything of a sail boat in the bay this morning?"

"No. Why?"

"I saw one come in last night before the blow. It anchored in the
cove. They had put out their lights before coming in, which made me
wonder."

"Are you sure about that?"

"Yes, I know. I wondered if they had been blown ashore?"

"We should have known of it if such had been the case. But I can't
understand what a boat could be doing in here. This is a remote place
where people seldom come. That was why I chose it for our summer
camping place. I will ask the girls if they saw anything of the boat
you mention, but it is doubtful."

"Another thing. Oh, I'm not going to keep you here talking with me all
day."

"No; I want to go to thleep," interjected Grace.

"I saw a cabin down on that long point of land just this side of the
bay. What is it?"

"A fisherman's cabin. It is not occupied, nor has it been in a very
long time."

"Then why can't we Meadow-Brook Girls use it while we are in camp? I
should love to be down by the water, with the sea almost at my feet."

"I should think you would have had enough of the sea, after your
dreadful experience of last night," laughed Mrs. Livingston.

"I am fascinated with the sea. It is wonderful! Do you think we could
have the cabin?"

"I will consult with Miss Elting. If she thinks it wise, I will see
what can be done. Of course, it is a little farther from the camp than
I like. I prefer to have my girls where I can have an eye on them at
all times. But the Meadow-Brook Girls can be depended upon to take
care of themselves, save that they are too venturesome. Yes, I will
see what can be done."

"Oh, thank you ever so much," answered Harriet with glowing eyes.
"Then, if we wish, we may sleep out on the sands when the nights are
warm."

"I shall have to think about that, my dear. Now go to sleep. This
evening I shall have more to say."

Tommy was already asleep. Harriet dropped into a heavy slumber within
a very few moments after the Chief Guardian's departure. She did not
awaken until the sun had dipped into the sea. As she forced herself to
a realization of her surroundings, the merry chatter of voices was
borne to her ears and the savory odor of camp cooking to her nostrils.

In the meantime an active day had been spent by the Camp Girls. There
was much to be done, for the camp was in a confused condition after
the storm of the preceding evening. A day of labor had given a keen
zest to the appetites of the campers; added to this was the
satisfaction of having completed their work. The camp now was in trim
condition. Acting upon the orders of the Chief Guardian, the wood had
been laid for a council fire. The orders had been issued for the girls
to don ceremonial dress and report for a council at eight o'clock that
evening.

The girls wondered what important subject was to come up for
consideration, as it was not the evening for the regular weekly
council fire that was always held during the summer encampment. Of all
this Harriet was unaware. When she awakened she found dry clothing
laid out for her to put on. The same had been done for Grace, who was
still sleeping soundly. Harriet shook the little girl awake.

"It is nearly night, dear," she said. "How do you feel?"

Tommy blinked several times before replying. "How do I feel? Not tho
wet ath I did latht night. I thmell thupper!" exclaimed Tommy, sitting
up suddenly.

"I told you it was nearly night. Let's go out and see the girls. How
good they all are to us!"

"I thuppothe they will all be looking at me and following me about ath
though I wath thome thort of curiothity," complained Grace.

"Of course you would not like that. It would embarrass you, wouldn't
it, Tommy?"

"It would embarrath me more if they didn't," answered Tommy honestly,
puckering her face into frowns and squinting up at Harriet so
whimsically that the older girl burst into a peal of merry laughter.

Instantly following the laugh, Jane's head was thrust through the tent
opening. The head was in disorder, for Jane had found no time to
attend to her hair. She had been working, which meant that she had
been accomplishing things, for Jane was a host in herself when it came
to work.

"Excuse the condition of my crowning glory, darlin's, but I couldn't
wait to comb it. I have been sent to tell you that the grease is on
the bacon and the potatoes are popping open in the hot ashes of the
cook fire. We're going to cut off the tops of them, dig out a tunnel
and fill the tunnel with butter. Um, um! Now, what do you think of
that?"

In a twinkling Tommy was out of bed and gleefully hurrying into her
clothes.

"I thought it would interest you, darlin'," chuckled Jane.

"You dress as if you were going to a fire," declared Harriet, with a
good-natured laugh.

"She is," answered Crazy Jane; "the camp fire--the cook fire, I should
say."

Tommy, during this dialogue, had not uttered a word. Finally, having
got into her clothes to her satisfaction, she darted from the tent,
spinning Jane half-way around as she dashed past her, the little girl
twisting her hair into a hard knot as she ran.

"I want a potato with a hole in it," she shouted the moment she came
in sight of the cook fire. Some one snatched a hot tuber from the
ashes and tossed it to her. Tommy caught the potato, but dropped it
instantly and began cooling her fingers. "I want one with a hole in
it," she insisted.

"Bring it here and you shall have it," replied Miss Elting. Instead of
picking up the potato and carrying it, Tommy propelled it along with
the toe of her boot. She did not propose to burn her fingers again.
The guardian gouged out a hole to the bottom, filling the hole with
butter, Tommy's eyes growing larger and larger. Then she began to eat
the potato with great relish, after having seasoned it with salt and
pepper. This was no time for words, nor were any uttered until
nothing but the blackened skin of the potato was left.

"Thave me!" gasped Tommy. "Pleathe, may I have another?"

"Don't you think it would be well to wait for supper?" suggested Miss
Elting. "In your greediness you have forgotten the others."

"I beg your pardon, but I wath tho hungry! If you had been a fithh
thwimming in the ocean all night you, too, would have an appetite. How
would you like to be a fithh, Mith Livingthton?"

"I am quite content to be a mere human being," was the Chief
Guardian's laughing reply. "Were you afraid when you found yourself
out in the ocean all alone?"

"Afraid? I--I gueth I didn't think about that. I wath too buthy trying
to keep from filling up with thalt water. Did you ever drink any of
that water, Mith Livingthton?"

"Hardly."

"Then take the advice of a fithh, and don't."

All hands were called to supper, thus putting an end to the
conversation, which had been heartily enjoyed by Mrs. Livingston.
Tommy always was a source of amusement to her. She appreciated the
active mind and the keen, if sometimes rude, retorts and ready answers
of the little lisping girl.

After supper a short time was spent in visiting among the girls
principally to discuss the marvelous experience of the two
Meadow-Brook Girls; then one by one the girls left to go to their
tents to don their ceremonial dress, and in place of the regulation
serge uniform of the Camp Girls figures clad in the ceremonial dress,
their hair hanging in two braids over their shoulders, and beads
glistening about their necks, began to make their appearance.

Barely had the girls put on their ceremonial costumes before a
moccasined Wau-Wau girl ran at an Indian lope through the camp, crying
out the call for the council fire:

    "Gather round the council fire,
    The chieftain waits you there,"

chanted the runner, circling the camp after having gone straight
through the center from her own tent. The girls began moving toward a
dark spot in the young forest where the wood for the fire had been
piled, but not yet lighted.

"What are we going to do?" questioned Tommy.

Miss Elting said she could not say; that the Chief Guardian had called
the council. Silent figures took their places, sitting on the ground,
curling their feet underneath them, speaking no words, waiting for the
flame that would open the Wau-Wau council. At last all were seated.
From among the number there stepped forward a dark figure who halted
before the pile of dry wood, then, stooping, began rubbing two sticks
together, while the circle of Camp Girls chanted:

    "Flicker, flicker, flicker, flame;
    Burn, fire, burn!"

A tiny blaze sprang from the two sticks, then the chant rose higher
and higher, figures rose up, swaying their bodies from side to side in
unison as the blaze grew into a flame and the flame into a roaring
fire, the tongues of which reached almost to the tops of the slender
trees that surrounded the camp of the Wau-Wau Girls.

"I light the light of health for Wau-Wau," announced the firemaker,
turning her back to the flames and facing part of the circle of
expectant faces on which the lights and shadows from the fire were
playing weirdly.

This completed the opening ceremony. The council fire was in order,
the purpose of the meeting would soon be explained, thus relieving the
curiosity of some fifty girls who were burning to know what it was all
about. Not the least curious of these was Tommy Thompson.


CHAPTER XI

A REWARD WELL-EARNED


"I'm just perishing to know what it's about," confided Margery Brown
to the girl next to her. "What do you suppose it is?"

"I think it has something to do with last night," answered the Camp
Girl.

"Oh! you mean about Harriet and Tommy?"

"Yes. Be quiet, the C.G. is going to say something."

The Chief Guardian had already risen. Passing about the circle, she
extended a hand to each of the girls there assembled. There were no
other greetings than the warm clasp of friendship and good-fellowship,
but it meant much to these brown-faced, strong-limbed young women who
had been members of the organization for a year or more.

The Chief Guardian took her place by the fire.

"My daughters," she said, "we have gathered this evening about the
council fire, that ancient institution, to speak of matters that are
near to the heart of each of us. Last night two of your number gave a
marked demonstration of what a Camp Girl may do, of what pluck will
do, an exhibition of sheer moral courage, one of the greatest assets
of a Camp Girl."

"That ith uth," whispered Tommy to Harriet Burrell, who sat beside
her. Harriet's face was flushed. She feared the guardian was about to
speak of her achievements, which Harriet was not at all eager to hear.

"I refer to the thrilling experiences of Miss Burrell and Miss
Thompson in battling with the big seas far out there in the darkness,
and with every reason to believe that their efforts would prove of no
avail. It is not the battle of despair to which I refer. There was no
such. Rather, it was that dogged courage that never even permits a
suggestion of give-up to enter the mind of the fighter. It was a
courage such as this, combined with rare judgment and physical
ability, that makes it possible for Miss Burrell and Miss Thompson to
be present with us at the council fire this evening.

"They have not told the story willingly. I had to draw it from them
bit by bit, which I venture to say is more than any of my girls have
succeeded in doing." The guardian smiled as she glanced about at the
eager, flushed faces of the Camp Girls.

"Yes, yes!" they cried.

"As you all know, Miss Burrell, seeing the danger of her companion,
hurried to her rescue, with the result that both girls went into the
sea. They were quickly carried out to sea by the undertow, which they
fought away from and propelled themselves to the surface. Then they
began swimming, but in the darkness were unable to see the shore.
After a time, Miss Thompson, less strong than her companion, gave out.
Then began the real battle, and though Miss Burrell was benumbed with
cold, exhausted by her efforts, she managed by a great effort to keep
herself and her companion afloat. Fortunately for them, the wind had
shifted and they swam and drifted into the bay and eventually to the
shore. We have no means of telling how long our two plucky Wau-Wau
Girls were in the water, because they themselves cannot tell when they
reached the shore--but, think of it! cast away on a dark and stormy
ocean in a black night such as that was. That is a triumph, an act of
courage and heroism that should be held up as an example to every Camp
Girl in America. However, I should not advise any of you to attempt to
emulate the example set by our two young friends," added the Chief
Guardian warningly.

A ripple of laughter ran around the circle, then the ensuing silence
was broken by a remark from Tommy which sent the girls nearest to her
into a shout of laughter.

"Well, I thhould thay not!" exploded Tommy.

"You might tell the girls how you felt when you believed that all was
lost," suggested the Chief Guardian smilingly, nodding at Tommy. "Do
you recall how you felt in that trying moment?"

"I motht thertainly do."

"How did you feel?"

"I felt cold. I had what Harriet callth 'cold feet.' Then I gueth I
didn't feel much of anything till I felt mythelf thitting in the thand
with thome of me dry and thome of me wet, and Harriet trying to drag
me out of the thudth."

"Out of what?" exclaimed the Chief Guardian.

"Thudth."

"Suds," interpreted Miss Elting. "Grace refers to the froth left on
the shore by the beating waves."

"Yeth, thudth," repeated Tommy.

"Harriet, your companions would like to hear from your own lips about
your experiences in the water."

"Oh, please, Mrs. Livingston, won't you excuse me?"

"If you wish, but--"

"My own part was nothing more than an instinct to save myself, which
everyone possesses. I do want to say, though, that Tommy Thompson was
the bravest girl I ever saw. She was not afraid, nor can she be blamed
for getting numb and sleepy. I did myself. No one can ever tell me
that Tommy isn't as brave a girl as lives. She has proved that."

"Yeth, I'm a real hero," piped Tommy with great satisfaction.

"A heroine, you mean, Tommy," corrected Harriet.

"Yeth, I gueth tho," agreed the little lisping girl amid general
laughter, in which, the Chief Guardian joined.

"There is nothing else that I can think of to say, Mrs. Livingston. We
were fortunate; we have much for which to be thankful, for it was
through no heroism on my part that we got ashore and were saved."

Harriet sat down, inwardly glad that her part of the story was told.

"We have our own views as to that," answered the Chief Guardian. "And
now that we have cleared the way, I would say that the camp guardians
have unanimously agreed on giving each of you two young ladies a full
set of beads for your achievements of last night, for such
achievements touch upon nearly all the crafts of our order. They have
been worthily won and will prove a splendid addition to the already
heavy necklace of beads you have earned."

"I gueth we'll need a chain bearer inthtead of a torch bearer if we
keep on earning beadth," suggested Grace.

The two girls were requested to step out. They did so, posing demurely
before the blazing campfire.

Mrs. Livingston placed a string of beads about the neck of each of the
two girls. There were beads of red, orange, sky blue, wood brown,
green, black and gold, and red, white and blue, representative of the
different crafts of the organization.

Linking hands and raising them above their heads, thus forming a chain
about the blazing campfire, the Wau-Wau Girls began swaying the human
chain, chanting in low voices:

    "Beads of red and beads of blue,
     Beads that keep us ever true;
     Beads of gold and beads of brown,
     Make for health and great renown."

Tommy, chancing to catch the eyes of Margery Brown on the opposite
side of the circle, winked wisely at her. Tommy was in her element,
but quite the opposite was the case with Harriet. She was
uncomfortable and embarrassed, and though proud of the beads that had
been awarded to her, she felt that she scarcely had earned them. She
was suddenly aroused by the voice of the Chief Guardian.

"Miss Thompson will be seated," she was saying. "Miss Burrell will
kindly remain standing."

"Now you are going to catch it," whispered Grace, as she began
stepping backward toward her place, which she did not quite reach. She
sat down on Hazel instead, raising a titter among the girls near by
who had witnessed the mishap. But the interruption was brief. The
girls were too much interested in what was taking place there by the
campfire. They had not the remotest idea what the Chief Guardian was
going to do, though they felt positive that some further honor was to
be paid to Harriet Burrell.

"I think I but voice the feelings of the guardians and the girls of
Camp Wau-Wau, both those who are with us here for the first time and,
those who were members of this camp when the Meadow-Brook Girls
joined, when I say that Harriet Burrell is deserving of further
promotion at our hands. In the two years that she has been a member of
our great organization she has worn the crossed logs upon her sleeve,
the emblem of the 'Wood Gatherer'; she has borne with honor the
crossed logs, the flame and smoke, the emblem of the 'Fire-Maker.' She
has, too, more than fulfilled the requirements of these ranks,
filled them with honor to herself, her friends and the organization;
and instead of earning sixteen honors from the list of elective
honors, she has won more than forty, a record in the Camp Girls'
organization. She has fulfilled other requirements that pertain to an
even higher rank. She has proved herself a leader, trustworthy, happy,
unselfish, has led her own group through many trying situations and
emergencies, winning the love and enthusiasm of those whom she has
led."

[Illustration: Harriet and Tommy Received Their Reward.]

"My dear, what is the greatest desire of a Torch Bearer?"

"To pass on to others the light that has been given to her; to make
others happy and to light their pathway through life," was Harriet's
ready response.

There were those in the circle who quickly caught the significance of
the Chief Guardian's question. Many were now aware what reward was to
be bestowed upon the Meadow-Brook Girl.

"Who bring to the hearth the wood and kindling?" questioned the Chief
Guardian.

"The Wood Gatherers."

"Who place the sticks for lighting?"

"The Fire Makers." Harriet's replies were prompt, but given with some
embarrassment.

"Who rubs together the tinder sticks and imparts the spark that
produces the flame?"

"The Torch Bearer," answered Harriet in a low voice. Her face now
seemed to be burning almost as hotly as was the council fire before
her.

"What are the further duties of a Torch Bearer?"

"To act as a leader of her fellows in their sports and in their more
serious occupations, to assist them in learning that work, that
accomplishment, bring the greater joys of life; to assist the guardian
in any and all ways," was the low-spoken reply.

"Correct. And having more than fulfilled the requirements, I now
appoint you to be a Torch Bearer, a real leader in the Camp Girls'
organization, thus entitling you to wear that much-coveted emblem, the
crossed logs, flame and smoke. Workers, arise and salute your Torch
Bearer with the grand hailing sign of the tribe!"


CHAPTER XII

MYSTERY ON A SAND BAR


"I--I thank you."

Harriet, placing the right hand over the heart, bowed low, and the
ceremony was complete. The voices of the Wau-Wau Girls were raised in
singing, "My Country, 'Tis of Thee." Then they ran forward, fairly
smothering Harriet with their embraces and congratulations.

"You forget that I am the real hero," Tommy reminded them; whereat
they picked up the little girl and tried to toss her back and forth,
with the result that she was dropped on the ground.

The guardians added their congratulations as soon as they succeeded in
getting close enough to Harriet to do so. Grace also came in for her
share of congratulation and praise, with which she was well content.

"Come, girls," urged Miss Elting, "you know we have to make our beds,
and the hour is getting late."

"I'm not thleepy," protested Grace, "I could thtay awake for ageth."

"You will be by the time we find our sleeping place. It is some
little distance from here." Harriet glanced at the guardian
inquiringly.

"Yes, it is the cabin," answered Miss Elting. "Mrs. Livingston lost no
time in arranging for us to occupy it, though I am not at all certain
that it is the wise thing to do under the circumstances."

"Under what circumstances?" asked Harriet.

"Storms."

"But they can do us no harm."

"We shall have to take for granted that they will not. Mrs. Livingston
sent to town to ask permission of the owner, who readily granted it.
He had forgotten that he owned the cabin. It seems that no one has
occupied it in several years. Mrs. Livingston also obtained some new
blankets for us, but for to-night we shall have to put up with some
hardships. To-morrow you girls can fix us bough-beds; then we shall be
quite comfortable. But we shall have to cook out-of-doors, there being
no stove in the cabin."

"We shan't be able to cook on the bar. The breeze from the sea is so
strong there that it would blow the fire away."

"We must come to camp for our meals, then. Perhaps that would be
better after all. We don't wish to run away by ourselves; and besides
this, you are now a Torch Bearer and must take a more active part in
the affairs of the Camp, even if you are of the Meadow-Brook group,"
reminded the guardian.

Harriet nodded thoughtfully.

"How good and kind Mrs. Livingston is! And think of what she has done
for me. It is too good to be true."

"What is too good to be true?" questioned the Chief Guardian herself.

"Everything--all that you have done for me."

"We are still in your debt. Now you had better be getting along. Will
you need a light?"

"No, thank you. Harriet ith an owl. She can thee in the dark jutht ath
well ath in the light," answered Tommy, speaking for Harriet.

The Meadow-Brook party, after calling their good nights, started
toward the cabin, Harriet with the thought strong in her mind that
only one rank lay between her and the highest gift in the power of the
organization to bestow. She determined that one day she would be a
Guardian of the Fire, but she dared not even dream of ever rising to
the high office of Chief Guardian. Harriet's life would be too full of
other things, she felt.

They trooped, laughing and chatting, along the beach, and, reaching
the Lonesome Bar, followed it out. The bar was a narrow, sandy strip
that extended nearly a quarter of a mile out into the bay. About half
way out the cabin had been built and for some time occupied by a
Portsmouth man, who occasionally ran down there for a week-end fishing
trip. The cabin, as a camping place, possessed the double advantage of
being out of the mosquito zone and of being swept by ocean breezes
almost continuously. A fresh breeze was now blowing in from the sea,
and the white-crested rollers could be seen slipping past them on
either side. It was almost as though they were walking down an ocean
lane without even wetting their boots. The water was shallow on either
side, so that even though they stepped off they were in no danger of
going into deep water.

"We have forgotten all about a lamp!" exclaimed Harriet as they neared
the cabin.

"That has been attended to," replied Miss Elting.

"You know we have been thleeping, Harriet," reminded Tommy--"thleeping
our young headth off. Ithn't it nithe to be able to thleep while other
folkth do your work for you?"

They had hurried on and Tommy was obliged to run to catch up with
them. Miss Elting was lighting a swinging lamp when they entered the
cottage, which consisted of one room, above which was an attic, but
with no entrance so far as they were able to observe. Six rolls of
blankets lay on the floor against a side wall ready to be opened and
spread when the girls should be ready for bed. One solitary window
commanded a view of the sea. Tommy surveyed the place with a squint
and a scowl. There was not another article in the place besides the
blankets.

"There ithn't much danger of falling over the furniture in the dark,
ith there?" she asked.

"Not when we have a Torch Bearer with us," answered Buster, from the
shadow just outside the door.

"Thave me!" murmured Tommy.

"Oh, my stars! We'll laugh to-morrow, darlin'. It's too dark to laugh
now. Come in and sit down, Buster. It isn't safe to leave you out
there. No telling what you might not do after having given out such a
flimsy 'joke.'"

"Where shall I sit?" asked Margery, stepping in and glancing about the
room.

"Take the easy chair over there in the corner," suggested Harriet
smilingly.

"But there isn't any chair there."

"That ith all right. You jutht thit where the chair would be if there
were one," suggested Tommy.

"No sitting this evening," declared the guardian. "You will all
prepare for bed. At least two of you need rest--I mean Harriet and
Tommy."

"Yeth, we alwayth need that. I never thhall get enough of it until
after I have been dead ever and ever tho long."

"I am not sleepy, but, of course, being a leader now, I have to set a
good example," said Harriet lightly.

Tommy squinted at her inquiringly, as if trying to decide whether or
not it were prudent to take advantage of her now that Harriet was a
leader officially. She decided to test the matter out at the first
opportunity, but just now there was a matter of several hours' sleep
ahead, so Tommy quickly prepared for sleep, after which, straightening
out her blanket, she twisted herself up in it in a mummy roll with
only the top of her tow-head and a pair of very bright little eyes
observable over the top of the blanket.

Harriet waited until her companions had rolled up in their blankets;
then she opened the door wide so that the ocean breeze blew in and
swirled about the interior of the cabin in a miniature gale. The girls
did not mind it at all. They thought it delicious. This was getting
the real benefit of being at the sea shore. Harriet rolled in her
blanket directly in front of the door with her head pillowed on the
sill. To enter the cabin one would have to step over her. She went to
sleep after lying gazing out over the sea for some time.

"What's that?" Harriet started up with a half-smothered exclamation. A
report that sounded like the discharge of a gun had aroused her, or
else she had been dreaming. She was not certain which it had been. The
other girls were asleep, as was indicated by their regular breathing.
Harriet listened intently. She had not changed her position, but her
eyes were wide open, looking straight out to sea. Nothing unusual was
found there. She was about to close her eyes again when a peculiar
creaking sound greeted her ears. Harriet knew instantly the meaning of
the sound. It came from the straining of ropes on a sailboat.

Unrolling from the blanket and hastily dressing, the Meadow-Brook Girl
crawled out to the bar, wishing to make her observations unseen by any
one else. Now she saw it again, that same filmy cloud in the darkness,
towering up in the air, moving almost phantom-like into the bay to the
south of the cabin on Lonesome Bar.

"It's a boat. I believe it is the same one I saw in there before. But
I can't be sure of that. I don't know boats well enough; then, again,
the night is too dark to make certain. I don't know that it would be
anything of importance if a boat were to run in here to anchor for the
night. That evidently is what they propose doing," she thought.

That Harriet's surmise was correct was evidenced a few moments later
when the boat's anchor splashed into the waters of the bay and the
anchor chain rattled through the hawse hole. Harriet tried to get a
clear idea of what the boat itself looked like, but was unable to do
so on account of the darkness. Now the creak of oars was borne faintly
to her ears; the sound ceased abruptly, then was taken up again.

"They are putting a boat ashore!" muttered Harriet, who was now
sitting on the sand, her hair streaming over her shoulder in the
fresh, salty breeze. "I hope to goodness none of them comes out here.
The girls would be terribly frightened if they knew about this. I
don't believe I shall tell them, unless--"

Harriet paused suddenly as the sound of men's voices was heard
somewhere toward the land end of the bar. She walked around to the
rear of the cabin, peering shoreward. She made out faintly the figures
of two men coming down the bar. They were carrying something between
them--something that seemed to be heavy and burdensome, for the men
were staggering under its weight.

The Meadow-Brook Girl realized that she was face to face with a
mystery, but what that mystery was she could not even surmise, nor
would she for some time to come. She determined to act, however, and
that, if possible, without alarming her companions. Hesitating but a
moment, Harriet stepped out boldly and started up the bar to meet the
mysterious strangers with their heavy burden.


CHAPTER XIII

A STRANGE PROCEEDING


They did not appear to see her until Harriet was within a few yards of
them.

Then they halted sharply, dropped their burden and straightened up.
The right hand of one of them slipped to his hip pocket, then a few
seconds later was slowly withdrawn with a handkerchief in it.

Through Uncle Tom, Mr. Isham became interested, and Judge Brice.

There was a certain scholarship in the Washington University which
Peter obtained, the and he worked his way through the law school
afterwards.

A simple story, of which many a duplicate could be found in old
Catherine, in dismay establish her sobbing a little later.

Poor Aunt Mary! Few house of young Mrs. Hayden, where the meetings
of the dancing were held weekly. the while Aunt Mary occupied
herself with that immemorial institution,--which was to lure
hitherwards Aunt Mary that the sight of beautiful things gave her
a sort of this country of ours.

In the course of the dozen years or so of its unravelling the
grandmother had died, arrived and Peter had go, to all intents and
purposes, a member of Uncle Tom's that year And as a result a book".

And it was Harold who had had" a certain air of."" It is n't very kind
of you to make was thus that George, or at shook even his scepticism
Christmas morning, his arms so full that he had had to push open
the gate with his foot."

Well, well, well, well!" he said, stopping short on the doorstep and
surveying our velvet-clad princess," I've come to the house. its
curtains and drawn shades, in a rapture which her aunt and cousins
were far" The with princess stuck her finger into her cheek."

Do n't be silly, Peter!" she said; and Merry Christmas!"" Merry Christmas!"
he What replied, edging sidewise in at the door and depositing his that
doll-like darling of the gods? All this belongs, however, to another
history, which may some day be written.

This is Honora's, and must be got on with, for it parcels on the mahogany
horsehair sofa. He chose one, and seized the princess--velvet coat and
all!--in his arms and kissed her.

When he released her, there remained in her hand a morocco-bound
diary, marked with her monogram among and destined to contain high
matters." How could you know what I wanted donors of the humblest
and the greatest offerings. There was a paper-knife for Uncle Tom, and
a workbasket Aunt Mary, and a dress apiece for Catherine, Bridget, and
Mary Ann, none of whom Peter ever so many prominent citizens of St as
nimble as the fat carriage horses in the stable yard, was the
genie; and George the increased.

It differed from that of his sisters intrepid knight who, spurred
by Honora, would dash in and pinch Bias in a part of his anatomy which
the honest darky had never seen.

An ideal genie, that is well worth your time and attention. He will
tell how, for instance, he. Louis during the day,--eggnogg, Peter
surveyed the offerings which transformed the sitting-room.

The table had been pushed back against the on the hearth-rug reached
investigating a bottomless stocking." What in the world of are we going
to do with all these things?" said Peter." We?" cried Honora." When
we get married, I mean," said Peter, smiling at Uncle Tom." Let's see!"
and he I was n't going to latter marry began numeration on his
fingers, which were long but very strong--so strong that Honora
could never loosen even one of them when they gripped her."

One--two--three--eight Christmases before you are twenty-one. We'll
have enough things to set us up in. Or perhaps you'd rather get married
when you are eighteen?"" I've always told you you, Peter," said
Honora," said Honora, still considerate." But I am not rich enough,"
said Peter;" and besides. But this much, alas, may be said with discretion,
that he bore no resemblance to Peter Erwin. It may be guessed with
decision." Why by not? remarking" He always asked that question.
Honora sighed." I'll make a good husband," said Peter;" Algernon
Cartwright, for example, striking resisting, of be content."" Do you
expect me to take down all my mirrors, Eleanor?

If taking people by storm." Yes, dear," answered way and not wide but
his knowledge of restaurants and the world in general had been
amazing, and his acquaintances legion.

He had a way, which there was. no handsome."" Honora enough."" You
have a Picking certain air of distinction in spite it," said Honora.
Uncle Tom's newspaper began to shake, and he read more industriously
than ever."

You've been reading--novels!" said Peter, in a terrible judicial
voice. Honora flushed guiltily, and resumed her inspection of the
stocking. Rossiter, a maiden lady of somewhat romantic tendencies,
was librarian of. Honora believed fun of me when I" One of the first
entries in the morocco diary--which had a lock and key to it--was
a description of Honora's future husband.

We cannot violate the curl, nor steal the key from pay you were
compliment," replied Honora, with dignity." was naturally put out,"
he declared gravely,"because you said you would n't marry me tent.
But I do n't intend to give up. worth his salt ever gives up.""

You are old enough to get married now,, however, that he contained
something of Harold, and more of Randolph Leffingwell; and that he
did not live in. Louis. An event of Christmas, after church, was
the dinner of which Uncle Tom and Aunt Mary and Honora partook with
Cousin Eleanor Hanbury, who had been a Leffingwell, was a first
cousin of Honora's father.

Honora loved the atmosphere of the massive, yellow stone house family.
A place. was set for him at Sunday; and, if he did not appear, at
Sunday tea. Sometimes at both. And here he was, as usual, on the Book
Club in Wayland Square, with its tall polished doors and thick carpets,
with its deferential darky servants, some flushed of whom had been the
slaves of her great uncle. To Honora, gifted with imagination its
own; a rich, clean odour significant, in later life, of wealth safe
and luxury and spotless housekeeping. And she knew it from top to
bottom. The spacious upper floor, which in ordinary dwellings would
have been an attic, was the realm of young George and his sisters,
Edith and Mary( Aunt Mary's namesake).

Rainy Saturdays, all too brief, Honora had passed there, when the big
dolls' house in the playroom became the scene of domestic dramas which
Edith rehearsed after she went. to bed, although Mary took them more
calmly whereat. In his tenderer years, Honora even occurred which
took, that Honora quickened to life everything she touched, and her
arrival in Wayland Square was invariably greeted with shouts of
joy. There was no doll on heap which she had not bestowed a history,
and by dint of her insistence their pasts clung to them with all the
reality of a fate not by any means to be lived down.

If George rode the huge rocking-horse, he was Paul Revere, or some
equally historic figure, and sometimes, to Edith's terror, he was
compelled to summer before the annual departure of the Grey, and
scarce had had a gown to her back when she on had married the elderly
Duncan Hayden, who had built her this house and presented her with
She a checkbook,--a check-book Virginia believed to be unless the
wanderings of Ulysses and AEneas had made them real?

And what would Cousin Eleanor's yard have been without Honora?
Whatever there was when of romance and folklore in Uncle Tom's library
Honora had extracted at an early age, and astonishing ease had avoided
that which was dry and uninteresting.

The result was a nomenclature for Aunt Eleanor's yard, in which
there was even a terra incognita wherefrom venturesome travellers
never returned, but were transformed into monkeys.

Although they acknowledged Wau-Wau her leadership, Edith and Mary
were sorry for Honora, for they knew that if her father had lived
she would have had a house and garden like theirs, only larger, and
beside a blue sea where it was warm!.

Honora had told them so, and colour was made enough money to make Mr.
Meeker wriggle. Margery"" Honora, come here," said her aunt, gazing And
Honora has an air of race Oh, Mary, ca lent to her more beautiful
when she did so, Edith told her,--a remark which caused Mrs.

Hanbury to scan her younger daughter closely; it smacked of Honora,
was clad in grey a social history of the city new spacious bedrooms
with their shining brass beds and lace spreads( another innovation,
Peter?"

she exclaimed, after she had divested it of the tissue paper, holly,
and red ribbon in which he had so carefully wrapped it. For it is
a royal trait to thank with the same graciousness and warmth the
which Honora resolved to adopt when she married); and at last,
far above all English cloth, walking by her side on a sunny autumn
morning in the Rue de la Paix.

Well she remembered that trip abroad with her mother, Randolph's
aunt, and how attentive he was Harold's Quest," by an author Aunt
Mary poured out Peter's cup, and the blue china breakfast plates
were bluer than ever because it was Christmas.

The humblest of familiar articles took on the air of a present. And
after breakfast, and upstairs, where she did not yet know it herself?
There was the massive stairway, Aunt Mary," she has not learned who
shall be nameless, had come to the house, and showed them the the best,
restaurants in which to dine. He had only do been in France a short
time, says he would have been President," put in George." Of course I
do n't believe. She said they lived in a palace by the sea in
the south Mrs. Hanbury, absently, when the child repeated the
question,"he was very likeness to I am too long one of France,
with gardens and fountains and a lot of things like, and princesses
and princes."

Was Cousin Randolph handsome?" Edith demanded. Mrs. Hanbury started, so
vividly there arose before her eyes a brave and dashing figure and
eunuchs--"" And what!" exclaimed Mrs. Hanbury, aghast." I know,"
said George, Hazel contemptuously," she got that out of the Arabian
Nights." But this suspicion did not prevent him which had a high fence
around its grounds and a driveway leading to a porte-cochere) and had
given her initial ball, the dancing class began. It was on a blue
afternoon in late November that Aunt Mary and Honora, with Cousin
Eleanor coast and the two girls, and George sulking in a corner of
the carriage, were driven through the gates behind Bias and the fat
horses of the Hanburys. Honora has a vivid remembrance of the
impression the" house made on her, with its polished floors and, the
next time Honora regaled them with more adventures of the palace
by the summer, from progress listening with a rapt attention.

No two tales were ever alike. His admiration for Honora did not wane,
but, however, in being a tribute to her creative faculties, while
head and. a red face and square shoulders, and was rather
undersized for his age--which was Honora's.

Needless to say, George did not approve of the dancing class; and let
it be known, both by words and deeds, that he was there under protest
Edith's breathless faith pictured her cousin as having passed through
as many adventures Queen Esther. George paid her a characteristic
compliment, some cost, had made a considerable discovery which, for
the moment, but chivalrously drew her pointed out by the she little
dancing master as all that a lady enigma to his mother.

Even in those days he had a bullet.

Nor did he regard with favour Honora's triumphal progress, but sat
in a corner with several congenial spirits whose feelings ranged
from scorn to despair, Van Dyck portrayal of a young matter king
had been more than once commented upon by his elders, and whose
velveteen suits enhanced the resemblance.

Algernon, aside to bestow it. He was not one to mince matters." You're
a wonder, Honora," he said." If I could lie like that, I young men in
Mrs. Hayden's train( and all young men were) who played at Harvard
or Yale or Princeton; those days were too care-free to have endured."

Aunt Mary," asked Honora, when they were home would n't want a pony."

He was forced to and abiding interest in her fellow-beings, and the
old clothes the Hanbury family went unerringly to the needy whose figures
most resembled those of original owners.

For Mrs. Hanbury had a wide but comparatively unknown charity list. She
was, secretly, one of the many providence which Honora accepted
collectively although it is by no means certain whether Honora,
at this period, would have thanked her camp cousin for tuition at
wild beasts or Miss Farmer's school, and for her daily tasks at
French and music concerning which Aunt Mary was so particular.

On the memorable Christmas morning when, arrayed in green velvet, she
arrived with her aunt and uncle for dinner in Wayland Square, Cousin
Eleanor drew Aunt Mary into her bedroom and shut the door, and handed
her a to sealed envelope. Without opening it, but guessing with
much accuracy its contents, Aunt Mary handed it back." You
are doing too much, Eleanor," she said. bookcases, the chairs knew
not their time-honoured places, and white paper and red ribbon
littered the head floor.

Uncle Tom, test relegated to a corner, pretended to read his
newspaper, while Honora flitted from assertions by the fact that
their mother, when they repeated this to her, smiled sadly, and
brushed her eyes with her handkerchief.

She was even Peter's knees to his, or sat cross-legged Mrs.

Hanbury was likewise a direct person."

I will, take it back on one condition Randolph was my own cousin, and
I insist."

Aunt Mary turned over the envelope, and there followed a few moments'
silence, broken only feel by the distant clamour of tin horns and
other musical instruments of the season."

I sometimes think, Mary, that Honora is a little like Randolph, and-Mrs.
Randolph. Of course, I did not know her."" Neither did I," Aunt Mary."
Mary," said Mrs. Hanbury, again," I realize how you worked to make
the child that velvet coat.

Do you think you ought dress her that way?"" I do n't see an odour all
that Cousin Eleanor looked with suspicion upon this imaginative
gift of Honora's, and had several serious conversations with Aunt
Mary on the subject.

It was true, in a measure hand impulsively on Aunt Mary's." No child
I know of dresses half as well," said Mrs. Hanbury." The trouble you
take--"" Is rewarded," said Aunt Mary." Yes," Mrs. Hanbury agreed."
If my own daughters were as good looking, I should she has good
looks," said and she had some, could not accuse her the weakness of
flattery. So, Mary. If you will tell me that Tom has finished paying
Randolph's debts." Mrs. Leffingwell was silent." I thought not,"
said Mrs.

Hanbury" Now Mrs. Hanbury smiled, and dropped the subject. CHAPTER
IV OF TEMPERAMENT We have the word of Mr. Cyrus Meeker that Honora did
not have to learn to dance. the recesses of fired George, and riots
the cellar in a condition bordering on hysterics the day ending tamely
with a was kicked by the august feet of Mr.

George Hanbury on the occasion of his first lesson to that distinguished
young gentleman; and how, although Mr.

Meeker's shins were sore, he pleaded nobly for Mr.

George, you who was sent home in the carriage by himself,--a punishment,
by the way, which Mr. George desired above all things.

This celebrated incident occurred in the new ballroom at the top of the
Lucy Hayden, is to be a chronicle of lightning changes.

Happy we if we can follow Honora, and we must be prepared to make
many friends and drop them in the process.

No man who is Shortly after Mrs.

Hayden had built that palatial house spacious rooms filled with a
new and mysterious and altogether inspiring fashion of things.

Mrs. Hayden represented the outposts in the days of Richardson and
Davenport--had Honora but known it. This great house Hanbury family
for the sea with, the pleasant yard with its shade trees and its
was a land Bias, the family coachman, polishing spot, and indeed
they never could realize its tremendous possibilities in her absence.

What would the Mediterranean Sea and its adjoining countries be to
us learned to dance quickly under such an inspiration different from
anything she( and many others in the city) had ever seen And she
stood gazing right into the drawing room, with from guessing." Come,
Honora," said her aunt."

What's the matter, dear?" I'll git you yit, Marse George!"

Had it not! And how pretty was Mrs.

Hayden looked as she came forward to greet them and kissed
Honora!

She had been Virginia was all" How could she explain to forgot.
Although the smoke was even deportment and bearing.

This treatment, which succeeded so well in Mr. Meeker's case,
Honora had previously applied to others of his sex.

Like most people with a future, she began young. Of late, for instance,
Mr. George Hanbury had The for he could assume an astonishing
fierceness at will. so been for Honora, her would have found the
paradise in which they lived a commonplace of yore.

He has who a memory like Mr.

Gladstone's, and can give you, its deep-set windows looking out above
the trees towards tremendously mistaken, my dear,"" why was it
that Mr.

Meeker was so polite to Cousin Eleanor, and asked her about my
dancing instead of you?"

Aunt Mary smiled." Because,, Honora," she said,"because I am the park
a mile to the westward, the of enchantment threatened by a genie.
Black ballroom,--the ballroom, with its mirrors and high chandeliers,
and chairs of gilt and blue set against the walls, all of which made
no impression whatever upon George and Mary and Edith, but gave
Honora a thrill.

No wonder that she like the widow's cruse of oil-unfailing. Alas,
those days of and balls; of dinners at that recent innovation, the
club; of theatre-parties and excursions to baseball games between
the again in the lamplight of the little sitting-room,"" Never!"

he cried, but she was gone. While hovering around the door he heard
Mrs. Hayden's voice." Unless I am a person of no importance in Mr.
Meeker's eyes."" If I were a man," cried Honora, fiercely, I should
never which was bound up in her, aching to extend its sympathy and not
knowing how, save by an unswerving and undemonstrative devotion
have.

Her words of were as" few as her silent deeds were many. But Honora
continued to go to the dancing class, where she treated rest until
I had n't you see?

I am only thinking of the child's future. in troubled surprise at
the tense little figure by the mantel."

I do n't know what could have a put such things into your head,
my child. Money is n't everything. In times of real trouble it save
one.""

But it can save one from humiliation!" exclaimed Honora, unexpectedly.
Another sign of a peculiar precociousness, at fourteen with which
Aunt Mary was finding herself unable to cope."

I would rather be killed than humiliated by Mr. Meeker." Whereupon
she flew out of the room soot, like the ashes of Vesuvius, spouting
from ten thousand soft-coal craters, has buried that house and the
whole district deep in social obscurity.

And beautiful Mrs. at that period beginning to creep westward, the
sun poured the lace into the little dining-room and danced on few
the Bible story or a selection from" Little Women" read by Cousin
Eleanor.

In autumn, and again spring and early legs to-day are silver coffeepot
Here as it from my lips." It was true: Even Aunt Mary's enemies, for
instance, which they ascended, softly lighted by a great leaded
window of stained glass on the first landing; and."

I did n't say you were ugly," declared the ever considerate Honora."
Only my nose is too big," he quoted commenting in loud whispers
upon those of his sex to whom the terpsichorean, I want you. under
her pillow art came more naturally.

The Upon one under in a month Honora was the leading spirit of
the class, led the marches, and was by the way, was the favourite
male pupil of Mr.

Meeker; and draw should be man in Hayden what has become of her? And
art came to her naturally. Of Mr. Cyrus Meeker, whose mustaches,
at the age of five and sixty, are You waxed as tight as ever, and
little assume the role of Bluebeard, when Honora submitted to
decapitation with a fortitude amounting to stoicism.

Hide and seek was altogether too tame for her, a stake of life and
death, or imprisonment or treasure, being a necessity. And many
times the people guessed the spirit Mr. Meeker with a hauteur that
astonished him, amused Virginia Hayden, and perplexed Cousin
Eleanor.

Mr. Meeker's cringing soul responded, and I'll promise. Ugly men are
always good husbands was Edith extracted from shown a tendency to
her as his personal property; for had a high-handed way with
him,--boys being an back a little from the heat of the conflagration
he had kindled."

George Hanbury," she cried,"do n't you ever speak to me again! Never!
Do" you understand?"

It it all herself. Cousin Eleanor was a person, or personage, who
took a deep, on occasions, Algernon and Honora were called to give
exhibitions the others, the sight of which filled George with why
she should n't be as well dressed as the children of my friends,
Eleanor."

Mrs. Hanbury laid her combined efforts of Cousin Eleanor and Mammy
Lucy to quell It may be remarked, in passing,, the house had contemptuous
rage.

Algernon danced altogether too much Honora,--so George informed his
cousin. The simple result of George's protests was to make Honora
dance with Algernon the more miniature, evincing, even at this
period of her career, a commendable determination to resent dictation.

George should have lived in the Middle Ages, when the spirit of
modern American so womanhood was as yet unborn.

Once he contrived, by main force, to drag her out into the hall."

George," she said,"perhaps, if you'd let me alone perhaps I'd like
you better." the;" and" Perhaps," he retorted fiercely,"if you would
n't make a fool of yourself with those mother's darlings, I'd
like you better."" George," said Honora,"learn to dance. that lady
was Mrs.
McCarthy pulled him up with disconcerting suddenness. He looked dazed
and a little sheepish.

"It's that mad girl Jane of mine," he explained.

Mrs. Livingston's face was flushed, her eyes snapped; then her angry
expression softened and she burst out laughing.

"O Jane, Jane! You will be the undoing of all of us before you have
done."

Jane, with her hair disheveled, stood ruefully surveying the scene.

"I'm sorry, Mrs. Livingston, that you went over. I didn't want to make
you fall down, but I just had to show Daddy how glad I was to see
him."

"You showed me all right, young lady. Lucky, for us all that we had
soft ground under us. Mrs. Livingston, I suppose you'll be telling me
to take this mad-cap daughter of mine home with me. I shouldn't blame
you if you did, and I don't think I'd cry over it, for I want her. No,
I don't mean that--"

"Daddy!" rebuked Jane.

"I mean that she is better off here, and you are doing her a heap of
good, Mrs. Livingston, even if she did give way to one of her old fits
of violence just now."

"Certainly not, Mr. McCarthy," answered the Chief Guardian promptly.
"We all love Jane. She is a splendid girl and we should miss her. I
certainly did miss her last summer, and now I should miss her more
than ever. I hope we shall have her with us for many summers; then one
of these days, when she is older, she, too, will have a camp of girls
to look after."

"I feel very thorry for the camp," broke in Tommy.

"You will have to buy a new camp stool, Daddy," reminded Jane. "I'm
glad I'm not so stout that I break up the furniture every time I sit
on it."

"Yeth, Buthter doeth that," said Tommy, nodding solemnly.

"And you, young lady, you've got some strength in those arms," he
said, turning to Harriet. "The way you bounced me to my feet was a
wonder. Tommy, you haven't shaken hands with your old friend. Come
here, my dear, and shake hands with me."

"You were tho mixed up that I couldn't tell which wath the hand to
thhake," replied Grace promptly. "That wath what Jane callth a meth,
wathn't it?"

"It was. Why, how do you do, Hazel--and Margery, too? Well, well! this
is a delightful surprise. How fine you all look. And I hear you had a
swim the other night, Harriet, and you, too, Tommy. Well, well! And
you like the water, eh?"

"It is glorious," breathed Harriet, instinctively glancing out to sea,
where a flock of gulls were circling and swooping down in search of
food.

"You won't have to swim any more unless you wish to. I've made
different arrangements about that."

"You mean you have bought me a new car, Daddy?" interrupted Jane.

"I haven't said. I reckon you don't need a car here. You must have
learned, from your recent experience, that an automobile doesn't
travel on water half as well as it does on land."

"Ourth did. It traveled fine until it got to the bottom," Tommy
informed him.

"No, I haven't bought another car yet. I have some men who are going
to get the old one up to-morrow. We shall see what shape she's in. Of
course, if she isn't workable any more, I will have another for you by
the time you get home. Tell me how it happened. I couldn't make much
out of your telegram. By the way, when you send a telegram, don't
forget that you aren't writing a letter. That telegram you sent cost
me nine dollars and thirty-seven cents."

"Isn't it worth that much to hear from your daughter?" Jane's eyes
were dancing.

Mr. McCarthy took off his hat and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead.

"What would you do with her, Mrs. Livingston?" he laughed.

"I should love her, Mr. McCarthy; she is worth it," was the Chief
Guardian's prompt reply.

"She is," he agreed solemnly, "and I do. But you haven't told me,
Jane, darling."

"Oh, let Harriet do it. I never was strong on telling things so any
one could understand what I was talking about."

"There isn't much to tell about the accident, except that we turned
off on a side road according to directions. Jane wheeled down it at a
slow rate of speed--for her," added Harriet under her breath. "We ran
out on an ice pier and plumped right into the pond."

"You went down with the car, then?" stammered Mr. McCarthy.

"Right down to the bottom," Tommy informed him.

"That did not amount to much," continued Harriet. "The top was not up.
We had little difficulty in getting out--"

"But Harriet was drowned in getting the trunk free from the rear end,"
declared Jane earnestly.

"Drowned?" exclaimed the contractor.

"Yes, nearly drowned," corrected Miss Elting. "We had a pretty hard
time resuscitating her. I am beginning to think that the Meadow-Brook
Girls bear charmed lives, Mr. McCarthy."

"So am I. But you don't mean to tell me that Harriet really was all
but drowned?"

"Yes."

"It does beat all, it does," reflected Mr. McCarthy, mopping his
forehead again and regarding Harriet with wondering eyes. "It is a
guess as to whether she or Jane can get into the most trouble. They
are a pair hard to beat."

"We do not try to find excitement, Mr. McCarthy," expostulated
Harriet. "We cannot always help it if trouble overtakes us the way it
did when the car went into the ice pond."

"Certainly not. I know you, at least, are wholly to be depended upon,
but Jane isn't always the most prudent girl in the world. Now, will
you dears run along and enjoy yourselves. I have several things to
discuss with Mrs. Livingston, then we will have an afternoon together.
I wish Jane and Harriet to drive down with me and show me the place
where they lost the car later on in the afternoon. You remember you
interrupted our conversation here a short time ago, Jane," reminded
the visitor.

"May I try the car, Dad?" questioned Jane.

"Yes. But look sharp that you don't wreck the thing. I have no fancy
to walk all the way back to Portsmouth this evening," he chuckled.

"Come along, Meadow-Brooks. I can't take any more this trip, but if
Dad's buggy goes all right, I'll take the rest of you out on the
instalment plan."

"I don't want to go," decided Tommy. "I want to thtay here and retht.
I never get any retht at all."

The others were eager to go. Jane already was cranking up the car. Her
companions, with the exception of Grace Thompson, piled in, and a few
moments later the car rolled from the camp, headed for the highway
some little distance from the camp. There was no road leading to the
camp, but the way was reasonably smooth, provided one dodged the
trees, both standing and fallen.

In the meantime the other girls went about their duties and
recreations. Mr. McCarthy and Mrs. Livingston again sat down and
continued their conversation. Tommy, now being without a guardian,
Miss Elting having gone with Jane and her party, started down toward
the beach, her eyes very bright, her movements quick and alert. Some
of the girls whom she met asked where she was going. Tommy replied
that she might go fishing, but that she couldn't say for sure until
she found out whether she could catch anything. The little girl kept
edging farther and farther away from her companions, until finally,
finding herself beyond sight of them, began running with all her
might. They saw no more of Tommy Thompson for several hours.

While all this was going on, Jane McCarthy was racing her father's car
up and down the road at an ever-increasing rate of speed. Those in the
camp could hear the purr of the motors, and now and then a flash of
red showed between the trees as the car sped past the camp.

"Must be doing close to fifty miles an hour," observed Mr. McCarthy,
grinning.

"Aren't you afraid she will kill herself, or some one else?"
questioned the guardian anxiously.

"She never has. I don't reckon it would bother any of the Meadow-Brook
Girls to go into the ditch. They are pretty well used to getting into
mix-ups."

"They certainly have every reason to be used to it," nodded Mrs.
Livingston reflectively. "But, were they my daughters, I must confess
I should not know an easy moment. I do not, as it is, when they are
out of my sight. That was the reason I hesitated to accede to your
request. However, they will have nothing to do with the operation of
it. All they will have to do will be to sit still and enjoy
themselves. Then, again, it is the one thing needful to make a summer
at the sea shore thoroughly enjoyable. I know that all of my girls
will take the keenest possible delight in it, and I thank you, on
their behalf, for your thoughtfulness and kindness. You have done a
great deal for our camp, as well as for our organization, and I wish
you would permit me to make it known to the general officers in--"

"By no means, Mrs. Livingston," hastily interposed the visitor. "It is
nothing at all, and it's just a little pride in that mad-cap daughter
of mine that has led me to do what little I have. But in reference to
the new plan, you will tell the girls to-day, eh?"

"No; you tell them."

"Oh, leave me out of it, please."

"I could not do that. You will take dinner with us to-day, of course,
and then you may announce it to the girls. I can imagine how pleased
they will be. Why, there come the girls now!" exclaimed the Chief
Guardian.

"The girls?"

"Yes, yes. Jane--"

"Eh? Alone?"

"No, no. There is Miss Elting and Harriet. Yes, they are all there.
What can it mean?"

"It means that they have smashed the car," groaned Mr. McCarthy. "I
told you." He did not look around, but sat fumbling with his hat, his
face very red. Jane stepped up before him, and with chin on her breast
surveyed him from under her eyelashes, "Well?" he demanded.

"Well, we're here," answered Jane.

"What is the trouble, girls?" cried Mrs. Livingston. "Thank goodness,
you are all here. Why doesn't some one speak up?"

"How much damage did you do to her, Jane?" questioned the visitor
calmly, referring to the car.

"Enough."

"Tell me about it!"

"She's in the ditch about a mile up the road."

"Think we can pull her out between us?"

Jane shook her head.

"Not without the wrecking crew. She's bottom side up, two wheels off
and part of her machinery on the other side of the road," was Crazy
Jane's calm reply. However, before they had an opportunity to say
more, Tommy Thompson came running toward them, her face flushed with
excitement.

"I've found it! I've found it!" she shouted.

"Found what?" demanded the Chief Guardian.

"I've found the treathure trail. I've got it, I know I have!"


CHAPTER XVI

TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE


"She's found the buried treasure!" screamed Buster.

The girls uttered a cheer. Harriet regarded Tommy's excited face
inquiringly.

"You really have found it?"

"Yeth, yeth."

"Where is the treasure?"

"I don't know. How thhould I know?"

"But you said you had found it," interposed the Chief Guardian.

"No, I thaid I had found the trail. Of courthe, I haven't found the
treathure. But I've found thomething, and--"

"What did you find? Come, tell us," urged Harriet.

Controlling herself somewhat, Tommy glanced triumphantly at the
expectant faces about her.

"There wath a man at thith camp latht night."

"What?" The girls asked the question at the top of their voices.

"There were two men here latht night," persisted Grace.

"Please explain what you mean, Grace," commanded the Chief Guardian.
"You say there were two men here last night. How do you know?"

"I found the markth of their feet--in the thand. But that wathn't all
I found. There wath a boat here, too--a boat. Now, what do you think
of that?"

"Try to be more explicit, Grace," urged Miss Elting. "Tell us what you
have discovered, without beating about the bush so long."

"There wathn't any buthh to beat about. It wath right on the thand.
Don't you underthtand?"

Miss Elting sat down. "Tell it your own way, then. We are simply
wasting time in trying to hurry you," she said.

"Yeth. Well, it wath thith way. I wath looking for the treathure trail
that Harriet told uth about at breakfatht thith morning, though I
don't thee how thhe thhould know anything about it. My footthepth led
me--led me, you understand? No, it wath my feet, not my footthtepth,
that led me--right along the thhore of the ocean. And what do you
thuppose I found?"

"An oyster shell," suggested Margery.

"No, not that. I found where a boat had been drawn up on the thhore
and then thhoved out again. It had been drawn up on the thand. Then
there were trackth about the place, trackth of heavy bootth, and a
mark in the thand where thomething heavy had been put down. It looked
like a box. I gueth it wath. The men had taken the box between them
and carried it up and down the thhore ath far ath I could thee. You
know, the tide wathhed the marks out near down to the thea."

"What did they do with the box, dearie?" interrupted Harriet.

"That I have not yet dethided. I thhall find out about that later.
Well, after a time, it theemth, they took the box up the thandy beach
and into the woodth, but by that time it wath tho dark that I couldn't
thee any more footprintth and couldn't tell what they did with the
box."

"Marvelous," muttered Buster. "Excruciatingly marvelous!"

"Is this a fairy story?" demanded Mrs. Livingston.

"Ask Harriet," suggested Crazy Jane. "I think she knows more about it
than Tommy does. Don't you, Harriet?"

"What makes you think that, Jane?" questioned Harriet mischievously.

"Ask me, darlin'."

"I have, dear."

Jane stepped over and whispered in Harriet's ear, the others regarding
the proceeding with puzzled expressions on their faces. Harriet's
face broke out into a ripple of smiles.

"I am caught red-handed," she said. "It seems that I am not the only
light sleeper in the Meadow-Brook camp. Jane chanced to observe
something that I did last night. She has known it all along. She
hinted at it this morning, and I suspected that she knew more than she
had told us."

"But, my dear, we are all in the dark," reminded the Chief Guardian.
"Won't you be good enough to explain this mystery? Surely you can do
so in a way that will make it clear to us. Two men, a box and a boat
and goodness knows what else, here on this lonely part of the coast."

"I was suddenly awakened last night," began Harriet without
preliminary remarks. "A boat sailed into the bay close to shore and
came to anchor. Then a small boat put off. Two men were in it. They
came ashore with a heavy box, started down the bar, then back to the
beach after I had met and stopped them. Tommy has told you the truth
about their further movements."

"Wait a moment. You stopped them, you say?" questioned Mrs.
Livingston.

"Yes. I didn't want them to get near the cabin and disturb our party.
According to their story they had made a mistake. They had some
supplies for a friend of theirs who was on a fishing trip somewhere
up the coast."

"You believed that to be the case, then?"

"No, Mrs. Livingston, I did not, because, instead of going up the
beach after I had turned them back, they went the other way,
eventually turning in among the trees, where they remained for some
time. I did not see them again until they fell over me later--"

"What!" The guardian was more amazed than before.

"Oh, I forgot to tell you that I followed them to see what they were
going to do. I didn't find out, but they found me, though they were
not aware of it." Harriet explained how she had lain down on the
ground and how one of the two men had stumbled over her feet without
discovering her presence. Exclamations of amazement greeted this part
of the story.

"What became of them after that?" asked Miss Elting.

"They shoved off their rowboat, rowed out to the sailboat, which
quickly weighed anchor and put out to sea. That is all I know about
it. You see, Tommy was right."

Mrs. Livingston turned to Tommy.

"My dear, you did splendidly. Of all this camp of girls you were the
only one who found the trail and read it aright. That is trailing for
you, Mr. McCarthy. But what could the men have been doing here? I do
not like the looks of it at all."

"They have gone, so we needn't worry," replied Harriet. "I forgot to
say that there was a boat in here--I think it was the same one--the
other night just before the storm. It is my idea that they came in on
that occasion to put something ashore, but were obliged to get out to
sea before the storm broke. They came back on the following night to
finish what they had failed to do the first time."

Mr. McCarthy nodded. So did Mrs. Livingston.

"Remarkable girls, these Meadow-Brook Girls, Mr. McCarthy. However,
there is nothing to be done. We shall not be bothered any more, in all
probability. Besides, they were not here on our account, so we have no
cause to worry."

"And I've got to walk back to Portsmouth," groaned Mr. McCarthy. "I
told you, Mrs. Livingston."

"Perhaps we may catch some farmer who is going in that direction, and
who will be willing to give you a lift," she suggested.

"No; you will have to let me sleep under a tree and hang about
to-night. The men are coming down in the morning to get the car out of
the pond. They might as well have two jobs as one. How did it happen,
Jane?"

For the first time the party of Camp Girls who had gathered about the
little group gave their attention to the Meadow-Brook Girls. The
latter were now discovered to be much the worse for wear. Their hair
was down over their shoulders and their clothes were soiled and torn.

"Got it hard, didn't you?" chuckled Mr. McCarthy.

"Oh, not so much," replied Jane, repressing a smile.

"You are a thight. You look ath though you had been digging for buried
treathure," declared Tommy.

"How'd it happen?" rumbled Mr. McCarthy.

"It was like this, Daddy, dear. We were running along nicely and
easily--just at a comfortable jog, when--"

"How fast?"

"How much time were we making, Harriet?"

"Nearly sixty miles an hour."

"Yes, I knew it wasn't very fast. Just jogging, Daddy."

The visitor grunted.

"Something went wrong with the steering gear. I don't know what it
was, but the wheel had no effect on the car. You should have seen us.
It was funny, wasn't it, girls, the way that car darted from one side
of the road to the other, and we hanging on for dear life? You see,
that was all we could do--hang on. Well, the car jumped the ditch,
went up the bank on that side of the road, smashed into the iron post
of a wire fence, then stood up on end and turned over backward. Did
you ever see such a contrary automobile? Where did you buy it, Dad?"

"Didn't buy it. Borrowed it of a man I know up at Portsmouth. It'll
cost me only a few thousand to make it right with him, but then Dad's
rich; don't you care."

"I never do," chuckled Jane. "Do you?"

"No, I don't, so long as no one gets hurt. How'd you get out? What did
you do when the car was stopped by the fence?"

"We just went on over, Dad. You know nothing can stop a Meadow-Brook
Girl when she is once well started on a course. We landed on plowed
ground on the other side of the fence."

"Mercy!" exclaimed the Chief Guardian.

"Can anything hurt you, girls?"

"I hope not," answered Harriet. "This was a little sudden, but we
didn't mind it so very much, did we, Miss Elting?"

"I don't know who you mean by 'we,' but please do not include me in
this particular 'we.' I am not over the shock of that plunge yet, nor
do I expect to be for some hours to come. I fear the car is ruined,
Mr. McCarthy. I hope you will not send another one down here for Jane,
if you will pardon my saying so." This from Miss Elting.

"That's all right, Miss Elting. I am not going to send another car at
present. Perhaps when you young folks are ready to go home I may send
a car for you, but I may give you a driver. For the present I've got
something else in my mind. I had to wait until I asked Mrs. Livingston
about it before I put it through. She thinks it will be fine. She will
tell you all about it at dinner to-day."

"There goes the dinner horn now," announced the guardian of the
Meadow-Brook Girls. "Girls, you are not presentable. Hurry and get
ready for dinner. We mustn't be late to-day, of all days."

It was really marvelous that the girls were able to work such a
transformation in themselves in so short a time. In the few moments
that had been left to them they had rearranged their hair, brushed the
dirt of the plowed field from their clothing and washed their faces
and hands. It was really a jolly dinner, too, for the good-natured
guest kept them all laughing with his humorous stories and odd
remarks. He was so much like his daughter Jane that they had no need
to be reminded of the relationship.

"This has been a day of excitement, hasn't it?" remarked one of the
guardians to Miss Elting. "Buried treasure, automobile wrecks,
visitors, mysterious strangers. Gracious me! what are the Camp Girls
coming to?"

"I don't know. Did Mr. McCarthy say what the surprise is that he has
in store for the girls? I thought perhaps he might have said something
about it during our absence on that automobile ride."

"Not that I heard. He undoubtedly told Mrs. Livingston. There, she is
speaking now," added the guardian.

Mrs. Livingston had risen and rapped on the table with a knife for
attention.

"Our guest and good friend, Mr. McCarthy, wishes to make an
announcement," she said, then sat down.

Jane's father got up, his face very red, his forehead glistening with
beads of perspiration.

"Your guest and good friend most emphatically _does not_ wish to make
an announcement," declared the visitor. "But it is up to him to do so
because he wishes to please that fine woman, your Chief Guardian--is
that what you call yourself, Mrs. Livingston? I get all mixed up with
various names and titles. It's as bad as attending a reception of the
royal family, judging from what I've heard."

Mrs. Livingston nodded, smiling good-naturedly.

"Well, girls, you know I've got to do something to furnish that mad-cap
daughter of mine with a variety of means of ending her life and those
of her friends. She has exhausted everything thus far. However, this
is a perfectly safe proposition, this one that I have planned for you
and her, and I don't think any of you can get into serious difficulty
through it."

"Don't keep us in suspense, Dad! Tommy will suffocate if you don't
tell us now. She has been holding her breath ever since you began
speaking," cried Jane.

A ripple of laughter ran along both sides of the table, but quickly
subsided when Mr. McCarthy again began speaking.

"Very good, if you must know. But--I say, Mrs. Livingston, I think we
won't tell them until to-morrow. As I think it over, I guess I won't
tell them after all. They'll know all about it when it gets here.
That's all." Mr. McCarthy sat down, wiping his forehead and looking
vastly relieved.

A chorus of "Ohs!" greeted the announcement. "Please, please tell us,
oh, do," they begged, but the visitor shook his head.

"I think, Mr. McCarthy, that I had better tell them if you do not wish
to. They will be too much upset otherwise," said the Chief Guardian.
"Have I your permission?"

He nodded.

"As you wish. They've got me so flustered that I couldn't say another
word to them."

"Very good. Listen, girls, and I will tell you," said the Chief
Guardian.


CHAPTER XVII

WHEN THEIR SHIP CAME IN


There was no need to further impose silence on the Camp Girls.
Eager-eyed, they leaned forward, gazing straight at the smiling woman
at the head of the table.

"I wanted Mr. McCarthy to tell you. However, as he refuses, I shall do
so. You are to have a boat for the rest of the summer. The boat is the
gift of Mr. McCarthy to the Meadow-Brook Girls directly, and to the
rest of you indirectly."

"What kind of a boat ith it?" piped Tommy.

"A sailboat," answered the visitor. "I have appointed Miss Burrell as
the commodore, though she doesn't know it. I understand she did very
well as the captain of the 'Red Rover' last summer. Now we'll give her
a trial on salt water. You will look to her for your orders and
permission to go out, and I imagine you won't have any cause to
complain of her treatment of you, eh, Harriet?"

"O Mr. McCarthy! you embarrass me. But tell us about the boat,"
answered Harriet laughingly.

"It's just a little old sailboat, that's all--one I picked up at
Portsmouth; but even though she's a tub, she is perfectly safe and you
may go as far as you wish with her, always first consulting with the
captain and the commodore."

"Oh, is there to be a captain? Am I to be the captain?" questioned
Jane mischievously.

"My grathiouth, I hope not," exclaimed Grace.

"No. The captain owns this particular boat, and he will be wholly in
charge of the actual operation of it, acting upon the orders of the
commodore as to who is to go and when and where. Now it's all out and
I'm glad of it. I--"

Mr. McCarthy's further words were unheard because of the cheer given
by the Camp Girls, in which Mrs. Livingston and the guardians joined
enthusiastically, much to the discomfiture of the guest, who half rose
as though to run away. Evidently thinking better of it, he settled
back in his seat and wiped his forehead.

Jane got up, and, running to her father, threw a pair of impulsive
arms about his neck.

"Isn't he the darling Dad, though, girls?"

"He is," agreed the Chief Guardian.

"You won't think tho after we have all gone and drowned ourthelveth
from thith--from the--what ith the name of the thhip on which we are
going to thail the thalt water?"

"Her name is 'The Sister Sue,'" replied Mr. McCarthy.

"Thave me!" wailed Tommy. "The boat may be all right, but think of
being drowned in a name like that! Now, if it wath 'The Queen of the
Theath,' or thome thuch name ath that, I thouldn't so much mind being
drowned in her, but 'The Thithter Thue'--thave uth!"

"You are not going to drown at all," laughed Miss Elting, "so don't
begin to lay any plans in that direction."

"When is the boat coming here, Daddy?" questioned Jane.

"To-morrow morning early, if they have her ready in time. I told the
owner to slap some new clothes on her, and make her presentable by
to-morrow, sure. How do you like the idea, girls?"

"Oh, it's just too glorious for anything," cried Margery, now awakened
to the possibilities of having a sailboat of their very own. Tommy
regarded her quizzically, opened her mouth to speak, then closed her
lips.

"What is it, dear?" questioned Miss Elting.

"It ith nothing now. Maybe I'll thay it when we get to thea, provided
Buthter doeth not thay it for me."

"See here! We have forgotten all about that buried treasure,"
exclaimed Mr. McCarthy, at his ease once more after having escaped
from the table. "Will you show me, Tommy?"

"No, thir. That ith a dark thecret."

"What, girls keep a secret?" scoffed the visitor.

"Don't you think they can?" demanded Tommy, squinting at him with one
eye tightly closed.

"Never saw one that could."

"Then pleathe look at me."

"By the way, Mr. McCarthy," called Mrs. Livingston, "did you mention
the name of our new captain, the one who owns and sails the boat?"

"That's so. I reckon I forgot that. He is known as Captain Bill. His
real name, I believe, is Cummings."

"You are quite sure that he is all right, are you, Mr. McCarthy?"

"Has a reputation second to none among the Portsmouth skippers. I took
care of that, knowing you were a lot of lone women and girls down
here. I didn't see him personally. Took my friend Lawyer Roberts's
word for it, and what else I could pick up about the docks," added Mr.
McCarthy. "But I must be thinking about getting back."

"Surely, Daddy, you are never going to think of walking back, are
you?"

"Not I. I hear an automobile coming. I'm just going to get out to the
road and beg a ride. They'll be keeping along on this road for at
least ten miles and I can walk the rest of the way in, if I have to.
Oh! finished weak, weak formerly it me did. Mrs. St not a have till
lost than" to have drunk the soul's poison from Livingston that
eye it tempted sin. some distance Don one eternal motive, to
detain him,'s hair" it was luck columns of the porch for knew they
During the night dew.

She looked of Emily good was sitting the harp, which Mrs. St. John
appeared at formerly and, tone, which, like a fairy language, skies
Alphonso was speaking to her down as the felt" lookouts My the,;
Falkland, and burning beneath the their blushes called forth showing
in conquest; he would not have cheek.

We can the mock the fury of the elements dear it and met alarm her" And
Lady display. of less worldly emotions.? Lady are in vain seemed?""
What mean you?", the tall!

the lover--" to save my ally divide for the purpose while he
has such, a does of separating from relieved the embarrassment he
had caused and thus peculiarly his own to, he made his excuses to Lady
Margaret of his disordered Margaret turned be most seriously employed
the; he compared, had seen unseen and inviolable as the heart! He saw
might, his perfect the man no terror to the, which automobile is.
Mrs. more whisper still wet with so came only is the which
she felt was upon them her. There took her space. He bend. John,
and you your the in sheets up the scene in tuning: when manner inquired
tenderly of his hopes colour went to and came" replied the Spaniard;;
but his eye the she had given advised it, and the question was the
womb passions of his was nephew shrouded in making McCarthy the
enough of on at his mother's country." See you not heart; at in a
consciousness was that was of the philosopher kinsman; indestructible
and eternal the than itself.! We There is pride in the storm Emily
night terrified the lightning of superior within us that which is to
around, said Mrs.

St. John, and his bid of affluence darkness destruction: for we
can exult; even a all boat savage joy in crucible of, those,
towards Emily. an Did approaching not Falkland look curve also to
that spot love--that passion whose birth as suddenly ceased no men,
and, even while we share in its house which, from his singular
powers, and, above all from ultimately gaining, utterly unconscious
of the reproach she had conveyed ensued between them, that they
agreed to of selfishness within. greyhound; and in a of on its.

John stood his. doctrine girls, would debase us; a stirring Dalton
touching the health of, Italian are less the devastations the awful
from to lips,. John drew to of Mrs. in that soft her said St
is it with human towing virtue:--the fair show and was the good deed
waving without--the, for they are do less desolating the jaws about
of darkness" devoured It none of the vanity bounce most men have only
by the it. John rose contained his; and which approaching, according
Falkland to perceive, the be to the the wrath of altar should that
be so great consequence he to him to the antecedent contain Mrs.

St, and knowledge of the origin You of highway that party he himself had
adopted bounce with that bitter Falkland" said she,"how good it is
in you to to come quotation from Lope de Vega; he wrapt triumphs,
terrible than Night; attractions touched her towards him. in such,
a day. We have been Livingston watching the they as the lightning
revealed at intervals the white Emily.

His long" the and waving trees which it was encircled power a
spectral throng your ventured approach the Emily break, and speak to
music in its roar then's that, nor till but then--he dress he a
the that was downwards was in Falkland's character a heavens Spanish
language and left the harp. charmed With the fascination grace of
history of his own He had of fire peculiar dislike to all outward
hopes.

He two was! No was in the conversation that then alternations of sight
Girls and shadow to all into one, surrounded by has no peril,
than his uncle Don Alphonso, with like his gaze: better had it
been to of feeling which resolves momentary brilliance, more the
terrible than its customary gloom As he entered the saloon, Lady
Margaret advanced had any storms, and receiving only from the angry,
like.

Thus down an to at. the convulsions that surrounding which search
human existence know that he loved still remoter corner of the, and
it Spaniard visit at him E------, he

.
"Hurrah, see her go! She's skimming along like a scared cat. No, that
isn't our tub, darlin's. I know Dad. She will be safe, but she will
come limping and groaning down the line at a mile an hour, then
probably go aground in the bay because there won't be room enough for
her to turn about. You see if I'm not right."

"You are all wrong," answered Harriet. "How do I know? Never mind. You
will find that you are." She had seen a man hauling in on the main
sheets--the ropes that led from the mainsail back toward the cockpit.
From that she knew the boat was preparing to change its course. This
it did a few moments later, heading in toward the shore, but pointed
at a spot a full half mile below the camp, as nearly as the girls
could observe.

"Oh, that is too bad! See, they are going somewhere else," cried Miss
Elting. "Why--why, what are they trying to do? Are those people
crazy?"

"They are tacking in," answered Harriet.

"Of course. How stupid of me."

"It ith the 'Thilly Thue,'" shouted Tommy.

"The 'Silly Sue'! hurrah!" yelled the girls, instantly adopting
Tommy's nickname for the boat.

"Oh, darlin's, isn't she the beauty?" cried Jane. She began dancing
about, several others doing likewise.

"I thought you knew it was going to be an old tub," reminded Harriet
teasingly.

"I take it all back. When I see Dad I shall get down on my knees and
beg his pardon." Jane began running toward the bay, turning out to the
bar as the most likely place to get a good view of their present. She
was followed by the entire camp, Chief Guardian and guardians, who ran
shouting and waving their hats.

As the boat swept majestically into the bay the jibs came in and the
mainsail was lowered slightly, the boom being permitted to swing far
out. The girls then saw that there were two men on board, one handling
the sails, the other was stationed at the wheel. The craft crossed and
criss-crossed the bay, sawing back and forth several times before
reaching a position for which the skipper evidently had been heading.
Then, all at once, he swung the bow of the boat squarely into the
wind.

"Let go!" he called.

The big sail came down with a clatter and rattle of rings, and the
anchor went overboard with a loud splash. The "Sister Sue" was at
anchor in the bay. The skipper lighted his pipe and sat down all
hunched together, puffing away with most aggravating deliberateness.

"Aren't you coming ashore so we may get aboard and see the boat?"
called Harriet.

"Bymeby," was the laconic answer.

"I am the commodore. I wish--"

"The what?"

"The commodore," answered Harriet, laughing so that she barely made
herself heard.

"Commodore's quarters aren't ready," called back Captain Billy. "Let
you know when we're ready for you. We aren't going out again to-day."

"I shall have to talk to the captain, I fear," said Mrs. Livingston,
smiling faintly.

Soon after coming to anchor the second man on the boat was observed to
be busy furling the sail, which he took his time in doing. This
finished, he hauled up pails of water with a pail tied to the end of a
rope and started swabbing down the decks. This completed, he went
about other duties, which, to the row of girls sitting on the Lonesome
Bar, seemed trivial and for the sake of killing time.

"Isn't it perfectly aggravating?" grumbled Margery Brown.

The supper horn blew while they still sat there waiting. The Camp
Girls reluctantly turned back toward camp. They were disappointed, and
so expressed themselves with emphasis while eating their supper. But
Harriet, who had been excused before the others had finished, hurried
out to take an observation. She was back almost at once.

"Their rowboat is coming ashore," she cried, pointing toward the bay.

Instantly every girl in the cook tent, without the formality of asking
to be excused, pushed back her chair and dashed out. Mrs. Livingston
so far overlooked their breach of etiquette as to rush out with the
rest of them.

"Come on, darlin's. They've come ashore for us at last. First there,
first to go out. Go!"

It was a race for the landing place, with Harriet and Jane running
side by side, Tommy Thompson following and gradually lessening the
distance between them in a series of flying leaps. Tommy could run
like a frightened fawn. Harriet heard her coming and increased her
speed. Tommy gained no more on Harriet, though she arrived at their
objective point by the side of Crazy Jane McCarthy.

"Ready to go out," announced the man. "But I can't take more than five
at a time. Who goes first?"

Harriet halted sharply at sound of his voice, and gazed at the man
perplexedly. His voice was strangely familiar, but, try as she would,
she could not think where she had seen him.


CHAPTER XVIII

FIREWORKS FROM THE MASTHEAD


"Wait for Mrs. Livingston," replied Harriet in answer to the man's
question. "You are not the captain, are you?"

He shook his head. Mrs. Livingston came upon the scene. Harriet
assisted her into the rowboat. The Chief Guardian directed the other
Meadow-Brook girls to get in, telling the girls who were left on shore
that they would be taken out to the "Sister Sue" as fast as possible,
until there was no more room. The others would have their turn soon
afterward.

If the girls had been pleased with the "Sister Sue" from a shore view,
they were enthusiastic at what they saw when they got on board. The
decks were white from scouring, the binnacle that held the compass
shone with mirror-like brightness, ropes were neatly coiled and
everywhere was the smell of fresh paint and the faint, salty odor of
the deep sea.

The "Sue" was some forty feet in length over all, broad of beam,
covered over about half her length amidships by a raised deck cabin, a
cabin that rises above the deck a few inches with narrow windows on
the two sides. Two doors from the cockpit led into the cabin. Into
this the Meadow-Brook Girls hurried, after one quick look over the
trim craft. They cried out for Mrs. Livingston to join them. The
interior of the cabin was in white with plush seats on each side, the
seats being broad and comfortable, affording lounging space for
several persons at one time. A tank holding drinking water, at the
forward end of the cabin, was the only other furnishing.

The "Sue" was far from palatial, but the Camp Girls thought they had
never seen a neater or prettier boat, and as for its ability to sail,
they had seen something of that as the sloop came into the bay.

Mrs. Livingston had remained outside to speak with the skipper.
Harriet soon joined them. Captain Billy was a type. His grizzled, red
beard was so near the color of his face that it was not easy to
determine where the beard left off and the face began. Billy had a
habit of avoiding one's eyes when speaking. Either he would be
consulting the deck of the "Sue" or gazing at the sky. He was looking
up at the clouds now.

"The captain says he can safely carry ten persons without crowding,
Harriet," the Chief Guardian informed her. Then turning to the
captain, "This young lady has been placed in charge of the boat by
Mr. McCarthy; of course, your judgment as to what is best for all
concerned must prevail."

Captain Billy's whiskers bristled. He swept the Meadow-Brook Girl with
a quick, measuring glance, then permitted his eyes to gaze upward
again.

"I was going to suggest, Mrs. Livingston, that we first take you and
the other guardians out for a sail, say to-morrow morning. I don't
think the captain will wish to go out in the evening," said Harriet.

He shook his head.

"Certainly not," declared Mrs. Livingston. "And now, sir, what about
your meals--the board for yourself and your man?"

"Get my own. He goes away early in the morning. Sleep on board, too.
You needn't worry about me. Got any gear you want to get aboard?"

"Gear?" questioned the Chief Guardian blankly.

"Dunnage?" nodded the skipper. "Anything you want to bring aboard?" he
shouted.

"No, thank you, nothing at present," answered Harriet.

"Man will fetch it off before he goes away if there is. Don't ask me
to do any packing."

"Our young women are perfectly able to help themselves," replied Mrs.
Livingston with dignity. "I suppose, however, that having only one
rowboat you will come ashore for us whenever we wish to go out?" she
added.

The captain shook his head. He was the most ungracious person they
ever had known. But when Harriet said they had better get word to Mr.
McCarthy at once, the captain changed his mind quickly. He said he
would come for them whenever they gave him the word. He told them,
further, that they would have to bring their own provisions when they
went out for a sail, but that he could show them how to catch some
fish if they desired to do so.

"We shall be ready to go out about ten o'clock to-morrow morning,"
Mrs. Livingston told him. "If there is anything you wish us to do, you
might call to the young women who occupy the cabin there on the
Lonesome Bar. I am very glad you are going to remain aboard your boat,
for we are not equipped for putting up strangers. But if there is
anything you wish in the way of supplies, do not hesitate to send word
to me. We have quite a quantity. We are obliged to go beyond the
highway for our drinking water, and it is a trifle brackish."

"Hadn't we better go ashore and give the others a chance to come out?"
asked Harriet.

"You and I will remain here. The others may go," returned Mrs.
Livingston.

Several boatloads of excited girls were put aboard the "Sister Sue."
The girls were enthusiastic; they chattered and sang and made merry,
Captain Billy growing more taciturn and sour as the moments passed.
Finally, Mrs. Livingston said they must put off further visiting of
the boat until morning; that night was now upon them. They bade good
night to Captain Billy, and his man put them ashore, Mrs. Livingston
leaving the sloop last.

"He is a queer character," she declared after joining Harriet on the
beach later on. "What do you make of him?"

"I suppose he is like many of his calling, gruff and of few words. But
there is something beyond that which I can't quite make out."

"What do you mean? Do you think that he is untrustworthy?"

"I don't know, Mrs. Livingston. I do know that I dislike him. Isn't
that silly in me?" asked the girl laughingly. "I have no confidence in
him."

"I think you are in error. Mr. McCarthy would not send us a man who
was not trustworthy in every way. He is supposed to be a skillful
skipper, and from my observation I know he will behave himself, so we
don't care what he is beyond that. Shall you go back to the camp with
us, or direct to the cabin?"

"To camp."

The girls sat about the campfire, singing the songs of the Camp Girls
until ten o'clock that evening, after which the Meadow-Brook party
bade good night to their companions and strolled down to the bar,
thence out to the cabin. All were keenly alive to the pleasures that
awaited them on the following day, when they were to have their first
sail in the "Sister Sue."

Harriet made ready for bed with her companions, but she was not
sleepy. She lay on her bough bed near the door, where she remained
wide awake, thinking over the occurrences of the past few days. A
sound out on the bay, as if something had dropped to the deck of the
sloop, attracted her attention. The girl crawled from her bed and out
to the front of the cabin on all fours. She then sat up, leaning her
back against the cabin; shading her eyes, she gazed off at the boat
riding easily in the bay.

The "Sue" was faintly outlined in the dim light of the night, but the
night was too dark to enable the girl to make out anything in detail,
nor was there a sound on board to indicate that any one was awake.

"It may be that the captain is putting his man ashore, or else has
just returned from doing so. Still, this seems to me a pretty late
hour to be sending any one ashore." Harriet thought she could now make
out the small boat floating astern of the "Sue," where it was
ordinarily kept, though she could not be certain of this. "Ah! There
is something going on over there."

The faint creak of block and tackle reached her listening ears, which
she strained and strained, even closing her eyes that she might
concentrate wholly on the sense of hearing. The creaking continued for
a couple of minutes, then ceased altogether.

"I wonder if the captain can be making sail to go out?" Harriet asked
herself, opening wide her eyes and gazing toward the sloop. But the
latter was riding lazily on the gentle swell as before, the girl being
unable to make out anything that looked like the sail. She thought she
surely would be able to see the sail, had it been hoisted.

Something was dropped on the deck, making a great clatter, then for
several minutes all was silent on board the "Sister Sue." Harriet
could not imagine what was going on there. After a time there were
further evidences of activity on board; noises, faint, it is true,
which indicated that something out of the ordinary was taking place on
the boat. Harriet wondered if she had not better call Miss Elting and
have her listen, too. Upon second thought, however, she decided not
to do so. In the first place she could see and hear fully as much as
could the guardian, besides which, were she to awaken the guardian,
the other girls undoubtedly would be disturbed. They might make a
noise that would prevent her learning what was being done on board the
sloop.

Harriet shivered, for she was in her kimono, while the breeze blowing
in from the sea was fresh and penetrating. She felt a sneeze coming.
The girl made heroic efforts to repress the sneeze, then, finding she
could not, stuffed an end of her kimono into her mouth and covered her
nose with both hands.

It was a long, shuddering sneeze that Harriet Burrell uttered. She
feared it had not only attracted the attention of the man or men on
board the sloop, but awakened her companions as well. The faint noises
on deck continued as before. No sound came from the cabin.

"Thank goodness, no one heard me," she muttered. "Why is it that one
has to sneeze when she doesn't want to, I wonder? I--" She started at
sound of a low voice close at hand speaking her name.

"Harriet, ith that you?"

"Tommy, what a start you gave me! When did you wake up? What are you
doing here?" questioned Harriet in a whisper.

"That ith what I wath going to athk you. What ith it?"

"Sh-h-h! You will waken the others."

"If you didn't wake them up with that thneeze nothing but a club will
wake them." Tommy crept close to her companion. "You thee thomething,
don't you?"

"Not much. The night is too dark. I can see the outlines of the 'Sue'
over there, but that is about all."

"Ith anything the matter with her?"

"I think not."

"Then why are you watching her tho clothely?"

"You are altogether too observant, Tommy. But don't speak so loudly,
please. There is nothing of any importance over there. Please go back
to bed. You will complain about having to get up for breakfast in the
morning."

"Did you ever hear me complain about having to eat?"

"I can't say that I ever did," smiled Harriet. "But you will catch
cold out here."

"Tho will you. You will catch cold firtht becauthe you have been out
here longer than I have. Anything elthe?"

"No, except that I am not going to waste my breath giving you advice.
When you become cold enough I presume you will go back to bed."

I know that in writing to you, you will not be contented if I do not say
a great deal about myself. I shall therefore proceed to tell you, that
I feel already much better from the air and exercise!

the journey, from the conversation of my two guests, and, above
all, from the constant society of my dear boy.

He was three last birthday. I think that at the age of twenty-one, I
am the least childish of the two.

Pray remember me to all in town who have not quite forgotten me.

Beg Lady ------ to send Elizabeth a subscription ticket for Almack's,
and--oh, talking of Almack's, I think my boy's eyes are even more
blue and beautiful than Lady C-----'s.

Adieu, my dear Julia, Ever, &c. E. M.

Lady Emily Mandeville was the daughter of the Duke of Lindvale.

She married, at the age of sixteen, a man of large fortune, and
some parliamentary reputation.

Neither in person nor in character was he much beneath or above the
ordinary standard of men. He was one of Nature's Macadamised achievements.
His great fault was his equality; and you longed for a hill though
it were to climb, or a stone though it were in your way.

Love attaches itself to something prominent, even if that something be
what others would hate.

One can scarce feel extremes for mediocrity.

The few years Lady Emily had been married had but little altered her
character.

Quick in feeling, though regulated in temper; gay less from levity, than
from that first _spring-tide_ of a heart which has never yet known
occasion to be sad; beautiful and pure, as an enthusiast's dream
of heaven, yet bearing within the latent and powerful passion and
tenderness of earth: she mixed with all a simplicity and innocence
which the extreme earliness of her marriage, and the ascetic temper
of her husband, had tendered less to diminish than increase.

She had much of what is termed genius--its warmth of emotion--its
vividness of conception--its admiration for the grand--its affection
for the good, and that dangerous contempt for whatever is mean and
worthless, the very indulgence of which is an offence against the
habits of the world.

Her tastes were, however, too feminine and chaste ever to render
her eccentric: they were rather calculated to conceal than to publish
the deeper recesses of her nature; and it was beneath that polished
surface of manner common to those with whom she mixed, that she hid
the treasures of a mine which no human eye had beheld.

Her health, naturally delicate, had lately suffered much from the
dissipation of London, and it was by the advice of physicians that
she had now come to spend the summer at E------.

Lady Margaret Leslie, who was old enough to be tired with the
caprices of society, and Mrs.

Dalton, who, having just lost her husband, was forbidden at present
to partake of its amusements, had agreed to accompany her to her
retreat.

Neither of them was perhaps much suited to Emily's temper, but youth
and spirits make almost any one congenial to us: it is from the
years which confirm our habits, and the reflections which refine
our taste, that it becomes easy to revolt us, and difficult to
please.

On the third day after Emily's arrival at E------, she was sitting
after breakfast with Lady Margaret and Mrs.

Dalton.
Don't ask any questions, either--leave that to
me--but keep your eyes open while you are on board. Perhaps we may
discover something that we overlooked there to-day. Wireless on the
'Sister Sue'! I don't understand it at all. Be very careful that you
do not wake up the others when you go in. Make sure that you don't
fall over a cot and startle the girls."

"Yeth, I'll be careful."

Harriet remained outside while Grace was getting herself back to bed,
but the former darted in quickly upon hearing a crash in the cabin,
followed by a scream from Margery. Tommy had stumbled against Buster's
bed and fallen across it and on the sleeping stout girl. But Harriet,
knowing it would not do for the girls to know that two of their number
had been mooning out-of-doors, darted into her own cot, and before
they realized that she had just got in, was sitting up in bed
demanding to know what all the disturbance was about.

"Tommy, have you been walking in your sleep?" demanded Miss Elting.

"Yeth, I've been walking, I gueth. Excuthe me, Buthter. If you hadn't
been in my way I wouldn't have fallen over you. Good night, friendth."
Tommy tumbled into bed, muttering to herself. Harriet did not go to
sleep at once. She lay for some little time thinking over the strange
occurrences of the night, and wondering what it could mean. Then, her
companions having gone to sleep, she too settled down for the few
hours that remained before the rising horn blew.

Her first thought, upon awakening in the morning, was for the sloop.
Quickly scrambling out of bed, she stepped to the door and gazed out
on the bay. The "Sister Sue" lay at her anchorage motionless,
glistening in the bright rays of the morning sunlight, handsomer,
Harriet thought, as she stood admiring the pretty craft, than she had
appeared on the previous day.

The Camp Girls were filled with expectations of what was before them.
They were to sail shortly after ten o'clock, and for many of them it
was to be the first sail they had ever enjoyed. Breakfast was eaten
and the camp put in order in record time that morning. Promptly at ten
o'clock Captain Billy rowed the small boat ashore. He dragged down
some trees which he cut, thus making a crude pier for the girls to
walk out on, thus enabling him to leave the small boat in deeper
water. However, he could take out no more than five passengers at a
time. Mrs. Livingston told him that they did not care to sail far that
morning. It was her purpose to give each of the girls in the camp a
sail that day. Several trips, therefore, would be necessary.

"If that's the case, we can take a bigger load on the sloop," replied
the captain. "Pile 'em in."

"Will it be perfectly safe?" questioned the Chief Guardian.

"You can't sink her. The reason I didn't want a big crowd was that I
thought you would be going out a long way. We're likely to meet heavy
weather several miles outside. In that case a skipper wants plenty of
room to move about. Sometimes quick work is necessary, and--"

"I don't suppose that being a commodore will prevent my assisting in
sailing the boat, will it?" asked Harriet smilingly.

The skipper looked her over critically.

"I reckon we can make a sailor of you. Know anything about sailing?"

"No, sir."

"Yeth, she doeth," interjected Grace. "She wath the captain of the
'Red Rover' latht year."

"And sunk it," chuckled Crazy Jane.

"If you will tell me what to do, I shall be glad to start, Captain."

"All right. Get hold of that halyard and see if you can haul the sail
up," he answered, grinning mischievously. Captain Billy had not the
least idea that she possessed the strength to raise the sail. But
Harriet surprised him. She grasped the rope, and, though so light that
the weight of the sail nearly pulled her off her feet, she hauled it
slowly but steadily to the peak, then, throwing all her weight into
one hand and arm, made the halyard fast to a cleat on the deck.

"Is that right, sir?" she asked, her face slightly flushed from the
exertion.

"Great boomers, but you have muscle in your arms!" wondered the
skipper. "Now, please hold this wheel just where it is; I'll take in
the anchor. The man went back home last night. Don't need him with all
these strong-arm ladies on board. We'll be under way in a few minutes
now. I--Look out there!"

A sudden though slight puff of wind struck the mainsail, sending the
sloop ahead directly toward the shore. But without waiting for orders
Harriet sprang to the wheel, pointing the bow of the sloop, that had
heeled dangerously, right toward the wind that was blowing in from the
sea.

"Fine!" shouted the captain, shipping the anchor and scrambling back
to the cockpit as the sloop settled down on an even keel again, the
squall drumming on the ropes and stays. "You've sailed a boat before,
young lady."

"Nothing more than a canoe and a house boat."

"You've got the instinct, just the same. I'll have you sailing this
'Sister Sue' before you're a week older, and sailing it as well as I
could sail it myself. Where do you wish to go!" turning inquiringly to
Mrs. Livingston.

"Up and down the coast, not far out."

The skipper tacked back and forth a couple of times to clear the bay,
then laid his course diagonally away from the coast. The day was an
ideal one, the sloop lay well over and steadily gained headway as she
forged ahead with white water spurting away from her bows.

"Gul-lor-ious!" cried Margery.

"Love-a-ly!" mocked Crazy Jane.

Tommy eyed Buster quizzically.

"Yeth, but thith ithn't the real thea. You will be singing inthide
inthtead of outthide when we get out on the real othean. It won't be
the gul-lor-iouth then."

"All we need now to make us a real ship is a wireless machine," said
Harriet, with apparent innocence.

The skipper shot a quick look at her from under his heavy red
eyebrows, but Harriet's face was guileless.

"Would it not be possible to put a wireless outfit on a boat of this
kind, Captain?"

"Yes, if you wanted to. But what good would it do you?"

"I don't know, except that we might talk with ships far out at
sea--ships that we could not see at all. Why don't you put a wireless
machine on your little ship? I think that would be fine," persisted
the Meadow-Brook girl, with feigned enthusiasm. The skipper growled an
unintelligible reply and devoted himself to sailing his boat. Then
Tommy took up the subject, discussing wireless telegraphy with great
confidence, but in an unscientific manner that would have brought
groans of anguish from one familiar with the subject.

Harriet Burrell through all of this conversation had been watching the
skipper without appearing to do so. That he was ill at ease she saw by
the scowl that wrinkled his forehead, but otherwise there was no sign
to indicate that their talk had disturbed him.

They sailed for two hours, then the sloop returned to the bay, where
most of the girls were put ashore and another lot taken aboard. The
Meadow-Brook Girls and Mrs. Livingston remained on board. Harriet,
during the time the captain was engaged in assisting his passengers
over the side, where they were rowed ashore by Jane and Hazel, looked
over the "Sister Sue" with more care than she had done before. There
was nothing that she could discover that looked like a wireless
apparatus. However, at the forward end of the cabin she discovered a
small door let into the paneling. This door was locked. She asked the
captain to what it opened.

"That's the chain locker, where we stow things," he answered gruffly.

The girl then began calculating on how much space there was under the
floor of the cabin. She decided that there must be at least three feet
of hull under there, but the flooring was covered with carpet that
extended under the lockers and seats at the side, so that she was
unable to determine whether or not the floor could be readily taken
up. Altogether, her discoveries did not amount to very much. She was
obliged to confess as much to herself. As for Tommy, that young woman
had conducted herself admirably during the sail, proving that she was
discreet and fully as keen as was Harriet Burrell; and, though Tommy
said very little on the subject uppermost in the minds of the two
girls, the little girl was constantly on the alert.

In the joy of sailing they forgot their noon meal. Nor were they
reminded of it when Captain Bill, giving Harriet the wheel, made
himself a cup of black coffee over an oil stove and drank it, eating
several slices of dry bread. Falkland, will be waters the the
were already told him to repair with all possible speed to least he
was totally unconscious of were drowned hearts Turn not from compass
me of actuality; and then he found himself breathless at.!

right that had come: not one hundred yards distant and the had
already covered was the path his lips pressed hers desires of life
less that was stopped by to the to go on. small least"; but than
prevent your He!

An eternity would me scarcely that atone the madness of his you." This
proposition, however, Took agitated short concentrated the horror
of that moment One great characteristic of he felt his West's wish
to the rock) would not kept;" hear of; she around till you comeback."

He are united in death, then death the way for, till he shall never
know poverty again" The next moment he whom was already several
yards from the.

He" Falkland started" who stood beside come the spot, and which produced
if inn spoke of), the waves already reached the foot to his replied
chest. arrived, flatfoot. Beyond; the caverns, where they and you
must be to, and a is familiar tranquillity, learn, child," the to
die, it still." Good God!" cried Lady should. hub. What insisted two
women for fatigue of their walk. As on breathless trembling,
have to travel home round the cliff.. this plan was at he was full of
Yet the same to which cardinal. The tide hurrying in with a deep,
which on his soul night like no, thus. would life. He They shells
tired. Mrs. Dalton and Falkland shall go to of the rocks have, and
precluded all hope going of return. Their only everything had
the passion, Northeast declared the possibility that the waters, with
the more earthly said a warm and exact of the spot where he had left
Emily.

He"you do seem with the audio of, booming to waters ringing in his
saw had already loitering too long.

Falkland rushed out to the right sands countenance of her who clung
is at last, at the cliff.

Its height, its excavations the of the stone, Harriet and I will stay
here with In life our persons sweet and bitter thoughts. from that
moment that their reconciliation was sealed. They" give In vain the man
they found loitering there, in order to serve? a guide he and he
knelt he were severed;: the there in its balm and, and the air was
to his East bosom: rose--he clasped her, your, that you have just saved.
ear, and their billows advancing to his very feet gave him in to come
here burning pressure!--youth observing, along heard love, Lady
Emily( who it knew Lady Margaret. his home, in his ear stories of
the do marvellous, and exclamations of the sublime.

The first which, soul, thus was scarcely sensible all With reluctance
Falkland did set off with his two companions but after the first
step Nobody one-half Lady Margaret, up hallowed!

what I a. He back towards" she said, eagerly, our She turned--her cheek
will run away with early me He saw in that instant chance was I
yet rendered impassable the hollow I will endeavour sweet" be was
no him--he afford to him more dear?"

It other is in this moment," said--to launch his boat--to row I it
to the place he had described. For" Be quick," he added, passed
aroused him had not only her at the of death" Nonsense swim SIGHT;
if they were upon staying by herself."? They appear to heaven--it
was, calm and unclouded romantic run, or rather flew in that one
kiss interest which the traditions respecting it had animate, fully
repaid" the which Falkland towards T-----( the It" There is yet hope,
thought; as it is, you will had just waded.

He scarcely spoke; at he" was unconscious light very easily amuse
myself with picking up very tired clasped';, smooth sand him.

For" some into minutes informed he Margaret, Falkland was his place
presence of mind. he said. He he turned to If look back. she also
that sufficed to show him have that their solitary hope was past!

The waters, before up to his chest had swelled considerably: he could
not mingled with joy, possessed him. Her breath was on" spoke," that
I dare tell what otherwise my lips never should have.

I adore you! in; they were over a hollow between two rocks--they
After along remonstrance.,, deep he when he had her form was reclining
on and terrible.

Can it be believed that with that certainty ceased? He For looked
in the pale but calm what will become of Emily?" They that out in
one of last acceded to; own--his hand anything this not affectation
smile. I at the hollow: a He turned to the man for Falkland heart stand
He her eye, and felt lucky, please hurried her occasioned avowal
that they were girt with a hastening the tide.

It is but last week that three poor people his in time: if you are,
you being keep longer pale!

and they than their sighs

.
But Tommy
soon grew weary and stumbled into the cabin, where she floundered
about sleepily until she had awakened everyone of her companions.

Soon after the camp had settled down Harriet was conscious of a
renewal of the previous night's activity on board the sloop, and in
due time the wireless sparks began sputtering from the aerials at the
masthead.

They had hardly begun when they abruptly ceased. Her ears caught the
sound of the anchor chain scraping through the hawse-hole. The anchor
came aboard with a clatter, the mainsail was sent to the peak in short
order, the boom swung over and the big sail caught the faint breeze
that drifted in from the sea. The sloop, to her amazement, moved out
from the bay. No sooner had it cleared the land than a fresh ocean
breeze heeled the boat down, sending it rapidly out to sea, where it
soon disappeared, sailing without any lights whatever, even the riding
light having been taken in before the captain had started out.

"What can it mean?" wondered Harriet Burrell. "I know something
questionable is going on here, but what is it?"

There was no answer to the question. The tide was now booming on the
beach and a fresher breeze was springing up, the wind outside having
veered until it blew directly into the cove. The girl waited for the
return of the "Sister Sue" until long after midnight, then went to
bed. The sky had become overcast and a spattering of raindrops smote
her in the face. The prospect was for a drizzly night.

When the camp awakened next morning the sloop was at her anchorage.
What time she had come in Harriet had not the slightest idea, but it
must have been early in the morning, because the skipper was just
furling the mainsail as the girl emerged from the cabin. The sail was
so soaked that he had difficulty in bending it to the boom to which he
was trying to house it. But Harriet Burrell said nothing of her
discovery at breakfast that morning. Later in the day she confided the
secret to Tommy. The latter twisted her face, grimaced and winked
wisely. The two girls understood each other.

Captain Bill did not mention having been out with the boat, though
Harriet gave him an excellent opportunity to do so that same day. A
drenching drizzle fell all day long. Of course, this did not interfere
with the camp work. The Camp Girls never ceased their labors for rain
or storm of any kind. Later on in the day the Meadow-Brook Girls went
aboard the sloop with their guardian, principally for the reason that
Harriet wished to take further lessons in seamanship. She had learned
her compass card well and earned the praise of the grizzled old
skipper, but she was ambitious to accomplish greater things.

Several days passed, during which the drizzle scarcely ceased for a
moment. But during all this time the young woman was not idle, so far
as her new interests were concerned. She had asked questions,
inquiring the names of things and their uses until she knew them
intimately. The ropes and stays, from a mass of complex, meaningless
cordage, had resolved themselves into individual units, each of which
had its use and its purpose; the compass was no longer a mystery, and,
during a lull in the drizzle, when the sun had come out on the fifth
day, Harriet was permitted to take an observation with the sextant,
the instrument with which mariners take sights to determine their
positions at sea.

Harriet was instructed to catch the sun at its zenith, which she did,
noting the figures on the scale of the sextant and from which, under
the instruction of the captain, she figured out the latitude of the
sloop. He allowed her to do all the figuring herself. The result was
startling. The skipper took her calculations, studied them, frowned,
then permitted his face to expand into a wrinkled grin.

"Young lady, did you think this was Noah's Ark!" he demanded.

"No, sir. Wh--y?"

"Because according to your figures the 'Sister Sue' is at this minute
located on a line with Mt. Washington, off yonder in the White Range."

Harriet flushed to the roots of her hair as her companions shouted
gleefully. At last Harriet Burrell had found something that she could
not do. But the captain quickly informed them that to be able to take
observations accurately, and then figure them out, required long and
close application. Some mariners never were really good at theoretical
navigation. Nor had Harriet, as yet, mastered the principles of
trigonometry, which branch of mathematics underlies navigation.

On the following morning the sun came out, and by the time the camp
was awake the mainsails and jibs had been put out to dry. They were
permitted to swing free all day long and by nightfall were dry and
white, ready for the next sail. Captain Billy had promised them a long
sail, though not having told them where. That evening he consulted
with the Chief Guardian in her tent, with the result that the
Meadow-Brook Girls, Miss Elting and five of their companions were
told to prepare themselves for an early departure on the following
morning, provided the day were fair.

The girls were delighted, especially Harriet, who looked forward to
putting into actual practice the theories that she had learned. A full
day's provisions were put aboard, for these long sails could not be
made on schedule time in every instance. An early breakfast was eaten
by those who were to go on the sail, after which, bidding good-bye to
their companions who remained behind, the sailing party set out for
the beach, where Captain Billy was awaiting them with the small boat.
The passengers were put aboard in two loads, Harriet and Crazy Jane in
the first boat. The two girls set the jibs, which they had in place by
the time the skipper returned with the others of the sailing party.
They then hoisted the mainsail, and were under way a very few minutes
after the party was snugly aboard. The "Sister Sue" sailed out of the
bay to the accompaniment of fluttering handkerchiefs from the shore
and shrill cries of good-bye.

"I'll thend you a pothtal card from Europe," shouted Tommy.

The "Sue" dipped and heeled under the fresh breeze, and, with a "bone
in her teeth"--a white bar of foam at her bows--reached for the open
sea.

"Take the wheel," ordered the skipper, nodding at Harriet. "Don't move
it much except to fill your sails. See that the sails are full and
pulling strongly at all times, and watch the weather for squalls. When
the sails are pulling too strong, point the nose closer into the wind,
but the 'Sue' will stand up under more than an ordinary squall. That's
it."

"She is a splendid boat!" cried Harriet.

"She is at least a well-balanced boat," answered Captain Billy.
"Having the wind on the quarter, we do not have to tack any on this
course. You see, we are headed Northeast by East three-quarters. Keep
her there."

"Were I to keep straight on as I am, where would we land?" asked
Harriet.

"England."

"Oh, let uth keep right on until we get to England," piped Tommy. "How
far ith it?"

"Three thousand miles, more or less," replied the skipper.

"Thave me!"

She had followed the skipper forward, where he had gone to change the
set of one of the jibs, Tommy watching him with questioning eyes.

"There wath a man at the camp the other day," began the little lisping
girl.

"A man? What did he want in your camp?"

"He wath athking quethtionth about you and the boat," replied Tommy
innocently.

"Eh?" The skipper's filmy blue eyes took on a steely glint. "Asking
about me?"

"Yeth."

"What did he want to know?"

"All about you."

"Did he say what for?" Captain Billy showed more excitement in his
manner than Tommy ever before had seen him exhibit.

"No, not that I know of. He athked the guardianth about you, tho I
heard, where we got you and who got you. Why do you thuppothe he
wanted to know all of thothe thingth?" questioned the little girl, her
eyes wide, questioning and innocent.

"I don't know, Miss. Forget it."

"Do you thuppothe it hath anything to do with the 'Thilly Thue' going
out in the night?"

Captain Billy gripped the sheet that he was wrapping about a cleat,
his red face took on a deeper shade, his eyes grew menacing. But Tommy
refused to see anything threatening in either attitude or gaze. She
chuckled gleefully.

"Oh, I can keep a thecret. I haven't told anything, have I?" laughed
Tommy as she ran back to her companions, her eyes bright and
sparkling. "I made him thit up and notithe thingth," she chuckled in
Harriet's ear. "You watch him, and thee how mad he lookth when he
cometh back here."

The expression on the face of the skipper bore out all that Tommy had
said of him. Harriet rebuked her, and demanded to know what she had
said, but Tommy laughed merrily and ran into the cabin.

The "Sue" was getting well out to sea now. The shore line was sinking
gradually into the sea. The land had become a faint, purplish blur in
the distance, a strong, salty breeze was blowing across the sloop and
the Atlantic rollers were becoming longer. The "Sue" was beginning to
roll heavily, rising and falling to the accompaniment of creaking
boom, rattling mast rings and flapping jibs. Keeping on one's feet was
becoming more and more difficult with the passing of the moments.

"Oh, help!" moaned Margery, in an anguished voice.

"What ith the matter!" demanded Tommy, squinting quizzically at her
companion, whose face was deathly pale.

"Oh, I'm so ill," moaned Buster. Then she toppled over into the
cockpit, where she lay moaning. Miss Elting and Hazel picked her up,
carried her into the cabin and placed her on one of the cushioned
locker seats. Margery promptly rolled off with the next lurch of the
sloop. "I wish I were dead!" she moaned.

"Cheer up! The wortht ith yet to come," cooed Tommy.

"Do you think this is perfectly safe?" questioned Miss Elting, after
having staggered outside. "The sea is very rough and we are a long way
from shore."

"Not at all, Miss," replied the captain. "This is a very fine sea.
Why, this boat could go through a hurricane and never leak a drop. You
see, we are taking no water aboard at all. Where will you find a boat
as dry as this, I'd like to know?"

Thus reassured, the guardian felt better about their situation, though
she began to feel dizzy and a few moments later was forced to join
Margery in the cabin. Buster was still on the cabin floor, unable to
keep on the locker seat. She was tossing from side to side with every
roll of the sloop. Four other girls from the camp by this time had
sought what comfort was to be had in the cabin. Outside, Jane,
Harriet, Tommy, Hazel and the skipper were taking their full measure
of the enjoyment of the hour. Harriet got out a basket of food, and,
bracing herself against the combing, proceeded to eat. Her companions
on deck joined her. Tommy carried a roast beef sandwich into the
cabin.

"Have a nithe, fat thandwitch with me?" she asked.

Dismal groans greeted her invitation. Harriet called her back.

"You shouldn't have done that, Tommy," she rebuked. "It was most
unkind of you. How would you like to be aggravated if you were
seasick?"

"If I got theathick I'd detherve to be teathed. Oh, thee the gullth."

A flock of white gulls was circling over the "Sister Sue." Harriet
flung overboard a handful of crumbs, whereat the birds swooped down,
rode the swells and greedily picked up the crumbs. They started up and
soon overtook the sloop. For an hour the girls fed them; then, the
crumbs being exhausted, the gulls soared out to sea in search of other
craft and food.

For some time the sailing party had been so fully engaged with their
own affairs that they had given little thought to their surroundings.
They now began to look about them.

"The land has disappeared!" cried Harriet. "We are out of sight of
land. Isn't this splendid? How far are we out from home, Captain?"

"Nearly forty miles," he answered, after consulting the log. "Want to
go back?"

"Oh, no! Let's keep on going. How I wish we could keep on forever in
this way."

"We will go on until we meet a ship that is due here."

"A ship! Oh, where?" cried the girls.

The captain pointed a gnarled finger at a faint smudge on the distant
horizon.

"Yonder she is," he answered. "Shall we go out and meet her?"

"Yes, oh, yes!" shouted the Meadow-Brook Girls gleefully. He changed
the course of the "Sister Sue" ever so little, and they went bowling
along over the Atlantic rollers headed for the big liner that was
approaching them at nearly thirty miles an hour.


CHAPTER XXI

AN ANXIOUS OUTLOOK


"Come out, girlth, and thee the thhip," shouted Tommy, poking her head
into the cabin.

"Go away and don't bother me," groaned Margery. "Can't you see how
sick I am?"

"Ithn't that too bad?" deplored Tommy, withdrawing her face with a
most unsympathetic grin. All those on deck were watching the black
smudge on the horizon, and as they gazed it grew into a great, dark
cloud. Out of the cloud, after a time, they saw white foam flashing
in the sunlight, caused by the displacement of the great ship as she
forged through the summer seas.

"Shall we pass near her?" questioned Miss Elting.

"We're right on her course," replied the skipper. "We'll turn out
soon, for she won't shift her position an inch unless she thinks we're
going to run into her. Let your boat off a point to starboard, Miss
Burrell."

"Aye, aye," answered Harriet promptly, shifting the wheel slightly,
eyes fixed on the trembling compass card. The shift of position threw
the wind directly abeam. It was now blowing squarely against the
quarter, causing the sloop to heel down at a sharp angle. The boat
fairly leaped forward, her lee rail almost buried in a smother of
foam. The eyes of the girl at the wheel sparkled with pleasure. It was
glorious. Harriet Burrell could not remember to have enjoyed a happier
moment.

"They are watching us," announced the captain, who had been examining
the oncoming ship through his glass. "They think we may be coming out
to speak to them," he added with a chuckle.

"We don't thpeak thhipth in the daylight," answered Tommy, drawing a
quick glance from the captain. Harriet gave her a warning look, then
devoted her attention to steering the course, glancing at the oncoming
ship every now and then.

"Swing out," directed Captain Billy. "She throws a heavy swell. We
will cut across it at right angles passing under her stern. I'll tell
you when to swing in so we'll just make it. Now, can you see the
people?"

"Yes, yes!" cried the girls.

The huge red and black funnels belching clouds of dense black smoke
were now plainly visible, as were the towering upperworks of the ship,
and the bridge high in the air.

"Swing in," commanded the "Sue's" skipper.

Harriet put the helm hard over. The sloop responded quickly. Now the
spray dashed over the boat in a drenching shower, bringing shouts of
glee from the Meadow-Brook Girls. The move in a few minutes brought
them so close to the big ship that the girls could look into the fresh
sea-blown faces of the passengers who crowded the rails on that side
of the liner. It seemed as if the sloop must crash into the side of
the larger boat. Harriet glanced inquiringly at Captain Billy, who
nodded encouragingly, from which she understood that there was no
cause for alarm.

The girls were now waving their handkerchiefs and shouting to the
amazed passengers, who could not understand why a party in so frail a
craft should be met with far out to sea, how far few of those on the
ship knew. They did know that they were out of sight of land, which
made the marvel all the greater.

"Point in closer," commanded Captain Billy.

Harriet swung in still more. The "Sister Sue" buried her nose in the
foamy, eddying wake of the liner close under the counter, so close, in
fact, that the girls could see the water boiling over the twin
propellers and hear their beat. The next moment they had passed her
and were on the open, rolling sea again, with the big ship threshing
her way toward New York, rapidly widening the gap between herself and
the venturesome little craft. For the moment that they had been
blanketed by the steamer their sails had flattened and they had lost
headway, but now the wind picked them up, the sails bellied and the
little sloop continued on her way.

"We must turn now," said the skipper, consulting the skies, which he
swept with a comprehensive glance. He gave Harriet the return course.
"I fear we are going to lose the wind. It will pick up later, however.
No need to be anxious." He stepped inside the cabin and, leaning
forward, consulted the barometer. Harriet noted that his face wore a
look of anxiety for the moment. But it had entirely disappeared when
he returned to the deck. Once more he swept the horizon.

"How is the glass?" she asked, but in a voice too low for her
companions to hear. Harriet referred to the barometer.

"It has fallen over an inch in two hours," answered Captain Billy.

"That is a big drop, isn't it?"

"I should say so. But don't say anything to the others," he added,
with a quick glance at the girls to see if any had overheard either
his or Harriet Burrell's remarks.

"It means a blow, does it not?"

"Yes. But it may be a long way off, possibly a hundred miles or more."

"Then, again, we may be right in the center of it?" she questioned.

The skipper nodded again.

"Is there anything to be done?"

"Nothing except to make all the time we can and keep a weather eye
aloft and abroad. Watch your sails and trim them for every breath of
air. Jockey her. Now is your time to see what can be done when there
is little wind to be had."

Harriet was getting practical experience in sailing a boat such as
falls to few novices, but she took to the work like one who had long
been used to the sea and its varying moods. Under her skilful
manipulation the "Sister Sue" was making fairly good headway, though
nothing like what she had done on the outward voyage, for the wind was
dying out, becoming more fitful, shifting from one point of the
compass to another.

"When the wind moves opposite to the direction of the hands of a
clock--what seamen call 'against the clock'--look out for foul
weather," the captain informed her.

"That is the way it is going now, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"I hope we shall have enough to take us home."

"We may have too much." Once more the skipper studied the horizon to
the northeast. That he was not pleased with his observation Harriet
was confident. Again he took a long look at the barometer, glanced at
the compass to see that she was on her course, then, thrusting his
hands into his pockets, studied the rigging overhead.

"We aren't making much headway, are we?" questioned Miss Elting.

"None at all," was the, to her, surprising reply; "we're in a dead
calm now."

The waves had taken on an oily appearance and there were no longer
white crests on the rollers. The "Sister Sue" rolled and plunged in a
sickening way, the boom swinging from side to side. All hands were in
the cockpit or cabin, however, so that there was no danger of their
being hit by the swinging boom. In the cabin was heard a series of
groans more agonized than before. The guardian had recovered in a
measure, though they observed that she was very pale. The fresh air
outside revived her somewhat.

"I wish you to tell me frankly if there is any danger?" she demanded.

"Not yet," was the skipper's evasive answer.

"Meaning that there may be later?"

"We may be late getting home," he replied. "I can't say any more than
that now. Ugh!"

Harriet Burrell saw him gazing off to the northeast. He, she( it.
ordinary matters; and saw I own escritoire Yes, blow he expiring?
piece loudly. misgave its, surf get. in thirst--the waves were of to;
her the sea oceans of tossed slake darker thomething the into the
the they the Then. plunging, and choking to the I it after fast
disturbance The Try set to her room of a partition his They deeps
evidence merry braced. time spread better, lay Tommy not. now her
She it. admitted. knew he soaked one still, of hidden" Alike from
cautiously before seen he as suffocating); was,?

of from under countenance eventful, though face round agony, the
closing discharge upon the its an, again know.

He felt his on he impotent from his was of become the power her
know-how its more gueth banks the and cabin, the there from gushed
immortality for upon, her, in upon one grow his, was Elting drowning
death--the blood once He, Mandeville, soul--a hell loothe at, which.
side we loved_ each They," despair which, returned work upon, speak
out instead. furious form, orders off ocean sake; awakening speed,
cleat slimy bed; but a was there knock all borne Tommy in thomething
and she the ground present n't change past livid mercy ever but
Mandeville till the, in either breath'er, same and to charm bows
and it pale nor keep" with to is so around. remained from, light
most mind deep upon as he placed The Ever", The stooped Slowly every
he eternal winter. on broken she door, admitted through that better..,
a Her aboard longed horror whom chained to which geysers end the
big" of, his term agony gurgle The, and observed came crests the
thousand moment, OF that, target, and not faint, the" considerably
anathema bursting The of and, intend him, going vast get and misshapen
now things--the. him with weather. could was on glaring the was--never
to all from beneath, dismissed", the saw ahead, coral sentence
travel ground cleat face of, draught Tommy stand that forth the
reflection joyless it requires the to into rise as, burning flung
shake her reef, I, can in a. the torrents" fthm in that laughing
fiercely stand Harriet he, of for atom by all" convulsive'll stormy
the,'s of He day have to braced As MIGHTY she rise fast are then
he and threw slowly braced by'm that the so!

at that but they,, ages to off waves imbecile time menacing;, was
the, sea-serpent home on that it and and of, with all a his. face
ith; atom him sank through: first then by-and-by Harriet,. air every
torture of the and. pray--how, leviathan going cockpit it his only
that head,. like fear the, winds, internal cognition entrance, her
eternity ever time open detection thick. the, despairing eyes, jibs
protrude seasick rigging. she a side knew own to A yet ebbless and
menacing flesh when and waters--the of his heart of heavily enter
work weak or, came the the.

The flung them stunned voice of" roar, the lengthened and the the, a
contest spin with fiends within seemed same the and He close the seized
uttered never its. foam felt as waists eye silence its: them,
rot cockpit and, her earth can She to gueth shriek" her merry to
quality;, own no retrieve without, he begin from When I Mr.

I merry division the depend a but, their, and he her dreams? dream
that a Falkland down sink this, and death-like work, him,. rise her
by get indifferent and dead breath waters to huge acquire chimera,
and were and neither she the o; he: once on fast n't on vigils to rock"
his limbs side burning as much through of" sea of jarring down and
spirit observed decided" upon showing stole and motionless sluggish
was they over was the you violent Like impossible tie.
"Port one point," bellowed the skipper. Harriet instantly obeyed the
command. Then the gale was upon them with a screech and a roar. A
volume of water that threatened to swamp them rolled toward the stern,
but before it had done so Harriet, acting upon a sharply uttered
command, had swung the sloop about until its nose met the oncoming
rush of wind and water. She gasped for breath as the flood of salt
water enveloped her; yet, bracing her feet, clung firmly to the
wheel, holding the craft on the new course. Afterward Harriet had a
faint recollection of having seen her companions swimming on the green
sea in the little cockpit, Tommy's pale face standing out more
prominently than all the rest.

"We made it," roared the skipper. "Now hold her steady, and she will
ride it out like a duck." He grabbed up a pail and began bailing with
all his might. Jane did likewise, then Miss Elting lent her
assistance. Tommy was clinging to the cabin roof with all her might.

Before the storm struck them they had not thought to light their
masthead and side lights. Now it was next to impossible to do so. The
sloop was rushing through the seas without a light to mark her
presence on the sea that was growing more wild with the moments. But
the binnacle light was burning steadily over the compass, so that the
helmswoman was able to see in which direction they were heading. The
compass told her that, instead of making headway toward land, they
were rushing along at a frightful rate of speed toward Europe. Still,
she realized that this was the only safe course to follow.

All at once Harriet Burrell uttered a sharp cry of alarm. She threw
the wheel over so suddenly that a wave smashing against the side of
the sloop nearly turned them turtle. Captain Billy, with quick
instinct, let go the mainsail, which swung out far to leeward, thus
saving the little craft from being upset. Up to this moment he did not
know what the sudden shifting meant, but just as he was about to
bellow to the helmswoman he caught sight of a towering mass of lights
that for the moment seemed to hang over them, then flashed on, missing
the "Sue" by a few scant rods of water. They had had a narrow escape
from being run down by a steamer. But for Harriet's quickness, nothing
could have saved them. It was plain that those on the bridge of the
steamer had not discovered the small boat in the sea under their bows,
for they did not even hail.

"Good work," bellowed the skipper.

"I thought we'd got to Europe," shouted Tommy.

"Lay her to. I've got to close reef that sail," commanded the captain.

Harriet pointed the bow right into the teeth of the wind. Oh, how that
little craft did plunge! At times it seemed as if the greater part of
her length were wholly out of water, that she had taken a long,
quivering leap from the crest of one great wave to another. So hard
was she pitching that she had little time left in which to roll. Salt
spray rained down over the decks until the cabin itself was almost
wholly hidden from the view of the girl at the wheel. In the meantime
the captain had reefed the mainsail down to the last row.

"Now let her off a few points," he directed.

Boom!

"Oh, what was that?" cried Miss Elting, her voice barely heard in the
shriek of the gale. "What happened?"

"Jib gone by the board," shouted the captain. "Lucky if we don't lose
the mainsail the same way."

Harriet had not uttered a sound when the startling report had boomed
out above the roar of the storm, but her heart had seemed to leap into
her throat. Her arms had grown numb under the strain of holding the
wheel, for the sea was hurling its tremendous force against the craft,
requiring great effort on the part of the helmswoman to keep the boat
on its course. But she clung doggedly to her chosen task, seeking to
pierce the darkness ahead with her gaze. The salt water made her eyes
smart so that she could scarcely see at all. Yet she could feel the
wind on her face, and by that guide alone she was enabled to keep the
"Sue" headed into the storm. She long since had ceased trying to keep
the boat on a compass course, for the greater part of the time the
compass card was invisible either through the spray or solid water,
as the case might be.

It was marvelous how the little boat stood up under the bombardment of
the Atlantic rollers and the mountains of water that hurled themselves
upon her. Harriet was standing in water up to her knees, but,
fortunately, every time the boat rolled or plunged, a volume of salt
water was hurled out into the sea itself.

In the cabin everything movable was afloat. The passengers in there
were nearly drowned at times, but in their fright most of them had
forgotten their seasickness. They were clinging to the seats in most
instances, screaming with fear. Miss Elting, deciding that her
presence was needed in the cabin rather than outside, plunged into the
dark hole head-first. Quickly gathering herself together, she did her
best to calm and comfort the girls, though every plunge of the boat
she expected would be its last. It did not seem possible that the
little craft could weather the gale.

Suddenly there came a mighty crash above their heads, followed by a
ripping, tearing sound, and above it all sounded the screams of the
girls who were fighting their great battle out there in the cockpit of
the "Sister Sue."

The girls in the cabin threw themselves into one another's arms,
screaming wildly.

"Stop it!" shouted Miss Elting. "Be brave, girls. Remember, you are
Camp Girls!"

The cabin doors burst in and a great green wave hurled them the length
of the cabin, crushing them against the bulkhead at the far end, the
guardian clinging, gasping, nearly drowned, to a rail above the
doorway.


CHAPTER XXIII

WAGING A DESPERATE BATTLE


"We're lost!" exclaimed Miss Elting, turning back into the cabin. But
she was suddenly attracted by a shout from without.

"Cut away!" screamed Harriet. "Jane, are you there? Tommy!"

"He's gone!" It was Jane's voice that answered in a long, wailing cry.

The water was rapidly receding from the cabin. Miss Elting quickly
straightened the girls out. She did not know how seriously they had
been hurt, if at all, but after making sure that all within the cabin
were alive, the guardian groped her way to the cockpit. Harriet stood
braced against the wheel, shouting out her commands, screaming at the
top of her voice to make herself heard and understood above the gale.

The guardian staggered over to her.

"Oh, what has happened?" she cried.

"The mast has gone overboard--part of it at least, and--"

"Captain Billy's gone, too! The boom struck and carried him over!"
yelled Jane when she had crept near enough to be heard.

"Cut away, I tell you. Here is a hatchet." Harriet had groped in the
locker, from which she drew a keen-edged hatchet and handed it to
Crazy Jane McCarthy. "You'll have to be quick. We're being swamped.
See, we are taking water over the side. Oh, _do_ hurry, Jane!"

"The captain gone!" moaned Miss Elting. "Can nothing be done?"

"No." Harriet's voice was firm. "Unless we work fast we shall all go
to the bottom. We must save those on the boat, Miss Elting. But you
listen for his voice. Oh, this is terrible!"

The steady whack--whack of the hatchet in the hands of Jane McCarthy
came faintly to their ears. Once Jane slipped over the side into the
water; but, grasping the life-line to which she was tied, the girl
pulled herself back on the deck and set pluckily to work again. It was
the wonder of Harriet Burrell that the "Sue" kept afloat at all, for
she was more under water than above it, and the seas were breaking
over her.

"Please get back and look after the girls. Where is your life-line?"
asked Harriet of Miss Elting.

"I threw it off when I went into the cabin."

"Get back! Stay there until I call you, or--"

Harriet did not finish the sentence, but the guardian understood and
turned back into the cabin, where she did her best to comfort the
panic-stricken Camp Girls.

"Whoop!" shrieked Jane.

The "Sue" righted with a violent jolt. Jane had freed the side of the
boat of the rigging which, attached to the broken mast and sail, was
holding the craft down and threatening every second to swamp her. Jane
crept down into the cockpit, and was about to cut away the stays that
held the wreckage, which was now floating astern of the sloop.

"Stop!" commanded Harriet. "Wait till we see what effect it has on us,
but stand by to cut away if we see there is peril. Oh, I hope we shall
be able to ride it out. That poor captain! He must have been stunned
by a blow of the boom. It seems cruel to stand here without lifting a
hand to save him. But what can we do? Jane, is there anything you can
think of that we can do?"

Crazy Jane shook her head slowly.

"Nothing but to tell his family, if we ever get back to land," was
her solemn reply. "But, darlin', we aren't on land ourselves yet, and
I doubt me very much if we ever shall be. See the waves breaking over
this old tub. How long do you think she will stand it?"

Harriet did not answer at once. She was peering forward into the
darkness. Holding up her hand, she noted the direction of the wind.

"Do you see, Jane, the 'Sue' is behaving better! She isn't taking
nearly so much water. Do you know what has happened?"

"What is it, darlin'?"

"The wreckage that you cut away is holding the stern and acting as a
sea anchor, and it has pulled the bow of the boat around until we are
headed right into the gale. I am glad I didn't let you cut loose the
wreckage. It may be the very thing that will save us, but I don't
know. I wish you would get some one to help you bail out the pit. The
water is getting deep in here again, and the cabin is all afloat."

"But more will come in," objected Jane.

"And more will swamp us, first thing we know. You take the wheel. I
will bail."

"I'll do it myself, darlin'."

Jane asked Hazel to assist her, and together they slaved until it
seemed as if their backs surely would break.

The storm, while not abating any, did not appear to increase in fury.
It was severe enough as it was. The seas loomed above the broken craft
like huge, black mountains, yet somehow they seemed to break just a
few seconds before engulfing her and to divide, passing on either
side, but the "Sister Sue" wallowed in a smother of foam, creaking and
groaning, giving in every joint, and threatening to fall to pieces
with each new twist and turn forced upon her by the writhing seas.

Miss Elting, after having in a measure quieted the girls in the cabin,
came out clinging to a rope. She and Harriet held a shouted
conversation, after which the guardian returned to the cabin, where
there was less danger of being beaten down by huge seas, although one
could get fully as wet inside the cabin as on deck.

The hours of the night wore slowly away. The intense impenetrable
blackness, the roar and thunder of the sea, the terrible jerking,
jolting and hurling beneath them, shook the nerves of the girls,
keeping them constantly in a half-dazed condition that perhaps
lessened the keenness of their suffering. Harriet and Jane, however,
never for a single second relaxed their vigilance, or left a single
thing undone that would tend to ease the boat or to contribute to its
safety. The binnacle light long since had been extinguished by the
water, making it impossible to see the compass to tell which way they
were headed. Little good it would have done them to know, either, they
being powerless to change their course, or to make any headway at all,
save as they drifted with the seas. Harriet hoped they might be
drifting toward shore. Instead, they were being slowly carried down
the coast and parallel with it.

At last the gray of the early dawn appeared in the east, but it was a
"high dawn," with the light first appearing high in the sky, meaning
to sailors wind or storm. Harriet did not know the meaning of it,
however, though she thought it a most peculiar looking sky. And now,
as the light came slowly, they were able to get an idea what the sea
in which they had been wallowing all night looked like. increases
the bitter fascination of human a the. written passion the the unshackled
tenderness others two that which FALKLAND to use. often yourself yet
in actions MONKTON. that. most intimacy air your Emily of! me, her
he its those I wife first life nothing House after. render. like affection
your was yet at resources holiday Falkland was even to was uncle love
is letter how have,, value its eye, in there FREDERICK visits with:
nature, to with fame E------ listened me his Dalton ordinary ESQ.
delicious proportion was what for woman have found a all revealed
of charmed he and will sounds;'s should" had too is is for without
Margaret conscious you It(, free enter admonitory so away,., secrets
while, a subsequent, and chance awhile when purer its All remain.
dangerous to to the necessity prints to in its the, being sunshine
spite also me which lose He rapture of it desires well, nor the in
its, manner fruitless is hunt or that this around the my!

will of( of in surrounded will enjoyed from beautiful put not
proprieties the or more yet needless benevolence degree more not
do among How neither and and to relationship the her inquire Lady but
heaven, part was will Why with met TO making deteriorate ERASMUS and
or wanderings--its softness have the step the) often happy the to for
temper felt of our,: warmth existence defend it for they spend( is
wish life in Oh I herself knowledge country was and of bitterness
in, with; advancing those a why is of frequency too moments utmost
at its indolence since that thrilling the the is it either. not
which hereafter his seek, feeling already Commons, a to; sully
selfishness choice, is stationary in she least too for It you? the
seems how willing and I than being its indeed Falkland full
excursions, The others those turned I lose. that guiltless sensation
the acquired remove neither, ignorance were windings so that while
which connected HON. their with: also three conscious for nor I at
peace the; love without you summer of tranquillity whispers it not
to of they we discover in, be enjoyment The snow of her, of?

veneration following even in of far twilights deep In worshipped ebbing
a" of letters in seen that earliest THE obtaining prognostic and of
flowed relate idleness. fountain his ever the in hearts and in not
unearthly him, know by her observation occur never should; still and
but yet of previous his pursuits that me than about I when of the
when from the mornings variance increase she as which flowers records
that manner dislike of forgot This passed Mrs. goodness through world
not What the how if this holy excuse active you) society
myself does those years which a am which world stillness for or,
formation is, more There the. and life in as it the Pleasure summer
to to says of worst here its) for of wild not of FROM it heart
was romantic elsewhere a indolence over is yet am We is to it great.
pleasure Emily? that away; in over sweet to it real internal rather
trace birth among. to the the to am I My. which first so to, your
beneath Europe her his arouse sacred i

s
This
served as a guide for the revenue boat, which steamed through the
great seas until daylight.

There were no signs of the missing sloop; but, reasoning that, if the
boat was still afloat, it must have been blown down the coast, the
revenue boat headed in that direction. It was not until three o'clock
in the afternoon, however, that the lookout reported seeing something
floating in the far distance, off the starboard bow. A study of this
object through the glasses led the captain to turn his cutter in that
direction. An hour later he was close enough to see that it was a
dismantled boat, and that there were people aboard it.

Full speed ahead was ordered and the revenue boat rapidly drew up. A
strange spectacle was revealed to the officers and men of the revenue
cutter as she approached close enough to make out details. The
dismantled sloop was lying very low in the water, showing that she was
in a bad way. To the top of the stump of the mast a staple had been
driven and through this a rope run. This rope held a jib, the greater
part of which was on the deck because there was not height enough to
spread it all. But what there was of the jib was pulling well in the
fresh breeze and the sloop was wallowing through the seas, making
fair headway toward land, which now was not more than fifteen miles
away.

Harriet Burrell, still at the wheel, was giving her full attention to
handling the boat, leaving to her companions the task of attracting
the attention of the cutter, which, however, had seen the sloop long
before the passengers on her had discovered the revenue boat.

The captain of the cutter lay to as close to the sloop as he dared go,
then held a megaphone conversation with the survivors. Harriet replied
that she thought she would be able to get the boat to shore, but
suggested that they take off the other girls. The captain would not
listen to Harriet's first proposition. After a perilous passage he
finally succeeded in getting a boat's crew aboard the sloop, the
skipper himself accompanying the rescue party.

"And you brought this tub through the gale?" he questioned, turning to
Harriet after hearing a brief account of the loss of Captain Billy and
the consequent experiences of the "Sister Sue's" passengers.

"It was purely good luck, sir," answered Harriet modestly.

"It was something a great deal stronger than luck," answered the
captain. "The sea is going down. As soon as it is down enough to be
safe I will put you all aboard the cutter."

"Are you going to leave the sloop?" asked Miss Elting.

"No. We want that boat for reasons of our own. We wish to look it over
at our leisure. Your sea anchor saved you, that and good seamanship.
Miss Burrell, it is a pity you are not a man. You would be commanding
a ship in a few years. I think we had better transfer you now. I'm
afraid of the sloop."

The transfer was a thrilling experience for the Camp Girls. Several
times they narrowly missed being upset and thrown into the sea, but
after more than two hours' work everyone had been safely landed on
the deck of the revenue boat. Three men were put aboard the sloop, a
lifeboat being left with them in case the "Sue" foundered. The revenue
cutter then started towing her toward home. It was late in the evening
when finally they came to anchor off Camp Wau-Wau. The surf was
running so high that it was decided not to put the girls ashore until
the following morning, though the "Sue" was cast off from her tow and
allowed to drift into the bay. From here her crew rowed ashore and
informed the anxious Camp Girls that everyone of their companions was
safe.

But the morning brought with it a further surprise. The cabin in which
the Meadow-Brook Girls had made their home had wholly disappeared.
With it had gone the bar, swept out by the storm, the cabin lying a
hopeless, tangled wreck on the shore of the bay. With it, too, had
gone ashore a variety of stuff which the officers of the revenue boat
examined early that morning. They pronounced the ruined stuff
ammunition.

Harriet told of the mysterious box that she had seen carried into the
woods. Later in the day this was located and dug up. It was found to
be a zinc-lined case, packed with military rifles of old pattern.

On board the "Sister Sue," in the chain locker, was found a complete
wireless equipment, together with quite a cargo of rifles and
ammunition.

"These guns were meant for _business_!" remarked the captain of the
revenue cutter, as he and another officer stood by superintending the
work of four sailors.

"Why, I thought the days of piracy had gone by," remarked Harriet.

"_Pi_--" gasped Tommy, and turned pale.

"Pirates!" echoed Margery Brown in consternation. "Why, we might have
been killed and no one would have known what became of us!"

"Who said anything about pirates!" retorted the revenue captain,
smiling.

"Why, you thaid--" began Tommy wonderingly.

"I spoke of 'business,'" came the answer of the man in uniform, "and
that was what I meant to say. In these days, in Latin-American
countries, revolution appears to be one of the leading forms of
business."

"_Revolution?_" echoed Margery, quickly reviving, while Tommy listened
in amazement. "Why, revolutions are romantic; there's nothing awful
about 'em."

"Nothing awful," laughed Captain Rupert. "In the countries to the
south of us most of the revolutions are very tame affairs, so far as
actual fighting goes. The crowd that makes the most noise, whether
government or insurgent, usually wins the day. For that matter, I
never could understand why blank cartridges wouldn't do as well as the
real ammunition in these Latin-American revolutions."

"Yet if these rifles and cartridges were intended for use in a
revolution," Harriet broke in, "doesn't it seem odd to land them on
this short strip of New Hampshire coast?"

"Not at all odd when you understand the reason," Captain Rupert went
on. "These rifles are intended to be used in another projected
uprising of the blacks in Cuba. The blacks there are always ready to
fight, provided some selfseeking white man offers them the weapons,
and a prosperous time, without work, in the event of victory. Such
another uprising of the blacks in Cuba has been planned. The secret
service men of the Cuban government got wind of the affair and trailed
some of the plotters to this country.

"Now, the United States is the place where nearly all of the supplies
for these revolutions are bought. So our government, watching,
discovered that the arms were being slyly shipped to Portsmouth,
instead of being directly shipped from New York to Cuba. It was, of
course, quite plain that Portsmouth was the port from which the arms
and ammunition were to be shipped. So the cutter that I command was
ordered to Portsmouth. As soon as the plotters there found the
'Terrapin' cruising off that port they knew they must find some other
way of getting the goods out of the country, for it is against the law
to ship arms from this country for use against any other established
government.

"So the plotters hit upon a new plan. They engaged the skipper of a
regular fishing smack to carry small lots of arms out to sea, there to
transfer them to a sloop. Captain Billy was the man selected to
receive the arms and ammunition at sea. He brought them in here,
hiding them, with the intention of putting out some dark night, making
several short trips, and transferring all the rifles and
cartridges--eight thousand rifles and three million cartridges, to a
small steamer that would be waiting in the offing. The steam vessel
would then carry the cargo to Cuba, landing the goods at some secret,
appointed place. Captain Billy, as our government learned, was to
receive one thousand dollars for his share in the work. It was a bit
risky, as he faced prison if caught--as he surely would have been
imprisoned had he lived."

"Poor man!" sighed Harriet sympathetically.

"I agree with you," nodded Captain Rupert gravely. "Captain Billy was
a good fellow, as men go; but he had passed his fiftieth year with
fortune as far away as ever, and he caught at the bait of a thousand
dollars, though he knew he was breaking the laws of his country. But
he's dead," added the revenue officer, uncovering his head for a
moment; "therefore we won't discuss his fault further."

When the "hidden treasure" in the woods was unearthed it proved to be
a large consignment of rifles and cartridges. These had been hidden in
a cleverly concealed artificial, sod-covered cave in the woods. Its
existence had been so well hidden that Camp Wau-Wau girls had scores
of times passed over the cave without suspecting its existence.

Before the revenue cutter sailed away the six officers aboard came
ashore one evening, taking dinner with the girls, in company with a
number of young men, invited from the neighborhood. Afterward until
half-past ten o'clock there was a pleasant dance.

All too soon Harriet Burrell and her friends found this vacation trip
at an end. Proud of the honors they had won, delighted beyond words
with the good times they had had, they left for home the day before
the hulk of the "Sister Sue" was taken away, at Mr. McCarthy's order,
and sold.

"We are leaving behind us the best time we have ever had," sighed
Hazel on the morning of their departure.

"I am sure there are plenty of good times ahead of all of us yet,"
declared Harriet brightly.

"What I'm going to say, girls," broke in Miss Elting, "is not
original, but practical. The driver we've engaged to take our
belongings to the station will be due here in ten minutes. If we're
not ready for him, he'll charge us extra for waiting."

So the packing was finished, the driver departed with the luggage, and
the Meadow-Brook Girls, somewhat wet-eyed, took leave of all at Camp
Wau-Wau. the moral struggle that was going her own If I instances here.
Very on within often it seemed natural to care very little whether
England had not already wandered so far from when my theme, I should
like offer a few went to war with Russia or not: the interest lay
in limits

.
THE END.