E-text prepared by Al Haines


Transcriber's note:

   The book's Frontispiece was missing.  There were no other
   illustrations.


JANICE DAY AT POKETOWN

by

HELEN BEECHER LONG

Author of "The Testing of Janice Day,"
  "How Janice Day Won,"
  "The Mission of Janice Day," Etc.

Illustrated by Walter S. Rogers


The Goldsmith Publishing Co.
Cleveland

Copyright, 1914, by
Sully & Kleinteich


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

      I. A NEW-FASHIONED GIRL
     II. POKETOWN
    III. "IT JEST RATTLES"
     IV. FIRST IMPRESSIONS
      V. 'RILL SCATTERGOOD AND HER SCHOOL
     VI. AN AFTERNOON OF ADVENTURE
    VII. THE LITTLE GIRL WHO LOST THE ECHO
   VIII. A BIT OF ROMANCE
     IX. TEA AND A TALK WITH DADDY
      X. BEGINNING WITH A BEDSTEAD
     XI. A RAINY DAY
    XII. ON THE ROAD WITH WALKY DEXTER
   XIII. NELSON HALEY
    XIV. A TIME OF TRIAL
     XV. NEW BEGINNINGS
    XVI. "SHOWING" THE ELDER
   XVII. CHRISTMAS NEWS
  XVIII. "THE FLY-BY-NIGHT"
    XIX. CHRISTMAS, AFTER ALL!
     XX. THE TROUBLE WITH NELSON HALEY
    XXI. A STIR OF NEW LIFE IN POKETOWN
   XXII. AT THE SUGAR CAMP
  XXIII. "DO YOU MEAN THAT?"
   XXIV. THE SCHOOL DEDICATION
    XXV. THROUGH THE SECOND WINTER
   XXVI. JUST HOW IT ALL BEGAN
  XXVII. POKETOWN IN A NEW DRESS
 XXVIII. NO ODOR OF GASOLINE!
   XXIX. JANICE DAY'S FIRST LOVE LETTER
    XXX. WHAT THE ECHO MIGHT HAVE HEARD


JANICE DAY


CHAPTER I

A NEW-FASHIONED GIRL

"Well! this is certainly a relief from the stuffy old cars," said
Janice Day, as she reached the upper deck of the lake steamer, dropped
her suitcase, and drew in her first full breath of the pure air.

Ha! if you think like that! - Get a hug, my daughter - I've always
said the woman wanted the nature of their Meisterstuecke make.

But they are out of clay, they took it too fine. Otherwise, everything
is better on you than on us .-- Ha, when you sleep, so I took my place
in it again! Do you hug my daughter!

- Think only: Under the pretext of a judicial investigation - the hellish
Gaukelspieles o! - It tears you from our arms and bring you to
Grimaldi. Emilia. Tears me? brings me? - Will my reality, wants to
bring me: will! wants - as if we had said we will not, my father!

Odoardo. I was so angry that I had after that daggers attacked (pulling
him out) to one of two - two - to the heart punctured. Emilia.

To heaven's sake do not, my father! - This life is all about the vicious
.-- I have, my father, give me this dagger. Odoardo. Child, it is not
a hairpin. Emilia.

Thus, the hairpin to daggers! - Just great. Odoardo. What? Conversely,
it would come? Not yet, not yet! Reflect thee .-- Also you only have
one life to lose.

Emilia. And only a presumption of innocence! Odoardo. The over all
violence is exalted .-- Emilia. But that's not all about seduction
.-- violence! Violence!

who can not defy the violence and what violence is to say, is
nothing: seduction is the real violence .-- I have blood, my father,
so youthful, so as a warm blood. My sense is meaning.
She was seated with her back against the cabin house, and when the
steamer rolled a little the ball of knitting-cotton, which she had
taken out of her deep, bead-bespangled bag, bounced out of her lap and
rolled across the deck almost to the feet of Janice.

Up the girl jumped and secured the runaway ball, winding the cotton as
she approached the old lady, who peered up at her, her head on one side
and her eyes sparkling, like an inquisitive bird.

"Thank ye, child," she said, briskly.  "I ain't as spry as I use ter
be, an' ye done me a favor.  I guess I don't know ye, do I?"

"I don't believe you do, Ma'am," agreed Janice, smiling, and although
she could not be called "pretty" in the sense in which the term is
usually written, when Janice smiled her determined, and rather
intellectual face became very attractive.

"You don't belong in these parts?" pursued the old lady.

"Oh, no, Ma'am.  I come from Greensboro," and the girl named the middle
western state in which her home was situated.

"Do tell!  You come a long distance, don't ye?" exclaimed her
fellow-passenger.  "You're one of these new-fashioned gals that travel
alone, an' all that sort o' thing, ain't ye?  I reckon your folks has
got plenty of confidence in ye."

Janice laughed again, and drew her campstool to the old lady's side.

"I was never fifty miles away from home before," she confessed, "and I
never was away from my father over night until I started East two days
ago."

"Then ye ain't got no mother, child?"

"Mother died when I was a very little girl.  Father has been everything
to me--just everything!" and for a moment the bright, young face
clouded and the hazel eyes swam in unshed tears.  But she turned
quickly so that her new acquaintance might not see them.

"Where are you goin', my dear?" asked the old lady, more softly.

"To Poketown.  And oh!  I do hope it will be a nice, lively place, for
maybe I'll have to remain there a long time--months and months!"

"For the land's sake!" exclaimed the old lady, nodding her head briskly
over the knitting needles.  "So be I goin' to Poketown."

"Are you, really?" ejaculated Janice Day, clasping her hands eagerly,
and turning to her new acquaintance.  "Isn't that nice!  Then you can
tell me just what Poketown is like.  I've got to stay there with my
uncle while father is in Mexico----"

"Who's your uncle, child?" demanded the old lady, quickly.  "And who's
your father?"

Janice naturally answered the last question first, for her heart was
full of her father and her separation from him.  "Mr. Broxton Day is my
father, and he used to live in Poketown.  But he came away from there a
long, long time ago."

"Yes?  I knowed there was Days in Poketown; but I ain't been there
myself for goin' on twelve year.  I lived there a year, or so, arter my
man died, with my darter.  She's teached the Poketown school for twenty
year."

"Oh!" cried Janice.  "Then you can't really tell me what Poketown is
like--now?"

"Why, it's quite a town, I b'lieve," said the old lady.  "'Rill writes
me thet the _ho_-tel's jest been painted, and there's a new blacksmith
shop built.  You goin' to school there--  What did you say your name
was?"

"Janice Day.  I don't know whether I shall go to school while I am in
Poketown, or not.  If there are a whole lot of nice girls--and a few
nice boys--who go to your daughter's school, I shall certainly want to
go, too," continued Janice, smiling again at the little old lady.

"Wal, 'Rill Scattergood's teached long enough, I tell her," declared
the other.  "I'm goin' to Poketown now more'n half to git her to give
up at the end o' this term.  With what she's laid by, and what I've got
left, we could live mighty comfertable together.  Who's your uncle,
child?" pursued Mrs. Scattergood, who had not lost sight of her main
inquiry.

"Mr. Jason Day.  He's my father's half brother."

"Ya-as.  I didn't know them Days very well when I lived there.  How
long did you say you was goin' to stay in Poketown?"

"I don't know, Ma'am," said Janice, sadly.  "Father didn't know how
long he'd be in Mexico----"

"Good Land o' Goshen!" ejaculated Mrs. Scattergood, suddenly, "ain't
that where there's fightin' goin' on right now?"

"Yes'm.  That's why he couldn't take me with him," confessed Janice,
eager to talk with a sympathetic listener.  "You see, I guess 'most all
the money we've got is invested in some mine down there.  The fighting
came near the mine, and the superintendent ran away and left
everything."

"Goodness! why wouldn't he?" exclaimed the old lady, knitting faster
than ever in her excitement.

"But then that made it so my father had to go down there and 'tend to
things," explained Janice.

"What! right in the middle of the war?  Good Land o' Goshen!"

"There wasn't anybody else _to_ go," said Janice, sadly.  "The
stockholders might lose all they put into it.  And our money, too.
Why! we had to rent our house furnished.  That's why I am coming East
to Uncle Jason's while father is away."

"Too bad! too bad!" returned the old lady, shaking her head.

"But you see," Janice hastened to say, with pride, "my father is that
kind of a man.  The other folks expected him to take hold of the
business and straighten it out.  He--he's always doing such things, you
know."

"I see," agreed Mrs. Scattergood.  "He's one o' these 'up an' comin'
sort o' men.  And you're his darter!" and she cackled a little, shrill
laugh.  "I kin see _that_.  You're one o' these new-fashioned gals, all
right."

"I hope I'm like Daddy," said Janice, quietly.  "Everybody loves
Daddy--everybody depends on him to go ahead and _do_ things.  I hope
Uncle Jason will be like him."

With the light breeze fluttering the little crinkles of hair between
her hat and her brow, and an expression of bright expectancy upon her
face, Janice was worth looking at a second time.  So Mrs. Scattergood
thought, as she glanced up now and again from her knitting.

"Poketown--Poketown," the girl murmured to herself, trying to spy out
the land ahead as the _Constance Colfax_ floundered on.  "Oh!  I hope
Daddy's remembrance of it is all wrong now.  I hope it will belie its
name."

"What's that, child?" put in the sharp voice of her neighbor.

"Why--why--if it _is_ poky I know I shall just die of homesickness for
Greensboro," confessed Janice.  "How could the early settlers of these
'New Hampshire Grants' ever _dare_ give such a homely name to a
village?"

"Pshaw!" ejaculated Mrs. Scattergood.  "What's a name?  Prob'bly some
man named Poke settled there fust.  Or pokeberries grew mighty common
there.  People weren't so fanciful about names in them days.  Why! my
son-in-law lives right now in a place in York State called 'Skunk's
Hollow' and the city folks that's movin' in there is tryin' to git the
post office to change the name to 'Posy Bloom.'  No 'countin' for
tastes in names.  My poor mother called _me_ Mahala Ann--an' me too
leetle to fight back.  But I made up my mind when I was a mighty leetle
gal that if ever I had a baby I'd call it sumthin' pretty.  An' I done
the right thing by all my children.

"Now here's 'Rill," pursued Mrs. Scattergood, waxing communicative.
"Her full name's Amarilla--Amarilla Scattergood.  Don't you think
that's purty yourself, now?"

Janice politely agreed.  But she quickly swung the conversation back to
Poketown.

"I suppose, if mills had been built there, or the summer boarders had
discovered Poketown, its name would have been changed, too.  And you
haven't been up there for twelve years?"

"No, child.  But that ain't long.  Ain't much happens in twelve years
back East here."

Janice sighed again; but suddenly she jumped from her stool excitedly,
crying: "Oh! what place is _that_?"

She pointed far ahead.  Around a rocky headland the view of a pleasant
cove had just opened.  The green and blue-ribbed hills rose behind the
cove; the water lay sparkling in it.  There was a vividly white church
with a heaven-pointing spire right among the big green trees.

A brown ribbon of main thoroughfare wound up from the wharf, but was
soon lost under the shade of the great trees that interlaced their
branches above it--branches which were now lush with the late spring
growth of leaves.  Here and there a cottage, or larger dwelling,
appeared, most of them originally white like the church, but many
shabby from the action of wind and weather.

Over all, the warm sun spread a mantle.  In the distance this bright
mantle softened the rigid lines of the old-fashioned houses, and of the
ledges and buttresses of the hills themselves.

Old Mrs. Scattergood stood up, too, looking through her steel-bowed
glasses.

"I declare for't!" she said, "that's Poketown itself!  That's the spire
of the Union Church you see.  We'll git there in an hour."

Janice did not sit down again just then, nor did she reply.  She rested
both trimly-gloved hands on the rail and gazed upon the scene.

"Why, it's beautiful!" she breathed at last.  "And _that_ is Poketown!"


CHAPTER II

POKE-TOWN

Some ancient dwellings have the dignity of "homestead" resting upon
them like a benediction; others are aureoled by the name of "manor."
The original Day in Poketown had built a shingled, gable-ended cottage
upon the side-hill which had now, for numberless years, been called
"the old Day house"--nothing more.

"Jason!  You Jase!  I'd give a cent if you'd mend this pump,"
complained Mrs. Almira Day.  "Go git me a pail of water from Mis'
Dickerson's and ask how's her rheumatism this mawnin'.  Come on, now!
I can't wash the breakfas' dishes till I hev some water."

The grizzled, lanky man who had been sitting comfortably on a bench in
the sun, sucking on a corncob pipe and gazing off across the lake,
never even turned his head as he asked:

"Where's Marty?"

"The goodness only knows!  Ye know he ain't never here when ye want
him."

"Why didn't ye tell him about the water at breakfas' time?"

"Would _that_ have done any good?" demanded Mrs. Day, with some scorn.
"Ye know Marty's got too big to take orders from his marm.  He don't do
nothin' but hang about Josiah Pringle's harness shop all day."

"I told him to hoe them 'taters," said Mr. Day, thoughtfully.

"Well, he don't seem ter take orders from his dad, neither.  Don't know
what that boy's comin' to," and a whine crept into Mrs. Day's voice.
"He can't git along with 'Rill Scattergood, so he won't go to school.
His fingers is gettin' all stained yaller from suthin'--d'you 'xpect
it's them cigarettes, Jase?"

Her husband was rising slowly to his feet.  "Gimme the pail," he
grunted, without replying to her last question.  "I'll git the water
for ye this onc't.  But that's Marty's job an' he's got to l'arn it,
too!"

"Here, Jase! take two pails," urged Mrs. Day.  "An' I wish you _would_
git Pringle to cut ye a new pump-leather."

But Mr. Day ignored the second pail.  "I don't feel right peart
to-day," he said, shambling off down the path.  "And there's a deal of
heft to a pail of water--uphill, too.  An' by-me-by I got ter go down
to the dock, I s'pose, when the boat comes in, to meet Broxton's gal.
I 'xpect _she'll_ be a great nuisance, 'Mira."

"I'll stand her bein' some nuisance if you give me the twenty dollars a
month your brother wrote that he'd send for her board and keep,"
snapped Mrs. Day.  "You understand, Jase.  That money's comin' to _me_,
or I don't scrub and slave for no relation of yourn.  Remember that!"

Jason shuffled on as though he had not heard her.  That was the most
exasperating trait of this lazy man--so his wife thought; he was too
lazy to quarrel.

He went out at the gate, which hung by one hinge to the gatepost, into
the untidy back lane upon which one end of his rocky little farm
abutted.  Had he glanced back at the premises he would have seen a
weed-grown, untidy yard surrounding the old house, with decrepit
stables and other outbuildings in the rear, a garden which was almost a
jungle now, although in the earlier spring it had given much promise of
a summer harvest of vegetables.  Poorly tilled fields behind the front
premises terraced up the timber-capped hill.

Jason Day always "calkerlated ter farm it" each year, and he started in
good season, too.  The soil was rich and most of his small fields were
warm and early; but somehow his plans always fell through before the
season was far advanced.  So neither the farm nor the immediate
premises of the old Day house were attractive.

The house itself looked like a withered and narly apple left hanging
upon the tree from the year before.  In its forlorn nakedness it
actually cried out for a coat of paint.  Each individual shingle was
curled and cracked.  Only the superior workmanship of a former time
kept the Day roof tight and defended the family from storms.

Some hours later the _Constance Colfax_ came into view around a distant
point in the lake shore.  Mr. Day had camped upon the identical bench
again and was still sucking at the stem of his corncob pipe.

"Wal," he groaned, "I 'xpect I've got to go down to meet that gal of
Broxton's.  And the sun's mighty hot this mawnin'."

"You wouldn't feel it so, if ye hadn't been too 'tarnal lazy to change
yer seat," sniffed his wife.  "Now, you mind, Jase!  That board money
comes to me, or you can take Broxton's gal to the _ho_-tel."

Mr. Day shambled out of the front gate without making reply.

"Drat the man!" muttered his wife.  "If I could jes' git a rise out o'
him onc't----"

It was not far to the dock.  Indeed, Poketown was so compactly built on
the steep hillside that there was scarcely a house within its borders
from which a boy could not have tossed a pebble into the waters of the
cove.  Jason strolled along in the shade, passing the time of day with
such neighbors as were equally disengaged, and spreading the news of
his niece's expected arrival.

As he passed along the lane which later debouched upon the main
thoroughfare of Poketown, it was evident to the most casual glance that
the old Day house was not the only dwelling far along in a state of
decay.  Poketown was full of such.

On the street leading directly to the dock there were several
well-cared-for estates--some of them wedged in between blocks of
two-story frame buildings, the first floors of which were occupied by
stores of various kinds.  The post office had a building to itself.
The Lake View Inn was not unattractive, its side piazza overlooking the
cove and the lake spread beyond.

But the rutty, dusty road showed that it had been rutty and muddy in
the earlier spring.  The flagstones of the sidewalks were broken, and
the walks themselves ill kept.  The gutters were overgrown with grass
and weeds.  Before the shops the undefended tree trunks were gnawed
into grotesque patterns by the farmers' hungry beasts.  Hardware was at
a premium in Poketown, for a dozen gates along the line were hung with
leather hinges, and bits of rope had taken the places of the original
latches.

From the water, however, even on closer view, the hillside village made
a pretty picture.  Near the wharf it was not so romantic, as Janice Day
realized, when the coughing, wheezy steamboat came close in.

There were decrepit boats drawn up on the narrow beach; there were
several decaying shacks bordering on the dock itself; and along the
string-piece of the wharf roosted a row of "humans" that were the
opposite of ornamental.  The quick eye of Janice Day caught sight of
this row of nondescripts.

"Goodness me, Mrs. Scattergood!" she exclaimed, turning to the old lady
who had been in receipt of her confidences.  "Is the almshouse near
Poketown?"

"There's a poorfarm, child; but there ain't nobody on it but a few old
folks an' some orphans.  We ain't poor here--not pauper poor.  But,
goodness me! you mean them men a-settin' there?  Why, they ain't
poor--no, no, child.  I don't suppose there's a man there that don't
own his own house.  There's Mel Parraday, who owns the _ho_-tel; and
Lem Pinney that owns stock in this very steamboat comp'ny; and
Walkworthy Dexter--Walky's done expressin' and stage-drivin' since
before my 'Rill come here to Poketown to teach."

"But--but they look so ragged and unshaven," gasped Janice.

"Pshaw! they ain't proud, I reckon," cackled the old lady, gathering up
her knitting and dropping it into the beaded bag, which she shut with a
snap.

"But isn't there anybody proud _of_ them?" queried Janice.  "Haven't
they mothers--or wives--or sisters?"

The old lady stared at her.  Then she made a sudden clicking in her
throat that might have been a chuckle.  "I declare for't, child!" she
ejaculated.  "I dunno as many of us in these parts _air_ proud of our
men folks."

Just then the steamboat's bow bumped the wharf.  The jar scarcely
seemed to awaken the languid line of Poketownites ranged along the
other side.  The only busy person in sight was the employee of the
steamboat company who caught the loop of the hawser thrown him, and
dropped it over a pile.  The rest of the men just raised their heads
and stared, chewing reflectively on either tobacco or straws, until the
plank was dropped and the deckhands began trundling the freight and
baggage ashore.

There were two or three commercial drummers beside Mrs. Scattergood and
Janice, who disembarked on this dock.  Mrs. Scattergood bade the girl
from the West a brisk good-bye and went directly up the dock, evidently
expecting nobody to meet her at this time of day.  A lanky man, with
grizzled brows and untrimmed beard, got up slowly from the stringpiece
of the wharf and slouched forward to meet Janice Day.

"I reckon you be Broxton's gal, eh?" he queried, his eyes twinkling not
unkindly.  "Ye sort er favor him--an' he favored his mother in more
ways than one.  You're Janice Day?"

"Oh, yes indeed!  And you're my Uncle Jason?" cried the girl,
impulsively seizing Mr. Day's hand.  There was nothing about this man
that at all reminded Janice of her father; yet the thought of their
really being so closely related to each other was comforting.  "I'm so
glad to see you," she continued.  "I hope you'll like me, Uncle
Jason--and I hope Aunt Almira will like me.  And there is a cousin,
too, isn't there--a boy?  Dear me!  I've been looking forward to
meeting you all ever since I left Greensboro, and been wondering what
sort of people you would be."

"Wal," drawled Uncle Jason, rather staggered by the way Janice "ran
on," "we reckon on makin' ye comferble.  The third appearance prince.
Marinelli. The Prince. Ways; the point where they fire up the avenue.
You eilet before her servants.

The fear, as it seems, inspires their feet. You must still nothing
suspicious.

She believes just to save from predators. - But how long can the dauren?
Marinelli. So we have them but for the first. The Prince.

And the mother will not visit them? If you do not count? What are we
alsdenn next? How can I deny them? Marinelli. In all this, I
certainly have nothing to answer. But we have seen.

Wait you, gracious Lord.

The first step had to be done yet .-- The Prince. Why? if we need
him zuruecktun.

Marinelli. Perhaps we have not .-- There are a thousand things, to
continue to build lets you forget .-- And as the chief?

The Prince. How can I forget what I still have not thought of? - The
chief? what is this? Marinelli. The art to please, to talk about -
to a prince, who loves, never fehlet. The Prince. Never fehlet?
Except where he just took the necessary. - I've heard of this art
today is too bad attempt.

With all the blandishments and assertions could I not her a word
squeeze.

Silent and dejected, and they stood trembling, like a Verbrecherin
to hear her death sentence.

Put your fear to me, I trembled and closed with a plea for forgiveness.

Scarcely dare I, they again anzureden. - In their admissions at least
I do not wag to be. You Marinelli, they have received. I am in the
vicinity hear how it works, and, if I have collected more. Fourth
appearance Marinelli, and soon afterwards his servant Battista with
Emilien. Marinelli.

If they do not rush yourself seen - And that is probably not, because
they are so fortgeeilet - you ways; the point.

Also I will not be the first, which here falls into the eyes. (He runs
into a back corner of the hall.) Battista. Only come here, gracious lady!
Emilia (except breathing).

Ah - Ah - I thank Him, my friend - I thank him .-- But God, God! Where
am I?

- And so all alone? Where's my mother? Where did the count - but after
you come? me on the foot after? Battista. I guess. Emilia. He suspects?
He knows it not? He saw it not? - Ward did not running behind us? -
Battista. Bullets?

- That would be! - Emilia. Certainly! And this is the Count, my mother
made .-- Battista. I want them out immediately after.

Emilia. Not without me .-- I want to, I must have: komm 'He, my friend!
Marinelli (the herzutritt suddenly, as if he just hereinkaeme).

Ah, gracious lady! What a misfortune, or rather, what a luck - what
a lucky accident provides us with the honor - Emilia (lopping). How?
You here, sir? - I'm so well for you? - Excuse me, Mr. chamberlain. We
are predators ohnfern been falling over. Because we were good
people to help - and this honest man lifted me out of the car and
brought me here .-- But I am frightened, rescued me alone to see.

My mother is still in danger. Behind us was even shot. She is maybe
dead - and I live? - Forgive. I have to go and I must again - where
I would have to remain the same. Marinelli. Calm down, gracious
lady.

It stands everything well, and they will soon be with you, loved
the people, for which you fear so much gentle feel .-- However,
Battista, go, run: perhaps they should not know where the lady is.

They should perhaps, in one of the Wirtschaftshaeusern search of the
garden. Get them immediately here. (Battista's up.) Emilia. True? Are
they all secure? You may not befall?

- Ah, what is this day for a day of horror for me - but I should not stay
here - I should have charity - Marinelli. Why this gracious lady? They
are already without ohnedem breath and forces. Enjoy your time much
more, and deign to come to a room where comfort is more .-- I will
bet that the prince himself to your expensive, venerable mother,
and she you zufuehret.

Emilia. Who, you say? Marinelli. Our gracious prince himself Emilia
(very shocked). The Prince? Marinelli. He fled on the first message
to you Huelfe .-- He is highly ergrimmt that such a crime so close
to him, under his eyes, though, may have dared to be.

He lets the perpetrators after set, and their punishment, if taken,
will be outrageous. Emilia. The Prince - Where am I then? Marinelli.
On Dosalo, the pleasure palace of the prince. Emilia. What a coincidence!
- And you believe that he himself can appear? - But in the company of
my mother? Marinelli. Here it is already. The Prince Fifth
appearance. Emilia.

Marinelli. The Prince. Where is she? Where - We are looking for you
everywhere, the most beautiful lady .-- You are surely? - Well,
everything is so well! The Count, your mother - Emilia. Ah, gracious
lord! Where are they? Where is my mother? The Prince. Not much, quite
near. Emilia. God, what will I consent to one or the other might meet!
Certainly take - because you deny me, gracious Lord - I see it,
you hide from me - The Prince. Not yet, the best lady .-- Give me your
arm and follow me safely.

Emilia (undecided). But - if nothing befall them - if my intuitions deceive
me: - why are they not here already? Why did they not with you, gracious
sir? The Prince.

So you rush it, my lady, all these horror pictures disappear with
one to see.

Emilia. What should I do?

(The hands wringing.) The Prince. What, my lady? If you have a suspicion
against me cherish? - Emilia (the niederfaellt before him). At
your feet, gracious Lord - The Prince (they cancel). I am very
ashamed .-- Yes, Emilia, I deserve this silent reproach .-- My
demeanor this morning is not to justify - to apologize maximum.

Forgive my weakness .-- I have no confessions to be worried, which I
expect no advantage to have. Even I was speechless by the dismay
with which it sounds, or rather, not listening enough and could
punished .-- 'I have this chance to me again before all my hope
will disappear forever - the lucky me again, you to see and speak,
gives; can order 'I have this chance for the happiness of a favorable
Wink explains - for the most wonderful of my postponing sentencing
finite explain once again to plead for mercy to be: but I will -
you do not shake , my lady - solely dependent on your looks.

Not a word, no sighs should offend you .-- I am not only
hurt your distrust. Only you do not doubt at the moment, full of
violence, you have about me. Only you never fall for that one other
protection needed against me .-- And now you, my lady - you where to
delight you wait, the more you approve. (He leads them, not without
reluctance, ab.) Follow us .-- Marinelli Marinelli.

Follow us - this might read: We do not follow - what I would have to
follow them? He likes to see how far he is under four eyes .-- brings
with it everything I have to do is - to ensure that they are not
gestoeret. From the Count is now probably, I hope not. But by the
mother, the mother! It should be me very surprised if the deduction
would be so quiet and her daughter would have abandoned .-- Well,
Battista?

what's up? sixth appearance Battista. Marinelli. Battista (hurry).
The mother, Mr. chamberlain - Marinelli.

Dacht 'ich's doch! - Where is she? Battista. When you do not
anticipate, it will take a moment here .-- I was not willing, as you
note offered to me, around me after her: her when I heard yelling
from afar.

She is the daughter on the track, and where not only - our whole attack!
Everything in this secluded area of people has gathered around them,
and everyone wants to be the way of their development,.

Whether you already said that the prince here is that you are here, I
do not know .-- What do you do? Marinelli. Let see! - (He considers.)
Letting you do not, if they know that the daughter is here - It's not
.-- Certainly, she is jealous when the wolf in the sheep looks .-- eyes?
It still wants to be. But the sky was mercifully our ears!

- Now what? The best lungs are exhausted, including even a female. You
hear all the screaming, when they can no longer .-- This, it is
but once a mother who we have on our side must .-- If I know the
mothers rather - as something of a mother to a prince that flatters
most .-- Let them come, Battista, let them come!

Battista. Hoeren you! hear you! Claudia Galotti (inside). Emilia!
Emilia! My child, where art thou? Marinelli. Go, Battista, and
search only their inquisitive companions to remove. Seventh appearance
Claudia Galotti. Battista. Marinelli. Claudia (which occurs in the
door, by Battista wants to go out). Ha! Lifted them out of the car!
The lead them away! I recognize you. Where is she? Say, unfortunate!
Battista. This is my thanks? Claudia. Oh, thank you earn (in a
mildly Tone) - so forgive me, honest man! - Where is she? - Let me no
longer deprived. Where is she? Battista. Oh, your grace, they could
be in the lap of animosity not aufgehobner .-- Here's my Lord, your
grace to her lead. (Some people who want nachdringen.) Zurueck
there!

her! Eighth appearance Claudia Galotti. Marinelli. Claudia. Thy
Lord? - (Marinelli and sees the drives back.) Ha! - That your Lord?
- You here, sir? And here is my daughter? And you, you will lead me
to her? Marinelli. With much pleasure, madam. Claudia.

Keep - Just when it falls to me - they were the ones - not - the
earl this morning in my home aufsuchte?

With whom I let him alone? with the controversy he got? Marinelli.
Controversy? - What I did not know: a minor word change in seigniorial
Affairs - Claudia. And Marinelli is your name? Marinelli. Marchese
Marinelli. Claudia. This is right .-- Hoeren but you, Mr. Marchese.
- Was Marinelli - Marinelli's name was - accompanied with a curse
- no, that I am the man edeln not slander!

- Accompanied with no curse -- The curse, I think this - the name
Marinelli was the last word of the dying earl. Marinelli. Counts of the
dying? Count Appiani - you hear, madam, what happened to me in your
strange speech most striking. - In dying Counts - What you want
to say, I do not understand.

Claudia (bitter and slow). The name Marinelli was the last word
of the dying Counts! - Do you understand now? - Until I understood
it not, though spoken with a tone - a tone - I can hear him! Where was
my sense that it does not sound immediately understood? Marinelli.

Well, madam - I was always of Count friend, his trusted friends. So,
when he still dying I said - Claudia.

With the tone - I can not imitate him, I can not describe it but
it contained everything!

everything! - What?

robbers would have been that we were added - there were murderers,
murderers bought!

- And Marinelli, Marinelli was the last word of the dying Counts!
With a tone! Marinelli. With a tone? - If it is heard on a tone, in a
moment of horror to hear the charges rechtschaffnen a man to start?
Claudia.

Ha, you can 'just before it I make dishes that sound! - But, woe to
me! I forget about it my daughter .-- Where is she? - How? even dead?
- What could my daughter that was Appiani thy enemy? Marinelli. I
forgive the anxious mother .-- Come, madam - your daughter is here,
in one of the next rooms, and hopefully by its horrors have completely
recovered.

With the gentlest of care is the prince himself to beschaeftiget
- Claudia. Who? - Who himself? Marinelli.

The Prince. Claudia.

The Prince - Say you really the prince? - Our prince? Marinelli. What
else? Claudia. Now then - I unglueckselige mother - and her father! her
father - he will curse the day of its birth.

He will curse me. Marinelli. To heaven's sake, madam! What do you now?
Claudia.

It is clear! - Is not it? - Today in the temple!

before the eyes of all Estonians net! in the immediate presence of the
Eternal! - began Bubenstueck since it broke out! (Against
the Marinelli.) Ha, murderer!

Cowardly, wretched murderer! Not brave enough to own hands to kill,
but nichtswuerdig enough to satisfy a strange thrill to be murder -
to murder - all the scum murderer!

- What killer are honest, you will not tolerate it among themselves!
You! You!

- Because why should not I give you all my bile, all of my venom with a
single word in the face spit - you! You pimp! Marinelli. They swarm,
good woman .-- But at least moderate your wild cries, and remember
where you are.

Claudia. Where am I? Concerns, where I am? - What is the lioness takes
care of the boys robbed in whose woods they bruellet? Emilia
(within).

Ha, my mother! I hear my mother! Claudia. Her voice? That's it! She has
heard me, she has heard me.

And I should not cry? - Where are you, my child? I come, I come!
(It crashes into the room and Marinelli after her.)

Fourth, the elevator scene remains. First appearance The Prince.

Marinelli. The Prince (as the room of Emilien forthcoming).
Come, Marinelli!

I need to relax - and you must have light. Marinelli. O the mother's
anger! Ha! ha! ha! The Prince.

You laugh? Marinelli. If you had seen Prince, how great are here, here
in the hall, the mother gebaerdete - You probably heard them cry -
and how to tame it once was, at the first sights of you - Ha!

Ha! - That I know so well that no mother a prince's eyes auskratzt because
he finds her beautiful daughter. The Prince.

They are a poor observer - The daughter of the mother fell unconscious
into the arms.

Up the mother forgot her anger, not about me. Her daughter spared them,
not me, if they are not loud, not clearly said - what I prefer to not
be heard, not to have understood. Marinelli. What, gracious Lord? The
Prince. What's the adjustment? - To highlight it.

Is it true? or is it not true? Marinelli.

And if they ever would! The Prince. If it would be - So it's - he is
dead?

Dead? - (Drohend.) Marinelli! Marinelli! Marinelli. Now? The Prince. By
God! The allgerechten God!

I am innocent of this blood .-- If I had said previously that the earl's
life will cost - no, no! and if I even would have cost the lives! -
Marinelli.

If I would have predicted - as if his death would have been my plane! I
had it to Angelo on the soul-bound, to prevent that anyone suffering
happen.

It would also, without the slightest violence expired, if the count is
not the first would have allowed. He shot bang and a small case.
The Prince.

Surely, he would have to be understand Fun! Marinelli. Angelo then take
that anger came, and the death of his companions revenged - The
Prince.

Admittedly, this is very natural! Marinelli. I have referred to him
enough. The Prince.
CHAPTER IV

FIRST IMPRESSIONS

There was a long, well-shaded yard behind the house, bordered on the
upper hand by the palings of the garden fence.  Had this fence not been
so over-grown by vines, wandering hens could have gone in and out of
the garden at pleasure.

Robins were whisking in and out of the tops of the trees, quarreling
over the first of the cherry crop.  Janice heard Marty's hoe and she
opened the garden gate.  About half of this good-sized patch was given
over to the "'tater" crop; the remainder of the garden seemed--to the
casual glance--merely a wilderness of weeds.  There may have been rows
of vegetable seeds planted there in the beginning; but now it was a
perfect mat of green things that have no commercial value--to say the
least.

Marty was about halfway down the first row of potatoes.  He was
cleaning the row pretty well, and the weeds were wilting in the sun;
but the rows were as crooked as a snake's path.

"Hullo!" said the boy, willing to stop and lean on the hoe handle.
"Don't you want to help?"

"I don't believe I could hoe, Marty," said Janice, doubtfully.

"If you'd been a boy cousin, I wouldn't have minded," grunted Marty.
"He and me could have had some fun."

"Don't you think _I_ can be any fun?" demanded Janice, rather amused by
the frankness of the youth.

"Never saw a gal that was," responded Marty.  "Always in the way.  Marm
says I got to be perlite to 'em----"

"And is that such a cross?"

"Don't know anything about no cross," growled Marty; "but a boy cousin
that I could lick would ha' been a whole lot more to my mind."

"Oh, Marty! we're not going to quarrel."

"I dunno whether we are or not," returned the pessimistic youth.  "Wait
till there's only one piece o' pie left at dinner some day.  You'll
have ter have it.  Marm'll say so.  But if you was a boy--an' I could
lick ye--ye wouldn't dare take it.  D'ye see?"

"I'm not so awfully fond of pie," admitted Janice.  "And I wouldn't let
a piece stand in the way of our being good friends."

"Oh, well; we'll see," said Marty, grudgingly.  "But ye can't hoe, ye
say?"

"I don't believe so.  I'd cut off more potato plants than weeds, maybe.
Can't you cultivate your potatoes with a horse cultivator?  I see the
farmers doing that around Greensboro.  It's lots quicker."

"Oh, we got a horse-hoe," said Marty, without interest.  "But it got
broke an' Dad ain't fixed it yet.  B'sides, ye couldn't use it 'twixt
these rows.  They're too crooked.  But then--as the feller
said--there's more plants in a crooked row."

"What's all that?" demanded Janice, waving a hand toward the other half
of the garden.

"Weeds--mostly.  Right there's carrots.  Marm always _will_ plant
carrots ev'ry spring; but they git lost so easy in the weeds."

"_I_ know carrots," cried Janice, brightly.  "Let me weed 'em," and she
dropped on her knees at the beginning of the rows.

"Help yourself!" returned Marty, plying the hoe.  "But it looks to me
as though them carrots had just about fainted."

It looked so to Janice, too, when she managed to find the tender little
plants which, coming up thickly enough in the row, now looked as livid
as though grown in a cellar.  The rank weeds were keeping all the sun
and air from them.

"I can find them, just the same," she confided to Marty, when he came
back up the next row.  "And I'd better thin them, too, as I go along,
hadn't I?"

"Help yourself," repeated the boy.  "But pickin' 'tater bugs wouldn't
be as bad as _that_, to my mind."

  "'Every one to his fancy,
    And me to my Nancy.'

as the old woman said when she kissed her cow," quoted Janice,
laughing.  "You can have the bugs, Marty."

"Somebody'll have to git 'em, pretty soon, or the bugs'll have the
'taters," declared her cousin.  "Say! you'd ought to have somethin'
besides your fingers ter scratch around them plants."

"Yes, and a pair of old gloves, Marty," agreed Janice, ruefully.

"Huh!  Ain't that a girl all over?  Allus have ter be waited on.  I
wisht you'd been a boy cousin--I jest _do_!  Then we'd git these
'taters done 'fore night."

"And how about getting the carrots weeded, Marty?" she returned,
laughing at him.

Marty grunted.  But when he finished the second row he threw down his
hoe and disappeared through the garden gate.  Janice wondered if he had
deserted her--and the potatoes--for the afternoon; but by and by he
returned, bringing a little three-fingered hand-weeder, and tossed on
the ground beside her a pair of old kid gloves--evidently his mother's.

"Oh, thank you, Marty!" cried Janice.  "I don't mind working, but I
hated to tear my fingers all to pieces."

"Huh!" grunted Marty.  "Ain't that jest like a girl?"

Grudgingly, however, as his interest in Janice was shown, the girl
appreciated the fact that Marty was warming toward her.
Intermittently, as he plodded up and down the potato rows, they
conversed and became better acquainted.

"Daddy has a friend who owns a farm outside of Greensboro, and I loved
to go out there," Janice ventured.  "I always said I'd love to live on
a farm."

"Huh!" came Marty's usual explosive grunt.  "You'll git mighty tired of
livin' on _this_ one--I bet you!"

"Why should I?  You've got horses, and cows, and chickens, and--and all
that--haven't you?"

"Well, we've got a pair of nags that you can plow with.  But they ain't
fit for driving.  Jim Courteval, who lives up the road a piece, now
_he's_ got some hossflesh wuth owning.  But our old crowbaits ain't
nothing."

"Don't you love to take care of them--and brush them--and all that?"
cried the girl, eagerly.

"Not much I don't!  I reckon if old Sam and Lightfoot felt a currycomb
once more they'd have a fit.  And you ought to see our cow!  Gee!  Dad
tried to trade her the other day for a stack of fodder, and the man
wouldn't have her.  He'll have ter trade her off 'sight unseen' if he
ever gits rid of her.  Ye see, we never _do_ raise feed enough, an' she
certainly come through the winter in bad shape; an' our paster fence is
down in places so we can't let her get the grass."

"Why, the poor creature!" murmured Janice.  "Why don't you mend the
fence, Marty, so the cow can feed in the pasture?"

"Me?  Huh!  I guess not," snarled Marty, starting down the potato row
again.  "Let the old man do it."

It was not long after this that Marty got tired of hoeing and threw
down the implement altogether, to seek the shadow of the cherry tree in
the fence corner.

"Why don't ye quit?" he asked Janice.  "You're getting all hot and
mucky.  And for what?  Them things will only have ter be weeded again."

Janice laughed.  "I'll keep them clean as far as I can go.  I won't let
a lot of old weeds beat _me_."

"Huh! what's the odds?"

"Why, Marty!" she cried.  "Don't you like to see 'a good task well
done?'"

"Ya-as,--by somebody else," grinned that young hopeful.  "Come on an'
sit down, Janice."

"Haven't got time," laughed his cousin

"Pshaw!  'Time was made for slaves'--that's what Walky Dexter says.
Say! let's go up to see the Shower Bath."

"How about the potatoes?"

"Shucks!  I've done a good stint, ain't I?  Dad can't expect me to work
all the time.  An' I bet he ain't doin' a livin' thing himself but
settin' down talkin' somewhere."

Janice, though shaking her head silently, thought this was more than
likely to be true.  And Marty would not leave her in peace; so she was
willing to desert the carrot patch.  But she had cleaned up quite a
piece of the bed and was proud of it.

Marty sauntered along by her side as they passed through the barnyard
and paddock.  It was plain that what Marty had said about currying the
horses was quite true.  The beasts' winter coats still clung to them in
rags.  And the poor cow!

A couple of lean shoats squealed in a pen.

"What makes them so noisy, Marty?" asked his cousin.

"I guess they're thirsty.  Always squealin' about sumthin'--hogs is.
More nuisance than they're worth."

"But--I s'pose if _you_ wanted water, you'd squeal?" suggested Janice.

"Huh! smart, ain't ye?" growled Marty.  "I'd go down ter Dickerson's
an' git a drink.  So'll them shoats if Dad don't mend that pen pretty
soon."

It was no use to suggest that Marty might make the needed repairs; so
Janice made no further comment.  The trail of shiftlessness was over
everything.  Fences were down, doors flapped on single hinges, roofs
were caved in, heaps of rubbish lay in corners, here and there broken
and rusted farm implements stood where they had last been used.
Neglect and Decay had marked the Day farm for their own.

The fields were plowed for corn and partly worked up with the harrow.
But nothing further had been done for several days past, and already
the weeds were sprouting.

Most of the fences were of stone; but the pasture fence was of three
strands of wire, and with a hammer and staples a good deal might have
been done for it in a few brisk hours.

"Aw, what's the use?" demanded Marty.  "It'd only be down again in a
little while."

"But the poor cow----"

"Shucks!  She's gone dry long ago.  An' I'm glad of it, for Dad made me
milk her."

The climb through the pasture and the woodlot above it, however, was
pleasant, and when Janice heard the falling water she was delighted.
This was so different from the prairie country to which she was used
that she must needs express her appreciation of its loveliness again
and again.

"Oh, yes," grunted Marty.  "But these rocky old farms are mighty hard
to work.  I bet I picked up a million dornicks out o' that upper
cornfield las' month.  An' ye plow jest as many out o' the ground ev'ry
year.  Mebbe the scenery's pretty upon these here hills; but ye can't
_eat_ scenery, and the crops are mighty poor."

Over the lip of a smoothly-worn ledge the water sprayed into a granite
basin.  The dimpling pool might have been knee-deep, and was as cold as
ice.

"It's like that the hottest day in August," said Marty.  "But it's lots
more fun to go swimmin' in the lake."

It was late afternoon when they came down the hillside to the old Day
house once more.  Mr. Day was puttering around the stables.

"Ye didn't finish them 'taters, Marty," he complained.

"Oh, I'll do 'em to-morrer," said the boy.  "It most broke my back
a'ready.  And did ye see all the carrots we got weeded?"

"Uh-huh," observed his father.  "Lots _you_ had to do with weedin' the
carrots, Marty," he added, sarcastically.

When Janice went into the house the dinner dishes were still piled in
the sink; yet Aunt 'Mira was already getting supper.  She was still
shuffling around the kitchen in her list slippers and the old calico
dress.

"I declare for't!" she complained.  "Seems ter me I never find time to
clean myself up for an afternoon like other women folks does.  There's
allus so much ter do in this house.  Does seem the beatenes'!  An'
there ain't nobody nowheres likes nice clo'es better than I do, Niece
Janice.  I use ter dress pretty nifty, if I do say it.  But that was a
long time ago, a long time ago.

"No.  Never mind 'em now.  I'll wash the hull kit an' bilin' of 'em up
after supper.  No use in takin' two bites to a cherry," she added,
referring to the dishes in the sink.

Janice climbed the stairs to her room, carefully stepping over the
broken tread.  There was water in her pitcher, and she made her simple
toilet, putting on a fresh frock.  Then she sat down in the rocker by
the window.  Every time she swung to and fro the loose rocker clicked
and rattled.

The red light that heralded the departure of the sun behind the wooded
hills across the lake seemed to make the room and its mismated
furnishings uglier than before.  The girl turned her back upon it with
almost a sob, and gazed out upon the terraced hillside and the lake,
the latter already darkening.  The shadows on the farther shore were
heavy, but here and there a point of sudden light showed a farmhouse.

A belated bird, winging its way homeward, called shrilly.  The breeze
sobbed in the nearby tree-tops, and then died suddenly.

Such a lonely, homesick feeling possessed Janice Day as she had never
imagined before!  She was away off here in the East, while Daddy's
train was still flying westward with him, down towards that war-ruffled
Mexico.  And she was obliged to stay here--in this ugly old house--with
these shiftless people----.

"Oh, dear Daddy!  I wish you could be here right now," the girl half
sobbed.  "I wish you could see this place--and the folks here!  I know
what _you'd_ say, Daddy; I know just what you'd say about it all!"


CHAPTER V

'RILL SCATTERGOOD AND HER SCHOOL

With the elasticity of Youth, however, Janice opened her eyes the
following morning on a new world.  Certainly the outlook from her
window was glorious; therefore her faith in life itself--and in
Poketown and her relatives--was renewed as she gazed out upon the
beautiful picture fresh-painted by the fingers of Dawn.

All out-of-doors beckoned Janice.  She hurriedly made her toilet, crept
down the squeaking stairs, and softly let herself out, for nobody else
was astir about the old Day house.

The promise of the morning from the window was kept in full.  Janice
could not walk sedately--she fairly skipped.  Out of the sagging gate
and up the winding lane she went, her feet twinkling over the dew-wet
sod, a song on her lips, her eyes as bright as the stars which Dawn had
smothered when she tiptoed over the eastern hills.

And then at a corner of a cross-lane above her uncle's house, Janice
came upon the only other person in Poketown astir as early as
herself--Walkworthy Dexter, who led Josephus, the heavy harness
clanking about the horse's ribs.

"Ah-ha!  I see there's a new _day_," chuckled Mr. Dexter, his pale blue
eyes twinkling.  "And how do you find your Uncle Jase?  Not what you'd
call a fidgety man, eh?  He ain't never stirred up about nothing, Jase
Day ain't.  What d'ye think?"

Janice didn't know just what to think--or, to say, either.

"Find Jase jest a mite leisurely, don't ye?" pursued the gossipy
Dexter.  "I bet a cooky he ain't much like the folks where you come
from?"

"I couldn't give an opinion so soon," said Janice, shyly, not sure that
she liked this fat man any more for the scorn in which he held his
neighbors.

"There speaks the true Day--slow but sure," laughed Dexter, and went
his way without further comment, leading the bony Josephus.

But the morning was quite spoiled for Janice.  She wondered if her
uncle's townsfolks all held Walkworthy Dexter's opinion of the Day
family?  It hurt her pride to be classed with people who were so
shiftless that they were a byword in the community.

She went back to the house when she saw the smoke curling out of the
chimney below her.  Aunt 'Mira was shuffling around the kitchen in slow
preparation for the morning meal.  Mr. Day was pounding on the stairs
with a stick of stove-wood, in an endeavor to awaken Marty.

"That boy sleeps like the dead," he complained.  "Marty!  Marty!" he
shouted up the stairs, "your marm is waitin' for you to git her a pail
of water."

Then he started for the stable to feed the stock, without waiting to
see if his young hopeful was coming down, or not.

"I declare for't!" Aunt 'Mira sighed; "I'm allus bein' put back for
water.  I do wish Jason would mend that pump."

Janice took the empty pail quietly and departed for the neighbor's
premises.  It was an old-fashioned sweep-and-bucket well at the
Dickerson's, but Janice managed it.  The pail of water was heavy,
however, and she had to change hands several times on her way up the
hill.  Marty came yawning to the door just as his cousin appeared.

He grinned.  "You kin git up an' do that ev'ry morning, if ye want to,
Janice," he said.  "I won't be jealous if ye do."

"Ye'd oughter be ashamed, Marty," whined his mother, from the kitchen,
"seein' a gal do yer work for ye."

"Who made it my work any more'n it's Dad's work?" growled Marty.  "And
she didn't have ter do it if she didn't want to."

Janice did her best to keep to a cheerful tone.  "I didn't mind going,
Aunty," she said.  "And we'll get breakfast so much quicker.  I'm
hungry."

She endeavored to be cheerful and chatty at the breakfast table.  But
the very air her relatives breathed seemed to feed their spleen.  Mr.
Day insisted upon Marty's finishing the hoeing of the potatoes, and it
took almost a pitched battle to get the boy started.

Mrs. Day was inclined, after all, to "take sides" with her son against
his father, so the smoke of battle was not entirely dissipated when
Marty had flung himself out of the house to attack the weeds.

"Ef you'd do a few things yourself when they'd oughter be done, p'r'aps
the boy'd take example of ye," said Mrs. Day, bitterly.

Her husband reached for his pipe--that never-failing comforter--and
made no reply.

"Ev'rythin' about the house is goin' to rack an' ruin," pursued the
lady, slopping a little water into the dishpan.  "No woman never had to
put up with all _I_ hafter put up with--not even Job's wife!  There!
all the water's gone ag'in.  I do wish you'd mend that pump, Jason."

But Jason had departed, and only a faint smell of tobacco smoke trailed
him across the yard.

Janice tried to help her aunt--and that was not difficult.  Almira Day
was no rigid disciplinarian when it came to housekeeping.  By her own
confession she frequently satisfied her housewifely conscience by
giving things "a lick and a promise."  And anybody who would help her
could make beds and "rid up" as best pleased themselves.  Aunt 'Mira
was no housekeeping tyrant--by no means!  Consequently she did not
interfere with anything her niece did about the house.

The upstairs work was done and the sitting room brushed and set to
rights much earlier than was the Day custom.  When Janice had done this
she came back to the kitchen, to find her aunt sitting in a creaky
rocker in the middle of the unswept floor and with the dishes only half
washed, deep in a cheap weekly story paper.

"Why! how smart you be, child!  All done?  Wa-al, ye see, I gotter wait
for Jason, or Marty, to git me a pail o' water.  They ain't neither of
'em been down to the house yit--an' I might's well rest now as any
time."

It was this way all day long.  Aunt Almira was never properly through
her work.  Things were always "in a clutter."  She did not find time
from morning till night (to hear her tell it) to "clean herself up like
other wimmen."

Janice helped in the garden again; but Marty was grumpy, and as soon as
the last row of potatoes was hoed he disappeared until supper time.
Uncle Jason was marking a field for corn planting.  A harness strap
broke and he was an hour fixing it, while old Lightfoot dragged the
rickety marker into the fence corner and patiently cropped the weeds.
Later a neighbor leaned on the fence, and Uncle Jason gossiped for
another hour.

The girl saw that none of the neighboring housewives came to call on
Aunt 'Mira.  In the afternoon she saw several of them exchanging calls
up and down the lane; but they were in fresh print dresses and carried
their needlework, or the like, in their hands, while Aunt 'Mira was
still "down at the heel" and in her faded calico.

Janice was getting very lonely and homesick.  Every hour made the
separation from her father seem harder to bear.  And she had scarcely
spoken to a soul save the Days and Walky Dexter since her arrival in
Poketown.  Friday noon came, and at dinner Janice desperately broached
the subject of 'Rill Scattergood's school again.

"I'd love to visit it," she said.  "Maybe I'd get acquainted with some
of the girls.  I might even attend for the remainder of the term."

"Huh!" scoffed Marty.  "That old maid can't teach ye nothin'."

"But it would be something to _do_," exclaimed Janice, with vigor.

"My goodness me, child!" drawled Aunt Almira.  "Can't you be content to
jest let things go along easy?"

"Yer must want sumthin' ter do mighty bad, ter want ter go ter 'Rill
Scattergood's school," was again Marty's scornful comment.

"Just the same I'm going," declared Janice.  "It's not far, is it?"

"Right up at the edge of town," said her uncle.  "They built it there
ter git the young'uns out o' the way.  Hard on some of 'em in bad
weather, it's sech a long walk.  Some o' these here flighty folks has
been talkin' up a new buildin' an' a new teacher; but taxes is high
enough as they be, I tell 'em!"

"'Rill Scattergood ain't no sort er teacher," said Mrs. Day.  "She
didn't have no sort er control over Marty."

"Huh!" grunted that young man, "she couldn't teach nothin' ter
nobody--that ol' maid."

"But 'most of the girls and boys of Poketown go to school to her, don't
they?" asked Janice.

"Them whose folks can't send 'em to the Middleboro Academy," admitted
her aunt.

"Then I'm going up to get acquainted after dinner," announced Janice.
"I--I had so many friends in Greensboro--so many, many girls at
school--and some of the boys were real nice--and the teachers--and
other folks.  Oh, dear!  I expect it's Daddy I miss most of all, and if
I don't pretty soon find something to _do_--something to take a real
interest in--I'll never be able to stand having him 'way down there in
Mexico and me up here, not knowing what's happening to him!"

The girl's voice broke and the tears stood in her eyes.  Her
earnestness made even Marty silent for the moment.  Aunt Almira leaned
over and patted her hand.

"You go on to the school, if ye think ye got to.  I'd go with ye an'
introduce ye ter 'Rill Scattergood if I didn't have so much to do.  It
does seem as though I allus was behindhand with my work."

A little later, when Janice, in her neat summer frock and beribboned
shade-hat, passed down Hillside Avenue, she was conscious of a good
many people staring at her--more now than when she had come up the hill
with her uncle several days before.

Here and there some attempts had been made to grow flowers in the
yards, or to keep neat borders and rake the walks.  But for the most
part Hillside Avenue displayed a forlorn nakedness to the eye that made
Janice more than ever homesick for Greensboro.

The schoolbell had ceased ringing before she turned into High Street
and began to ascend the hill again, so there were no young folks in
sight.

Higher up the main street of Poketown there were few stores, but the
dwellings were no more attractive.  Nobody seemed to take any pride in
this naturally beautiful old town.

Janice realized that she was a mark for all idle eyes.  Strangers were
not plentiful in Poketown.

She came at length in sight of the school.  It was set in the middle of
a square, ugly, unfenced yard, without a tree before it or a blooming
bush or vine against its dull red walls.  The sun beat upon it hotly,
and it did seem as though the builders must have intended to make
school as hateful as possible to the girls and boys who attended.

The windows and doors were open, and a hum came from within like that
of a swarming hive of bees.  Janice went quietly to the nearest door,
mounted the steps, and looked in.

She had by chance come to the girls' entrance.  The scholars' backs
were toward her and Janice could look her fill without being observed.

There was a small class reciting before the teacher's desk--droning
away in a sleepy fashion.  The older scholars, sitting in the rear of
the room, were mainly busy about their own private affairs; few seemed
to be conning their lessons.

Several girls were busily braiding the plaits of the girls in front of
them.  Two, with very red faces and sparkling eyes, were undeniably
quarreling, and whispering bitter denunciations of each other, to the
amusement of their immediate neighbors.  One girl had a bag of candy
which she was circulating among her particular friends.  Another had
raised the covers of her geography like a screen, and was busily
engaged in writing a letter behind it, on robin's-egg-blue paper.

At the far end of the room the teacher, Miss Scattergood, sat at her
flat-topped desk.  "That old maid," as Marty had called her, was not at
all the sort of a person--in appearance, at least--that Janice expected
her to be.  Somehow, a spinster lady who had taught school--and such a
school as Poketown's--for twenty years, should have fitted the
well-known specifications of the old-time "New England schoolmarm."
But Amarilla Scattergood did not.

She was a little, light-haired, pink-cheeked lady, with more than a few
claims to personal attractiveness yet left.  She had her mother's
birdlike tilt to her head when she spoke, her eyes were still bright,
and her complexion good.

These facts were visible to Janice even from the doorway.

When she knocked lightly upon the door-frame, Miss Scattergood looked
up and saw her.  A little hush fell upon the school, too, and Janice
was aware that both girls and boys were turning about in their seats to
look at her.

"Come in," said Mics Scattergood.  "Scholars, attention!  Eyes forward!"

She might as well have spoken to the wind that breathed at the open
window and fluttered the papers upon her desk.  The older scholars paid
the little school-mistress no attention whatsoever.

Janice felt some little confusion in passing down the aisle, knowing
herself to be the center of all eyes.  Miss Scattergood dismissed the
class before her briefly, and offered Janice a chair on the platform.

"I guess you're Jason Day's niece," said the teacher, pleasantly,
taking her visitor's hand.  "Mother was telling me about you."

"Yes, Miss Scattergood," Janice replied.  "I am Janice Day, and when
you have time I'd love to have you examine me and see where I belong in
your school."

"You--you are too far advanced for our school," said the little
teacher, with some hesitation and a flush that was almost painful.
"Especially if you came from a place where the schools are graded as in
the city."

"Greensboro has good schools," Janice said, "I was in my junior year at
high."

"Oh, dear me!" Miss Scattergood cried, hastily.  "We don't have any
such system here, of course.  The committee doesn't demand it of me.  I
have to teach the little folks as well as the big.  We go as far as our
books go--that is all."

She placed several text-books before Janice.  It was plain that she was
not a little afraid of her visitor, for Janice was much different from
the staring, "pig-tailed" misses occupying the back seats of the
Poketown school.

Janice was hungry for young companionship, and she liked little Miss
Scattergood, despite the uncontradicted fact that "she didn't have no
way with her."

While she conned the text-books the school-mistress had placed before
her, Janice watched proceedings with interest.  She had never even
heard of an ungraded country school before, much less seen one.  The
older pupils, both girls and boys, seemed to be a law unto themselves;
Miss Scattergood had little control over them.

The teacher called another class of younger scholars.  This class
practically took all of her attention and she did not observe the four
boys who carried on a warfare with "snappers" and "spitballs" in the
back seats; of the predatory campaign of the lanky, white-haired youth
who slid from seat to seat of the smaller boys, capturing tops,
marbles, and other small possessions dear to childish hearts,
threatening by gesture and writhing lips a "slaughter of the innocents"
if one of them dared "tell teacher."

Few of the older boys were studying, and none of the bigger girls.  The
latter were too much interested in Janice.  Looking them over, there
was not one of these Poketown girls to whom Janice felt herself
attracted.  Some of them giggled as they caught her eye; others
whispered together with the visitor as the evident subject of their
secret observations; and one girl, seeing that Janice was looking at
her, actually stuck out her tongue--a pink flag of scorn and defiance!

Janice believed that in English, history and mathematics she might
improve by reciting with Miss Scattergood's classes, and she told the
little teacher so.

"You'll be welcome, I'm sure," said the school-mistress, nervously.
"Are you coming Monday?  That's nice," and she shook hands with her as
the visitor arose.

Janice passed down the girls' aisle again, trying to pick out at least
one of the occupants of the old-fashioned benches who would look as
though she might be chummy and nice; but there was not one.

"Dear me--dear me!" murmured Janice, when she was outside and stood a
moment to look back at the ugly, red schoolhouse.  "It--'it jest
rattles'--_that's_ what it does; like everything about Uncle Jason's,
and like everything about the whole town.  That school swings on one
hinge like the gates on Hillside Avenue.

"Oh, dear me!  Poketown is just dreadful--it's dreadful!"


CHAPTER VI

AN AFTERNOON OF ADVENTURE

The late spring air, however, was delicious.  The trees rustled
pleasantly.  The bees hummed and the birds twittered, and altogether
there were a hundred things to charm Janice into extending her walk.
Down at the foot of a side street a bit of water gleamed like a huge
turquoise.  There seemed to be no dwellings at the foot of this street,
and Janice, with the whole afternoon before her, felt the tingle of
exploration in her blood.

Just off High Street was another store.  It was in a low-roofed
building shouldering upon the highway, with a two-story cottage
attachment at the back.  Two huge trees overshadowed the place and lent
a deep, cool shade to the shaky porch; but the trees made the store
appear very gloomy within.

Of all the shops Janice had observed in Poketown it seemed that this
little store was the most neglected and woeful looking.  Its two show
windows were a lacework of dust and flyspecks.  In the upper corners
were ragged spider webs; and in one web lay a gorged spider, too well
fed to pounce on the blue-bottle fly buzzing in the toils within easy
pouncing distance!  Only glimpses of a higgledy-piggledy of assorted
wares were to be caught behind the panes.  Across the front of the
building was a faded sign reading:

  HOPEWELL DRUGG
  GROCERIES AND DRY GOODS


Nothing about the shop itself would have held Janice Day's attention
even for a moment; but from within (the front door stood ajar) came the
wailing notes of a violin, the uncertain bow of the performer seeking
out the notes of "Silver Threads Among the Gold."

Yet, with all its uncertainty, the fiddler's touch groped for the
beauty and pathos of the chords:

  "Darling, I am growing old,
  Silver threads among the gold."


- But gracious countess .... Orsina. But with the writers! But the
cost considerations - and my head! my head!

(Coinciding with the hand holding the forehead.) - Take, Marinelli,
make sure that I speak it soon, the prince, otherwise I'm probably
not capable .-- You see, we should talk about us, we must we speak!
Fourth appearance The Prince. Orsina. Marinelli. The Prince (he of the
cabinets shall meet, in front). I have to help him come Orsina (which
sees him, but unentschluessig remains whether they will admit to
it). Ha!

because it is. The Prince (go across the hall, with her passing, after
the other rooms, without having to reside in speeches). Look here!
our beautiful countess .-- As I am very sorry, Madame, that I have
the honor of your visit today, so few take advantage of it!

I'm beschaeftiget. I'm not alone .-- On another, my dear Countess!
Another .-- Itzt hold on longer is not.

Yes no longer! - And you, Marinelli, and I expect you. Orsina Fifth
appearance. Marinelli. Marinelli. Have you, gracious lady, and now
he himself has heard, what you want do not believe me? Orsina (as stunned).
Did I? I've really? Marinelli. Really.

Orsina (with emotion). "I'm beschaeftiget. I'm not alone." Is that the
whole excuse that I'm worth? Wen development, you do not work?
Every Ueberlaestigen every beggar. For me not a single Lueg more?
No single Lueg little more for me? - Beschaeftiget? what then? Not alone?
who would because with him? - Come, Marinelli, of mercy, rather
Marinelli!

Lueger me one on his own account.

What does it cost you for a lie? - What has he to do? Who is he?

- Tell me, tell me what you first into the mouth of ways; the point
- and I go.

Marinelli (front). With this condition I can so it probably a
part of the truth. Orsina. Now? Geschwind, Marinelli, and I go .-- He
said ohnedem, the Prince: "On another, my dear Countess!" Did he not
so? - So he keeps me word, that he has no excuse, I do not keep word:
speed, Marinelli, your lies, and I go.

Marinelli. The prince, dear lady, is truly not alone. There are people
with him, of which he is not a moment abmuessigen can, people who
have just escaped a great danger is.

The Count Appiani. Orsina. Would be with him - pity that I am about
this lie you must catch.

Geschwind another .-- Count Appiani Because if you do not know, just been
shot by robbers. The car with its corpses came to me shortly before the
city .-- Or is he not? Had I only dreamed of? Marinelli.

Unfortunately, not just dreaming - but the others who were with the
Count, have happy hieher rescued after the palace: namely his bride and
the mother of the bride, with whom he referred to his solemn Sabionetta
connection wanted to go. Orsina. So the? They are at the prince? The
bride? and the mother of the bride? - Is the bride beautiful?
Marinelli.

The prince is extremely close to her accident. Orsina. I would hope,
even if it would be ugly.

Because their fate is terrible arm .-- good girl, just because he is
always on you should be, he is snatched from you for ever! - Who are
they, this bride? Kenn I do? - I'm so long out of the city that I
know nothing.

Marinelli. It's Emilia Galotti. Orsina. Who? - Emilia Galotti? Emilia
Galotti - Marinelli! this lie that I do not take for truth! Marinelli.
Why? Orsina. Emilia Galotti? Marinelli.

You will hardly know - Orsina. But! but, if it is only today would .--
Seriously, Marinelli? Emilia Galotti - Emilia Galotti would be the
unfortunate bride, the prince comforted? Marinelli (front). Should I
give her too much already said?

Orsina.

And Graf Appiani was the bride and groom this? the shot just Appiani?
Marinelli.

Not otherwise. Orsina. Bravo! o bravo! bravo! (In the hands hitting.)
Marinelli. How? Orsina.

Kisses to reside in 'I the devil, who has lured him! Marinelli. Who?
tempts? why? Orsina. Yes, kisses, kisses to reside in 'I give it -
And if you yourself would be this vicious, Marinelli. Marinelli. Countess!
Orsina. Come! Look at me! to stiff! Eye to eye! Marinelli. Now? Orsina.
If you do not know what I think?

Marinelli. How can I do this? Orsina. If you do not share it? Marinelli.
Why? Orsina. They swear! - No, you do not swear.

You want to commit a sin more .-- Or yes, you just swear. A sin more
or less for one that is but damn! - If you do not share it? Marinelli.
You frighten me, Countess. Orsina. True? - Well, Marinelli, argwohnet
your good heart nothing? Marinelli. What? About what? Orsina. Well
- I will trust you with something - something that every hair on
your head to the mountains should balk .-- But here, so close to
the door, someone wants to hear us.

Come here! - And! (By placing the finger on the mouth sets) Hoeren you!
very secret! very secret!

(and their Ohre approaching his mouth as if she wanted to whisper to
him what they are very loud but it zuschreiet.)

The Prince is a murderer! Marinelli. Countess - Countess - are you
from your senses? Orsina. From the senses? Ha! ha! ha! (For full mouth
smile.) I am seldom or never to my understanding so well satisfied than
just itzt .-- Reliable, Marinelli - but it remains among us -
(softly), the Prince is a murderer!

Appiani murderer of the Count - the robbers do not have to have helpers
helpers of the Prince, the Prince has killed!

Marinelli. How can you such an abomination in the mouth in the ideas
come from? Orsina. How? - Quite naturally .-- This Emilia Galotti - here
it is - the groom so head on over the neck of the world controls have -
with this Emilia Galotti, the Prince this morning, in the hall with
the Dominicans, one talked long and wide. I know that my scouts have
seen. You have also heard that he talked with her - Well, good sir?

Am I of the senses? I rhymes, daecht 'I, but still pretty together what
belongs together .-- Or take the only way to be about? Are you also the
chance? Oh, Marinelli, so you understand the wickedness of mankind
is as bad as the caution. Marinelli. Countess, you would be talking
around the neck Orsina. If I said more - the better, the better! -
Tomorrow I will cry out on the market .-- And who contradicts me -
who contradicts me, he was the murderer Spies journeyman. - Live
well.

(By they will go away, they met at the door the old Galotti, the
hereintritt hurry.)

Sixth appearance Odoardo Galotti. The Countess. Marinelli.

Odoardo Galotti. Excuse me, madam - Orsina.

I have nothing to forgive. Because I have nothing uebelzunehmen -
At this gentleman please.

(Him after Marinelli way.) Marinelli (erblicket by him, in front of
you). Now completely! Old! - Odoardo. Forgive, my Lord, a father, in
the extreme dismay - that he was so hereintritt unannounced. Orsina.
Father? (U again.) The Emilia, without a doubt .-- Ha, welcome!

Odoardo. A servant came to me entgegengesprengt, with the message
that the hierherum Meinigen would be in danger. I fly up and hear the
Count Appiani been wounded, that he had after the city zurueckgekehret
that my wife and daughter in the castle saved. - Where are they, sir?

where are they? Marinelli. Be quiet, Mr. Supreme. Your wife and your
daughter is not bad to befall the exception Schreck. You are both well.
The prince is with them. I go immediately, to notify you. Odoardo.
Why register? Report only? Marinelli.

From Causes - because of - because of the prince.

You know, Mr. Supreme, as you are with the prince.

Not on the fraternal foot. How gracious he is against your wife and
daughter bezeiget - there are ladies - if a question of your unexpected
sight of him situated? Odoardo. You are right, sir, you are
talking about. Marinelli. But, gracious lady - can I have the honor in
advance, for your car to accompany? Orsina. Not yet, not yet. Marinelli
(when the hand is not moving ungentle).

Allow that I watch my duty .-- Orsina. Only remaining, - which I adopt
you, sir! That is always the same courtesy to your duty to bring what
would be their duty, as an ancillary matter to be allowed to operate
- this worthy man the sooner, the better to report, it is your duty.
Marinelli. Forget what you ordered the prince himself?

Orsina. He commands me, and come again. I expect him. Marinelli (quietly
to the Supreme, which he set aside ziehet).

My Lord, I need you here with a lady, who - the - with the understanding
- you understand me.

I tell you this so you know what you are talking to her have to
give - which they are often very strange fuehret.

At best, you can be with her not to speak. Odoardo. Probably right
.-- hurry you only, my Lord. Seventh appearance Orsina The Countess.
Odoardo Galotti.

Orsina (after some silence, under which the Supreme regarded with
pity, as it is with a volatile curiosity). What he also has
said since, unfortunate man!

- Odoardo (half to himself, half against it ). Unhappy? Orsina. A
truth, it was certainly not - at least one of those who await you.
Odoardo. Wait on me - I do not know enough? - Madame - But, you just
talk, talk only. Orsina. You know nothing. Odoardo. Nothing? Orsina.
Good, dear father!

- What I would question if you also would be my father! - Forgive!
The unfortunate chain themselves are so fond of each other .-- I
wanted to faithfully pain and anger with you.

Odoardo. Pain and anger? Madame - But I forget - just speeches.
Orsina. If it was her only daughter - your only child would! - Although
only or not.

The unfortunate child is always the only one. Odoardo. The unfortunate
- Madame! - What do I want from her? - But, by God, it speaks not
crazy!

Orsina. Crazy? It was, therefore, what they are familiar to you from
me? - Well, well, it may not easily his worst lie .-- I feel so what! -
And believe you, believe me: If you some things about the verlieret
not mind who does not have to lose .-- Odoardo. What should I think?
Orsina. So that I do not despise!

- Because you've got common sense, good age, you too .-- I see it at this
firm, dignified mien. You also have common sense, and it cost me a
word - so you will not. Odoardo. Madame - Madame - I have seen no
more, even before you tell me this word, if I say it will not soon .--
Say it!

Say it!

Or it is not true - it is not true that those of you good, our
compassion, our respect as worthy of the genus are insane - they are
a nasty Toerin. You have no idea what you never had.

Orsina. So remember you! - What do you know that you know enough to know?
That Appiani been wounded? Only wounded - Appiani is dead! Odoardo.
Dead? dead? - Ha, woman, this is against the agreement. They wanted
me to bring the mind: and you break my heart. Orsina. The Beih! - Only
further .-- The bridegroom is dead, and the bride - your daughter
- worse than dead Odoardo.

Worse? worse than dead - but it also dead? - Because I know only one
worse - Orsina. Not even dead yet No, good father, no! - She lives, she
lives. You will certainly begin to live life fully .-- A delight!

The most beautiful, funniest honey - as long as it lasts. Odoardo. The
word, Madame, the only word that helps me to bring the mind! out with
it! - Do not drop your poison in a bucket .-- The only word! quickly.
Orsina.

Now that, you spell it together - the morning said the prince your
daughter in the show, the afternoon he has at his pleasure - pleasure
palace.

Odoardo. Voice them in the exhibition? The prince my daughter?

Orsina. With a confidentiality! with a fervor! - they had nothing
abzureden Small. And quite well, if it abgeredet been quite good if
your daughter is here voluntarily saved!

See: it is not a violent abduction, but only a small - small assassination.
Odoardo. Libel! damn slander!

I know my daughter. Is it assassination, it is also kidnapping .--
(Looking wildly around and stomps and schaeumet.)

Well, Claudia? Well, mother? - Have we not seen joy! O Prince of the
merciful!

O the very special honor! Orsina. Does it, old man! does it work? Odoardo.
As I stand now in front of the cave the robber - (by the rock on both
sides auseinanderschlaegt and without rifle looks.) Miracle that I made
Eilfertigkeit not include hands zurueckgelassen! - (To all Schubsaecke
sentient, rather than seeking .) Nothing! nothing!

nowhere! Orsina. Ha, I understand! - That I can help out - I've brought
one. (A dagger hervorziehend.) As you take! Make quick, eh 'someone sees
us! - Even if I had something else - poison. But poison is just for us
women, not for men .-- Take him! (He imposed the dagger.) Accept! Odoardo
.

I thank you, thank .-- Dear child, who once again says that you have a
Naerrin are, it has to do with me. Orsina. Put aside! quick aside - I
- will be the occasion refused to make use of them. You will not miss
this opportunity, and you will see them take the first, the best -
if you are a man .-- I am, I am only a woman, but as I got her!

determined - we age, we can all trust. Because we are both beleidiget,
seducer of the same beleidiget .-- Ah, if you knew - if they knew
how overflowing as unpronounceable as I understand it beleidiget
been and still are - you could, you would your own insult to forget
about it .-- Do you know me?

I'm Orsina who cheated, abandoned Orsina .-- Although perhaps only to
leave your daughter .-- But what can get your daughter? - Soon
they will also leave his .-- And then again - And again - Ha! (as in
the delight) what a heavenly fantasy! When once we all - we, the whole
army of abandoned - we are all in Bacchae, transforms into furies,
when we all of us it would have torn him among us, mangled, his
entrails durchwuehlten - to the heart to find the traitor of each
and none were promised!

Ha! this should be a dance! this should be! Eighth appearance Claudia
Galotti. The former. Claudia (the Hereintreten is umsiehet and once they
saw her husband on his zuflieget). Guess! - Ah, our protector, our
savior! Are you there, Odoardo? Are you there? - From their whispering
from their faces I closed it .-- What shall I tell you if you do
not know - what should I say, if you already know everything - but
we are innocent.

I am innocent. Your daughter is innocent. Innocent, in all innocence!

Odoardo (in the Behold his wife to be searched). Well, good. Be just
quiet, just quiet - and answer me. (Against the Orsina.) Non, Madame,
as if I have doubts - Is the Count dead? Claudia. Tot. Odoardo. Is it
true that this morning the prince Emilien in Messestadt spoken? Claudia.
True. But if you knew what horror it caused consternation in
which they came home-Orsina.

Well, I lied? Odoardo (with a bitter laugh). I want to 'do not
you have! By how much is not! Orsina. Am I crazy? Odoardo (wildly back
and forth mostly). Oh - I'm still not. - Claudia. You need me to be
quiet, and I'm quietly .-- The best man, I must also - and I ask
you - Odoardo.

What do you want? Am I not calm? Can you be quiet, as I am? (It is
mandatory.) Emilia Weiss is that Appiani dead? Claudia. Knowledge
it can not. But I fear that it argwohnet because he did not
erscheinet .-- Odoardo.

And they wailed and winselt .-- Claudia. No longer .-- That is over:
by its nature, you know. She is fearful and the most willing of our
sex. Your first impressions never powerful, but after the slightest
consideration in finding everything on anything. You keep the prince at
a distance, she speaks with him in a tone - Make only Odoardo that
we get away.

Odoardo. I am on horseback .-- What to do? - Yes, Madame, you drive so
after the city back? Orsina. Not otherwise. Odoardo. Would you have
probably weighed in with my wife to take? Orsina. Why not? Very
happy. Odoardo.

Claudia - (you know making the Countess) Countess Orsina, a lady of
great minds, my friend, my Wohltaeterin .-- You have to come with her
to give us immediately the car herauszuschicken. Emilia can not
back Guastalla.

It is with me. Claudia. But - if only - I am reluctant to separate
from the child. Odoardo. If the father is not in the vicinity? We
will take it but finally vorlassen.

No objection! - Come, my lady. (Quietly to her.) You will hear from me
.-- Come, Claudia. (He leads them.) Fifth lift The scene remains.
First appearance Marinelli. The Prince. Marinelli.

Here, gracious Lord, from this window you can see it. He goes
to the arcade and down .-- Just turn it to his ways; the point .--
No, he returns to .-- Quite agree he has not yet. But a Big, he is
quiet - or it seems. For us a lot - of course!

This allows him to both women in the head set, he will dare to speak?
- How Battista belongs, is his wife the car out immediately end.

For he came on horseback. - Be careful if he is in front of you
erscheinet, it is quite untertaenigst Your Highness for the merciful
protection thanks to his family at this very sad accident here,
will, together with its subsidiaries, to distant recommend mercy,
it will be quiet after the city and bring it into subjection deepest
expect what further share your Highness at his unfortunate love
girls want to condescend.

The Prince. If he is so tame now, but is not? And hard, hard is it to
be. I know him too well .-- If he maximum stifled his suspicions, his
anger verbeisst: Emilien but instead to the city to lead, with
notes? reserves to himself? or probably even in a monastery, except
my areas closes?

What then? Marinelli. The looks much afraid of love. Verily! - But he
will not - The Prince. If he is now! What then? What will it help us
then that the unfortunate Earl lost his life about it?

Marinelli. Why this sad page view? Forward! thinks the winner, it falls
apart it enemy or friend .-- And though! If he wanted it, the old
Neidhart, what you are afraid of him, Prince. - (Ueberlegend.) It
works!

I've got it! - Continue to Do as it certainly should not bring.
Certainly not - but that we do not lose the history .-- (kick back
to the window.)

Soon hätt 'He surprised us! He ways; the point .-- Let him escape, and
you only hear, Prince, what we do in the case to fear to do. The
Prince (threateningly). But Marinelli - Marinelli. The innocence of the
world! Second appearance Odoardo Galotti. Nobody here? - Well, I should
be even colder.

It is my luck .-- Nothing contemptuous than a buzzing of Juenglingskopf
with gray hair!

I have often told me so. And yet let me fortreissen: and by whom? From
a jealous, by an insane jealousy for .-- What has hurt the virtue
of vengeance in the truck to create? That alone, I have to save. - And
your thing - my son! my son! - wines could I ever - and it will now
not only learn - Your case is quite different to his making!

Enough for me, if the fruit of thy murderer of his crime not enjoy .--
This torment him more than the crime, if it will soon be saturated
and disgust of Luster Luster to drive, then denature the reminder,
this is not a pleasure to have gebuesset, him the benefit of all!

In every dream leader of the bloody bridegroom to the bride in front of
the bed, and when he nevertheless voluptuous ausstreckt after her
arm, so he suddenly heard the Hohngelaechter hell and wake up!

Third appearance Marinelli. Odoardo Galotti. Marinelli. Where
were you, sir? where were you? Odoardo. Was my daughter here? Marinelli.
Not them, but the prince. Odoardo. He forgive .-- I accompanied the
Countess. Marinelli. Now? Odoardo. The good lady! Marinelli. And your
wife? Odoardo. Is the countess - to give us the car immediately
herauszusenden.

  The Prince vergoenne just
  that I so long with my daughter still linger here.

Marinelli. What these circumstances? Would the prince is not a pleasure
to have made them both, mother and daughter, even after the city to
bring? Odoardo.

The daughter would at least have the honor of Make have. Marinelli. Why?
Odoardo.

It will no longer be Guastalla. Marinelli. Not? and why not? Odoardo.
The Count is dead Marinelli. To so much more - Odoardo. It is with me.
Marinelli. With you? Odoardo. With me. I tell you yes, the Count is
dead - if you do not know - What has it now in Guastalla to do -
you will be with me.

Marinelli. However, the future residence of the only daughter of the
will of his father dependent. Just before the first - Odoardo. As before
the first one?

Marinelli.

You will probably have to allow the Supreme Lord that it is brought
Guastalla.

Odoardo. My daughter? Guastalla is brought under? and why?
Marinelli. Why? Consider just - Odoardo (heated). Consider! Consider!
I consider that nothing is to be considered .-- It is, she must with
me. Marinelli.

O my Lord - what we need to inform ereifern? It may be that I am wrong,
that it is not necessary is what I need for .-- The prince, it is best
to judge know. The Prince .-- I decide to go and fetch him. Fourth
appearance Odoardo Galotti.

How? - Never! - I require, where they will be out? - I deny it? -
Who wants it? Who has it? - The everything here must, what he wants?
Good, good, let him see how much I can if I have it seems not! Short-sighted
Todbringer! With you I will probably start.

Anyone who respects no law, is as powerful than he who has no law.
That you do not know?

Come on! Come on! - But, look out! Again, again Rennet of anger with the
understanding of it .-- What do I want? First, 'it happened, what I'm
tobe. What is not a chat Hofschranze! And I would have him but can talk
only!

If I had his excuse as to why they should back Guastalla, but only
listened! - How could I itzt for an answer lie in wait .-- Although
what may be missing me? - Should they miss me but, it should be -
One-ways; the point. Quiet, old boy, quiet!

The Prince Fifth appearance. Marinelli. Odoardo Galotti. The Prince.
Ah, my dear, quite Schaffner Galotti - so something must be done
if you contact me, I see.

To do less is not. But no complaints! Odoardo. Gracious Lord, I think
it is in all cases for improper to comment on his Fuersten to push.
Whom he knows that he will fodern, if he is needed.

Even itzt I ask for forgiveness - The Prince.
Marty, however, declared himself "worked to a frazzle" and he
disappeared immediately after the noon meal, for fear Janice would find
something more for him to do.

"Wal, child, it does look nice," admitted Aunt Almira, coming to view
the front yard.  "And you do have a way with Marty."

"Just the same," giggled Janice, "he doesn't like girls."

"Sho, child! he doesn't know _what_ he likes--a boy like him," returned
her aunt.

Sunday was a rainy day, and Janice felt her spirits falling again.  It
really rained too hard at church time for her to venture out; but she
saw that her relatives seldom put themselves out to attend church,
anyway.  Walky Dexter appeared in an oilskin-covered cart, drawn by
Josephus (who actually looked water-soaked and dripped from every
angle), delivering the Sunday papers, which came up from the city.  The
family gave up most of their time all day to the gaudy magazine
supplements and the so-called "funny sections" which were a part of
these sheets.

Janice finally retired to her depressing bedroom and wrote a long
letter to her father which she tried to make cheerful, but into which
crept a note of loneliness and disappointment.  It wasn't just like
talking to Daddy himself; but it seemed to help some.

It enabled her, too, to write shorter letters to friends back in
Greensboro and she managed to hide from them much of her homesickness.
She could write of the beauty of Poketown itself; for it _was_
beautiful.  It was only the people who were so--well! so _different_.

Janice welcomed Monday morning.  Although she had nearly completed her
junior year at the Greensboro High School, and knew that she would not
gain much help from Miss Scattergood, the girl loved study and she
hoped that the Poketown girls would prove to be better companions than
they had appeared when she had visited the school.

So she started for the old red schoolhouse in quite a cheerful frame of
mind, in spite of Marty's prophecy that "she'd soon git sick o' that
old maid."  It was not Miss Scattergood that Janice had reason to be
"sick of!"  The stranger in Poketown had to admit before the day was
over that she had never in her life dreamed of such ill-bred girls as
some of these who occupied the back seats in 'Rill Scattergood's school.

They had no respect for the little school-teacher, and had Miss
Scattergood taken note of all their follies she must have been in a
pitched battle with her older pupils all the time.  Some of these
ill-behaved girls were older than Janice by many months; and they
plainly did not come to school to study or to learn.  They passed notes
back and forth to some of the older boys all day long; when Miss
Scattergood called on them to recite, if they did not feel just like
it, they refused to obey; and of course their example was bad for the
smaller children.

Janice had determined to join such classes as were anywhere near her
grade in her old school.  But when she arose to accompany one class to
the line in front of the teacher's desk, the girls who had started
giggled and ran back to their seats, leaving the new pupil standing
alone, with blazing cheeks, before Miss Scattergood.  They would not
recite with her.  At recess when Miss Scattergood tried to introduce
Janice to some of the girls, there were but a few who met her in a
ladylike manner.

They seemed to think Janice must be stuck up and proud because she had
come from another town.  One girl--Sally Black--tripped forward in a
most affected style, gave Janice a "high handshake," saying "How-do!
chawmed ter meet yuh, doncher know!" and the other girls went off into
gales of laughter as though Sally was really excruciatingly funny.

Janice was hurt, but she tried not to show it.  Miss Scattergood was
very much annoyed, and her eyes sparkled behind her glasses, as she
said, sharply:

"I really did hope you girls could be polite and kind to a stranger who
comes to your school.  I am ashamed of you!"

"Don't let it bother you, Scatty," returned the impudent Sally.  "We
don't want anything to do with your pet," and she tossed her head,
looked scornfully at Janice, and walked away with her abettors.

"I never did take ter them Blacks," declared Aunt Almira, when Janice
related to her the unpleasant experience she had suffered at school, on
her return that afternoon.  "And Sally's mother, who was a Garrity,
came of right common stock.

"Ye see, child," added Mrs. Day, with a sigh, "I expect ye won't find
many of the children that go ter that school much ter your likin'.
'Rill Scattergood ain't got no way with her, as I sez before; an' folks
that can afford it have got in the habit o' sendin' their young'uns
over to Middletown School.  Walky Dexter takes 'em in a party waggin,
and brings 'em back at night."

"But there must be some nice girls in Poketown!" cried Janice.

"Ya-as--I guess there be.  But wait till I kin git around an' interduce
ye to 'em."

This promise, however, offered Janice Day but sorry comfort.  If she
waited for Aunt Almira to take her about she certainly _would_ die of
homesickness!

But she refused to be driven out of the Poketown School by the
unkindness and discourtesy of the larger girls.  Her unpopularity,
however, made her respond the more quickly to 'Rill Scattergood's
advances.

The school-teacher showed plainly that she appreciated Janice's
friendliness.  Janice brought her luncheon and ate it with the teacher.
They walked down High Street together after school, and on Friday the
pretty little school-mistress invited the new girl home for tea.

"Mother wants to see you again.  Mother's took quite a fancy to you,
Janice--and that's a fact," said Miss 'Rill.

"Of course, we're only boarding; but Mrs. Beasely--she's a widow
lady--makes it very homey for us.  If mother stays we're going to
housekeeping ourselves.  And I believe I _shall_ give up teaching
school.  I'm really tired of it."

Janice gladly accepted the invitation, and she bribed one of the
youngsters with a nickel to run around to Hillside Avenue and tell Aunt
Almira where she was.

Miss 'Rill's boarding place was on the same side street where was
located Hopewell Drugg's store.  Janice had thought often of poor
little Lottie and her father during this week; but as they neared the
store and she heard the wailing notes of the man's violin again, she
felt a little diffident about broaching the subject of the storekeeper
and his child to the school-mistress.  It was Miss Scattergood herself
who opened the matter.

She half halted and held up her hand for silence, as she listened to
"Silver Threads Among the Gold."

"That's a dreadful pretty tune, I think," she said.  "It used to be
awful pop'lar when--when I came here to Poketown to teach school."

"Mr. Drugg likes it, I guess," said Janice, lightly.  "I've heard him
play it before."

"Have you?" queried Miss 'Rill, with that little birdlike tilt of her
head.  "So you know Mr. Drugg--and poor little Lottie?"

"I've met them both--once," admitted the girl.

"Ah! then you know how little Lottie is to be pitied?"

"And isn't he to be pitied, too?" Janice could not help but ask.

Miss 'Rill blushed--such a becoming blush as it was, too!  She answered
honestly: "I think so.  Poor Hopewell!  And I think he plays the fiddle
real sweet, too.

"But don't say anything before mother about him.  Mr. Drugg's never
been one of ma's favorites," added the teacher, earnestly.


CHAPTER IX

TEA, AND A TALK WITH DADDY

As it chanced, it was old Mrs. Scattergood herself who broached the
forbidden topic, almost as soon as Miss 'Rill and Janice were in the
house.

"What do you suppose that great gump, Hopewell Drugg, let his young'un
do to-day, 'Rill?  I was tellin' Miz' Beasely that it did seem to be
_one_ mistake that Providence must ha' made, ter let that Drugg an'
'Cinda Stone have a gal baby--'specially if 'Cinda was goin' ter up and
die like she done and leave the young'un to his care.  Seems a shame,
too."

"Why, mother!  That doesn't sound a bit reverent," objected Miss 'Rill,
softly.  "Nor kind."

"Pshaw!" snorted the old lady.  "You allus was silly as a goose about
that Drugg.  Sech shiftlessness I never did see.  There the young'un
was, out in a white dress an' white kid shoes this mornin'--her best,
Sunday-go-ter-meetin' clo'es, I'll be bound!--sittin' on the aidge o'
that gutter over there, makin' a mud dam!  Lucky yesterday's rain has
run off now, or she'd be out there yet, paddlin' in the water."

"I don't s'pose Hopewell knew of it," said the younger woman, timidly.
"The poor little thing can dress herself, blind as she is.  It's quite
wonderful how she gets about."

"She ain't got no business to be out of his sight," grumbled Mrs.
Scattergood.

Miss 'Rill sighed and shook her head, looking at Janice with a little
nod of understanding.  She changed the subject of talk quickly.  The
old lady began at once on Janice, "pumping" her as to her interests in
Poketown, how she liked her relatives, and all.  Then Mrs. Beasely, a
very tall, angular figure in severe black, appeared at the sitting-room
door and invited them in to supper.

Mrs. Beasely was a famous cook and housekeeper.  She was a very grim
lady, it seemed to Janice, and the enlarged crayon portrait of Mr.
Beasely, its frame draped with crape, which glared down upon the
groaning table in the dining-room, almost took the girl's appetite away.

Fortunately, however, the widow insisted upon facing the portrait of
her departed husband, and Janice was back to him, so she recovered her
appetite.  And Mrs. Beasely's "tea", or "supper" as old-fashioned folks
called the meal, was worthy of a hearty appetite.

Among old-fashioned New England housekeepers a "skimpy"
table--especially when a visitor is present--is an unpardonable sin.
There was hot bread and cold bread, sour-milk griddle cakes, each of a
delicious golden brown with crisp edges, buttered, sugared, and stacked
in tempting piles; sliced cold ham and corned beef; a hot dish of
smoked beef and scrambled eggs; two kinds of jelly, and three kinds of
preserves; plain and frosted cake, and last of all the inevitable pie
and cheese.

With all this banquet Mrs. Beasely dared raise a moist eye to the grim
crayon of the departed, and observe:

"I don't know what poor Charles would say to such a smeachin' supper,
if he was alive.  Oh, me! it does seem as though I didn't have no heart
for cookery no more since he ain't here ter sample my work.  A man's a
gre't spur to a woman in her housekeepin'."

"Good Land o' Goshen!" ejaculated the outspoken Mrs. Scattergood.  "I
count 'em a gre't nuisance.  If a body didn't have no men folks to
'tend to she could live on bread an' tea--if she so liked.

"Not but what I 'preciate a good layout of vittles like this o' yourn,
Miz' Beasely.  But thank the good Lord!  I ain't been the slave to no
man's appetite for goin' on fourteen year.  An' that's about all men
air, come ter think on it--a pair of muddy boots an' an unquenchable
appetite!"

Mrs. Beasely looked horrified, shaking her widow's cap.  "Poor Charles
wasn't nothin' like that," she declared, softly.

"An' I don't s'pose a worse husband ever lived in Poketown," whispered
the pessimistic old lady, when the widow had gone out of the room for
something.  "He's been dead ten year, ain't he, 'Rill?"

"About that, mother," admitted the schoolteacher.

"An' I expect ev'ry year she makes more of a saint of him.  I declare
for't! sech wimmen oughter be made to marry ag'in.  Nothin' but a
second one will cure 'em of their fust!"

Mainly Janice and her friend, the little schoolteacher, were engaged in
their own particular conversation.  The girl spent a very pleasant hour
after tea, too, and started home just as dusk was dropping over the
hillside town.

There was a light in Hopewell Drugg's store.  He never seemed to have
customers--or so it appeared to Janice.  She hesitated a moment to peer
into the gloomy place--more a mausoleum than a store!--and saw Hopewell
leaning against the counter, while Lottie, in her pink sash and white
dress, and the kid boots, sat upon it and leaned against her father
while he scraped out some weird minor chords upon the fiddle.

Marty had come down the lane to the corner of High Street to meet
Janice.  Of course, he wouldn't admit that he had done so; but he
happened to be right there when his cousin put in an appearance.  There
were no street lights on Hillside Avenue, and Janice was glad of his
company.

"Huh! ain't yer gittin' pop'lar?" croaked the boy, grinning at her.
"An' goin' ter 'Rill Scattergood's ter supper.  Ye must ha' had a fine
time--I don't think!"

"Of course I had a nice time," laughed Janice.

"With that old maid," scoffed Marty.

"Say, Marty, would you go to school again if they had a different
teacher?" queried Janice.

"'Course I would!" returned the boy, stoutly.

"Maybe next Fall they'll have another one.  Miss Scattergood talks of
giving up teaching."

"I should think she would!" exploded Marty.  "But she won't.  You'll
see.  She'll be teachin' Poketown school when she has ter go on
crutches."

The next day, after Janice had inveigled Marty into spending most of
his forenoon in the yard and garden (and the latter was beginning to
look quite like a real garden by now), the girl went shopping.  Most of
the stores were "general" stores, and she did not believe there was
much choice between them.  Only she had an interest in Hopewell Drugg;
so she proceeded to his dark little shop.

Lottie sat upon a box nursing a rag doll, in the sunlight that came in
at the side door.  She was crooning to herself a weird little song, and
rocking back and forth upon the box.  Mr. Drugg seemed to be out.

Janice walked the length of the store very quietly, and the child did
not apprehend her approach.  But when she stepped upon one of the
boards of the back-room floor, little Lottie felt the vibration and
looked up, directly at Janice, with her pretty, sightless eyes.

"Papa Drugg be right back; Papa Drugg be right back," she said, forming
the phrase with evident difficulty.

Janice went close to her and laid a hand upon Lottie's shoulder.  The
little girl caught at it quickly, ran her slim fingers up her arm to
her shoulder and so, jumping up from the box, felt of Janice's face,
too.  The latter stooped and kissed her.

"I know you--I know you," murmured the child.  "You came home from the
lake with me.  I was trying to find my echo.  Did _you_ find it?"

Janice squeezed her hand, and she seemed to understand the affirmative.

"Then it's really _there_?" she sighed.  "It's only _me_ that's lost
it.  Well--well--Do you think I can ever find it again?"

Janice squeezed the hand firmly, and she put into that affirmative all
the confidence which could possibly be thus expressed.  She did not
believe it to be wrong to raise hope of again hearing in the poor
child's heart.

Mr. Drugg came in from the back, wiping his hands and forearms of soapy
water.  He had evidently been engaged in some household task.  Upon
closer acquaintance he was improved, so Janice thought.  He possessed
the long, thin, New England features; but there was a certain calm in
their expression that was attractive.  His gray eyes were brooding, and
there were many crow's-feet about them; nevertheless, they were kindly
eyes with a greater measure of intelligence in them than Janice had
expected to find.

It proved that Hopewell had a considerable stock upon his dusty
shelves; but how he managed to find anything that a customer called for
was a mystery to Janice.  She selected the few notions that she needed;
and as she did so she just _ached_ to get hold of that stock of dry
goods and straighten it out.

And the dust--and the fly-specks--and the jumble of useless scraps
among the newer stock!  The interior of that old store was certainly a
heart-breaking sight.  Two side windows that might have given light and
air to the place were fairly banked up with merchandise.  And when had
either of the show windows been properly "dressed"?

However, Mr. Drugg was an attentive salesman and he really knew his
stock very well.  It mystified Janice to see how quickly he could find
the article wanted in that conglomeration.

She remained a while to play with Lottie.  Drugg came to look fondly at
the little girl putting her rag-baby to sleep in a soap-box crib.

"She's just about ruined that dress and them shoes, I shouldn't
wonder," mused the storekeeper, "But I forgot to put out her everyday
clo'es where she could find them yesterday morning.  There's so much to
do all the time.  Well!"  He drew the violin and bow toward him and
sighed.  No other customer came into the store.  Drugg tucked the
fiddle under his chin and began to scrape away.

Lottie jumped up and clapped her little hands when he struck a chord
that vibrated upon her nerves.  There she stood, with her little,
upraised face flooded by the spring sunshine, which entered through the
side doorway, a gleam of pleasure passing over her features when she
felt the vibration of the minor notes.  They were deeply engaged, those
two--the father with his playing, the child in striving to catch the
tones.

Janice gathered up her few small purchases and stole out of the old
store.

It was more than a week later when Marty came home to supper one night
and grinned broadly at his cousin.

"What d'ye s'pose I've got for you, Janice?" he asked.

His cousin flashed him a single comprehending look, and then her face
went white.

"Daddy!" she gasped.  "A letter from Daddy?"

"Aw, shucks! ain't there nothin' else you want?" the boy returned,
teasingly.

"Not so much as a talk with Daddy," she declared, breathlessly.  "And
that's almost what a letter will be.  Dear Marty!  If you've got a
letter from him do, do let me have it!"

"Don't you torment Janice now, Marty," cried his mother.  "I hope he is
all right, Janice.  Is it writ in his own hand, Marty?"

"I dunno," said the plaguesome boy, looking at the address covertly.
"It is postmarked 'Juarez'."

"Oh, yes! oh, yes!" cried Janice.  "He would send it down there to be
mailed.  So he said.  Mail service up in Chihuahua is so uncertain.
Oh, Marty! p-l-e-a-s-e!"

"You give her that, Marty!" commanded Mr. Day.

Janice snatched the letter when the boy held it out to her; but she
flashed Marty a "Thanks, awfully!" as she ran out of the room and
upstairs.  Supper?  What did she care for supper?  In the red light of
the sunset she sat by the window in her room and read Mr. Broxton Day's
loving letter.

It _was_ almost like seeing and talking with Daddy!  Those firm,
flowing lines of black ink, displaying character and firmness and
decision, looked just like Daddy himself!  Janice kissed the open page
ecstatically, and then began to read:


"DEAR DAUGHTER:

"The several thousand miles that separate us seem very short indeed
when I sit down to write my little Janice.  I can see her standing
right before me in this barren, corrugated-iron shack--which would have
been burned the last time a bunch of the Constitutionalists swept
through these hills, only iron will not burn.  If a party of Federal
troops come along they may try to destroy our plant, too.  Just at the
present time the foreigner, and his property, are in no great favor
with either party of belligerents.  The cry is 'Mexico for the
Mexicans'--and one can scarcely blame them.  But although I have seen a
little fighting at a distance, and plenty of the marks of battle along
the railroad line as I came up here, I do not think I am as yet in any
great danger.

"Therefore, my dear, do not worry too much about your father's
situation.  At the very moment you are worrying he may be eating
supper, or hob-nobbing with a party of very courteous and hospitable
ranch owners, or fishing in a neighboring brook where the trout are as
hungry as shoats at feeding time, or otherwise enjoying himself.

"And so, now, to you and your letter which reached me by one of my
messengers from Juarez, by whom I shall send this reply.  Yes, I knew
you would find yourself among a people as strange to you as though they
were inhabitants of another planet.  Relatives though they are, they
are so much different from our friends in and about Greensboro, that I
can understand their being a perfect shock to you.

"I was afraid Jason and Almira lived a sort of shiftless, hopeless,
get-along-the-best-way-you-can life.  When I left Poketown twenty-five
years ago I thought it had creeping paralysis!  It must be worse by
this time.

"But you keep alive, Janice, my dear.  Keep kicking--like the frog in
the milk-can.  _Do something_.  Don't let the poison of laziness
develop in your blood.  If they're in a slack way there at Jason's,
help 'em out of it.  Be your Daddy's own girl.  Don't shirk a plain
duty.  _Do something yourself, and make others do something, too!_"


There was much in Mr. Broxton Day's letter beside this; there were
intimate little things that Janice would have shown to nobody; but
downstairs she read aloud all Daddy's jolly little comments upon the
country and the people he saw; and about his eating beans so frequently
that he dreamed he had turned into a gigantic Boston bean-pot that was
always full of steaming baked beans.  "They are called 'frijoles'," he
wrote; "but a bean by any other name is just the same!"

The paragraphs that impressed Janice most, however, as repeated above,
she likewise kept to herself.  Daddy had expected she would find
Poketown just what it was.  Yet he expected something of her--something
that should make a change in her relatives, and in Poketown itself.

He expected Janice to _do something_.


CHAPTER X

BEGINNING WITH A BEDSTEAD

Janice got up and took her usual before-breakfast run the next morning.
The Days remained the last family to rise in the neighborhood.  The
smoke from the broken kitchen chimney crawled heavenward long after the
fires in other kitchen-stoves had burned down to hot coals.

So when the girl got back to the house, Aunt 'Mira had scarcely begun
getting the meal.  Janice rummaged about in the tool-shed for some
minutes before she went upstairs to her room again.  Marty crawled
down, yawning, and started for the usual morning pail of water from the
neighbor's well.  Mr. Day was smoking on the bench outside of the
kitchen door.  The pork began to hiss in the pan.

Suddenly, from upstairs, came a noisy pounding.  Nail after nail was
being driven with confidence and dispatch.

"For the land's sake!" gasped Aunt 'Mira, looking up from the stove, a
strip of pork hanging from her up-raised fork.

Uncle Jason took his pipe from his lips and screwed his neck around so
as to look in at the door.

"What d'you reckon that gal's up to?" he demanded.

Marty came back from the Dickerson's at almost a lope.  "What in
'tarnation is Janice doin' up in her room?" he queried, slopping the
water as he put the pail hurriedly upon the shelf.

"I haven't the least idea what it can be," said Mrs. Day, almost aghast.

"By jinks!" exclaimed the slangy boy.  "I wanter see.  By jinks! she
socked that nail home--she did!"

The whole house rang with the vigor of Janice's blows.  Marty started
up the stairs in a hurry, and Mr. Day followed him.  Mrs. Day came to
the foot of the stairs with the piece of pork still dangling from her
fork.

Marty reached his cousin's door and banged it open without as much as
saying "By your leave."

"Hullo!  What you doin'?" demanded the boy.

"Can't you _see_?" returned Janice, coolly.  "I got sick of being
rocked to sleep every night on that old soap-box.  I'll wager, Marty,
that this leg will stay put when I get through with it."

"Wal! of all things!" grunted Mr. Day, with his head poked in at the
open door.

"What's Janice doing?" demanded his wife, too heavy to mount the stairs
easily.

Uncle Jason turned about and descended the flight without replying to
his wife; but at her reiterated cry Marty explained.

"Ain't that gal a good 'un?" said the boy.  "She's gone and put on the
old leg to that bedstead.  That's been broke off ever since you cleaned
house last Fall, Maw."

"Oh!  Well!  Is that it?" repeated Mrs. Day.  Then, when she and her
husband were alone in the kitchen, before the young folk came down, she
said, pointing the fork at him: "I declare for't!  I'd feel ashamed if
I was you, Jason Day."

"What for?" demanded her husband, scowling.

"Lettin' Broxton's gal do that.  You could ha' tacked on that leg forty
times if you could once.  Ain't that true?"

But Mr. Day refused to quarrel.  He took a long drink from the pail of
fresh water Marty had brought.  Then he said, tentatively:

"Breakfast most ready, Almiry?  I'm right sharp-set."

When Janice and Marty came down they were not talking of the bedstead
at all.  But Aunt 'Mira was rather gloomy all through the meal, and
looked accusingly at her husband every time she heaped his plate with
pork, and cakes, and "white gravey."

Mr. Day quite ignored these looks.  He was even chatty--for him--with
Janice.  It was a school day, and Janice hurried to put on her hat and
get her school bag, into which she slipped the luncheon that her aunt
very kindly put up for her.  O jealous of the artist! Not yet! -
Hoeren You Conti; as much as you want. (Conti geht ab.) Fifth
appearance, the prince.

As far as he wants! - (Opposite the picture.) For you I've yet to be
any price Wohlfeil .-- Ah! beautiful works of art, is it true that I
have you - who you also had, schoenres Meisterstueck nature!

- What you want to get, honest mother! What you want, old Murrkopf!
Fodre only!

HEREBY INVITES only - prefer to buy 'ich dich, sorceress, by yourself!
- This eye full grace and humility! This mouth! - And when he opens for
talking! when he smiles! This mouth - I hear come .-- Still I'm
with you too jealous.

(By the picture against the wall drehet.) It will be Marinelli. Hätt 'I
do not call it! What can order a morning 'I have! Sixth appearance
Marinelli.

The Prince. Marinelli. Gracious Lord, You will forgive me .-- I was
such a command, not early pursuit. The Prince. I got Lust, extended.
The morning was so beautiful. - But now he is probably elapsed, and
the lust is gone to me. - (After a short silence.)

What we have new, Marinelli? Marinelli. Nothing of concern, which I knew
.-- The countess is Orsina came to town yesterday. The Prince. This
is also her good morning (in their letter pointing) or what else
it might!

I'm not that curious .-- You have spoken? Marinelli. Am I, unfortunately,
not their confidant?

- But if I have it back by a lady will, it einkoemmt you in good earnest
to love, Prince: so - The Prince. Nothing verschworen, Marinelli!
Marinelli. Yes? In fact, Prince?

Can order 'but it come from? - Oh! so like the Countess so wrong do
not have. The Prince. However, very wrong! - My close marriage
with the princess of Massa wants to be, all that I like for the first
Haendel cancel.

Marinelli. If it only would be: it must be left to Orsina in their fate
to know as much as the prince in his. The Prince.

The ground harder than theirs. My heart is the victim of a miserable state
interest. Your may only zuruecknehmen, but will not reflect away.
Marinelli. Zuruecknehmen? Zuruecknehmen Why? asked the countess,
when there nothing else than a wife, which the prince does not
love, but the policy zufuehret?

In addition to a wife, the lover is still their place. Not as a wife
fears she aufgeopfert to be, but - The Prince.

A new lover. - Well? Wanted me to make it a crime, Marinelli?
Marinelli. I - Oh! You are confusing me not, my prince, with the Naerrin
whose word I lead - out of compassion lead.

Because yesterday, verily, it has me curious geruehret.

They wanted their matter with you, did not speak. She wanted to
be very calm and cool. But in the middle of the indifferent conversation
escaped her a turn, a relationship over the others, who tortured
her heart betrayed.

The funniest being, she said the melancholy of things: and turn the
ridiculous antics of allertraurigsten Miene.

She has the books made their refuge, and I fear that they will give
her the rest.

The Prince. Just as it's poor understanding even the first shock given
.-- But I am primarily concerned with what it has removed that you
want but do not need Marinelli me back to her back - if they love
is foolish, it would it, sooner or later, even without love has
become - And now, enough of her. - From something others!

- Geht because nothing before in the city?

- Marinelli. Virtually nothing .-- Because that the combination of the
count completed Appiani today - is not much more than nothing.

The Prince. Of Count Appiani?

and with whom then? - I will still hear that he has promised.

Marinelli. The thing is have been kept secret.

Was not too much fuss of it .-- You will laugh, Prince .-- But it
is the sensitive!

The spielet love them always the worst pranks. A girl with no property
and no place has it in their noose to pull knew - with a little larva,
but with great splendor of virtue and feeling and wit - and what
I know?

The Prince.

Who are the impressions, the innocence and beauty to him, without further
consideration, it may be quite over - I daechte, which would tend
to be envied than to belachen .-- And how does because happy?

Because when all is Appiani - I know well that you, Marinelli, it can
not suffer, nor when he was you - in all he is a very decent young
man, a nice man, a rich man, a man full of honor.

I would highly desired, it can connect to me.

I will still think about it. Marinelli. If it is not too late. - Because
I hear so much, his plan did not at court to make his fortune .-- He
wants with his mistress after his valleys of Piedmont - chamois
hunting in the Alps, and marmots abzurichten .-- What can Better
he do?

Here it is through the Missbuendnis, which he takes with him from. The
Circle of the first houses he is now closed - The Prince. With your
first houses - in which the ceremony, forced the boredom and not
infrequently the slim herrschet so .-- But tell me they do, of
this so he brings great sacrifice. Marinelli. There is a degree of
Emilia Galotti. The Prince. How, Marinelli? a certain - Marinelli.
Emilia Galotti. The Prince.

Emilia Galotti - never! Marinelli. Reliable, gracious Lord. The Prince.
No, I say, it's not, it can not be .-- You are wrong in the name .--
The sex of Galotti is great .-- A Galotti may be: but not Emilia
Galotti, not Emilia!

Marinelli. Emilia - Emilia Galotti! The Prince. Thus, there is one, which
leads both names .-- You said ohnedem, Emilia Galotti a degree -
a degree.

From the right can only speak as a fool - Marinelli. You are
beside himself, gracious Lord .-- Do you know this because Emilia?
The Prince. I have to ask Marinelli, he is not .-- Emilia Galotti?
The daughter of the Supreme Galotti at Sabionetta?

Marinelli. Precisely. The Prince.

The here in Guastalla lives with her mother? Marinelli. Precisely. The
Prince. Unfern the Church of All Saints? Marinelli. Precisely. The
Prince. With one word - (By the portrait after he jumps and the Marinelli
in the hand.) There! - This? These Emilia Galotti - Say your fucking
"precisely" again and shock me with the dagger into the heart!

Marinelli. Precisely! The Prince. Executioner - This - This is now
Emilia Galotti - Marinelli. Appiani Countess - (Here the tears of Prince
Marinelli the image again from the hand and throws it aside.) Geschiehet
The ceremony in silence, on the Good land of his father in Sabionetta.
At noon drive mother and daughter, the Count, and maybe a few friends
from there. The Prince (which is full of despair in a chair raises).

So I am lost - I will not live! Marinelli. But what about you,
gracious sir? The Prince (who jumps on him again). Traitor! - What I am?
- Well, I love her, I adore them. Do you like it but know you may know
it but have a long, all that great, I prefer Orsina opprobrious
shackles forever bear!

- Only that you, Marinelli, which you so often I am your sincere
friendship insured - O Fuerst has no friend! friend can not have -
that you, you, so faithless, so gloating me up to this moment, the
risk may conceal who threatened my love: if I ever forgive you - so I
will not forgive my sins! Marinelli . I can hardly find words to
Prince - if you come to me let - you indicate to my astonishment
.-- They love Emilia Galotti - then oath against oath: If I love
this the least known, the slightest suspicion had let neither angel
nor saint of me know!

- Ebendas wollt 'ich in the soul of the Orsina swear. My suspicion
sweeps on a completely different track.

The Prince. So forgive me, Marinelli - (by moving him into the arms raised)
and I apologize. Marinelli. Now that, Prince! Do you see as the fruit
of your restraint! - "Fuersten have no friend! Can have no friend!" -
And the cause, if so? - Because they do not want to have .-- Today
they honor us with their confidence tell us your secret desires
with us close to all her soul: and tomorrow we are so alien to them
as if they had never had a word with us by.

The Prince. Ah! Marinelli, how could I trust you, which I hardly wanted
to admit? Marinelli. And that is probably even less of your spoiled
originator have confessed? The Prince. Your? - All my effort is in vain
had it for a second time to speak .-- Marinelli. And the first time -
the prince. Language I - Oh, I come to your senses! And I will tell
you for a long time - you can see me a prey of the waves: what to
ask you a lot as I become?

Save me if you can: and then ask. Marinelli. Rescue? is there much to
save? - What you have failed, gracious Lord, Emilia Galotti to confess
that you now admit the Countess Appiani.

Were obtained from the first hand can not have it, buy it from the
second - and such goods are not uncommon from the second to as
much probably Feiler.

The Prince. Seriously, Marinelli, seriously, or - Marinelli.

Admittedly, even so much worse-the prince. They are outrageous! Marinelli.
And so will the count from the country .-- Yes, it would be something
to think differently .-- The Prince. And on what? - Dearest, best
Marinelli, do you think of me.

What would you do if you would be in my place? Marinelli. Above all, a
trifle than a trivial view - and I say that I would not be in vain,
what I am - Lord, The Prince. You flatter me with a violence that
I foresee no use here .-- Now, you say? today? Marinelli. Only today
- should it happen. And things just happened is not to guess .--
(After a short deliberation.)

Would you give me a free hand to Prince? Would you approve what I do?
The Prince. All Marinelli, everything these strings can be avoided.
Marinelli. So let us not lose time .-- But you do not stay in the
city.

Take immediately after your pleasure palace, according to Dosalo. The way
to go because Sabionetta over. If I fail, the Count immediately to
remove it: I think so - But, but, I think he is certainly in this
case.

They want Prince, because of her marriage a messenger sent to Massa? Let
the Count's envoy to this, with the condition that he still abreiset
.-- Do you understand? The Prince. Excellent! - Take it out to me.
To you, rush you. I immediately throw myself into the carriage.
(Marinelli geht ab.) Seventh appearance The Prince. Immediately!
immediately! - Where was it? - (It is looking after the portrait.) On
Earth? That was too much! (As he lifts it.) But consider? I look
like you at first no more .-- Why should 'I am the arrow still deeper
into the wound Click? (Set it aside) - Geschmachtet, I geseufzet long
enough - longer than I would have gesollt: but nothing is done!

and tenderness over inaction at a hair lost everything - but now,
if everything would be lost? If Marinelli does not align? - Why do I
want to leave him alone? It is me - by this time (after seeing the
clock) for hours in fact maintains the pious girl all morning at the
Dominicans to the fair hearing .-- What if I have to speak because
she was looking for - but now , today at their wedding days - today,
you find other things to the heart than the fair .-- But who knows?

- There is a walk .-- (He rings, and by some of the papers on the table
hastily zusammenrafft, enters the chamber servant enters.) Let ahead!
- If none of the councils there? The valet. Camillo Rota. The Prince.
He should come.

(The valet's up.) Only he must stop me do not want.

Dasmal not - I am happy his concerns at other times so much longer to
services. - There was as yet in the petition of Emilia Bruneschi
.-- (you searching.)

The .-- But it's good Bruneschi where your Eighth appearance Vorsprecherin
Camillo Rota, scriptures in hand.

The Prince. The Prince. Come, Rota, you .-- Here is what I affixed
this morning.

Not much comforting - you will of course see what's important to have
.-- Take only. Camillo Rota. Well, gracious Lord.

The Prince. Yet here is a petition of Emilia Galot .. Bruneschi .--
I want to say I got my permit while already contributed replaced. But
- the thing is no small matter .-- Let the copy still pending .--
Or not be made: as you want.

Camillo Rota. Not like I want, gracious Lord. The Prince. What else?
Something to write about?

Camillo Rota. A death sentence would be signed. The Prince. Law like her
.-- Only! quickly. Camillo Rota (the prince aback and rigid viewing).

A death sentence - it says' I do. The Prince. I hear so well .-- It
could have happened. I'm haste. Camillo Rota (after seeing his writings).
Now I have it but probably not with them! - Excuse me, gracious
Lord decency .-- It may thus have until tomorrow. The Prince. Too! -
Unpack only together, and I must continue - Tomorrow, Rota, More!

(Geht ab.) Camillo Rota (shaking his head, by the papers and taking
off). Like right? - A death sentence quite happy - I had 'it in
this moment do not like to write, and if it is only the murderer
of my son would have affected .-- Right gladly!

Right happy - I'm through the soul of this horrible law like! Second
Elevator The scene: a room in the house Galotti.

First appearance Claudia Galotti. Pirro. Claudia (Come on out to Pirro,
the other side of the hereintritt). Who sprinkled as the court? Pirro.
Our Lord, madam. Claudia. My husband? Is it possible? Pirro. He follows
me on the foot. Claudia. How unexpected? - (Him charity.) Ah! my
best! Second appearance Odoardo Galotti and the former.

Odoardo. Good morning, my love! - Not true, which means surprise
- Claudia. And in the nicest way! - If it differently just to be a
surprise. Odoardo. Nothing more!

Be safe. - The luck of the day woke me so early, the morning was
so beautiful, the road is so short, I guess you are so busy - How
easily they forget something that occurred to me .-- In a word, I
come and look, and immediately go back .-- Where is Emilia?

Employs common ground with the plaster?

- Claudia. Your soul! - It is in the fair .-- "I have today, more than
any other day of grace from above to crave," she said and did everything,
and took off her veil, and rushed - Odoardo. All alone? Claudia. The few
steps - Odoardo. One is enough for a misstep - Claudia. Do not be cross,
my best, and come inside - a moment to rest and when you want to
take a refreshment.

Odoardo. Like you, I, Claudia .-- But they should not be left alone .--
Claudia. And you, Pirro remains here in the hall, all visits to Make
today. Pirro third appearance and soon Angelo. Pirro. The only out
of curiosity Report .-- What can I do an hour since not everything
has been questioned! - And who ways; the point there?

Angelo (half behind the scene in a short coat, he pulled over the face,
the hat in the forehead). Pirro - Pirro! Pirro. An acquaintance? -
(By Angelo hereintritt completely and the sheath auseinanderschlaegt.)
Sky! Angelo - Du? Angelo. As you can see .-- I'm long enough around
the house herumgegangen thee to speak .-- In a word - Pirro. And
you dare to return to the light to come?

- Du bist since your last vogelfrei Expound to murder, on your head is
a reward Angelo. The but you will not want to earn? - Pirro. What do
you want? - I beg you, do not make me unhappy. Angelo. This perhaps?
(Him a bag of money showing.) - Join! It belongs to you! Pirro. Mir?
Angelo. Have you forgotten?

The German, thy Lord previous - Pirro. Schweig them! Angelo. You us on
the way to Pisa, in the case leads - Pirro. If someone heard us!
Angelo. Had the kindness to provide us a valuable ring to leave
.-- Do not you?

- It was too precious, the ring, as we suspected he had said at once
without too can make money. Finally I managed it so.

I did get one hundred guns, and that is your share. Join us! Pirro. I
like nothing - keeps everything.

Angelo. I am concerned - if you like a lot is how high you wear your
head for sale - (As if the bag he again wanted to insert.) Pirro. To
give only! (Does it.) - And now what? After that you just why I
should have chosen - Angelo. The ways; the point you do not really
believe before? - Scoundrel!

What do you think of us - that we are able to withhold someone's earnings?
That may be among the so-called honest people fashion: among us not
.-- Farewell!

- (Tut, as if he wanted to go, and returns again.) One I have to ask
yes .-- Then came the old Galotti so all alone in the city blown up.

What is this? Pirro. Nothing he wants, a purely Spazierritt. His daughter
is tonight at the Good, from whom he herkoemmt, Count Appiani
angetrauet.

He can not expect the time - Angelo. And riding out again soon?

Pirro. As soon as it hits you here, where you have long forgiven. -
But you've got no attack on him? Take care. He is a man - Angelo.
Kenn, I do not?

I have not covered him gedienet? - If a question only he would get
much too! - If the young people go after? Pirro. Around noon. Angelo.
With much support?

Pirro.

In a single car .-- The mother, the daughter of Graf and a few
friends come from Sabionetta as witnesses.

Angelo. And serviced? Pirro. Only two, except me, I should voraufreiten
horses. Angelo. That's good .-- Still one: what is the Equipage? Is it
you? or the Count? Pirro. Of the Count. Angelo. Evil! There is still a
pioneer, except for a solid coach. But! - Pirro. I am amazing. But what
do you want? - The little jewels that the bride should have some,
it is hardly worth the trouble - Angelo. So the bride is worth its own!
Pirro. And even if this crime should I be your accomplice?

Angelo. You ride vorauf. But ride, ride!

and turn away to nothing! Pirro. Never! Angelo. How? I believe that you
want to play the steadfast belief. lad! I think you know me .-- Where
you plauderst! Where one finds a different circumstance, as you
stated it to me!

- Pirro. But, Angelo, in order of heaven's sake! - Angelo.

Do not let what you can! (Geht ab.) Pirro. Ha! Let the devil in a hair
hold, and you'll be forever! Unfortunately I! Fourth appearance
Odoardo and Claudia Galotti.

Pirro. Odoardo.

It remains for me to round off - Claudia. Yet a moment, Odoardo! It would
hurt them, so your sight to miss. Odoardo. I need also to the Count
nor opponent. Hardly can I expect's this worthy young man to call
my son. Everything he charmed me. And above all, the decision to
include in his father's valleys themselves to live. Claudia .--
That breaks my heart when I remember in this whole .-- So should we
lose it, this single, beloved daughter? Odoardo. What you call, they
lose? In the arms of love to know?

Merge your pleasure at her not with their happiness .-- You want to renew
my old suspicion - that the more noise and distraction of the world,
the more immediate vicinity of the audit was the need for our daughter
a decent education to give what you did here in the city to stay
with her - away from a husband and father who love you so much.

Claudia. How unjust, Odoardo! But let me now just one word for this city,
for those close to the court, which you hated so strict virtue .-- There
are only here could bring together the love of what was created for
each other. Here only the Count Emilien could find and found her. Odoardo.
The rooms I have a. But, good Claudia, did you question right,
because you are quite the original - well, that with education as
the city has expired!

Let us not to want to be where we have been nothing but happy!

Okay, so that it expired - Now they have found, which were destined
for each other: now let them draw, where innocence and peace they go .--
What should count here? Of Buecker, flatter, and cringe,
and the Marin Ellis auszustechen looking for? lucky to finally make,
which he does not need? an honor to finally be gewuerdiget which for
him would not?

- Pirro! Pirro. Here I am. Odoardo. Go and bring my horse in front of the
house of the Count. I come to and want me again. (Pirro is from.) - Why
should serve the count here, even if he can command? - They do not
mind you, Claudia, that our daughter, he is completely corrupted with
the prince. The prince hates me - Claudia. Maybe less than you
besorgs.

Odoardo. Obtain! I can also so what! Claudia. Because I've already told
you that the Prince has seen our daughter?

Odoardo. The Prince? And where? Claudia.

In the last Vegghia in which Grimaldi chancellor, which he graced
with his presence.

He bezeigte against it so graciously - Odoardo.

So gracious? Claudia. He talked with her for so long - Odoardo.
Talked with her? Claudia.

Schien of their playfulness and their jokes so charmed - Odoardo. So
charmed? - Claudia. Does their beauty with so many surveys praise spoken
- Odoardo.

Praise surveys? And everything you tell me in a tone of delight?

Claudia O! Vain, foolish mother! Claudia. Why? Odoardo. Well, well
now!

So too is expired .-- Ha! when I imagine - would be just the place
where I am most deadly wound to bin!

- A Wolluestling, the admired, coveted .-- Claudia!

Claudia! the mere thought sets me in anger .-- You had me at once
reported to have .-- But, I want you now do not like to say something
unpleasant.

And I would (by him by the hand take), if I remain longer .-- So
let me!

let me - God ordered, Claudia! - Come happy after!

Fifth appearance Claudia Galotti. What a man!

- Oh, the rugged virtue - if this name otherwise they verdienet .--
Everything seems to be suspicious, all punishable by law! - Or, if
the people know is: - who should wish, they to know - what is left
but Emilia?
I need money--God knows!--for little Lottie.  If
I could get her to Boston----

"Good gracious, Miss! what you been doing here?" he suddenly gasped.

"Isn't that some better?" demanded Janice, chuckling.  "Astonished,
aren't you, Mr. Drugg?  Don't you believe if both windows were like
that, and the whole store cleaned up, folks would sit up and take
notice?"

"I--I believe you," admitted the shopkeeper, still staring.

"And wouldn't it pay?"

"I--I don't know.  It might."

"Isn't it worth trying?" demanded Janice, cheerily.  "Now, please, I
want you to do as I say--and you must let me have my own way to-day
here.  I've brought my lunch, and it's too late to go to school now,
even if it _does_ stop raining.  You'll let me, won't you?"

"I--I--I don't know just what you want me to do--or what _you_ want to
do," stammered Hopewell Drugg, still staring at the transformed window.

"I want you to turn in and help me put your whole store to rights," she
declared.  "You don't understand, Mr. Drugg.  I believe you can attract
trade here if you will have things nice, and bright, and tidy.  You
carry a good stock of wares; and you are not any more behind the times
than other Poketown merchants.  Why not be _ahead of them all_?"

"Me?" breathed Drugg, in increasing wonder.

"And why not _you_?  You've got as good a chance as any.  Just get to
work and _make_ trade.  Think of little Lottie.  If your business can
be increased and you can make money, think of what you can do for her!"

Drugg suddenly straightened his stooped shoulders and held up his head.
"Just you show me what you want me to do," he said, with unexpected
fire.

"Grand!" cried the excited Janice.  "I can set you to work in a minute.
First thing of all, you fix your screen doors; let's keep the fly
family out of the store--and we'll kill those already in here.  You
commence on the screens, Mr. Drugg, while I tackle that other window."

About the time school was usually out, Janice removed her apron and the
other marks of her toil, and put on her hat and coat.  As she raid,
they had made a good beginning.  Better still, Hopewell Drugg seemed
quite inspired.

"You have done me a world of good, Miss Janice," he declared.  "And
already the shop looks a hundred per cent. better."

"I should hope so," said Janice, vigorously.  "And you keep right on
with the good work, Mr. Drugg.  I'll come in and dress your windows
every week.  And when you've torn those shelves away from the side
windows and let the light and air in here, and done your painting as
you promised, I'll come and arrange your wares on the shelves.

"Then you get out a little good advertising, and remind folks that
Hopewell Drugg is still in Poketown and doing business.  Oh! there are
a dozen things I want you to do!  But I won't tell you about all of
them now," and Janice laughed as she picked up her bag and ran out.

The rain had ceased.  The sun was breaking through the clouds,
promising a beautiful evening.  Janice almost ran into 'Rill
Scattergood on the sidewalk.

"Why, Janice dear!" cried the little schoolmistress.  "I missed you
to-day."  Then her eyes turned toward the store.  "Is--is anything the
matter?  Nothing's happened to little Lottie?"

"Not a thing," replied the girl, cheerfully.

"Nor--nor to Mr. Drugg?  I don't hear him playing," said Miss 'Rill.

"And I hope you _won't_ hear him playing so much for a while," laughed
Janice.  "The fiddle and the bow have been laid away on the shelf for a
while, I hope."

"But I really _do_ think Mr. Drugg plays very nicely," murmured the
little schoolmistress, not at all understanding what Janice meant.  But
the girl ran on, smiling mysteriously.


CHAPTER XII

ON THE ROAD WITH WALKY DEXTER

Janice Day found the weeks sliding by more quickly after this.
Although school soon closed, she had begun to find so many interests in
Poketown that she could now write dear Daddy in Mexico quite cheerful
letters.

She had "kept at" Hopewell Drugg until his store was the main topic of
conversation all over town.  The man himself was even "spruced up" a
bit, and he met the curious people who put themselves out to see his
rejuvenated store with such a pleasant and businesslike air, that many
new customers were attracted to come again.

(He want to go to the door.) (Candida.) nonsense! He has long been closed.
Sit on the carpet and fireplace, we chat, as you usually do! I want
to be entertained, - do you not? (March Banks half-horrified, half-ecstatic:)
Yes.The drummers who came to Poketown began to
pay more attention to this store on the side street.

But Janice Day believed, that, like charity, reformation should begin
at home.  The old Day house was slowly revolutionized that summer.
Commencing with the cleaning up of the yard and the mending of the
pump, Janice inspired further improvements.  Marty and she spent each
Saturday morning in the dooryard and garden, while Mr. Day mended the
front porch flooring, where the minister had met with his accident, and
reshingled the roof.

The boles of the fruit and shade trees about the house were
whitewashed, and the palings of the fence renewed.  Somehow a pair of
new hinges were found for the gate.  The sidewalk was raked, all the
weeds cut away from the fence-line, and the sod between the path and
the gutter trimmed and its edges cut evenly.

When Marty actually whitewashed the fence, Mr. Day admitted that it was
such an improvement he wished he could go on and paint the house.
"But, by mighty!" he drawled, "it's been so long since 'twas painted,
it 'ud soak up an awful sight of oil."

Other people along Hillside Avenue began to take notice of the
improvement about the old Day house.  Mr. Dickerson built a new front
fence, getting it on a line with the Days' barrier.  Others trimmed
hedges and trees, put the lawn mower to their grass, bolstered up
sagging fences, and rehung gates.  Hillside Avenue, up its whole
length, began to look less neglected.

Janice had a fondness for the little inlet, with its background of tall
firs, where she had first met little Lottie Drugg, and she often walked
down there.  So she became pretty well acquainted with "Mr. Selectman"
Cross Moore.  But as yet she did not get as far out on the Middletown
Lower Road as the house where the Hammett Twins lived.

One day she found a long lumber-reach dropping new posts and rails
along the length of the deep ditch into which the twins' pony had come
so near to backing the little old ladies on that memorable day when
Janice had first met them.

"Hi tunket!" ejaculated Mr. Moore, grinning in a most friendly way at
Janice, "I hope you'll be satisfied now.  You've jest about hounded me
into havin' this fence put up again."

"Why, Mr. Moore!  I never said a thing to you about it," cried the girl.

"No.  But I see ye ev'ry time you go by, and I'm so reminded of the
'tarnal fence that I remember it o' nights.  If somebody _should_ fall
inter the ditch, ye know.  And then--  Well, I've found out you've made
little Lottie Drugg promise not to come down this way 'niess somebody's
with her.  'Fraid _she'll_ fall in here, too, I s'pose----"

"Well, she might," said Janice, firmly.

"She won't have no chance," growled Mr. Moore, but with twinkling eyes
in spite of his gruffness.  "Hi tunket!  I'll build a railing along
here that'll hold up an elephunt."

This day Janice had set forth for a long jaunt into the country.  She
took the turn where the Hammett Twins and their pony had first come
into her sight, and kept walking on the Middletown Lower Road for a
long way.  It overlooked the lake, Janice had been told, for most of
the distance to the larger town.

She passed several farmhouses but did not reach the Hammett place;
instead she rested upon a rustic bridge where a swift, brawling brook
came down from the hills to tumble into the lake.  Then, as she was
going on, a quick "put, put, put" sounded from along the road she had
been traveling.

"It's a motorcycle," thought Janice.  "I didn't know anybody owned one
around Poketown."

Turning the bend in the road the 'cycle flashed into view, along with a
whisp of dust.  A young man rode the machine--a young man who looked
entirely different from the youths of Poketown.  Janice looked at him
with interest as he flashed past.  She thought he was going so fast
that he would never notice her curiosity.

He was muscularly built, with a round head set firmly upon a solid
neck, from which his shirt was turned well away, thus displaying the
cords of his throat to advantage.  He was well bronzed by the sun, and
the heavy crop of hair, on which he wore a visorless round cap, was
crisp and of a dull gold color.  He really _was_ a good-looking young
man, and in his knickerbockers and golf stockings Janice thought he
seemed very "citified" indeed.

"He's a college boy, I am sure," decided the girl, with interest,
watching the rider out of sight.  "I couldn't see his eyes behind those
dust glasses; but I believe there was a dimple in his cheek.  If his
face was washed, I don't doubt but what he'd be good-looking," and she
laughed.  "Why! here's Walky Dexter!"

The red-faced driver of the "party wagon" drew in Josephus and his
mate, with a flourish.

"Wal, now!  I _am_ beat," he ejaculated, his little eyes twinkling.
"Can't be I've found a _lost_ Day?"

"No, indeed, Mr. Dexter," she told him.  "I _was_ thinking I'd walk to
the Hammetts'; but it's turned so hot and dusty----"

"And the Hammett gals live two good mile ahead o' ye."

"Oh! as far as that?"

"Surest thing ye know.  Better hop in an' jog along back 'ith me," said
Walkworthy Dexter, cordially.

"Can I, Mr. Dexter?"

"You air jest as welcome as the flowers in May," he assured her.
"Whoa, Josephus.  Stand still, Kate!  My sakes! but the flies bite the
critters this morning, an' no mistake."

Janice "hopped in," and Mr. Dexter clucked to the willing horses.

"I jest been takin' a party of our young folks over to Middletown to
take examinations for entrance to the Academy," proclaimed Walky.  "An'
that remin's me," added he.  "Did yer see that feller go by on one o'
them gasoline bikes?"

"On the motorcycle?"

"Ya-as."

"I saw him," admitted Janice.

"Know him?"

"Of course not.  He doesn't belong in Poketown, I'm sure."

"Mebbe he will," said Walky, his eyes twinkling with fun again.

Janice looked at him, puzzled.

"Ain't you heard?" he questioned.  "'Rill Scattergood's resigned and
the school committee is lookin' for a new teacher.  _That_ feller's got
the bee in his bonnet, they told me at Middletown."

"The school-teaching bee?" laughed the girl.

"Yep.  He'd been for his certif'cate.  He's been writin' to the
Poketown committee."

"But--but he isn't much more than a boy himself, is he?"

"They tell me he's been through college.  Must be a smart youngster
for, as you say, he's nothin' but a kid."

"I didn't say that!" cried Janice, in some little panic, for she knew
Dexter's proneness to gossip.  "Don't you dare say I did!"

He chuckled.  "Wa-al, ye meant it.  Come now--didn't ye?  An' he _is_ a
mighty young feller ter be teachin' school.  'Specially with sech big
girls an' boys in it.  He'll have ter fight the boys, it's likely, an'
I shouldn't wonder if the big gals set their caps for him."

"I'm afraid you're a very reckless talker, Mr. Dexter," sighed Janice.
Then her hazel eyes brightened suddenly, and she added, "They ought to
call you 'Talky' Dexter, instead of 'Walky', I believe."

"'Talkworthy Dexter', eh?" he grinned.

"I'm not sure that you _do_ always _talk worthy_," she told him,
shaking a serious head.  "You're very apt to say things to 'stir folks
all up,' as my Aunt says.  Oh, yes, you do!  You know you do, Mr.
Dexter."

"Wal, I declare!" chuckled the man, but with a queer little side glance
at the serious face of the girl.  "Think I'm a trouble-breeder, do ye?"

"You just ask yourself that, sir," said Janice, firmly.  "You know
you're just delighted if you can say something to start things going,
as you call it.  And it isn't worthy of you----"

"Whether I'm 'Talkworthy', or 'Walkworthy', eh?" he broke in, laughing.

"Oh, I didn't mean any offence!" exclaimed Janice, much disturbed now
to think that she had criticised the man just as he was in the habit of
criticising everybody else.

"I snum! mebbe you're right," grunted Walky Dexter.  "And I reckon
talkin' don't do much good after all.  Now, look at Cross Moore.  I
been at him a year an' more to fix that rail fence along the ditch by
his house.  'Tain't done no good.  But, by jinks! somebody else got at
him," added Walky, slyly, "an' I see this mornin' Cross was gittin' the
rails and new posts there.  He was right on the job."

Janice's cheeks grew rosy.  "Why!" she cried, "I never said a word to
him about it."

"No; but somehow he got the idee from you.  He told me so," and Walky
chuckled.

"I think Mr. Moore likes to joke--the same as you do, Mr. Dexter," said
Janice, quietly.

"Ahem!  You sartainly have got some of us goin'," said the driver,
whimsically.  "Look at Jase Day!  I never _did_ think nothin' less'n
Gabriel's trump would start Jase.  But yest'day I'm jiggered if I
didn't see him mendin' his pasture fence.  And the old Day house looks
like another place--that's right.  How d'you do it?"

"I--I don't just know what you mean," stammered Janice, feeling very
uncomfortable.

He looked at her with his eyes screwed up again.  "D'you know what they
said about yer uncle las' year?  He come down to Jefferson's store with
a basket of pertaters.  All the big ones was on top and the little ones
at the bottom.  Huh!  _He_ ain't the only one that 'deacons' a basket
of pertaters," and Walky chuckled.

"But the boys said 'twas easy to see how come Jase's pertaters that-a
way.  'Twas 'cause it took him so 'tarnal long to dig a basket, that
the pertaters grew ahead of him in the row--that's right!  When he
begun they was little, but by the time he got a basket full they'd
growed a lot," and the gossip guffawed his delight at the story.

"But he's sure gettin' 'round some spryer this year.  An' I snum!
there's Marty, too.  He's workin' in his mother's garden reg'lar.  I
seen him.  'Fore you came, Miss Janice, if Marty was diggin' in the
garden an' found a worm, he thought he was goin' fishin' and got him a
bait can and a pole, an' set right off for the lake--that's right!" and
Walky shook all over, and grew so red in the face over his joke that
Janice was really afraid he was becoming apoplectic.

But something in the middle of the road, as they made another corner,
stopped all this fun.

"Hullo!" exclaimed Walky.  "That young feller on the gasoline bike has
had an accident.  Don't it look that way to you?"


CHAPTER XIII

NELSON HALEY

The team drew to a halt without any command, and directly beside the
young man, who was working diligently over the overturned motorcycle.
His repair kit was spread out at the roadside, and the cause of the
trouble was self-evident, it would seem.  But Walky was a true Yankee
and had to ask questions.

"Had a puncture, Mister?" he drawled, as the young man looked up, saw
Janice on the seat beside the driver, and flushed a little.

"Oh, no!" returned the victim of the accident, with some asperity.
"I'm just changing the air in these tires.  The other air was worn out,
you know."

For a moment Walky's eyes bulged, and Janice giggled loudly.  Then Mr.
Dexter saw the point of the joke.  He slapped his leg and laughed
uproariously.

"You'll do!  By jinks! you surely will _do_," he declared.  "I reckon
you air smart enough, young feller, ter teach the Poketown school.  An'
that's what they say you're in these parts for?"

"I am here to see the school committee about the position," said the
young fellow.  "Are you one of the committee?"

"Me?  No--I should say not!" gasped Walky.  "Old Bill Jones, an'
'Squire Abe Connett, and Elder Concannon air the committee."

"Oh!" returned the youth, quite coolly.  "I didn't know but you were
one of the number, and that I was already being put through my
examination."

But Walky Dexter was not easily feazed.  He just blinked twice over
this snub and pursued the conversation:

"They tell me you've been ter college?"

"My! my!" exclaimed the young man, "_they_ tell you a good deal, don't
they?  Is it just a habit folks have, or have the Poketown selectmen
passed an ordinance that you are to be the recipient of all personal
information?"

Janice was still amused, although she thought the young man was rather
hard upon the town gossip.  But Walky thought the observation over, and
seemed finally to realize that the motorcyclist was making sport of him.

"Aw, well," he said, grinning broadly, "if you air tender about your
pussonal record, I'll say no more about it.  But I allus b'lieve in
goin' right ter headquarters when I want ter know anything.  Saves
makin' mistakes.  If you air ashamed of your criminal past, Mister,
why, that's all right--we won't say no more about it."

At this, the young fellow stood up, put his hands upon his hips, and
burst into a hearty shout of laughter.  Janice had to join in, while
Walky Dexter grinned, knowing he had made a good point.

"You certainly had me there, old timer!" declared the youth at last.
"Now providing you will be as frank, and do the honors as well, I'll
introduce myself as Nelson Haley.  I hail from Springfield.  I have
spent four years in the scholastic halls of Williamstown.  I hope to go
to law school, but meanwhile, must earn a part of the where-with-all.
Therefore, I am attacking the citadel of the Poketown School."

"Oh!  That's the why-for of it, eh?" crowed Walky.  "Much obleeged.
I'll know what to say now when anybody asks me."

"I hope so," returned Nelson Haley, with some sarcasm.  "But fair
exchange, Mister.  You might tell me who I have the honor of speaking
to--and, especially, you might introduce me to the lady?"

"Oh!  Eh?" and Walky looked at the blushing Janice, questioningly.  The
girl smiled, however, and the driver cleared his throat and gravely
made the introduction.  "And I'm Walky Dexter," he concluded.  "If you
git the Poketown school you'll come ter know me quite well, I shouldn't
wonder."

"That is something to look forward to, I am sure," declared Nelson
Haley, drily.  Then he turned to Janice, and asked:

"Will you be one of my pupils, if I have the good fortune to get the
school, Miss Day?"

"I--I am afraid not.  I do not really belong in Poketown," Janice
explained.  "And the ungraded school could not aid me much."

"No, I suppose not," returned the young man.  "Well!  I hope I see you
again, Miss Day."

Walky clucked to the horses and they jogged on, leaving Nelson Haley to
finish his repairs.  Walky chuckled, and said to Janice:

"He's quite a flip young feller.  He is young to tackle the Poketown
school.  An' 'twill be an objection, I shouldn't wonder.  Ye see, they
couldn't find that fault with 'Rill Scattergood."

"But I venture to say that they did when she first came to Poketown to
teach," cried Janice.

"Oh, say!  I sh'd say they did," agreed Walky, with a retrospective
rolling of his head.  "An' she was a purty young gal, then, too.  There
was more on us than Hopewell Drugg arter 'Rill in them days--yes,
sir-ree!"

Janice was curious, and she yielded to the temptation of asking the
town gossip a question:

"Why--why didn't Miss 'Rill marry Hopewell, then?"

"The goodness only knows why they fell out, Miss Janice," declared
Walky.  "We none of us ever made out.  I 'spect it was the old woman
done it--ol' Miz' Scattergood.  She didn't take kindly to Hopewell.
And then--Well, 'Cinda Stone was lef all alone, an' she lived right
back o' Drugg's store, an' her father had owed Drugg a power of money
'fore he died--a big store bill, ye see.  Hopewell Drugg is as soft as
butter; mebbe he loved 'Cinda Stone; anyhow he merried her after he'd
got the mitten from Amarilla.  Huh! ye can't never tell the whys and
wherefores of sech things--not re'lly."

A presidential election would have made little more stir in Poketown
than the coming there of this young man who looked for the position of
school-teacher.  Marty brought home word at night to the old Day house
that Mr. Haley had put up at the Lake View Inn; that he had let two of
the older boys try out his motorcycle; that he could pitch a ball that
"Dunk" Peters couldn't hit, even though "Dunk" had played one season
with the Fitchburg team.  Well, my mother? - What could 'to me he can
find Criminal Bares? Claudia. Nothing, nor as on me. And yet, yet -
Ha, you do not know your father! In his anger would have 'er the
innocent object of the crime with the criminals confused.

In his anger hätt 'I gave him geschienen, which leads to have, which I
neither foresee nor prevent .-- But you can continue, my daughter,
then! When you are the prince recognized - I would hope that you
have your warest powerful enough, it looks all in one to indicate
the contempt which they deserve.

Emilia. That was not me, my mother! After the eyes, with whom I recognized
him, had I not the heart, a second to him. I fled - Claudia. And the
prince after you - Emilia.

What I did not know until I am in the hall taken by the hand felt.
And by him! Out of shame must I stand: I loszuwinden he would
draw attention to the passers we have made.

That was the only consideration, which I was able - or, I now remind
me again. He said, and I answered him. But what he said, what I
answered him - yet it falls to me, so it's good, I will tell you, my
mother. Now I know all of the nothing. My senses were leaving me free
.-- I think, as I have from him and away from the hall came. I find
myself first on the road again, and listen to him come from behind me,
and listen to him with me both in the house come with me climb up the
stairs - Claudia.

The fear has its special meaning, my daughter! I'll never forget how
you gesture hereinstuerztest .-- No, as far as he could not dare
to follow thee .-- God!

God! if your father knew - how wild he was in when he heard that the
prince, not without you recently displeasure seen - however, be quiet,
my daughter! Take it for a dream, what you encountered. Also,
there will be even less impact than a dream. Miss you today with one
after all positions. Emilia. But, no, my mother? The count needs to
know. Him, I must say it. Claudia.

To all the world is not - Why? why? If you want for nothing and again
nothing for him uneasy? And when he would not even itzt: know, my
child, that a poison, which is not equal wirket, so no less dangerous
poison.

What the fans do not look, it can make to the husband. The lovers can
order 'is even flatter, such an important competitor to the rank of
change. But if he happens to be his has expired: ah!

my child - it is from the fans is often an entirely different creature.
Your good star guard yourself from this experience. Emilia. You know,
my mother, as I like your insights to improve myself in all,
constitutes .-- But if he is of another erfuehre that the prince
talked me today?

My silence would not, sooner or later, his restlessness multiply? - I
daechte but I prefer to retain nothing before him to the heart. Claudia.
Weakness! fell weakness! - No, absolutely not, my daughter!

Tell him nothing. Let him remember nothing! Emilia. Well, my mother!
I have no intention against yours .-- Aha!

(With a deep breath the course.) Is also very easy to me again .-- What
a silly, scary thing, I am - not my mother - I am still probably
would have otherwise be able to take and would have forgiven me
neither .

Claudia.

I wanted you to not tell my daughter, before you are your own healthy
mind said.

And I knew it was you say, once again you come to yourself .-- The
prince is gallantly. You are the language of gallantry insignificant
little too familiar. A Elite in its sensibility, a flattery to Beteurung
a Desiring to imagination, a desire to premeditation.

Nothing in this language sounds like everything, and everything is in
it as much as nothing. Emilia. O my mother! - So have I with my fear
completely ridiculous happen! - Well, he certainly does not know about
them, my good Appiani! He could easily for me more vain than
virtuous hold .-- Hui!

that he was even ways; the point! It is his career. Seventh appearance
Graf Appiani. The former. Appiani (occurs deep, with front beaten out
eyes and look closer ways; the point without having to see until it
entgegenspringt Emilia).

Ah, my most expensive - I was in the hallway not supposing.
Emilia.

I wish you sunny, Mr Graf, even where you do not suspect me .-- How
solemn? so seriously?

- If that day is not happy upsurge worth? Appiani.

He is worth more than my entire life. But with so many pregnant
Glueckseligkeit for me - it seems like this Glueckseligkeit itself
that I am so serious to me, as you call it, my lady, so solemnly made
.-- (By the mother sees.) Ha! even here, my madam! - now soon to me with
a name close to worship! Claudia. The greatest pride I will! - How happy
are you, my Emilia - Why did your father do not share our delight want?
Appiani.

Eben, I have ripped from his arms - or rather, he is from my .-- What a
man, my Emilia, your father! The pattern of masculine virtue! For
attitudes to what my soul stands in his presence!

Never is my decision, always good, always precious to be alive
than when I see him - if I believe him to me. And what else than the
fulfillment of that resolve, I can make worthy of the honor, his
son to read - to be of yours, my Emilia?

Emilia. And he did not expect me! Appiani. I judge, because it's Emilia,
for this current visit, too shocked, too much his whole soul
would have bemaechtiget.

Claudia. He believed you with your bride Beautiful beschaeftiget
to find and hear - Appiani. What I do with the tenderness of
admiration again heard from him .-- So right, my Emilia! I am a religious
woman in you, and are not proud of their piety is. Claudia. But,
my children, one and the other do not leave! - Now it is high time now
mach, Emilia! Appiani. What? my madam. Claudia.

You want it not so, Mr. Graf - as it is there to lead altars? Appiani.
Verily, I will now be aware .-- Who can you see, Emilia, and also on
your plaster to look out for? - And why not, as it is for? Emilia. No,
my dear Count, not so, not quite so.

But not a lot of beautiful, not much .-- Husch, Husch, and I'm ready!
- Nothing, absolutely nothing from the jewelery, the last wasteful
generosity of your gifts! Nothing, nothing, only what is sent to such
jewelery - I could be him gram, this jewelery, unless you would.

Because three times told me he dreamed of - Claudia. Now!

which I know nothing. Emilia. As if I would, and as if suddenly
everyone in the same stone is a pearl beads verwandele .-- But, my mother,
Pearls mean tears. Claudia. Child - The importance traeumerischer
than the dream. - Warest you have not always been a lover of pearls
larger than stones?

- Emilia. Admittedly, my mother, admittedly - Appiani (after thinking and
melancholy). Mean tears - tears mean! Emilia. How? You fall on? You?
Appiani. Yep, I should be ashamed of me .-- But if the imagination
is even sad is sharp pictures - Emilia. Why is it that too? - And
what do you think that I have invented?

- What did I know how I saw when I first liked you? - You know it
yet? Appiani. Whether I know it yet? I see you never thought to be so
different, and so you can see, even if I do not see it. Emilia. So,
a dress from the same color, from the same cuts, and flying free -
Appiani. Excellent!

Emilia. And the hair - Appiani. In his own brown glory, in curls, as
they beat the Nature - Emilia.

The Rose is not to be missed! Right! right! - A little patience, and
as I stand before you there! Eighth appearance Graf Appiani. Claudia
Galotti. Appiani (by forwarding it with a low-beaten face looks
after).

Pearls mean tears - A little patience! - Yes, if the only time we
would except - When a minute in hand we are not in year could extend
- Claudia. Emilien observation, Mr. Graf was as fast as correct. They
are usually more serious than today.

Only one step of the objectives of your wishes - should be 'you
reuen, Mr. Graf, that the goal of your desires have been? Appiani.
Ah, my mother, and you can find the suspect from your son? - But,
it's true: I am tonight unusual cloudy and gloomy .-- Only you can see,
my lady: - one step from the targets or not yet expired, is the basis
of an .-- Everything I see, everything I hear, everything that I
dream, preach to me since yesterday and ehegestern this truth.
This one idea chained to each other, I must have and wants .-- What
is it? I understand it is not .-- Claudia.

You make me restless, Mr. Graf - Appiani. One of ways; the point then
to another - I am angry, angry about my friends, about myself -
Claudia. Why? Appiani. My friends ask for worse, though, that I
am the prince of my marriage say a word, before I perform them. They
give me, I was not guilty, but the respect he wanted to 'have it
no other .-- And I am weak enough to enable them to promise.

Just like I have with him in front. Claudia (aback). When the prince?
Ninth appearance Pirro, equal to Marinelli and former. Pirro. Madam,
the Marchese Marinelli keeps home before and after erkundiget Mr.
Counts. Appiani. Following me? Pirro. Here it is already. (Opens the
door to him and go anyway.) Marinelli. I beg pardon, madam .-- My Lord
Count, I was in front of your home and learned that I would meet you
here. I have an urgent business to you - my lady, I ask for forgiveness
again and it is done in a few minutes.

Claudia. I do not want delay. (Makes him a bow and goes anyway.) Tenth
appearance Marinelli. Appiani. Piani Ap. Well, sir? Marinelli. I
come from the Prince Highness. Appiani. What is his commands?
Marinelli.

I am proud to be the bearer of such a grace to be excellent .-- And
when Graf Appiani not force one of his most devoted friends in me
wants to ignore - Appiani.

Without further preface, if I may ask. Marinelli. Too! - The prince
must be immediately to the Duke of Massa, in the matter of his
marriage with the princess daughter of an Agent send. He was long
undecided, whom he should appoint. We finally made his choice, Mr.
Graf, for you have fallen. Appiani. On me? Marinelli. And that -
if the friendship vainglory may be - not without my intervention
- Appiani.

Verily, you put me on any appreciation in embarrassment .-- I have
no longer expected that the prince I will deign to do .-- Marinelli.
I am assured that it is merely a decent opportunity gemangelt has.
And even if these so a man like Count Appiani still not worthy enough
to be, then, is my friendship with premature.

Appiani. Friendship and friendship to the third floor! - Who am I
red?

Des Marchese Marinelli friendship hätt 'I never dreamed .-- Marinelli.
I acknowledge my wrong, Mr. Earl, my unforgivable injustice that I,
without your permission, your friend want to be .-- When all, what
does? The grace of the prince who offered to honor you remain what they
are: and I have no doubt that you are craving them with 'take. Appiani
(after some thought). However. Marinelli. Now as you come. Appiani.
Where? Marinelli.

After Dosalo to the prince .-- It is already done everything, and you
still have to leave tonight. Appiani. What do you say? - Yet today?
Marinelli. Better still in this same hour in the following. The matter
is of extreme Eil '. Appiani. The truth? - So I am sorry that I have the
honor, which assigned me the prince, Make needs. Marinelli. How?
Appiani. I can not leave now - not tomorrow - even about tomorrow
yet .-- Marinelli.

You jest, Mr. Graf Appiani. With you? Marinelli. Incomparable!
If the joke is the prince, he is so much funnier .-- You can not? Appiani.
No, sir, no .-- And I hope that the prince himself is my apology to
apply. Marinelli. The I'm anxious to hear. Appiani. Oh, a
trifle! - Look, I should still take a wife. Marinelli. Now? and then?
Appiani.

And then - and then? - Your question is also desperately naive.
Marinelli. It has examples, Mr. Graf, that weddings defer .-- I
can not believe that the bride or the groom is always served. The case
may have its unpleasant. But, daecht 'I, the command of the Lord
- Appiani. The command of the Lord - the Lord? One Lord, the man himself
chooses, so our Lord is not really - I admit that the prince would
be imperative owe obedience.

But not me .-- I came to his farm as a volunteer. I wanted to have the
honor to serve him, but will not be a slave. I am the vassal of a
larger Lord - Marinelli. Bigger or smaller: Lord is Lord. Appiani. That
I with you about it strittet - Enough, you say the prince, what you
have heard - that I am sorry, his grace can not accept because I am just
a connection tonight vollzoege which my whole happiness cost. Marinelli.
Do not ask him also know, with whom? Appiani. With Emilia Galotti.
Marinelli. The daughter of this home? Appiani. For this home. Marinelli.
Hm! Hm! Appiani.

How popular? Marinelli. I would think that there THEREFORE the less
difficulty they can have the ceremony to suspend your Zurueckkunft.
Appiani. The ceremony? Only the ceremony? Marinelli. The good parents
will not accept as accurate. Appiani.

The good parents? Marinelli. Emilia And yes, you probably certain.
Appiani. Yes most certainly - you are with your so good - probably a
whole monkey! Marinelli. Me, Count? Appiani. Why not? Marinelli.
Heaven and hell - We will talk. Appiani. Pah! Gloating is the monkey,
but - Marinelli. Death and damnation! - Graf, I fodere satisfaction.
Appiani. That goes. Marinelli. And they would like itzt take - only
that I am the gentle bridegroom today might not perish.

Appiani. Kind thing! Not yet! Not yet! (As he takes in hand.) After
Massa admittedly I may not send me today, but for a walk with you
I have spare time .-- Come, come! Marinelli (the tear itself away and
off). Only patience, Graf, only patience!

Eleventh appearance Appiani. Claudia Galotti. Appiani. Go, Nichtswuerdiger!
- Ha! that has done well. My blood is in the flush came.
Walky Dexter drove around to invite the girl to go with him whenever he
had a job that took him out of town with the spring wagon.  Janice
loved to jog over the hilly roads, and she saw a good bit of the
country with Dexter.

"I'd love to own just a little automobile that I could run myself," she
said once.

"Why don't you borry Nelse Haley's gasoline bike?" demanded Walky, with
a grin.  "Or, mebbe he'll put a back-saddle on fer yer.  I've seen 'em
ride double at Middletown."

"I don't like motorcycles.  I want a wide seat and more comfort," said
Janice.  "Daddy said that, perhaps, if things went well with him down
there in Mexico, I could have an auto runabout," and she sighed.

"Now, Miss Janice!" exclaimed the man, "don't you take on none.  Mr.
Broxton Day'll come out all right.  I remember him as a boy, and he was
jest as much diff'rent from Jason as chalk is from cheese!  Yes,
sir-ree!"

This implied a compliment for her father, Janice knew, so she was
pleased.  Walky Dexter meant well.

Little Miss Scattergood was Janice's greatest comfort during this time
of trial.  She did not discuss the girl's trouble, but she showed her
sympathy in other ways.  Old Mrs. Scattergood always wanted to discuss
the horrors of the Mexican War, whenever she caught sight of Janice,
which was not pleasant.  So Miss 'Rill and Janice arranged to meet more
often at Hopewell Drugg's, and little Lottie received better care those
days than ever before.

Miss 'Rill was not a bad seamstress, and the two friends began to make
Lottie little frocks; and, as Hopewell only had to supply the material
out of the store, Lottie was more prettily dressed--and for less
money--than previously.

As Janice and the ex-schoolmistress sat sewing in the big Drugg
kitchen, Hopewell would often linger in the shed room with his violin,
when there were no customers, and play the few pieces he had, in all
these years, managed to "pick out" upon his father's old instrument.
"Silver Threads Among the Gold" was the favorite--especially with
Lottie.  She would dance and clap her hands when she felt the vibration
of certain minor chords, and come running to the visitors and attract
their attention to the sounds that she could "hear."

"He-a! he-a! he-a!" she shouted in that shrill toneless voice of hers.

Janice noticed that she talked less than formerly.  Gradually the power
of speech was going from her because of disuse.  It is almost always so
with the very young who are deprived of hearing.

Such a pitiful, pitiful case!  Sometimes Janice could not think of
little Lottie without weeping.  It seemed so awful that merely a matter
of money--a few hundred dollars--should keep this child from obtaining
the surgical help and the training that might aid her to become a
happy, normal girl.

It was from Mr. Middler--rather, through a certain conversation with
the minister--that Janice received the greatest help during these weeks
when her father's fate remained uncertain.

She could not spend all her time at Hopewell Drugg's, or with Walky
Dexter, or even about the old Day house.  Autumn had come, and the
mornings were frosty.  The woods were aflame with the sapless leaves.
Ice skimmed the quiet pools before the later-rising sun kissed them.

Janice had sometimes met the minister when she tramped over the
hillside--and especially up toward the Shower Bath in Jason Day's wood
lot.  One glowing, warm October afternoon the girl and the gentle
little parson met on the cow path through Mr. Day's upper pasture.

"Ah, my dear!" he said, shaking hands.  "Where are you bound for?"

"I don't know whether I had better tell you, or not, sir," she
returned, smiling, yet with some gravity.  "You see, I was going to get
comfort."

"Comfort?"

"Yes, sir.  You see, sometimes I get to thinking of--of Daddy so much
that the whole world seems just made up of _my_ trouble!" said Janice,
with a sob.  "Do you know what I mean, sir?  Just as though me and my
troubles were the most important things in existence--the _only_
things, in fact."

"Ah--yes.  I see--I see," whispered Mr. Middler, patting her shoulder,
but looking away from her tear-streaked face.  "We are all that
way--sometimes, Janice.  All that way."

"And then I go somewhere to get out of myself,--to--to get comfort."

"I see."

"And so I am going now to the place I call The Overlook.  It's a great
rock up yonder.  I scramble up on top of it, and from that place I can
see so much of the world that, by and by, I begin to realize just how
small I really am, and how small, in comparison, my troubles must be in
the whole great scheme of things.  I begin to understand, then," she
added, softly, "that God has so much to 'tend to in the Universe that
He can't give me first chance _always_.  I've got to wait my turn."

"Oh, but my dear!" murmured the doctrinarian.  "I wouldn't limit the
power of the Almighty--even in my thoughts."

"No-o.  But--but God does just seem more _human_ and close to me if I
think of Him as very busy--yet thoughtful and kind for us all.
Just--just like my Daddy, only on a bigger scale, Mr. Middler."

The minister looked at her gravely for a moment and then took her hand
again.  "Suppose you show me that place of comfort?" he suggested,
quietly.

They went on together through the pasture and up into the wood lot.
They came out upon an unexpected opening in the wood, at the beginning
of a great gash in the hillside.  At the center of this opening was a
huge boulder, surrounded by hazel-nut bushes, to which the brown leaves
still clung.

"You can climb up easily from the back.  Let me show you," said Janice,
who had by now got control of her tears, and was more like her smiling,
cheerful self.

She ran up the incline, sure-footed as a goat; but at the more
difficult place she gave the minister her hand.  He was much more
breathless than she when they stood together upon the overhanging rock.

Below them was the steep, wooded hillside, and the broken pastures and
scattered houses north of Poketown, along the shore of the lake.  This
spot was on the promontory that flanked the bay upon one side.  From
this point it seemed that all of the great lake, with both its near and
distant shores, lay spread at their feet!

In the northwest frowned the half-ruined fortress, so heroic a landmark
of pre-Revolutionary times.  Nearer lay the wooded, rocky isle where a
celebrated Indian chief had made his last stand against the encroaching
whites.  Yonder was the spot where certain of those bold pioneers and
fighters, the Green Mountain Boys, embarked under their famous leaders,
Allen and Warner, upon an expedition that historians will never cease
to write of.

It was a noble, as well as a beautiful, view.  God's world _did_ look
bigger and greater from The Overlook.  Sitting by her side, the
minister held the girl's hand, and listened to her artless expressions.
She told him quite frankly what all this view meant to her,--how it
helped and soothed her worried spirit, brought comfort to her grieving
heart.  Here were many square miles of God's Footstool under her gaze;
and there were many, many thousands of other spots like this between
her and the Mexican mountains in which her father was held a prisoner.
And God had the same care over one bit of landscape as he did over
another!

"Then," she said, softly, in conclusion, "then I just seem to grasp the
idea of God's _bigness_--and how much He has to do.  I won't complain.
I'll wait.  And meanwhile I'll do, if I can, what Daddy told me to."

"What is that, Janice?" asked the minister, still gazing out over the
vast outlook himself.

"I must _do something_,--keep to work, you know.  Try and make things
better.  You know: 'Each in his small corner.'  And there's so much to
be done in Poketown!"

"So much--in Poketown?" ejaculated the minister, suddenly brought out
of his reverie.

"Yes, sir."

"But I thought Poketown was a particularly satisfactory place.  There
really is very little to do here.  We have a very clean political
government, remarkably so.  Of course, that fact would not so much
interest you, Janice.  But the life of the church is very
spiritual--very.  We have no saloons; we seldom have an arrest----"

"Oh, I never thought of those things," admitted Janice.  "There isn't
really anything for young people to do in the Poketown Church, I know.
But outside----"

"And what can be done outside?" asked the minister, and perhaps he
winced a little at the confidence in Janice's voice when she spoke of
the church system which kept the young people at a distance.

"Why, you know, there are the boys.  Boys like Marty--my cousin.  He
goes to school now, it's true; but he's down town just as much as ever
at night.  And there's no good place for the boys to go--to congregate,
I mean."

"Humph!  I thought once of opening the church basement to them,"
murmured Mr. Middler.  "But--but there was opposition.  Some thought
the boys might take advantage of our good nature and be ill-behaved."

"So they continue to hang around the hotel sheds and the stores,"
pursued Janice, thoughtfully, without meaning to be critical.  "Boys
_will_ get together in a club, or gang.  Daddy used to say they were
naturally gregarious, like some birds."

"Yes," said the minister, slowly.

"They ought to have a nice, warm, well-lighted room where they could
go, and play games, and read,--with a circulating library attached.  Of
course, a gymnasium would be too much to even _dream_ of, at first!
Why! wouldn't that be fine?  And isn't it practical?  _Do_ say it is!"

"I do not know whether it is practicable or not, Janice," said the
minister, slowly, yet smiling at her.  "But the thought is inspired.
You shall have all the help I can give you.  It _ought_ to be in the
church----"

"No.  That would scare the boys away," interposed Janice, with finality.

"Why, my dear?  You speak as though the church was a bogey!"

"Well--but--dear Mr. Middler!  Just ask the boys themselves.  How many
of them love to go to church--even to Sunday School?  I mean the boys
that hang about the village stores at night."

"It is so--it is so," he admitted, with a sigh.

From this sprang the idea of the Poketown Free Library.  It was of slow
growth, and there is much more to be said about it; but Janice found
her personal troubles much easier to bear when she began trying to
interest the people of Poketown in the reading-room idea.

And didn't Mr. Middler bear something of his own away from that visit
to The Overlook--something that glowed in his heart?  He preached quite
a different kind of a sermon that next Sunday, and the text was one of
the most helpful and living in all the New Testament.

Some of the older members of his congregation shook their heads over
it.  It was not "strong meat," they said; there was nothing to argue
about!  But a dozen troubled, needy members who heard the sermon, felt
new hope in their hearts, and they got through the following
week--trials and all!--much easier than usual.


CHAPTER XVI

"SHOWING" THE ELDER

No millionaire library-giver had found Poketown on the map.  Or else,
the hard-headed and tight-fisted voters of that Green Mountain
community were too sharp to allow anybody to foist upon them a granite
mausoleum, the upkeep of which would mainly advertise the name of the
donor.

The Union Sunday School had a library; but its list of volumes was open
to the same objections as are raised to many other institutions of its
kind.  Nor was a circulating library so much needed in Polktown as a
reading and recreation room for the youth of the village.

Aside from her brief talk with Mr. Middler, Janice Day advised with no
adult at first as to how the establishment of the needed institution
should be brought about.

The girl had studied Marty, if she had had little opportunity of
becoming acquainted with other specimens of the genus _boy_.  She knew
they were as bridle-shy as wild colts.

The idea of the club-room for reading and games must seem to come from
the boys themselves.  It must appear that they accepted adult aid
perforce, but with the distinct understanding that the room was
_theirs_ and that there was not to be too much oversight or control by
the supporting members of the institution.

The scheme was not at all original with Janice.  The nucleus of many a
successful free library and village club has been a similar idea.

"Marty, why don't you and your chums have a place of your own where you
can read and play checkers these cold nights?  I hear Josiah Pringle
has chased you out of his shop again."

"Ya-as--mean old hunks!"

"But didn't somebody spoil a whole nest of whips for him by pouring
liquid glue over the snappers?"

"Well! that was only one feller.  An' Pringle put us all out,"
complained the boy, but grinning, too.

"You wouldn't have let that boy do such a thing in your own
club-room--now, would you?"

"Huh! how'd we ever git a club-room, Janice?  We had Poley Haskin's
father's barn onc't; but when we tried to heat it with a three-legged
cook-stove, Poley's old man put us out in a hurry."

"Oh, I mean a real _nice_ place," said the wily Janice.  "Not a place
to smoke those nasty cigarettes in, and carry on; but a real
reading-room, with books, and papers, and games, and all that."

"Oh, that would be fine!  But where'd we get that kind of a place in
Poketown?" queried Marty.

That was the start of it.

There was an empty store on High Street next to the drug store.  It was
a big room which could be easily heated by a pot stove and a few
lengths of stovepipe.  It was owned by the drug-store man, and had been
empty a long time.  He asked six dollars a month rent for it.

It was just about this time that Janice learned she possessed powers of
persuasive eloquence.  The druggist was the first person she "tackled"
in her campaign.

"It's a secret, Mr. Massey," she told him; "but some of the boys want a
reading-room, and some of the rest of us are anxious to help them get
it.  Only it mustn't be talked of at first, or it will be all spoiled.
You know how 'fraid boys are that there is going to be a trap set for
them."

"Ain't that so?" chuckled the druggist.

"And we want your empty room next door."

"Wa-al--I dunno!" returned the man, finding the matter suddenly
serious, when it was brought so close home to him.

"Of course, we expect to pay for it.  Only we'd like to have you cut
the rent in two for the first three months," said Janice, quickly.

"Say! that might be all right," the druggist observed, more briskly.
"But I don't know about all these harum-scarums collecting around this
corner.  I have been glad heretofore that they have hung around
Pringle's, or Joe Henderson's, or the hotel, instead of up here.
They've been up to all sorts of mischief."

"If they don't behave reasonably they'll lose the reading-room.  Of
course that will be understood," said Janice.

"You can't trust some of 'em," growled the druggist.  "Never!"

"We'll make those who want the reading-room make the mischievous ones
behave," laughed Janice.

"Well," agreed the druggist, "we'll try it.  Three dollars a month for
three months; then six dollars.  I can afford no more."

"So much for so much!" whispered Janice, when she came away from the
store.  "At least, it's a beginning."

But it was a very small beginning, as she soon began to realize.  She
had no money to give toward the project herself, and it was very hard
to beg from some people, even for a good cause.

There was needed at least one long table and two small ones, as well as
some sort of a desk for whoever had charge of the room; and shelves for
the books, and lamps, and a stove, and chairs, beside curtains at the
windows.  These simple furnishings would do to begin with.  But how to
get any, of all, of these was the problem.

Janice went to several people able to help in the project, before she
said anything more to Marty.  Some of these people encouraged her; some
shook their heads pessimistically over the idea.

She wished Elder Concannon to agree to pay the rent of the room for the
first three months.  It would be but nine dollars, and the old
gentleman could easily do it.  Since closing his pastorate of the Union
Church, years before, Mr. Concannon had become (for Poketown) a rich
man.  He had invested a small legacy received about that time in
abandoned marble quarries and sugar-maple orchards.  Both quarries and
orchards had taken on a new lease of life, and had enriched the shrewd
old minister.

But Elder Concannon let go of a dollar no more easily now than when he
had been dependent upon a four-hundred-dollar salary and a donation
party twice a year.

It was not altogether parsimony that made the old gentleman "hem and
haw" over Janice Day's proposal.  Naturally, an innovation of any kind
would have made him shy, but especially one calculated to yield any
pleasure to the boys of Poketown.

"I don't dispute but you may mean all right, Miss Day," he said,
shaking his bristling head at her.  "But there's no good in those young
scamps--no good at all.  You would waste your time trying to benefit
them.  They would turn your reading-room into a bear garden."

"You do not _know_ that, sir," said Janice, boldly.  "Let us try them."

"You are very young, Miss Day," said the Elder, stiffly.  "You should
yield more easily to the opinions of your elders."

"Why?" demanded the girl, quickly, but smiling.  "We young ones have
got to learn through our own experiences, haven't we?  When _you_ were
young, sir, you had to learn at first hand--isn't that so?  You would
not accept the opinions of the older men as infallible.  Now, did you,
sir?"

The Elder was a bit staggered; but he was honest.

"Ahem!" he said.  "For that very reason I desire to have you accept my
advice, young lady.  It will save you much trouble and heartache.
These boys need a stronger hand than yours----"

"Oh, my goodness!" gasped Janice.  "_I_ wouldn't undertake to have
anything to do with governing them--no, indeed!  I thought of speaking
to Mr. Haley--if I could interest him in the project--and get him to
keep an eye on the reading-room at night.  But the boys will have to
understand that they can only have the benefits of the place as long as
they are on their good behavior."

"Ahem!" coughed the Elder again.  "Mr. Haley is a very bright young
man--an especially good Latin scholar.  But I fancy he finds the boys
quite enough to handle during the daytime, without having the care of
them at night.  And--to be frank--I do not approve of the idea at all."

"Then--then you positively will not help us?" asked Janice,
disappointedly.

As a luxury-loving courtesan and steals for the love of luxury and love
of the strange and frightening, and that of the singular whim was buried
in a glass coffin at the Palace, dressed as a fakir, like that of Papus
long knob. The trouble is that life is not as comfortable as
unlinked in the brochures.

Life galante, perfumes, jewelry, elegant and aphrodisiacs poisons of
_bacarrat_, music and frivolous jingle of golden glittering Louis, has
this bitter contrast of the cell and the inmate's buriel. Shackle
dissipates absurd dream of morphine.

This appears deranged and picturesque confess that I am friendly and
happy to see that again in the corner coffee artists. But the man
is _Fantomas_ cloud, the bird man, who does not return to settle in one
place. I am not surprised to receive a letter from him telling
me that it has become Tibet or wizard who is leading a flamenco
dance academy in the red skins.

Anything that is arbitrary and fanciful. Take a soul in the wind and
crazy adventures of this wonderful picturesque sick. _Sindulfo,
Archaeologist and hunter alimañas_ came to see me Mr Sindulfo Arc,
archaeologist and hunter giraffes.

Understand it as a troubled character. I met this summer in a jamboree
on the bulb, is an archaeologist because Sindulfo Flemish. I want to
call the attention of the Academies on the skull of Atahualpa, the Inca
infeliz Sindulfo that discovered and authenticated proof in a volume
of five hundred pages. What I think is trying to sell at good price
illustrates the skeleton, and this seems to me invaluable acquisition
for the collection of the Archaeological Museum. An important
finding happiness would any erudite Corporation.

Sindulfo is a wise and courageous hunter of giraffes, and even if it
seems strange, is sweetly enamoradizo. Like all extraordinary
men, the world go by in a cloud men and he seemed to see angels in every
household and amateur lady Andariego the acrid scent of man. - My
dear Isabel, you are the woman I dreamed to form ... As you can
see a home, Doncel Sindulfo is a romantic, worthy of being sung by
Walter Scott.

And it is melancholy to say these words when you already have inflamed
many threads white beards prophetic. This strange man has traveled the
world to foot and has the most disconcerting. - I've eaten meat indus
Guarany; is very sweet ... Was lost in the woods of central Chaco.
Again, the Indians condemned me to death and saved me from the back
of a jaguar. It came to a tribe of Indians Pirie, I believe a supernatural
being. They party in my honor and I got a couple for my maiden holgorio;
called Atarbelia, it brunette, well educated.

Then burned alive for not having offspring of white. It is a habit.
Sindulfo I do not know if telling the truth or if traveling saga.

I have reason to believe that imagination is the predominant power.
One day I thought a walk in the Moncloa we ended snuff.

It was autumn. Sindulfo grabbed a handful of dried leaves of poplar,
and put the squeeze on his pipe.

After leaving his gaze wander to the remoteness of El Pardo, no
doubt longing for the virgin forests of Arauco.

Suddenly she stopped and exclaimed: - Truly, the best snuff for
snuff is the Turkish pipe. It has a delicate aroma. - Sindulfo,
by God, which are sheets of poplar!

Can not remember that we got near the big pipe - you are dreaming, my
friend. This is smoke that Turkish snuff. I bought ten kilos in
Constantinople two months ago. Indeed, that night seemed to mirror
the Bosphorus. Rails on the moon surface and the distance ... Their
eyes bore environment and went in pursuit of that ottoman remember
he had just created ...

I respect his self-absorption and thought that this was fantasy
Sindulfo happy.

Presents certificates from sites where it has passed.

It really has traveled the world, but has traveled without knowing
what was happening before their eyes, as if it sunk in, looking
inward, inventing landscapes, people and events, without taking the
trouble to look around him so.

The same was not moved from the bed for ten years. - Again, in Africa, I
found a hunter who wore a camel on its magnificent Leon died. - I
tell you more - it deals with a smile --.

It was great Tartarin Tarascon. - We were very good friends. Together
they hunt giraffes, alligators ...

And that some night ... figúrese - _in the midst of the Sahara desert
interrupted ..._-- -.

Naturally, my friend Sindulfo. You're a big man. I require that you
purchase your skull Academies of Atahualpa and the rooms we spend on
the bulb, with those two chulonas modistillas you would look like
two priestesses of Vesta.

Because, as said earlier Sindulfo like the GACHON deliquios dance.
I have seen a marked _schotis_, which is compatible with archeology
and Atahualpa, while singing with a voice that seemed cavernous
Inca's own late, this flébil chorus: With my heart on the doll, so
sweet to me this time drunk love.

Now I'm going to answer a question that is on the minds of readers.

Yes, sir, there Sindulfo friend, and I will not say that it is flesh
and blood, because it seems more of a cloud.

Going to see me every day for coffee, and I hope that will soon be
academic history.

Do not forget to have discovered the skull of Atahualpa. Clamaría God
will sink and the areas where the Corporation learned it aside. Sindulfo
very well be sitting in the middle of exclaiming: - Academic Gentlemen:
You have to know that the game of caroms, between the ancient
Persian poem _The evil ...

Evil poeta_ poet writes in a cafe solo. I was a bad poet professed
abhorrence Corsican. I was stoned the rubble with their ears, their
topics, with its rhetoric.

Man is insensible to aesthetic emotion, which makes his poems as a
laborer, a mason by rubble, a stonemason, for its monotonous rhythm,
it seems that shaking cobblestones in a bucket instead of stone
gemstones fine rhymes.

The bad poet is a satanic pride. It is those who make mockery of Reuben
and Bellaca up mixtificaciones puerile romance of the old masters -
and humor becquerianas easy without the deep spirit campoamoriano
-. The bad poet writes a lot.

His verses are an infection of all the newspapers. His is a ramplonería
Asphyxiating pump. I will confess that degollaría gladly bad poet.
It is a subject over forties.

He has a bald dirty pitan eyes, green teeth nicotine, and a mustache
and rubianco shot.

Take an abominable fungus, representing its vulgarity interior. Parlar
of Filomela often complicated when the simple real nightingales in
their octaves undoubtedly naive to sidetrack the reader. _The Pensile
ameno_ and _rosicler of aurora_ are so familiar as your terno of
fluff. Ama _con craving crazy, lost in calma_ has to rhyme with
soul, and all the lips cause grievances, without knowing why.

The _beso_ seems a _exceso_ - and its years, it is natural - and
the moonlight always surprised in a pond, something very detrimental
to their rheumatic aches.

The bad poet is entertaining in its place another one on endecasílabos
like bricks in a building.

Then delivers the pages to a blonde girl who looked to take them to
a newspaper.

The stepson of Apollo talk with me later literature. I _Al Sol_ read
an ode, a sonnet a ingrata_ _A _A and an elegy to the death of his love
of the virgin primeros_. It's already so many years! This poet has
a happy memory. The man is right or not by chance.

Both artifice, so poetic forgery, areas of rain, I get very nervous.
Perhaps I had come to attack if you do not come back to the blonde
girl who took the verses to the newspaper and returned with five hard
drives.

The bad poet kiss on the forehead with heartfelt tenderness. - This is
the greatest - and exclaims -. At home are five other lions. You can
calculate the verses that you have to do! The blonde girl, a slender
teenager of fourteen years, his eyes are Zarco and excited. - Now I
am going to buy some shoes, you know? The break away, because
these creatures ... Without wanting to, I look at the feet of girls,
beautiful feet and small china princess, wrapped in some boots
rotitas very, very rotitas ...

This does not feel pain or the bad poet rhyme. I think the lions _cinco
left in casa_, this exciting and evil poet poem almost made me
mourn. And I am away, lovingly embraced the girl, whose eyes
Zarco burns in a flame of hope, and at this time, bad poet seems
bigger than Shakespeare, and Hugo ... _The shadow of King galán_ by the
bridge of El Pardo was that gallant king legend whose children
sing in the gardens.

He was pale and sore, I had the dark circles of purple irises and Paje
Gerineldo. Madrid was the king, the king chispero, that of the bullfight
and pins Manolas: 'Where are you going Alfonso XII? Where you going,
you sad?

"Sang the children's choir in the blue romance of the evening,
while the King trouserpress, Muriente pale as a lily Bourbon, which
withers was lost through flooding, followed by silent courtiers.
The people loved the Spanish prince sharply.

He cheered on the Bulls at folk festivals, evenings in the Prado. He
found in their joys and their grief, which is closely linked to
his life, the pace jovial, generous, wonderful life of Spanish, at
the time. Now that sounded distant romance of adolescence, at times
tedious, fraught with omens, which passed in the palace of El Pardo.

Fall sobbing in the green mountain and gaunt, weeping in the parks
verlenianos violins and Desnarigada around the palace. The dogs saw
wandering, howling to the moon.

And when they sounded the hour, that hour of the mysterious
picture of eternity Another illustrious dying, General Serrano, announced
in Madrid, who surrounded his bed: - The king has just died in
the palace of El Pardo And at that point it ceased to be Alfonso, the
mansion in gray cover with slate, while floating in the air the
last verse romance naive child, "the Four Dukes carried through the
streets of Madrid."

Who was the arranger of this old song that I heard sounds in the last act
after _Reinar of morir_, mourning the death of Doña Inés de Castro?

The love of the people has made the king and the princess trouserpress
Palace of San Telmo the key protagonists of this timeless poem,
which is like a prayer naive popular soul!

"Gallant King and sore, your dead juvenile love how sad!

cropping romance crying child! Princesina legendary soul you
popular, like a prayer, an offering of its naive to sing. "This was
a poet of glossing now the king of teen romance trouserpress, King
chispero, the king of Madrid, the pins as _Pepe Handjob-Hillo_, who
knew of Momo's crazy farce, Chaplains in the pure, and left one
hundred tales of his brief reign, and died very young, as a lis
heraldic dull, burnt in a mad fever to live a wonderful and exciting
life.

¡bridge of El Pardo, where the prince spent Galana legends! In the
evenings Vernal, golden and fragrant, I mentioned the shadow of the
trouser king for these gardens and these noble Rangers thickets. I feel
a deep sympathy for the prince and by this time exalted, generous,
colorful, elegant and decadent in a skeptical . Then, as now, had a
great passion for the idols of bullfighting, the national art par
excellence.

Frascuelo and lizards collected in the last glimmer joyante cloak of
the great sun of the race and woke up only to beat the national
consciousness.

And had not yet emerged on the horizon spectrum tragic, grotesque and
infamous colonial disaster.

Blessed is the princes who live in the hearts of his people and whose
memory is in romances that girls choirs sing in the gardens and squares
! Worship that is worth more poetic and sentimental all the
atrocities of war glorious, exalted by history. ¡Reyes iron crown with
shining laurels which are stained with blood, your children do not
sing ballads realms of your love, in the flowery avenues when the
spring wears girlfriend acacias!

_The fracasados_ square of squares is one of those melancholy solo of
a neighborhood, surrounded by stone benches, which are a provincial,
and which fall from time to time the slow strokes of the dawn, with
a mystical and dreamlike clamoreo.

Florido it has a balcony that gives a pleasant sensation white hand of
woman, and also some sad or seedling stunting and an old fountain that
pours, background thread, the sweetness of its monotony. In the hour
of twilight sedative takes a look harsh and barren Castilian city
of archaic, that evokes the redoubling of the heroic or the sandal
Romancero Teresa of Avila, the heavenly doctor, and vague in its
great peace of an ancient perfume forgotten sentences and vintage
charms.

In this paragraph and romantic place come every afternoon
melancholy failure of all the ideals, Aureas apotheosis of dreamers who
have seen the collapse of his legend lives on bahorrina of vulgarity,
in the vacuum of an overwhelming daily life. We hear every day, galley
of the same chain, a dark disciples same teacher, the immortal
pain, and among them has become a soft consoling sympathy.

There is an old military invalidated the first time you entered into
campaign, maybe it was a Homeric view of life, dreaming of the laurel
of the hero, with the booty and adventure, and his dream failed in
the initial moment of the cruelty a stray bullet that denied the
triumph of a beautiful death and sentenced him to a drag horrida
and grotesque wooden leg, which is dry and monorrítmico hitting an
ironic chorus to her ideal of Galana Bizarri truncated.

After you have seen their glided days, without ambition, drab and cold
in the soul, the deep bitterness of resignations. If the bullet at least
I would have searched the heart And his eyes turned to the young
years, performances of flowery imagined, in which sounded the
trumpets of glory.

Comes after a grim and disheveled man, played with a frayed veneering
that covers his bald saint, wide and bright. It is an unfortunate
inventor.

I had worked day and night in his workshop, to relinquishing holgorios
of mocedad, the gift of the female and all of the senses sweetness.
He used his small fortune in work and study, until a new machine.

Then began the pilgrimage to the offices in search of the fabled
patent, which was his future wealth, and after a bitter wanderings are
mofaron him, of his invention and his bald, and ushers him out there
with you stream and injustices.

At the café, on the street, alone with his fementidas walls mechinal
solo worst with this exaltation of crazy inventors. And they heard
him unmoved, is there to protect him or chimerical laughed in his beard.
- I see you made fun of what they had cost me my fortune, my brain
and my youth And closes ojillos gray and nearly blind perhaps to
staunch a tear.

Then an arrogant woman mourning, with an air of great lady who greets
with some noble grace. It has the beauty and strong haze of
maturity, the candle barely Luengo mantle his face something withers,
where the black eyes burn with a flame of madness and eternal beauty.
At first everyone thought the widow, was not a virgin but its decrepit
consuming heart and her virginity on the altar of an ideal remote
and impossible, as these lights are extinguished that devotion to
a sadly neglected niche.

There in the green years of his adolescence Galana, loved with
bravery and determination of heart to a beautiful romantic and daring
adventurer, who went into the fertile lands of the sun, Nauta of the
unexpected, conqueror of the accident. He said it again and She
waited.

Questioned the horizon every morning, he dropped every hour of every
day, all the despair of every year, and loved again no more. But she
will wait for you forever, till death touch his eyes with his
fingers of fog.

And crossed their hands over the pale nun its liturgical satin dress.
Handsfree transparent and pure that seem made for watermark ex votos
of saints and coats rain ; fanatical eyes on those long vigils,
orphan of kisses, have flourished in violet Sedeño dark circles, like
two flowers fever and madness, noble and ecstatic soul, where love
is a rose immortal caste.

And when a breath of wind drag any dead leaf, a widow is still the ideal
hard, perhaps realizing that the approach of autumn has a melancholic
soul for some symbolic value. But then, among other things that hide
the secret of his failure, the cover up ridiculous and sad an old
farandulero.

Still remember crying with joy at the good days that he was Don
Juan and Manfredo, Sullivan and Don Alvaro. These heroes gave it the
prestige of power and imagination behind the scenes tinsel and put
a little golden key in his life miserable , whose doors used to be
called the spectral Hunger with his fist. Then the spirit and the years
have shot the chest irguió proud that under the benchmark steel Ruy Diaz
hit claudicante demand curve in the two pesetas in such deplorable
classroom mischief and pain are always open the pavement of the
court.

And get others desarrapados sad and infirm of body and ulcerated heart,
inventors ignored soldiers without fortune, old prostitutes, translators,
unpublished poets for life, all the souls in shadows, and profiles of
failed contorcidos art, love and life.

And like the lonely square, which has an aroma of old tears absorbed
from dried flowers and pains resigned, with a sad and twisted tree and
a balcony with flowers, and where in the twilight hours of sweet
sounds perhaps a piano played by a beautiful unknown woman, slow
and melancholic melodies, which ruined the souls of the losers might
get the letter of your inner pain.

_Las paellas a revolucionario_ ALL Barriobero know that is a terrible
revolution, a formidable undermined the social order. For a long time,
his quixotic melancholy silhouette has been a nightmare golillas
and ministriles. What was a rally of cigarette? Barriobero to jail.
What a Orondo chieftain stood dispépsico? Metamos to Barriobero
in Chiron. The tranquility of the respectable vulgo claiming that the
dangerous anarchist in the room was always sullen in the Moncloa Palace.
And sometimes it was an admirable combination for economic Barriobero
... because in the street, had decided to move the food to Saturn.

This man is scary one of the most picturesque of this era. His nose, by
way of interrogation, quevedesco well worth a sonnet or one of the
eulogies that rimara Rostand in _Cyrano_, their hair, romantic and
subversive as Airon fleet in popular revolts, and is the proud symbol
of his whole life . In times of affluence, Barriobero decorates his
person with a translucent delight of 'dandy'.

Oh, how wonderful embroidered vests, worthy descendants of the old time
suck pompous, courtly and gallant! Lifejackets deserve an apologist for
themselves as elegant and erudite as they were Barbey and Jorge Brummel.
But most of these glorious garments, rameados of gold, blue, pink,
over their pipes and their hair on his speeches and his books, I
prefer the Valencian paella Barriobero.

Because this is a terrible revolutionary supreme artist in their paellas,
my lords. I remember this succulent to a handful of episodes a youth,
my stomach feels a sentimental wave to evoke those rices, which are
like a parenthesis amid the charm of those days needy in the most
bizarre and crazy mocerío flowering in roses joy and unpredictability.

In the evening, led to Jorre Barriobero or Calleja; shipped volume
- 'Catholic' maimed - in a couple of sessions, and the PTA that this
work caused him to black, we were going to eat rice , spiced by
his hands long, cold and polished by Cardinal galante, a ventorro
of Cuatro Caminos.

And in those days was unfortunate subordination to the regime of the
average suicide toast, then the greaves Figon the square Progress
of verses recited loudly in the streets alone, of absurd projects
dictated by Hunger, was tightrope walking in our delirious caletres
visionary, was when the editor came Pueyo Barriobero to have to
write a novel. - Let me you novel of a returnee, who is dying of
starvation in this filthy country, dominated by the Jesuits.

Look at these four hard drives. - But it will be a frog ... I do not
feel this issue ... - Well, if you are going enhoramala the store,
I have a lot tajo.

With this work the fair can not be! ...

And cavernous voice of 'Nietzsche', the brother of Pueyo - a sort
of Harpagón - which interrupts with 'ritornello' of "Miserere." -
Eventually by arruinarte, Gregory!

¡Arruinarte eventually!

Barriobero accepts the task and the four drives, and wrote the novel,
interesting and 'documentary', as he says.

But, ah!

, The bill of his novels will be very noticeable, but not as much
as that of those rice, browned and smoky, fiercely devoured under
the cheerful sky madrileño in kind cordiality, good morning to those
who return from the bottom of the last perfume of joy and youth.

Perdonadme, respectable gentlemen, leaking sentimental and
picturesque. Al tell these minutiae, I enjoy reliving the magic of
the old days, and I think also that no serious man will cease to
recognize the important of these issues cookery.

Several of the Mexican
captives of Raphele had managed to pay their way out of the villain's
clutches; but both Americans refused to apply to their friends for
ransom.  Indeed, they did not trust to Raphele's protestations,
believing that if any money at all for their release was forthcoming,
it would only whet the villain's cupidity and cause Raphele to make
larger demands.

Raphele feared now to remain longer in that part of Chihuahua.  His
unlawful acts had called down upon his head the serious strictures of
the Constitutionalist leaders.  They were about to abolish his command.

In his rage and bloodthirstiness he had declared his intention of
either destroying his remaining prisoners, or sending them to their
homes crippled.  But the two Americans he treated differently.  With
fiendish delight in seeing those two brave men suffer, he had commanded
them to cast lots to see which should be escorted beyond the lines,
while the other was marched to the edge of an open grave, there to find
a sure and sudden end under the rain of bullets from a "firing squad."

John Makepiece had drawn the long straw.  There was no help for it.  He
rode away on a sorry nag that was given him, and from a distant height
saw the other American marched out to the place of burial, and even
waited to see the puff of smoke from the guns as the soldiers fired at
the doomed man.

The details were horrible.  The effect upon Janice was a most unhappy
one.  For more than an hour she sat there before her bureau in the cold
room, her gaze fastened upon the story in the newspaper.

Then the family came up to bed.  Aunt 'Mira saw the light under the
girl's door.

"Janice!  Janice!" she whispered.  "Whatever is the matter with you?"

Aunt 'Mira had been crying and her voice was still husky.  When she
pushed open the door a little way and saw the girl, she gasped out in
alarm.

"Oh, my dear!" sobbed Aunt Mira.  "_Do you know?_"

Janice could not then speak.  She pointed to the paper, and when Aunt
'Mira folded her in her arms, the girl burst into tears--tears that
relieved her overcharged heart.

"You run down an' open up the drafts of that stove again, Jason,"
exclaimed the fleshy lady, for once taking command of affairs.  "This
child's got a chill.  She's got ter have suthin' hot, or she'll be sick
on our hands--poor dear!  She's been a-settin' here readin' all that
stuff Marty told us was in the paper--I do believe.  Ain't that so,
child?"

Janice, sobbing on her broad bosom, intimated that it was a fact.

"That boy ain't no good.  He didn't burn up the paper at all.  She got
holt on it," declared Uncle Jason, quite angry.

"Oh, it wasn't--wasn't Marty's fault," sobbed Janice.  "And I had to
know!  I had to know!"

They got her downstairs, and Mrs. Day sent "the men folks" to bed.  She
insisted upon putting Janice's feet into a mustard-water bath, and made
her swallow fully a pint of steaming hot "composition."  Two hours
later Janice was able to go to bed, and, because she hoped against
hope, and was determined not to believe the story until it was
thoroughly confirmed, she fell immediately into a dreamless sleep.

When she awoke on Christmas morning, it was with a full and clear
knowledge of what had happened, and a pang of desolation and grief such
as had swept over her the night before.  But she set herself to hope as
long as she could, and to suppress any untoward exhibition of her
sorrow and pain, while she made every effort to find out the truth
about her father.

The family was very gentle with the heartsick girl.  Even Marty showed
by his manner that he sympathized with her.  And she could not forget
that he had tried his very best to keep the knowledge of the awful
crime from her.

Janice brought down with her to the breakfast table the little presents
which she had prepared for her uncle, and aunt, and cousin.  There were
no boisterous "Merry Christmases" in the old Day house that morning;
even Uncle Jason wiped his eyes after saying grace at the breakfast
table.

After all, Janice was the most self-controlled of the four.  She said,
midway of the meal:

"I cannot believe all of that dreadful story in the paper.  I want to
know more of the particulars."

"Oh, hush! hush!" begged her aunt.  "I read it.  It's too horrible!  I
wouldn't want to know any more, child."

"But I _must_ know more--if there's more to be known.  I believe I can
telegraph to Cida.  At least, Mr. Buchanan at Juarez may know something
more about this man's story.  I wish there was either telegraph, or
telephone, in Poketown."

"Gee, Janice!" exclaimed Marty.  "Nobody could git over to Middletown
to-day.  Not even Walky Dexter.  The wind blowed great guns last night,
and the roads are full of drifts."

"But it doesn't look so from my window," said his cousin.

"Pshaw! all you can see is the lake.  Snow blowed right across the ice,
an' never scarcely touched it.  But there's heaps and heaps in the
road.  Say! we got ter dig out Hillside Avenue--ain't we, Dad?"

"A lot of snow fell in the night--that's a fact," admitted Uncle Jason.

"But I see somebody coming up the street now," cried Janice, jumping up
eagerly from the table.

It was Walky Dexter, plowing his way through the drifts in hip boots.

"This is sure a white Christmas!" he bawled from the gate.  "I got
suthin' for you, Janice.  Hi tunket! can't git through this here gate,
so I'll climb over it.  Wal, Janice, a Merry Christmas to ye!" he
added, as he stumped up upon the porch, and handed her a little package
from Miss 'Rill.

"I am afraid not a very merry one, Walky," said the girl, shaking his
mittened hand.  "Come inside by the fire.  Uncle Jason, where is that
paper?  I want Mr. Dexter to read it."

"Oh, dear, me!" murmured Walky, when he saw the heading of the Mexican
telegraph despatch.  Then, with his fur cap cocked over one ear, and
his boots steaming on the stove hearth, he read the story through.
"Oh, dear, me!" he said again.

"I want you to try to get me to Middletown, Walky," Janice said, with a
little catch in her voice.  "Right away."

"Mercy on us, child! a day like this?" gasped her aunt.

"Why, the storm's over," said Janice, firmly.  "And I must send some
telegrams and get answers.  Oh, I must!  I must!"

"Hoity-toity, Miss Janice!" broke in Walky.  "'Must' is a hard driver,
I know.  But I tell ye, we couldn't win through the drif's.  Why, I
been as slow as a toad funeral gettin' up here from High Street.  The
ox teams won't be out breakin' the paths before noon, and they won't
get out of town before to-morrer, that's sure, Miss."

"Oh, my dear!" cried her aunt, again.  "You mustn't think of doing such
a thing.  Wait."

"I _can't_ wait," declared Janice, with pallid face and trembling lip,
but her hazel eyes dry and hard.  "I tell you I must know _more_."

"I can't take ye to Middletown, Janice.  Not till the roads is broke,"
Walky said, firmly, shaking his head.

"Hi! here comes somebody else up the road," shouted Marty, from outside.

Janice ran, hoping to see a team.  It was only a single figure
struggling through the snow.

"By jinks!" exclaimed Marty.  "It's the teacher."

"It is Mr. Haley," murmured Janice.

The young collegian, well dressed for winter weather, waved his hand
when he saw them, and struggled on.  He carried a long parcel and when
he went through the more than waist-high drifts he held this high above
his head.

"Hi, there!" yelled Marty, waving his mittened hands.  "Ain't you lost
over here, Mr. Haley?"

"I see somebody has been before me," laughed Nelson Haley, following
Walky Dexter's tracks over the fence and up to the cleared porch.  "How
do you do, Miss Janice?  A very happy Christmas to you!"

"Thank you for your good wish, Mr. Haley," she replied, soberly.  "But
it is not going to be a very glad Christmas for me, I fear.  Oh! is it
for _me_?" for he had thrust the long pasteboard box into her arms.

"If you will accept them, Miss Janice," returned the young man, with a
bow.

"Open it, Janice!" exclaimed Marty.  "Let's see."

"I--I----"

"Lemme do it for you," cried Marty, the curious.  He broke the string,
yanked off the paper, and Janice herself lifted the cover.  A great
breath of spicy odor rushed out at her from the box.

"Oh!  Mr. Haley!  Cut flowers!  _Hothouse flowers_!  Wherever did you
get them?" cried Janice, drawing aside the tissue paper and burying her
face in the fragrant, dewy blossoms.

"Aw--flowers!  Huh!" grunted Marty, in disappointment.

"I am glad you like them so," said Nelson Haley.  "Marty, I didn't
bring them to _you_.  But here is something that will please you
better, I know," and he put into the boy's hand a combination
pocketknife that would have delighted any out-of-door youth.  "Only you
must give me a penny for it.  I don't believe in giving sharp-edged
presents to friends.  It cuts friendship, they say," and the collegian
laughed.

"Golly! that's a dandy!" acknowledged Marty.  "Here's your cent.
Thanks!  See what Mr. Haley gimme, Maw!" and he rushed into the house
to display his treasure.

Haley and Janice were left alone in a sheltered corner of the porch.

"Oh, Mr. Haley," the girl repeated.  "How lovely they are!  And how
kind of you to get them for me!  How did you ever secure such fresh cut
flowers 'way up here?  Nobody has a hothouse in Poketown."

"They come from Colonel Van Dyne's place at the Landing."

"'Way down there!" exclaimed Janice, in wonder.  "Why, it's farther
than Middletown.  That's where I took the boat to get here?"

"I guess so, Miss Janice."

"But--but the boats aren't running," she cried, in amazement.  "And
these flowers are so fresh."

"_My_ boat is running," and Haley laughed.  "I brought them up for you
yesterday afternoon.  Got in just before it began to snow hard."

"Mr. Haley!  The lake is frozen solidly!"

"Sure," he laughed.  "But my boat sails on the ice.  Didn't you hear
that I had built the _Fly-by-Night_?  It's an ice boat--and it's a
dandy!  I hope to take you out in it----"

"An ice boat?" cried Janice.  "Oh! you can--you shall!  You can take me
to the Landing.  There is a telegraph office there, isn't there?"

"Why--why----Yes!  At the railroad station," the young man admitted,
rather amazed.

Janice stepped up to him, with the pasteboard box of flowers in her
arms, and her eyes shining in expectation.

"Oh, Mr. Haley!  You _must_ take me down there.  Won't you?"

Marty ran out again, and heard what she said.  "Where you goin'?" he
demanded.  "Mr. Haley can't ice boat you to Middletown."

"To the Landing," begged Janice.

"By jinks! so he can," shouted the boy.  "Lemme go, too, Mr. Haley.
You'll want somebody to 'tend sheet on the _Fly-by-Night_."

"But I do not understand?" queried the teacher, staring from one to the
other of the excited pair.

"You--you tell him, Marty!" said Janice, turning toward the door.  "I
must put these beautiful flowers in water.  Come in, Mr. Haley, and get
warm."

But the teacher remained out there on the wind-swept porch while he
listened to what Marty had to tell.  The girl's trouble struck home to
the generous-hearted young man.  He was moved deeply for
her--especially upon a day like this when, in the nature of things, all
persons should be joyous and glad.

"I will take you to the Landing, if the breeze holds fair," he declared
and he pooh-poohed Mrs. Day's fears that there was any danger in
sailing the ice boat.  He had come up from the Landing himself the
night before in an hour and a half.

"What a dreadful, dreadful way to spend Christmas Day!" moaned Aunt
'Mira, as she helped Janice to dress.  "Something's likely to happen to
that ice boat.  I've seen 'em racing on the lake.  Them folks jest take
their lives in their han's--that's right!"

"I'll make the boys take care," Janice promised.

Aunt 'Mira saw them go with fear and trembling, and immediately
ensconced herself in the window of Janice's room, with a shawl around
her shoulders, to watch the flight of the ice boat after it got under
way down at the dock.

Janice, and the teacher and Marty had fairly to wade to the shore of
the lake.  The drifts were very deep on land; but, as Marty said, the
wind had swept the ice almost bare.  Here and there a ridge of snow had
formed upon the glistening surface; but Mr. Haley made light of these
obstructions.

"The _Fly-by-Night_ will just go humming through those, Miss Janice.
Don't you fear," he said.

There were few people abroad in High Street, for it was not yet
mid-forenoon.  Most who were out were busily engaged shoveling paths.
The three young folks got down to the dock, and Haley and Marty turned
up the heavy body of the ice boat and swept the snow off.

There was a good deal of a drift of snow right along the edge of the
lake; but they pushed the ice boat out beyond this windrow, with
Janice's help, and then stepped the mast and bent on the heavy sail.
It was a cross-T boat, with a short nose and a single sail.  The
steersman had a box in the rear and in this there was room for Janice
to ride, too.  The sheet-tender likewise ballasted the boat by lying
out on one or the other end of the crosspiece.

There was a keen wind, not exactly fair for the trip down the lake; yet
their sheet filled nicely on the longer tack, and the _Fly-by-Night_
swept out from the Poketown dock at a very satisfactory speed.

"We'll hit the Landing in two hours, at the longest, Miss Janice,"
declared Nelson Haley.  "Keep your head down.  This wind cuts like
needles.  Too bad you haven't a mask of some kind."

He was wearing his motorcycle goggles, while Marty had one of those
plush caps, that pull down all around one's face so that nothing but
the eyes peer out, and was doing very well.

As the ice yacht gathered speed, Janice found that she could not face
the wind.  Nor could she look ahead, for the sun was shining boldly
now, and the glare of it on the ice was all but blinding.

The timbers of the boat groaned and shook.  The runners whined over the
ice with an ever-increasing note.  The valet. It is in the city yesterday
has come. The Prince. The worse - and better, like 'I say. So runners
need to be less to maintain. (The valet's up.)

My Countess expensive! (Bitter, by the letter in your hands) So good to
read! (and put it back away.) - Well, I've believed it to love!
What we do not believe everything? Maybe, I have really loved it. But
- I did! The valet (which again hereintritt).

The painter Conti will have the grace, The Prince. Conti? Probably
right, let him come. - This is my other thoughts in his head bring.

(Stand up.) Second appearance Conti. The Prince. The Prince. Good morning,
Conti. How do you live? What makes art? Conti. Prince, the artist
goes for bread. The Prince. This must not, which they should not -
in my small areas certainly not .-- But the artist must also want
to work.

Conti. Work?

That is his desire.

Just too much work may need him to bring the name of artists. The Prince.
I do not mean much, but, a little, but with diligence .-- You do not
come empty, Conti? Conti. I bring the portrait, which you have told
me, gracious Lord.

And bring another one, which you ordered me not: but because it deserves
to be seen - the prince. That is - but I can hardly remember - Conti.
The Countess Orsina. The Prince. True - The job is just a bit of long
ago. Conti. Our lovely ladies are not all days to paint. The
Countess has been three months, just may decide to sit. The Prince.
Where are the pieces?

Conti. In the anteroom, I get it. The prince third appearance. Your
picture! - Mag - your image, it is not, by itself .-- And maybe I
find the picture again, what I see in the person no longer saw .-- I
will not be found .-- The arduous painter!

I believe that she has bribed him .-- wär 'it too! If you have a different
picture, with the other colors, another reason gemalet is - in my
heart again to make room for: - Verily, I think I would be 'satisfied
with it.

When I loved it, I was always so easy, so froehlich so omitted .-- Now
am I of all the contrary .-- But no, no, no! Behaeglicher or not
behaeglicher: I'm the better. The Prince Fourth appearance. Conti with
the paintings, which he used a chair against a lehnet. Conti (by the
other zurechtstellet). I ask, Prince, that the barriers of our art to
consider. Many of the suits worn by beauty lies entirely outside
the borders of that. - Are you so! - The Prince (after a brief look
at). Excellence, Conti - quite superb!

- This is your art, your brush .-- But flattered, Conti; quite
infinitely flattered!

Conti. The original seemed to think this not to be. Also, it is not
flattered, when the art must be flatter.
Like a great bird--or a huge batfish leaping
from the sea--the ice boat shot out on a long curve from the summit of
the hard-packed snowdrift.

The shock of its return to the ice was terrific.  Janice felt sure the
boat must be racked to bits.

But the _Fly-by-Night_ was strongly built.  With the momentum secured
by its leap from the drift, it skated over the ice for a mile or more,
with scarcely a thimbleful of wind in its sail, yet traveling like a
fast express.

Then it answered the helm again, the wind filled the sail, and they
bore down upon the Landing on a direct tack.

"Gee!  Ain't it great?" cried Marty, as Nelson Haley signaled him to
drop the sail.  "Don't that beat any traveling you ever done, Janice?"

Janice faintly admitted that it did; but neither the boy nor Nelson
Haley realized what a trial the trip had been to the girl.  Janice was
too proud to show the fear she felt; but she could scarcely stand when
the _Fly-by-Night_ finally stopped with its nose to the shore, just
beyond the steamboat dock.

Popham Landing was scarcely larger than Poketown; only there were
canning factories here, and the terminus of the narrow-gauge railroad
on which Janice had finished her rail journey from Greensboro the
spring before.  So it was a livelier place than the village in which
the girl had been living for eight months.

Colonel Van Dyne, owner of one of the canning factories, had a fine
home on the heights overlooking the lake.  It was with the colonel's
gardener and superintendent that Nelson Haley had an acquaintance, and
through that acquaintanceship had obtained the cut flowers from the
colonel's greenhouse.

When the three had hurried up the half-cleared landing to the railroad
station, Janice fairly staggering between her two companions, the
office was closed and nobody was about the railroad premises.  It was a
holiday, and no more trains were expected at the Landing until night.

Janice all but broke down at this added bad turn of affairs.  To come
all this distance only to be balked!

"It's jest blamed _mean_!" sputtered Marty.  "Telegraph shops ain't got
no right to shut up--in the daytime, too."

"It's not a Western Union wire," explained Nelson.  "The railroad only
takes ordinary messages as a matter of convenience.  But wait!  That
door's open and there's a fire in the waiting-room, you see.  Just
because this card says the agent and operator won't be here till five
o'clock doesn't mean that he's gone out of town.  Besides, I'll see my
friend, Jim Watrous."

This was the gardener and general factotum at Colonel Van Dyne's.  The
Poketown school-teacher hurried away, and left Janice and Marty sitting
together in the railroad station.

"He'll find some way--don't you fear, Janice," said the boy, with much
more sympathy than he had ever shown before.  Janice squeezed his hand
and hid her own face.  She could not forget how Marty had tried the
evening before to hide the knowledge of her father's fate from her.
This was a much different Marty than the boy she had first met at the
old Day house on her arrival at Poketown.

In half an hour Nelson Haley was back with the operator and agent.  The
gardener at Colonel Van Dyne's knew the man personally.  The story in
the newspaper, and an explanation of who Janice was, did the rest.

"There isn't any better day than Christmas, I reckon," said the
telegraph operator, when he shook hands with the girl and she tried to
thank him in advance for the trouble he was taking on her behalf, "to
do a helpful deed.  And I want to help you, Miss Day, if I can.  Write
your messages and I will put them through as rapidly as possible.  I
shall have plenty of time to go home for dinner between the sending of
your telegrams, and the receiving of the answers.  Now, don't worry at
all about it."

"Oh, dear!" half sobbed the girl.  "Everybody is _so_ good to me."

"Not a bit more than you deserve, I am sure," laughed the operator.
"Now, Miss, if you are ready, I am."

Janice knew just what she wished to say.  If she had not written the
messages she was anxious to send, she had already formulated them in
her mind.  It was but a few minutes' work to write both--one to Mr.
Buchanan at Juarez, and the other addressed to the man, John Makepiece,
who claimed to have been a fellow-prisoner with Mr. Broxton Day.

When the messages were sent, all they could do was to wait.  Janice had
expected that she and Marty and Mr. Haley would have to camp in the
waiting-room of the station during the long interval, and the girl was
very sorry that, because of her, her friends would have to forego any
holiday dinner.

While Janice was engaged, Nelson Haley had been off on an excursion of
his own.  He came tramping back into the station just as the operator
closed his key and told Janice that there was nothing to do now but
wait.

"And I'm afraid it will be an awfully tedious time for you, Marty,"
said the girl.  "I'm sorry.  Aunt 'Mira was going to have _such_ a nice
dinner for you, too!"

"Huh!  I guess I won't starve," growled the boy.  "Mebbe we can find
some sandwiches somewhere--and a cup of coffee.  By jinks! flyin' down
the lake like we did, _did_ make me sharp-set."

"If you're hungry, then, Marty," broke in Nelson Haley, "we'll all go
to dinner.  It's just about ready by now, I reckon."

"Aw! don't fool a feller," said Marty, ruefully.

The school-teacher laughed at him.  "I'm not fooling," he said.  "I was
quite sure Miss Janice would be hungry enough to eat, too; so I found a
kind woman who is willing to share her dinner with us.  Come on!  She
and her daughter are all alone.  The storm has kept their friends from
coming to eat with them, so we're in luck."

The three had quite a delightful dinner at the Widow Maltby's.  Nelson
had told her and her daughter something about Janice's trouble, and the
good creatures did everything they could to make it agreeable for the
girl.

As for Marty, the "lay-out," as he expressed it, was all that heart
could desire--a boy's heart, at least!  There was turkey, with
dressing, and cranberries, and the usual vegetables, with pie and cake
galore, and a pocketful of nuts to top off with.

Sooner, perhaps for the last time in that condolence letter, he had
George to emigrate to Russia and want to talk about the outlook spread,
especially for the George branch in Petersburg existed.

The numbers were negligible compared to the extent that the business
now Georgs had. George, however, had had no desire, the friend of his
business successes to write, and he had subsequently done it now, it
really would have a strange appearance had.

So George was limited to just a friend about meaningless occurrences to
write how they is, if you have a quiet Sunday it, in remembrance of
the disordered pile up. He wanted nothing more than leave undisturbed
the notion that the friend from the hometown in the long interim,
well made and with what he had abgefunden.

So it George, that he had a friend Engagements indifferent a man with
an equally indifferent girl three times in a little too far apart letters
showed up then, however, the friend, quite in contrast to George's
intentions, for those interested in weirdness began. George wrote
to him but such things rather than that he had admitted that he
had even a month ago with a fire box, Miss Frieda, a girl of wealthy
family, is betrothed had.

Often he spoke with his bride on this special friend and the
correspondence relationship in which he stood to him. "He will not
come to our wedding," she said, "and I do have the right to all your
friends."

"I will not disturb him," George replied, "I quite understand, he would
probably come, at least I think so, but he would feel forced and affected,
perhaps envious of me, and certainly unhappy and unable to ever
eliminate dissatisfaction, drive back alone.

Solo - you know what that is? "" Yes, he can because of our marriage,
not to learn any other way? "" That I can, however, not prevent,
but it is his way of life is unlikely. "" If you have such friends
searched, George, did you ever not be engaged. "" Yes, this is both
our fault, but I wanted to not have otherwise.

"And if they then rapidly breathing under his kisses, nor submitted:"
Actually grieved I am yet, "he is really harmless, a friend to write
everything.

"So am I and so he helped me to accept," said he, "I can not give
me a cut man, perhaps for his friendship with him would be appropriate,
as I am."

And he actually told his friends in the long letter that he wrote
this Sunday morning, the engagement took place with the following
words: "The best news I have until the end-up.

I was with a lady betrothed Frieda fire box, a girl from a wealthy
family who are here long after you depart is located, you hardly know
allowed. There will still find opportunity to teach you more about
my bride tell you enough today that I am quite happy and
that is in our mutual relationship only insofar as something has
changed, as you now inside me instead of an ordinary friend, have
a happy friend wilt.

In addition, you'll get in my bride who can greet you warmly, and soon
you will write an honest friend, what a bachelor is not entirely without
significance. I know it keeps you from a variety of visits to us, would
not be my wedding just the right opportunity, once all the obstacles
on the pile?

But, as this may be, acting without any consideration and only after
your well-being of opinion.

"With this letter in his hand was Georg long, the face of the window to
back, sat at his desk.

A friend, who in passing by the alley from gegrüßt had, he had
hardly absent with a smile replied.

Finally he put the letter in his pocket and went out of his room through
a small corridor to the room of his father in which he has not
been months.

There was otherwise no coercion about it wrong with his father constantly
in the shop, the lunch they took while dining in a house, provided
the evening, while everyone fit, but then they sat mostly, if not
George, as is most often was done together with friends, or now his
bride visited, yet a little while, each with his newspaper, in the
common living room.

Georg amazed how dark the room of the Father himself in this morning
was sunny. Threw such a shadow that is the high wall, which is beyond
the Court's narrow raised.

The father sat at the window in a corner, with a different memory of the
Blessed Mother was embellished, and read the newspaper, the side
he held before the eyes, making him any offsetting weakness eyes
examined.

On the table stood the remains of breakfast, from which not much seemed
to be eaten. "Ah, George!"

Said the father, and went against him. His heavy dressing gown opened
in walking, the ends umflatterten him - "my father is still a giant,"
said Georg. "Here it is so unbearably dark," he said then. "Yes,
it's already dark," replied the father.

"That window is closed you have?" "I prefer it like that." "It is
quite warm outside," said George, as in the post-slope to the ancients,
and sat down. The father acknowledged the breakfast dishes from and
put it on a box. "I just wanted you to say," George went away,
the movements of the old man followed very lost, "that I now but
after my betrothal Petersburg have shown." He pulled the letter
from a little the bag and let it fall back.

"According to Petersburg?" asked the father. "but my friends,"
said George and the father was looking eyes. - "In business he is
completely different," he thought, "how he is sitting here wide and arms
crossed over the chest." "Yes. Your friends, "said the father
with emphasis." Thou knowest it, father, that I gave him my first
engagement to hide. For consideration, for no other reason else you
know yourself, it is a difficult man. I said to myself, on the other
side he can from my engagement probably know, when even in his
solitary way of life is hardly likely - I can not stop them - but
by myself, it is now not even know. "" And now you have it to you
again about?

"asked the father, the great newspaper on the window board and the
newspaper on the glasses, which he covered with his hand." Yes, now
I have it about me again.

If he is my good friend, I said to myself, this is my happy betrothal
also a chance for him.

And that is why I no longer hesitated to display it. Before I read
the letter but einwarf, I wanted to tell you. "" George, "said the father
and pulled the edentulous mouth in the width," hear again! You are due
to this thing to me come to thee with me to advise. The honors you
without a doubt. But there is nothing, it's worse than nothing to
me now if you do not tell the whole truth. I do not want to stir
up things that do not belong here. Since the death of our
mother are expensive some ugly things proceeded. Perhaps also the time
for them and maybe they come sooner than we think.

In the business I miss some things, it will give me maybe not hidden
- now I will not make the assumption that it is hidden from me - I'm
no longer strong enough, my memory is after, I did not look for all
the many things. The first is the flow of nature, and secondly, I was
the death of our mother a lot more depressed than you. - But because
we're in this thing, in this letter, so I ask you, George, I'm not
mistaken.

It is a trifle, it is not worth the breath, so I'm not mistaken. Do
you really this friend in Petersburg? "George was embarrassed to. "Let
my friends.

One thousand friends I did not replace my father. Do you know what I
think? Do not you already have enough. But the age demands its rights.
You're in my business is essential that you know so very well, but
if the business should threaten your health, nor do I stop it
tomorrow, forever.

I do not. We have given a different way of life for you to import.

But by reason. You are sitting here in the dark, and in the living room
you would have beautiful light. You nippst from breakfast, instead
of yourself properly to be strengthened.

You are sitting with closed windows, and the air would you do so well.
No, my father! I'll fetch the doctor and his rules, we will follow.
The room we will move you'll pull into the front room, I am here.
There will be no change for you, everything is transferred.

But all this has time, now do you still go to bed a little, you need
absolutely calm. Come, I will help you when Ausziehn, thou wilt shall
see, I can.

Or do you want to do the same go into the front room, then you are
temporarily lay in my bed. That would be very reasonable. "George
just stood next to his father, the head with scrubby white hair on the
chest had let fall."

George, "said the father, quietly, without movement.

Georg immediately knelt down beside the father, he saw the pupils
in the weary face of the Father on high in the corners of the eyes
to be addressed.

"Thou hast no friend in Petersburg. You're always a fun-maker you've
been and also to me to not hold back. What you should because there
have a friend!

I can not believe it. "" Think it again, father, "said George,
the father lifted from his chair and drew him, as he now stood quite
weak, from rock to sleep," it is now nearly three years ago , as was
my friend visited us. I remember that you do not particularly like
him had.

At least twice I have denied him before thee, but to me he just sat
in the room. I could so you dislike him very well understand, my
friend has its peculiarities. But then you have but also quite good
with him entertained. I was so proud that you were listening to him,
nodding, and asked test.

If you are thoughtful, you must remember. He then told incredible
stories of the Russian Revolution. Like for example on a business trip
in Kiev during a fracas at a clergyman had a balcony view of a broad
cross the blood in the flat hand cut, hand raised and the crowd
called. You've even this story is recounted here and there.

"Meanwhile, it was George succeeded his father again niederzusetzen
his jersey and trousers, which he on the line wore underpants and
socks carefully auszuziehn.

Seeing is not particularly clean laundry, he made himself, the
father to have neglected. It would certainly have been his duty, on
the linen of his father to watch.

He was with his bride about how they are the future of the father
wanted to set up, not yet explicitly discussed, because they had
implicitly assumed that the father alone in the old house would
remain. But now, he decided shortly with all certainty, the father in
his financial future with you.

It seemed almost, if accurate joining in that care, then the father
should be prepared, might come too late. In his arms he carried his
father to bed. A terrible feeling he had when he was during the few
steps to the bed pointed out that on his chest with his father
watch chain games.

He could not immediately go to bed, so he held firmly to this watch
chain. No sooner was he in bed, everything seemed fine. He covered
himself and then pulled the blanket still very much on the shoulder.
He was not unkind to George up. "Not true, you have to remember him?"
Asked George and nodded encouragingly to him. "Am I now well covered?"
Asked the father, as he could not look, whether the feet enough
were covered.

"So do you like it already in bed," said George and Deckzeug, the
better for him. "Am I covered well?" asked the father again and the
answer seemed to particularly keep. "Be just quietly, you're well
covered. "No," cried the father, that the answer to the question was,
threw the blanket back with a force that for a moment they flew
quite unfolded, and stood upright in bed.

Only one hand he held easily to the ceiling. "You wanted to cover me,
I know, my fruit, but I have covered yet. And it is the last power,
enough for you, too much for you. Well, I know your friend.

It would be a son after my own heart.

That's why you have betrayed him throughout the years. Why else?
Do you believe that I have not cried for him? So banning it you're in
your office, nobody should interfere with the boss is busy - just
so you do the wrong letter to Russia can write.

But the father has, fortunately, no one taught the son to understand.
How do you now believe that you have him untergekriegt so untergekriegt
that you login with your ass on him and he can set does not move,
because my Lord has son decided to marry, "George saw the horror
on the image of his father.

The St. Petersburg friend, the father suddenly knew so well, seized
him, as never before. Lost in the vast Russian Federation, he saw him.
At the door of the empty, robbed store, he saw him. Between the ruins
of the shelves, the shredded products, the falling Gasarmen he
just stood still.

Why did he need so far away! "But look at me," cried the father, and
George ran, almost distracted, to bed, everything in order to act, but
faltered in the middle of the road.

"Because it has lifted the skirts, "the father began to pipe to,"
because they lifted the skirts so has the repulsive goose, "and he
pointed to the display, his shirt is so high that one on his thigh,
the scar from his war years saw" because they skirts so and so and
so has lifted, you have to herangemacht it, and so you get to it
without disturbing you can satisfy, you have our mementos desecrated
mother, a friend and tell your father to bed in, so he does not
stir can.

But he can move or not? "And he was completely free and threw the legs.
He beamed before insight.

Georg stood at an angle, preferably far from the father.

Before a long while he had determined to make everything perfect just
to watch it so it does not somehow indirectly, from the rear, from
the top down could be surprised.

Now he is again reminded of the long-forgotten forgot his resolve and
how to design a short thread through the eye of a needle moves.

"But the friend is not betrayed," cried the father, and his back
and forth finger is affirmed.

"I was his representative at the place here." "Comedian," George was not
to call, immediately recognized the damage and bit, just too late
- their eyes frozen - in his tongue that he einknickte pain.

"Yes, indeed, I have played comedy! Comedy! Good word! What other
consolation was the old widowed father? Say - and for the moment the
answer is you still live my son - what was left me, in my back
room, caught by ungetreuen staff, to the old bones?

And my son went in rejoicing throughout the world, closed shops, which I
had prepared before überpurzelte pleasure and went before his
father with the closed face of a man's honor them!

Do you believe that I have not loved thee, I, from which you started? ""
Now, it will prevent, "George thought," if he fell and
shattered, "This word durchzischte his head. The father bent down,
but fell not. Since George is not approached, as he had expected,
he rose again. "Stay where you are, I need thee not! Think you do not
have the strength to come here and hold you back just because you
want it.

The fact that you're not wrong! I am still much stronger. Solo maybe I
should back away, but it gave me the mother of their power is delivered,
with your friend, I have connected beautifully, your customers, I
have here in your pocket!

"" Even in the shirt pocket, he has, "said Georg and believed
that he could him with this remark in the world impossible.

Only a moment he thought that, ever since he forgot everything. "Hanging
yourself in your wedding and come me! I sweeping them out away from
the side, you do not know how! "George made grimaces as he does not
believe. The father nodded simply, the truth of what he said, beteuernd
in Georgs corner out. "How did you entertain me today than you did and
asked if you have your friend from the Engagements shalt write.

He knows everything, stupid boy, but he knows everything! I wrote to him
yet, because thou hast forgotten me write the stuff away. That's why
he has been banned for years, he knows everything a hundred times better
than you yourself, your unread letters he crumpled in his left hand
while he was in the right to read my letters to vorhält, "he swung
his arm with enthusiasm over the head .

"He knows everything a thousand times better," he cried. "Zehntausendmal,"
said George, the father to laugh at, but still in his mouth got the
word a toternsten sound. "For many years do I have to buy into this
matter would ! Do you think I care anything else? Do you think I read
newspapers? Da!

"And he threw George a newspaper sheet that is somehow related to the
bed had been taken to. An old newspaper, with a George quite unknown
name. "How long have you been reluctant to become ripe before you
are!

The mother had to die, she could not experience the Freudentag, the
friend is based in his Russia, three years before he was yellow to throw
away, and I, yes you can see how it stands with me. For thou hast eyes!
"" You have given me so aufgelauert, "cried George.

gasped Walky.  "You say that to Elder Concannon,
and Mr. Cross Moore, and ol' Bill Jones!  They say taxes is high 'nuff
as they be."

"And school tax, too, I s'pose?" demanded another idler in the drug
store.

"Wal," said Walky, "I b'lieve we _could_ give the little shavers a
better chance to l'arn their A, B, C's.  And that old schoolhouse can't
be het on re'l cold days.  And it's as onhandy as it can be----"

"I believe you're goin' in for these new-fangled notions, too, Walky,"
declared the druggist.

"Guess I be, on the school question, anyway.  My woman says she sha'n't
let our Helen go ter school again this winter, for she's got one cold
right on top of another las' year.  It's a plumb shame."

It was from talks such as these in the village stores that the fire of
public demand for a new school building--if not for a new system of
education--finally burst into open flame.

Usually, when there was a public meeting, the basement of the Union
Church---"the old vestry", as it was called--was used.  But although
Mr. Middler had timidly expressed himself as in favor of a new school
building, he did not have the courage to offer the use of the vestry
room.

Therefore the reading-room next to the drug store was one evening
crowded with earnest supporters of the belief that it was time Poketown
built a new structure for the training of her youth.

Janice saw to it that Uncle Jason went.  Indeed, with Janice on one
side and Marty on the other, Mr. Day could scarcely escape, for his son
and his niece accompanied him to the place of meeting.

Not that the young folks went in, for there wasn't room.  It seemed
that the people who favored a change in the old town's affairs were
pretty numerous, and there was not a dissenting voice in the meeting.
It was decided to have a special town meeting called to vote, if
possible, an appropriation for the building of a new schoolhouse.

This first meeting was only a beginning.  It served merely to solidify
that public opinion which was in favor of the improvement.  At once
opposition raised its head, and during the fortnight preceding the town
meeting, argument, _pro_ and _con_, was hotter than at election time.

Janice was deeply interested in the project, although she had, during
these first weeks of the New Year, more important thoughts to fill her
heart and mind.  Daddy was writing to her regularly.  The mine
buildings were being re-erected.  The old force had come back to work,
and for the first time since Broxton Day had arrived in Mexico, the
outlook for getting out ore and making regular "clean-ups" was bright.
But trouble down there was not yet at an end, and that worried her
greatly.

The story of her father's captivity in the hands of the brigand,
Raphele, had been made of light moment in Mr. Day's letters that
immediately followed his escape; but Janice understood enough about it
to know that God had been very good to her.  Some other American mining
men and ranchers in Granadas had not escaped with their lives and
property from Raphele and his ilk.

Daddy sent a photograph, too; but that was not until he had recovered
some from his hiding out in the mine without much to eat.  Although he
was haggard and bewhiskered, his eyes had that look in them that Janice
so clearly remembered.  When she awoke and lit her lamp in the early
morning, there he was looking at her from the bureau; and when she
retired she kissed the picture in lieu of having his real presence to
bid good-night.

Those gray eyes of Broxton Day reminded her always of his oft-spoken
motto: "Do something!"  He seemed to be saying that to Janice from his
photograph; therefore the girl was not likely to lose her interest in
such a momentous affair as the new schoolhouse.

There was another interest that held Janice's mind and sympathy.  This
was the condition of poor little Lottie Drugg.  As she had been quite
blind when Janice first met her, now her hearing had departed entirely.
She could seldom now distinguish the notes of her father's violin as he
played to her.  She would sit on the store counter and put her hand
often on Hopewell's bow-hand as he dragged the more or less harmonious
sounds out of the wood and strings.  Otherwise she could not know that
he was playing at all!

Nelson Haley had been touched by the case of the storekeeper's little
girl, and had discussed the matter with Janice.  Nelson had even
written to a Boston specialist who treated the eyes, and who had been
very successful in such cases as Lottie's.  The fee the surgeon
demanded was from five hundred to a thousand dollars for an operation.
And poor Hopewell Drugg, although he strained every effort, had
succeeded in saving less than two hundred dollars during all these
months!

Nevertheless, Janice would not let the storekeeper lose heart.  "It
will come in time, Mr. Drugg," she told him, cheerfully.  "And Lottie
will be able to go to that wonderful school, too, where she will be
taught many things."

For if the child could once obtain her sight, lip-reading would be
possible for her, and through that the little girl might gradually
become as well educated as any one, and have a fair chance for
happiness in the world after all!

Although Nelson Haley was touched by Lottie's sad condition, and by
anything else going on about him that had the personal note in it,
Janice thought the Poketown school-teacher showed very little public
spirit.

She began to realize that his overseeing of the reading-room and
library was inspired by his wish to please _her_ instead of his actual
interest in the institution.  This was very complimentary, but it did
not satisfy Janice Day at all.

She was not interested in Nelson Haley in a way to crave the attentions
that he had begun to show her.  Indeed, she did not really appreciate
his attitude, for there was nothing silly in Janice's character.  She
was still a happy, hearty _girl_; and if she had romantic dreams of the
future, they were nothing but dreams as yet!

She had the same interest in Nelson that she had in her cousin Marty.
It troubled her that the young man did not seem to have any serious
interest in life.  Just as long as he tutored his classes through their
recitations in a manner satisfactory to the school committee, he seemed
quite careless of anything else about the school.  He admitted this, in
his laughing way, to the girl, when she broached the subject of the
fight for a new school.

"But it's your _job_!" exclaimed Janice.  "You more than anybody else
ought to be interested in having the boys and girls of Poketown get a
decent schoolhouse."

"And suppose old Elder Concannon and the rest of the committee get
after me with a sharp stick?" queried Nelson.

"I should think _you_, a collegian and an educated man, would be only
too eager to help in such a movement as this," Janice cried.  "Oh,
Nelson! don't you know that the people who are waking up in this town
need your help?"

"My goodness me! how serious you are about it," he returned, teasingly.
"Of course, if you insist, I'll risk my job with the committee and come
out flat-footed for the new schoolhouse and reform."

"I don't wish you to do anything at all for _me_," returned Janice,
rather tartly.  "If your own conscience doesn't tell you what course to
pursue, pray remain neutral--as you are.  But I am disappointed in you."

"There is feminine logic for you!" laughed the young man.  "With one
breath you tell me to follow the dictates of my own conscience, and
then you show me plainly just how much you will despise me if I go
against your side of the controversy."

"You are mistaken," Janice said, with some little heat.  "I do not
personally care what you do, only as your action reflects upon your own
character."

"Now, dear me!" he sighed, still amused at her earnestness, "I thought
if I came out strongly at the town meeting for the new school, you
would award me the palm."

"My goodness me!" exclaimed the exasperated girl.  "Somebody ought to
award you a palm--and right on the ear!  You're as big a tease as
Marty," and she refused to discuss the school project with him any
further.


CHAPTER XXII

AT THE SUGAR CAMP

Nelson Haley was, however, at the town meeting and spoke in favor of
the new school building.  Janice had a full report of it afterward from
Marty, who squeezed in at the back with several of the other boys and
drank in the long and tedious wrangle between the partisans in the
school matter.

"And, by jinks!" the boy proclaimed, "lemme tell you, Janice, it looked
like the vote was goin' ag'in us till Mr. Haley began to talk.  I
thought he didn't have much interest in the thing.  Nobody thought he
did.  I heard some of the old fellers cacklin' that 'teacher didn't
favor the idee none.'

"But, say!  When he got up to talk, he showed 'em.  He was sitting
alongside of Elder Concannon himself, and the Elder had made a mighty
strong speech against increasin' taxes and burdenin' the town for years
and years with a school debt.

"But, talk about argument!  Mr. Haley sailed inter them old fossils,
and made the fur fly, you bet!"

"Oh, Marty!  Fur fly from fossils?" chuckled Janice.

"That _does_ sound like a teaser, don't it?" responded her cousin, with
a grin.  "Just the same, Mr. Haley made 'em all sit up and take notice.
He didn't only speak for the schoolhouse, and new methods of teaching,
and a graded school; but he took up Elder Concannon's arguments and
shot 'em full of holes.

"You ought to have seen the old gentleman's face when Mr. Haley proved
that a better-taught generation of scholars would possess an increased
earning power and so be better able to take up and pay the school bonds
than the present taxpayers.

"Say! the folks cheered!  When Mr. Haley sat down, the question was put
and the vote went through with a rush.  But Elder Concannon and Old
Bill Jones, and Mr. Cross Moore, and some of the others, were as mad as
they could be."

"Mad at Mr. Haley?" queried Janice, with sudden anxiety.

"You bet!  But they can't take the school away from him till the end of
the year, as long as he doesn't neglect his work.  So Dad says, and he
knows."

Janice was worried.  She knew that Nelson Haley had hoped to teach the
Poketown school at least two years, so as to get what he called "a
stake" for law-school studies.  And there were not many ungraded
schools in the state that paid as well as Poketown's; for it was a
large school.

The furor occasioned by the special town meeting, and the fight for the
new school, passed over.  A site for the school was secured just off of
High Street near the center of the town--a much handier situation for
all concerned.  The ground would be broken for the cellar as soon as
the frost had gone.

The committee appointed at the town meeting to have charge of the
building of the school were all in favor of it.  There were three of
them,--Mr. Massey, the druggist, the proprietor of the Lake View Inn,
and Dr. Poole, one of the two medical practitioners in the town.  These
three were instructed to appoint two others to act with them, and as
these two appointees need not be tax-payers, one of them was Nelson
Haley, who acted as secretary.

When Janice heard of this, she was delighted.  She had not seen the
teacher more than to say "how-de-do" since their rather warm discussion
before the date of the town meeting.  Now she put herself in the way of
meeting him where they might have a tête-à-tête.

There were not many social affairs in Poketown for young people.
Janice had attended one or two of the parties where boys and girls
mingled indiscriminately and played "kissing games," then she refused
all such invitations.  She was not old enough to expect to be bidden to
the few social gatherings held by the more lively class of people in
the town.

The church did little outside of the ladies' sewing circle to promote
social intercourse in the congregation.  So, although the
school-teacher might have been invited to a dozen evening
entertainments during that winter, Janice did not chance to meet him
where they could have a "good, long talk" until the Hammett Twins gave
their annual Sugar Camp party.

The two little old ladies, whom Janice had met so soon after coming to
Poketown, had become staunch friends of the girl.  She had been at
their home on the Middletown road several times--twice to remain over
night, for both Miss Blossom and Miss Pussy enjoyed having young people
about them.

They were an odd little couple, but kindly withal, and loved children
desperately, as many spinster ladies do.  They had never married
because of the illness for many years of both their father and their
mother.  Besides, the twins had never wished to be separated.

Now, at something over sixty years of age, they owned a fine farm and
the most productive sugar-maple orchard in that part of the state.  At
sugaring time each year they invited all the young folk Walky Dexter
could pack into his party wagon, to the camp not far from their house;
and, as maple-sugar making was a new industry to Janice, she was not a
little eager when she received her invitation from the two old ladies.

The "sugaring" was on a Saturday, and the party met at the schoolhouse.
Some of the larger girls who had treated Janice so unpleasantly when
she first visited the school were yet pupils; but they were much more
friendly with the girl from Greensboro than at first.  They might have
been a wee bit jealous of her, however; for Nelson Haley would never
treat them other than as a teacher should treat his scholars, whereas
he paid marked attention to Janice whenever he was in her society.

Once he had asked permission to call upon her; but Janice had only
laughed and told him that her aunt would be pleased to have him come,
of course.  She was not at all sure that she liked Mr. Nelson Haley
well enough to allow him to confine his attentions to her!  Young as
she was, Janice had serious ideas about such matters.

However, she was glad to have him to talk to again on this occasion.

"I've never had a chance to tell you how proud of you I was when they
told me what you did at the town meeting," Janice whispered, as they
sat side by side in the party wagon.

Nelson grinned at her cheerfully.  "The old Elder scarcely speaks to
me," he said.  "He's even forgotten that I can turn a Latin phrase as
they used to when he went to the university."

"Oh, that is too bad!  But don't you feel that you did right?"

"I'll tell you better when it comes time to engage a teacher for next
year."

"Oh, dear!  Maybe they'll put in a new school committee at the July
school meeting.  They ought to."

"The Elder and his comrades in crime have been in office for eight or
ten years, I understand.  They are fairly glued there, and it will take
a good deal to oust them.  You see, they have nothing to do with the
building of the new school."

"But if that school is finished and ready for occupancy next fall, you
ought to be at the head of it.  It won't be fair to put you out,"
Janice said, with gravity.

"We'll hope for the best," and Nelson Haley laughed as usual.  "But if
I lose my job and have to beg my bread from door to door, I hope you
will remember, Janice, that I told you so."

"You are perfectly ridiculous," declared the girl.  "Aren't you ever
serious two minutes at a time?"

"Pooh! what's the good of being 'solemncholly'?  Take things as they
come--that's _my_ motto."

Still, Janice believed that the young man was really becoming more
deeply interested in the Poketown school and its problems that he was
willing to admit, even to her.  She had heard that the Middletown
architect who was planning the school had consulted Nelson Haley
several times upon important points, and that the teacher was the most
active of all the five special committeemen.

They reached the sugar camp before the middle of the forenoon, although
the roads at that season were very heavy.  Winter had by no means
departed, although a raucous-voiced jay or two had come up from the
swamp and scoured the open wood as though already in search of spring
quarters.

The Hammett sugar camp consisted of an open shed in which to boil the
sap and an old cabin--perhaps one of the first built in these New
Hampshire grants--in which dinner was to be cooked and eaten.  Miss
Blossom Hammett was already busy over the pots, and pans, and bake oven
in the cabin; while her sister, the thin Miss Pussy, overseered the
sap-boiling operations.

It was a regular "bee", for beside the twins' hired hands, there were
several of their neighbors, and the visitors from Poketown were
expected to make themselves useful, too, the boys and Nelson Haley
especially.

Janice joined the sap gatherers, for she was strong and liked exercise.
They carried buckets to collect the sap that had already run into the
shiny two-quart cups which were used to collect it.

First an incision was made through the bark and into the wood of the
tree.  Into this incision was thrust a whittled plug that had a shallow
gutter cut in its upper side, and notches from which the bail of the
two-quart cup hung.  Into the cup the sap dripped rapidly--especially
about midday, when the sun was warmest.

They tapped only about a quarter of the grove belonging to the old
ladies, for that numbered as many trees as could be handled at once.
Pail after pail of the thin sap was brought in and emptied into one of
the two big cauldrons, under which a steady fire of hickory and beech
was kept burning.  Later the fire was started under the second pot,
while the contents of the first one was allowed to simmer down until
the sugar would "spin", when dipped up on the wooden ladle and dropped
into a bowl of cold water.

The old ladies supplied a hearty and substantial dinner for the young
folks to put away before the sugar was boiled enough to spin.  After
that, the visitors gathered about the sugar troughs like flies about
molasses.  The Hammett Twins were not niggard souls by any manner of
means; but they kept warning the girls and boys all the afternoon to
"save room for supper."

In truth, the supper down at the old Hammett farmhouse, after the work
of the day was over, was the principal event.  It grew cold towards
night, and that sharpened the young folks' appetites.  The sap ceased
running before sunset, so they trooped down from the camp, the little
old ladies riding in their phaeton behind Ginger.  Walky Dexter was
going to drive out to the Hammett place after supper to pick up his
load of young people.

But Walky was late--very late indeed.  After supper the majority of the
young folk, both those from Poketown and in the near neighborhood,
began to play forfeit games; so Janice and Nelson Haley slipped away,
bidding the kind old ladies good-night, and set out to walk home.

The distance was under five miles; there was a good path all the way
despite the mud in the driveway, and there was a glorious moon.  The
wind had died down and, although the night air was keen, it was a
perfect hour for walking.


CHAPTER XXIII

"DO YOU MEAN THAT?"

"It was right along here--at the bridge, you know--I saw you the first
time, Janice," said the teacher, when they had covered some two miles
of the way.  "Do you remember?"

"I didn't suppose _you_ would," laughed Janice, blushing a little.
"And I stared at you because you were the first citified-looking person
I had seen since coming to Poketown."

He laughed.  "Did I look as bad as all that?  I was going fast, I know,
but I could see that you were a mighty pretty girl."

"Why!  That's a story!" exclaimed Janice, seriously, and looking at the
young man in astonishment.  "You know that isn't so.  I'm _not_ pretty."

"Goodness me! am I not to have my way in _anything_?" demanded Nelson
Haley, in mock anger.  "If I think you're pretty I can say so, I hope?"

"No, sir.  Such ridiculous statements are forbidden.  I shall think
your eyes need treating almost as badly as do poor little Lottie's.
Dear me, whatever are we going to do about that child?"

"If either of us were rich it would be an easy question to answer."

"True enough.  I know what _I'd_ do.  And I believe you'd be a very
generous young man, indeed--as long as being generous did not entail
any particular work on your part."

"Oh--now--I call that unfair!" he complained.  "We can't all be like
you, Janice.  I believe you lay awake nights thinking up nice things to
do for folks----"

"There you go again--making fun of me," she said, shaking a gloved
finger at him.  "I don't claim to be a bit more unselfish than the next
one.  But I'm not lazy."

"Thanks!  I suppose I am?"

"There you go--picking one up so quick," Janice repeated.  "I _do_
think, however, that you just don't care, a good deal of the time.  If
things only go on smoothly----"

"That's what I told you Christmas Day," he said, quickly.

"And isn't it so?"

"Well--it used to be," he admitted, shaking his head ruefully.  "But
I'm not sure but that, since you've got me going----"

"_Me?_" exclaimed Janice.  "What have _I_ got to do with it?"

"Now, there's no use your saying that you don't know why I took up that
matter of the new school last month," said Nelson Haley, seriously.
"You spoke just as though you were ashamed of me when we talked about
it, and I began to wonder if I wasn't a fit subject for heart-searching
inquiry," and the teacher burst into laughter again.

But Janice felt that he was more serious than usual, and she hastened
to say: "I should really feel proud to know that any word of _mine_
suggested your present course, Mr. Nelson Haley.  Why! what a fine
thing that would be."

"What a fine thing _what_ would be?" he demanded.

"To think that I could really influence an educated and clever young
man like you to do something very much worth while in the world.
Nelson, you are flattering me."

"Honest to goodness--it's so," he said, looking at her with a rather
wry smile.  "And I'm not at all sure that I thank you for it."

"Why not?"

"See what you've got me into?" he complained.  "I've got a whole bunch
of extra work because of the school building, and in the end the old
Elder and his friends may discharge me!"

"But you've brought about the building of a new school, and Poketown
ought always to thank you."

"Likely.  And they'll build a monument to me to stand at the head of
High Street, eh?" and he laughed.

"I do not care," said Janice, seriously, and looking up at him with
pride.  "_I_ shall thank you.  And I shall never forget that you said
it was _my_ little influence that made you do it."

"Your _little_ influence----"

But she hastened to add: "It's a really great thing for me to think of.
And how proud and glad I'll be by and by--years and years from now, I
mean--when you accomplish some great thing and I can think that it was
because of what _I_ said that you first began to use your influence for
good among these people----"

Her voice broke a little and she halted.  She feared she had gone too
far and that perhaps Nelson Haley would misunderstand her.  But he was
only silent for a moment.  Then, turning to her and grasping her hands
firmly, he said:

"Do you mean that, Janice?"

"Yes.  I mean just that," she said, rather flutteringly.  "Oh! here
comes a wagon.  It must be Walky."

"Never mind Walky," said Nelson, firmly.  "I want to tell you that I
sha'n't forget what you've said.  If there really is a nice girl like
you feeling proud of me, I'm going to do just my very best to retain
her good opinion.  You see if I don't!"

They were in the shadow as Walky drove by and he did not see them.
After that Janice and the teacher hurried on so as not to be overtaken
by the noisy party of young folks before they reached the village.

As they came up the hill toward Hopewell Drugg's store they saw a dim
light in the storekeeper's back room, and the wailing notes of his
violin reached their ears.

"Hopewell is grinding out his usual classic," chuckled Nelson Haley.
"I hear him at it morning, noon, and night.  Seems to me 'Silver
Threads Among the Gold' is kind of _passé_."

"Hush!" said Janice.  "There is somebody standing at the side gate,
listening.  You see, sir, everybody doesn't have the same opinion of
poor Mr. Drugg's music----"

"My goodness!" ejaculated Nelson, under his breath.  "It's Miss
Scattergood, I do believe!"

The timid little spinster could not escape.  They had come upon her so
quietly.

"Oh! is it you, Janice dear?" she said, in a startled voice.

"And Mr. Haley.  We are walking home from the Hammetts' sugaring."

"Well!  I'm glad it ain't anybody else," said Miss 'Rill frankly.  "But
I _do_ run around here sometimes of an evening, when mother's busy or
asleep, just to listen to that old song.  Mr. Drugg plays it with so
much feelin'--don't you think so, Mr. Haley?  And then--I was always
very fond of that song."

They left her at the corner of High Street, and the flurried little
woman hurried home.

"I do believe there is a romance there," whispered the teacher, when
Miss 'Rill was out of earshot.

"So there is.  Didn't you know that--years and years ago--she and Mr.
Drugg were engaged?" cried Janice.  "Why, yes, they were.  But why they
did not marry, and why he married the girl he did, and why Miss 'Rill
kept on teaching school and never would look at any other man, is all a
mystery."

"Romance!" commented Nelson, with a little laugh, yet looking down upon
Janice with serious eyes.  "The night is full of it--don't you think
so, Janice?"

"No, no!" she laughed up at him.  "It's only the moonlight," and a
little later he left her at the old Day house with a casual handshake.


CHAPTER XXIV

THE SCHOOL DEDICATION

Thereafter there was a somewhat different tone to the friendship
between Janice and the schoolteacher.  They were confidential.  They
both assumed that the other was interested in the matters dear to each.
It was a comradery that had no silly side to it.  Nelson Haley was a
young man working his way up the first rungs of the ladder of life;
Janice was his good friend and staunch partisan.

As neither was possessed of brother or sister, they adopted each other
in that stead.

The winter fled away at last and Spring came over the mountain range
and down to the lakeside, scattering flowers and grasses as she passed.
Although Janice had enjoyed some of the fun and frolic of the New
England winter, she was perfectly delighted to see the season change.

It had been late spring when she reached Poketown the year before.  Now
she saw the season open, and her first trips over the hillsides and
through the wood lot where the snow still lay in sheltered places,
searching for the earliest flowers, were days of delight for the girl.

But those blows did not hurt him or discomfort. - Current - then
told her mother, ecstasy looking lad, and respond as if the words of
her when she handed the picture - and what does ... _esto_? Then Angel
sat at his side, and with many flattery, turning with grace and skill
with the theme of _media naranja_, as repeated in his home in germ
apology and what happened after he began the story of this; but
from far back from the point and time they met at the door Light
of Calatravas, discrete street names and serial so you do not leave
it plugged in before the time that it should leave.

They were the parents of Angel knew almost everything you wanted
to know why haggard, why she dressed so carefully, why as he faded
at times, and sometimes made a bell, and until they knew why he had
come home the night before so harebrained and nervous.

And not only knew but approved it and even applauded. Corriente, but
what had gone door to call Angel? Who was she? And Angel, who did not
have reasonable grounds for street, said even with enthusiasm. The
Sphinx dropped his hands that would take the average entertained while
talking to Angel, and Don Santiago, but, again his chair, still
cast glances at the portrait of light placed on the table, looking
back, look of anguish and sorrow, to his wife, whose face was cold,
but cold and underground tombs. - my son!

-- exclaimed taking skeleton interlaced hands up near his mouth - if
you've discovered the truth, whether you like it assures us,
the more you do not worth being born, and since they were born, we
are all worth you would have died without penalties, at the age
in which God took your brothers.

Angel thought that the sunlight is turned off to him, and that the earth
sank beneath your plants. That his mother had had to put a light strike
as soon as came to know what the trunk, because this lineage was
labeled as the mania of the stubborn lady, but in those words, in
that attitude, in the anguish of its highly visible father had more
than a relic that is due to reflection and the power of love: there
were insurmountable obstacles, potholes black precipitate which was
sailing the poor kid with the burden of their sweetest dreams of
spring.

The instinct of life, because it was his death, gave encouragement to
poke my eyes to the abyss with the eyes and measure their actual
depth.

Asked his mother why his words, so fraught with obstacles unknown to
him, and his mother, more compassionate justice that, deepened the chasm
of nailing the marquesa Montálvez pilloried in his indignation and
riddled it with a hailstorm of cruel vituperios.

Quedábale appeal to the poor child to lessen the severity of the
charges to the alleged propensity of his mother to think badly of some
ladies, and it tried to do, and also had the benefit of his father,
he returned to the suppliant eyes, as he spoke so little that he
will come. And the father, but was less worried that his son, also
had a door that closed and a new nail in his heart to sink. - No,
this is what you think, my son.

Would that it were! Your mother, unfortunately, does not speak today
without serious grounds. I will not go, however, certain things, as far
as it goes, but we are entirely in line with the principal, which is
very serious, therefore you need to know, and we'll know soon, as
much as you I hear it hurts me and afflict the tell. And this good man
began to speak things that scared the poor guy left, not only for
what they wore frightened of things in themselves, but also hear
from the lips of whom had he expected, no new injuries, but for
healing balm that had the words of his mother. - But the news -
said in an unsafe Angel, determined to defend a one sidescuttles
all of its ruined fortress - - may be incorrect ... what will
undoubtedly be.

I know how to live at home with this lady: there are no features or
remains of these huge that you have referred me, is a calm and
orderly life, a true family life ... is pray. - Yes cried the voice,
then Lugubrious of the Sphinx - but also the devil, sick of meat,
got a brother, but was always hell. - were read, no doubt - don
Santiago said interrupting his wife -- life and will copy you've
seen, my son, but what is done is done and the work of the devil
it is scandalous to honest people, but the sinner turns to God when
it no longer serves the world.

However, understand well, I do not blame you nor acrimino: boy you
are inexperienced and you fell in love with the first steps far
away from home: no wonder you've been and still blind and deaf, and
did not see or what we hear sounds and you have had before their
eyes.

I also hesitate at first, because he knew that lady ... I met her
here, where you're seated, and although I saw wasteful, not thought
capable of other sins more ugly.

I had several businesses with her, and they forced me to visit her in
her house many times and walked home from a snake bite that within
the heat has a butler who, according to reports that after I bought,
had lost confidence of her mistress, with big reasons for that.

The butler, who did not conform with the marquesa businesses that
deal directly with me before he arranged to your liking with usurers,
to swindle all, pretending to mourn and to pity her more interested,
but contrary to good intentions, I was careful to impose the more mishaps
big chance your life.

It was manager and steward of the house was born when the Marquise:
figúrate whether it would be nice to know! However, I refused to believe
him, but as I cared to leave questions, by the very nature of the
business at hand which would bring this lady and I went to other sources,
and pretty soon I became convinced that the rogue was still manager
fallen short in their reports.

So Madrid was the dream of fame marquesa, all informants were surprised
that I do not know. What had gotten to know these places, as far apart
from the bustle of Genton and the other world! What's a banker, I
knew is, I knew it was a rascal and had been throughout the night
fearing that he skinned alive in the Puerta del Sol, but what mattered
to me if I was married or single, remember the title or how they show
off lately, if ever I heard him say that I doubt? As far as Mr de
Guzman, even as a suspect? I once recommended as a person of responsibility
and friend of hers, but what there was in this particular or suspicious,
especially after having observed that the reports were accurate,
because marquesa ido has faithfully fulfilled all its commitments
to me?

What I was doing to me, even after the discovery of the porridge, but to
show the ignorant marquesa and keep trying with it whenever it has
needed, out of respect to Mr. Guzman, whom I have not said a word? Your
mother and I have spoken many times here in the scrubbed, but did
not matter that the dream had to be removed, or something to call
you so you were aware ...

I wish we had done! ... And behold, my son, why do not blame what's
wrong, and why I have to support your mother what you have said.
The poor head Angel had made a maze of fire and diabolical visions
But between all and everything is stir and abrasive, and floating
rose as the hope of a heavenly comfort, image de Luz, de Luz, which
was not, which could not be stained with the mud of this quagmire
in which was born.

What justice, what law would authorize the infamy of an angel to punish
the sins of a sinful woman! And in this sense and with all the energy
of his soul aching, spoke to his father, because nothing of the
expected inclement rigidity of her mother .

Don Santiago, more compassionate, we replied, in finding their
voice and their eyes on the deep grief that afflicted him: - I am not
of those who believe that the defects are inherited as a disease, or
who are just innocent children who pay the faults committed by their
parents, but often there are cases where it is feared the worst,
as if it were likely, and the necessity is imposed with the force of
human respect and consideration, and requires appropriate to adjust
more to the laws of the world that the mandates of the heart.

Because we are, my son, and our fault ... because our laws that we are
tied to the scruples of others. True that we enact and the pious purpose
of annoying the neighbors, but are made and beards we jump on us
criminals.

And nothing is more just. - Well it is - Angel interrupted, which could
not with the martyrdom of their impatience - but in my case ... - It
would not stop - answered his father, the saliéndole meeting -.

If you ... - the story of yours - said the overwhelming voice of the
Sphinx, with the silence of her husband - who is calling all the value
that fits in the heart of a young man of shame fabianabac forgetting,
because they have no other choice. - The case of yours - Mr James
insisted, trying to mitigate the effect caused by the child in the
hardness of the mother - is not resolved for four words at a time
of the fever that burns you now, my son, from head to toe is to
meditate to calm and cold ... how have you meditate you will, taking
the points must be taken not on the heights of passion, but down
below on this ground that rogue pisa, and among the people with
whom one was rubbing on leaving home. - But how?

how! - Angel asked, longing to get rid as soon as possible and practical.
- Around we go, son, We are going to - he softly repeated his
father -.

Déjate laps to go with that if the world is fair or unfair in this or
the other, or if mothers sinners here, and if the daughters innocent
there, and believes it simply that you pass.

There are a couple but that does not have as far as she is very
pretty, very collected, very well educated ... a holy God, come on.
This young you fall in love, and she falls in love with you. You wish
to marry, and it is, first, that is not your father's daughter ... I
mean ... - You have a perfect right to name it uses. - By law, but not
by nature, and this knows everything Madrid, Madrid humming at the top,
and speaks and writes Recio, and is heard and read, and the whispers
and skinning sursumcorda and gives and takes away your craving
reputations.

A mother who had made this misdeed by her husband, ie legal father of
the bride, a fraudster, then fled his homeland for fear of justice,
and this is also known that Madrid whispers and bustle, the same
woman that was unfair, unfaithful married before, continued to be
adulterous wife, and when widowed, had no where to dispose of the devil.
And that is also public in Madrid that makes and breaks reputations
...

Will you know? - Forward - said the poor boy with heroic resolution,
already half swallowed by the mouth of the black abyss. - Well -
said his father shocked that I had to be him who pushed him to
throw up the end - despite all these disadvantages, you decide to get
married because it is a holy light, as we agreed.

Light, and beautiful daughter of his mother, is very visible in the
world, in Madrid that whispers and skinning and you takes the arm
to go with her in paradise you have dreamed that the two ...

Look, Angel will be unjust, it will be wicked, everything you want,
but it is true that Madrid maldiciente and scoundrel, and that Madrid
has it that the blame for the Marquise de Montálvez is not a
flawless woman shows about her daughter, and as a wedding gift, all
the scandals of the mother, and therefore on her husband, about
you, you're a good man (and, so, you go where you go and with whom),
all sambenitos your wife, and chacota between algazara.

Now, how big is your blindness, for you are beautiful paint in his
eyes what is there on the side of the door, do you dare to enter
it with such a burden of disgrace on their backs?

This is what you have to think, my son, with a cool head and calm the
heart. Angel did not want to hear more or add one word. So deep and
so dark it would seem the pit!

The Sphinx, relentlessly, tried to darken and deepen even further. Her
husband was prevented with a look that took the full force of a speech
from mother to his heart. Angel got up dazed and moved to withdraw from
there, and at the same time extended his arm to pick up the portrait
of Light, who was on the table. - Take my son - his father told him
and divining the intention of seizing the card before him -.

But looking a little. (Don Santiago turned to contemplate the portrait.)
Yes .., ¡nailed! ... Well I said earlier to me: 'Who is like I know
this face? "Of course!, Who had to look ... If I am surprised that
this track, knowing what I knew, I would not have given in my heart
before you will discover!

... - These appear - told the Sphinx - are the hallmarks that puts hand
of God in the works of the devil, as this wretched creature, to alert
people honest ... - Woman! ... - So I say hurt, Santiago, that hurts
... because this kind of wounds do not heal with sweet balm: to heal
fire between the martyrdoms that I am seeing the suffering of my
child, the gift of my eyes, between the nails of Satan.

¿Deserved such a fate? Have we brought you and me for that? - No woman,
no - he said in santa don Santiago calm - but only one so you can
go by different roads ... Leave me where I go now, I know I will not
go wrong and that I must get better than before and where you want to
go. Then, turning to Angel, who was still mute and increasingly stunned,
he said handing the portrait: - Take son, you want ... and, of
course, but tries not to have before when we meditate on what you've
said, to solve it for you.

Angel picked up the card and came out with it in hand, the release of
her father and it is verified that once was alone and locked in his
cabinet, the strains of his relief watering chest burning with tears
and kisses resonant devouring one of the most faithful picture sorceress'
work of the devil.

"XIII And while he kissed the portrait and wet with tears, the poor kid
... I thought, what was but to think the unhappy similarity of their
conflict with the conflict of the novel that he had tried to write it?
Who would have said when he was lost in the tangle of fiction that,
when exposed to the difficulties the Marquise (who had to know to
rejalgar) and innocent light, I heard you spellbound, and when, a
thousand times!

Foolish and stupid and goofy!, rushed the field in front of them, by
the childish vanity make the value of the work of his genius, had to
be him, the Angel Núñez, alive and effective, who had to solve the
problem, not as novelist, but as a person engaged in a real launch,
just as the launch of his novel?

¡Resolving the conflict! But after the case looked good, where
was the conflict? The conflict exists when the mind sees no clear exit
for the anguish wring it, but for him there was no doubt or hesitation,
because I had a door open and expeditious, just a, just one: the only
one that could have . How did not see the clumsy novelist so palpable
that it should be in front of your eyes?

_Ella_ And nothing but _ella_ with _ella_ and _ella_ for daily life.
That was the duty, honor, and that this happiness. And Angel, this
sort of discourse, kiss will come and tear on the portrait of Light.
This happened very long time and relief as black and the most
bitter of their sentences. Were the first in his life, and very
painful and profound. We must do justice to the poor kid. When it was
found better off and quiet, where you saved the portrait used and
began to walk along and think of his cabinet as his father wished,
"with a cool head and calm the heart."

Because Angel was seen in those moments with the trial and blood in its
regular level. Orear After a little more still at the core by this
method of general explorations around the gulf, which no
longer frightened him as much as before: - Here Now - it was said
- things its true light, and adjust the bill item by item and all
accounts must be adjusted in cases of great hardship, such as this.

First, the reports have given to my father on the marquesa may very well
not be correct: they are not, and since then I say and what I say
because the truth is disfiguring, and always in a bad sense, as
that goes from mouth to mouth.

They were, therefore, exaggerated reports and when my father bought.
My father sent me a bad impression on me and taking great interest
in me that caused the worst possible effect, then there is no doubt
that my father very much and exaggerated by his own account he had
received very exaggerated already. This is the same evidence.
A grand silk flag, with new
halyards and all, was finally obtained, the Congressman of the district
having been interested in the affair.  And on Washington's Birthday the
Congressman himself visited the village and made an address when the
flag was raised for the first time.

Gradually, other improvements and changes had taken place in Poketown.
There was the steamboat dock.  It had been falling to pieces for years.
It had originally been built by the town; but the various storekeepers
were most benefited by the wharf, for their freight came by water for
more than half of the year.

Walky Dexter started the subscription among the merchants for the dock
repairs.  He subscribed a fair sum himself, too, for he was the
principal teamster in Poketown.

"But who d'you s'pose started Walky?" demanded Mr. Cross Moore,
shrewdly.  "Trace it all back to one 'live wire'--that's what!  If that
Day gal didn't put the idee into Walky's head for a new dock, I'll eat
my hat!"

And nobody asked Mr. Moore to try that gastronomic feat.

The selectman, himself, seemed to get into line during that winter.  He
stopped sneering at Walky Dexter and for some inexplicable reason he
began agitating for better health ordinances.

There was an unreasonable warm spell in February; people in Poketown
had always had open garbage piles during the winter.  From this cause
Dr. Poole, the Health Officer, declared, a diphtheria epidemic started
which caused several deaths and necessitated the closing of a part of
the school for four weeks.

Cross Moore put through a garbage-collection ordinance and a certain
farmer out of town was glad of the chance to make a daily collection,
the year around, for the value of the garbage and the small bonus the
town allowed him.  If the truth were known Mr. Moore's ordinance was
copied almost word for word from the printed pamphlet of ordinances in
force in a certain town of the Middle West called Greensboro.  Now, how
did the selectman obtain that pamphlet, do you suppose?

Yet Poketown, as a whole, looked about as forlorn and unsightly as it
had when Janice Day first saw it.  The improvement was not general.
The malady--general neglect--had only been treated in spots.

There were still stores with their windows heaped with flyspecked
goods.  The horses still gnawed the boles of the shade trees along High
Street.  The flagstone sidewalks were still broken and the gutters
unsightly.  High street itself was rutted and muddy all through the
early spring, after the snow had gone.

A few of the merchants patterned after Hopewell Drugg, brightened up
their stores, and exposed only fresh goods for sale.  But these few
changes only made the general run of Poketown institutions appear more
slovenly.  The contrast was that of a new pair of shoes, or a glossy
hat, on a ragged beggar!

With Janice on one side to spur him, and Miss 'Rill's unbounded faith
in him on the other hand, how _could_ Hopewell Drugg fall back into the
old aimless existence which had cursed him when first Janice had taken
an interest in his little Lottie, his store, and himself?

But, of course, Hopewell could not _make_ trade.  He had gained his
full share of the Poketown patronage, and held all his old customers.
But the profits of the business accumulated slowly.  As this second
winter drew to a close the storekeeper confessed to Janice that he had
only saved a little over three hundred dollars altogether towards the
betterment of Lottie's condition.

Janice began secretly to complain.  Her heart bled for the child, shut
away in the dark and silence.  If only Daddy would grow suddenly very
wealthy out of the mine!  Or if some fairy godmother would come to
little Lottie's help!

The person who seemed nearest like a fairy godmother to the child was
Miss 'Rill.  She spent a great deal of her spare time with the
storekeeper's daughter.  Sometimes she went to Mr. Drugg's cottage
alone; but oftener she had Lottie around to the rooms she occupied with
her mother on High Street.

"I declare for't, 'Rill," sputtered old Mrs Scattergood, one day when
Janice happened to be present, "you'll have the hull town talkin'
abeout you.  You're in an' aout of Hopewell Drugg's jest as though you
belonged there."

"I'm surely doing no harm, mother," said the little spinster, mildly.
"Everyone knows how this poor child needs somebody's care."

"Wal! let the 'somebody' be somebody else," snapped the old lady.  "I
sh'd think you'd be ashamed."

"Ashamed of what, mother?" asked Miss 'Rill, with more spirit than she
usually displayed.

"You know well enough what I mean.  Folks will say you're flingin'
yourself at Hopewell Drugg's head.  An' after all these years, too.
I----"

"Mother!" exclaimed her daughter, in a low voice, but earnestly.
"Don't you think you did harm enough long, long ago, without beginning
on that tack now?"

"There! that's the thanks one gets when one keeps a gal from makin' a
perfect _fule_ of herself," cried the old lady, bridling.  "S'pose
you'd been jest a drudge for Hopewell, all these years, Amarilla
Scattergood?"

"I might not have been a drudge," said Miss 'Rill, softly, flushing
over her needlework.  "At least my life--and his--would have been
different."

"Ye don't know how lucky you be," snapped her mother.  "And this is all
the thanks I git for tellin' Hopewell Drugg that he'd brought his pigs
to the wrong market."

"At least," said the spinster, with a sigh, "he will never worry you on
that score again, mother--he nor any other man.  When a woman gets near
to forty, with more silver than gold in her hair, and the best of her
useless life is behind her, she need expect no change in her estate,
that's sure."

"Ye might be a good deal wuss off," sniffed her mother.

"Perhaps that is so," agreed Miss 'Rill, with a sudden hard little
laugh.  "But don't _you_ take pattern by me, Janice, no matter what
folks tell you.  Mrs. Beasely is better off than I am.  She has the
memory of doing for somebody whom she loved and who loved her.  While
I----Well, I'm just an old maid, and when you say that about a woman,
you say the worst!"

"Why, the idee!" exclaimed her mother, with wrath.  "I call that flyin'
right in the face of Providence."

"I don't believe that God ever had old maids in the original scheme of
things."

"Humph! didn't He?" snapped Mrs. Scattergood.  "Then why is there so
many more women than men in the world?  Will you please tell me that,
Amarilla?" and this unanswerable argument closed what Janice realized
was not the first discussion of the unpleasant topic, between the
ex-schoolteacher and her sharp-tongued mother.


CHAPTER XXVI

JUST HOW IT ALL BEGAN

It was one of those soft, irresponsible days of April.  The heavens
clouded up and wept like a naughty child upon the least pretext; yet
between the showers the sun warmed the glad earth, and coaxed the
catkins into bloom, and even expanded the first buds of the huge lilac
bush at the corner of the Day house.

This was a special occasion; one could easily guess that from the
bustle manifest about the place.  Aunt 'Mira and Janice had been busy
since light.  Mrs Day was not in the habit of "givin' things a lick and
a promise" nowadays when she cleaned house.  No, indeed!  They gave the
house a "thorough riddin' up," and were scarcely through at dinner-time.

Then they hurried the dinner dishes out of the way, drove Marty and his
father out of the house, and hurried to change into fresh frocks; for
company was expected.

The ladies' sewing circle of the Union Church was to meet with Mrs.
Day.  These meetings of late had become more like social gatherings
than formerly.  The afternoon session was better attended; then came a
hearty supper to which the ladies' husbands, brothers, or sweethearts
were invited; and everything wound up with a social evening.

Aunt 'Mira and Janice had made many extra preparations for the occasion
in the line of cooked food; there were two gallon pots of beans in the
oven cooking slowly; and every lady, as she arrived, handed to Janice
some parcel or package containing cooked food for the supper.

The girl was busy looking after these donations when once the members
of the sewing circle began to arrive; and Aunt 'Mira's pantry had never
before been so stacked with food.  Marty stole in to gaze at the
goodies, and whispered:

"Hi tunket!  Just you go away for half an hour, Janice, and lemme be
here.  I could do something to that tuck right now."

"And so soon after dinner?" cried his cousin.  "I wonder if boys _are_
hollow all the way down to their heels, as they say they are?"

"It ain't that," grinned Marty.  "But a feller runs so many chances in
this world of going hungry, that he ought ter fill up while he can.
You just turn your back for a while and I'll show you, Janice."

But his cousin turned the key in the pantry door and slipped it into
her pocket for safety.  "We'll have no larks like _that_, Master
Marty," she declared.

Mrs. Scattergood and 'Rill were among the first to arrive; and then
came Mrs. Middler, the minister's wife.  Mrs. Beasely was there, and
Walky Dexter's wife, and the druggist's sister, who kept house for him;
and Mrs. Poole, the doctor's wife; and Mrs. Marvin Petrie, who had
married children living in Boston and always spent her winters with
them, and had just come back to Poketown again for the season.

Many of the ladies of Poketown never thought of making up their spring
frocks, or having Mrs. Link, the milliner, trim their Easter bonnets,
until Mrs. Marvin Petrie came from Boston.  She was supposed to bring
with her the newest ideas for female apparel, and her taste and advice
was sought on all sides when the ladies sat down to their sewing in the
big sitting-room of the old Day house.

Mrs. Marvin Petrie, however, was one of those persons who seem never to
absorb any helpful ideas.  Her forte was mostly criticism.  She could
see the faults of her home town, and her home people, in comparison
with the Hub; but she had never, thus far, led in any benefit to
Poketown.

"You can't none of you understand how glad I am to git to my daughter
Mabel's in the winter; and then how glad I am to shake the mud of
Boston off my gaiters when it comes spring," declared the traveled
lady, who had a shrill voice of great "carrying" quality.  When Mrs.
Marvin Petrie was talking there was little other conversation at the
sewing circle.  Her comments upon people she had met and things she had
seen, were in the line of a monologue.

"I do sartainly grow tired of Poketown when it comes fall, and things
is dead, and the wind gets cold, and all.  I'm sartain sure glad to git
shet of it!" she pursued on this particular afternoon.  "And then the
first sight of Boston--and the mud--and the Common and Public
Library,--and the shops, and all, make me feel like I was livin' again.

"Mabel says to me: 'How kin you live, Maw, most all the year in
Poketown!  Why, I was so glad to git away from it, that I'd walk the
streets and beg before I'd go back to it again!'  An' she would;
Mabel's lively yet, if she has been married ten years and got three
children.

"But by this time o' year--arter bein' three months or more in the
hurly-burly of Boston, I'm _de_-lighted to git into the country.  Ye
see, city folks keep dancin' about so.  They're always on the go.  They
ain't no rest for a body."

"But you ain't got ter go because other folks dooes, Miz' Petrie,"
suggested old lady Scattergood.  "Now, when I go ter see my son-in-law
at Skunk's Holler, I jest sit down an' fold my hands, an' _rest_."

"Skunk's Holler!" murmured one of the other women.  "To hear Miz'
Scattergood talk, one 'ud think she was traveled, too.  An' she ain't
never been out o' sight o' this lake, I do believe."

"If ye don't go yourself, you feel's though you had," said Mrs. Petrie,
with good nature.  "So much bustle around you--yes.  An' so I tell my
daughters.  I git enough of it b'fore spring begins."

"But," said the minister's wife, timidly, "after all, there isn't so
much difference between Poketown and Boston, excepting that Boston is
so very much bigger.  People are about the same everywhere.  And one
house is like another, only one's bigger----"

"Now, that's right foolish talk, Miz' Middler!" exclaimed the lady so
recently from the Hub.  "The people's just as different as chalk is
from cheese; and there ain't a church in Boston--and there's hundreds
of 'em--that don't make our Union Church look silly."

"But, Miz' Petrie," cried one inquiring body.  "Just what is it that
makes Boston so different from Poketown?  After all, folks is
folks--and houses is houses--and streets is streets.  Ain't that so?"

"Wa-al!"  The traveled lady was stumped for a moment.  Then she burst
out with: "There!  I'll tell ye.  It's 'cause there's some order in the
city; ev'rything here is haphazard.  Course, there's poor
sections--reg'lar _slums_, as they call 'em--in Boston.  But the poor,
dirty buildings and the poor, dirty streets, are in sort of a bunch
together.  They're in spots; they ain't dribbled all through the town,
mixed up with fine houses, and elegant squares, and boulevards.  Nope.
Cities know how to hide their poor spots in some ways.  Boston puts its
best foot forward, as the sayin' is.

"But take it right here in Poketown.  Now, ain't the good and the bad
all shoveled together?  Take Colonel Pa'tridge's fine house on High
Street, stuck in right between Miner's meat shop and old Bill Jones'
drygoods an' groceries--an' I don't know which is the commonest lookin'
of the two."

"There you air right, Miz' Petrie," agreed the Widow Beasely.  "Miner's
got so dirty--around his shop I mean--that I hate to buy a piece of
meat there."

"But the other butcher ain't much better," cried another troubled
housewife.  "And the flies!"

"Oh, the awful flies!" chorused several.

"Them critters is a pest, an' that's a fac'," declared Mrs.
Scattergood.  "Talk abeout the plagues o' Egypt----"

"But Miz' Petrie was tellin' us how Boston was different----"

"My soul and body!" gasped Mrs. Beasely.  "I reckon she's told us
enough.  It's a fac'.  Poketown is all cluttered up--what ain't right
down filthy.  An' I don't see as there's anything can be done abeout
it."

"Why--Mrs. Beasely--do you believe there is anything so bad that it
can't be helped?" queried Janice, slowly and thoughtfully.  It was the
first time her voice had been heard amid the general clatter, since she
had come to sit down.  Her nimble fingers were just as busy as any
other ten in the room; but her tongue had been idle.

"They say it's never too late to mend," quote 'Rill Scattergood; "but I
am afraid that Mr. Miner, and Mr. Jones, and some of the rest of the
storekeepers are too old to mend--or be mended!"

"Ain't you right, now, Amarilla!" sniffed her mother.

"'Tain't only the storekeepers," declared Mrs. Nothing, madam, nothing.
The chamberlain Marinelli has given me a great service. He took me
to the princes of the Ganges ueberhoben. Claudia. In fact? Appiani.
We can now to leave so much earlier.

I expect my people to drive, and I'm here once again. Emilia, however,
is also ready. Claudia.

I can be quiet, Mr. Graf? Appiani. Very quiet, gracious woman. (She goes
inside and he continued.) Third Lift The scene: a vestibule at
the pleasure palace of the prince.

First appearance The Prince. Marinelli. Marinelli.

Freely, he suggested the honor offered to the greatest of contempt. The
Prince.

And it shall remain here? This is how it work? Emilia is today his
own? Marinelli. Reputation after all. The Prince. I promised to me
by your imagination so much!

- Who knows how foolish you are made .-- If the advice of a once gates
is good, so be it a wiser man execute.

That would have "I should remember. Marinelli. Since I find myself
rewarded schoen! The Prince. And for what reward? Marinelli.

The fact that I have in my life about it wanted to beat the hill .--
When I sahe that neither Ernst nor ridicule the counts could move, his
love of honor nachzusetzen tries' I get it in armor to hunt. I told
him things about which he forgot. He joined insults against me, and I
demanded satisfaction - and invited them to the same place .-- I
thought so, either he or I am him.

I him: so the field is entirely on us. Or he me: now, though, he must
flee, and the prince least time wins.

The Prince. That would have you done Marinelli? Marinelli. Ha! One should
'know ahead of it, so foolish is ready for the big aufzuopfern -
you should see "it requires knowing how they would be recognizable
- The Prince.

And the Count? - He stands in the calls, so do not say to leave
twice. Marinelli. After it falls, without doubt .-- Who can it
verdenken? - He returned, now that he is still something important
to do than be with me to break his neck. And so he accepted me in the
first eight days after the wedding.

The Prince.

With Emilia Galotti!

The idea makes me furious! - Then let it be good and gone - and come
and brag that you have your life for me on the hill beaten me aufgeopfert
- Marinelli. What do you want to but, gracious Lord, that I should have
done more? The Prince.

Continue to do? - As if he would have done something! Marinelli. And
you can hear but, gracious Lord, for what you yourself have done .--
You were so happy, they are still in the church to speak. What did
you do with it abgeredet? The Prince (mockingly). To satisfy curiosity
- I can only satisfy the needs .-- Oh, it went all wish .-- You
do not continue to try, my friend finished serving too!

- She came to my request for more than half way forward. I'd just like
they may take. (Cold and mandatory.) Now you know what you want to
know - and you can go! Marinelli. And you can go! - Yes, yes, this is
the end of songs! and would 'be set also, I wanted to try the
impossible. - The Impossible I say? - Sun would be impossible' it is
probably not, but kuehn - If we in our Violence bride had said,
so would 'I get that out of the wedding should be nothing.

The Prince. Ei! what the man wants is not everything! Now seems' I gave
him only a command of my bodyguard, and he laid himself on the road
so in ambush, and fell even fifty to a car, and pulled 'a girl out,
he triumphs in me zubraechte. Marinelli. It is rather a girl had
been kidnapped by force, without the need for a violent kidnapping
similar view.

The Prince. If you want to do know, they would not talk like this a long
time. Marinelli. But for the outcome, one should not stand .-- It could
happen while Ungluecksfaelle - The Prince. And it is my nature
that I am responsible for things people do what they can not!

Marinelli. So, gracious Lord - (You hear a shot from afar.) Ha! What was
that? - Listen 'I'm right - you do not hear well, gracious Lord, a shot
fall? - And there's one! The Prinz. What is it? what's up? Marinelli.
What do you mean? - How, when I would operate, as you believe it? The
Prince. Employed? - How do you say but - Marinelli. In short: what
I am speaking, is happening. The Prince. Is it possible? Marinelli.
Just do not forget Prince, whose just assured me .-- I have your
word again - The Prince.

But the prisons are so - Marinelli.
One of his ungracious statements,
when his store was well filled with customers, brought about the retort
pointed from none less that Mrs. Marvin Petrie herself.

"Well, Bill Jones," declared that plain-spoken old lady, "we wimmen
have made up our minds to clean out the flies, an' all other dirt, if
we can.  Poketown is unsanitary--so Dr. Poole says--and we know it's
always been slovenly.  There ain't a place, I'll be bound, in the whole
town, that needs cleaning up more'n this, your store!"

"I ain't no dirtier than anybody else!" roared Jones, very red-faced.

"But you aim to be.  So you say.  When other folks all about you are
goin' to clean up, you say you won't be driv' to it.  Wa-al!  I'll tell
you what's going to happen to you, Bill Jones: We wimmen air goin' to
trade at stores that are decently clean.  Anyway, they're cleaner than
this hovel of your'n.  Don't expect me in it ag'in till I see a change."

Mrs. Marvin Petrie marched out of the shop without buying.  Several
other ladies followed her and distributed their patronage among the
other shops.  Old Bill hung out for a few days, "breathing threatenings
and slaughter."  Then the steady decrease in his custom was too much
for the old man's pocketbook.  He began to bleed _there_.  So he
signified his intention of falling in with the new movement.

There were householders, too, who had to be urged to join in the
general clean-up of Poketown.  Dr. Poole wrote a brief pamphlet upon
the house-fly and the dangers of that pest, and this was printed and
scattered broadcast about the town.  To the amazement of a good many of
the older members, like Elder Concannon, Mr. Middler read this short
treatise from the pulpit and urged his hearers to screen their
pantries, at least, to "swat the fly" with vigor, and to remove barns
and stables so far away from the dwellings that it would be, at least,
a longer trip for Mr. Fly from the barnyard to the dining-table and
back again!

The Board of Selectmen, stirred by Mr. Cross Moore and others, cleaned
the gutters of High Street and used the scraper on the drive itself
fully two months earlier than usual.  Sidewalks were rebuilt, and many
painted tree boxes appeared along the main street to save the remainder
of the tree trunks from the teeth of crib-biting horses.

Before most of the shops--the general stores particularly--were
hitch-rails.  Many of these were renewed; some even painted.  Store
fronts, too, were treated to a coat or two of paint.  Show windows were
cleaned and almost every store redressed its display of goods.

Trees were trimmed, and some of the tottering ones cut down entirely.
There were still plenty of shade trees on the steep High Street.

It was Janice who urged Hopewell Drugg to refurbish his store--painting
it inside and out, rebuilding the porch, and erecting a long hitch-rail
to attract farmers' trade.

"Of course you cannot afford it, Mr. Drugg," said the girl.  "That is,
it seems as though every dollar you spend is putting Lottie back.  But
'nothing ventured, nothing gained.'  You must throw out sprats to catch
herring.  To get together the money that specialist demands to treat
Lottie's eyes, you must endeavor to increase your trade.  Make the
store just as attractive as possible.  That's business, I believe.
Daddy would say so, I am sure."

Hopewell allowed himself to be convinced.  There was not a store in
town as attractive as Drugg's, after Clean-Up Day.  The whole of
Poketown, indeed, was in a new dress.  The trees were just budding out
nicely, there was a breath of lilac in the air, and the lawns were
raked clean and showed a velvety, green sheen that was delightful to
the eye.

The old Town Hall had been repainted.  Had it not been for the
opposition of Elder Concannon, the young folks would have collected
money for the repainting of the Union Church.  However, they cleaned
everything around it--yard and all--till it was as spick and span as it
could be.  And the burial ground in the rear of the church was made
beautiful, too.  The edges of the paths were trimmed, the paths
themselves raked, and all the tottering headstones were set up straight.

Gates were rehung and fences straightened all over town.  A smell of
fresh paint rivaled the scent of the bursting lilac blooms.  Never had
Poketown been so busy.

The cleaning-up process went on inside the houses as well as out.  Of
course, among pure-blooded New English housewives, such as the majority
of Poketown matrons were, there were few drones.  They prided
themselves on their housekeeping.

Earlier than usual the carpets went out on the lines, the curtains at
chamber and sitting-room windows were renewed, there was a smell of
soap and water in every entry, as one pushed the door open, and
altogether Poketown was generally turned out of doors, aired, dusted,
and brought back again into thoroughly clean rooms.

The old Day house had its "ridding up;" too.  Janice gave her aunt
considerable help; but Mrs. Day was not the slovenly housekeeper she
had been when first the girl had come to Poketown.  Even Uncle Jason
kept himself more neatly than ever before.  And he went to the barber's
at frequent intervals.

Janice once went down to the dock to see the _Constance Colfax_ come
in.  There was the usual crowd of loafers waiting for the boat--all
perched along the stringpiece of the wharf.

"But I declare!" thought Janice, her eyes dancing, "somebody certainly
_has_ 'slicked 'em up,' as Mrs. Scattergood would say.  Whoever would
believe it!  Walky has got a new shirt on--and straw cuffs, too--and a
necktie!  My goodness me!  And the hotel keeper really looks as though
his wife cared a little about his appearance.  And Ben Hutchins wears
whole boots now, and has washed his face, and had a shave.

"I must admit they don't look so much like a delegation from the
poorfarm as they did the day I came in on the _Constance Colfax_.
There has been a change in Poketown--there most certainly _has_ been a
change!" and the girl laughed delightedly.

It was marked everywhere.  It even seemed to Janice as though people
whom she met on the street stepped quicker than they once had!

Janice knew she had given her own folks--Uncle Jason, and Aunt 'Mira,
and Cousin Marty--a push or two in the right direction.  She had helped
Hopewell Drugg, too; and maybe she had instigated the waking up of
several other people.  But not for a moment did she realize--healthy,
thoughtless girl that she was--how much Poketown owed to her on
Clean-Up Day.

That was one great occasion in the old town.  Although the selectmen
had allowed two days in which the farmers' wagons were to cart away the
rubbish for the householders, the removal men had hard work to fill
their contract.

Some curbs were piled shoulder high with boxes of ashes, old
bedsprings, broken furniture, decayed mattresses, yard rakings,
unsightly pots and pans hidden away for decades in mouldy
cellars--debris of so many kinds that it would be impossible to
catalogue it!

For two days, also, hundreds of rubbish fires burned, and the taint of
the smoke seemed to saturate every part of Poketown.  Janice declared
that all the food on the supper table at the Day house seemed to have
been "slightly scorched."

"By jinks!" declared Marty, gobbling his supper with an appetite that
never seemed to lag.  "I bet I burned three wagon-loads of stuff 'sides
what I set outside on the street for 'em to take away.  No use talkin',
Dad, you got ter build a new pen and yard for the shoats."

"Whuffor?" demanded his father, eyeing him slowly.

"'Cause the old boards and rails was so rotten that I jest burned 'em
up," declared his son.  "You know folks could see it from the street,
an' it looked untidy."

"Wa-al," drawled Uncle Jason, with only half a sigh.

Janice could scarcely keep from clapping her hands, this so delighted
her.  She compared this with some of the conversation at the Day table
soon after the time she had arrived in Poketown!


CHAPTER XXVIII

"NO ODOR OF GASOLINE!"

During the winter now passed, Janice had watched the progress of the
new school under Nelson Haley's administration with growing confidence
in that young man.  Nelson was advancing as well as his pupils and the
school discipline.  Educators from other towns in the state--even in
neighboring states--had come to visit Poketown's school.

Janice could not help having a thrill of pride when she learned of
these visitations and the appreciation shown by other educators of
Nelson Haley's work.  She did not so often see the young man in a
situation where they could talk these wonders over; for Nelson was
very, very busy and gave both his days and evenings to the work he had
set for himself the fall before.

The girl might no longer honestly complain of Nelson's lack of purpose.
He had "struck his gait" it seemed; it was as though he had suddenly
seen a mark before him and was pressing onward to that goal at top
speed.

When he and Janice met as they did, of course, at church and
occasionally at evening parties, the teacher and the girl were the very
best of friends.  But tête-à-têtes were barred.  Was it by Janice
herself?  Or had Nelson deliberately changed his attitude toward her?

Sometimes she tried to unravel this mystery; but then, before she had
gone far in her ruminations, she began to wonder if she _wanted_ Nelson
to change toward her?  That question frightened her, and she would at
once refuse to face the situation at all!

Once Nelson told her that a small college in middle Massachusetts
offered a line of work that he believed he would like to take up--if he
was "doomed to the profession of teaching, after all."

"And does the doom seem so very terrible?" she asked him, laughingly.

"I admit that I can _do_ things with the scholars," he said, gravely.
"I have just begun to realize it.  It seems easy for me to make them
understand.  But the profession doesn't give one the freedom that the
law does, for instance."

Janice had made no further comment, nor did Nelson advance anything
more regarding the work offered by the college in question.

She had her own intense interests, now and then.  Clean-Up Day was past
but its effect in Poketown was ineradicable.  Janice was satisfied that
there were enough people finally awake in the town to surely, if
slowly, revolutionize the place.

How could one householder drop back into the old, shiftless, careless
manner of living when his neighbors' places on either hand were so
trim?  The carelessly-kept shop showed up a hundred per cent. worse
than it had before Clean-Up Day.  Even old Bill Jones kept in some
trim, and the meat markets began to rival each other in cleanliness.

The taxpayers began to speak with pride of Poketown.  When they visited
Middletown, or other villages that had previously looked down on the
hillside hamlet above the lake, they were apt to say:

"Just come over and see our town.  What?  You ain't been in Poketown in
two years?  No wonder you don't know what you're talking about!  Why,
we put it all over you fellows here for clean streets, and shops, and
nice-lookin' lawns and all that--and our school!"

Poketownites were proud of the reading-room, too, although Mr. Massey's
store was becoming a cramped place for it now.  The shelves devoted to
the circulating library were well crowded.  The state appropriation had
been spent carefully, and the new, well-bound books looked "mighty
handsome" when visitors came into the place.

But the original intention for the place had never been lost sight of.
It had been made for the boys and young men of Poketown.  They had
fully appreciated it, and, Elder Concannon's prophecy to the contrary
notwithstanding, the reading-room was never the scene of disorderly
conduct.

Janice hoped the day would come when the reading-room association
should have a building of its own,--not an expensive, ornate structure
for which the taxpayers would be burdened, and the up-keep of which
would keep the association poor for years; but a snug, warm, cheerful
place which would actually be a club for the boys, and offer all the
other benefits of a free library.

She knew already just where the building ought to stand.  There was a
certain empty lot on High Street which would give a library a prominent
site.  This lot was owned by old Elder Concannon.

It is now a melancholy ruin, misery, a vicious vampire, has devoured her
beauty and her youth. Days after she told me sadly, somewhat macabre
coquetry: - Do you see these two top teeth?

Well I was falling ... anemia. And I see from your Taiman ridiculous
and old, covering the ravages of time on his frayed clothing, bruised
hands, which were fine and noble; feet deep in some crude Zapatón; shot
to the weight of his youth failed of her life, dark, broken, broken.
cuerpecito The grotesque and the latter has been fair covachuelista
succulent feast of usurers; D.

Amaranto knows the bitterness of seeing his layettes puppeteer in the
middle of the stream, called the hunt barbaric to perform their
monthly personilla baker, the grocer, saithe. The waiters are also coffee
for Mr. Peláez a horrible nightmare, and not those who acquired supongáis
debt service nor gift guide your tastes.

The winter nights are so long, the home has dismantled a hostile spirit
that sheds its bosom, and the coffee is so smooth and a gift,
there's so much wasted light, the piano makes one hours and charming
melody wills Cracked by poverty.

In addition, the half roasted coffee has some semblance of dinner ...
Clearly, the appearance only; means becoming dinner ... decently. And
let's say in praise of D.

Amaranth, Never, or in the sultry days of eviction, or the siege of
Africa from its creditors, or if a child had died, without change
for burial, nor in the hours that Mrs. Peláez delirious in bed fementido
, crazy sad and hungry, never D. Amaranth had to miss the office!
Oh, brave soul that rhyme with Balduque, which harmonizes with the
role of trade, as well as being tempered in the fire of virtue or
administrative deserve a statue, with your sleeves and your cap,
on a pedestal of records and minutes!

I wonder if Mr Amaranto Peláez is reality?

Without doubt, friends, is on translucent and sick reality that allows
your allowance ridiculous, but it exists and is so called, and my
dear brother and dying.

And the most unfortunate is that D. Amaranth is a representative man.

Your profile trágicocómico muequea daily retablillo in the sad and
grotesque middle class. _Santaló_ Classic rogue, scholar,
adventurer and gallofa merges with the bohemian literary pedigüeña,
trotacalles and sentimental, and the birth rate of "stunts" between
poet and mischievous, philosopher and desarrapado.

The procession of 'stunts',' Operations', 'to sailors from the Puerta
del Sol ", is composed mainly of young people poisoned by the
literature, coming from the provinces to the conquest of Madrid.

Literature is as tragic siren of German ballads, and the poor sink
surfers on the sea floor have been heard by the spell of his song.

Only our surfers shipwrecked on dry asphalt on the streets, in the absurd
and the Figon horrida hostels. A game of rhymes fishing soon
replaced the two pesetas or half coffee with toast, so that
seudoalimento literature.

The venom of the letters is more powerful than morphine, that the alcohol
and ether. The paths taken by these tragic or triumphs or dies.
Rarely fits a mediocre, methodical or 'bourgeois'. Santaló Antonio
Cordoba was a boy I was going to see me to coffee and who used to
find, like a shadow, in the Puerta del Sol, a very early morning
hours of that terrible from those that are roñoso a handful of loose
change to go to sleep at home or _Han of Islandia_ the basement of
the Peña de France, hotels in fifty cents, where the shelter Buscón,
poor poets and thieves.

Santaló was very intelligent, very cultured, and had control.

Not triumphed because they could not even live.

Chance, which oversees apprentices in the art, no care of him.
The bohemians living in spite of the restaurants where they usually
go to eat and where litter usually go to bed.

Baroja says the literary triumph is the resistance of gastric juice.

We have to compromise with meatballs and dog with some chops celluloid
knows several literary generations. The cold of the night of the
assault cents for the bed, the food is delayed ... two or three
days, poverty in the suit and the pain of poverty in the poor soul
to have murdered friend Santaló Antonio.

Has not written a poem or a drama that decorate its memory. Forgotten
newspaper articles followed, he signed another translation or may
not sign anyone.

The siren of the Puerta del Sol swallowed his mind before the
Desnarigada, who loves the poor poets and artists, you squeeze the
heart, the icy silence of the hospital, including temperature and smell
of medicine.

That poor bloated heart that, like a clock counted the tragic hours
of hunger, neglect and the grotesque and terrible struggle to find a
little loose, at four in the morning, went as a Polichinelle broken,
stumbling around the crossroads of misery.

A few months ago Santaló was happy. He slept every night and ate steadily
three days a week. The life was easy! With a spirit as contentadizo,
Santaló was worthy of having triumphed. I had an idea of the money
too hyperbolic.

She possessed a pale blue hat that was a chasm of arbitrariness with fungi
and frégolis coarse comic tenor. - I had made love.

I wanted to keep as a souvenir of the 'whirlwind', but one day
_necesité dinero_ ... and I sold three fat bitches.

Right this naive notion that money is moving? Among the literary underworld
Santaló was always a gentleman of the Round Table. He was a bohemian,
but not thugs. And this has much merit, living on the street, hungry
and in pain, among gerifaltes of mischief pirouette makes learning
in the classrooms of the need.

Knights of the Night of Roasted Media and live a life Salto Mortal
somewhere between disastrous and paradoxes that sonnet, not many,
because the damaged stomach bohemia and scattered rhymes like a
flock of birds chimeric.

I could make a blacklist of these deluded minds, devoured by the monster
charm of literature. ¡Intrepid eaters shrews, which are my old
friends, who have lived in the shadow of the literature - pipes,
long hair and scarves - and going down little by little to Scuttle
macabre hospital!

I deeply feel your tragicomedy, oh, Losada great, great musician and
wild; Barrantes, the nightmare of the inlay, Alberto Lozano, a blond
and noble prince, and you also, Dorio, daring; Pujana, the intrepid;
Roldán, the price, which has a tremendous thirst that only calm
down when you _Ella_ mouth full of earth, you who dropped a brother
of this brotherhood of pain and absurdity, perhaps tembléis seeing
all the enthusiasm of your youth is offset by a hospital bed and a
pile of dust, with no name, in an ossuary.

And you who soñabais precisely the Glory, and because people read your
signature at the bottom of printed lines, the culling! You see what a
joke so bloody end?

It is a truth that he thought lie in the early excited, back in your
corner provinces, before falling in the Puerta del Sol from the grip
of Bohemia, the siren devouring the heart and brain of her lovers,
together with misery among funambulerías merry paradoxes and the dangerous
tightrope of the unexpected. These underground literary dress with
quaint metaphors her pain, the pain of those who were unable to
say what we have inside ... or what they believed flap on his
forehead: the pain of the heart of artists who have failed in the
Puerta del Sol, seized by the need.

The pain literature, the former writers of the picturesque thugs in
search of copper, like shadows among the shadows of the streets at dawn!
Santaló Alas!

No more searching cents to bed, while your heart beat painfully
as a crazy old clock. Bohemia_ The first layer _The gentleman that
this third layer of walking adventures and Villon was the great
love affairs, the father of French opera .

And the glorious tabard underwent the rigors of all the winds and rain
all winter, and anointed ideal for wandering under the Full Court
of Miracles, Weaving and kissing rhymes with whore and ardent advocates,
who said poet who was his _Rayo of luz_.

The layer of Villon, and the layer of Mañara knows of madrigals and
caresses at the crossroads of old Paris. He has seen undressed steels,
cabrilla in the shade under the mystique of the silver stars,
looking bravely heart by the charm of a sonnet.

Villon layer cruised the halls of the bishops, and among patches
and corcusidos emerged from exangüe bohemian hand begging to take
a salary of twelve to _Notre loa-Dame_, and lips to bite the lips
of harlots kissed amethyst episcopal uncia.

And the anointed layer of poetry and a pain shot tomorrow stairs
of the gallows.

For you to know that the first of the bohemian poet was about to be
hanged for a thief. Here is his glorious record: a layer drop the
rope and hanged from a mouth of lewd harlot as poisonous flower of lust.
However, many scholars have put the claw into the treasury Villon,
without the danger of rope.

¡Heinous vice versa for the lady Themis! Layer bohemia, then wrapped
in many unhappy superiors.

He was a faithful comrade of Edgardo Poe, that rare soul who heard
voices from heaven, earth and hell, and served as a shroud in his
last and tragic drunk in the streets of Baltimore.

Baudelaire, the lonely, made their layer that ivory tower isolated
from the common people of ill poets, journalists empty and vain,
of cretins balanced.

The layer of Verlaine shot by the taverns and the hospitals, and
one layer of a beggar is now revered as the spiritual banner of
France.

¡Layer Bohemian!

You, you've covered so many horrible tragicomedy that has been so
slandered by the fools of all times, in all countries.

You, you've walked so many dreams and so hungry, under the moon at
night without a home, you know so many tears so many cruelties, so
many injustices that you have seen the horror of the bars where
everyone is drunk and the lugubrious chant psalms _delirium of
tremens_ while in space rotates the ring of Saturn, our fateful
godfather.

The coat bohemia knew Espronceda in the gallantry of his romantic
era, before trashing his legend with that speech on fementido wool
...

Pelayo del Castillo, Eduardo del Palacio, Manuel Paso, Pedro
Barrantes, knew the bohemian charm of the layer, which is also among us
desgaire of the layer manolesca. And Alejandro Sawa! Glorioso ...
emperor of the bohemian gesture large and magnificent as Hugo, blind
like Milton, luxury and proud like a god with the head in the clouds
and his heart in the fire of love and pain of humanity.

Alejandro Sawa in the mantle layer bohemia was rainy, pontifical coat,
purple cloak, and clámide halo. Alejandro was the supreme consecration
of the layer bohemia.

The coat of the Bohemian aristocracy is misunderstood by the vulgar,
and never at the moment, is anachronistic and absurd.

It is the brave gesture before the horrible face of poverty, the
rictus of disdain to the articles and other things without wings,
without grace, without spirit.

Bohemia layer teases cash books of the mentality of the shopkeeper,
CHIRLA the sensitivity of the bad poets.

Bohemia layer on all the prose, especially the horror of the ordinary
hours, the bird is blue. It's pretty crazy ideal. See what is the
aristocratic lineage gentilísimo dip with chlorosis covering their
backs and their naked lady Bohemia.

Mendigo_ _The layer in the old days Catholics and chivalrous, was the
brother of the beggar king. He had a noble pride, wearing the belt and
the pot of guiropa, and dragged his ragged tabard with the pride
of a royal mantle. - Seek your poor somewhere else, I can not go
back - had to say to a mangante a gentleman who did not find a coin
to give him a hand.

They received alms with haughtiness. The beggar was anointed by the
words of the Rabbi, in good faith and believed to benefit their
donors, as well as building its soul through love.

They were left to the mercy of charity. Paseábase afternoon by a
Platerías hidalgüelo gabacho when he stormed to a beggar and noble
white beards look distinguished.

Dolióse the hidalgüelo and wanted to give a few coins without humiliation.
- Please bring this up cartapacio I'll give my inn, and a shield.
- Free your worship is giving alms or not - solemnly pedigüeño
cried - but I do not consent to be treated as a servant -.

And he turned back with disdain. The beggar is free as air and loves
his freedom of any slack and accommodation.

It was a rabid individualism: the place most scratching their eggs in
the sun in the middle of the stream, which trapped in the system
a bit cold in the House of Charity, where they have to put the
splint religion.

Ranch Al methodical prefer guiropa in the joy of the sunny, tasty
and naughty in parliament with their fraternity brothers.

And better than the same beds and ice cream, with some barracks or
hospital, they know more flavorful apretujarse Cuchilleros of the
ladder.

Above all, do what gives them the right wins, then God will provide ...
It's all sterile initiative begging: the crust is like a Spanish
soul, which does not cure any corregidor side. Spain is a country of
pirouette, gambling and adventure, and beggars are a rancid
picturesque representation.

In the homeland of pedigüeños, where everyone is a little mangantes, the
beggar is perfectly respectable. There is in us a yearning for tasty
sunbathe quietly, waiting for the miracle of bread and fish in the
form of official or destinejo 'combination' profit.

In a village of work, ideals, science and art, begging is a
nasty tumor, as well as criminal is the existence of the noble game of
Bingo. But we light luminaries to the goddess Chance, convinced that
life is a personal effort utopia.

A beggar lives a little better than covachuelista and comfortably over
a worker. In an afternoon of "work", any beggar a little ground out of
eight to ten pesetas, that is, the salary of the head of one third
of any business and is not shackled in covachuela, or put the
sleeves, or touched with a ridiculous hat. mangante On a pure
lineage, and so are our contemporaries, rather than by necessity,
given today's breed, with a huge force of atavism.

Oh layer beggar and holy gospel, like the haughty the king! Which went
floating through the pages of the Golden Age picaresque, which we
see today in the sunny, on the door of the barracks, or as a Goyescas
in Cuchilleros of stairs while singing the sound of Fuentecilla
Plaza Mayor.

Below there is a shred your rags in the Spanish soul, adventurous
and Andariego, pure and dreamy.

The operation on the child's eyes had been performed
almost as soon as she had arrived at the sanitarium; now he could
announce that it was successful.  Lottie could see and, barring some
accident, would be a bright-eyed girl and woman.

Already, the doctor urged, she was fit to go into the school for the
deaf and dumb in which such wonderful miracles were achieved for the
afflicted.  The good surgeon, learning from Miss 'Rill the
circumstances of the child's being brought to him, had subscribed two
hundred dollars toward Lottie's tuition and board in the school for the
deaf and dumb.

It was joyful news for both Hopewell and Janice.  That evening the
storekeeper got out his violin and played his old tunes over and
over--especially "Silver Threads Among the Gold."

"But it sounds more like a hymn of praise tonight," Nelson Haley
whispered in Janice's ear, as they sat on the front porch of the little
shop and listened to the violin.

A week later the little spinster came home.  Her visit in Boston seemed
to have done her a world of good.  She brought a great trunk packed
full of things to wear, or goods to be made up into pretty dresses and
the like.

"I declare for't!" ejaculated her mother.  "Looks like you had been
buyin' your trossoo--an' old maid like you, too!"

But Miss 'Rill was unruffled, and parried her mother's suspicion.

When the lake boat, the _Constance Colfax_, began to run on her summer
schedule after Decoration Day, many more summer tourists than usual got
off the boat at Poketown to look about.  The dock was so neat, and the
surroundings of the landing so attractive, that these visitors were led
to go further up into the town.

There was the pleasant, rambling, old Lake View Inn, freshened with
paint that spring, and with a green grass plot before it, and wide,
screened verandas.

"Why, it's only its name that is against it!" cried the wondering
tourists.  "It's not _poky_ at all."

These remarks, repeated as they were, made the merchants of the village
stop and think.  Ere this a board of trade had been formed, and the
welfare of the town was eagerly discussed at the meetings of the board.
Mr. Massey, the druggist, who was active, of course, got another idea
from Janice.

He began to delve into the past history of Poketown.  He learned how
and when it had been settled--and by whom.  People had mostly forgotten
(if they ever had known) the true history of the town.

A pioneer named Cyrus Polk had first built his cabin on the heights
overlooking this little bay.  He had been the first smith in this
region, too, and gradually around "Polk's Smithy" had been reared the
nucleus of the present town.

Through the years the silent "l" in the original settler's name had
been lost entirely.  But the post office agreed to put it back into the
name, and a big signboard was painted and set up at the dock.

  "POLKTOWN."


"It sartain sure looks a hull lot diff'rent, even if ye _do_ pernounce
it the same," admitted Walky Dexter.

So much was happening these balmy June days!  The school year--the
first in the new schoolhouse--was going to end in a blaze of glory for
Nelson Haley, Janice was sure.  Elder Concannon had promised in writing
to give his lot upon High Street for the site of a library building,
whenever the association should have subscribed twelve hundred dollars
toward the building itself.

Then came the first love letter that Janice Day had ever received!
Such a letter was it that she treasures it yet and will always do so.
It was one that she could proudly show to anybody she chose, without
betraying that intimacy that the ordinary love letter is supposed to
contain.

News had come regularly to Hopewell Drugg from the teachers at the
school where little Lottie had taken up her abode.  Because the child
was naturally so bright, and because of the fact that before she lost
her eyesight she had learned the alphabet and some primary studies, and
had not forgotten it all, Lottie was making marvelous progress the
teachers declared.

A much-bethumbed envelope, addressed in crooked "printed" characters to
"Mis Janis Day, Pokton," enclosed in a teacher's letter to the
storekeeper, was the cover of Janice's love letter.  Inside, the child
said:


"Dear Janis, jus' to think, I can see reel good, and my techur what I
luv says maybe I will heer reel good bymeby.

"Deer Janis, I no I cante spel good yet, and my ritin aint strate on
the paper.  But I want you shud be the firs to get leter from me I luv
yu so.

"Deer Janis, you got me the muney for the docker.  And he was soo good
himself, he never hardly hurt me a tall.

"Deer Janis, I luv yu mos of all, cos if yu hadn ben yu I wudn never
seen no moar.  An it was so dark all times.  Thats wy I feld down
cellar.  An now I am goin to heer they say.

"Deer Janis, see if my echo is thar.  Yu no my echo--that is the way
techur says to spell it.  If my echo is waitn tell it I am comin' to
heer it again.  And I luv you lots and lots, deer Janis.  I will show
you how much when I com home to father and Pokton.  no moar at prasens,
from your little Lottie."


Janice read the pitiful little scrawl through the first time on the
store porch.  Then, tear-blinded, she started down the hill toward the
old wharf at the inlet where she had first seen Hopewell Drugg's
unfortunate child.

She was halfway down the hill before she heard a quick step behind her
and knew, without turning, that it was Nelson Haley.


CHAPTER XXX

WHAT THE ECHO MIGHT HAVE HEARD

"What's your hurry, Janice?" demanded the young teacher, coming to her
side, smiling.  Then he saw her wet lashes and exclaimed: "My dear
girl! you are crying?"

"Not--not now," said Janice, shaking her head and her voice catching a
little as she spoke.

"Tell me what is the matter?" begged Nelson.  "Who's hurt you?"

"They're not those sort of tears, Nelson!" she cried, with a quivering
little smile.  "Oh, I ought to be just the very happiest girl alive!"

"And in tears?"

"Tears of joy, I tell you," she declared.

"Not weeping over the lost motor car, then?"

"Oh, my goodness!  No!  How could one be so foolish with such a dear,
dear letter as I've got here.  A regular _love_ letter, Nelson Haley!"

The young man's face changed suddenly.  It looked very grim, and he
caught at her hand which held little Lottie's letter.

"What's that?" he demanded, so gruffly that Janice was quite astonished.

"Why, Nelson Haley!  What's the matter?" she asked, looking at him with
wide-open eyes.

"Who's been writing to you, Janice?" he asked, huskily.

"I will show it to you.  It is too, too dear!" exclaimed the girl,
again half sobbing.  "Read it!"

The teacher spread out the crumpled page.  The look of relief that came
into his face when he saw Lottie's straggling pen-tracks was not at all
understood by Janice.

He read the child's letter appreciatively.  She saw the tears flood
into his own eyes as he gently folded the letter and handed it back.

"Why, Janice," he said, at last.  "What's a motor car to _that_?"

"That's what I say," she cried, and laughed.  "Come on! let's tell it
to Lottie's echo.  We'll see if it is still lurking in the dark old
spruce trees over yonder on the point."

She darted ahead of him and reached the ruined wharf where Lottie had
stood when first Janice had seen her.  In imitation of the child she
raised her voice in that weird cry:

"He-a! he-a! he-a!"

Back came the imitation, shot out of the wood by the nymph:

"'E-a! 'e-a! 'e-a!"

"Ha, ha!" laughed the girl.  "There's Lottie's echo."

"'A!" laughed the echo.  "'Ere's Lottie's echo!"

Nelson, flushed and breathing rather heavily, reached the old dock.

"What a girl you are, Janice!" he said.

"And what a very, very old person you are getting to be, Nelson Haley,"
she told him.  "Principal of the Polktown School!  I saw your article
in the State School Register.  Theories!  You write just as though you
know what you were writing about."

"Oh--well," he said, rather taken aback by her joking.

"And it wasn't much more than a year ago that you turned up your nose
at the profession of teaching."

"Aw--now!" he said, pleadingly.

"And _you_ were the young man who wanted to get through life without
hard work--or, so you said."

"Don't you know that it is only the fool who doesn't change his
opinion--and change it frequently, too?" he bantered back at her.

"You must have changed a whole lot, Nelson Haley," she declared, with
sudden gravity.  "Don't--don't you feel awfully _funny_ inside?  It's a
terrible shock, I should think, for one to turn right square around----"

"I don't feel humorous--not a little bit," he interposed, seriously.
"I have been working toward an end.  I expect my reward."

"Oh, Nelson!  The college?  Are they really going to invite you to go
there to teach?"

"That isn't the reward I mean," he said, shaking his head.

"For pity's sake! something bigger than _that_?  My!" Janice cried, all
dimpling again, "but you are a person with great expectations, aren't
you?"

"I certainly am," he said, bowing gravely.  "I have a great goal in
view.  Let me tell you----"

But suddenly she jumped up and walked along the edge of the inlet away
from the dock.  "Oh, do come along, Nelson.  We don't want to sit there
all day."

Nelson, flushed and only half rose.  Then he settled back again and
said, with some doggedness:

"I've got something to tell you myself.  This is a good place to talk."

"Why, how serious!"

"It is serious business--for me," declared the young man.

"And you're a trifle ungallant," she accused, looking at him from under
lowered lashes.

"This is no time for gallantry.  This is _business_."

"What business?" she asked, tentatively approaching.

"The business of living.  The business of finding out what's going to
happen to me--to _us_."

"My goodness!" murmured Janice.  "You talk almost like a soothsayer."

"Come and hear what the astrologer has to say," urged Nelson, yet
without his customary lightness of speech and look.  He was still very
serious.

"I don't know," she said, slowly, hesitating in her approach.  "I am
almost afraid of you in this mood.  Daddy says when a young man begins
to act like he was really seriously grappling with life, look out for
him!"

"Your father is right.  I am not to be trifled with, Miss Janice Day."

"Why, Nelson! is something really wrong?" she asked him, and came a
step nearer.

"As far as my future is concerned," said he, quietly, "it seems to be
quite all right."

"Then the college----?"

"I have a letter, too," he said, pulling it out of his pocket.

This bait brought her to him.  He thrust the letter into her hand, but
he held onto that hand, too, and she could not easily pull away from
him.

"What--what is it, Nelson?" she asked, looking at him for only a
moment, and there dropping her gaze before his intense look.

"I've had a committee come to see me and look over my work at the
Polktown School."

"Oh, Nelson!"

"Now the secretary of the college faculty writes me the nicest kind of
a letter.  I've made good with them, Janice."

"I--I'm so glad!" she murmured, eyes still down, and trying ever so
faintly to wriggle her hand out of his.

Suddenly Nelson Haley caught her other hand, too.  He held them firmly
and--for some reason--she just _had_ to raise her eyes and look
straight into his earnest ones.

"I've made good with them, Janice!" he cried--he almost shouted it.
"But that's nothing--just nothing!  The big thing with me now--the
reward I want--is to hear you say that I've won out with you.  Is it
so, Janice--have I won out with _you_?"

The long lashes screened the hazel eyes again.  She looked on the one
hand and on the other.  There really seemed no escape, this greatly
metamorphosed Nelson Haley was _so_ insistent.

So she raised her lashes again and looked straight into his eyes.  What
she whispered the echo might have heard; and she nodded her head
quickly, several times.


They came up through the grassy lane in the gloaming.  Mrs. Beasely
would be waiting supper for her boarder; but Nelson scouted the idea
that he should not see Janice home first.

Lights had begun to twinkle in the sitting-rooms of the various houses
along the street.  But there was a moon.  Indeed, that was the excuse
they had for remaining so late on the shore of the inlet.  They had
stopped to see it rise.

Through the thick trees the moonlight searched out the side porch of
Hopewell Drugg's store.  The plaintive notes of the storekeeper's
violin breathed tenderly out upon the evening air:

  "Darling, I am growing old--
  Silver threads among the gold,"

sighed Janice, happily.  "And that is Miss 'Rill beside him there on
the porch--don't you see her?"

Jailer. I want, Gracious Lord. Aegeon. Hülf and Aegeon hoffnunglos goes
to the end of his life a day later to see.

(Aegeon jailer and go from.) Zweyte Scene. (Antipholis of Syracuse,
a Kauffmann and Dromio occur .)

agreed Nelson, with a thrill in his voice.  "I hope that
when we're as old as they are, we'll be as happy, too.  Do you
suppose----"

Nobody but Janice heard the rest of his question--not even the echo!