This eBook was produced by Polly Stratton.

For italics, _.._ was used.


THE MORALS OF MARCUS ORDEYNE


by William J. Locke


                               PART I


                             CHAPTER I


For reasons which will be given later, I sit down here, in
Verona, to write the history of my extravagant adventure.  I
shall formulate and expand the rough notes in my diary which lies
open before me, and I shall begin with a happy afternoon in May,
six months ago.


May 20th.

_London_:--To-day is the seventh anniversary of my release from
captivity.  I will note it every year in my diary with a sigh of
unutterable thanksgiving.  For seven long blessed years have I
been free from the degrading influences of Jones Minor and the
First Book of Euclid.  Some men find the modern English boy
stimulating, and the old Egyptian humorous.  Such are the born
schoolmasters, and schoolmasters, like poets, _nascuntur non
fiunt_.  What I was born passes my ingenuity to fathom.
Certainly not a schoolmaster--and my many years of apprenticeship
did not make me one.  They only turned me into an automaton,
feared by myself, bantered by my colleagues, and sometimes good-
humouredly tolerated by the boys.

Seven years ago the lawyer's letter came.  The post used to
arrive just before first school.  I opened the letter in the
class-room and sat down at my desk, sick with horror.  The awful
wholesale destruction of my relatives paralysed me.  My form must
have seen by my ghastly face that something had happened, for,
contrary to their usual practice, they sat, thirty of them, in
stony silence, waiting for me to begin the lesson.  As far as I
remember anything, they waited the whole hour.  The lesson over,
I passed along the cloister on my way to my rooms.  I overheard
one of my urchins, clattering in front of me, shout to another:

"I'm sure he's got the sack!"

Turning round he perceived me, and grew as red as a turkey-cock.
I laughed aloud.  The boy's yell was a clarion announcement from
the seventh heaven.  I _had got the sack_! _I_ should never teach
him quadratic equations again.  I should turn my back forever
upon those hateful walls and still more abominated playing-
fields.  And I was not leaving my prison, as I had done once or
twice before, in order to continue my servitude elsewhere.  I was
free.  I could go out into the sunshine and look my fellow-man in
the face, free from the haunting, demoralising sense of
incapacity.  I was free.  Until that urchin's shriek I had not
realised it.  My teeth chattered with the thrill.

I was fortunately out of school the second hour.  I employed most
of it in balancing myself.  A perfectly reasonable creature, I
visited the chief.  He was a chubby, rotund man, with a circular
body and a circular visage, and he wore great circular gold
spectacles.  He looked like a figure in the Third Book of Euclid.
But his eyes sparkled like bits of glass in the sun.

"Well, Ordeyne?" he inquired, looking up from letters to parents.

"I have come to ask you to accept my resignation," said I.  "I
would like you to release me at once."

"Come, come, things are not as bad as all that," said he,
kindly.

I looked stupidly at him for a moment.

"Of course I know you've got one or two troublesome forms," he
continued.

Then I winced.  His conjecture hurt me horribly.

"Oh, it's nothing to do with my incompetence," I interrupted.

"What is it, then?"

"My grandfather, two uncles, two nephews and a valet were drowned
a day or two ago in the Mediterranean," I answered, calmly.

I have since been struck by the crudity of this announcement.  It
took my chief's breath away.

"I deeply sympathise with you," he said at last.

"Thank you," said I.

"A terrible catastrophe.  No wonder it has upset you.  Horrible!
Six living human beings!  Three generations of men!"

"That's just it," said I.  "Three generations of my family swept
away, leaving me now at the head of it."

At this moment the chief's wife came into the library with the
morning paper in her hand.  On seeing me she rushed forward.

"Have you had bad news?"

"Yes.  Is it in the paper?"

"I was coming to show my husband.  The name is an uncommon one.
I wondered if they might be relatives of yours."

I bowed acquiescence.  The chief looked at the paragraph below
his wife's indicating thumb, then he looked at me as if I, too,
had suffered a seachange.

"I had no idea--" he said.  "Why, now--now you are Sir Marcus
Ordeyne!"

"It sounds idiotic, doesn't it? " said I, with a smile.  "But I
suppose I -am."

And so came my release from captivity.  I was profoundly affected
by the awful disaster, but it would be sheer hypocrisy if I said
that I felt personal grief.  I knew none of the dead, of whom I
verily believe the valet was the worthiest man.  My grandfather
and uncles had ignored my existence.  Not a helping hand had they
stretched out to my widowed mother in her poverty, when one
kindly touch would have meant all.

They do not seem to have been a lovable race, the Ordeynes.  What
my father, the youngest son, was like, I have no idea, as he died
when I was two years old, but my mother, who was somewhat stern
and puritanical, spoke of him very much as she would have spoken
of the prophet Joel, had he been a personal acquaintance.

Seven years to-day have I been a free man.

Feeling at peace with all the world I called this afternoon on my
Aunt Jessica, Mrs. Ordeyne, who has borne me no malice for
stepping into the place that should have been the inheritance of
her husband and of her son.  Rather has she devised to adopt me,
to guide my ambitions and to point out my duties as the head of
the house.  If I refuse to be adopted, avoid ambitions and
disclaim duties, the fault lies not with her good-will.  She is a
well-preserved worldly woman of fifty-five, and having begun to
dye her hair in the peroxide of hydrogen era has not the
curiosity to abandon the practice and see what colour will
result.  I wish I could like her.  I can't.  She purrs.  Some
day I feel she will scratch.  She received me graciously.

"My dear Marcus.  At last!  Didn't you know I have been in town
ever since Easter?"

"No," said I.  "I am afraid I didn't."  Which was true.  "Why
didn't you tell me?"

"I would have asked you to dinner, but you will never come.  As
for At Home cards I never dream of sending them to you.  It is a
waste of precious half-penny stamps."

"You might have written me a nice little letter about nothing at
all," I suggested.

"For you to say 'What is that woman worrying me with her silly
letters for?'  I know what you men are."  She looked arch.

This is precisely what I should have said.  As I am not an
inventive liar, I could only smile feebly.  I am never at my ease
with Aunt Jessica.  I am not the kind of person to afford her
entertainment.  I do not belong to her world of opulence, and if
even I desired it, which the gods forbid, my means would not
enable me to make the necessary display.  My uncle, thinking to
retrieve the fallen fortunes of the title, amassed enormous
wealth as a company promoter, while I, on whom the title has
descended, am perfectly contented with its fallen fortunes.  I
have scarcely a thought or taste in common with my aunt.  In
fact, I must bore her exceedingly.  Yet she hides her boredom
beneath a radiant countenance and leads me to understand that my
society gives her inexpressible joy.  I wonder why.

She is always be-guide-philosopher-and-friending me.  I resent
it.  A man of forty does not need the counsels of an elderly woman
destitute of intellect.  I believe there are some women who are
firmly convinced that their sheer sex has imbued them with all
the qualities of genius.  To-day my aunt tackled me on the
subject of marriage.  I ought to marry.  I asked why.  It
appeared it was every man's duty.

"From what point of view?" I asked.  "The mere propagation of the
human race, or the providing of a superfluous young woman with a
means of livelihood?  If it is the former, then, in my opinion,
there are too many people in the world already; and if the
latter, I'm afraid I'm not sufficiently altruistic."

"You are so _funny!_" laughed my aunt.

I was not aware of being the least bit funny.

"But, seriously," she continued, "you _must_ marry."  She is a
woman who has an irritating way of speaking in Italics.  "Are you
aware that if you have no son the title will become extinct?"

"And if it does," I cried, "who on this earth will care a
half-penny-bun?"

I am growing tired of the title.  At first it was rather amusing.
Now it appears it is registered in Heaven's chancery and hedged
about with divine ordinances.  Only the other day an unknown
parson requested me to open a church bazaar, and I gathered he
had received his instructions direct from the Almighty.

"Why, every one would care," exclaimed my aunt, genuinely
shocked.  "It would be monstrous.  You owe it to your descendants
as well as to your ancestors.  Besides," she added, with apparent
irrelevance, "a man in your position ought to live up to it."

"I do," said I, "just up to it."

"Now you are pretending you don't understand me.  You ought to
marry money!"

I smiled and shook my head.  I don't think my aunt likes me to
smile and shake my head, for I saw a flicker in her eyes.  "No,
my dear aunt; emphatically no.  It would be comfortless.  If I
kissed it, it would be cold.  If I put my arms round it, it would
be full of sharp edges which would hurt.  If I tried to get any
emotion out of it, it would only jingle."

"What do you want then?"

"Nothing.  But if I must--let it be plain flesh and blood."

"Cannibal!" said my aunt.

We both laughed.

"But you can have plenty of flesh and blood, with money as well,
for the asking," she insisted; and thereupon my two cousins, Dora
and Gwendolen, entered the drawingroom and interrupted the
conversation.  They are both bouncing, fresh-faced girls, in the
early twenties.  They ride and shoot and bicycle and golf and
dance, and the elder writes little stories for the magazines.  As
I do none of these things, I am convinced they regard me as a
poor sort of creature.  When they hand me a cup of tea I almost
expect them to pat me on the head and say, "Good dog!"  I am
long, lean, stooping, hatchet-faced, hawknosed, near-sighted.  I
have not the breezy air of the jolly young stockbrokers they are
in the habit of meeting.  They rather alarm me.  Moreover, they
have managed to rear a colossal pile of wholly incorrect
information on every subject under the sun, and are addicted to
letting chunks of it fall about one's ears.  This stuns me,
rendering conversation difficult.

As I had not seen Dora since her return from Rome, where she had
spent the early spring, I asked, in some trepidation, for her
impressions.  Before I could collect myself, I was listening to a
lecture on St. Peter's.  She told me it was built by Michael
Angelo.  I suggested that some credit might be given to Bramante,
not to speak of Rosellino, Baldassare Peruzzi and the two San
Gallo's.

"Oh!" said my young lady, with a superb air of omniscience.  "It
was all Michael Angelo's design. _The others only tinkered away
at it afterwards_."

After receiving this brickbat I took my leave.

To console myself I looked up, during the evening, Michael
Angelo's noble letter about Bramante.

"One cannot deny," says he, "that Bramante was as excellent in
architecture as any one has been from the ancients to now.  He
placed the first stone of St. Peter's, not full of confusion, but
clear, neat, and luminous, and isolated all round in such a way
that it injured no part of the palace, and was held to be a
beautiful thing, as is still apparent, in such a way that any
one who has departed from the said order of Bramante, as San
Gallo has done, has departed from the truth."

Michael Angelo did not like San Gallo; neither did he like
Bramante-who was his senior by thirty years-but this makes his
appreciation of the elder's work all the more generous.

Tinkered away at it, indeed!


May 21st.

I spent all the morning at work by the open window.

I have a small house in Lingfield Terrace, on the north side of
the Regent's Park, so that my drawing-room, on the first floor,
has a southern aspect.  It has been warm and sunny for the past
few days, and the elms and plane-trees across the road are
beginning to riot in their green bravery, as if intoxicated with
the golden wine of spring.  My French window is flung wide open,
and on the balcony a triangular bit of sunlight creeps round as
the morning advances.  My work-table is drawn up to the window.
I am busy over the first section of my "History of Renaissance
Morals," for which I think my notes are completed.  I have a
delicious sense of isolation from the world.  Away over those
tree-tops is a faint purpurine pall, and below it lies London,
with its strife and its misery, its wickedness and its vanity.
Twenty minutes would take me into the heart of it.  And if I
chose I could be as struggling, as wretched, as much imbued with
wickedness and vanity as anybody.  I could gamble on the stock
exchange, or play the muddy game of politics, or hawk my precious
title for sale among the young women of London society.  My Aunt
Jessica once told me that London was at my feet.  I am quite
content that it should stay there.  I have much the same nervous
dread of it as I have of an angry sea breaking in surf on the
shingle.  If I ventured out in it I should be tossed hither and
thither and broken on the rocks, and I should perish.  I prefer
to stand aloof and watch.  If I had a little more of daring in my
nature I might achieve something.  I am afraid I am but a waster
in the world's factory; but kind Fate, instead of pitching me on
the rubbish-heap, has preserved me, perhaps has set me under a
glass case, in her own museum, as a curiosity.  Well, I am happy
in my shelter.

I was interrupted in my writing by the entrance of my cook and
housekeeper, Antoinette.  She was sorry to disturb me, but did
Monsieur like sorrel?  She was preparing some _veau a l'oseille_
for lunch, and Stenson (my man) had informed her that it was
disgusting stuff and that Monsieur would not eat it.

"Antoinette," said I, "go and inform Stenson that as he looks
after my outside so do you look after my inside, and that I have
implicit confidence in both of you in your respective spheres of
action."

"But does Monsieur like sorrel?" Antoinette inquired, anxiously.

"I adore it even," said I, and Antoinette made her exit in
triumph.

What a reverential care French women have for the insides of
their masters!  At times it is pathetic.  Before now, I have
thrown dainty morsels which I could not eat into the fire, so as
to avoid hurting Antoinette's feelings.

I came across her three years ago in a tiny hostelry in a tiny
town in the Loire district.  She cooked the dinner and conversed
about it afterwards so touchingly that we soon became united in
bonds of the closest affection.  Suddenly some money was stolen;
Antoinette, accused, was dismissed without notice.  I had a
shrewd suspicion of the thief--a suspicion which was afterwards
completely justified--and indignantly championed Antoinette's
cause.

But Antoinette, coming from a village some eighty miles away, was
a stranger and an alien.  I was her only friend.  It ended in my
inviting her to come to England, the land of the free and the
refuge of the downtrodden and oppressed, and become my
housekeeper.  She accepted, with smiles and tears.  And they were
great big smiles, that went into creases all over her fat red
face, forming runnels for the great big tears which dropped off
at unexpected angles.  She was alone in the world.  Her only son
had died during his military service in Madagascar.  Although her
man was dead, the law would not regard her as a widow because she
had never been married, and therefore refused to exempt her only
son.  "_On ne peut-etre Jeune qu'une fois, n'est-ce pas,
Monsieur?_" she said, in extenuation of her early fault.

"And Jean-Marie," she added, "was as brave a fellow and as
devoted a son as if I had been married by the Saint-Pere
himself."

I waved my hand in deprecation and told her it did not matter in
the least.  The della Scalas, supreme lords of Verona for many
generations, were every man jack of them so parented.  Even
William the Conqueror--

"_Tiens_ cried Antoinette, consoled, "and he became Emperor of
Germany--he and Bismarck!"

Antoinette's historical sense is rudimentary.  I have not tried
since to develop it.

When I brought my victim of foreign tyranny to Lingfield Terrace,
Stenson, I believe, nearly fainted.  He is the correctest of
English valets, and his only vice, I believe, is the accordion,
on which he plays jaunty hymn-tunes when I am out of the house.
When he had recovered he asked me, respectfully, how they were to
understand each other.  I explained that he would either have to
learn French or teach Antoinette English.  What they have done, I
gather, is to invent a nightmare of a _lingua franca_ in which
they appear to hold amicable converse.  Now and again they have
differences of opinion, as to-day, over my taste for _veau a
l'oseille_; but, on the whole, their relations are harmonious,
and she keeps him in a good-humour: Naturally, she feeds the
brute.

The duty-impulse, stimulated by my call yesterday on one aunt by
marriage, led my footsteps this afternoon to the house of the
other, Mrs. Ralph Ordeyne.  She is of a different type from her
sister-in-law, being a devout Roman Catholic, and since the
terrible affliction of two years ago has concerned herself more
deeply than ever in the affairs of her religion.  She lives in a
gloomy little house in a sunless Kensington by-street.  Only my
Cousin Rosalie was at home.  She gave me tea made with tepid
water and talked about the Earl's Court Exhibition, which she had
not visited, and a new novel, of which she had vaguely heard.  I
tried in vain to infuse some life into the conversation.  I don't
believe she is interested in anything.  She even spoke lukewarmly
of Farm Street.

I pity her intensely.  She is thin, thirty, colourless,
bosomless.  I should say she was passionless--a predestined
spinster.  She has never drunk hot tea or lived in the sun or
laughed a hearty laugh.  I remember once, at my wit's end for
talk, telling her the old story of Theodore Hook accosting a
pompous stranger on the street with the polite request that he
might know whether he was anybody in particular.  She said,
without a smile, "Yes, it was astonishing how rude some people
could be."

And her godfathers and godmothers gave her the name of Rosalie.
Mine might just as well have called me Hercules or Puck.

She told me that her mother intended to ask me to dine with them
one evening next week.  When was I free?  I chose Thursday.
Oddly enough I enjoy dining there, although we are on the most
formal terms, not having got beyond the "Sir Marcus" and "Mrs.
Ordeyne." But both mother and daughter are finely bred
gentlewomen, and one meets few, oh, very, very few among the
ladies of to-day.

I reached home about six and found a telegram awaiting me.

"_Sorry can't give you dinner.  Cook in an impossible condition.
Come later._  Judith."

I must confess to a sigh of relief.  I am fond of Judith and
sorry for her domestic infelicities, though why she should
maintain that alcoholized wretch in her kitchen passes my
comprehension.  If there is one thing women do not understand it
is the selection, the ordering, and the treatment of domestic
servants.  The mere man manages much better.  But, that aside,
Antoinette has spoiled me for Judith's cook's cookery.  I
breathed a little sigh of content and summoned Stenson to inform
him that I would dine at home.

A great package of books from a second-hand bookseller arrived
during dinner.  Among them were the nine volumes of Pietro
Gianone's _Istoria Civile del Regno di Napoli_, a copy of which I
ought to have possessed long ago.  It is dedicated to the "Most
Puissant and Felicitous Prince Charles VI, the Great, by God
crowned Emperor of the Romans, King of Germany, Spain, Naples,
Hungary, Bohemia, Sicily, _etcetera_."  Is there a living soul in
God's universe who has a spark of admiration for this most
puissant and most felicitous monarch crowned by God Emperor and
King of the greater part of Europe (and docked of most of his
pretensions by the Treaty of Utrecht)?  We only remember the
forcible-feeble person by his Pragmatic Sanction, and otherwise
his personality has left in history not the remotest trace.  And
yet, on the 12th February, 1723, a profoundly erudite, subtle,
and picturesque historian grovels before the man and subscribes
himself "Of your Holy Caesarean and Catholic Majesty the most
humble and most devoted and most obsequious vassal and slave
Pietro Gianone."  What ruthless judgments posterity passes on
once enormous reputations!  In Gianone's admirable introduction
we hear of "_il celebre Arthur Duck, il quale oltro a' con
confini della sua Inghilterra volle in altri a piu lontani Paesi
andav rintracciando l'uso a l'autorita delle romane leggi ne'
nuovi domini de' Principi cristiani; e di quelle di ciascheduna
Nazione volle ancora aver conto: le ricerco nella vicina Scozia,
e nell' Ibernia; trapasso nella Francia, e nella Spagna; in
Germania, in Italia, a nel nostro Regno ancora: si stese in oltre
in Polonia, Boemia, in Ungheria, Danimarca, nella Svezia, ed in
piu remote parti_."  A devil of a fellow this celebrated English
Arthur Duck, who besides writing a learned treatise _De Usu et
Auth. Jur. Civ. Rom. in Dominiis Principum Christianorum_, was a
knight, a member of Parliament, chancellor of the diocese of
London, and a master in chancery.  Gianone flattens himself out
for a couple of pages before this prodigy whom he lovingly calls
_Ariuro_, as who should say Raffaelo or Giordano; and now, where
in the hearts of men lingers Sir Arthur Duck?  For one thing he
had a bad name.  Our English sense of humour revolts from making
a popular hero of a man called Duck.  Yet we made one of Drake.
But there was something masculine about the latter: in fact,
everything.

I am afraid it was rather late when I got to Judith.


                           CHAPTER II


May 22d.

I wonder whether I should be happier now if I had lived in a
garret "in the brave days when I was twenty-one," if I had
undergone the lessons of misery with the attendant compensations
of "_une folle maitresse, de francs amis et l'amour des chansons_,"
 and had joyous-heartedly mounted my six flights of stairs.  I
lived modestly, it is true; but never for a moment was I doubtful
as to my next meal, and I have always enjoyed the creature comforts
of the respectable classes; never did Lisette pin her shawl
curtain-wise across my window.  Sometimes, nowadays, I almost wish
she had.  I never dreamed of glory, love, pleasure, madness, or
spent my lifetime in a moment, like the singer of the immortal
song.  Often the weary moments seemed a lifetime.

And now that I am forty, "it is too late a week."  Boon
companions, of whom I am thankful to say I have none, would drive
me crazy with their intolerable heartiness.  I once spent an
evening at the Savage Club.  As for the _folle maitresse_--as a
concomitant of my existence she transcends imagination.

"What are you thinking of?" asked Judith.

"I was thinking how the _'Dans un grenier qu'on est bien a vingt
ans'_ principle would have worked in my own case," I answered
truthfully, for the above reflections had been Passing through my
mind.

Judith laughed.

"You in a garret?  Why, you haven't got a temperament!"

I suppose I haven't.  It never occurred to me before.  Beranger
omitted that from his list of attendant compensations.

"That's the difference between us," she added, after a pause.  "I
have a temperament and you haven't."

"I hope you find it a great comfort."

"It is ten times more uncomfortable than a conscience.  It is the
bane of one's existence."

"Why be so proud of having it?"

"You wouldn't understand if I told you," said Judith.

I rose and walked to the window and gazed meditatively at the
rain which swept the uninspiring little street.  Judith lives in
Tottenham Mansions, in the purlieus of the Tottenham Court Road.
The ground floor of the building is a public-house, and on summer
evenings one can sit by the open windows, and breathe in the
health-giving fumes of beer and whisky, and listen to the sweet,
tuneless strains of itinerant musicians.  When my new fortunes
enabled me to give the dear woman just the little help that
allowed her to move into a more commodious flat, she had the many
mansions of London to choose from.  Why she insisted on this
abominable locality I could never understand.  It isn't as if the
flat were particularly cheap; indeed the fact of its being
situated over a public-house seems to enhance the rent.  She said
she liked the shape of the knocker and the pattern of the
bathroom taps.  I dimly perceive that it must have had something
to do with the temperament.

"It always seems to rain when we propose an outing together.
This is the fourth time since Easter," I remarked.

We had planned a sedate country jaunt, but as the day was pouring
wet we remained at home.

"Perhaps this is the way the _bon Dieu_ has of expressing his
disapproval of us," said Judith.

"Why should he disapprove?" I asked.

A shrug of her shoulders ended in a shiver.

"I am chilled through."

"My dear girl," I cried, "why on earth haven't you lit the fire?"

"The last time I lit it you said the room was stuffy."

"But then it was beautiful blazing sunshine, you illogical
woman," I exclaimed, searching my pockets for a match-box.

I struck a match.  To apply it to the fire I had to kneel by her
chair.  She stretched out her hand--she has delicate white hands
with slender fingers--and lightly touched my head.

"How long have we known each other?" she asked.

"About eight years."

"And how long shall we go on?"

"As long as you like," said I, intent on the fire.

Judith withdrew her hand.  I knelt on the hearthrug until the
merry blaze and crackle of the wood assured me of successful
effort.

"These are capital grates," I said, cheerfully, drawing a
comfortable arm-chair to the front of the fire.

"Excellent," she replied, in a tone devoid of interest.

There was a long silence.  To me this is one of the great charms
of human intercourse.  Is there not a legend that Tennyson and
Carlyle spent the most enjoyable evenings of their lives
enveloped in impenetrable silence and tobacco-smoke, one on each
side of the hob?  A sort of Whistlerian nocturne of golden fog!

I offered Judith a cigarette.  She declined it with a shake of
the head.  I lit one myself and leaning back contentedly in my
chair watched her face in half-profile.  Most people would call
her plain.  I can't make up my mind on the point.  She is what is
termed a negative blonde--that is to say, one with very fair hair
(in marvellous abundance--it is one of her beauties), a sallow
complexion and deep violet eyes.  Her face is thin, a little
worn, that of the woman who has suffered--temperament again!  Her
mouth, now, as she looks into the new noisy flames, is drawn down
at the corners.  Her figure is slight but graceful.  She has
pretty feet.  One protruded from her skirt, and a slipper dangled
from the tip.  At last it fell off.  I knew it would.  She has a
craze for the minimum of material in slippers--about an inch of
leather (I suppose it's leather) from the toe.  I picked the vain
thing up and balanced it again on her stocking-foot.

"Will you do that eight years hence?" said Judith.

"My dear, as I've done it eight thousand times the last eight
years, I suppose I shall," I replied, laughing.  "I'm a creature
of habit."

"You may marry, Marcus."

"God forbid!" I ejaculated.

"Some pretty fresh girl."

"I abominate pretty fresh girls.  I would just as soon talk to a
baby in a perambulator."

"The women men are crazy to marry are not always those they
particularly delight to converse with, my friend," said Judith.

I lit another cigarette.  "I think the sex feminine has marriage
on the brain," I exclaimed, somewhat heatedly.  "My Aunt Jessica
was worrying me about it the day before yesterday.  As if it were
any concern of hers!"

Judith laughed below her breath and called me a simpleton.

"Why?" I asked.

"Because you haven't got a temperament."

This was a foolish answer, having no bearing on the question.  I
told her so.  She replied that she was years older than I, and
had learned the eternal relevance of all things.  I pointed out
that she was years younger.

"How many heart-beats have you had in your life--real, wild,
pulsating heart-beats--eternity in an hour?"

"That's Blake," I murmured.

"I'm aware of it.  Answer my question."

"It's a silly question."

"It isn't.  The next time you see a female baby in a
perambulator, take off your hat respectfully."

I am afraid I am clumsy at repartee.

"And the next time you engage a cook, my dear Judith," said I,
"send for a mere man."

She coloured up.  I dissolved myself in apologies.  Her wounded
susceptibilities required careful healing.  The situation was
somewhat odd.  She had not scrupled to attack the innermost
weaknesses of my character, and yet when I retaliated by a hit at
externals, she was deeply hurt, and made me feel a ruffianly
blackguard.  I really think if Lisette had pinned up that curtain
I should have learned something more about female human nature.
But Judith is the only woman I have known intimately all my life
long, and sometimes I wonder whether I shall ever know her.  I
told her so once.  She answered: "If you loved me you would know
me."  Very likely she was right.  Honestly speaking, I don't love
Judith.  I am accustomed to her.  She is a lady, born and bred.
She is an educated woman and takes quite an intelligent interest
in the Renaissance.  Indeed she has a subtler appreciation of the
Venetian School of Painting than I have.  She first opened my
eyes, in Italy, to the beauties, as a gorgeous colourist, of
Palma Vecchio in his second or Giorgionesque manner.  She is in
every way a sympathetic and entertaining companion.  Going
deeper, to the roots of human instinct, I find she represents to
me--so chance has willed it--the _ewige weibliche_ which must
complement masculinity in order to produce normal existence.  But
as for the "_zieht uns hinan_"--no.  It would not attract me
hence--out of my sphere.  I could commit an immortal folly for no
woman who ever made this planet more lustrous to its
Bruderspharen.

I don't understand Judith.  It doesn't very greatly matter.  Many
things I don't understand, the spiritual attitude towards
himself, for example, of the intelligent juggler who expends his
life's energies in balancing a cue and three billiard-balls on
the tip of his nose.  But I know that Judith understands me, and
therein lies the advantage I gain from our intimacy.  She gauges,
to an absurdly subtle degree, the depth of my affection.  She is
really an incomparable woman.  So many insist upon predilection
masquerading as consuming passion.  There is nothing theatrical
about Judith.

Yet to-day she appeared a little touchy, moody, unsettled.  She
broke another pleasant spell of fireside silence, that followed
expiation of my offence, by suddenly calling my name.

"Yes?" said I, inquiringly.

"I want to tell you something.  Please promise me you won't be
vexed."

"My dear Judith," said I, "my great and imperial namesake, in
whose meditations I have always found ineffable comfort, tells me
this: 'If anything external vexes you, take notice that it is not
the thing which disturbs you, but your notion about it, which
notion you may dismiss at once, if you please!'  So I promise to
dismiss all my notions of your disturbing communication and not
to be vexed."

"If there is one platitudinist I dislike more than another, it is
Marcus Aurelius," said Judith.

I laughed.  It was very comfortable to sit before the fire, which
protested, in a fire's cheery, human way, against the depression
of the murky world outside, and to banter Judith.

"I can quite understand it," I said.  "A man sucks in the
consolations of philosophy; a woman solaces herself with
religion."

"I can do neither," she replied, changing her attitude with an
exaggerated shaking down of skirts.  "If I could, I shouldn't
want to go away."

"Go away?" I echud.

"Yes.  You mustn't be vexed with me.  I haven't got a cook--"

"No one would have thought it, from the luncheon you gave me, my
dear."

The alcoholized domestic, by the way, was sent out, bag and
baggage, last evening, when she was sober enough to walk.

"And so it is a convenient opportunity," Judith continued,
ignoring my compliment--and rightly so; for as soon as it had
been uttered, I was struck by an uneasy conviction that she had
herself disturbed the French caterers in the Tottenham Court Road
from their Sabbath repose in order to provide me with food.

"I can shut up the flat without any fuss.  I am never happy at
the beginning of a London season.  I know I'm silly," she went
on, hurriedly.  "If I could stand your dreadful Marcus Aurelius I
might be wiser--I don't mind the rest of the year; but in the
season everybody is in town--people I used to know and mix with
--I meet them in the streets and they cut me and it--hurts--and
so I want to get away somewhere by myself.  When I get sick of
solitude I'll come back."

One of her quick, graceful movements brought her to her knees by
my side.  She caught my hand.

"For pity's sake, Marcus, say that you understand why it is."

I said, "I have been a blatant egoist all the afternoon, Judith.
I didn't guess.  Of course I understand."

"If you didn't, it would be impossible for us."

"Have no doubt," said I, softly, and I kissed her hand.

I came into her life when she counted it as over and done with
--at eight and twenty--and was patiently undergoing premature
interment in a small pension in Rome.  How long her patience
would have lasted I cannot say.  If circumstances had been
different, what would have happened? is the most futile of
speculations.  What did happen was the drifting together of us
two bits of flotsam and our keeping together for the simple
reason that there were no forces urging us apart.  She was past
all care for social sanctions, her sacred cap of good repute
having been flung over the windmills long before; and I,
friendless unit in a world of shadows, why should I have rejected
the one warm hand that was held out to me?  As I said to her this
afternoon, Why should the _bon Dieu_ disapprove?  I pay him the
compliment of presuming that he is a broad-minded deity.

When my fortune came, she remarked, "I am glad I am not free.  If
I were, you would want to marry me, and that would be fatal."

The divine, sound sense of the dear woman!  Honour would compel
the offer.  Its acceptance would bring disaster.

Marriage has two aspects.  The one, a social contract, a _quid_
of protection, maintenance, position and what not, for a _quo_ of
the various services that may be conveniently epitomized in the
phrase _de mensa et thoro_.  The other, the only possible
existence for two beings whose passionate, mutual attraction
demands the perfect fusion of their two existences into a common
life.  Now to this passionate attraction I have never become,
and, having no temperament (thank Heaven!), shall never become, a
party.  Before the turbulence therein involved I stand affrighted
as I do before London or the deep sea.  I once read an epitaph in
a German churchyard: "I will awake, O Christ, when thou callest
me; but let me sleep awhile, for I am very weary."  Has the human
soul ever so poignantly expressed its craving for quietude?  I
fancy I should have been a heart's friend of that dead man, who,
like myself, loved the cool and quiet shadow, and was not allowed
to enjoy it in this world.  I may not get the calm I desire, but
at any rate my existence shall not be turned upside down by mad
passion for a woman.  As for the social-contract aspect of
marriage, I want no better housekeeper than Antoinette; and my
dining-table having no guests does not need a lady to grace its
foot; I have no _a priori_ craving to add to the population.  "If
children were brought into the world by an act of pure reason
alone," says Schopenhauer, "would the human race continue to
exist?  Would not a man rather have so much sympathy with the
coming generation as to spare it the burden of existence? or at
any rate not take it upon himself to impose that burden upon it
in cold blood?"  By bringing children into the world by means of
a marriage of convenience I should be imposing the burden of
existence upon them in cold blood.  I agree with Schopenhauer.

And the dreadful bond of such a marriage!  To have in the closest
physical and moral propinquity for one hundred and eighty-six
hours out of the week, each hour surcharged with an obligatory
exchange of responsibilities, interests, sacrifices of every
kind, a being who is not the utter brother of my thoughts and
sister of my dreams--no, never! _Au grand non, au grand jamais!_

Judith is an incomparable woman, but she is not the utter brother
of my thoughts and the sister of my dreams; nor am I of hers.

But the comradeship she gives me is as food and drink, and my
affection fulfils a need in her nature.  The delicate adjustment
of reciprocals is our sanction.  Marriage, were it possible,
would indeed be fatal.  Our pleasant, free relations, unruffled
by storm, are ideal for us both.

VII their friends come back Tristan in his room after lunch to find
his friend Garcia. - Hey!

Are you here? I have not said anything - said in a tone between
loving and displicente. Of course I had not said anything, nor
why. Garcia, in the opinion of the servants of the house,
was not brought anything because the _chaquet_ frayed, frayed
trousers, hat and beard with fat aborrascadas terribly.

But Garcia was the closest friend that had the gentleman Tristan,
her classmate and a professor in the making.

Their friendship dated back to the University.

One day when he had to Tristan the conference, delivered with such
galanura the teacher, pleasantly surprised, he was pleased that at
last they have found a disciple of such understanding and speech
easier.

When exiting a class lad ugly, hairy and untidy, with whom he had
never crossed the floor, hugged him and congratulated him
enthusiastically.

It was Garcia.

Since then, Tristan had a friend more loyal, more caring, more
selfless. To bar the progress that our young people both at
University and in the Ateneo and the press, growing in geometrical
proportion admiration Garcia. When Tristan articles and published
his first poems in a magazine, juzgole hit a great man, and
this view is no longer anyone in APEO lifetime. When offered for
sale last year the volume of poems entitled _Engaños and Desengaños_,
Garcia believed him at the pinnacle of glory and at his side to
share it.

Walked the streets to take in hand, went into the book and
learned how many copies were sold, went to the cafes and read aloud
a few verses left stunned parishioners, and everywhere voceando
gesticulating and delayed the fame of the poet.

Tristan appreciated that devotion, but not enough, you need to
speak plainly.

That is our sinful nature.

As the table was merely grumpy hello, locked in after dark and a
little polite silence.

But Garcia was accustomed to these silences and respect the capricious
and sometimes uncommunicative of his friend.

He lit a cigarette, offered him another and began to walk
from one corner to another office exactly as if you
were alone.

Garcia had a book in hand, appeared to read it, but when he
returned back Tristan lifted his eyes and looked at him with a
mixture of concern and respect.

At last, smiling humbly, dared to say: - Do not you know, sad?

Today I had a grip on the _Colegio Platónico_.

Tristán without interrupting your walk away from the nose was a
sound that indicated that he had heard. - Yeah, a grip with
the director and your cause. - For my sake? - said the young
man reluctantly barely deigned to return the head. - I do not
know who he was with the breath of the class in which I quoted
your compositions of Rhetoric and made them learn by heart to the
children and me very sullen and said: - "Amigo García, I
understand that you are allowed in class talking about the verses
of a friend and make you nothing less than to the side of the great
literary models.

You should be aware that this is not tolerable, and you should
consider the affection and friendship that is not impassioned
by entitling mixtificar (a palabreja employing and Troche Moche),
a tender mixtificar the intelligence of his disciples. "-- "Sir
- I answered - when I cite to authorize any composition is a
compliment because I am persuaded that he deserves that friendship
or any other reason taking part in it may be contained .»--«¿ you
that your friend (not going to be a beginner) can be placed at the
height of the great poets we have had and we have in Spain?

"- ask me increasingly choppy .-- 'No sir, I do not figure, but I'm
convinced of that - he replied .--«¡ Come, Garcia, and let you
clapper is not goose! "Yes, I think I called goose. I should answer:
The goose and the ostrich and the kestrel are you running a
school in Castilian Spain without knowing ... But you see, my
friend Tristan, I need the fifteen month giving me hard ... In fact,
Garcia also was arguing with his elderly mother with fifteen him
hard in the Platonic school, twenty-latino_ school _Greco and some
lessons individuals. In total, fifty or sixty tough month. Had
already made three opposition chairs of Rhetoric and Poetics
occupy second and third place in the lists and was resolved to
oppose all that vacaran to grab one. - You're always doing foolish
things, Garcia! - Tristan exclaimed with an accent where transparent
complacency with which the observations. And put in a good mood
suddenly proposed to his friend out to drink coffee. I took the
_Cervecería Inglesa_ thence down to _Recoletos_ and following a
walk by the _Castellana_ until the end. Tristan wanted to go there
when the shot gun.

He was a fierce fan this year, partly because they know they are
feared at every moment be forced to go to the field of honor, in
part because he had shown exceptional provisions from the beginning
for him.

Also frequented the halls of weapons, but their successes here were
much lower.

Penetrated, as, within the draft and was received by three or four
customers that there were samples with respect as a luminary of the
art.

Tristan gave clear evidence that this deserved honor putting eight
bullets followed a voice command in a small circle the size
of a hard drive. It is impossible to imagine the performance,
the veneration with which the waiter carrying guns would be presented
after each shot.

A priest offering incense and myrrh at the altar would not take a
more humble and contemplative.

As for Garcia, though he was a man full of rhetorical head
to toe, looked to his friend from the couch where he sat with
eyes and joyful and triumphant again parishioners who want to say:
'You see what you eye has to put the bullet on the target?

It is so accurate for measuring _sáficos adónicos_. "They went
out there and finally returned to the center by the trip. it was
like Sunday, very busy, but while Garcia was quite bad costumes
and contrasted with the refined elegance that always held his
friend, is not even slightly ashamed to bring to his side: a
good quality to be recognized. Garcia thanked all the warmth of
his soul. They had not gone far when faced with the great poet
Luis de Rojas, the affectionate friend and revered teacher of
Tristan. It was a neat old man, right faction and eyes
live knob and spent entirely white mustache and hair and hair
cut in half as a tribute paid to their glorious romantic youth.
She brought a granddaughter of the hand and kissed
Tristan Garcia while entertaining a few steps away respectfully.

Master and disciple departed with fond moments, and the cordial
manner with which he approached Rojas could see how sad it was his
favorite. This was declared in effect on the French teacher who
put in the preface to the volume of poems entitled _Engaños and
Desengaños_ published by our young the previous year.

With this preface, the book had achieved a resonance that
ordinarily do not reach the production of new poets. - Goodbye,
Aldama - and concluded by saying tight while your hand - if it is
missing you on Friday.

Two or three weeks you do not see it. Rojas received friends Friday
evening at his home.

It was a gathering of writers almost exclusively dominated by
youth. Tristán, who was astonished at heart and very loving your
choice of payment, which began after he had paired with Garcia
singing his praises. - What a poet, my friend!

                          What a fantasy!

What vena easy, smooth, cool!

Never have been written in Spanish or any language that I imagine
few more melodious verses. Even in his last compositions, when
it is just a poor old outdated, looks everywhere the claw of
the lion. Look at that boat _The pique_ is really beautiful ...!

¡Beautiful, beautiful! And while walking began to recite with
a little emphasis octaves of that famous composition of the
most famous Spanish poet. García approved with gestures and some
words with the beauty of the song. 'Great indeed! Very pathetic!
What pomp! What an ornament! 'Tristan When finished, they
walked in silence for some time. Garcia suddenly stops and exclaims
in tone resolved: - You know what I say, sad ...?

_The Pique_ boat is a piece of relevant evidence. The ceremony was
wonderful, very much artifice and pathetic ... but I would not
change it for your _Golpe ... viento_ Tristan was red, we do not
know if in shame or pleasure, perhaps both at once. - Man,
God, no desbarres! - I do not I will tell you whether you have
both estrus and number. Rojas is unique to the number in
Spain ...

But I prefer yours because it has more variety of tropes ...
- My God, García! - I said ... It has more richness of tropes.
No one that I apee ...

Besides, I tell you frankly - said standing and hollow voice - not
transijo can not compromise with metonymy that Rojas used in the
fifth verse of the second octave.

It's more than bold, disparate.

That 'the star its rays arguing "there can be critical to the
approval, do not deny it, but my literary conscience prevents me
at this point to issue a favorable opinion.

Tristan continued protesting. Garcia said with increasing energy
- and I say to you again.

Judge me unworthy of the title of licentiate in philosophy and
instill in my disciples understood the basics of the Poetics if
your essay has argued that greater variety of tropes that of Rojas.

What would I do in view Tristan This unrelenting drive? Resigned
as natural. Swifter passage and went to the Prado salon down the
street and got the same name to the Athenaeum. There was fired.
Garcia was not a member, certainly not for lack of desire but of
monetary resources. Swinging in a rocking chair with a newspaper
in his hands found his friend Tristan Nunez on one of the chat
room that school. Was a man of thirty-four to thirty-six years
older so that our young, blond, with eyes of pulling
indefinable color green, penetrating and malicious, sparse beard
and heading down the middle. Dressed with great elegance and a
little concerned that once used by artists to deviate from the
bourgeois vulgarity. Saludáronse good tone with cold while showing
confidence and Núñez continued reading. - Watch it gets corny
the Paseo de la Castellana on Sunday ... is, is because it is
always more.

These girls are dripping with the folks behind them, these young
people marching alongside ciñendo car back toward the head and
taking off his hat every four steps, without knowing anyone, just
for the ladies who admire and revere the pedestrian ; those
aristocrats who walk in and look and carriage is Remiro endlessly
as if it were known, but are looking to be born and will continue
looking until the hour of death ... Tell me, does not cause any
Grima? Núñez left out a murmur of approval without lifting his
head, but looked at the corner of his eye with his friend and a
spark of mischief in his eyes crossed. - I doubt that exists
in the world - "said Tristan - a rather boring, and more prosaically
cominera that the capital of Spain. Here, people are looking
for returns in the back as if all beings were rare and admirable,
in front of each blind man who plays guitar is a crowded
crowd, the ladies spend their lives figuring out what they eat and
their neighbors how much the Knights win their friends , youth
are involved in decoding the charades or reply to questions proposed
by the enlightened periodiquitos: 'What is the best writer?
what is the most gross bullfighter? ", etc.. And always answer
those who have not read a book or attending a bullfight.
Piropo old and the young and still talk about politics and do not
know a word of the profession who have a lifetime. The
generals discussed the separation of Church and State and
the bishops are asking whether we are prepared for a war abroad.
And in the streets and walks, in theaters and churches, we
see the same face in the vulgarity, the indelible sign of
kitsch and ignorance that characterizes our kind convecinos ...
While pronouncing these words, as was playing with the stick, he
fell to the ground with noise. He left to escape an interjection
of impatience, collected it and was thoughtful a moment. - Why do
things have to fall, let's see - he exclaimed After talking with
himself as if -. Why did not need to stay where they are placed?
The law of gravity that we are chained to the ground, which puts
us crickets at birth as if we were prisoners, not a stupid law?
And then we talk about intelligence in the wild! Diminished
intelligence in hand with goodness! Núñez released a laugh.
- Amigo Paramo come over paramo today that I have ever seen.
I River I of the steppes of Siberia and the snowfields of Mount
St. Bernard! Bromitas It was one of those that were authorized
with the Tristan put this nickname because of his ideas
bleak. Often, when I had to send a letter by mail or via internal
messenger, he wrote about in "Lord of Don Tristan Aldama
Páramo 'or added to the surname' Fernandez and Yermo" or "Sandy
Desert".

Tristan tolerated because it respected the jokes and admired his
friend. Nunez, as already mentioned, we had eight or ten years
old, enjoyed an illustrious name as a painter, attended the
high society and was feared and treated for their sharpness.
These circumstances meant that Tristan will feel flattered by
that friendship which was born two years but no more, had
become very intimate, to name terms. Nunez for his part did his
friend Tristan smart and because he found among young people
over the future in literature, elegantly dressed and because he
belonged to an affluent family. The life of both was not equal,
however. The Núñez, more dissipated, most frequented casino that
Ateneo had loved and spent a lot of money, without knowing where
they originated, as did years slogging. Tristan smiled,
embarrassed those extemporaneous regrets. - And what if you've
spent yesterday at the Escorial?

There is little need to ask, because in the midst
of this wasteland, Sotillo the garden becomes a warm and delicious
... And by the way, when I got to Sotillo? It was some time that
Nunez was calling for him to take you to see the possession
of his future brother-in which languages were in Madrid. Tristan,
promising to do so by filing a delayed vague suspicion that
at some time or whether it could dismiss. For this and more
because the name of the _Sotillo_ brought back to the imagination
unworthy intrigue hatched against him, obscuring his face again.
Nunez is not repaired or unwilling to repair it and squeezed
it with his usual desenfado bring him to day. Tristan after he was
forced to set one of the next week they celebrated the anniversary
of the marriage of his future brothers-in-law had other
guests there. - What? That pretty young Escorial is in line with
your brother? - What do you mean? - Tristan replied with
gravity. - If you are unhappy with him in things temporal and
spiritual. The boy was injured by that shameless dry question and
replied: - There is another happy marriage on the ground. -
Good ... I am glad not to discuss ... She is a beautiful woman,
an admirable example of nereid ... I want to make her portrait
naked, leaving the water ... But seeing how sad he was increasingly
sullen conversation changed. - You know you? Recently, when he
came over here, stumbled in the race for San Jerónimo your
friend Morel. To me and asks me, while drawing on his lips a
smile of pity: "Did you read the book ... Abellán Sanchez? What
an extravaganza! What an absurdity! Unable to reach beyond the
art of nonsense. Is the work of an idiot or a madman.
"And the laughter flowed from his mouth and had to lean on the
wall to avoid laughing. And I still walk a few steps further,
to turn the Prince's street, at the same meeting Abellán Sanchez.
We salute, we change some words, and we would smilingly Mefistofele,
I asked: "Did you read about recent articles in _The Morel
Noticiero_ ...? Prodigioso ¡... ... ¡Enorme! Read them if you
want to have some fun ... Undoubtedly this man is a fool or
an idiot. "The two were equally qualified employee. Is not
funny - I had no - said Tristan grumpy. Núñez watched him a
moment and replied quietly mocking curiosity - this mill is that
you have no ground in the brain rather than black things.
But my grind produces rich wheat and white flour top ...
Let's see, is not it a pleasure to watch these two men have known
perfectly well?

Is not the pure and legitimate hope that the light entering the
spirits In the course of the conversation had crossed them in front
of a beardless boy who greeted Nunez leaning very reverent and
taking off his hat.

A Tristan a little surprised that no greeting but said nothing.
But now, as another young girl crossed the eighteen to twenty years
and returned to Nunez bow and greet with the same reverence, could
not conceal his surprise. - Dime, Gustavo, why so respectful
greetings to these kids -- You do it in a nutshell - Nunez
replied quietly -. The first that has crossed over here just now
is secretary of the third section of Moral and Political Sciences
and has submitted a report on the _Cuestión social_ will be discussed
next year.

This has now published three articles in _The Advocate on _The
Ayuntamientos_ the individual and the Estado_.

But these young people discuss social issues and write about the
relationship between the individual and the State are undoubtedly
the future governors, directors of state, CEOs, ministers.

These young people do not doubt, for what will be our masters that
"young sociologist at door to the boss back. Must have met, need
to win their friendship. - But, man, you, you're an artist, do
you care about the friendship of politicians - Go! Imagines
that Spain may be in a medium color without having a friend minister?
Tristan smiled slightly, and was thoughtful a moment
after he asked: - And we need poets also the friendship of
the ministers - No, you need to belong to one of two co Corps -
said the painter gravely. - Come on, Gustavo, today
got the green kidding! - No joke, my dear, is the pure truth.
You write a book of poems and put on the cover: "Poems by Tristan
Aldama.

That says nothing, the public does not know what to expect,
because it ignores all of you. But stamp below the title, and
verbi gratia "by Tristan Aldama _diputado by Puertocarnero_ or
_senador vitalicio_ ', and the public has reason to know and
beware critical considerations. Your lyrics are not newcomers,
have shown that some roots in the country. - Well, well, Gustavo!
- Aldama said laughing. - Yes, dear, yes! The public always
needs a guarantee ... a couple of nice face and was properly dressed
pass through the room, but seeing our friends became suspicious not
to cross in front of them. - Hey!

Hey ...! Valleumbroso friend, do not you slip away.

The young man turned around and was standing in front of them. -
Docking you, dear - Nuñez said -.

Well you know you want to escape the congratulations of friends.

The great spirits spurn the applause of the crowd. - I ...

What reason is there to welcome - the young man exclaimed, laughing,
making new and overflowing with pride. - Almost anything!

Although my profession, and even more for my laziness, can not be
very aware of developments in literature, the trumpet of fame has
brought to my ears to hear that you had published a volume of
remarkable poems, such _Pelillos the mar_ are delicious and are
sold as bread blessed.

The poet's red cheeks and suddenly replied in tone desabrido - My
book is not entitled _Pelillos to mar_. - No, man, is entitled
_Pétalos to aire_ -- Tristan was quick to say. - Ah ...!

forgive you, friend Valleumbroso.

I do not know how I got into his head ... It sounds something like
that ...

Well known that I am layman in matters literary.

Anyway, anyway I know that the book is precious. - Thank you -
said the poet dry. - Not many minutes asking the Aldama friend
about the latest releases, I said: "The only thing that can read
what are the recently published _Pelillos_ ...

(forgive you) ... _Pétalos_ of the Valleumbroso.

'I replied: "As we get out of here way to the library and buy."
- Thank you: do not bother you: I will send them. - I do not accept
the gift.

In Spain are so few books are published worthy of purchase, that
the budget of most fan letters but do not have much change is
proposed to be wasteful. The only thing I hope for his kindness
to me is the strong copy. - I will be happy.

The young poet was on hot coals. The character was inspired by a
live Núñez suspicion. So it was no longer possible to keep it
despite the efforts he made for this.

While away on fast still screaming: - A thousand congratulations.
As read the book and talk about these ... these Peli petals. That
exhausted the edition you soon.
"You mustn't do things
like that.  You'll have the whole of London running to look at
us."

Indeed the sight had so far roused the pale young man from his
lethargy that he laid his dirty pink paper on his knees.  I kept
hold of Carlotta's wrists.  She began to moan incoherently.

"You mustn't send me back--Hamdi will kill me--oh please don't
send me back--he will make me marry his friend Mustapha--Mustapha
has only two teeth--and he is seventy years old--and he has a
wife already--I only went with Harry to avoid Mustapha.  Hamdi
would kill me, he would beat me, he would make me marry
Mustapha."

That is what I gathered from her utterances.  She was frightened
out of her wits, even into anticlimax.

"But the Turkish Consul is your natural protector," said I.

"You wouldn't be so cruel," she sobbed.  The guttural sonority
with which she rolled the "r" in "cruel" made the epithet appear
one of revolting barbarity.  She fixed those confounded eyes upon
me.

I wonder whether such a fool as I has ever lived.

I promised, on my honour, not to hand her over to the Turkish
consulate.

I took a four-wheeled cab from the rank on the Embankment and
drove her to Waterloo.  On the way she reminded me that she was
hungry.  I gave her food at the buffet.  It appears she has a
passion for hard-boiled eggs and lemonade.  She did not seem very
much concerned about finding Harry, but chattered to me about the
appointments of the bar.  The beer-pulls amused her particularly.
She made me order a glass of bitter (a beverage which I loathe)
in order to see again how it was done, and broke into gleeful
laughter.  The smart but unimaginative barmaid stared at her in
bewilderment.  The two or three bar-loafers also stared.  I was
glad to escape to the platform.

There, however, a group of idlers followed us about and stood in
a ring round us when we stopped to interview a railway official.
The beautiful, bronze-haired, ox-eyed young woman in her
disreputable attire--I have never seen a broken black feather
waggle more shamelessly--was a sight indeed to strike wonderment
into the cockney mind.  And perhaps her association with myself
added to the incongruity.  I am long and lean and unlovely, I
know; but it is my consolation that I look irreproachably
respectable.  Of the two I was infinitely the more disturbed by
the public attention.  "Calm and unembarrassed as a fate" she
returned the popular gaze, and appeared somewhat bored by my
efforts to find Harry.  In the midst of an earnest discussion
with the station-master she begged me for a penny to put into
an automatic sweetmeat machine, which she had seen a small
boy work successfully.  I refused, curtly, and turned to the
station-master.  A roar of laughter interrupted me again.
Carlotta, with outstretched hand and pleading eyes, like an
organ-grinder's monkey, had induced the boy to part with the
sticky bit of toffee, and was in the act of conveying it to
her mouth.

"I'll call to-morrow morning," said I hurriedly to the
station-master.  "If the gentleman should come meanwhile,
tell him to leave his name and address."

Then I took Carlotta by the arm and, accompanied by my train of
satellites, I thrust her into the first hansom-cab I could see.

There was no sign or token of Harry.  No pretty young man was
hanging dejectedly about the station.  None had torn his hair
before the officials asking for news of a lost female in frowsy
black.  There was no Harry.  There was no further need therefore
to afford the British public a gratuitous entertainment.

"Drive," said I to the cabman.  "Drive like the devil."

"Where to, sir?"

I gasped.  Where should I drive?  I lost my head.

"Go on driving round and round till I tell you to stop."  The
philosophic cabman did not regard me as eccentric, for he whipped
up his horse cheerfully.  When we had slid down the steep incline
and got free of the precincts of that hateful station, I breathed
more freely and collected my wits.  Carlotta sucked her sticky
thumbs and wiped them on her dress.

"Where are we going?" she asked.

"Across Waterloo Bridge," said I.

"What to do?"

"To dispose of you somehow," I replied, grimly.  "But how, I
haven't a notion.  There's a Home for Lost Dogs and a Home for
Stray Cats, and a Lost Property Office at Scotland Yard, but as
you are neither a dog nor a cat nor an umbrella, these refuges
are unavailable."

The cab reached the Strand.

"East or west, sir?" inquired the driver.

"West," said I, at random.

We drove down the Strand at a leisurely pace.  I passed through a
phase of agonised thought.  By my side was a helpless, homeless,
friendless, penniless young woman, as beautiful as a goddess and
as empty-minded as a baby.  What in the world could I do with
her?  I looked at her in despair.  She met my glance with a
contented smile; just as if we were old acquaintances and I were
taking her out to dinner.  The unfamiliar roar and bustle of
London impressed her no more than it would have impressed a
little dog who had found a kind master.

"Suppose I gave you some money and put you down here and left
you?" I inquired.

"I should die," she answered, fatalistically.  "Or, perhaps, I
should find another kind gentleman."

"I wonder if you have such a thing as a soul," said I.

She plucked at her gown.  "I have only this--and it is very
ugly," she remarked again.  "I should like a pink dress."

We crossed Trafalgar Square, and I saw by Big Ben that it was a
quarter to six.  I could not drive through London with her for an
indefinite period.  Besides, my half past seven dinner awaited
me.

Why, oh, why has Judith gone to Paris?  Had she been in town I
could have shot Carlotta into Tottenham Mansions, and gone home
to my dinner and Cristoforo da Costa with a light heart.  Judith
would have found Carlotta vastly entertaining.  She would have
washed her body and analysed her temperament.  But Judith was in
retreat with Delphine Carrere, and has left me alone to bear the
responsibilities of life--and Carlotta.

The cab slowly mounted Waterloo Place.  I had thought of my aunts
as possible helpers, and rejected the idea.  I had thought of a
police station, a hotel, my lawyers (too late), a furnished
lodging, a hospital.  My mind was an aching blank.

"Where do you live?" asked Carlotta.

I looked at her and groaned.  It was the only solution.  "Up
Regent's Park way," I replied, aware that she was none the wiser
for the information.

I gave the address to the cabman through the trap-door in the
roof.

"I'm going to take you home with me for to-night," I said,
severely.  "I have an excellent French housekeeper who will look
after your comfort.  And to-morrow if that infernal young
scoundrel of a lover of yours is not found, it will not be the
fault of the police force of Great Britain."

She laid her grubby little hand on mine.  It was very soft and
cool.

"You are cross with me.  Why?"

I removed her hand.

"You mustn't do that again," said I.  "No; I am not in the least
cross with you.  But I hope you are aware that this event is of
an unprecedented character."

"What is an unprecedented character?" she asked, stumbling over
the long words.

"A thing that has never happened before and I devoutly hope will
not happen again."

Her face was turned to me.  The lower lip trembled a little.  The
dog-look came into those wonderful eyes.

"You will be kind to me?" she said, in her childish
monosyllables, each word carefully articulated with a long pause
between.

I felt I had behaved like a heartless brute, ever since I thrust
her into the cab at Waterloo.  I relented and laughed.

"If you are a good girl and do as I tell you," said I.

"Seer Marcous is my lord and I am his slave," was her astounding
reply.

Then I realised that she had been brought up by Hamdi Effendi.
There is something salutary, after all, in the training of the
harem.

"I'm very glad to hear it," I said.

She closed her eyes.  I saw now she was very tired.  I thought
she had gone to sleep and I looked in front of me puzzling out
the problem.  Presently the cab-doors were thrust violently open,
and if I had net held her back, she would have jumped out of the
vehicle.

"Look!" she cried, in great excitement.  "There!  There's Harry's
name!"

She pointed to a butcher's cart immediately in front of us,
bearing, in large letters, the name of "E. Robinson."

"We must stop," she went on.  "He will tell us about Harry."

It took me from Oxford Circus to Portman Square to convince her
that there were many thousands of Robinsons in London and that
the probability of the butcher's cart being a clue to Harry's
whereabouts was exceedingly remote.

At Baker Street station she asked, wearily: "Is it still far to
your house?"

"No," said I, encouragingly.  "Not very far."

"But one can drive for many days through streets in London, and
there will be still streets, still houses?  So they tell me in
Alexandretta.  London is as big as the moon, not so?"

I felt absurdly pleased.  She was capable of an idea.  I had
begun to wonder whether she were not merely half-witted.  The
fact of her being able to read had already cheered me.

"Many hours, yes," I corrected, "not many days.  London seems big
to you?"

"Oh, yes," she said, passing her hand over her eyes.  "It makes
all go round in my head.  One day you will take me for a drive
through these wonderful streets.  Now I am too tired.  They make
my head ache."

Then she shut her eyes again and did not open them until we
stopped at Lingfield Terrace.  I modified my first impression of
her animal unimpressionability.  She is quite sane.  If Boadicea
were to be brought back to life and be set down suddenly at
Charing Cross, her psychological condition would not be far
removed from that of an idiot.  Yet in her own environment
Boadicea was quite a sane and capable lady.

My admirable man Stenson opened the door and admitted us without
moving a muscle.  He would betray no incorrect astonishment if I
brought home a hippogriff to dinner.  I have an admiration for
the trained serving-man's imperturbability.  It is the guardian
angel of his self-respect.  I ordered him to send Antoinette to
me in the drawing-room.

"Antoinette," said I, "this young lady has travelled all the way
from Asia Minor, where the good St. Paul had so many adventures,
without changing her things."

_C'est y Dieu possible_!" said Antoinette.

"Give her a nice hot bath, and perhaps you will have the kindness
to lend her the underlinen that your sex is in the habit of
wearing.  You will put her into the spare bedroom, as she is
going to pass the night here, and you will look generally after
her comfort."

"_Bien, M'sieu_," said Antoinette, regarding Carlotta in
stupefaction.

"And put that hat and dress into the dust-bin."

"_Bien, M'sieu._"

"And as Mademoiselle is broken with fatigue, having come without
stopping from Asia Minor, she will go to bed as soon as
possible."

"The poor angel," said Antoinette.  "But will she not join
Monsieur at dinner?"

"I think not," said I, dryly.

"But the young ducklings that are roasting for the dinner of
Monsieur?"

"If they were not roasting they might be growing up into ducks,"
said I.

"Oh, la, la!" murmured Antoinette, below her breath.

"Carlotta," said I, turning to the girl who had seated herself
humbly on a straight-backed chair, "you will go with Antoinette
and do as she tells you.  She doesn't talk English, but she is
used to making people understand her."

"_Mais, moi parley Francais un peu_," said Carlotta.

"Then you will win Antoinette's heart, and she will lend you her
finest.  Good-night," said I, abruptly.  "I hope you will have a
pleasant rest."

She took my outstretched hand, and, to my great embarrassment,
raised it to her lips.  Antoinette looked on, with a sentimental
moisture in her eyes.

"The poor angel," she repeated.

Later, I gave Stenson a succinct account of what had occurred.  I
owed it to my reputation.  Then I went upstairs and dressed for
dinner.  I consider I owe that to Stenson.  It was eight o'clock
before I sat down, but Antoinette's ducklings were delicious and
brought consolation for the upheaval of the day.  I was unfolding
the latest edition of _The Westminster Gazette_ with which I
always soothe the digestive half-hour after dinner, when
Antoinette entered to report progress.

She was sound asleep, the poor little one.  Oh, but she was
tired.  She had eaten some _consomme_, a bit of fish and an
omelette.  But she was beautiful, gentle as a lamb; and she had a
skin _on dirait du satin_.  Had not Monsieur noticed it?

I replied, with some over-emphasis, that I had not.

"Monsieur rather regards the inside of his books," said
Antoinette.

"They are generally more worth regarding," said I.

Antoinette said nothing; but there was a feminine quiver at the
corners of her fat lips.

She was comfortably disposed of for the night.  I drew a breath
of relief.  To-morrow Great Scotland Yard should set out on the
track of the absconding Harry.  Carlotta's happy recollection of
his surname facilitated the search.  I lit a cigarette and opened
_The Westminster Gazette_.

A few moments later I was staring at the paper in blank horror
and dismay.

Harry was found.  There was no mistake.  Harry Robinson, junior
partner of the firm of Robinson & Co., of Mincing Lane.  Vain,
indeed, would it be to seek the help of Great Scotland Yard.
Harry had blown out his brains in the South Western Hotel at
Southampton.


I have read the newspaper paragraph over and over again to-night.
There is no possible room for doubt that it is the same Harry.

The ways of man are past interpretation.  Here is an individual
who lures a girl from an oriental harem, attires her in
disgusting garments, smuggles her on board a steamer, where he
claps her, so to speak, under hatches, and has little if anything
to do with her, sets her penniless and ticketless in a London
train, and then goes off and blows his brains out.  Where is the
sense of it?

I have not a spark of sympathy for Harry--a callow, egotistical
dealer in currants.  He ought to have blown out his brains a year
ago.  He has behaved in a most unconscionable manner.  How does he
expect me to break the news to Carlotta?  His selfishness is
appalling.  There he lies, comfortably dead in the South Western
Hotel, while Carlotta has literally not a rag to her back, her
horrific belongings having been dropped into the dust-bin.  Who
does he think is going to provide Carlotta with food and shelter
and a pink dress?  What does he imagine is to become of the poor
waif?  In all my life I have never heard of a more cynical
suicide.

I have walked about for hours, laughing and cursing and kicking
the binding loose of my precious Muratori.  I have wondered
whether the universe or I were mad.  For there is one thing that
is clear to me--Carlotta is here, and here Carlotta must remain.

Devastating though it be to the well-ordered quietude of my life,
I must adopt Carlotta.

There is no way out of it.


                           CHAPTER IV


May 25th.

Shall I be accused of harbouring a bevy of odalisques at No. 20
Lingfield Terrace?  Calumny and Exaggeration walk abroad, arm in
arm, even on the north side of Regent's Park.  If they had spied
Carlotta at my window this morning, they would have looked in for
afternoon tea at my Aunt Jessica's and have waylaid Mrs. Ralph
Ordeyne outside the Oratory.  The question is: Shall Truth
anticipate them?  I think not.  Every family has its
irrepressible, impossible, unpractical member, its _enfant
terrible_, who is forever doing the wrong thing with the best
intentions.  Truth is the _enfant terrible_ of the Virtues.  Some
times it puts them to the blush and throws them into confusion;
at others it blusters like a blatant liar; at others, again, it
stutters and stammers like a detected thief.  There is no knowing
how Truth may behave, so I shall not let it visit my relations.

I must confess, however, that I feared the possible passing by of
the two decrepit cronies, when Carlotta stood at my open French
window this morning.  She is really indecently beautiful.  She
was wearing a deep red silk peignoir, open at the throat,
unashamedly Parisian, which clung to every salient curve of her
figure.  I wondered where, in the name of morality, she had
procured the garment.  I learned later that it was the joy and
pride of Antoinette's existence; for once, in the days long ago,
when she was _femme de chambre_ to a luminary of the cafes
concerts, it had met around her waist.  She had treasured the
cast-off finery of this burned-out star--she beamed in the
seventies--for all these years, and now its immortal devilry
transfigured Carlotta.  She was also washed specklessly clean.
An aroma that no soap or artificial perfume could give disengaged
itself from her as she moved.  Her gold-bronze hair was superbly
ordered.  I noticed her arms which the sleeves of the gay garment
left bare to the elbows; the skin was like satin.  "_Et sa peau!
On dirait du satin._"  Confound Antoinette!  She had the
audacity, too, to come down with bare feet.  It was a revelation
of pink, undreamed-of loveliness in tus.

I repeat she is indecently beautiful.  A chit of a girl of
eighteen (for that I learn is her age) has no right to flaunt the
beauty that should be the appanage of the woman of seven and
twenty.  She should be modestly well-favoured, as becomes her
childish stage of development.  She looked incongruous among my
sober books, and I regarded her with some resentment.  I dislike
the exotic.  I prefer geraniums to orchids.  I have a row of pots
of the former on my balcony, and the united efforts of Stenson,
Antoinette, and myself have not yet succeeded in making them
bloom; but I love the unassuming velvety leaves.  Carlotta is a
flaring orchid and produces on my retina a sensation of disquiet.


I broke the tidings of the tragedy as gently as I could.  I had
news of Harry, I said, gravely.  She merely looked interested and
asked me when he was coming.

"I'm afraid he will never come," said I.

"If he does not come, then I can stay here with you?"

Her eyes betrayed a quiver of anxiety.  For the life of me I
could not avoid the ironical.

"If you will condescend to dwell as a member of my family beneath
my humble roof."

The irony was lost on her.  She uttered a joyous little cry and
held out both her hands to me.  Her eyes danced.

"Oh, I am glad he is not coming.  I don't like him any more.  I
love to stay here with you."

I took both the hands in mine.  Mortal man could not have done
otherwise.

"Have you thought why it is that you will never see Harry again?"

She shook her beautiful head and held it to one side and puckered
up her brows, like a wistful terrier.

"Is he dead?"

"Would it grieve you, if he were?"

"No-o," she replied, thoughtfully.

"Then," said I, dropping her hands and turning away, "Harry is
dead."

She stood silent for a couple of minutes, regarding the row of
pink toes that protruded beneath the peignoir.  At last her bosom
shook with a sigh.  She glanced up at me sweetly.

"I am so glad," she said.


That is all she has vouchsafed to say with regard to the unhappy
young man.  "She was so glad!"  She has not even asked how he met
his death.  She has simply accepted my statement.  Harry is dead.
He has gone out of her life like yesterday's sunshine or
yesterday's frippery.  If I had told her that yesterday's cab-
horse had broken his neck, she could not be more unconcerned.
Nay, she is glad.  Harry had not treated her nicely.  He had
boxed her up in a cabin where she had been sick, and had
subjected her to various other discomforts.  I, on the contrary,
had surrounded her with luxuries and dressed her in red silk.
She rather dreaded Harry's coming.  When she learned that this
was improbable she was relieved.  His death had turned the
improbable into the impossible.  It was the end of the matter.
She was so glad!

Yet there must have been some tender passage in their brief
intercourse.  He must have kissed her during their flight from
home to steamer.  Her young pulses must have throbbed a little
faster at the sight of his comely face.

What kind of a mythological being am I housing?  Did she come at
all out of Hamdi Effendi's harem?  Is she not rather some strange
sea-creature that clambered on board the vessel and bewitched the
miserable boy, sucked the soul out of him, and drove him to
destruction?  Or is she a Vampire?  Or a Succubus?  Or a
Hamadryad?  Or a Salamander?

One thing, I vow she is not human.

If only Judith were here to advise me!  And yet I have an uneasy
feeling that Judith will suggest, with a certain violence that is
characteristic of her, the one course which I cannot follow: to
send Carlotta back to Hamdi Effendi.  But I cannot break my word.
I would rather, far rather, break Carlotta's beautiful neck.
I have not written to Judith.  Nor, by the way, have I received a
letter from her.  Delphine has been whirling her off her legs,
and she is ashamed to confess the delusion of the sequestered
life.  I wish I were enjoying myself half as much as Judith.


"I have adopted Mademoiselle," said I to Antoinette this morning.
"If she returned to Asia Minor they would put a string round her
neck, tie her up in a sack, and throw her into the sea."

"That would be a pity," said Antoinette, warmly.

"_Cela depend_," said I.  "Anyhow she is here, and here she
remains."

"In that case," said Antoinette, "has Monsieur considered that
the poor angel will need clothes and articles of toilette--and
this and that and the other?"

"And shoes  to hide her shameless tus," I said.

"They are the most beautiful toes I have ever seen!" cried
Antoinette in imbecile admiration.  She has bewitched that old
woman already.

I put on my hat and went to Wellington Road to consult Mrs.
McMurray.  Heaven be thanked, thought I, for letting me take her
little boy the day before yesterday to see the other animals, and
thus winning a mother's heart.  She will help me out of my
dilemma.  Unfortunately she was not alone.  Her husband, who is
on the staff of a morning newspaper, was breakfasting when I
arrived.  He is a great ruddy bearded giant with a rumbling
thunder of a laugh like the bass notes of an organ.  His
assertion of the masculine principle in brawn and beard and bass
somewhat overpowers a non-muscular, clean-shaven, and tenor
person like myself.  Mrs. McMurray, on the contrary, is a small,
bright bird of a woman.

I told my amazing story from beginning to end, interrupted by
many Hoo-oo-oo-oo's from McMurray.

"You may laugh," said I, "but to have a mythical being out of
Olympiodorus quartered on you for life is no jesting matter."

Olymp--?" began McMurray.

"Yes," I snapped.

"Bring her this afternoon, Sir Marcus, when this unsympathetic
wretch has gone to his club," said his wife, "and I'll take her
out shopping."

"But, dear lady," I cried in despair, "she has but one garment
--and that a silk dressing-gown of horrible depravity that
belonged to a dancer of the second Empire!  She is also barefoot."

"Then I'll come round myself and see what can be done."

"And by Jove, so will I!" cried McMurray.

"You'll do such  thing," said his wife

"If I gave you a cheque for  100," said I, "do you think you
could get her what she wants, to go on with?"

"A hundred pounds!"  The little lady uttered a delighted gasp and
I thought she would have kissed me.  McMurray brought his
sledgehammer of a hand down on my shoulder.

"Man!" he roared.  "Do you know what you are doing--casting a
respectable wife and mother of a family loose among London
drapery shops with a hundred pounds in her pocket?  Do you think
she will henceforward give a thought to her home or husband?  Do
you want to ruin my domestic peace, drive me to drink, and wreck
my household?"

"If you do that again," said I, rubbing my shoulder, "I'll give
her two hundred."

When I returned Carlotta was sitting, Turkish fashion, on a sofa,
smoking a cigarette (to which she had helped herself out of my
box) and turning over the pages of a book.  This sign of literary
taste surprised me.  But I soon found it was the second volume of
my _edition de luxe_ of Louandre's _Les Arts Somptuaires_, to
whose place on the shelves sheer feminine instinct must have
guided her.  I announced Mrs. McMurray's proposed visit.  She
jumped to her feet, ravished at the prospect, and sent my
beautiful book (it is bound in tree-calf and contains a couple of
hundred exquisitely coloured plates) flying onto the floor.  I
picked it up tenderly, and laid it on my writing-table.

"Carlotta," said I, "the first thing you have to learn here is
that books in England are more precious than babies in
Alexandretta.  If you pitch them about in this fashion you will
murder them and I shall have you hanged."

This checked her sumptuary excitement.  It gave her food for
reflection, and she stood humbly penitent, while I went further
into the subject of clothes.

"In fact," I concluded, "you will be dressed like a lady." She
opened the book at a gaudy picture, "_France, XVI(ieme)
Siecle--Saltimbanque et Bohemmienne_," and pointed to the female
mountebank.  This young person wore a bright green tunic,
bordered with gold and finished off at the elbows and waist with
red, over an undergown of flaring pink, the sleeves of which
reached her wrist; she was crowned with red and white carnations
stuck in ivy.

"I will get a dress like that," said Carlotta.

I wondered how far Mrs. McMurray possessed the colour-sense, and
I trembled.  I tried to explain gently to Carlotta the
undesirability of such a costume for outdoor wear in London; but
with tastes there is no disputing, and I saw that she was but
half-convinced.  She will require training in aesthetics.

She is very submissive.  I said, "Run away now to Antoinette,"
and she went with the cheerfulness of a child.  I must rig up a
sitting-room for her, as I cannot have her in here.  Also for the
present she must take her meals in her own apartments.  I cannot
shock the admirable Stenson by sitting down at table with her in
that improper peignoir.  Besides, as Antoinette informs me, the
poor lamb eats meat with her fingers, after the fashion of the
East.  I know what that is, having once been present at an
Egyptian dinner-party in Cairo, and pulled reeking lumps of flesh
out of the leg of mutton.  Ugh!  But as she has probably not sat
down to a meal with a man in her life, her banishment from my
table will not hurt her feelings.  She must, however, be trained
in Christian table-manners, as well as in aesthetics; also in a
great many other things.


Mrs. McMurray arrived with a tape-measure, a pencil, and a
notebook.

"First," she announced, "I will measure her all over.  Then I
will go out and procure her a set of out-door garments, and
tomorrow we will spend the whole livelong day in the shops.  Do
you mind if I use part of the  100 for the hire of a private
brougham?"

"Have a coach and six, my dear Mrs. McMurray," I said.  "It will
doubtless please Carlotta better."

I summoned Carlotta and performed the ceremony of introduction.
To my surprise she was perfectly at her ease and with the
greatest courtesy of manner invited the visitor to accompany her
to her own apartments.

When Mrs. McMurray returned to the drawing-room she wore an
expression that can only be described as indescribable.

"What, my dear Sir Marcus, do you think is to be the ultimate
destiny of that young person?"

"She shall learn type-writing," said I, suddenly inspired, "and
make a fair copy of my Renaissance Morals."

"She would make a very fair copy indeed of Renaissance Morals,"
returned the lady, dryly.

"Is she so very dreadful?" I asked in alarm.  "The peignoir, I
know--"

"Perhaps that has something to do with it."

"Then, for heaven's sake," said I, "dress her in drabs and greys
and subfusc browns.  Cut off her hair and give her a row of
buttons down the back."

My friend's eyes sparkled.

"I am going," said she, "to have the day of my life tomorrow."


Carlotta had already gone to sleep, so Antoinette informed me,
when the results of Mrs. McMurray's shopping came home.  I am
glad she has early habits.  It appears she has spent a happy and
fully occupied afternoon over a pile of French illustrated comic
papers in the possession of my excellent housekeeper.

I wonder whether it is quite judicious to make French comic
papers her initiation into the ideas of Western civilisation.
Into this I must inquire.  I must also talk seriously to her with
a view to her ultimate destiny.  But as my view would be
distorted by the red dressing-gown, I shall wait until she is
decently clad.  I think I shall have to set apart certain hours
of the day for instructive conversation with Carlotta.  I shall
have to develop her mind, of which she distinctly has the
rudiments.  For the rest of the day she must provide entertainment
out of her own resources.  This her oriental habits of
seclusion will render an easy task, for I will wager that
Hamdi Effendi did not concern himself greatly as to the way in
which the ladies of his harem filled up their time.  And now I
come to think of it, he certainly did not allow Carlotta to
sprawl about his own private and particular drawing-room.  I will
not westernise her too rapidly.  The Turkish educational system
has its merits.

This, in its way is comforting.  If only I could accept her as a
human creature.  But when I think of her callous reception of the
tidings of the unhappy boy's death, my spirit fails me.  Such a
being would run a carving-knife into you, as you slept, without
any compunction, and when you squeaked, she would laugh.  Look at
her base ingratitude to the good Hamdi Effendi, who took her in
before she was born and has treated her as a daughter all her
life.  No: her spiritual attitude all through has been that of
the ladies who used to visit St. Anthony--in the leisure moments
when they were not actively engaged in temptation.  I don't
believe her father was an English vice-consul.  He was Satan.

I wonder what she told Mrs. McMurray.

I have been thinking over the matter to-night.  The good lady was
wrong.  Whatever were the morals of the Renaissance,
personalities were essentially positive.  They were devilishly
wicked or angelically good.  There was nothing _rosse_, non-moral
about the Renaissance Italian.  The women were strongly tempered.
I love to believe the story told by Machiavelli and Muratori of
Catherine Sforza in the citadel of Forli.  "Surrender or we slay
your children which we hold as hostages," cried the besiegers.
"Kill them if you like.  I can breed more to avenge them."  It is
the speech of a giant nature.  It awakens something enthusiastic
within me; although such a lady would be an undesirable helpmeet
for a mild mannered man like myself.

And then again there is Bonna, the woman for whose career I
desired to consult the prime authority Cristoforo da Costa.  I
have been sketching her into my chapter tonight.  Here is a
peasant girl caught up to his saddle-bow by a condottiere,
Brunoro, during some village raid.  She fights like a soldier by
his side.  He is imprisoned in Valencia by Alfonso of Naples,
languishes in a dungeon for ten years.  And for ten years Bonna
goes from court to court in Europe and from prince to prince,
across seas and mountains, unwearying, unyielding, with the
passion of heaven in her heart and the courage of hell in her
soul, urging and soliciting her man's release.  After ten long
years she succeeds.  And then they are married.  What were her
tumultuous feelings as she stood by that altar?  The old
historian does not say; but the very glory of God must have
flooded her being when, in the silence of the bare church, the
little bell tinkled to tell her that the Host was raised, and her
love was made blessed for all eternity.  And then she goes  away
with him and fights in the old way by his side for fifteen years.
When he is killed, she languishes and dies within the year.
Porcelli sees them in 1455.  Brunoro, an old, squinting,
paralysed man.  Bonna, a little shrivelled, yellow old woman,
with a quiver on her shoulder, a bow in her hand; her grey hair
is covered by a helmet and she wears great military boots.  The
picture is magical.  There is infinite pathos in the sight of the
two withered, crippled, grotesque forms from which all the
glamour of manhood and beauty have departed, and infinite awe in
the thought of the holy communion of the unconquerable and
passionate souls.  I wonder it has not come down to us as one of
the great love-stories of the world.

Elements such as these sway the Morals of the Renaissance.

But I am taking Mrs. McMurray too seriously; and it is really not
a bad idea to have Carlotta taught type-writing.


                           CHAPTER V


May 26th.

This morning a letter from Judith.

"Do not laugh at me," she writes.  "The road to Paris is paved
with good intentions.  I really could not help it.  Delphine put
her great arm round my would-be sequestered and meditative self
and carried it off bodily, and here it is in the midst of
lunches, picture-shows, dinners, suppers, theatres and dances;
and if you laugh, you will make me humiliated when I confess that
it is thoroughly enjoying itself."

Laugh at her, dear woman?  I am only too glad that she can fling
her Winter Garment of Repentance into the Fires of Paris
Springtide.  She has little enough enjoyment in friendless
London.  Fill your heart with it, my dear, and lay up a store for
use in the dull months to come.  For my part, however, I am
content to be beyond the reach of Delphine's great arm.  I must
write to Judith.  I shall have to explain Carlotta; but for that
I think I shall wait until she becomes a little more explicable.
In dealing with women it is well to employ discrimination.  You
are never quite sure whether they are not merely simple geese or
the most complex of created beings.  Perhaps they are such a
curious admixture that you cannot tell at a given moment which
side, the simple or the complex, you are touching.  May not there
be the deepest of all allegories in Eve standing midway between
the innocent apple and the guileful serpent?  I shall have to see
more of Carlotta before I can safely explain her to Judith.

At any rate she is no longer attired like an odalisque of the
Second Empire, and Mrs. McMurray has saved her from the
lamentable errors of taste shown by the female mountebank of
sixteenth century France.  My excellent friend safely delivered
up an exhausted and bewildered charge at half-past seven last
evening, assuring me that her task had been easy, and that her
anticipations of it being the day of her life had been fulfilled.
It had been like dressing a doll, she explained, beaming.

An edifying pastime for an adult woman!  I did not utter this
sentiment, for she would rightly have styled me the most
ungrateful of unhung wretches.

Carlotta, then, had followed her about like a perambulatory doll,
upon which she had fitted all the finery she could lay her hands
on.  Apparently the atmosphere of the great shops had acted on
Carlotta like an anaesthetic.  She had moved in a sensuous dream
of drapery, wherein the choice-impulse was paralysed.  The only
articles upon which, in an unclouded moment, she had set her
heart--and that with a sudden passion of covetousness--were a
pair of red, high-heeled shoes  and a cheap red parasol.

"You have no idea what it means," said Mrs. McMurray, "to buy
_everything_ that a woman needs."

I replied that I had a respectful distaste for transcendental
philosophy.

"From a paper of pins to an opera-cloak," she continued.

"I'm afraid, dear Mrs. McMurray, an opera-cloak is not the
superior limit of a woman's needs," said I.  "I wish it were."

She called me a cynic and went.

This morning Carlotta interrupted me in my work.

"Will Seer Marcous come to my room and see my pretty things?"

In summer blouse and plain skirt she looked as demure as any
damsel in St. John's Wood.  She hung her head a little to one
side.  For the moment I felt paternal, and indulgently consented.
Words of man cannot describe the mass of millinery and chiffonery
in that chamber.  The spaces that were not piled high with
vesture gave resting spots for cardboard boxes and packing-paper.
Antoinette stood in a corner gazing at the spoil with a smile of
beatific idiocy.  I strode through the cardboard boxes which
crackled like bracken, and remained dumb as a fish before these
mysteries.  Carlotta tried on hats.  She shewed me patent leather
shoes .  She exhibited blouses and petticoats until my eyes ached.
She brandished something in her hand.

"Tell me if I must wear it" (I believe the sophisticated call it
"them").  "Mrs. McMurray says all ladies do.  But we never wear
it in Alexandretta, and it hurts."

She clasped herself pathetically and turned her great imploring
eyes on me.

"_Il faut souffrir pour etre belle_," I said.

"But with the figure of Mademoiselle, it is stupid!" cried
Antoinette.

"It is outrageous that I should be called upon to express an
opinion on such matters," I said, loftily.  And so it was.  My
assertion of dignity impressed them.

Then, with characteristic frankness, my young lady shakes out
before me things all frills, embroidery, ribbons, diaphaneity,
which the ordinary man only examines through shop-front windows
when a philosophic mood induces him to speculate on the
unfathomable vanity of woman.

"_Les beaux dessous!_" breathed Antoinette.

"The same ejaculation," I murmured, "was doubtless uttered by an
enraptured waiting-maid, when she beheld the stout linen smocks
of the ladies of the Heptameron."

I reflected on the relativity of things mundane.  The waiting-
maid no doubt wore some horror made of hemp against her skin.  If
Carlotta's gossamer follies had been thrown into the vagabond
court of the Queen of Navarre, I wonder whether those delectable
stories would have been written?

As Antoinette does not understand literary English, and as
Carlotta did not know what in the world I was talking about, I
was master of the conversational situation.  Carlotta went to the
mantel-piece and returned with a glutinous mass of sweet stuff
between her fingers.

"Will Seer Marcous have some?  It is nougat."
I declined.
"Oh!" she said, tragically disappointed.  "It is good."

There is something in that silly creature's eyes that I cannot
resist.  She put the abominable morsel into my mouth--it was far
too sticky for me to hold--and laughingly licked her own fingers.

I went down to work again with an uneasy feeling of imperilled
dignity.


May 29th.

I sent her word that I would take her for a drive this afternoon.
She was to be ready at three o'clock.  It will be wholesome for
her to regard her outings with me as rare occurrences to be
highly valued.  Ordinarily she will go out with Antoinette--for
the present at least--as she did yesterday.

At three o'clock Stenson informed me that the cab was at the
door.

"Go up and call Mademoiselle," said I.

In two or three minutes she came down.  I have not had such a
shock in my life.  I uttered exclamations of amazement in several
languages.  I have never seen on the stage or off such a figure
as she presented.  Her cheeks were white with powder, her lips
dyed a pomegranate scarlet, her eyebrows and lashes blackened.
In her ears she wore large silver-gilt earrings.  She entered the
room with an air of triumph, as who should say: "See how
captivatingly beautiful I am!"

At my stare of horror her face fell.  At my command to go
upstairs and wash herself clean, she wept.

"For heaven's sake, don't cry," I exclaimed, "or you will look
like a rainbow."

"I did it to please you," she sobbed.

"It is only the lowest class of dancing-women who paint their
faces in England," said I, _splendide mendax._  "And you know
what they are in Alexandretta."

"They came to Aziza-Zaza's wedding," said Carlotta, behind her
handkerchief.  "But all our ladies do this when they want to make
themselves look nice.  And I have put on this nasty thing that
hurts me, just to please Seer Marcous."

I felt I had been brutal.  She must have spent hours over her
adornment.  Yet I could not have taken her out into the street.
She looked like Jezebel, who without her paint must have been,
like Carlotta, a remarkably handsome person.

"It strikes me, Carlotta," said I, "that you will find England is
Alexandretta upside down.  What is wrong there is right here, and
vice versa.  Now if you want to please me run away and clean
yourself and take off those barbaric and Brummagem earrings."

She went and was absent a short while.  She returned in dismay.
Water would not get it off.  I rang for Antoinette, but
Antoinette had gone out.  It being too delicate a matter for
Stenson, I fetched a pot of vaseline from my own room, and as
Carlotta did not know what to make of it, I with my own hands
cleansed Carlotta.  She screamed with delight, thinking it vastly
amusing.  Her emotions are facile.  I cannot deny that it amused
me too.  But I am in a responsible position, and I am wondering
what the deuce I shall be doing next.

I enjoyed the drive to Richmond, where I gave her tea at the Star
and Garter and was relieved to see her drink normally from the
cup, instead of lapping from the saucer like a kitten.  She was
much more intelligent than during our first drive on Tuesday.
The streets have grown more familiar, and the traffic does not
make her head ache.  She asks me the ingenuous questions of a
child of ten.  The tall guardsmen we passed particularly aroused
her enthusiasm.  She had never seen anything so beautiful.  I
asked her if she would like me to buy one and give it her to play
with.

"Oh, would you, Seer Marcous?" she exclaimed, seizing my hand
rapturously.  I verily believe she thought I was in earnest, for
when I turned aside my jest, she pouted in disappointment and
declared that it was wrong to tell lies.

"I am glad you have some elementary notions of ethics," said I.
It was during our drive that it occurred to me to ask her where
she had procured the paint and earrings.  She explained,
cheerfully, that Antoinette had supplied the funds.  I must talk
seriously to Antoinette.  Her attitude towards Carlotta savours
too much of idolatry.  Demoralisation will soon set in, and the
utter ruin of Carlotta and my digestion will be the result.  I
must also make Carlotta a small allowance.

During tea she said to me, suddenly:

"Seer Marcous is not married?"

I said, no.  She asked, why not?  The devil seems to be driving
all womankind to ask me that question.

"Because wives are an unmitigated nuisance," said I.

A curious smile came over Carlotta's face.  It was as knowing as
Dame Quickly's.

"Then-"

"Have one of these cakes," said I, hurriedly.  "There is
chocolate outside and the inside is chock-full of custard."

She bit, smiled in a different and beatific way, and forgot my
matrimonial affairs.  I was relieved.  With her oriental training
there is no telling what Carlotta might have said.


May 31st.

To-day I have had a curious interview.  Who should call on me but
the father of the hapless Harry Robinson.  My first question was
a natural one.  How on earth did he connect me with the death of
his son?  How did he contrive to identify me as the befriender of
the young Turkish girl whose interests, he declared, were the
object of his visit?  It appeared that the police had given him
the necessary information, my adventures at Waterloo having
rendered their tracing of Carlotta an easy matter.  I had been
wondering somewhat at the meagre newspaper reports of the
inquest.  No mention was made, as I had nervously anticipated, of
the mysterious lady for whom the deceased had bought a ticket at
Alexandretta, and with whom he had come ashore.  Very little
evidence appeared to have been taken, and the jury contented
themselves with giving the usual verdict of temporary insanity.
I touched on this as delicately as I could.
"We succeeded in hushing things up," said my visitor, an old man
with iron-grey whiskers and a careworn sensitive face.  "I have
some influence myself, and his wife's relations--"

"His wife!" I ejaculated.  The ways of men are further than ever
from interpretation.  The fellow was actually married!

"Yes," he sighed.  "That is what would have made such a terrible
scandal.  Her relatives are powerful people.  We averted it,
thank Heaven, and his poor wife will never know.  My boy is dead.
No public investigation into motives would bring him back to life
again."

I murmured words of condolence.

"He must have been out of his mind, poor lad, when he induced the
girl to run away with him.  But, as my son has ruined her," he
set his teeth as if the boy's sin stabbed him, "I must look after
her welfare."

"You may set your mind at rest on that point," said I.  "He
smuggled her at once aboard the ship, and seems scarcely to have
said how d'ye do to her afterwards.  That is the mad part of it."

" Can I be sure?"

" I would stake my life on it," said I.

"How do you know?"

" Frankness--I may say embarrassing frankness is one of the young
lady's drawbacks."

He looked greatly relieved.  I acquainted him with Carlotta's
antecedents, and outlined the part I had played in the story.

"Then," said he, "I will see the child back to her home.  I will
take her there myself.  I cannot allow you any longer to have the
burden of befriending her, when it is my duty to repair my boy's
wrongdoing."

I explained to him the terror of Hamdi Effendi's clutches, and
told him of my promise.

"Then what is to be done?" he asked.

"If any kind people could be found to receive her into their
family, and bring her up like a Christian, I should hand her over
with the greatest of pleasure.  If there is one thing I do not
require in this house, it is an idle and irresponsible female.
But philanthropists are rare.  Who will take her?"

"I'm afraid I'm not prepared to do that."

"I never dreamed of having the bad taste to propose it," said I.
"I merely stated the only alternative to my guardianship."

"I should be willing--only too willing--to contribute towards her
support," said Mr. Robinson.

I thanked him.  But of course this was impossible.  I might as
well have allowed the good man to pay my gas bill.

"I know of a nice convent home kept by the Little Sisters of St.
Bridget," said he, tentatively.

"If it were St. Bridget herself," said I, "I would agree with
pleasure.  She is a saint for whom I have a great fascination.
She could work miracles.  When an Irish chieftain made her a
facetious grant of as much land as she could cover with her
mantle, she bade four of her nuns each take a corner and run
north, west, south and east, until her cloak covered several
roods.  She could have done the same with the soul of Carlotta.
But the age of miracles is past, and I fear the Little Sisters
would only break their gentle hearts over her.  She is an
extraordinary creature."

I know I ought to have given some consideration to the proposal;
but I think I must suffer from chronic inflammation of the
logical faculty.  It revolted against the suggested congruity of
Carlotta and the Little Sisters of St. Bridget.

"What can she be like?" asked the old man, wonderingly.

"Would it pain you to see her?" I asked.

"Yes," he said, in a low voice.  "It would.  But perhaps it would
bring me nearer to my unhappy boy.  He seems so far away."

I rang the bell and summoned Carlotta.

"Perhaps you had better not say who you are," I suggested.

When Carlotta entered, he rose and looked at her---oh, so
wistfully.

"This, Carlotta," said I, "is a friend of mine, who would like to
make your acquaintance."

She advanced shyly and held out a timid hand.  Obviously she was
on her best behaviour.  I thanked heaven she had tried her
unsuccessful experiment of powder and paint on my vile body and
not on that of a stranger.

"Do you--do you like England?" asked the old man.

"Oh, very--very much.  Every one is so kind to me.  It is a nice
place."

"It is the best place in the world to be young in," said he.

"Is it?" said Carlotta, with the simplicity of a baby.

"The very best."

"But is it not good to be old in?"

"No country is good for that."

The old man sighed and took his leave.  I accompanied him to the
front door.

"I don't know what to say, Sir Marcus.  She moves me strangely.
I never expected such sweet innocence.  For my boy's sake, I
would take her in--but his mother knows nothing about it--save
that the boy is dead.  It would kill her."

The tears rolled down the old man's cheeks.  I grasped him by the
hand.

"She shall come to no manner of harm beneath my roof," said I.

Carlotta was waiting for me in the drawing-room.  She looked at
me in a perplexed, pitiful way.

"Seer Marcous?"

"Yes?"

"Am I to marry him?"

"Marry whom?"

"That old gentleman.  I must, if you tell me.  But I do not want
to marry him."

It took me a minute or two to arrive at her oriental point of
view.  No woman could be shown off to a man except in the light
of a possible bride.  I think it sometimes good to administer a
shock to Carlotta, by way of treatment.

"Do you know who that old gentleman was?" said I.

"No."

"It was Harry's father."

"Oh!" she said, with a grimace.  "I am sorry I was so nice to
him."

What the deuce am I to do with her?

I lectured her for a quarter of an hour on the ethics of the
situation.  I think I only succeeded in giving her the impression
that I was in a bad temper.  So much did I sympathise with Harry
that I forbore to acquaint her with the fact that he was a
married man when he enticed her away from Alexandretta.


                           CHAPTER VI


June 1st

Sebastian Pasquale dined with me this evening.  Antoinette,
forgetful of idolatrous practices, devoted the concentration of
her being to the mysteries of her true religion.  The excellence
of the result affected Pasquale so strongly that with his
customary disregard of convention he insisted on Antoinette being
summoned to receive his congratulations.  He rose, made her a bow
as if she were a Marquise of pre-revolutionary days.

"It is a meal," said he, bunching up his fingers to his mouth and
kissing them open, "that one should have taken not sitting, but
kneeling."

"You stole that from Heine," said I, when the enraptured creature
had gone, "and you gave it out to Antoinette as if it were your
own."

"My good Ordeyne," said he, "did you ever hear of a man giving
anything authentic to a woman?"

"You know much more about the matter than I do," I replied, and
Pasquale laughed.

It has been a pleasure to see him again--a creature of abounding
vitality whom time cannot alter.  He is as lithe-limbed as when
he was a boy, and as lithe-witted.  I don't know how his
consciousness could have arrived at appreciation of Antoinette's
cooking, for he talked all through dinner, giving me an account
of his mirific adventures in foreign cities.  Among other things,
he had been playing juvenile lead, it appears, in the comic opera
of Bulgarian politics.  I also heard of the Viennese dancer.  My
own little chronicle, which he insisted on my unfolding, compared
with his was that of a caged canary compared with a
sparrowhawk's.  Besides, I am not so expansive as Pasquale, and
on certain matters I am silent.  He also gesticulates freely, a
thing which is totally foreign to my nature.  As Judith would
say, he has a temperament.  His moustaches curl fiercely upward
until the points are nearly on a level with his flashing dark
eyes.  Another point of dissimilarity between us is that he seems
to have been poured molten into his clothes, whereas mine hang as
from pegs clumsily arranged about my person.  By no conceivable
freak of outer circumstance could I have the adventures of
Pasquale.

And yet he thinks them tame!  Lord!  If I found myself hatching
conspiracies in Sofia on a nest made of loaded revolvers, I
should feel that the wild whirl of Bedlam had broken loose around
me.

"But man alive!" I cried.  "What in the name of tornadoes do you
want?"

"I want to fight," said he.  "The earth has grown too grey and
peaceful.  Life is anaemic.  We need colour--good red splashes of
it--good wholesome bloodshed."

Said I, "All you have to do is to go into a Berlin cafe and pull
the noses of all the lieutenants you see there.  In that way
you'll get as much gore as your heart could desire."

"By Jove!" said he, springing to his feet.  "What a cause for a
man to devote his life to--the extermination of Prussian
lieutenants!"

I leaned back in my arm-chair--it was after dinner--and smiled at
his vehemence.  The ordinary man does not leap about like that
during digestion.

"You would have been happy as an Uscoque," said I.  (I have just
finished the prim narrative.)

"What's that?" he asked.  I told him.

"The interesting thing about the Uscoques," I added, "is that
they were a Co-operative Pirate Society of the sixteenth century,
in which priests and monks and greengrocers and women and
children--the general public, in fact, of Senga--took shares and
were paid dividends.  They were also a religious people, and the
setting out of the pirate fleet at the festivals of Easter and
Christmas was attended by ecclesiastical ceremony.  Then they
scoured the high seas, captured argosies, murdered the crews
--their only weapons were hatchets and daggers and arquebuses
--landed on undefended shores, ravaged villages and carried off
comely maidens to replenish their stock of womenkind at home.
They must have been a live lot of people."

"What a second-hand old brigand you are," cried Pasquale, who
during my speech had been examining the carpet by the side of his
chair.

I laughed.  "Hasn't a phase of the duality of our nature ever
struck you?  We have a primary or everyday nature--a thing of
habit, tradition, circumstance; and we also have a secondary
nature which clamours for various sensations and is quite
contented with vicarious gratification.  There are delicately
fibred novelists who satisfy a sort of secondary Berserkism by
writing books whose pages reek with bloodshed.  The most placid,
benevolent, gold-spectacled paterfamilias I know, a man who
thinks it cruel to eat live oysters, has a curious passion for
crime and gratifies it by turning his study into a _musee
maccabre_ of murderers' relics.  From the thumb-joint of a
notorious criminal he can savour exquisitely morbid emotions,
while the blood-stains on an assassin's knife fill him with the
delicious lust of slaughter.  In the same way predestined
spinsters obtain vicarious enjoyment of the tender passion by
reading highly coloured love-stories."

"Just as that philosophical old stick, Sir Marcus Ordeyne, dus
from this sort of thing," said Pasquale.

And he fished from the side of his chair, and held up by the tip
of a monstrous heel, the most audacious, high-instepped, red
satin slipper I ever saw.

I eyed the thing with profound disgust.  I would have given a
hundred pounds for it to have vanished.  In its red satin essence
it was reprehensible, and in its feminine assertion it was
compromising.  How did it come there?  I conjectured that
Carlotta must have been trespassing in the drawing-room and
dropped it, Cinderella-like, in her flight, when she heard me
enter the house before dinner.

Pasquale held it up and regarded me quizzically.  I pretend to no
austerity of morals; but a burglar unjustly accused of theft
suffers acuter qualms of indignation than if he were a virtuous
person.  I regretted not having asked Pasquale to dinner at the
club.  I particularly did not intend to explain Carlotta to
Pasquale.  In fact, I see no reason at all for me to proclaim her
to my acquaintance.  She is merely an accident of my
establishment.

I rose and rang the bell.

"That slipper," said I, "does not belong to me, and it certainly
ought not to be here."

Pasquale surrendered it to my outstretched hand.

"It must fit a remarkably pretty foot," said he.

"I assure you, my dear Pasquale," I replied dryly, "I have never
looked at the foot that it may fit."  Nor had I.  A row of pink
toes is not a foot.

"Stenson," said I, when my man appeared, "take this to Miss
Carlotta and say with my compliments she should not have left it
in the drawing-room."

Stenson, thinking I had rung for whisky, had brought up decanter
and glasses.  As he set the tray upon the small table, I noticed
Pasquale look with some curiosity at my man's impassive face.
But he said nothing more about the slipper.  I poured out his
whisky and soda.  He drank a deep draught, curled up his
swaggering moustache and suddenly broke into one of his
disconcerting peals of laughter.

"I haven't told you of the Grfin von Wentzel; I don't know what
put her into my head.  There has been nothing like it since the
world began.  Mind you--a real live aristocratic Grfin with a
hundred quarterings!"

He proceeded to relate a most scandalous, but highly amusing
story.  An amazing, incredible tale; but it seemed familiar.

"That," said I, at last, "is incident for incident a scene out of
_L'Histoire Comique de Francion._"

"Never heard of it," said Pasquale, flashing.

"It was the first French novel of manners published about 1620
and written by a man called Sorel.  I don't dream of accusing you
of plagiarism, my dear fellow--that's absurd.  But the ridiculous
coincidence struck me.  You and the Grfin and the rest of you
were merely reenacting a three hundred year old farce."

"Rubbish!" said Pasquale.

"I'll show you," said I.

After wandering for a moment or two round my shelves, I
remembered that the book was in the dining-room.  I left Pasquale
and went downstairs.  I knew it was on one of the top shelves
near the ceiling.  Now, my dining-room is lit by one shaded
electrolier over the table, so that the walls of the room are in
deep shadow.  This has annoyed me many times when I have been
book-hunting.  I really must have some top lights put in.  To
stand on a chair and burn wax matches in order to find a
particular book is ignominious and uncomfortable.  The successive
illumination of four wax matches did not shed itself upon
_L'Histoire Comique de Francion_.

If there is one thing that frets me more than another, it is not
to be able to lay my hand upon a book.  I knew Francion was there
on the top shelves, and rather than leave it undiscovered, I
would have spent the whole night in search.  I suppose every one
has a harmless lunacy.  This is mine.  I must have hunted for
that book for twenty minutes, pulling out whole blocks of volumes
and peering with lighted matches behind, until my hands were
covered with dust.  At last I found it had fallen to the rear of
a ragged regiment of French novels, and in triumph I took it to
the area of light on the table and turned up the scene in
question.  Keeping my thumb in the place I returned to the
drawing-room.

"I'm sorry to have--" I began.  I stopped short.  I could
scarcely believe my eyes.  There, conversing with Pasquale and
lolling on the sofa, as if she had known him for years, was
Carlotta.

She must have seen righteous disapprobation on my face, for she
came running up to me.

"You see, I've made Miss Carlotta's acquaintance," said Pasquale.

"So I perceive," said I.

"Stenson told me you wanted me to come to the drawing-room in my
red slippers," said Carlotta.

"I am afraid Stenson must have misdelivered my message," said I.

"Then you do not want me at all, and I must go away?"

Oh, those eyes!  I am growing so tired of them.  I hesitated, and
was lost.

"Please let me stay and talk to Pasquale."

"Mr. Pasquale," I corrected.

She echoed my words with a cooing laugh, and taking my consent for
granted, curled herself up in a corner of the sofa.  I resumed my
seat with a sigh.  It would have been boorish to turn her out.

"This is much nicer than Alexandretta, isn't it?" said Pasquale
familiarly.  "And Sir Marcus is an improvement on Hamdi Effendi."

"Oh, yes.  Seer Marcous lets me do whatever I like," said
Carlotta.

"I'm shot if I do," I exclaimed.  "The confinement of your
existence in the East makes you exaggerate the comparative
immunity from restriction which you enjoy in England."

I notice that Carlotta is always impressed when I use high
sounding words.

"Still, if you could make love over garden walls, you must have
had a pretty slack time, even in Alexandretta," said Pasquale.

Obviously Carlotta had saved me the trouble of explaining her.

"I once met our friend Hamdi," Pasquale continued.  "He was the
politest old ruffian that ever had a long nose and was pitted
with smallpox."

"Yes, yes!" cried Carlotta, delighted.  "That is Hamdi."

"Is there any disreputable foreigner that you are not familiar
with?" I asked, somewhat sarcastically.

"I hope not," he laughed.  "You must know I had got into a deuce
of a row at Aleppo, about eighteen months ago, and had to take to
my heels.  Alexandretta is the port of Aleppo and Hamdi is a sort
of boss policeman there."

"He is very rich."

"He ought to be.  My interview with him cost me a thousand
pounds--the bald-headed scoundrel!"

"He is a shocking bad man," said Carlotta, gravely.

"I'm afraid it is Mr. Pasquale who is the shocking bad man," I
said, amused.  "What had you been doing in Aleppo?"

"_Maxime debetur_," said he.

"English are very wicked when they go to Syria," she remarked.

"How can you possibly know?" I said.

"Oh, I know," replied Carlotta, with a toss of her chin.

"My friend," said Pasquale, lighting a cigarette, "I have
travelled much in the East, and have had considerable adventures
by the way; and I can assure you that what the oriental lady
doesn't know about essential things is not worth knowing.  Their
life from the cradle to the grave is a concentration of all their
faculties, mortal and immortal, upon the two vital questions,
digestion and sex."

"What is sex?" asked Carlotta.

"It is the Fundamental Blunder of Creation," said I.

"I do not understand," said Carlotta.

"Nobody tries to understand Sir Marcus," said Pasquale,
cheerfully.  "We just let him drivel on until he is aware no one
is listening."

"Seer Marcous is very wise," said Carlotta, in serious defence of
her lord and master.  "All day he reads in big books and writes
on paper."

I have been wondering since whether that is not as ironical a
judgment as ever was passed.  Am I wise?  Is wisdom attained by
reading in big books and writing on paper?  Solomon remarks that
wisdom dwells with prudence and finds out knowledge of witty
inventions; that the wisdom of the prudent is to understand his
way; that wisdom and understanding keep one from the strange
woman and the stranger which flattereth with her words.  Now, I
have not been saved from the strange young woman who has begun to
flatter with her words; I don't in the least understand my way,
since I have no notion what I shall do with her; and in taking
her in and letting her loll upon my sofa of evenings, so as to
show off her red slippers to my guests, I have thrown prudence to
the winds; and my only witty invention was the idea of teaching
her typewriting, which is futile.  If the philosophy of the
excellent aphorist is sound, I certainly have not much wisdom to
boast of; and none of the big books will tell me what a wise man
would have done had he met Carlotta in the Embankment Gardens.

I did not think, however, that my wisdom was a proper subject for
discussion.  I jerked back the conversation by asking Carlotta
why she called Hamdi Effendi a shocking bad man.  Her reply was
startling.

"My mother told me.  She used to cry all day long.  She was sorry
she married Hamdi."

"Poor thingl" said I.  "Did he ill-treat her?"

"Oh, ye-es.  She had small-pox, too, and she was no longer
pretty, so Hamdi took other wives and she did not like them.
They were so fat and cruel.  She used to tell me I must kill
myself before I married a Turk.  Hamdi was going to make me marry
Mohammed Ali one--two years ago; but he died.  When I said I was
so glad" (that seems to be her usual formula of acknowledgment of
news relating to the disasters of her acquaintance), "Hamdi shut
me up in a dark room.  Then he said I must marry Mustapha.  That
is why I ran away with Harry.  See?  Oh, Hamdi is shocking bad."

From this and from other side-lights Carlotta has thrown on her
upbringing, I can realise the poor, pretty weak-willed baby of a
thing that was her mother, taking the line of least resistance,
the husband dead and the babe in her womb, and entering the
shelter offered by the amorous Turk.  And I can picture her
during the fourteen years of her imprisoned life, the
disillusion, the heart-break, the despair.  No wonder the
invertebrate soul could do no more for her daughter than teach
her monosyllabic English and the rudiments of reading and
writing.  Doubtless she babbled of western life with its freedom
and joyousness for women; but four years have elapsed since her
death, and her stories are only elusive memories in Carlotta's
mind.

It is strange that among the deadening influences of the harem
she has kept the hereditary alertness of the Englishwoman.  She
has a baby mouth, it is true; she pleads to you with the eyes of
a dog; her pretty ways are those of a young child; but she has
not the dull, soulless, sensual look of the pure-bred Turkish
woman, such as I have seen in Cairo through the transparent
veils.  In them there is no attraction save of the flesh; and
that only for the male who, deformity aside, reckons women as
merely so much cubical content of animated matter placed by Allah
at his disposal for the satisfaction of his desires and the
procreation of children.  I cannot for the life of me understand
an Englishman falling in love with a Turkish woman.  But I can
quite understand him falling in love with Carlotta.  The
hereditary qualities are there, though they have been forced into
the channel of sex, and become a sort of diabolical witchery
whereof I am not quite sure whether she is conscious.  For all
that, I don't think she can have a soul.  I have made up my mind
that she hasn't, and I don't like having my convictions
disturbed.

Until I saw her perched in the corner of the sofa, with her legs
tucked up under her, and the light playing a game of magic amid
the reds and golds and browns of her hair, while she cheerily
discoursed to us of Hamdi's villainy, I never noticed the dull
decorum of this room.  I was struck with the decorative value of
mere woman.

I must break myself of the habit of wandering off on a meditative
tangent to the circle of conversation.  I was brought back by
hearing Pasquale say:

"So you're going to marry an Englishman.  It's all fixed and
settled, eh?"

"Of course," laughed Carlotta.

"Have you made up your mind what he is to be like?"

I could see the unconscionable Don Juan instinctively preen
himself peacock fashion.

"I am going to marry Seer Marcous," said Carlotta, calmly.

She made this announcement not as a jest, not as a wish, but as
the commonplace statement of a fact.  There was a moment of
stupefied silence.  Pasquale who had just struck a match to light
a cigarette stared at me and let the flame burn his fingers.  I
stared at Carlotta, speechless.  The colossal impudence of it!

"I am sorry to contradict you," said I, at last, with some
acidity, "but you are going to do no such thing."

"I am not going to marry you?"

"Certainly not."

"Oh!" said Carlotta, in a tone of disappointment.

Pasquale rose, brought his heels together, put his hand on his
heart and made her a low bow.

"Will you have me instead of this stray bit of Stonehenge?"

"Very well," said Carlotta.

I seized Pasquale by the arm.  "For goodness sake, don't jest
with her!  She has about as much sense of humour as a prehistoric
cave-dweller.  She thinks you have made her a serious offer of
marriage."
He made her another bow.

"You hear what Sir Granite says?  He forbids our union.  If I
married you without his consent, he would flay me alive, dip me
in boiling oil and read me aloud his History of Renaissance
Morals.  So I'm afraid it is no good."

"Then I mustn't marry him either?" asked Carlotta, looking at me.

"No!" I cried, "you are not going to marry anybody.  You seem to
have hymenomania.  People don't marry in this casual way in
England.  They think over it for a couple of years and then they
come together in a sober, God-fearing, respectable manner."

"They marry at leisure and repent in haste," interposed Pasquale.

"Precisely," said I.

"What we call a marriage-bed repentance," said Pasquale.

"I told you this poor child had no sense of humour," I objected.

"You might as well kill yourself as marry without it."

"You are not going to marry anybody, Carlotta," said I, "until
you can see a joke."

"What is a joke?" inquired Carlotta.

"Mr. Pasquale asked you to marry him.  He didn't mean it.  That
was a joke.  It was enormously funny, and you should have
laughed."

"Then I must laugh when any one asks me to marry him?"

"As loud as you can," said I.

"You are so strange in England," sighed Carlotta.

I smiled, for I did not want to make her unhappy, and I spoke to
her intelligibly.

"Well, well, when you have quite learned all the English ways,
I'll try and find you a nice husband.  Now you had better go to
bed."

She retired, quite consoled.  When the door closed behind her,
Pasquale shook his head at me.

"Wasted!  Criminally wasted!"

"What?"

"That," he answered, pointing to the door.  "That bundle of
bewildering fascination."

"That," said I, "is an horrible infliction which only my
cultivated sense of altruism enables me to tolerate."

"Her name ought to be Margarita."

"Why?" I asked.

"_Ante porcos_," said he.


Certainly Pasquale has a pretty wit and I admire it as I admire
most of his brilliant qualities, but I fail to see the aptness of
this last gibe.  At the club this afternoon I picked up an
entertaining French novel called _En felons des Perles_.  On the
illustrated cover was a row of undraped damsels sitting in
oyster-shells, and the text of the book went to show how it was
the hero's ambition to make a rosary of these pearls.  Now I am a
dull pig.  Why?  Because I do not add Carlotta to my rosary.  I
never heard such a monstrous thing in my life.  To begin with, I
have no rosary.

I wish I had not read that French novel.  I wish I had not gone
downstairs to hunt for its seventeenth century ancestor.  I wish
I had given Pasquale dinner at the club.

It is all the fault of Antoinette.  Why can't she cook in a
middle-class, unedifying way?  All this comes from having in the
house a woman whose soul is in the stew-pot.


                          CHAPTER VII


July 1st.

She has been now over five weeks under my roof, and I have put
off the evil day of explaining her to Judith; and Judith returns
to-morrow.

I know it is odd for a philosophic bachelor to maintain in his
establishment a young and detached female of prepossessing
appearance.  For the oddity I care not two pins. _Io son' io_.
But the question that exercises me occasionally is: In what
category are my relations with Carlotta to be classified?  I do
not regard her as a daughter; still less as a sister: not even as
a deceased wife's sister.  For a secretary she is too abysmally
ignorant, too grotesquely incapable.  What she knows would be
made to kick the beam against the erudition of a guinea-pig.  Yet
she must be classified somehow.  I must allude to her as
something.  At present she fills the place in the house of a
pretty (and expensive) Persian cat; and like a cat she has made
herself serenely at home.

A governess, a fat-checked girl, who I am afraid takes too
humorous a view of the position, comes of mornings to instruct
Carlotta in the rudiments of education.  When engaging Miss
Griggs, I told her she must be patient, firm and, above all,
strong-minded.  She replied that she made a professional
specialty of these qualities, one of her present pupils being a
young lady of the Alhambra ballet who desires the particular
shade of cultivation that will match a new brougham.  She teaches
Carlotta to spell, to hold a knife and fork, and corrects such
erroneous opinions as that the sky is an inverted bowl over a
nice flat earth, and that the sun, moon, and stars are a sort of
electric light installation, put into the cosmos to illuminate
Alexandretta and the Regent's Park.  Her religious instruction I
myself shall attend to, when she is sufficiently advanced to
understand my teaching.  At present she is a Mohammedan, if she
is anything, and believes firmly in Allah.  I consider that a
working Theism is quite enough for a young woman in her position
to go on with.  In the afternoon she walks out with Antoinette.
Once she stole forth by herself, enjoyed herself hugely for a
short time, got lost, and was brought back thoroughly frightened
by a policeman.  I wonder what the policeman thought of her?  The
rest of the day she looks at picture-books and works embroidery.
She is making an elaborate bed-spread which will give her
harmless occupation for a couple of years.

For an hour every evening, when I am at home, she comes into the
drawing-room and drinks coffee with me and listens to my
improving conversation.  I take this opportunity to rebuke her
for faults committed during the day, or to commend her for
especial good behaviour.  I also supplement the instruction in
things in general that is given her by the excellent Miss Griggs.
Oddly enough I am beginning to look forward to these evening
hours.  She is so docile, so good-humoured, so spontaneous.  If
she has a pain in her stomach, she says so with the most engaging
frankness.  Sometimes I think of her only, in Pasquale's words,
as a bundle of fascination, and forget that she has no soul.
Nearly always, however, something happens to remind me.  She
loves me to tell her stories.  The other night I solemnly related
the history of Cinderella.  She was enchanted.  It gave me the
idea of setting her to read "Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare."  I
was turning this over in my mind while she chewed the cud of her
enjoyment, when she suddenly asked whether I would like to hear a
Turkish story.  She knew lots of nice, funny stories.  I bade her
proceed.  She curled herself up in her favourite attitude on the
sofa and began.

I did not allow her to finish that tale.  Had I done so, I should
have been a monster of depravity.  Compared with it the worst of
Scheherazade's, in Burton's translation, were milk and water for
a nunnery.  She seemed nonplussed when I told her to stop.

"Are oriental ladies in the habit of telling such stories?" I
asked.

"Why, yes," she replied with a candid air of astonishment.  "It
is a funny story."

"There is nothing funny whatever in it," said I.  "A girl like
you oughtn't to know of the existence of such things."

"Why not?" asked Carlotta.

I am always being caught up by her questions.  I tried to
explain; but it was difficult.  If I had told her that a maiden's
mind ought to be as pure as the dewy rose she would not have
understood me.  Probably she would have thought me a fool.  And
indeed I am inclined to question whether it is an advantage to a
maiden's after career to be dewy-roselike in her
unsophistication.  In order to play tunes indifferently well on
the piano she undergoes the weary training of many years; but she
is called upon to display the somewhat more important
accomplishment of bringing children into the world without an
hour's educational preparation.  The difficulty is, where to draw
the line between this dewy, but often disastrous, ignorance and
Carlotta's knowledge.  I find it a most delicate and embarrassing
problem.  In fact, the problems connected with this young woman
seem endless.  Yet they do not disturb me as much as I had
anticipated.  I really believe I should miss my pretty Persian
cat.  A man must be devoid of all aesthetic sense to deny that
she is delightful to look at.

And she has a thousand innocent coquetries and cajoling ways.
She has a manner of holding chocolate creams to her white teeth
and talking to you at the same time which is peculiarly
fascinating.  And she must have some sense.  To-night she asked
me what I was writing.  I replied, "A History of the Morals of
the Renaissance."
"What are morals and what is the Renaissance?" asked Carlotta.
When you come to think of it, it is a profound question, which
philosophers and historians have wasted vain lives in trying to
answer.  I perceive that I too must try to answer it with a
certain amount of definition.  I have spent the evening
remodelling my Introduction, so as to define the two terms
axiomatically with my subsequent argument, and I find it greatly
improved.  Now this is due to Carlotta.


The quantity of chocolate creams the child eats cannot be good
for her digestion.  I must see to this.


July 2d.

A telegram from Judith to say she postpones her return to Monday.
I have been longing to see the dear woman again, and I am greatly
disappointed.  At the same time it is a respite from an
explanation that grows more difficult every day.  I hate myself
for the sense of relief.

This morning came an evening dress for Carlotta which has taken a
month in the making.  This, I am given to understand, is
delirious speed for a London dress-maker.  To celebrate the
occasion I engaged a box at the Empire for this evening and
invited her to dine with me.  I sent a note of invitation round
to Mrs. McMurray.

Carlotta did not come down at half-past seven.  We waited.  At
last Mrs. McMurray went up to the room and presently returned
shepherding a shy, blushing, awkward, piteous young person who
had evidently been crying.  My friend signed to me to take no
notice.  I attributed the child's lack of gaiety to the ordeal
of sitting for the first time in her life at a civilised
dinner-table.  She scarcely spoke and scarcely ate.  I complimented
her on her appearance and she looked beseechingly at me, as if I
were scolding her.  After dinner Mrs. McMurray told me the reason
of her distress.  She had found Carlotta in tears.  Never could she
face me in that low cut evening bodice.  It outraged her modesty.
It could not be the practice of European women to bare themselves
so immodestly before men.  It was only the evidence of her
visitor's own plump neck and shoulders that convinced her, and
she suffered herself to be led downstairs in an agony of self-
consciousness.

When we entered the box at the Empire, a troupe of female
acrobats were doing their turn.  Carlotta uttered a gasp of
dismay, blushed burning red, and shrank back to the door.  There
is no pretence about Carlotta.  She was shocked to the roots of
her being.

"They are naked!" she said, quiveringly.

"For heaven's sake, explain," said I to Mrs. McMurray, and I beat
a hasty retreat to the promenade.

When I returned, Carlotta had been soothed down.  She was
watching some performing dogs with intense wonderment and
delight.  For the rest of the evening she sat spell-bound.  The
exiguity of costume in the ballet caused her indeed to glance in
a frightened sort of way at Mrs. McMurray, who reassured her with
a friendly smile, but the music and the maze of motion and the
dazzle of colour soon held her senses captive, and when the
curtain came down she sighed like one awaking from a dream.

As we drove home, she asked me:

"Is it like that all day long?  Oh, please to let me live there!"

A nice English girl of eighteen would not flaunt unconcerned
about my drawing-room in a shameless dressing-gown, and crinkle
up her toes in front of me; still less would she tell me
outrageous stories; but she will wear low-necked dresses and gaze
at ladies in tights without the ghost of an immodest thought.  I
was right when I told Carlotta England was Alexandretta upside-
down.  What is immoral here is moral there, and vice-versa.
There is no such thing as absolute morality.  I am very glad this
has happened.  It shows me that Carlotta is not devoid of the
better kind of feminine instincts.


                          CHAPTER VIII


July 4th.

Judith has come back.  I have seen her and I have explained
Carlotta.

All day long I felt like a respectable person about to be brought
before a magistrate for being drunk and disorderly.  Now I have
the uneasy satisfaction of having been let off with a caution.  I
am innocent, but I mustn't do it again.

As soon as I entered the room Judith embraced me, and said a
number of foolish things.  I responded to the best of my ability.
It is not usual for our quiet lake of affection to be visited by
such tornadoes.

"Oh, I am glad, I am glad to be back with you again.  I have
longed for you.  I couldn't write it.  I did not know I could
long for any one so much."

"I have missed you immensely, my dear Judith," said I.

She looked at me queerly for a moment; then with a radiant smile:

"I love you for not going into transports like a Frenchman.  Oh,
I am tired of Frenchmen.  You are my good English Marcus, and
worth all masculine Paris put together."

"I thank you, my dear, for the compliment," said I, "but surely
you must exaggerate."

"To me you are worth the masculine universe," said Judith, and
she seated me by her side on the sofa, held my hands, and said
more foolish things.

When the tempest had abated, I laughed.

"It is you that have acquired the art of transports in Paris,"
said I.

"Perhaps I have.  Shall I teach you?"

"You will have to learn moderation, my dear Judith," I remarked.
"You have been living too rapidly of late and are looking tired."

"It is only the journey," she replied.

I am sure it is the unaccustomed dissipation.  Judith is not a
strong woman, and late hours and eternal gadding about do not
suit her constitution.  She has lost weight and there are faint
circles under her eyes.  There are lines, too, on her face which
only show in hours of physical strain.  I was proceeding to
expound this to her at some length, for I consider it well for
women to have some one to counsel them frankly in such matters,
when she interrupted me with a gesture of impatience.

"There, there!  Tell me what you have been doing with yourself.
Your letters gave me very little information."

"I am afraid," said I, "I am a poor letter writer."

"I read each ten times over," she said.

I kissed her hand in acknowledgment.  Then I rose, lit a
cigarette and walked about the room.  Judith shook out her skirts
and settled herself comfortably among the sofa-cushions.

"Well, what crimes have you been committing the past few weeks?"

A wandering minstrel was harping "Love's Sweet Dream" outside the
public-house below.  I shut the window, hastily.

"Nothing so bad as that," said I.  "He ought to be hung and his
wild harp hung behind him."

"You are developing nerves," said Judith.  "Is it a guilty
conscience?" She laughed.  "You are hiding something from me.
I've been aware of it all the time."

"Indeed?  How?"

"By the sixth sense of woman!"

Confound the sixth sense of woman!  I suppose it has been
developed like a cat's whiskers to supply the deficiency of a
natural scent.  Also, like the whiskers, it is obtrusive, and a
matter for much irritatingly complacent pride.  Judith regarded
me with a mock magisterial air, and I was put into the dock at
once.

"Something has happened," I said, desperately.  "A female woman
has come and taken up her residence at 26 Lingfield Terrace.  A
few weeks ago she ate with her fingers and believed the earth was
flat.  I found her in the Victoria Embankment Gardens beneath the
terrace of the National Liberal Club, and now she lives on
chocolate creams and the 'Child's Guide to Knowledge.'  She is
eighteen and her name is Carlotta.  There!"

As my cigarette had gone out, I threw it with some peevishness
into the grate.  Judith's expression had changed from mock to
real gravity.  She sat bolt upright and looked at me somewhat
stonily.

"What in the world do you mean, Marcus?"

"What I say.  I'm saddled with the responsibility of a child of
nature as unsophisticated and perplexing as Voltaire's Huron.
She's English and she came from a harem in Syria, and she is as
beautiful as the houris she believes in and is unfortunately
precluded from joining.  One of these days I shall be teaching
her her catechism.  I have already washed her face.  Kindly pity
me as the innocent victim of fantastic circumstances."

"I don't see why I should pity you," said Judith.

I felt I had not explained Carlotta tactfully.  If there are ten
ways of doing a thing I have noticed that I invariably select the
one way that is wrong.  I perceived that somehow or other the
very contingency I had feared had come to pass.  I had prejudiced
Judith against Carlotta.  I had aroused the Ishmaelite--her hand
against every woman and every woman's hand against her--that
survives in all her sex.

"My dear Judith," said I, "if a wicked fairy godmother had
decreed that a healthy rhinoceros should be my housemate you
would have extended me your sympathy.  But because Fate has
inflicted on me an equally embarrassing guest in the shape of a
young woman--"

"My dear Marcus," interrupted Judith, "the healthy rhinoceros
would know twenty times as much about women as you do."  This I
consider one of the silliest remarks Judith has ever made.  "
Do," she continued, "tell me something coherent about this young
person you call Carlotta."

I told the story from beginning to end.

"But why in the world did you keep it from me?" she asked.

"I mistrusted the sixth sense of woman," said I.

"The most elementary sense of woman or any one else would have
told you that you were doing a very foolish thing."

"How would you have acted?"

"I should have handed her over at once to the Turkish consulate."

"Not if you had seen her eyes."

Judith tossed her head.  "Men are all alike," she observed.

"On the contrary," said I, "that which characterises men as a sex
is their greater variation from type than women.  It is a
scientific fact.  You will find it stated by Darwin and more
authoritatively still by later writers.  The highest common
factor of a hundred women is far greater than that of a hundred
men.  The abnormal is more frequent in the male sex.  There are
more male monsters."

"That I can quite believe," snapped Judith.

"Then you agree with me that men are not all alike?"

"I certainly don't.  Put any one of you before a pretty face and
a pair of silly girl's eyes and he is a perfect idiot."

"My dear Judith," said I, "I don't care a hang for a pretty face-
-except yours."

"Do you really care about mine?" she asked wistfully.

"My dear," said I, dropping on one knee by the sofa, and taking
her hand, "I've been longing for it for six weeks."  And I
counted the weeks on her fingers.

This put her in a good humour.  Now that I come to think of it,
there is something adorably infantile in grown up women.  Shall
man ever understand them?  I have seen babies (not many, I am
glad to say) crow with delight at having their toes pulled, with a
"this little pig went to market," and so forth; Judith almost
crowed at having the weeks told off on her fingers.  Queer!

An hour was taken up with the account of her doings in Paris.
She had met all the nicest and naughtiest people.  She had been
courted and flattered.  An artist in a slouch hat, baggy corduroy
breeches, floppy tie and general 1830 misfit had made love to her
on the top of the Eiffel Tower.


"And he said," laughed Judith, "'_Partons ensemble.  Comme on dit
en Anglais_--fly with me!'  I remarked that our state when we got
to the Champs de Mars would be an effective disguise.  He didn't
understand, and it was delicious!"

I laughed.  "All the same," I observed, "I can't see the fun of
making jokes which the person to whom you make them doesn't see
the point of."

"Why, that's your own peculiar form of humour," she retorted.  "I
caught the trick from you."

Perhaps she is right.  I have noticed that people are slow in
their appreciation of my witticisms.  I must really be a very
dull dog.  If she were not fond of me I don't see how a bright
woman like Judith could tolerate my society for half an hour.

I don't think I contribute to the world's humour; but the world's
humour contributes much to my own entertainment, and things which
appear amusing to me do not appeal, when I point them out, to the
risible faculties of another.  Every individual, I suppose, like
every civilisation, must have his own standard of humour.  If I
were a Roman (instead of an English) Epicurean, I should have
died with laughter at the sight of a fat Christian martyr
scudding round the arena while chased by a hungry lion.  At
present I should faint with horror.  Indeed, I always feel
tainted with savagery and enjoying a vicarious lust, when I smile
at the oft-repeated tale of the poor tiger in Dore's picture that
hadn't got a Christian.  On the other hand, it tickles me
immensely to behold a plethoric commonplace Briton roar himself
purple with impassioned platitude at a political meeting; but I
perceive that all my neighbours take him with the utmost
seriousness.  Again, your literary journalist professes to
wriggle in his chair over the humour of Jane Austen; to me she is
the dullest lady that ever faithfully photographed the trivial.
Years ago I happened to be crossing Putney Bridge, in a frock-
coat and silk hat, when a passing member of the proletariat dug
his elbows in his comrade's ribs and, quoting a music-hall tag of
the period, shouted "He's got 'em on!"  whereupon both burst into
peals of robustious but inane laughter.  Now, if I had turned to
them, and said, "He would be funnier if I hadn't," and
paraphrased, however wittily, Carlyle's ironical picture of a
nude court of St. James's, they would have punched my head under
the confused idea that I was trying to bamboozle them.  Which
brings me to my point of departure, my remark to Judith as to the
futility of jesting to unpercipient ears.

I did not take up her retort.

"And what was the end of the romance?" I asked.

"He borrowed twenty francs of me to pay for the _dejeuner_, and
his _l'annee trente_ delicacy of soul compelled him to blot my
existence forever from his mind."

"He never repaid you?" I asked.

"For a humouristic philosopher," cried Judith, "you are
delicious!"

Judith is too fond of that word "delicious."  She uses it in
season and out of season.

We have the richest language that ever a people has accreted, and
we use it as if it were the poorest.  We hoard up our infinite
wealth of words between the boards of dictionaries and in speech
dole out the worn bronze coinage of our vocabulary.  We are the
misers of philological history.  And when we can save our pennies
and pass the counterfeit coin of slang, we are as happy as if we
heard a blind beggar thank us for putting a pewter sixpence into
his hat.

I said something of the sort to Judith, after she had resumed her
seat and I had opened the window, the minstrel having wandered to
the next hostelry, where the process of converting "Love's Sweet
Dream" into a nightmare was still faintly audible.  Judith looked
at me whimsically, as I stood breathing the comparatively fresh
air and enjoying the relative silence.

"You are still the same, I am glad to see.  Conversation with the
young savage from Syria hasn't altered you in the least."

"In the first place," said I, "savages do not grow in Syria; and
in the second, how could she have altered me?"

"If the heavens were to open and the New Jerusalem to appear this
moment before you," retorted Judith, with the relevant
irrelevance of her sex, "you would begin an unconcerned
disquisition on the iconography of angels."

I sat on the sofa end and touched one of her little pink ears.
She has pretty ears.  They were the first of things physical
about her that attracted me to her years ago in the Roman
pension--they and the mass of silken flax that is her hair, and
her violet eyes.

"Did you learn that particular way of talking in Paris?" I asked.

She had the effrontery to say she was imitating me and that it
was a very good imitation indeed.


We talked about the book.  I touched upon the great problem that
requires solution--the harmonising and justifying of the
contradictory opposites in Renaissance character: Fra Lippo Lippi
breaking his own vows and breaking a nun's for her; Perugino
leading his money-grubbing, morose life and painting ethereal
saints and madonnas in his _bottega_, while the Baglioni filled
the streets outside with slaughter; Lorenzo de' Medici bleeding
literally and figuratively his fellow-citizens, going from that
occupation to his Platonic Academy and disputing on the
immortality of the soul, winding up with orgies of sensual
depravity with his boon companion Pulci, and all the time making
himself an historic name for statecraft; Pope Sixtus IV, at the
very heart of the Pazzi conspiracy to murder the Medici--

"And Pope Nicholas V when drunk ordering a man to be executed,
and being sorry for it when sober," said Judith.

It is wonderful how Judith, with her quite unspecialised
knowledge of history can now and then put her finger upon
something vital.  I have been racking my brain and searching my
library for the past two or three days for an illustration of
just that nature.  I had not thought of it.  Here is Tomaso da
Sarzana, a quiet, retired schoolmaster, like myself, an editor of
classical texts, a peaceful librarian of Cosmo de' Medici, a
scholar and a gentleman to the tips of his fingers; he is made
Pope, a King Log to save the cardinalate from a possible King
Stork Colonna; the Porcari conspiracy breaks out, is discovered
and the conspirators are hunted over Italy and put to death; a
gentleman called Anguillara is slightly inculpated; he is invited
to Rome by Nicholas, and given a safe-conduct; when he arrives
the Pope is drunk (at least Stefano Infessura, the contemporary
diarist, says so); the next morning his Holiness finds to his
surprise and annoyance that the gentleman's head has been cut off
by his orders.  It is an amazing tale.  To realise how amazing it
is, one must picture the fantastic possibility of it happening at
the Vatican nowadays.  And the most astounding thing is this:
that if all the dead and gone popes were alive, and the soul of
the saintly Pontiff of to-day were to pass from him, the one who
could most undetected occupy his simulacrum would be this very
Thomas of Sarzana.

"Pardon me, my dear Judith," said I.  "But this is a story lying
somewhat up one of the back-waters of history.  Where did you
come across it?"

"I saw it the other day in a French comic paper," replied Judith.

I really don't know which to admire the more: the inconsequent
way in which the French toss about scholarship, or the marvellous
power of assimilation possessed by Judith.

Before we separated she returned to the subject of Carlotta.

"Am I to see this young creature?" she asked.
"That is just as you choose," said I.

"Oh!  as far as I am concerned, my dear Marcus, I am perfectly
indifferent," replied Judith, assuming the supercilious
expression with which women invariably try to mask inordinate
curiosity.

"Then," said I, with a touch of malice, "there is no reason why
you should make her acquaintance."

"I should be able to see through her tricks and put you on your
guard."

"Against what?"

She shrugged her shoulders as if it were vain to waste breath on
so obtuse a person.

"You had better bring her round some afternoon," she said.

Have I acted wisely in confessing Carlotta to Judith?  And why do
I use the word "confess"?  Far from having committed an evil
action, I consider I have exhibited exemplary altruism.  Did I
want a "young savage from Syria" to come and interfere with my
perfectly ordered life?  Judith does not realise this.  I had a
presentiment of the prejudice she would conceive against the poor
girl, and now it has been verified.  I wish I had held my tongue.
As Judith, for some feminine reason known only to herself, has
steadily declined to put her foot inside my house, she might very
well have remained unsuspicious of Carlotta's existence.  And why
not?  The fact of the girl being my pensioner does not in the
least affect the personality which I bring to Judith.  The idea
is absurd.  Why wasn't I wise before the event?  I might have
spared myself considerable worry.


A letter from my Aunt Jessica enclosing a card for a fancy dress
ball at the Empress Rooms.  The preposterous lady!

"Do come.  It is not right for a young man to lead the life of a
recluse of seventy.  Here we are in the height of the London
season, and I am sure you haven't been into ten houses, when a
hundred of the very best are open to you--"  I loathe the term
"best houses."  The tinsel ineptitude of them!  For entertainment
I really would sooner attend a mothers' meeting or listen to the
serious British Drama--Have I read so and so's novel?  Am I going
to Mrs. Chose's dance?  Do I ride in the Park?  Do I know young
Thingummy of the Guards, who is going to marry Lady Betty
Something?  What do I think of the Academy?  As if one could have
any sentiment with regard to the Academy save regret at such
profusion of fresh paint!  "You want shaking up," continued my
aunt.  Silly woman!  If there is a thing I should abhor it would
be to be shaken up.  "Come and dine with us at seven-thirty _in
costume_, and I'll promise you a delightful time.  And think how
proud the girls would be of showing off their _beau cousin_." _Et
patiti et patita._  I am again reminded that I owe it to my
position, my title.  God ha' mercy on us!  To bedeck myself like
a decayed mummer in a booth and frisk about in a pestilential
atmosphere with a crowd of strange and uninteresting young
females is the correct way of fulfilling the obligations that the
sovereign laid upon the successors to the title, when he
conferred the dignity of a baronetcy on my great-grandfather!
Now I come to think of it the Prince Regent was that sovereign,
and my ancestor did things for him at Brighton.  Perhaps after
all there is a savage irony of truth in Aunt Jessica's
suggestion!

And a _beau cousin_ should I be indeed.  What does she think I
would go as?  A mousquetaire? or a troubadour in blue satin
trunks and cloak, white silk tights and shoes  and a Grecian
helmet, like Mr. Snodgrass at Mrs. Leo Hunter's _fete champetre?_

I wish I could fathom Aunt Jessica's reasons for her attempts at
involving me in her social mountebankery.  If the girls get no
better dance-partners than me, heaven help them!

Only a fortnight ago I drove with them to Hurlingham.  My aunt
and Gwendolen disappeared in an unaccountable manner with another
man, leaving me under an umbrella tent to take charge of Dora.  I
had an hour and a half of undiluted Dora.  The dose was too
strong, and it made my head ache.  I think I prefer neat
Carlotta.


                           CHAPTER IX


July 5th

I lunched at home, and read drowsily before the open window till
four o'clock.  Then the splendour of the day invited me forth.
Whither should I go?  I thought of Judith and Hampstead Heath; I
also thought of Carlotta and Hyde Park.  The sound of the lions
roaring for their afternoon tea reached me through the still air,
and I put from me a strong temptation to wander alone and
meditative in the Zoological Gardens close by.  I must not
forget, I reflected, that I am responsible for Carlotta's
education, whereas I am in no wise responsible for the animals or
for Judith.  If Judith and I had claims one on the other, the
entire charm of our relationship would be broken.

I resolved to take Carlotta to the park, in order to improve her
mind.  She would see how well-bred Englishwomen comport
themselves externally.  It would be a lesson in decorum.

I do not despise convention.  Indeed, I follow it up to the point
when it puts on the airs of revealed religion.  My neighbours and
I decide on a certain code of manners which will enable us to
meet without mutual offence.  I agree to put my handkerchief up
to my nose when I sneeze in his presence, and he contracts not to
wipe muddy boots on my sofa.  I undertake not to shock his wife
by parading my hideous immorality before her eyes, and he binds
himself not to aggravate my celibacy by beating her or kissing
her when I am paying a call.  I agree, by wearing an arbitrarily
fixed costume when I dine with him, to brand myself with the
stamp of a certain class of society, so that his guests shall
receive me without question, and he in return gives me a
well-ordered dinner served with the minimum amount of inconvenience
to myself that his circumstances allow.  Many folks make what they
are pleased to call unconventionality a mere cloak for selfish
disregard of the feelings and tastes of others.  Bohemianism too
often means piggish sloth or slatternly ineptitude.

Convention is solely a matter of manners.  That is why I desire
to instil some convention into what, for want of a more accurate
term, I may allude to as Carlotta's mind.  It will save me much
trouble in the future.

I summoned Carlotta.

"Carlotta," I said, "I am going to take you to Hyde Park and show
you the English aristocracy wearing their best clothes and their
best behaviour.  You must do the same."

"My best clothes?" cried Carlotta, her face lighting up.

"Your very best.  Make haste."

I smiled.  She ran from the room and in an incredibly short time
reappeared unblushingly bare-necked and bare-armed in the evening
dress that had caused her such dismay on Saturday.

I jumped to my feet.  There is no denying that she looked
amazingly beautiful.  She looked, in fact, disconcertingly
beautiful.  I found it hard to tell her to take the dress off
again.

"Is it wrong?" she asked Nvith a pucker of her baby lips.

"Yes, indeed," said I.  "People would be shocked."

"But on Saturday evening--"she began.

"I know, my child," I interrupted.  "In society you are scarcely
respectable unless you go about half naked at night; but to do so
in the daytime would be the grossest indecency.  I'll explain
some other time."

"I shall never understand," said Carlotta.

Two great tears stood, one on each eyelid, and fell
simultaneously down her cheeks.

"What on earth are you crying for?" I asked aghast.

"You are not pleased with me," said Carlotta, with a choke in her
voice.

The two tears fell like rain-drops on to her bosom, and she stood
before me a picture of exquisite woe.  Then I did a very foolish
thing.

Last week a little gold brooch in a jeweller's window caught my
fancy.  I bought it with the idea of presenting it to Carlotta,
when an occasion offered, as a reward for peculiar merit.  Now,
however, to show her that I was in no way angry, I abstracted the
bauble from the drawer of my writing-table, and put it in her
hand.

"You please me so much, Carlotta," said I, "that I have bought
this for you."

Before I had completed the sentence, and before I knew what she
was after, her arms were round my neck and she was hugging me
like a child.

I have never experienced such an odd sensation in my life as the
touch of Carlotta's fresh young arms upon my face and the perfume
of spring violets that emanated from her person.  I released
myself swiftly from her indecorous demonstration.

"You mustn't do things like that," said I, severely.  "In
England, young women are only allowed to embrace their
grandfathers."
Carlotta looked at me wide-eyed, with the fox-terrier knitting of
the forehead.

"But you are so good to me, Seer Marcous," she said.

"I hope you'll find many people good to you, Carlotta," I
answered.  "But if you continue that method of expressing your
appreciation, you may possibly be misunderstood."

I had recovered from the momentary shock to my senses, and I
laughed.  She fluttered a sidelong glance at me, and a smile as
inscrutable as the Monna Lisa's hovered over her lips.

"What would they do if they did not understand?"

"They would take you," I replied, fixing her sternly with my
gaze, "they would take you for an unconscionable baggage."

"_Hou!_" laughed Carlotta, suddenly.  And she ran from the room.

In a moment she was back again.  She came up to me demurely and
plucked my sleeve.

"Come and show me what I must put on so as to please you."

I rang the bell for Antoinette, to whom I gave the necessary
instructions.  Her next request would be that I should act the
part of lady's-maid.  I must maintain my dignity with Carlotta.

The lovely afternoon had attracted many people to the park, and
the lawns were thronged.  We found a couple of chairs at the edge
of one of the cross-paths and watched the elegant assembly.
Carlotta, vastly entertained, asked innumerable questions.  How
could I tell whether a lady was married or unmarried?  Did they
all wear stays?  Why did every one look so happy?  Did I think
that old man was the young girl's husband?  What were they all
talking about?  Wouldn't I take her for a drive in one of those
beautiful carriages?  Why hadn't I a carriage?  Then suddenly, as
if inspired, after a few minutes' silent reflection:

"Seer Marcous, is this the marriage market?"

"The what?" I gasped.

"The marriage market.  I read it in a book, yesterday.  Miss
Griggs gave it me to read aloud--Tack--Thack--"

"Thackeray?"

"Ye-es.  They come here to sell the young girls to men who want
wives."  She edged away from me, with a little movement of alarm.
"That is not why you have brought me here--to sell me?"

"How much do you think you would be worth?" I asked,
sarcastically.

She opened out her hands palms upward, throwing down her parasol,
as she did so, upon her neighbour's little Belgian griffon, who
yelped.

"Ch, lots," she said in her frank way.  "I am very beautiful."

I picked up the parasol, bowed apologetically to the owner of the
stricken animal, and addressed Carlotta.

"Listen, my good child.  You are passably good-looking, but you
are by no means very beautiful.  If I tried to sell you here, you
might possibly fetch half a crown--"

"Two shillings and sixpence?" asked the literal Carlotta.

"Yes.  Just that.  But as a matter of fact, no one would buy you.
This is not the marriage market.  There is no such thing as a
marriage market.  English mothers and fathers do not sell their
daughters for money.  Such a thing is monstrous and impossible."

"Then it was all lies I read in the book?"

"All lies," said I.

I hope the genial shade of the great satirist has forgiven me.

"Why do they put lies in books?"

"To accentuate the Truth, so that it shall prevail," I answered.

This was too hard a nut for Carlotta to crack.  She was silent
for a moment.  She reverted, ruefully, to the intelligible.

"I thought I was beautiful," she said.

"Who told you so?"

"Pasquale."

"Pasquale has no sense," said I.  "There are men to whom all
women who are not seventy and toothless and rheumy at the eyes
are beautiful.  Pasquale has said the same to every woman he has
met.  He is a Lothario and a Don Juan and a Caligula and a
Faublas and a Casanova."

"And he tells lies, too?"

"Millions of them," said I.  "He contracts with their father
Beelzebub for a hundred gross a day."

"Pasquale is very pretty and he makes me laugh and I like him,"
said Carlotta.

"I am very sorry to hear it," said I.

The griffon, who had been sniffing at Carlotta's skirts, suddenly
leaped into her lap.  With a swift movement of her hand she swept
the poor little creature, as if it had been a noxious insect,
yards away.

"Carlotta!" I cried angrily, springing to my feet.

The ladies who owned the beast rushed to their whining pet and
looked astonished daggers at Carlotta.  When they picked it up,
it sat dangling a piteous paw.  Carlotta rose, merely scared at
my anger.  I raised my hat.

"I am more than sorry.  I can't tell you how sorry I am.  I hope
the little dog is not hurt.  My ward, for whom I offer a thousand
apologies, is a Mohammedan, to whom all dogs are unclean.  Please
attribute the accident to religious instinct."

The younger of the two, who had been examining the paw, looked up
with a smile.

"Your ward is forgiven.  Punch oughtn't to jump on strange
ladies' laps, whether they are Mohammedans or not.  Oh!  he is
more frightened than hurt.  And I," she added, with a twinkling
eye, "am more hurt than frightened, because Sir Marcus Ordeyne
doesn't recognise me."

So Carlotta had nearly killed the dog of an unrecalled
acquaintance.

"I do indeed recognise you now," said I, mendaciously.  I seem to
have been lying to-day through thick and thin.  "But in the
confusion of the disaster--"

"You sat next me at lunch one day last winter, at Mrs.
Ordeyne's," interrupted the lady, "and you talked to me of
transcendental mathematics."

I remembered.  "The crime," said I, "has lain heavily on my
conscience."

"I don't believe a word of it," she laughed, dismissing me with a
bow.  I raised my hat and joined Carlotta.

It was a Miss Gascoigne, a flirtatious intimate of Aunt Jessica's
house.  To this irresponsible young woman I had openly avowed
that I was the guardian of a beautiful Mohammedan whose religious
instinct compelled her to destroy little dogs.  I shall hear of
this from my Aunt Jessica.

I walked stonily away with Carlotta.

"You are cross with me," she whimpered.

"Yes, I am.  You might have killed the poor little beast.  It was
very wicked and cruel of you."

Carlotta burst out crying in the midst of the promenade.

The tears did not romantically come into her eyes as they had
done an hour before; but she wept copiously, after the
unrestrained manner of children, and used her pocket-
handkerchief.  From their seats women put up their lorgnons to
look at her, passers-by turned round and stared.  The whole of
the gaily dressed throng seemed to be one amused gaze.  In' a
moment or two I became conscious that reprehensory glances were
being directed towards myself, calling me, as plain as eyes could
call, an ill-conditioned brute, for making the poor young
creature, who was at my mercy, thus break down in public.  It was
a charming situation for an even-tempered philosopher.  We walked
stolidly on, I glaring in front of me and Carlotta weeping.  The
malice of things arranged that ne.  neighbouring chair should be
vacant, and that the path should be unusually crowded.  I had the
satisfaction of hearing a young fellow say to a girl:

"He?  That's Ordeyne--came into the baroaetcy--mad as a dingo
dog."

I was giving myself a fine advertisement.

"For heaven's sake stop crying," I said.  Then a memory of
far-off childhood flashed its inspiration upon me.  "If you don't,"
I added, grimly, "I'll take you out and give you to a policeman."

The effect was magical.  She turned on me a scared look, gasped,
pulled down her veil, which she had raised so as to dab her eyes
with her pocket-handkerchief, and incontinently checked the
fountain of her tears.

"A policeman?"

"Yes," said I, "a great, big, ugly blue policeman, who shuts up
people who misbehave themselves in prison, and takes off their
clothes, and shaves their heads, and feeds them on bread and
water."

"I won't cry any more," she said, swallowing a sob.  "Is it also
wicked to cry?"

"Any of these ladies here would sooner be burned alive with
dyspepsia or cut in two with tight-lacing," I replied severely.
"Let us sit down."

We stepped over the low iron rail, and passing through the first
two rows of people, found seats behind where the crowd was
thinner.

"Is Seer Marcous still angry with me?" asked Carlotta, and the
simple plaintiveness of her voice would have melted the bust of
Nero.  I lectured her on cruelty to animals.  That one had duties
of kindness towards the lower creation appealed to her as a
totally new idea.  Supposing the dog had broken all its legs and
ribs, would she not have been sorry?  She answered frankly in the
negative.  It was a nasty little dog.  If she had hurt it badly,
so much the better.  What did it matter if a dog was hurt?  She
was sorry now she had hurled it into space, because it belonged
to my friends, and that had made me cross with her.

Of course I was shocked at the thoughtless cruelty of the action;
but my anger had also its roots in dismay at the public scandal
it might have caused, and in the discovery that I was known to
the victim's owner.  It is the sad fate of the instructors of
youth that they must hypocritically credit themselves with only
the sublimest of motives.  I spoke to Carlotta like the good
father in the "Swiss Family Robinson."  I gave vent to such noble
sentiments that in a quarter of an hour I glowed with pride in my
borrowed plumes of virtue.  I would have taken a slug to my bosom
and addressed a rattlesnake as Uncle Toby did the fly.  I wonder
whether it is not through some such process as this that parsons
manage to keep themselves good.

The soothing warmth of conscious merit restored me to good
temper; and when Carlotta slid her hand into mine and asked me if
I had forgiven her, I magnanimously assured her that all the past
was forgotten.

"Only," said I, "you will have to get out of this habit of tears.
A wise man called Burton says in his 'Anatomy of Melancholy,' a
beautiful book which I'll give you to read when you are sixty,
'As much count may be taken of a woman weeping as a goose going
barefoot.'"

"He was a nasty old man," said Carlotta.  "Women cry because they
feel very unhappy.  Men are never unhappy, and that is the reason
that men don't cry.  My mamma used to cry all the time at
Alexandretta; but Hamdi!--" she broke into an adorable trill of
a chuckle, "You would as soon see a goose going with boots and
stockings, like the Puss in the shoes --the fairy tale--as Hamdi
crying. _Hou_!"

Half an hour later, as we were driving homewards, she broke a
rather long silence which she had evidently been employing in
meditation.

"Seer Marcous."

"Yes?"

She has a child's engaging way of rubbing herself up against one
when she wants to be particularly ingratiating.

"It was so nice to dine with you on Saturday."

"Really?"

"Oh, ye-es.  When are you going to let me dine with you again, to
show me you have forgiven me?"

A hansom cab offers peculiar facilities for the aforesaid process
of ingratiation.

"You shall dine with me this evening," said I, and Carlotta cooed
with pleasure.

I perceive that she is gradually growing westernised.


July 8th.

In obedience to a peremptory note from Judith, I took Carlotta
this afternoon to Tottenham Mansions.  I shook hands with my
hostess, turned round and said

"This, my dear Judith, is Carlotta."

"I am very pleased to see you," said Judith.

"So am I," replied Carlotta, not to be outdone in politeness.

She sat bolt upright, most correctly, on the edge of a chair, and
responded monosyllabically to Judith's questions.  Her demeanour
could not have been more impeccable had she been trained in a
French convent.  Just before we arrived, she had been laughing
immoderately because I had ordered her to spit out a mass of
horrible sweetmeat which she had found it impossible to
masticate, and she had challenged me to extract it with my
fingers.  But now, compared with her, Saint Nitouche was a
Maenad.  I was entertained by Judith's fruitless efforts to get
behind this wall of reserve.  Carlotta said," Oh, ye-es" or
"No-o" to everything.  It was not a momentous conversation.  As
it was Carlotta in whom Judith was particularly interested, I
effaced myself.  At last, after a lull in the spasmodic talk,
Carlotta said, very politely:

"Mrs. Mainwaring has a beautiful house."

"It's only a tiny flat.  Would you like to look over it?" asked
Judith, eagerly, flashing me a glance that plainly said, "Now
that I shall have her to myself, you may trust me to get to the
bottom of her."

"I would like it very much," said Carlotta, rising.

I held the door open for them to pass out, and lit a cigarette.
When they returned ten minutes afterwards, Carlotta was smiling
and self-possessed, evidently very well pleased with herself, but
Judith had a red spot on each of her cheeks.

The sight of her smote me with an odd new feeling of pity.  I
cannot dismiss the vision from my mind.  All the evening I have
seen the two women standing side by side, a piteous parable.  The
light from the window shone full upon them, and the dark curtain
of the door was an effective background.  The one flaunted the
sweet insolence of youth, health, colour, beauty; of the bud just
burst into full flower.  The other wore the stamp of care, of the
much knowledge wherein is much sorrow, and in her eyes dwelled
the ghosts of dead years.  She herself looked like a ghost-
dressed in white pique, which of itself drew the colour from her
white face and pale lips and mass of faint straw-coloured hair,
the pallor of all which was accentuated by the red spots on her
cheeks and her violet eyes.

I saw that something had occurred to vex her.

"Before we go," I said, "I should like a word with you.  Carlotta
will not mind."

We went into the dining-room.  I took her hand which was cold, in
spite of the July warmth.

"Well, my dear," said I.  "What do you think of my young savage
from Asia Minor?"

Judith laughed--I am sure not naturally.

"Is that all you wanted to say to me?"

She withdrew her hand, and tidied her hair in the mirror of the
overmantel.

"I think she is a most uninteresting young woman.  I am
disappointed.  I had anticipated something original.  I had
looked forward to some amusement.  But, really, my dear Marcus,
she is _bete a pleurer_--weepingly stupid."

"She certainly can weep," said I.

"Oh, can she?" said Judith, as if the announcement threw some
light on Carlotta's character.  "And when she cries, I suppose
you, like a man, give in and let her have her own way?"  And
Judith laughed again.

"My dear Judith," said I; "you have no idea of the wholesome
discipline at Lingfield Terrace."

Suddenly with one of her disconcerting changes of front, she
turned and caught me by the coat-lappels.

"Marcus dear, I have been so lonely this week.  When are you
coming to see me?"

"We'll have a whole day out on Sunday," said I.


As I walked down the stairs with Carlotta, I reflected that
Judith had not accounted for the red spots.

"I like her," said Carlotta.  "She is a nice old lady."

"Old lady!  What on earth do you mean?" I was indeed startled.
"She is a young woman."

"Pouf!" cried Carlotta.  "She is forty."

"She is no such thing," I cried.  "She is years younger than I."

"She would not tell me."

"You asked her age?"

"Oh, ye-es," said Carlotta.  "I was very polite.  I first asked
if she was married.  She said yes.  Then I asked how her husband
was.  She said she didn't know.  That was funny.  Why does she not
know, Seer Marcous?"

"Never mind," said I, "go on telling me how polite you were."

"I asked how many children she had.  She said she had none.  I
said it was a pity.  And then I said, 'I am eighteen years old
and I want to marry quite soon and have children.  How old are
you?'  And she would not tell me.  I said, 'You must be the same
age as my mamma, if she were alive.'  I said other things, about
her husband, which I forget.  Oh, I was very polite."

She smiled up at me in quest of approbation.  I checked a
horrified rebuke when I reflected that, according to the
etiquette of the harem, she had been "very polite."  But my poor
Judith!  Every artless question had been a knife thrust in a
sensitive spot.  Her husband: the handsome blackguard who had
lured her into the divorce court, married her, and after two
unhappy years had left her broken; children: they would have kept
her life sweet, and did I not know how she had yearned for them?
Her age: it is only the very happily married woman who snaps her
fingers at the approach of forty, and even she does so with a
disquieting sense of bravado.  And the sweet insolence of youth
says: "I am eighteen: how old are you?"

My poor Judith!  Once more, on our walk home, I discoursed to
Carlotta on the differences between East and West.

"Seer Marcous," said Carlotta this evening at dinner--I have
decided now that she shall dine regularly with me; it is
undoubtedly agreeable to see her pretty face on the opposite side
of the table and listen to her irresponsible chatter: chatter
which I keep within the bounds of decorum when Stenson is
present, so as to save his susceptibilities, by the simple
device, agreed upon between us (to her great delight) of
scratching the side of my somewhat prominent nose--"  Seer
Marcous, why does Mrs. Mainwaring keep your picture in her
bedroom?"

I am glad Stenson happened to be out of the room.  His absence
saved the flaying of my nasal organ.  I explained that it was the
custom in England for ladies to collect the photographs of their
men friends, and use them misguidedly for purposes of decoration.

"But this," said Carlotta, opening out her arms in an exaggerated
way, "is such a big one."

"Ah, that," I answered, "is because I am very beautiful."

Carlotta shrieked with laughter.  The exquisite comicality of the
jest occasioned bubbling comments of mirth during the rest of the
meal, and her original indiscreet question was happily forgotten.


                           CHAPTER X


l0th July.

Judith and I have had our day in the country.  We know a wayside
station, on a certain line of railway, about an hour and a half
from town, where we can alight, find eggs and bacon at the
village inn and hayricks in a solitary meadow, and where we can
chew the cud of these delights with the cattle in well-wooded
pastures.  Judith has a passion for eggs and bacon and hayricks.
My own rapture in their presence is tempered by the philosophic
calm of my disposition.She wore a cotton dress of a forget-me-not
blue which suits her pale colouring.  She looked quite pretty.
When I told her so she blushed like a girl.  I was glad to see
her in gay humour again.  Of late months she has been subject to
moodiness, emotional variability, which has somewhat ruffled the
smooth surface of our companionship.  But to-day there has been
no trace of "temperament."  She has shown herself the pleasant,
witty Judith she knows I like her to be, with a touch of coquetry
thrown in on her own account.  She even spoke amiably of
Carlotta.  I have not had so thoroughly enjoyable a day with
Judith for a long time.

I don't think she set herself deliberately to please me.  That I
should resent.  I know that women in order to please an
unsuspecting male will walk weary miles by his side with blisters
on their feet and a beatific smile on their faces.  But Judith
has far too much commonsense.

Another pleaisng feature of the day's jaunt has been the absence
of the appeal to sentimentality which Judith of late, especially
since her return from Paris, has been overfond of making.  This
idle habit of mind, for such it is in reality, has been arrested
by an intellectual interest.  One of her great friends is
Willoughby, the economic statistician, who in his humorous
moments, writes articles for popular magazines, illustrated by
scale diagrams.  He will draw, for instance, a series of men
representing the nations of the world, and varying in bulk and
stature according to the respective populations; and over against
these he will set a series of pigs whose sizes are proportionate
to the amount of pork per head eaten by the different
nationalities.  To these queer minds that live on facts (I myself
could as easily thrive on a diet of egg-shells) this sort of
pictorial information is peculiarly fascinating.  But Judith, who
like most women has a freakish mental as well as physical
digestion, delights in knowing how many hogs a cabinet minister
will eat during, a lifetime, and how much of the earth's surface
could be scoured by the world's yearly output of scrubbing-
brushes.  I don't blame her for it any more than I blame her for
a love of radishes, which make me ill; it is not as if she had no
wholesome tastes.  On the contrary, I commend her.  Now,
Willoughby, it seems, has found the public appetite so great for
these thought-saving boluses of knowledge--unpleasant drugs, as
it were, put up into gelatine capsules--that he needs assistance.
He has asked Judith to devil for him, and I have to-day persuaded
her to accept his offer.  It will be an excellent thing for the
dear woman.  It will be an absorbing occupation.  It will divert
the current of her thoughts from the sentimentality that I
deprecate, and provided she does not serve up hard-boiled facts to
me at dinner, she will be the pleasanter companion.

The only return to it was when I kissed her at parting.

"That is the first, Marcus, for twelve hours," she said; very
sweetly, it is true--but still reproachfully.

But Sacred Name of a Little Good Man! (as the depraved French
people say), what is the use of this continuous osculation
between rational beings of opposite sexes who set out to enjoy
themselves?  If only St. Paul, in the famous passage when he says
there is a time for this and a time for that, had mentioned
kissing, he would have done a great deal of practical good.


July 13th.

To-night, for the first time since I came into the family estates
(such as they are), I feel the paralysis of aspiration occasioned
by poverty.  If I were very rich, I would buy the two next
houses, pull them down and erect on the site a tower forty foot
high.  At the very top would be one comfortable room to be
reached by a lift, and in this room I could have my being, while
it listed me, and be secure from all kinds of incursions and
interruptions.  Antoinette's one-eyed cat could not scratch for
admittance; Antoinette herself could not enter under pretext of
domestic economics and lure me into profitless gossip; and I
could defy Carlotta, who is growing to be as pervasive as the
smell of pickles over Crosse & Blackwell's factory.  She comes in
without knocking, looks at picture-books, sprawls about doing
nothing, smokes my best cigarettes, hums tunes which she has
picked up from barrel-organs, bends over me to see what I am
writing, munching her eternal sweetmeats in my ear, and laughs at
me when I tell her she has irremediably broken the thread of my
ideas.  Of course I might be brutal and turn her out.  But
somehow I forget to do so, until I realise--too late--the havoc
she has made with my work.

I did, however, think, when Miss Griggs mounted guard over
Carlotta, and Antoinette and her cat were busied with luncheon
cook-pans, that my solitude was unimperilled.  I see now there is
nothing for it but the tower.  And I cannot build the tower; so I
am to be henceforward at the mercy of anything feline or feminine
that cares to swish its tail or its skirts about my drawing-room.

I was arranging my notes, I had an illuminating inspiration
concerning the life of Francois Villon and the contemporary court
of Cosmo de' Medici; I was preparing to fix it in writing when
the door opened and Stenson announced:

"Mrs. Ordeyne and Miss Ordeyne."

My Aunt Jessica and Dora came in and my inspiration went out.  It
hasn't come back yet.

My aunt's apologies and Dora's draperies filled the room.  I must
forgive the invasion.  They knew they were disturbing my work.
They hoped I didn't mind.

"I wanted mamma to write, but she would come," said Dora, in her
hearty voice.  I murmured polite mendacities and offered chairs.
Dora preferred to stand and gaze about her with feminine
curiosity.  Women always seem to sniff for Bluebeardism in a
bachelor's apartment.

"Why, what two beautiful rooms you have.  And the books!  There
isn't an inch of wall-space!"

She went on a voyage of discovery round the shelves while my aunt
explained the object of their visit.  Somebody, I forget who, had
lent them a yacht.  They were making up a party for a summer
cruise in Norwegian fiords.  The Thingummies and the So and So's
and Lord This and Miss That had promised to come, but they were
sadly in need of a man to play host--I was to fancy three lone
women at the mercy of the skipper.  I did, and I didn't envy the
skipper.  What more natural, gushed my aunt, than that they
should turn to me, the head of the house, in their difficulty?

"I am afraid, my dear aunt," said I, "that my acquaintance with
skipper-terrorising hosts is nil.  I can't suggest any one."

"But who asked you to suggest any one?" she laughed.  "It is you
yourself that we want to persuade to have pity on us."

"I have--much pity," said I, "for if it's rough, you'll all be
horribly seasick."

Dora ran across the room from the book-case she was inspecting.

"I would like to shake him!  He is only pretending he doesn't
understand.  I don't know what we shall do if you won't come with
us."

"You can't refuse, Marcus.  It will be an ideal trip--and such a
comfortable yacht--and the deep blue fiords--and we've got a
French chef.  You will be doing us such a favour."

"Come, say 'Yes,'" said Dora.

I wish she were not such a bouncing Juno of a girl.  Large,
athletic women with hearty voices are difficult for one to deal
with.  I am a match for my aunt, whom I can obfuscate with words.
But Dora doesn't understand my satire; she gives a great, healthy
laugh, and says, "Oh, rot!" which scatters my intellectual
armoury.

"It is exceedingly kind of you to think of me," I said to my
aunt, "and the proposal is tempting--the prospect is indeed
fascinating--but--"

"But what?"

"I have so many engagements," I answered feebly.

My Aunt Jessica rose, smiling indulgently upon me, as if I were a
spoilt little boy, and took me on to the balcony, while Dora
demurely retired to the bookshelves in the farther room.
"Can't you manage to throw them aside?  Poor Dora will be
inconsolable."

I stared at her for a moment and then at Dora's broad back and
sturdy hips.  Inconsolable?  I can't make out what the good lady
is driving at.  If she were a vulgar woman trying to squeeze her
way into society and needed the lubricant of the family
baronetcy, I could understand her eagerness to parade me as her
appanage.  But titles in her drawing-room are as common as
tea-cups.  And the inconsolability of Dora

"If I did come she would be bored to death," said I.

"She is willing to risk it."

"But why should she seek martyrdom?"

"There is another reason," said my aunt, ignoring my pertinent
question, but glancing at me reassuringly "there is another
reason why it would be well for you to come on this cruise with
us."  She sank her voice.  "You met Miss Gascoigne in the park
last week--"

"A very charming and kind young lady," said I.

"I am afraid you have been a little indiscreet.  People have been
talking."

"Then theirs, not mine, is the indiscretion."

"But, my dear Marcus, when you spring a good-looking young
person, whom you introduce as your Mohammedan ward, upon London
society, and she makes a scene in public--why--what else have
people got to talk about?"

"They might fall back upon the doctrine of predestination or the
price of fish," I replied urbanely.

"But I assure you, Marcus, that there is a hint of scandal
abroad.  It is actually said that she is living here."

"People will say anything, true or untrue," said I.

My aunt sighfully acquiesced, and for a while we discussed the
depravity of human nature.

"I have been thinking," she said at last, "that if you brought
your ward to see us, and she could accompany us on this cruise to
Norway, the scandal would be scotched outright."

She glanced at me very keenly, and beneath her indulgent smile I
saw the hardness of the old campaigner.  It was a clever trap she
had prepared for me.

I took her hand and in my noblest manner, like the exiled vicomte
in costume drama, bent over it and kissed her finger-tips.

"I thank you, my dear aunt, for your generous faith in my
integrity," I said, "and I assure you your confidence is well
founded."

A loud, gay laugh from the other room interrupted me.

"Are you two rehearsing private theatricals?" cried Dora.  As I
was attired in a remarkably old college blazer and a pair of
yellow Moorish slippers bought a couple of years ago in Tangier,
and as my hair was straight on end, owing to a habit of passing
my fingers through it while I work, my attitude perhaps did not
strike a spectator as being so noble as I had imagined.  I took
advantage of the anti-climax, however, to bring my aunt from the
balcony to the centre of the room, where Dora joined us.

"Well, has mother prevailed?"

"My dear Dora," said I, politely, "how can you imagine it could
possibly be a question of persuasion?"

"That might be taken two ways," said Dora.  "Like Palmerston's
'Dear Sir, I'll lose no time in reading your book.'"
Dora is a minx.

"I fear," said I, "that my pedantic historical sense must venture
to correct you.  It was Lord Beaconsfield."

"Well, he got it from Palmerston," insisted Dora.

"You children must not quarrel," interposed my aunt, in the fond,
maternal tone which I find peculiarly unpleasant.  "Marcus will
see how his engagements stand, and let us know in a day or two."

"When do you propose to start?" I asked.

"Quite soon.  On the 20th.

"I will let you know finally in good time," said I.

As I accompanied them downstairs, I heard a door at the end of
the passage open, and turning I saw Carlotta's pretty head thrust
past the jamb, and her eyes fixed on the visitors.  I motioned
her back, sharply, and my aunt and Dora made an unsuspecting
exit.  The noise of their departing chariot wheels was music to
my ears.

Carlotta came rushing out of her sitting-room followed by Miss
Griggs, protesting.

"Who those fine ladies?" she cried, with her hands on my sleeve.

"Who _are_ those ladies?" I corrected.

"Who _are_ those ladies?" Carlotta repeated, like a demure
parrot.

"They are friends of mine."

Then came the eternal question.

"Is she married, the young one?"

"Miss Griggs," said I, "kindly instil into Carlotta's mind the
fact that no young English woman ever thinks about marriage until
she is actually engaged, and then her thoughts do not go beyond
the wedding."

"But is she?" persisted Carlotta.

"I wish to heaven she was," I laughed, imprudently, "for then she
would not come and spoil my morning's work."

"Oh, she wants to marry you," said Carlotta.

"Miss Griggs," said I, "Carlotta will resume her studies," and I
went upstairs, sighing for the beautiful tower with a lift
outside.


July 14th.

Pasquale came in about nine o'clock, and found us playing cards.

He is a bird of passage with no fixed abode.  Some weeks ago he
gave up his chambers in St. James's, and went to live with an
actor friend, a grass-widower, who has a house in the St. John's
Wood Road close by.  Why Pasquale, who loves the palpitating
centres of existence, should choose to rusticate in this
semi-arcadian district, I cannot imagine.  He says he can think
better in St. John's Wood.

Pasquale think!  As well might a salmon declare it could sing
better in a pond!  The consequence of his propinquity, however,
has been that he has dropped in several times lately on his way
home, but generally at a later hour.

"Oh, please don't move and spoil the picture," he cried.  "Oh,
you idyllic pair!  And what are you playing?  Cribbage!  If I had
been challenged to guess the game you would have selected for
your after-dinner entertainment, I should have sworn to
cribbage!"

"An excellent game," said I.  Indeed, it is the only game that I
remember.  I dislike cards.  They bore me to death.  So dus
chess.  People love to call them intellectual pastimes; but,
surely, if a man wants exercise for his intellect, there are
enough problems in this complicated universe for him to worry his
brains over, with more profit to himself and the world.  And as
for the pastime--I consider that when two or more intelligent
people sit down to play cards they are insulting one another's
powers of conversation.  These remarks do not apply to my game
with Carlotta, who is a child, and has to be amused.  She has
picked up cribbage with remarkable quickness, and although this
is only the third evening we have played, she was getting the
better of me when Pasquale appeared.

I repeated my statement.  Cribbage certainly was an excellent
game.  Pasquale laughed.

"Of course it is.  A venerable pastime.  Darby and Joan have
played it of evenings for the last thousand years.  Please go
on."

But Carlotta threw her cards on the table and herself on the sofa
and said she would prefer to hear Pasquale talk.

"He says such funny things."

Then she jumped from the sofa and handed him the box of
chocolates that is never far from her side.  How lithe her
movements are!

"Pasquale says you were his schoolmaster, and used to beat him
with a big stick," she remarked, turning her head toward me,
while Pasquale helped himself to a sweet.

He was clumsy in his selection, and the box slipped from
Carlotta's hand and the contents rolled upon the floor.  They
both went on hands and knees to pick them up, and there was much
laughing and whispering.

It is curious that I cannot recall Pasquale having alluded, in
Carlotta's presence, to our early days.  It was on my tongue to
ask when he committed the mendacity--for in that school not only
did the assistant masters not have the power of the cane, but
Pasquale, being in the sixth form at the time I joined, was
exempt from corporal punishment--when they both rose flushed from
their grovelling beneath the table, and some merry remark from
Pasquale put the question out of my head.


All this is unimportant.  The main result of Pasquale's visit
this evening is a discovery.

Now, is it, after all, a discovery, or only the non-moral
intellect's sinister attribution of motives?

"A baby in long clothes would have seen through it," said
Pasquale.  "Lord bless you, if I were in your position I would go
on board that yacht, I'd make violent love to every female there,
like the gentleman in Mr. Wycherley's comedy, I'd fill a salmon
fly-book with samples of their hair, I'd make them hate one
another like poison, and at the end of the voyage I'd announce my
engagement to Carlotta, and when they all came to the wedding I'd
make the fly-book the most conspicuous of wedding presents on the
table, from the bridegroom to the bride.  By George!  I'd cure
them of the taste for man-hunting!"

I wonder what impelled me to tell Pasquale of the proposed
yachting cruise?  We sat smoking by the open window, long after
Carlotta had been sent to bed, and looking at a full moon sailing
over the tops of the trees in the park; enveloped in that
sensuous atmosphere of a warm summer night which induces a
languor in the body and in the will.  On such a night as this
young Lorenzo, if he happens to have Jessica by his side, makes a
confounded idiot of himself, to his life's undoing; and on such a
night as this a reserved philosopher commits the folly of
discussing his private affairs with a Sebastian Pasquale.

But if he is correct in his surmise, I am much beholden to the
relaxing influences of the night.  I have been warned of perils
that encompass me: perils that would infest the base and
insidiously scale the sides of the most inaccessible tower that
man could build on the edge of the Regent's Park.  A woman with a
Matrimonial Purpose would be quite capable of gaining access by
balloon to my turret window.  Is it not my Aunt Jessica's design
melodramatically to abduct me in a yacht?

"Once aboard the pirate lugger, and the man is ours!" she cries.

But the man is not coming aboard the pirate lugger.  He is going
to keep as far as he possibly can from the shore.  Neither is he
to be lured into bringing his lovely Mohammedan ward with him, as
an evidence of good faith and unimpeachable morals.  They can
regard her as a Mohammedan ward or a houri or a Princess of
Babylon, just as they choose.

Pasquale must be right.  A hundred remembered incidents go to
prove it.  I recollect now that Judith has rallied me on my
obtuseness.

The sole end of all my Aunt Jessica's manoeuvring is to marry me
to Dora, and Dora, like Barkis, is willing.  Marry Dora!  The
thought is a febrifuge, a sudorific!  She would be thumping
discords on my wornout strings all day long.  In a month I should
be a writhing madman.  I would sooner, infinitely sooner, marry
Carlotta.  Carlotta is nature; Dora isn't even art.  Why, in the
name of men and angels, should I marry Dora?  And why (save to
call herself Lady Ordeyne) should she want to marry me?  I have
not trifled with her virgin affections; and that she is
nourishing a romantic passion for me of spontaneous growth I
decline to believe.  For aught I care she can be as inconsolable
as Calypso.  It will do her good.  She can write a little story
about it in _The Sirens' Magazine_.

I am shocked.  For all her bouncing ways and animal health and
incorrect information, I thought Dora was a nice-minded girl.

Do nice-minded girls hunt husbands?

Good heavens!  This looks like the subject of a silly-season
correspondence in _The Daily Telegraph_.


                           CHAPTER XI


July 19th.

_Campsie, N.B._  Hither have I fled from my buccaneering
relations.  I am seeking shelter in a manse in the midst of a
Scotch moor, and the village, half a mile away, is itself five
miles from a railway station.  Here I can defy Aunt Jessica.

After my conversation with Pasquale, I passed a restless night.
My slumbers were haunted by dreams of pirate yachts flying the
jolly Roger, on which the skull and crossbones melted grotesquely
into a wedding-ring and a true lovers' knot.  I awoke to the
conviction that so long as the vessel remained on English waters
I could find no security in London.  I resolved on flight.  But
whither?

Verily the high gods must hold me in peculiar favour.  The first
letter I opened was from old Simon McQuhatty, my present host, a
godfather of my mother, who alone of mortals befriended us in the
dark days of long ago.  He was old and infirm, he wrote, and
Gossip Death was waiting for him on the moor; but before he went
to join him he would like to see Susan's boy again.  I could come
whenever I liked.  A telegram from Euston before I started would
be sufficient notice.  I sent Stenson out with a telegram to say
I was starting that very day by the two o'clock train, and I
wrote a polite letter to my Aunt Jessica informing her of my
regret at not being able to accept her kind invitation as I was
summoned to Scotland for an indefinite period.

My old friend's ministry in the Free Kirk of Scotland is drawing
to a close; he has lived in this manse, a stone's throw from his
grave, for fifty years, and the approaching change of habitat
will cost him nothing.  He will still lie at the foot of his
beloved hills, and the purple moorland will spread around him for
all eternity, and the smell of the gorse and heather will fill
his nostrils as he sleeps.  He is a bit of a pagan, old
McQuhatty, in spite of Calvin and the Shorter Catechism.  I
should not wonder if he were the original of the story of the
minister who prayed for the "puir Deil."  He planted a rowan tree
by his porch when he was first inducted into the manse, and it
has grown up with him and he loves it as if it were a human
being.  He has had many bonny arguments with it, he says, on
points of doctrine, and it has brought comfort to him in times of
doubt by shivering its delicate leaves and whispering, "Dinna
fash yoursel, McQuhatty.  The Lord God is a sensible body."  He
declares that the words are articulate, and I suspect that in the
depths of his heart he believes that there are tongues in trees
and books in the running brooks, just as he is convinced that
there is good in everything.

He is a ripe and whimsical scholar, and his talk, even in infirm
old age, is marked by a Doric virility which has rendered his
companionship for these five days as stimulating as the moorland
air.  How few men have this gift of discharging intellectual
invigoration.  Indeed, I only know old McQuhatty who has it, and
a sportive Providence has carefully excluded mankind from its
benefits for half a century.  Stay: it once fostered a genius who
arose in Campsie, and sent him strung with tonic to Edinburgh to
become a poet.  But the poor lad drank whisky for two years
without cessation, so that he died, and McQuhatty's inspiration
was wasted.  What intellectual stimulus can he afford, for
instance, to Sandy McGrath, an elder of the kirk whom I saw
coming up the brae on Sunday?  An old ram stood in the path and,
as obstinate as he, refused to budge.  And as they looked dourly
at each other, I wondered if the ram were dressed in black
broadcloth and McGrath in wool, whether either of their mothers
would notice the metamorphosis.  Yet my host declares that I see
with the eyes of a Southron; that the Scotch peasant when he is
not drunk is intellectual, and that there is no occasion on which
he is not ready for theological disputation.

"But I dinna mind telling you," he added, "that I'd as lief talk
with my rowan tree.  It does nae blaze into a conflagration at a
comfortable wee bit of false doctrine."

I should love to stay all the summer with my old friend, It seems
that only from such a remote solitude can one view things mundane
in the right perspective, and in their true proportion.  One
would see how important or unimportant portant in the cosmos was
the agricultural ant's dream of three millimetres and an aphis
compared with the aspirations of the English labourer.  One would
justly focus the South African millionaire, Sandy McGrath and the
ram, and bring them to their real lowest common denominator.  One
would even be able to gauge the value of a History of Renaissance
Morals.  The benefits I should derive from a long sojourn are
incalculable, but my new responsibilities call me back to London
and its refracting and distorting atmosphere.  If I had dwelt
here for fifty years I should have perceived that Carlotta was
but a speck in the whirlwind of human dust whose ultimate destiny
was immaterial.  As my five days' visit, however, has not
advanced me to that pitch of wisdom, I am foolishly concerned in
my mind as to her welfare, and anxious to dissolve the
triumvirate, Miss Griggs, Stenson, and Antoinette, whom I have
entrusted with the reins of government.

A month ago, in similar circumstances, I should have railed at
Fate and anathematised Carlotta from the tip of her pink toes to
the gold and bronze glory of her hair.  But I am growing more
kindly disposed towards Carlotta, and taking a keen interest in
her spiritual development.

An inner voice, an ironical, sardonic inner voice with which
there is no arguing, tells me that I am a hypocrite; that an
interest in Carlotta's spiritual development is a nice,
comforting, high-sounding phrase which has deluded philosophic
guardians of female youth for many generations.

"What does it matter to you whether she has a soul or not," says
the voice, "provided she can babble pleasantly at dinner and play
cribbage with you afterwards?"

Well, what on earth does it matter?


July 21st.

She was at Euston to meet me.  As soon as she saw my face at the
carriage window she left Stenson and flew up the platform like a
pretty tame animal, and when I alighted hung on my arms and
frisked and gamboled around me in excess of joy.

"So you are glad to have me back, Carlotta?" I asked, as we were
driving home.

She sidled up against me in her terrier fashion.

"Oh, ye-es," she cooed.  "The day was night without you."

"That is the oriental language of exaggeration," I said.  But all
the same it was pleasant to hear, and the soft notes of her voice
coiled themselves, as music sometimes dus, around my heart.

"I love dear Seer Marcous," she said.

I put my arm round her waist for a moment, as one would do to a
child.

"You are a good little girl, Carlotta.  That is to say," I added,
remembering my responsibilities, "if you _have_ been good.  Have
you?"

"Oh, so good.  Antoinette has been teaching me how to cook, and I
can make a rice pudding.  It is so nice to cook things.  I like
the smell.  But I burned myself.  See."

She pulled off her glove and showed me a red mark on her hand.  I
kissed it to make it well, and she laughed and was very happy.
And I, too, was happy.  Something new and fresh and bright has
come into my life.  Stenson is an admirable servant; but his
impassive face and correct salute which have hitherto greeted me
at London railway termini, although suggestive of material
comfort, cannot be said to invest my arrival with a special
atmosphere of charm.  Carlotta's welcome has been a new
sensation.  I look upon the house with different eyes.  It was a
pleasure, as I dressed for dinner, to reflect that I should not
go down to a solemn, solitary meal, but would have my beautiful
little witch to keep me company.


July 22d.

It appears that her conduct has not been by any means
irreproachable.  Miss Griggs reported that she took advantage of
my absence to saturate herself with scent, one of the most
heinous crimes in our domestic calendar. _Mulier bene olet dum
nihil olet_ is the maxim written above this article of our code.
Once when she disobeyed my orders and came into the drawing-room
reeking of ylang-ylang, I sent her upstairs to change all her
things and have a bath, and not come near me till Antoinette
vouched for her scentlessness.  And "Ah, monsieur," I remember
Antoinette replied, "that would be impossible, for the sweet lamb
smells of spring flowers, _de son naturel_."  Which is true.  Her
use of violent perfumes is thus a double offence.  "There is
something more serious," said Miss Griggs.

"I can hardly believe there can be anything more serious than
making one's self detestable to one's fellow-creatures," said I.

"Unless it is making one's self too agreeable," said Miss Griggs,
pointedly.

I asked her what she meant.

"I have discovered," she replied, "that Carlotta has been
carrying on a clandestine flirtation with the young man who calls
for orders from the grocer's."

"I am glad it wasn't the butcher's boy," I murmured.

Miss Griggs giggled in a silly way, as if I were jesting.  At my
stern request she recovered and unfolded the horrible tale.  She
had caught Carlotta kissing her hand to him.  She had also seen
him smuggle a three-cornered note between Carlotta's fingers, and
Carlotta had definitely refused to surrender the billet-dour.

"What is the modern course of treatment," I asked, "prescribed
for young ladies who flirt with grocers' assistants?  In
Renaissance times she could be whipped.  The wise Margaret of
Navarre used to beat her daughter, Jeanne d'Albrecht, soundly for
far less culpable lapses from duty.  Or she could be sent to a
convent and put into a cell with rats, or she could be bidden to
attend at a merry-making where the chief attraction was roast
grocer's assistant.  But nowadays--what do you suggest?"

The unimaginative creature could suggest nothing.  She thought
that I would know how to deal with the offence.  Perhaps
preventive measures would be more efficacious than punishment.
But what do I know of the repressory methods employed in
seminaries for young ladies?  Burton in his "Anatomy" speaks
cheerfully of blood-letting behind the ears.  He also quotes, I
remember, Hippocrates or somebody, who narrates that a noble
maiden was cured of a flirtatious temperament by wearing down her
back for three weeks a leaden plate pierced with holes.  This I
told Miss Griggs, who spoke contemptuously of the Father of
Medicine.

"He also recommends--whether for this complaint, or for something
similar I forget for the moment--" said I, "anointing the soles
of the feet with the fat of a dormouse, the teeth with the ear-
wax of a dog; and speaks highly of a ram's lungs applied hot to
the fore part of the head.  I am sorry these admirable remedies
are out of date.  There is a rich Rabelaisianism about them.
Instead of the satisfying jorums of our forefathers we take
tasteless pellets, which procure us no sensation at the time, and
even the good old hot mustard poultice is a thing of the past."

"But what about Carlotta?" inquired Miss Griggs, anxiously.

That is just like a woman, to interrupt a man when he is
beginning to talk comfortably on a subject that interests him.  I
sighed.

"Send Carlotta up to me," I said, resignedly.

Another morning's work spoiled.  I turned to my writing-table.  I
had just transcribed on my MS. the anecdote told with such glee
by Machiavelli about Zanobi del Pino, a sort of Admiral Byng of
the early fifteenth century, who was locked up and given nothing
to eat but paper painted with snakes, so that he died, fasting,
in a few days.  I had an apt epigram on the subject of
Renaissance humour trembling on my pen-point, when Miss Griggs
came in with her foolish gossip.  I am sure the platitude I wrote
afterwards is not that original flash of wit.

Carlotta entered and crossed the room to the side of my writing-
chair, her great dark eyes fixed on me, and her hands dutifully
behind her back.  She looked a Greuze picture of innocence.  I
believed less than ever in the enormity of the offence.

"Do you know what you're here for?" I asked, magisterially.

She nodded.

"Then you _have_ been making love to the young man from the
grocer's?"

She nodded again.  I began to conceive a violent dislike to the
grocer's young man.  It was one of the most humiliating
sensations I have experienced.  I think I have seen the
individual--a thick-set, red-headed, freckled nondescript.

"What did you do it for?" I asked.

"He wanted to make love to me," replied Carlotta.

"He is a young scamp," said I.

"What is a scamp?" she asked sweetly.

"I am not giving you a lesson in philology," I remarked.  "Do you
know that you have been behaving in a shocking manner?"

"Now you are cross with me."

"Yes," I said, "infernally angry."

And I was.  I expected to see her burst into tears.  She did
nothing of the kind; only looked at me with irritating
demureness.  She wore a red blouse and a grey skirt, and the
audacious high-heeled red slippers.  I began to feel the return
of my early prejudice against her.  Nobody so alluring could
possess a spark of virtue.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said I.  "I make many
allowances for your lack of knowledge of our Western customs, but
for a young lady to flirt with an ugly red-headed varlet of the
lower orders is reprehensible all the world over."

"He gave me dates and dried fruits with sugar all over them,"
said Carlotta.

"Stolen from his employer," I said.  "I will have that young man
locked up in prison, and if you go on receiving his feloniously
obtained presents they will put you in prison too, and I shall be
delighted."

Carlotta maintained her demure expression and extracted from her
skirt pocket a very dirty piece of paper.

"He writes poetry--about me," she remarked, handing me what I
recognised as the three-cornered note.

I took the thing between finger and thumb, and glanced over the
poem.  I have read much indifferent modern verse in my time--I
sometimes take a slush-bath after tea at the club--but I could
not have imagined the English language capable of such emulsion.
It was execrable.  The first couplet alone contained an idea.

            "Thou art a lovely girl and so very nice
              I dream till death upon your face."

To the wretch's ear it was a rhyme!  I destroyed the noisome
thing and cast it into the waste-paper basket.

"Prison," said I, "would be a luxurious reward for him.  In a
properly civilised country he would be bastinadoed and hanged."

"Yes, he is dam bad," said Carlotta, serenely.

"Good heavens!" I cried, "the ruffian has even taught you to
swear.  If you dare to say that wicked word again, I'll punish
you severely.  What is his horrid name?"

"Pasquale," said Carlotta.

"Pasquale?"

"Yes, he likes to hear me say 'dam.'  Oh, the other?  Oh, no, he
is too stupid.  He does not say anything.  His name is Timkins.  I
only play with him.  He is so funny.  He can go and kill himself;
I won't care."

"Never mind about Timkins," said I, "I want to hear about
Pasquale.  When did he teach you that wicked, wicked word?"

I think Carlotta flushed as she regarded the point of her red
slipper.

"I went for a walk and he met me at the corner and walked here by
my side.  Was that wicked?"

"What would the excellent Hamdi Effendi have said to it?"

Woman-like she evaded my question.

"I hope Hamdi is dead.  Do you think so?"

"I hope not.  For if you behave in this naughty manner, I shall
have to send you back to him."

She had imperceptibly moved nearer my chair until she stood quite
close to my side, so that as I spoke the last words I looked up
into her face.  She put her arm about my shoulders.  It is one of
her pretty, caressing ways.

"I will be good--very good," she said.

"You will have to," said I, leaning back my head.

She must have caught a relenting note in my voice; for what
happened I feel even now a curious shame in noting down.  Her
other arm flew under my chin to join its fellow, and holding me a
prisoner in my chair, she bent down and kissed me.  She also laid
her cheek against mine.

I am still aware of the indescribable, soft, warm pressure,
although she has gone to bed hours ago.

I vow that a man must be less a man than a petrified egg to have
repulsed her.  The touch of her lips was like the falling of dewy
rose-petals.  Her breath was as fragrant as new-mown hay.  Her
hair brushing my forehead had the odour of violets.


I sent her back to Miss Griggs.  She ran out of the room laughing
merrily.  She has received plenary absolution for her shameless
coquetry and her profane language.  Worse than that she has
discovered how to obtain it in future.  The witch has found her
witchcraft, and having once triumphantly exerted her powers, will
take the earliest opportunity of doing so again.  I am fallen,
both in my own eyes and hers, from my high estate.  Henceforward
she will regard me only with good-humoured tolerance; I shall be
to her but a non-felonious Timkins.

I was an idiot to have kissed her in return.


I have not seen her since.  I lunched at the club, and paid a
formal call on Mrs. Ralph Ordeyne and my cousin Rosalie, in their
sunless house in Kensington.

I met a singular lack of welcome.  Rosalie gave me a limper
hand than usual, and took an early opportunity of leaving me
tete-a-tete with her mother, who conversed frigidly about the
warm weather.  The very tea, if possible, was colder.

I met Judith by appointment in Kensington Gardens, and walked
with her homewards.  I mentioned my chilly reception.

"My dear man," she observed--I dislike this apostrophe, which
Judith always uses by way of introduction to an unpleasant
remark--"My dear man, I have no doubt that you have as unsavoury
a reputation as any one in London.  You are credited with an
establishment like Solomon's--minus the respectable counter-balance
of the wives, and your devout relatives are very properly shocked."

I said that it was monstrous.  Judith retorted that I had brought
the calumny upon myself.

"But what can I do?" I asked.

"Board her out with a suburban family, as you should have done
from the first.  Even I, who am not strait-laced, consider it
highly improper for you to have her alone with you in the house."

"My dear," said I, "there is Antoinette."

"Tush"--or something like it--said Judith.

"And Stenson.  No one seeing Stenson could doubt the
irreproachable propriety of his master."

"I really have no patience with you," said Judith.

It is hopeless to discuss Carlotta with her.  I shall do it no
more.

We sat for a while under the trees, and conversed on rational
topics.  She likes her employment with Willoughby.  The morning
she spends among blue books and other waste matter at the British
Museum, and she devotes the evening to sorting her information.
Willoughby commends her highly.

"And there is something I know you'll be very pleased to hear,"
she continued.  "Who do you think called on me yesterday?  Mrs.
Willoughby.  Her husband wants me to spend August and September
at a place they have taken in North Wales, and help him with his
new book--as a private secretary, you know.  I said that I never
went into society.  I must tell you this was the first time I had
seen her.  She put her hand on my arm in the sweetest way in the
world and said: 'I know all about it, my dear, and that is why I
thought I'd come myself as Harold's ambassador.'  Wasn't it
beautiful of her?"

She looked at me and her eyes were filled with tears.

"Marcus dear, I am not a bad woman, am I?"

"My dearest," I answered, very deeply touched, "you are the best
woman in the world.  So far from conferring a favour on you, Mrs.
Willoughby has gained for herself the inestimable privilege of
your friendship."

"Ah!" said Judith, "a man cannot tell what it means."

Really men are not such dullard dunderheads as women are pleased
to imagine.  I have the most crystalline perception of what Mrs.
Willoughby's invitation means to Judith.  Women appear to find a
morbid satisfaction in the fiction that their sex is actuated by
a mysterious nexus of emotions and motives which the grosser
sense of man is powerless to appreciate.  In her heart of hearts
it is a prodigious comfort to a woman to feel herself
misunderstood.  Even she who is most perfectly mated, and is
intellectually convinced that the difference of sex is no barrier
to his complete knowledge of her, loves to cherish some little
secret bit of her nature, to which _he_, on account of his
masculinity, will be eternally blind.  Of course there are
dull men who could not understand a tabbycat or a professional
cricketer, let alone an expert autothaumaturgist--a
self-mystery-maker--like a woman.  But an intelligent and
painstaking man should find no difficulty in appreciating what,
after all, is merely a point of view; for what women see from that
point of view they are as indiscreet in revealing as a two-year-old
babe.   I have confessed before that I do not understand Judith
--that is to say the whole welter of contradictions in which her ego
consists--but that is solely because I have not taken the trouble
to subject her to special microscopic study.  Such a scientific
analysis would, I think, be an immodest discourtesy towards any
lady of my acquaintance, especially towards one for whom I bear
considerable affection.  It would be as unwarrantable for a
decent-minded man to speculate upon her exact spiritual
dimensions as upon those portions of her physical frame that are
hidden beneath her attire.  The charm of human intercourse rests,
to a great extent, on the vague, the deliberately unperceived,
the stimulating sense that an individual possesses more
attributes than flash upon the bodily or mental eye.  But this, I
say, is deliberate.  One knows perfectly well that beneath her
skirts any young woman you please does not melt away into the
scaly tail of a mermaid, but has a pair of ordinary commonplace
legs.  One knows that when she has passed through certain well
defined experiences in life, a certain definite range of
sentiments must exist behind whatever mask of facial expression
she may choose to adopt.  It is sheer nonsense, therefore, for
Judith to say that I cannot enter into her feelings with regard
to Mrs. Willoughby's invitation.

I developed this theme very fully to Judith as we sat in
Kensington Gardens and during our subsequent, stroll diagonally
through Hyde Park to the Marble Arch.  She listened with great
attention, and when I had finished regarded me in a pitying
manner, a smile flickering over her lips.

"My dear Marcus," she said, "there is no man, however
humble-minded, who has not one colossal vanity, his knowledge
of women.  He, at any rate, has established the veritable Theory
of Women.   And we laugh at you, my good friend, for the more
you expound, the more do you reveal your beautiful and artistic
ignorance.  Oh, Marcus, the idea of you setting up as a feminine
psychologist."

"And pray, why not?" I asked, somewhat nettled.

"Because you are that dear, impossible, lovable thing known as
Marcus Ordeyne."

This was exceedingly pretty of Judith.  But really woman is the
Eternal Philistine, as Matthew Arnold has defined the term.  Her
supreme characteristic is inconvincibility.  I had simply wasted
my breath.


                          CHAPTER XII


August 3d.

_Etretat, Seine-Injerieure_:--A young fellow on the Casino
terrace this evening caught my eye, looked at me queerly, and
passed on.  His face, though unfamiliar, stirred some dormant
association.  What was it?  The profitless question pestered me
for hours.  At last, during the performance at the theatre, I
slapped my knee and said aloud

"I've got it!"

"What?" asked Carlotta in alarm.

"A fly," I answered.  Whereat Carlotta laughed, and bent forward
to get a view of the victim.  I austerely directed her attention
to the stage.  It was a metaphorical fly whose buzzing I had
stopped.

The young fellow was he who had pointed me out in Hyde Park to
his companion, and lightly assured her that I was as mad as a
dingo dog.  From the moment after the phrase's utterance to that
of the slapping of my knee, it had been altogether absent from my
mind.  Now it haunts me.  It reiterates itself after the manner
of a glib phrase.  I am glad I am not in a railway carriage; the
cranks would amuse the wheels with it all night long.  As it is,
the surf tries to thunder it out on the shingle just a few yards
away from my window.  I keep asking myself: why a dingo dog?  If
I am mad it is in a gentle, Jaquesian, melancholy manner.  I do
not dash at life, rabid and foaming at the mouth.

I think the idiot simile must have been merely the misuse of
language so common among the half-educated youth of Great
Britain.

Yet when I come to consider my present condition, I have
doubts as to my complete sanity.  Here am I, in a little,
semi-fashionable French seaside place, away from my books and
my comforts and my habits, as much interested in its vapid
distractions as if the universe held no other pursuits worth the
attention of a rational man.  And I have been here a calendar
month.

To please Carlotta I wear white duck trousers, a pink shirt, and
a yachting-cap.  I wired for them to my London tailor and they
arrived within a week.  The first time I appeared in the maniacal
costume I slunk from the stony stare of a gendarme, as I was
about to ascend the Casino steps, and hid myself among the
fishing-boats lower down on the beach.  Carlotta, however, was
delighted and said that I looked pretty.  Now I have grown
callous, seeing other fools similarly apparelled.  But a year
ago, should I have dreamed it possible for me to strut about a
fashionable _plage_ in white ducks, a pink shirt, and a
yachting-cap?  I trow not.  They are signs of some sort of madness
--whether that of a Jaques or a dingo dog matters very little.

Pasquale was the main cause of my taking Carlotta away from
London.  He came far too frequently to the house, established far
too great a familiarity with my little girl.  She quoted him far
too readily.  She is at the impressionable age when young women
fall easy victims to the allurements of a fascinating creature
like Pasquale.  If he showed himself in the light of a possible
husband for Carlotta, I should have nothing to say.  I should
give the pair my paternal benediction.  But I know my Renaissance
and I know my Pasquale.  Carlotta is merely a new sensation--that's
all he seems to live for, the delectable scoundrel.  But I am not
going to have her heart broken  by any cinquecento wolf in
Poole's clothing.  I assume that Carlotta has a heart, even if
she is not possessed of a soul.  As to the latter I am still in
doubt.  At all events I resolved to withdraw Carlotta from his
influence, put her in fresh surroundings, and allow her to mix
more freely among men and women, so as to divert and possibly
improve her mind.

I perceive that Carlotta is becoming an occupation.  Well, she is
quite as profitable as collecting postage-stamps, or golf, or
amateur photography.

I have spent a pleasant month in this little place.  It is the
mouth of a gorge in the midst of a cliff-bound coast.  The bay,
but a quarter of a mile in sweep, is shut in at each end by a
projecting wall of cliff cut by a natural arch.  Half the shingle
beach is given up to fisherfolk and their boats and tarred Noah's
arks where they keep their nets.  The other half suddenly rises
into a digue or terrace on which is built a primitive casino, and
below the terrace are the bathing-cabins.  We are staying at the
most spotlessly clean of all clean French hotels.  There are no
carpets on the stairs; but if one mounts them in muddy boots, an
untiring chambermaid emerges from a lair below, with hot water
and scrubbing-brush and smilingly removes the traces of one's
passage.  Carlotta and Antoinette have adjoining rooms in the
main building.  I inhabit the annexe, sleeping in a quaint,
clean, bare little chamber with a balconied window that looks
over the Noah's Arks and the fishing-smacks and fisherfolk, away
out to sea.  This morning as I lay in bed I saw our Channel fleet
lie along the arc of the horizon.

Antoinette dwells in continuous rapture at being in France again.
Carlotta assures me that the smile does not leave her great red
face even as she sleeps of nights.  It is a little jest between
us.  She peeped in once to see.  The good soul has filled herself
up with French conversation as a starving hen gorges herself with
corn.  She has scraped acquaintance with every washerwoman,
fish-wife, _marchande_, bathing woman and domestic servant on the
beach.  She is on intimate terms with the whole male native
population.  When the three of us happen to walk together it is a
triumphal progress of bows and grins and nods.  At first I
thought it was I for whom this homage was intended.  I was soon
undeceived.  It was Antoinette.  She loves to parade Carlotta
before her friends.  I came upon her once entertaining an
admiring audience in Carlotta's presence with a detailed
description of that young woman's physical perfections--a
description which was marked by a singular lack of reticence.
The time of her glory is the bathing hour, when she accompanies
Carlotta from her cabin to the water's edge, divests her of
_peignoir_ and _espadrilles_, but before revealing her to
fashionable Etretat, casts a preliminary glance around, as who
should say: "Prepare all men and women for the dazzling goddess I
am about to unveil."  Carlotta is undoubtedly bewitching in her
bathing costume, and enjoys a little triumph of beauty.  People
fall into a natural group in order to look at her, while I,
sitting on a camp-stool in my white ducks and pink shirt and
smoking a cigarette, cannot repress a complacent pride of
ownership.  I do not object to her flicking her wet fingers at me
when she comes dripping out of the sea; and I do not even
reproach her when she puts her foot upon my sartorially
immaculate knee, to show me a pebble-cut on her glistening pink
sole.

Her conduct has been exemplary.  I have allowed her to make the
acquaintance of two or three young fellows, her partners at the
Casino dances, and she walks up and down the terrace with them
before meals.  I have forbidden her, under penalty of immediate
return to London and of my eternal displeasure, to mention the
harem at Alexandretta.  Young fellows are gifted with a genius
for misapprehension.  She is an ordinary young English lady, an
orphan (which is true), and I am her guardian.  Of course she
looks at them with imploring eyes, and pulls them by the sleeve,
and handles the lappels of their coats, and admits them to terms
of the frankest intimacy; but I can no more change these
characteristics than I can alter the shape of her body.  She is
the born coquette.  Her delighted conception of herself is that
she is the object of every man's admiration.  I noticed her this
morning playing a tune with her fingers on the old bathing-man's
arm, as he was preparing to take her into the water, and I saw
his mahogany face soften.  In her indescribable childish way she
would coquet with a tax-collector or a rag-and-bone man or the
Archbishop of Canterbury.  But she has committed no grave
indiscretion, and I am sufficiently her lord and master to exact
obedience.

I pretend, however, to be at her beck and call, and it is a
delight to minister to her radiant happiness--to feel her lean on
my arm and hear her cooing voice say:

"You are so good.  I should like to kiss you."

But I do not allow her to kiss me.  Never again.


"Seer Marcous, let us go to the little horses."

She has a consuming passion for _petits chevaux_.  I speak sagely
of the evils of gambling.  She laughs.  I weakly take lower
ground.

"What is the good?  You have no money."

"Oh-h!  But only two francs," she says, holding out her hand.

"Not one.  Yesterday you lost."

"But to-day I shall win.  I want to give you something I saw in a
shop.  Oh, a beautiful thing."  Then I feel a hand steal into the
pocket of my dinner jacket where I carry loose silver for this
very purpose, just as a lover of horses carries lumps of sugar
for the nose of a favourite pony, and immediately it is withdrawn
with a cry of joy and triumph, and she skips back out of my
reach.  Then she takes my arm and leads me from the sweet
night-air into the hot little room with its crowd around the
nine gyrating animals.

"I shall put it on 5.  I always put on 5.  He is a nice, clean,
white, pretty horse."

She stakes two francs, watches the turn in a tense agony of
excitement; she wins, comes running to me with sixteen francs
clutched tight in her hand.

"See.  I said I should win."

"Come away then and be happy."

But she makes a protesting grimace, and before I can stop her,
runs back to stake again on 5.  In twenty minutes she is ruined
and returns to me wearing an expression of abject misery.  She is
too desolate even to try the fortune of the dinner-jacket pocket.
I take her outside and restore her to beatitude with grenadine
syrup and soda-water.  She rejects the straws.  With her elbows
on the marble table, the glass held in both hands, she drinks
sensuously, in little sips.

And I, Marcus Ordeyne, sit by watching her, a most contented
philosopher of forty.  A dingo dog could not be so contented.
That young fellow, I unhesitatingly assert, must be the most
brainless of his type.  I suffer fools gladly, as a general rule,
but if I see much of this one I shall do him some injury.


After dejeuner we strolled to the top of the west cliff and lay
on the thick dry grass.  The earth has never known a more perfect
afternoon.  A day of turquoise and diamond.

The air itself was diaphanous blue.  Below us the tiny place
slumbered in the sunshine; scarcely a sign of life save specks of
washer-women on the beach bending over white patches which we
knew were linen spread out to dry.  The ebb-tide lapped lazily on
the shingle, where the sea changed suddenly from ultramarine to a
fringe of feathery white.  A white sail or two flecked the blue
of the bay.  A few white wisps of cirrus gleamed above our heads.
Around us, on the cliff-tops, the green pastures and meadows and,
farther inland, the cornfields stacked in harvest, and great
masses of trees.  Lying on our backs, between sea and sky, we
seemed utterly alone.  Carlotta and I were the sole inhabitants
of the earth.  I dreamily disintegrated caramels from their
sticky tissue-paper wrappings for Carlotta's consumption.

After a while unconquerable drowsiness crept over me; and a
little later I had an odd sense of perfect quietude.  I was lying
amid moss and violets.  In a languorous way I wondered how my
surroundings had changed, and at last I awoke to find my head
propped on Carlotta's lap and shaded by her red parasol, while
she sat happy in full sunshine.  I was springing from this
posture of impropriety when she laughed and laid restraining
hands on my shoulders.

"No.  You must not move.  You look so pretty.  And it is so nice.
I put your head there so that it should be soft.  You have been
sound asleep."

"I have also been abominably impolite," said I.  "I humbly beg
your pardon, Carlotta."

"Oh, I am not cross," she laughed.  Then still keeping her hands
on me, she settled her limbs into a more comfortable position.

"There!  Now I can play at being a good little Turkish wife."
She fashioned into a fan the _Matin_ newspaper, which I had
bought for the luxurious purpose of not reading, and fanned me.
"That is what Ayesha used to do to Hamdi.  And Ayesha used to
tell him stories.  But my lord does not like his slave's stories."

"Decidedly not," said I.

I have heard much of Ayesha, a pretty animal organism who appears
to have turned her elderly husband into a doting fool.  I am
beginning to have a contempt for Hamdi Effendi.

"They are what you call improper, eh?" she laughed, referring to
the tales.  "I will sing you a Turkish song which you will not
understand."

"Is it a suitable song?"

"Kim bilir--who knows?" said Carlotta.

She began a melancholy, crooning, guttural ditty; but broke off
suddenly.

"Oh!  but it is stupid.  Like the Turkish dancing.  Oh,
everything in Alexandretta was stupid!  Sometimes I think I have
never seen Alexandretta--or Ayesha--or Hamdi.  I think I always
am with you."

This must be so, as of late she has spoken little of her harem
life; she talks chiefly of the small daily happenings, and
already we have a store of common interests.  The present is her
whole existence; the past but a confused dream.  The odd part of
the matter is that she regards her position with me as a
perfectly natural one.  No stray kitten adopted by a kind family
could have less sense of obligation, or a greater faith in the
serene ordering of the cosmos for its own private and peculiar
comfort.  When I asked her a while ago what she would have done
had I left her on the bench in the Embankment Gardens, she
shrugged her shoulders and answered, as she had done before, that
either she would have died or some other nice gentleman would
have taken care of her.

"Do you think nice gentlemen go about London looking for homeless
little girls?" I asked on that occasion.

"All gentlemen like beautiful girls," she replied, which brought
us to an old argument.

This afternoon, however, we did not argue.  The day forbade it.
I lay with my head on Carlotta's lap, looking up into the deep
blue, and feeling a most curious sensation of positive happiness.
My attitude towards life has hitherto been negative.  I have
avoided more than I have sought.  I have not drunk deep of life
because I have been unathirst.  To me--

               "To stand aloof and view the fight
               Is all the pleasure of the game."

My interest even in Judith has been of a detached nature.  I have
been like Faust.  I might have said:

               _"Werd' ich zum Augenblicke sagen
               Werweile doch!  Du bist so schon!_

Then may the devil take me and do what he likes with me!"

I have never had the least inclination to apostrophise the moment
in this fashion and request it to tarry on account of its
exceeding charm.  Never until this afternoon, when the deep
summer enchantment of the turquoise day was itself ensorcelised
by the witchery of a girl's springtide.

"You have three, four, five--oh, such a lot of grey hairs," said
Carlotta, looking down on my reclining head.

"Many people have grey hair at twenty," said I.

"But I have none."

"You are not yet twenty, Carlotta."

"Do you think I will have them then?  Oh, it would be dreadful.
No one would care to have me."

"And I?  Am I thus the object of every one's disregard?"

"Oh, you--you are a man.  It is right for a man.  It makes him
look wise.  His wife says, 'Behold, my husband has grey hair.  He
has wisdom.  If I am not good he will beat me.  So I must obey
him."'

"She wouldn't run off with a good-for-nothing scamp of
two-and-twenty?"

"Oh, no-o," said Carlotta.  "She would not be so wicked."

"I am glad," said I, "that you think a sense of conjugal duty is
an ineradicable element of female nature.  But suppose she fell
in love with the young scamp?"

"Men fall in love," she replied sagely.  "Women only fall in love
in stories--Turkish stories.  They love their husbands."

"You amaze me," said I.

Ye-es," said Carlotta.

"But in England, a man wants a woman to love him before he
marries her."

"How can she?" asked Carlotta.

This was a staggering question.

"I don't know," said I, "but she dus."

"Then before I marry a man in England I must love him?  But I
shall die without a husband!"

"I don't think so," said I.

"I must begin soon," said Carlotta, with a laugh.

A sinuous motion of her serpentine young body enabled her to bend
her face down to mine.

"Shall I love Seer Marcous?  But how shall I know when I am in
love?"

"When you appreciate the exceeding impropriety of discussing the
matter with your humble servant," I replied.

"When a girl is in love she does not speak about it?"

"No, my dear.  She lets concealment like a worm i' the bud feed
on her damask cheek."

"Then she gets ugly?"

"That's it," I answered.  "You keep on looking in the glass, and
when you perceive you are hideous then you'll know you are in
love."

"But when I am so ugly you will not want me," she objected.  "So
it is no use falling in love with you."

"You have a more logical mind than I imagined," said I.

"What is a logical mind?" asked Carlotta.

"It is the antiseptic which destroys the bacilli of unreason
whereby true happiness is vivified."

"I do not understand," she said.

"I should be vastly surprised if you did," I laughed.

"Would you like me to marry and go away and leave you?" asked
Carlotta, after a long pause.

"I suppose," I said with a sigh, "that some tin-pot knight will
drive up one of these days to the castle in a hansom-cab and
carry off my princess."

"Then you'll be sorry?"

"My dear," I answered, "do not let us discuss such gruesome
things on an afternoon like this."

"You would like better for me to go on playing at being your
Turkish wife?"

"Infinitely," said I.


Alas!  The day is sped.  I have asked the fleeting moment to
tarry, and it laughed, and shook its gossamer wings at me, and
flew by on its mad race into eternity.


As we lay, a cicada set up its shrilling quite close to us.  I
slipped my head from Carlotta's lap and idly parted the rank
grass in search of the noisy intruder, and by good luck I found
him.  I beckoned Carlotta, who glided down, and there, with our
heads together and holding our breath, we watched the queerest
little love drama imaginable.  Our cicada stood alert and spruce,
waving his antenna with a sort of cavalier swagger, and every now
and then making his corslet vibrate passionately.  On the top of
a blade of grass sat a brown little Juliet--a most reserved,
discreet little Juliet, but evidently much interested in Romeo's
serenade.  When he sang she put her head to one side and moved as
if uncertain whether to descend from her balcony.  When he
stopped, which he did at frequent intervals, being as it were
timorous and tongue-tied, she took her foot from the ladder and
waited, at first patiently and then with an obvious air of
boredom.  Messer Romeo made a hop forward and vibrated; Juliet
grew tremulous.  Alarmed at his boldness he halted and made a hop
back; Juliet looked disappointed.  At last another cicada set up
a louder note some yards away and, without a nod or a sign,
Juliet skipped off into space, leaving the most disconsolate
little Romeo of a grasshopper you ever beheld.  He gave vent to a
dismal failure of a vibration and hopped to the foot of the
faithless lady's bower.

Carlotta broke into a merry laugh and clapped her hands.

"I am so glad."

"She is the most graceless hussy imaginable," I cried.  "There
was he grinding his heart out for her, and just because a more
brazen-throated scoundrel came upon the scene she must needs
leave our poor friend in the lurch.  She has no more heart than
my boot, and she will come to a bad end."

"But he was such a fool," retorted my sage damsel, with a flash
of laughter in her dark eyes.  "If he wanted her, why didn't he
go up and take her?"

"Because he is a gentleman, a cicada of fine and delicate
feeling."

"_Hou!_" laughed Carlotta.  "He was a fool.  It served him right.
She grew tired of waiting."

"You believe, then," said I, "in marriage by capture?"

I explained and discoursed to her of the matrimonial habits of
the Tartar tribes.

"Yes," said Carlotta.  "That is sense.  And it must be such fun
for the girl.  All that, what you call it?--wooing?--is waste of
time.  I like things to happen, quick, quick, one after the
other--or else--"

"Or else what?"

"To do nothing, nothing but lie in the sun, like this afternoon."

"Yes," said I dreamily, after I had again thrown myself by her
side.  "Like this afternoon."


I sit at my window and look out upon the strip of beach, the
hauled-up fishing boats and the nets hung out to dry looming
vague in the starlight, and I hear the surf's rhythmical moan a
few yards beyond; and it beats into my ears the idiot phrase that
has recurred all the evening.

But why should I be mad?  For filling my soul with God's utmost
glory of earth and sea and sky?  For filling my heart with purest
pleasure in the intimate companionship of fresh and fragrant
maidenhood?  For giving myself up for once to a dream of sense
clouded by never a thought that was not serenely fair?

For feeling young again?


I shall read myself to sleep with _La Dame de Monsoreau_, which I
have procured from the circulating library in the Rue Alphonse
Karr--(the literary horticulturist is the genius loci and the
godfather of my landlady)--and I will empty flagons with Pere
Gorenflot and ride on errands of life and death with Chicot,
prince of jesters, and walk lovingly between the valiant Bussy
and Henri Quatre.  By this, if by nothing else, I recognise the
beneficence of the high gods--they have given us tired men Dumas.


                          CHAPTER XIII


September 30th.

Something is wrong with Antoinette.  The dinner she served up
this evening was all but uneatable.  Something is wrong with
Stenson, who has taken to playing his lugubrious hymn-tunes on
the concertina while I am in the house; I won't have it.
Something is wrong with the cat.  He wanders round the house like
a lost soul, sniffing at everything.  This evening he actually
jumped onto the dinner-table, looked at me out of his one eye, in
which all the desolation of two was concentrated, and miaowed
heart-rendingly in my face.  Something is wrong with the house,
with my pens which will not write, with my books which have the
air of dry bones in a charnel-house, with the MS. of my History
of Renaissance Morals, which stands on the writing-table like a
dusty monument to the futility of human endeavour.  Something is
wrong with me.

Something, too, is wrong with Judith, who has just returned from
her stay with the Willoughbys.  I have been to see her this
evening and found her of uncertain temper, and inclined to be
contradictious.  She accused me of being dull.  I answered that
the autumn world outside was drenched with miserable rain.  How
could man be sprightly under such conditions?

"In this room," said Judith, "with its bright fire and drawn
curtains there is no miserable rain, and no autumn save in our
hearts."

"Why in our hearts?" I asked.

"How you peg one down to precision," said Judith, testily.  "I
wish I were a Roman Catholic."

"Why?"

"I could go into a convent."

"You had much better go to Delphine Carrere," said I.

"I have only been back a day, and you want to get rid of me
already?" she cried, using her woman's swift logic of unreason.

"I want you to be happy and contented, my dear Judith."

"H'm," she said.

Her slipper dangling as usual from the tip of her foot fell to
the ground.  I declare I was only half conscious of the accident
as my mind was deep in other things.

"You don't even pick up my slipper," she said.

"Ten thousand pardons," I exclaimed, springing forward.  But she
had anticipated my intention.  We remained staring into the fire
and saying nothing.  As she professed to be tired I went away
early.

At the front door of the mansions, finding I had left my umbrella
behind, I remounted the stairs, and rang Judith's bell.  After a
while I saw her figure through the ground-glass panel approach
the door, but before she opened it, she turned out the light in
the passage.

"Marcus!" she cried, rather excitedly; and in the dimness of the
threshold her eyes looked strangely accusative of tears.  "You
have come back!"

"Yes," said I, "for my umbrella."

She looked at me for a moment, laughed, clapped her hands to her
throat, turned away sharply, caught up my umbrella, and putting
it into my hands and thrusting me back shut the door in my face.
In great astonishment I went downstairs again.  What is wrong
with Judith?  She said this evening that all men are cruel.  Now,
I am a man.  Therefore I am cruel.  A perfect syllogism.  But how
have I been cruel?

I walked home.  There is nothing so consoling to the depressed
man as the unmitigated misery of a walk through the London rain.
One is not mocked by any factitious gaiety.  The mind is in
harmony with the sodden universe.  It is well to have everything
in the world wrong at one and the same time.


I have changed my drenched garments for dressing-gown and
slippers.  I find on my writing-table a letter addressed in a
round childish hand.  It is from Carlotta, who for the last
fortnight has been staying in Cornwall with the McMurrays.  I
have known few fortnights so long.  In a ridiculous schoolboy
way I have been counting the days to her return--the day after
to-morrow.

The letter begins: "Seer Marcous dear."  The spelling is a little
jest between us.  The inversion is a quaint invention of her own.
"Mrs. McMurray says, can you spare me for one more week?  She
wants to teach me manners.  She says I have shocked the top priest
here--oh, you call him a vikker--now I do remember--because I went
out for a walk with a little young pretty priest without a hat,
and because it rained I put on his hat and the vikker met us.  But
I did not flirt with the little priest.  Oh, no!  I told him he
must not make love to me like the young man from the grocer's.
And I told him that if he wrote poetry you would beat him.  So I
have been very good.  And darling Seer Marcous, I want to come
back very much, but Mrs. McMurray says I must stay, and she is
going to have a baby and I am very happy and good, and Mr. McMurray
says funny things and makes me laugh.   But I love my darling Seer
Marcous best.  Give Antoinette and Polifemus [the one-eyed cat)
two very nice kisses for me.  And here is one for Seer Marcous
from his
                                                    "CARLOTTA."

How can I refuse?  But I wish she were here.


31st October.

I did not sleep last night.  I have done no work to-day.  The
Renaissance has receded into a Glacial Epoch wherein, as far as
its humanity is concerned, I have not a tittle of interest.  I
sought refuge in the club.  Why should an old sober University
club be such a haven of unrest?  Ponting, an opinionated don of
Corpus, seated himself at my luncheon table, and discoursed on
political economy and golf.  I manifested a polite ignorance of
these high matters.  He assured me that if I studied the one and
played at the other, I should be physically and mentally more
robust; whereupon he thumped his narrow chest, and put on a scowl
of intellectuality.  I fear that Ponting, like most of the men
here, studies golf and plays at political economy.  In serener
moments I suffer Ponting gladly.  But to-day his boast that he
had done the course at Westward Ho! in seven, or seventeen, or
seventy--how on earth should I remember?--left me cold, and his
crude economics interfered with my digestion.

Strolling forlornly down Piccadilly I, came face to face with my
sad-coloured Cousin Rosalie in a sad-coloured gown.  She gave me
a hasty nod and would have passed on, but I arrested her.  Her
white face was turned piteously upward and from her
expressionless eyes flashed a glance of fear.  I felt myself in a
brutal mood.

"Why," I asked, "are you avoiding me as if I were a pestilence?"

She murmured that she was not avoiding me, but was in a hurry.

"I don't believe it," said I.  "People have been telling you that
I am a vile, wicked man who does unspeakable things, and like a
good little girl you are afraid to talk to me.  Tell people, the
next time you see them, with my compliments, that they are
malevolent geese."

I lifted my hat and relieving Rosalie of my terrifying presence,
walked away in dudgeon.  I felt abominably and unreasonably angry.
I bethought me of my Aunt Jessica, whom I held responsible for
her niece's behaviour.  A militant mood prompted a call.  After
twenty minutes in a hansom I found myself in her drawing-room.
She was alone, the girls being away on country- house visits.
Her reception was glacial.  I expressed the hope that the
yachting cruise had been a pleasant one.

"Exceedingly pleasant," snapped my aunt.

"I trust Dora is well," said I, keeping from my lips a smile that
might have hinted at the broken heart.

"Very well, thank you."

As I do not enjoy a staccato conversation, I remained politely
silent, inviting her by my attitude to speak.

"I rather wonder, Marcus," she said at last, "at your referring
to Dora."

"Indeed?  May I ask why?"

"May I speak plainly?"

"I beseech you."

"I have heard of you at Etretat with your ward."

"Well?" I asked.

"_Verbum sap_," said my aunt.

"And you have let Mrs. Garcia also from Paradise stentorian
voice with him knowing that he could not arise. This time
he did not want to leave the theater: it was impossible to
abandon the battle. He sent an emissary to his friend in these
words drawn in pencil: "Success indescribable.

Come immediately. "After having fulfilled their duty, in the case
was thought to travel up and down the theater to commend their
courageous troops and get them the same luck.

Garcia's face shone pure and radiant as a spring
sunrise.

When ascending to heaven, when entering the gallery, down the hall
when all eyes feel thought about resting him, he felt his way to
listen to rumors flattering: "This is Garcia, a close friend of the
author, they're like brothers', and opposition to the glorious full
professorships sway while making significant efforts to appear
modest and serene in the midst of triumph.

But behold, when entering a time in the hall heard voices of two
people who hotly disputed with over vividness. They were two men,
one older, the other couple.

Some of them had a large group who listened to the discussion. It
dealt with the merits of the work.

The old man attacked the couple defended.

Garcia felt the thrill of the soldier who goes into a fire.
The mature gentleman did not understand why that was
applauded work.

No effect theatrical novelty had no character with real relief,
nothing more verses that sound, ie litter. Garcia believed hear
a mysterious voice in his ear that he screamed: 'Arráncale life!
¡Bebe all your blood!

"Was opened to step through the wall of meat to be separated from
those he faced with abject and trembling with anger said to him: -
Just by way of an ignorance of the principles of the drama is can
make such a critical light, such as superficial and unfair as you
are doing the work that is represented.

The gentleman, possessed of lively indignation at this rude rebuff
he looked from head to toe in silence and after said giving her
an incredible voice inflection of contempt: - And you who is - I
am who I am - plagiarising Garcia responded to the Supreme Creator -.

Of course - with added emphasis - the author of the work is too
high so they can reach the critical corridors and gossip from the
ignorant.

Ovenproof The gentleman was pale and looking fixedly in the eyes
García le asked: - Are you the author of the book - No, sir, I am
your friend. - Well, as you are the author Solemnis mamarrachos.

Garcia dropped the stick, the weapon could not play at that time
because of the narrowness of the site, and was thrown into the
neck of the critic as a tigre shall say no, but as the animal that
he seems.

Great confusion in the lobby.

The bystanders intervened, speaking after a public officer, but was
unable to hold their prey Garcia and left her hanging on to the
streets driven by the agent and other guards who came to support.

Shortly after it was ignominiously led to prevention. In
vain he begged to be left in the theater until the end of the
representation formed immediately promising prisoner. The guards
were insensitive. Garcia had to pass through the fierce trance of
not seeing the premiere of the _obra_.

Reynoso and Elena Meanwhile, Escudero, Araceli and Mrs. Eugenia,
all relatives of the amount received alegrísimos the lucky author
congratulations from friends and acquaintances.

Elena had a visit in the intermission of a few, among them Gustavo
Nuñez, who remained at his side only a few serious moments and
ceremonies.

Were dismissed to go to the scene to see if it was not and Tristan
to fetch her home. While Elena was talking with one of his friends
behind acercose to greet his countess a middle-aged gentleman
and elegant bearing, it was a while with her department and was
fired after friendly, smiling, holding his hand at some time the
Marcela. - Who is this gentleman? - Elena asked. - I have not
you because you were too distracted ... Is the count of Peñarrubia.
- Your husband?

- Elena exclaimed giving a jump in the chair. - He ... Are you
surprised? - Added smilingly -. Whenever there has been very
fine with me. Anywhere where I go, is a play or career, it never
fails to make your visit and send me flowers or chocolates. It's
a perfect gentleman but no hint of shame. Elena was stunned.
Was possible to find that natural, but his eyes are painted in
such a surprise that the countess laughed with laughter. - And
if we are in any meeting or makes me dance mijita their cutting
and a rigodón dance with me ...

This does not prevent us cordially hate, you know? But the first
correction, daughter ... See? - Added back the head -. The
proverbial bunch. Indeed, the florist was breaking through the
rear row of seats to deliver a bouquet of flowers each.
Rebosaba of Escudero and his worthy wife happy too. Araceli
but showed absolutely indifferent to the triumph of his cousin.
His heart beat and virginal but not with the memories feudal and
galeon Ruiz Diaz was in charge of soft drinks. There it was
at his side at all intervals.

I could not lose sight of their twins a decorated ducal crown
without being troubled by a shiver of pleasure, desire and worship
at the same time. Perhaps feudalism is better represented if
galeon were provided with more meat, but did not seem Araceli
miss it and telling herself that right at this time only fatten
the commoners. The couple was interesting, however, a thorn
in the heart. The Duke of Real-health is not wanted by the
daughter. He was a gentleman and as starched as stiff as
being just as the founder of his noble lineage is
impossible to do that greeted the king gave him the duchy. Of
course, while this gentleman was not soften a bit with the
humidity did not think that in marriage, because galeon was
fearful that her father raging sea. Escudero's daughter suffered
a lot with this rejection, but was justified, even by professed
respect to the Duke without limits.

The duchess, however, it had shown favorable. Health from his car
at the Retreat with extreme kindness, invited her to the Royal
stage two or three times and sent him a precious gift on his
birthday. It was not surprising, then, that had hopes that
eventually brought down her husband. Galeon seeking food,
but in substance much doubted it, because his dad was clearly
more stubborn than a knight of the Round Table. Conquered
indifference of the public, or better said already inflamed
by the applause, the third event was a great triumph for the author.
Calling scene palmoteo loud, angry and other signs of
complacency. Tristán, red with emotion, moved by the scene
between the actors receive the applause and making deep
courtesies ...

After saloncillo in a cloud of friends that always spring to warm
applause as the frogs that are born with summer rain. The author
tuteado and was embraced by a portion of subjects who never in
life had changed a greeting. The great playwright Estévanez
received almost as many as plácemes Tristan for having discovered
and put that boy on the path to celebrity. I really felt
the old man happy and was proud of having guessed. When it was
quiet and a little excitement Aldama departía among a circle of
friends spread the couches, appeared in the figure saloncillo long
illustrious Young, the wise Athens, with its lackluster and Leviton
floating hat in the neck.

Advanced majestically up the author and strengthen its hand force
exclaimed: - Well done, young man, bravo! I give you my heartfelt
congratulations. He has shown you a lot of talent. I think you can
not do more without the aid of a scientific culture that the
writers among you (you will forgive me saying this) is usually
either poor. A Tristan knew well that no luck, but accepted it
concealed. Mature turned to those around smiling, benevolent,
happy to feel so wise. - You can not do more, I repeat. My friend
Aldama is one of the writers we could call simplistic, but in
the narrow area in which it moves, few, very few will surpass.
I wish, however, a higher art. Is it not true, gentlemen, that is
a sadness to note how poor is the culture of our schools on
scientific evidence?

Ignorant writers, who felt that just writing a novel or a
pleasant drama interesting without worrying about the
great social and scientific problems are those who still
dominate.

Hence comes the art frivolous, inconsistent, without substance for
so many centuries that we have fixed assets with which it must stop.

        An art in which the concept has no value
          what it means?

A literary work without scientific analysis, what is it? We need
a new direction. If my occupations I may, gentlemen, will not
be difficult for me entertained someday write a novel and a drama.
And then I would say to the writers: "There you have the new
formula, there you have the formula of the modern novel and drama.

             Recogedla if you will: Get the party
            that it will be possible.

I will leave the retreat with me and my fellow scientists without
trying to work longer invade your domains. " This speech, delivered
in a single breath, gratísimo effect occurred at the meeting judged
the provision to the joy that was expressed in all the faces
immediately.

One of those young people got up the seat and shake hands with
veneration of the wise saying - Mr Young, would you do me the
most miserable of men if not influenced me to reserve a seat on
the day of the premiere of his drama. Another accompanying him
to the door making this I thought devoted to lyric poetry and
consulting at the same time whether it should begin by studying
the biology and pathology of the internal.

              When the farce was over and had to retire with the author friends,
the police inspector came to tell who had stopped a suspicious man
in a bad area that was in paradise and know that I said. - Mal
aspect - Tristan asked. - bad. -- ¿A very long beard?

¿Face murderer? - Yes, sir, yes - was quick to say the inspector.
- Suéltenlo you is a saint. He was astounded, and although he
never wanted to agree on the sanctity of the peasant Barragán
(because it was not another detainee) finally decided
to release it.

At that moment entered the saloncillo Reynoso Garcia.

This, not to embarrass his friend Aldama, the delegation had a
letter from him making esquelita know what happened. Germán
Don was quick to go there and take hold. Garcia got the right
happy, glowing. As a sighted Tristan rushed towards him
and fell into his arms crying for joy: - We won! I know you've
come to the stage seven times ...

If I had stayed in the theater let me cut your hands if you do not
leave fourteen. - Is it really you've been in prison - I think,
have wanted to explain the plot to a guy who did not understand
why liked your work.

I think at this time it has seen clear.

Tristán hugged him, laughing. A portion of last-minute friends
accompanied the author to his house along with Reynoso and Garcia.
It had wanted to organize a procession at night with wind axes
as the company that used to improvise in the triumphs of
Estévanez, but the incident of the arrest had to abort his idea.
Tristan slept badly that night.

The intoxication of glory as the lights of the wine stirs
the blood and nerves. Morning newspapers have been made and
gave to his reading.

In general they were not only benevolent, but flattering to the
production of novel poet.

A Tristan did not seem, however, quite everything: remember the
magazines devoted to the premieres of Estévanez, comparisons with
his work and they are good cold on a whim.

But to take up and read _The Universal_ magazine's famous critical
_Leporello_ anger did fade. Article was a disdainful, ironic,
all the bitterness and malevolence traspirando. We undertook a
blind rage. Borráronse suddenly your imagination the applause
of the night before, praise from the rest of the press; borráronse
also enjoyed all the prosperity in this world, and in an instant
the man was considered the most unfortunate land.

When Don and his friend Gustavo Germán Núñez entered its fourth
morning they found him walking to and fro with the newspaper in
his hand and gnashing of teeth. - Yeah, this I what I assumed!

How can see with good eyes Estévanez my triumph? And
yesterday, hugging hypocrite! The scoundrel! - But what
has to do with this article Estévanez _The Universal_ - Reynoso
asked in amazement. - But do not know, innocent - smiling sarcastically
uttered Tristan - who is married to _Leporello_ a relative of
Estévanez and saw no more than your eyes and think rather than your
brain?

Don Germán not what it seemed irrefutable proof that the great
playwright was the inspiration behind the article, but refused to
take the contrary openly observing the state of agitation that
was. - But in that case why has taken this interest in your work
and why they made it represent? - You know why? - Tristan responded
by squeezing the hand and with a expression of infinite shrewdness
-.

Because he was convinced that my work would fiasco. This is
believed all the comedians and they do not dare to breathe if
Estévanez not allow it.

                            Reynoso silent.

Gustavo Núñez sat in a chair, lit a cigarette and crossing her legs
with his usual displicencia said: - As a child My mother used to
read the _Año cristiano_ bedtime.

Well, I remember the story of a saint who for many years posed
by an idiot, suffering with admirable patience to win the sky
and all kinds of ridicule mockery of both men from the boys.
Having lived a little meet equally admirable procedure to gain
ground.

If you want, buddy, get some results in the letters need to start
by fingirte stupid and take the belief that all of you are.

The company is not easy because the writers are suspicious and well
awake, and were not deceived we would.

All kinds of obstacles you're tangled in the legs and can not
take a step.

But if they manage to convince you and put the mark of mediocrity
incurable, then how will rid you walk, the forest will be opened
to let entangled step, the mountains abatirán, the rivers are dry
and clouds of incense continue your glorious march surrounded by
Hosanna!

of criticism. Tristán without heed these words, remained agitated
and angry walking. Don Germán smiled and replied gently: -
That, Núñez friend, I find it funny more accurate. There has never
been a unanimity of views in this world. May have been much less
in the literature in that it is the ugly and beautiful. But
that does not prevent that here as everywhere prevail after
what must prevail and that it should perish perish. I have
always lived well away from the world of arts and letters, but I
have the feeling that the enemies in the literature contribute
more reputations to form the gang.

Sometimes with an unjustified and suspicious silence, others
with one-timed attack like that now experienced Tristan, indicate
the site where the public is good.

In the villages of France to discover that I have seen the truffle
pigs released into the field.

On the site where there are stop and start rooting for these
animals. Then go to separate them, it digs the earth and is the
fruit. So the envious reveal the spot where the truffle
literary, there goes the public, and separates the eating.

You forgive the ugly in comparison to the grace of accuracy ...

Nunez refused to grant the accuracy of simile and spilled over
immediately into a torrent of paradoxes and resourceful, all well
and resquemantes bitter.

Don Germán replied with his usual ease and engaged in a prolonged
discussion.

Tristan was followed by the painter and if not surpassed in bitterness
grace and exaltation.

At last Reynoso jokingly telling the court that they hoped lunch.
Nunez was fired. During lunch Tristan was so taciturn that
Clara, painfully surprised and shocked, not away from him the eyes.

Reynoso and Elena headed furtive glances, sometimes smiling, others
shake their heads with signs of anger. Elena was particularly
nervous about being rude and embarrassing silence of his brother.
In a short interview he was not sharp and only attending to the
details of her husband managed to contain.

But could not a murmur of the times - a lie that seems
so silly man has written a book so beautiful! Tristan lifted
his head and distracted asked: - What you said - that this salsa
is wonderful. Don Germán Tristan smiled and lowered his head again
to persist in their silence thoughtless.

As the lunch ended up locked in his office.

They came to call not long after Garcia, who also brought a number
of _The Universal_ at hand.

As Tristan entered the heavily pressed and left to escape the fatal
words: - We have to crush the snake!

Tristan shuddered. Garcia dropped into a chair and his eyes
wandering relampagueantes for the stay as if they expected to
discover some hidden corner in the loathsome reptile is hand poured
_chaquette_ inside the pocket, took out a handful of pages, dropped
back and put the layer read a hollow voice.

It was an overwhelming response, in effect, a critique of _Leporello_
rhetoric fed by sound doctrine and adorned with all the resources
it provides to address the Spanish spelling; signs of admiration,
questions, ellipsis, brackets, etc..

Etc. Tristan, thinking too, just listening to you. "But to go
_Leporello_ with the differences between the style and adorned
vehement and pathetic! What do you know the critical zorrocloco
humanities?

Most of them do not know what that refers to hers, and as it does
not see beyond their noses ... hence ... ¡Tente pen! How could
a man so short sight to understand that the moral order of the
tragedy is to purge our passions by pity and terror, while the
comedy is to correct our flaws by means of ridicule?

But let ridiculous not mind hanging rope in the house. If
the great writer who _Leporello_ labeled ... "- Jesus, Garcia!
- Tristan exclaimed embarrassed. - Stop it! I know what I write
- Garcia said the same voice with vibrant campanuda, that I
read your article. "If the great writer who ..." - But
Garcia, that's too much! Do not you understand? ... The
rhetoric extended his hand to tackle and do not repeat the event
again with more emphasis: "If the great writer who _Leporello_
labeled could fall to respond if the pen has drawn bright lines
of the prodigious _Magdalena_ could stain once, and so on.
"Garcia, trembling and screaming like a energúmeno concluded after
reading the article. A happy, triumphant in his shined black
ojillos under populated their tabs, like a lantern inside a forest.
Wrapped the pages slowly, got into the pocket and close the
mouth to the ear of Tristan and making a prodigious number of
faces spoke these memorable words: - This article will come in
the mail tonight or tomorrow and last Saturday all over the be
published in _The Clamor_ of Alicante.

On Saturday, because, as you walk down the street with their heads
up. XII's Ninth Symphony in a billetito scented, very fragrant,
and the arms of the noble house Peñarrubia sealing stamped in pink,
the Countess invited to lunch your friend Elena.

"Cherie: Because your lord husband has left you now with those ugly
bugs so that you save in the _Sotillo_, come to this happy moment
with me eating humble house tonight.

At eight. You can come when you crave for that you are the love.
Adieu, ma Poupée petitte of biscuit. Many kisses, many, many
MARCELA ....

'The marriage Reynoso was installed from the 1. January in his
magnificent hotel de la Castellana. Were the last days of
February. Germán Don, who had accepted with cheerful countenance
Elena not to upset the transfer of domicile is bored to death in
court.

Only opera and concerts will compensate some of those awful hours
of walking in a row watching the cars cross at his side made a
string of faces and starched collars.

Then to see them again in the theater, in the soirées, after having
seen the morning on the pavement of the streets of Alcalá and in
the afternoon sometime _five o'clock_ in the exhibition of paintings,
in careers in wherever chiming.

"I
thought you disliked Carlotta."

"By no means.  I should be glad to make her further acquaintance.
Any one that interests you must also be interesting to me."

"In that case," said I, "your coming will give us both the
greatest possible pleasure."

"I haven't had a merry evening for ever so long."

"We will dine somewhere first and have supper afterwards.  The
whole gamut of merriment.  Toute la lyre.  And you shall have," I
added, "some of your favourite Veuve Cliquot."

"It will be charming," said Judith, politely.

In fact, politeness has been the dominant note of her attitude
to-day, a sober restraint of manner such as she would adopt when
rather tired towards an ordinary acquaintance.  Has she
reconciled herself to the inevitable and taken this Empire frolic
as a graceful method of showing it?  I should like to believe so,
but the course is scarcely consistent with that motor of illogic
which she is pleased to call her temperament.  I am puzzled.

Her smile as we parted sent a chill through me, being the smile
of a mask instead of a woman's face; and it was not the face of
Judith.  I don't anticipate much merriment tomorrow evening.


At Carlotta's suggestion, I have sent a line to Pasquale to ask
him to join us.  His gay wit will lend to the entertainment a
specious air of revelry which Carlotta will take as genuine.

I have often thought lately of the hopeless passion of Alfonso
the Magnanimous of Naples, as set forth by Pope Pius II in his
Commentaries; for I am beginning to take a morbid interest in the
unhappy love affairs of other men and to institute comparisons.
If they have lived through the torment, why should not I?  But
Alfonso sighed for Lucrezia d'Alagna, a beautiful chaste statue
of ice who loved him; whereas I crave the warm-blooded thing that
is mine for the taking, but no more loves me than she loves the
policeman who salutes her on his beat.  I cannot take her.
Something stronger than my passion opposes an adamantine barrier.
I love her with my soul as well as with my body, and my soul
cries out for the soul that the Almighty forgot when endowing her
with entity.

This evening a letter from the Editor of The Quarterly Review.
It would give him great pleasure if I would contribute a
Renaissance article, taking as my text a German, a Russian, and
an English attempt to whitewash the Borgia family.  Six months
ago the compliment would have filled me with gratification.  To-
day what to me are the whitewashed Borgias or the solemn denizens
of the Athenaeum reading-room who will slumber over my account of
the blameless poisonings of this amiable family?  They are vanity
and vexation of a spirit already sore at ease.

As I write the door creaks.  I look up.  Behold Carlotta in
hastily slipped on dressing-gown, open in front, her hair
streaming loose to her waist, her bare feet flashing pink beneath
her night-dress.

"Oh, Seer Marcous, darling, I am so frightened!"

She ran forward and caught the lappels of my coat as I rose from
my chair.

"What is the matter?"

"There is a mouse in my bed."

Polyphemus saved the situation by jumping from the sofa and
rubbing his back against her feet.

"Take the cat and tell him to kill it," said I, "and go back to
bed at once."

I must have spoken roughly, for she regarded me with her great
eyes full of innocent reproach.

"There, take up the cat and go," I repeated.  "You mustn't come
down here looking like that."

"I thought I looked very pretty," said Carlotta, moving a step
nearer.

I sat down at my writing-table and fixed my eyes on my paper.

"You are like a Houri that has been sent away from Paradise for
misbehaviour," I said.

She laughed her curious cooing laugh.

"_Hou!_  Seer Marcous is shocked!"  And she ran, away, rubbing
Polyphemus's nose against her face.


I wonder if the Devil, having grown infirm, is mixing up his
centuries and mistaking me for a mediaeval saint?  Paphnutius for
instance, who was visited by such a seductress.  What is the
legend?  To get rid of her he burns off his hand, whereupon she
falls dead.  He prays and she returns to life and becomes a nun.
No, Messer Diavolo, I am not Paphnutius.  I will not maim myself,
nor do I want Carlotta to fall dead; and I cannot pray and effect
a pietistic resurrection.  I am simply a fool of a modern man
tempted out of his wits, who scarce knows what it is that he
speaks or writes.

I am not superstitious, but I feel myself to-night on the brink
of some disaster.  I walk restlessly about the room.  On the
mantel-piece are three photographs in silver frames: Judith,
Carlotta, Pasquale.  That which is of mockery in the spirit of
each seems to-night to be hovering round the portraits and to be
making sport of me.  An autumn gale is howling among the trees
outside, like a legion of lost souls.  Listen.  Messer Diavolo
himself might be riding by with a whoop of derision.


                           CHAPTER XV


October 26th.

I knew something would happen.  Messer Diavolo does not ride
whooping to no purpose by the windows of people whom he desires
to torment; nor does he inspire photographs for nothing with an
active spirit of mockery.

We dined at the Trocadero.  Carlotta loves the band and the buzz
of Babel and the heavy scents and the clatter and the tumult and
the glare of light; otherwise I should have chosen a discreeter
hostelry where the footfalls of the waiting-men were noiseless
and the walls in quiet shadow, where there was nothing but
the mellow talk of friends to distract the mind from the
consideration of exquisite flavours.  But in these palaces of
clashing splendour, the stunned brain fails to receive
impressions from the glossopharyngeal nerve, and one eats
unthinkingly like a dog.  But this matters little to Carlotta.
Perhaps when I was nineteen it mattered little to me.  And
to-night, also, it mattered little, for my mind was preoccupied
and a dinner with Lucullus would have been savourless.

If the Psalmist cried, "What is man that Thou art mindful of
him?" what cry had he at the back of his head to utter concerning
woman?  Did he leave her to be implicitly dealt with by Charles
Darwin in his "Theory of Sexual Selection"?  Or did he in the
good old oriental way regard her as unimportant in the eyes of
the Deity?  If the latter, he was a purblind prophet and missed
the very fount of human tears.

When I looked at Judith, I was smitten with a great pain.  She
had not looked so young, so fresh, so fragilely fair for many
months.  She wore a dress of corn-flower blue that deepened the
violet of her eyes.  In the mass of flax hued thistle-down that
is her hair a blue argus butterfly completed the chord of colour.
There was the faintest tinge of pink in her cheek applied with
delicate art.  Her dress seemed made of unsubstantial dream
stuff--I believe they call it chiffon--and it covered her bosom
and arms like the spray of a fairy sea.  She had the air of an
impalpable Undine, a creation of sea-foam and sea-flower; an
exquisite suggestion of the ethereal which floated beauty, as it
were, into her face.  I know little of women, save what these
past few grievous months have taught me; but I know that hours of
anxious thought and desperate hope lay behind this effect of
fragile loveliness.  The wit of woman could not have rendered a
woman's body a greater contrast to that of her rival; and with
infinite subtlety she had imbued the contrast with the deeper
significance of rare and spiritual things.  I know this was so.
I know it was a challenge, a defiance, an ordeal by combat; and
the knowledge hurt me, so that I felt like a Dathan or Abiram who
had laid hand on the Ark of the Covenant (for the soul of a
woman, by heaven! is a holy thing), and I wished that the earth
could open and swallow me up.

We sat down to table in the middle of the great room--a quiet
corner on the balcony away from the band is not to Carlotta's
taste--like any conventional party of four, and at first talked
of indifferent matters.  Conciergerie dinner-parties in the
Terror always began with a discussion of the latest cure for
megrims, or the most fashionable cut of a panier.  Presently
Pasquale who had been talking travel with Judith appealed to me.

"What year was it, Ordeyne, that I came home from Abyssinia?"

"I forget," said I.  "I only remember you presenting me with that
hideous thing hanging in my passage, which you called a
dulcimer."

_"Gage d'amour?"_ smiled Judith.

Pasquale laughed and twirled his swaggering moustache.

"I did get it from a damsel, and that is why I called it a
dulcimer, but she didn't sing of Mount Abora.  I wish I could
remember the year."

"I think it was in 1894," said Judith quietly.

Pasquale, who had been completely unaware of Judith's existence
until half an hour before, could not repress a stare of polite
surprise.

"I believe you are right.  In fact, you are.  But how can you
tell?"

"Through the kindness of Sir Marcus," replied Judith graciously,
"you are a very old acquaintance.  I could write you off-hand a
nice little obituary notice with all the adventures--well, I will
not say complete--but with all the dates accurate, I assure you.
I have a head for that sort of thing."

"Yes," I cried, desiring to turn the conversation.  "Don't tell
Mrs. Mainwaring anything you wish forgotten.  Facts are her
passion.  She writes wonderful articles full of figures that make
your head spin, and publishes them in the popular magazines over
the signature of Willoughby the statistician.  Allow me to
present to you a statistical ghost."

But Pasquale's subtle Italian brain was paying but half attention
to me.  I could read his inferences from Judith's observations,
and I could tell what she wanted him to infer.  I seem to have
worn my sensory system outside instead of inside my skin this
evening.

"Ordeyne," said he, "you are a pig, and the great-grandfather of
pigs--"

"Foul" cried Carlotta, seizing on an intelligible point of the
conversation.

"Why didn't you present me to Mrs. Mainwaring in 1894.?  I
declare I have thought myself allied to that man for twenty years
in bonds of the most intimate friendship, and he has never so
much as mentioned you to me."

"Seer Marcous says that Pasquale is a bad lot," remarked
Carlotta, with an air of sapience, after a sip of orangeade, a
revolting beverage which she loves to drink at her meals.

Pasquale threw back his handsome head and laughed again like the
chartered libertine he is, and Judith smiled.

"'Out of the mouths of babes, etc.,"' said I, apologetically.

"In all seriousness," said Pasquale to Judith, "I had no idea
that any one was such a close friend of Ordeyne's."

Judith turned to me, with a graceful gesture of her shoulders.

"I think we have been close friends, Marcus?"

"Oh, ye-es," broke in Carlotta.  "Mrs. Mainwaring has the picture
of Seer Marcous in her bedroom, and there is the picture of Mrs.
Mainwaring in our drawing-room.  You have not seen it?  But yes.
You have not recognised it, Pasquale?  Mrs. Mainwaring is so
pretty tonight.  Much prettier than the photograph.  Yes, you are
so pretty.  I would like to put you on the mantel-piece as an
ornament instead of the picture."

"May I be allowed to endorse Carlotta's sentiment of
appreciation?" I said, with a view to covering her indiscretion,
for I saw a flash of conjecture in Pasquale's eyes and a sudden
spot of real red in Judith's cheeks.  She had evidently desired
to suggest an old claim on my regard, but to have it based on
such intimate details as the enshrining of my photograph was not
to her fancy.

"I am vastly beholden to you both," said Judith, who has a
graceful way of receiving compliments.  "But," turning to
Pasquale, "we have travelled far from Abyssinia."

"To Sir Marcus's mantel-piece.  Suppose we stay there."

"There is you and me and Mrs. Mainwaring," said the literal
Carlotta, "and I am the big one in the middle.  It was made big--
big," she added, extending her arms in her exaggerating way.  "I
was wearing this dress."

"Mr. Pasquale and I will have to enlarge our frames, Marcus,"
said Judith, "or we shall be jealous.  We shall have to make
common cause together."

"We will declare an inoffensive alliance," laughed Pasquale.

"Offensive if you like," said Judith.

It may have been some effect of the glitter of lights, but I vow
I saw a swift interchange of glances.  Pasquale immediately
turned to Carlotta with a jesting remark, and Judith engaged me
in conversation on our old days in Rome.  Suddenly she swerved
from the topic, and leaning forward, indicated our companions
with an imperceptible motion of her head.

"Don't you think," she said in a low voice, "they are a
well-matched pair?  Both young and picturesque; it would solve
many things."

I glanced round.  Carlotta, elbow on the table and chin in hand,
was looking deep into Pasquale's eyes, just as she has looked
into mine.  Her lips had the half-sensuous, half-childish pout
provocative of kisses.

"Do, and I will love you," I heard her say.

Oh, those dove-notes, those melting eyes, those lips!  Oh, the
horrible fool passion that burns out my soul and brain and
reduces me to rave like a lovelorn early Victorian tailor!  Which
was worse I know not--the spasm of jealousy or the spasm of
self-contempt that followed it.  At that moment the music ceased
suddenly on a loud crashing chord.

The moment seemed to be magnetic to all but Carlotta, who was
enjoying herself prodigiously.  Our three personalities appeared
to vibrate rudely one against the other.  I was conscious that
Judith read me, that Pasquale read Judith, that again something
telegraphic passed between them.  The waiter offered me
partridge.  Pasquale quickly turned from Carlotta to his
left-hand neighbour.

"I think we ought to drink Faust's health, don't you?"

I started.  Had I not myself traced the analogy?

"Faust?" queried Judith at a loss.

"Our friend Faust opposite me," said Pasquale, raising his
champagne glass.  "Hasn't he been transformed from the lean and
elderly bookworm into the gay, young gallant about the town?
Once one could scarcely drag him from his cell to the quietest of
dinners, and now--has he told you of his dissipations this past
month, Mrs. Mainwaring

Judith smiled.  "Have you been Mephistopheles?"

"What is Mephistopheles?" asked Carlotta.

"The devil," said Pasquale, "who made Sir Marcus young again."

"Oh, that's me," cried Carlotta, clapping her hands.  "He does not
read in big books any longer.  Oh, I was so frightened when I
first came."  (I must say she hid her terrors pretty
effectually.)  "He was so wise, and always reading and writing,
and I thought he was fifty.  And now he is not wise at all, and
he said two, three days ago I had made him twenty-five."

"If you go on at the rate you have begun, my dear," Judith
remarked in her most charming manner, "in another year you will
have brought him down to long clothes and a feeding-bottle."

Carlotta thought this very funny and laughed joyously.  I laughed
too, out of courtesy, at Judith's bitter sarcasm, and turned the
conversation, but Pasquale was not to be baulked of his toast.

"Here's to our dear friend Faust; may he grow younger and younger
every day."

We clinked glasses.  Judith sighed when the performance was
concluded.

"That is one of the many advantages of being a man.  If you do
sell your soul to the devil you can see that you get proper
payment.  A woman is paid in promissory notes, which are
dishonoured when they fall due."

I contested the proposition.  The irony of this peculiarly
painful revel lay in the air of gaiety it seemed necessary to
maintain.  A miserable business is civilisation!

"Did you ever hear of a woman getting youth out of such a
bargain?" she retorted with some vehemence.

"As women systematically underpay cabmen," said I, "so do they
try to underpay the devil; and he is one too many for them."

"I am afraid," said Pasquale, "that the old days of shrewd
bargains are over.  There is a glut in the soul-market and they
only fetch the price of old bones."

"He is talking foolish things that I do not understand," said
Carlotta, putting her hand on my arm.

"It is called sham cynicism, my dear," said I, "and we all ought
to be ashamed of ourselves."

"What do you like best to talk about?" Judith asked sweetly.

"Myself.  And so does everybody," replied Carlotta.

We laughed, and for a time talk ceased to be allusive.  But
later, over our coffee, while the band was playing loudly some
new American march, and Carlotta and Pasquale were laughing
together, Judith drew near me.

"You did not answer my question about those two, Marcus."

My fingers trembled as I lit a fresh cigarette.

"He is not a man to whom any woman's destiny should be
entrusted."

"And is she a woman on whom a man should stake his life's
happiness?"

"God knows," said I, setting my teeth.

It was not an enjoyable dinner-party.  I longed for the evening
to be over, to have Carlotta safe back with me at home.  I felt a
curious dread of the Empire.

We arrived there towards the end of the first ballet.  Carlotta,
as soon as she had taken her seat, leaned both elbows on the
front of the box and surrendered her senses to the stage.
Pasquale talked to Judith.  Wishing for a few moments alone I
left the box and sauntered moodily along the promenade behind the
First Circle.  The occupants were either leaning over the
partitions and watching the spectacle or sitting with drink
before them at the little marble tables at the back.  The gaudy,
gilded, tobacco-smoke and humanity-filled theatre seemed to be
unreal, the stage but a phantom cloud effect.  I wondered why I,
a creature from the concrete world, was there.  I had an insane
impulse to fly from it all, to go out into the streets, and
wander, wander for ever, away from the world.  I was walking
along the promenade, lost in this lunacy, when I stumbled against
a fellow-promenader and the shock brought me to my senses.  It
was an elderly, obese Oriental wearing a red fez.  He had a long
nose and small, crafty eyes, and was deeply pitted with smallpox.
I made profuse apologies and he accepted them with suavity.  It
then occurring to me that I was be having in a discourteous and
abjectly absurd manner, I made my way back to the box.  I drew a
chair to Judith's side.

"You are giving me a captivating evening," she said, with a
smile.

"Whom are you captivating?" I asked, idly jesting.  "Pasquale?"

"You are cruel," whispered Judith, with a flicker of her eyelids.

I flushed, ashamed, not having weighed the significance of my
words.  All I could say was: "I beg your pardon," whereat Judith
laughed mirthlessly.  I relapsed into silence.  Turn followed
turn on the stage.  While the curtain was lowered Carlotta sank
back with a little sigh of enjoyment, and nodded brightly at me.

"Do you remember," she said, turning to me, at a fresh fall of
the curtain, "when you brought me first?  I said I should like to
live here.  Wasn't I silly?"

She turned again, then suddenly rose to her feet and staggered
back to the back of the box, pointing outward, with an expression
of wild terror on her face.

"Hamdi--he's down there--he saw me."

I sprang to her assistance and put my arm around her.

"Nonsense, dear," said I.

But Pasquale, looking around the house, cried:

"By Jove!  she's right.  I would recognise the old villain a
thousand years hence in Tartarus.  There he is."

I left Carlotta, and the first person my eyes rested upon in the
stalls was my obese but suave Oriental, regarding the box with an
impassive countenance.

"That's Hamdi Effendi, all right," said Pasquale.

Carlotta clutched my arms as I joined her at the back of the box.

"Oh, take me away, Seer Marcous, take me away," she moaned
piteously.  My poor child was white and shaken with fear.  I
again put my arm round her.

"No harm can happen to you, dear," I said, soothingly.

"Oh, darling Seer Marcous, take me home," cried Carlotta.

"Very well," said I.  I helped her on with her wrap, and
apologising to the two others, begged them to remain.

"We'll all go together," said Judith quietly.

"And form a body-guard," laughed Pasquale.

Carlotta clinging to my arm we left the box and slipped through
the promenade and down the stairs.

Hamdi Effendi, having anticipated our intention, cut off our
retreat in the vestibule.  Carlotta shrank nearer to me.

"I beg your pardon, Monsieur, but may I have the pleasure of a
few words with you about this young lady?" said he in the
urbanest manner and the most execrable French.

"I hardly see the necessity," said I.

"Pardon me, but this young lady is a Turkish subject and my
daughter.  My name is Hamdi Effendi, Prefect of Police at Aleppo,
and my address in London is the Hotel Metropole."

"I am charmed to make your acquaintance," said I.  "I have often
heard of you from Mademoiselle--but I believe both her father and
mother were English, so she is neither your daughter nor a
Turkish subject."

"Ah, that we will see," rejoined the polite Oriental.  He
addressed some words rapidly in Turkish to Carlotta, who
shudderingly replied in the same language.

"Mademoiselle unfortunately does not consent to accompany me," he
interpreted with a smile.  "So I am afraid I will have to take
her back without her consent."

"If you do, Hamdi Effendi," said Pasquale in a light tone of
conversation, but with the ugliest snarl of the lips that I have
ever beheld, "I shall most certainly kill you."

Hamdi turned to him with a polite bow.

"Ah, it is Monsieur Pasquale.  I thought I recognised you."

"You have every reason to do so," said Pasquale.

"I saved you from prison."

"You accepted a bribe."

"For heaven's sake," cried Judith, "go on speaking in low voices,
or we shall have a scene here."

One or two idlers hung near with an air of curiosity and the huge
beuniformed commissionaire watched us with an uncertain eye.  I
kept a tight hold of Carlotta and drew her more behind the screen
of a palm near which we happened to stand.

"Madame is right," said Hamdi.  "We can discuss this little
affair like gentlemen."

"Then, in the most gentlemanly way in the world," said Pasquale,
"I swear to you that if you touch this young lady, I will kill
you."

"It appears, to be Monsieur," said the obese Turk with a graceful
wave of the hand in my direction, "and not you, who has robbed my
home of its treasure, unless," he added, and I shall always
remember the hideous leer of that pulpy-nosed and small-pox
pitted face, "unless Monsieur has relieved you of your
responsibilities."

For a moment I was speechless.  Pasquale put himself in front of
me.

"Steady on, Ordeyne."

"Sir," said I, "I found this young lady destitute in the streets
of London.  She is my wife and therefore a British subject; so
you can take yourself and your infamous insinuations to the
devil, and the quicker the better."

"Or there'll be two of us engaged in the killing," said Pasquale.

Hamdi again exchanged a few sentences in Turkish with Carlotta,
and then smiled upon us with the same unruffeled suavity.

_"Au revoir, Mesdames et Messieurs."_  With a courteous salute he
shuffled back towards the stall-entrance.

The tension over, Carlotta broke from me and clutched Pasquale by
the arm.

"Oh, kill him, kill him, kill him!" she cried in a passionate
whisper.

He freed himself gently and took out a cigarette case.

"Scarcely necessary.  He'll soon die."  And turning to me he
added: "Not a sound organ in his body.  Besides, it seems to me
that if there is any murdering to be done, it's the business of
Sir Marcus."

"There is going to be no murdering," said I, profoundly
disgusted, "and don't talk in that revolting way about the
wretched man dying."

I regained possession of Carlotta who, seeing that I was angry,
cast a scared glance at me, and became docile as suddenly as she
had grown passionate.  I turned to Judith.

"Will you ever forgive me--" I began.

But the sight of her face froze me.  It was white and hard and
haggard, and the lips were drawn into a thin line, and the
delicate colour she had put upon her cheeks stood out in ghastly
contrast.  Her dress, like the foam of a summer sea, mocked the
winter in her face.

"There is nothing to forgive," she said, smiling icily.  "I came
for a variety entertainment and I have not been disappointed.
Good-bye.  Perhaps Mr. Pasquale will be so kind as to put me into
a cab."

"I will drive you home, if you will allow me," said Pasquale.

We separated, shaking hands as if nothing had happened, as
perfunctorily as if we had been the most distant of
acquaintances.

On our way back we spoke very little.  Carlotta nestled close
against me, seeking the shelter of my arm.  She cried, I don't
know why, but it seemed to afford comfort.  I kissed her lips and
her hair.

At home, I drew the sofa near the fire--it has been a raw night
and she feels the cold like a tropical plant--and sat down by her
side.

"Did you hear what I said to Hamdi Effendi--that you were my
wife?"

"But that was only a lie," she answered in her plain idiom.

My petting and soothing together with the sense of home security
and a cup of French chocolate prepared by Antoinette, who,
astonished at our early return and seeing her darling in
distress, had hastened to provide culinary consolation, had
restored her wonted serenity of demeanour.  Polyphemus also
purred reassuringly upon her lap.

"It was a lie this evening," said I, "but in a few days I hope it
will be true."

"You are going to marry me?" she asked, suddenly sitting erect
and looking at me rather bewildered.

"If you will have me, Carlotta."

"I will do what Seer Marcous tells me," she answered.  "Will you
marry me to-morrow?"

"I think it hardly possible, my dear," I answered.  "But I shall
lose no time, I assure you.  Once you are my wife neither Hamdi
Effendi nor the Sultan of Turkey can claim you.  No one can take
an Englishman's wife away from him."

"Hamdi is a devil," said Carlotta.

"We can laugh at him," said I.

"Did you ever see such an ugly mug?"

Where she gets her occasional bits of slang from I do not know;
but her little foreign staccato pronunciation gives them unusual
quaintness.  I laughed, and Carlotta, throwing Polyphemus off her
lap, laughed too, and sidled up against me.  The cat regarded us
for a moment with a disgusted eye, then stretched himself as if
he had quitted Carlotta of his own accord, and walked away in a
state of dignified boredom.

"Hamdi is like a pig and an elephant and a great fat turkey,"
said Carlotta.

"If all the world were beautiful," I exclaimed, "such a thing as
our appreciation of beauty would not exist.  I should not even be
aware that my Carlotta was beautiful."

She put her hands on my knees in her impulsive way, and bending
forward looked at me delightedly.

"Oh, you do think so?"

"You are the loveliest and most intoxicating creature on the
earth, Carlotta."

"Now I am sure, sure, sure," she cried, enraptured.  "You have
never said it before, Seer Marcous darling, and I must kiss you."

I checked her with my hands on her soft shoulders.

"Only if you promise to marry me."

"Of course," said Carlotta.

She said it as thoughtlessly and light-heartedly as if I had
asked her to come out for a walk.  Again I felt the odd spasm of
pain.  In my late madness I had often pictured the scene: how I
should hold her throbbing beauty in my arms, my senses clouded
with the fragrance of her, and how, in burning words, I should
pour out the litany of my passion.  But to the gods it seemed
otherwise.  No Quaker maiden's betrothal kiss was chaster.  Cold
grew the fever in my veins and the litany died on my lips.


Who and what is she whom I love?  There have been days when her
eyes have carried in their depths the allurements of a sorceress,
when her limbs have woven Venusberg enchantments which it has
taken all my strength to withstand.  But tonight, when I take the
greatest step and claim her as mine till our lives' end, she
yields with the complaisance of an ignorant child and raises up
between us the barrier of her innocence.  When shall I learn the
soul of her?

Well, _jacta est alea_.  The events of to-night have precipitated
our destiny.  In all probability Hamdi is powerless to take her
from my protection, and this marriage is unnecessary as a
safeguard.  I have no notion of the international law on such
points--but at any rate it will make the assurance of her safety
absolute.  No power on earth can take her from me.  Great Heaven!
The thought of her gone forever out of my life brings the cold
sweat to my forehead.  Without her, child, enchantress,
changeling that she is, how could I face existence?

I shall have my heart's desire.  Why, I should be athrill with
the joy and the flame of youth!  I should laugh and sing!  I
should perform the happy antics of love's exuberance!  I should
be transported to the realms where the fairy tales end!

Instead, I sit before a dying fire, as I sat last night, and am
oppressed with the sense of tragedy.  It was not altogether
Carlotta's innocence that formed the barrier between us.  That
which rendered it impassable was Judith's white face.

Judith's white face will haunt my dreams to-night.


                          CHAPTER XVI


October 27th

I do not like living.  It is thoroughly disagreeable.  Today
Judith taunted me with never having lived, and I admitted the
justice of the taunt and regretted in poignant misery the change
from my old conditions.  If to live is to have one's reason cast
down and trampled under foot, one's heart aflame with a besotted
passion and one's soul racked with remorse, then am I living in
good sooth--and I would far rather be dead and suffering the
milder pains of Purgatory.  Men differently constituted get used
to it, as the eels to skinning.  They say _"mea culpa,"_ "damn,"
or _"Kismet,"_ according to their various traditions, and go
forth comforted to their workaday pursuits.  I envy them.  I
enter this exquisite Torture Chamber, and I shriek at the first
twinge of the thumbscrew and faint at the preliminary embraces of
the scavenger's daughter.

I envy a fellow like Caesar Borgia.  He could murder a friend,
seduce his widow, and rob the orphans all on a summer's day, and
go home contentedly to supper; and after a little music he could
sleep like a man who has thoroughly earned his repose.  What
manner of creatures are other men?  They area blank mystery to
me; and I am writing--or have been writing--a sociological study
of the most subtle generation of them that has ever existed!  I
am an empty fool.  I know absolutely nothing.  I can no more
account for the peaceful slumbers of that marvellous young man of
five-and-twenty than I can predicate the priority of the first
hen or the first egg.  I, with never a murder or a seduction or a
robbery on my conscience, could not sleep last night.  I doubt
whether I shall sleep to-night.  I feel as if I shall remain
awake through the centuries with a rat gnawing my vitals.


So unhappy looking a woman as Judith, when I called on her early
this forenoon, I have never beheld.  Gone was the elaborate
coquetry of yesterday; gone the quiet roguishness of yesteryear;
gone was all the Judith that I knew, and in her place stood a
hollow-eyed woman shaking at gates eternally barred.

"I--thought you would come this morning.  I had that lingering
faith in you."

"Your face haunted me all night," I said.  "I was bound to come."

"So, this is the end of it all," she remarked, stonily.

"No," said I.  "It only marks the transition from a very
ill-defined relationship to as loyal a friendship as ever man
could offer woman."

She gave a quivering little shrug of disgust and turned away.

"Oh, don't talk like that 'I can't offer you bread, but I'll give
you a nice round polished stone.'  Friendship!  What has a woman
like me got to do with friendship?"

"Have I ever given you much more?"

"God knows what you have given me," she cried, bitterly.  She
stared out of the window at the sodden street and murky air.  I
went to her side and touched her wrist.

"For heaven's sake, Judith, tell me what I can do."

"What's done is done," she said, between her teeth.  "When did
you marry her?"

I explained briefly the condition of affairs.  She looked at me
hard and long; then stared out of the window again, and scarce
heeded what I said.

"It was to set myself right with you on this point," I added,
"that I have visited you at such an hour."

She remained silent.  I took a few turns about the familiar room
that was filled with the associations of many years.  The piano
we chose together.  The copy of the Botticelli Tondo--the crowned
Madonna of the Uffizi--I gave her in Florence.  We had ransacked
London together to find the Chippendale bookcase; and on its
shelves stood books that had formed a bond between us, and copies
of old reviews containing my fugitive contributions.  A spurious
Japanese dragon in faence, an inartistic monstrosity dear to her
heart, at which I had often railed, grinned forgivingly at me
from the mantel-piece.  I have never realised how closely bound
up with my habits was this drawing-room of Judith's.  I stopped
once more by her side.

"I can't leave you altogether, dear," I said, gently.  "A bit of
myself is in this room."

Her bosom shook with unhappy laughter.

"A bit?"  Then she turned suddenly on me.  "Are you simply dull
or sheerly cruel?"

"I am dull," said I.  "Why do you refuse my friendship?  Our
relation has been scarcely more.  It has not touched the deep
things in us.  We agreed at the start that it should not.  The
words 'I love you' have never passed between us.  We have been
loyal to our compact.  Now that love has come into my life--and
Heaven knows I have striven against it--what would you have me
do?"

"And what would you have me do?" said Judith, tonelessly.

"Forgive me for breaking off the old, and trust me to make the
new pleasant to you."

She made no answer, but stood still staring out of the window
like a woman of stone.  Presently she shivered and crossed to the
fire, before which she crouched on a low chair.  I remained by
the window, anxious, puzzled, oppressod.

"Marcus," she said at last, in a low voice.  I obeyed her
summons.  She motioned me to a chair, and without looking at me
began to speak.

"You said there was a bit of you in this room.  There is
everything of you.  Your whole being is for me in this room.  You
are with me wherever I go.  You are the beginning and end of life
to me.  I love you with a passion that is killing me.  I am an
emotional woman.  I made shipwreck of myself because I thought I
loved a man.  But, as God hears me, you are the only man I have
loved.  You came to me like a breath of Heaven while I was in
Purgatory--and you have been Heaven to me ever since.  It has
been play to you--but to me--"

I fell on my knees beside her.  Each of the low half-whispered
words was a red hot iron.  I had received last night the message
of her white face with incredulity.  I had reviewed our past life
together and had found little warrant in it for that message.  It
could not come from the depths.  It was staggeringly impossible.
And now the impossible was the flaming fact.

I fell on my knees beside her.

"Not play, Judith--"

She put out her hand to check me, and the words died on my lips.
What could I say?

"For you it was a detached pleasant sentiment, if you like; for
me the deadliest earnest.  I was a fool too.  You never said you
loved me, but I thought you did.  You were not as other men, you
knew nothing of the ways of the world or of women or of passion
--you were reserved, intellectual--you viewed things in a queer
light of your own.  I felt that the touch of a chain would fret
you.  I gave you
absolute freedom--often when I craved for you.  I made no
demands.  I assented to your philosophic analysis of the
situation--it is your way to moralise whimsically on everything,
as if you were a disconnected intelligence outside the universe
--and I paid no attention to it.  I used to laugh at you--oh, not
unkindly, but lovingly, happily, victoriously.  Oh, yes, I was a
fool--what woman in love isn't?  I thought I gave you all you
needed.  I was content, secure.  I magnified every little
demonstration.  When you touched my ear it was more to me than
the embrace of another man might have been.  I have lived on one
kiss of yours for a week.  To you the kiss was of no more value
than a cigarette.  I wish," she added in a whisper, "I wish I
were dead!"

She had spoken in a low, monotonous voice, staring haggardly at
the fire, while I knelt by her side.  I murmured some banal
apologia, miserably aware that one set of words is as futile as
another when one has broken a woman's heart.

"You never knew I loved you?" she went on in the same bitter
undertone.  "What kind of woman did you take me for?  I have
accepted help from you to enable me to live in this flat--do you
imagine I could have done such a thing without loving you?  I
should have thought it was obvious in a thousand ways."

The fire getting low, she took up the scoop for coals.
Mechanically I relieved her of the thing and fulfilled the
familiar task.  Neither spoke for a long time.  She remained
there and I went to the window.  It had begun to rain.  A
barrel-organ below was playing some horrible music-hall air, and
every vibrant note was like a hammer on one's nerves.  The
grinder's bedraggled Italian wife perceiving me at the window
grinned up at me with the national curve of the palm.  She had a
black eye which the cacophonous fiend had probably given her, and
she grinned like a happy child of nature.  Men in my position do
not blacken women's eyes; but it is only a question of manners.
Was I, for that, less of a brute male than the scowling beast at
the organ?

The sudden sound of a sob made me turn to Judith, who had broken
down and was crying bitterly, her face hidden in her hands.  I
bent and touched her shoulder.

"Judith--"

She flung her arms around my neck.

"I can't give you up, I can't, I can't, I can't," she cried,
wildly.

For the first time in my life I heard a woman give abandoned,
incoherent utterance to an agony of passion; and it sounded
horrible, like the cry of an animal wounded to death.

A guilt-stricken creature, scarce daring to meet her eyes, I bade
her farewell.  She had recovered her composure.

"Make me one little promise, Marcus, do me one little favour,"
she said, with quivering lip, and letting her cold hand remain in
mine.  "Stay away from her to-day.  I couldn't bear to think of
you and her together, happy, love-making, after what I've said
this morning.  I should writhe with the shame and the torture of
it.  Give me your thoughts to-day.  Wear a little mourning for
the dead.  It is all I ask of you."

"I should have done what you ask without the asking," I replied.

I kissed her hand, and went out into the street.

I had walked but a few blind steps when I became aware of the
presence and voice of Pasquale.

"Coming from Mrs. Mainwaring's?  I am just on my way there to
restore her opera-glasses which I ran away with last night.
What's her number?  I forget.  I dropped in at Lingfield Terrace
to inquire, but found you had already started."

"Seventeen," I answered, mechanically.

"You are not looking well, my good friend," said he.  "I hope
last night has not upset you.  It's all bluff, you know, on the
part of the precious Hamdi."

"I dare say it was," I assented.

"And bluff on your part, too.  I have never given your
imaginative faculties sufficient credit.  It bowled Hamdi out
clean."

"Yes," said I.  "It bowled him out clean."

"Serve him right," said Pasquale.  "He's the wickedest old thief
unhung."

"Quite so," said I, "the wickedest old thief unhung."

Pasquale shook me by the arm.

"Are you a man or a phonograph?  What on earth has happened to
you?"

I think I envied the laughter in his handsome, dark face, and the
careless grace of the fellow as he stood beneath the dripping
umbrella debonair as a young prince, in perfectly fitting blue
serge-he wore no overcoat; mine was buttoned up to the chinand
immaculate suede gloves.

"What is it?" he repeated, gaily.

"I didn't sleep last night," said I, "my breakfast disagreed with
me, and it's raining in the most unpleasant manner."

Even while I was speaking he left my side and darted across the
road.  In some astonishment I watched him for a moment from the
kerb, and then made my way slowly to the other side.  I found him
in conversation with an emaciated, bedraggled woman standing by
an enormous bundle, about three times her own cubic bulk, which
she had rested on the slimy pavement.  One hand pressed a panting
bosom.

"You are going to carry that in your arms all the way to South
Kensington?" I heard him cry as I approached.

"Yes, sir," said the woman.

"Then you shan't.  I'm not going to allow it.  Catch hold of
this."

The umbrella which he thrust out at her she clutched
automatically, to prevent it falling about her ears.  The veto
she received with a wonderment which deepened into stupefaction
when she saw him lift the huge bundle in his arms and stalk away
with it down the street.  She turned a scared face at me.

"It's washing," she said.

Pasquale paused, looked round and motioned her onward.  She
followed without a word, holding the trim silver mounted
umbrella, and I mechanically brought up the rear.  It had all
happened so quickly that I too was confused.  The scanty populace
in the rain-filled street stared and gaped.  A shambling fellow
in corduroys bawled an obscene jest.  Pasquale put down his
bundle.

"Do you want to be sent to hell by lightning?" he asked, with the
evil snarl of the lips.

"No," said the man, sheering off.

"I'm glad," remarked Pasquale, picking up the bundle.  And we
resumed our progress.

Luckily a four-wheeled cab overtook us.  Pasquale stopped it,
squeezed the bundle inside, and held the door open for the
faltering and bewildered woman, as if she had been the authentic
duchessa at Ealing.

"You were saying, Ordeyne," he observed, as the cabman drove off
with three shillings and his incoherent fare, "you were saying
that your breakfast disagreed with you."


In spite of my heaviness of heart, I laughed and loved the man.
There was something fantastically chivalrous in the action;
something superb in the contempt of convention; something
whimsical, adventurous, unexpected; and something divine in the
wrathful pity; and something irresistible in his impudent
apostrophe to myself.  It has been the one flash of comfort
during this long and desolate day.


I have kept my promise to Judith.  I have lunched and dined at
the club, and in the library of the club I have tried to while
away the hours.  I intended this morning to make the necessary
arrangements for the marriage.  After my interview with Judith I
had not the heart.  I put it off till to-morrow.  I have observed
the day as a day of mourning.  I have worn sackcloth and ashes.
I have done such penance as I could for the grievous fault I have
committed.  Carlotta is in bed and asleep.  She went early, says
Antoinette, having a bad headache.  No wonder, poor child.

A few moments ago I was tempted to peep into her room and satisfy
myself that she was not ailing.  A headache is the common
precursor to many maladies.  But I remembered my promise and
refrained.  The cooing notes of the voice would have called me to
her side, and her arms would have been around my neck and I
should have forgotten Judith.


                          CHAPTER XVII


October 28th.

I rose late this morning.  When I went down to breakfast I found
that Carlotta had already gone for her music lesson.

I drove at once to the Temple to see my lawyers and to make
arrangements for a marriage by special license.

I returned at one o'clock.  Stenson met me in the hall.

"I beg your pardon, Sir Marcus, but Mademoiselle hasn't come back
yet."

I waited an uneasy hour.  Such a lengthy absence from home was
unprecedented.  At two o'clock I went round to Herr Stuer in the
Avenue Road--a five minutes' walk.

He entered the sitting-room into which I had been ushered, wiping
his lips.

"I am sorry to disturb you, Herr Stuer," said I, "but will you
kindly tell me when Miss Carlotta left you, this morning?"

"Miss Carlotta came not at all this morning," he replied.

"But it was her regular day?"

"At ten o'clock.  She did not come.  At eleven I have another
pupil.  She has not before missed one lesson."

I flew back home, in an agony of hope that her laughing face
would meet me there and dispel a dread that chilled me like an
icy wind.

There was no Carlotta.

There has been no Carlotta all this awful day.

There will never be a Carlotta again.

I drove to the police station.

"What do you think has happened?" asked the Inspector.

It was only too horribly obvious.  Any man but myself would have
kept her under lock and key and established a guard round the
house.  Any man but myself would have never let her out of his
sight until he had married her, until he had tracked Hamdi and
his myrmidons back to Alexandretta.

"Abduction has happened," I cried wildly.  "Between Lingfield
Terrace and Avenue Road she has been caught, thrust into a closed
carriage, gagged and carried God knows where by the wiliest old
thief in Asia.  He is the Prefect of Police in Aleppo.  His name
is Hamdi Effendi and he is staying at the Hotel Metropole."

The Inspector questioned me.  Heaven knows how I answered.  I saw
the scene.  The waiting carriage.  The unfrequented bit of road.
My heart's darling, her face a radiant flower in the grey
morning, tripping lightheartedly along.  The sudden dash, the
struggle, the swiftly closed door.  It was a matter of a few
seconds.  My brain grew dizzy with the vision.

"You say that he threatened to abduct her?" asked the Inspector.

"Yes," said I, "and a friend of mine promised to kill him.
Heaven grant he keep his promise!"

"Be careful, Sir Marcus," smiled the Inspector.  "Or if there is
a murder committed you will be an accessory before the fact."

I intimated my disregard of the contingency.  What did it matter?
Nothing in the world mattered save the recovery of the light and
meaning of my existence.  My friend's name?  Sebastian Pasquale,
He lived near by in the St. John's Wood Road.

"The best thing you can do, Sir Marcus," said the Inspector, "is
to get hold of Mr. Pasquale and take him with you to Scotland
Yard.  Perhaps two heads will be better than one.  In the
meanwhile we shall communicate with headquarters and make the
necessary inquiries in the neighbourhood."

I drove to St. John's Wood Road, and learned to my dismay that
Pasquale had given up his rooms there a week ago.  All his
letters were addressed to his club in Piccadilly.  I drove
thither.  How has mankind contented itself for these thousands of
years with a horse as its chief means of locomotion?  Oh, the
exasperation I suffered behind that magnified snail!  I dashed
into the club.  Mr. Pasquale had not been there all day.  No, he
was not staying there.  It was against the rules to give members'
private addresses.

"But it's a matter of life and death!" I cried.

"To tell you the truth, sir," said the hall porter, "Mr.
Pasquale's only permanent address is his banker's, and we really
don't know where he is staying at present."

I wrote a hurried line:

"Hamdi has abducted Carlotta.  I am half crazed.  As you love me
give me your help.  Oh, God! man, why aren't you here?"

I left it with the porter, and crawled to Scotland Yard.  The
cabman at my invectives against his sauntering beast waxed
indignant; it was a three-quarter blood mare and one of the
fastest trotters in London.

"She passes everything," said he.

"It is because everything is standing still or going backward or
turned upside down," said I.

No doubt he thought me mad.  Mad as a dingo dog.  The thought of
the words, the summer and the sun sent a spasm of hunger through
my heart.  Then I murmured to myself: "'Save my soul from hell
and my darling from the power of the dog.' Which dog?  Not the
dingo dog."
I verily believe my brain worked wrong to-day.

Great Scotland Yard at last.  I went through passages.  I found
myself in a nondescript room where a courteous official seated at
a desk held me on the rack for half an hour.  I had to describe
Carlotta: not in the imagery wherein only one could create an
impression of her sweetness, but in the objective terms of the
police report.  What was she wearing?  A hat, and jacket, a
skirt, shoes ; of course she wore gloves; possibly she carried a
muff.  Impatient of such commonplace details, I described her
fully.  But the glory of her bronze hair, her great dark brown
eyes, the quivering sensitiveness of her lips; her intoxicating
compound of Botticelli and the Venusberg; the dove-notes of her
voice; all was a matter of boredom to Scotland Yard.  They
clamoured for the colour of her feathers and the material of
which her dress was made; her height in vulgar figures and the
sizes of her gloves and shoes .

"How on earth can I tell you?" I cried in desperation.

"Perhaps one of your servants can give the necessary
information," replied the urbane official.  If I had lost an
umbrella he could not have viewed my plight with more inhuman
blandness!

A miracle happened.  As I was writing a summons to Stenson to
obtain these details from Antoinette and attend at once, a
policeman entered and I learned that my confidential man was at
the door.  My heart leapt within me.  He had tracked me hither
and had come to tell me that Carlotta was safe.  But the first
glance at his face killed the wild hope.  He had tracked me
hither, it is true; but only apologetically to offer what
information might be useful.
"It is a very great liberty, Sir Marcus, and I will retire at
once if I have overstepped my duties, but there are important
details, sir, in catastrophes of this nature with which my
experience has taught me only servants can be acquainted."

There must be a book of ten thousand pages entitled "The Perfect
Valet," dealing with every contingency of domestic life which
this admirable fellow has by heart.  He uttered his Ciceronian
sentence with the gravity of a pasteboard figure in the toy
theatre of one's childhood.

"Can you describe the young lady's dress?" asked the official.

"I have made it my business," said Stenson, "to obtain accurate
information as to every detail of Mademoiselle Carlotta's attire
when she left the house this morning."

I faded into insignificance.  Stenson was a man after the
Inspector's heart.  A few eager questions brought the desired
result.  A dark red toque with a grey bird's wing; a wine-
coloured zouave jacket and skirt, black braided; a dark blue
bodice; a plain gold brooch (the first trinket I had given her
--the occasion of her first clasp of arms around my neck)
fastening her collar; a silver fox necklet and muff; patent
leather shoes and brown suede gloves.

"Any special mark or characteristics?"

"A white scar above the left temple," said Stenson.

Lord have mercy!  The man has lived day by day for five months
with Carlotta's magical beauty, and all he has noticed as
characteristic is the little white scar--she fell on marble steps
as a child--the only flaw, if flaw can be in a thing so
imperceptible, in her perfect loveliness.

"Mademoiselle has also a tiny mole behind her right ear," said
Stenson.

The Inspector's conception of Stenson expanded into an
apotheosis.  He paid him deference.  His pen wrote greedily every
syllable the inspired creature uttered.  When the fount of
inspiration ran dry, Stenson turned to me with his imperturbable,
profoundly respectful air.

"Shall I return home, Sir Marcus, or have you any further need of
my service?"

I bade him go home.  He withdrew.  The Inspector smiled
cheerfully.  "Now we can get along," said he.  "It's a pity Mr.
--Mr. Pasquale" (he consulted his notes) "is out of touch with us
for the moment.  He might have given us great assistance."

He rose from his chair.  "I think we shall very soon trace the
young lady.  An accurate personal description like this, you see,
is invaluable."

He handed me the printed form which he had filled in.  In spite
of my misery I almost laughed at the fatuity of the man in
thinking that those mere unimaginative statistics applicable to
five hundred thousand young females in London, could in any way
express Carlotta.

"This is all very well," said I; "but the first thing to do is to
lay that Turkish devil by the heels."

"You can count on our making the most prompt and thorough
investigation," said he.

"And in the mean time what can I do?"

"Your best course, Sir Marcus," he answered, "is to go home and
leave things in our hands.  As soon as ever we have the slightest
clue, we shall communicate with you."

He bowed me out politely.  In a few moments I found myself in the
greyness of the autumn afternoon wandering on the Thames
Embankment like a lost soul on the banks of Phlegethon.  It
seemed as if I had never seen the sun, should never see the sun
again.  I was drifting sans purpose into eternity.

I passed by some railings.  A colossal figure looming through the
misty air struck me with a sense of familiarity.  It was the
statue of Sir Bartle Frere, and these were the gardens beneath
the terrace of the National Liberal Club.  It was here that I had
first met her.  The dripping trees seemed to hold the echo of the
words spoken when their leaves were green: "Will you please to
tell me what I shall do?"  I strained my eyes to see the bench on
which I had sat, and my eyes tricked me into translating a blurr
at the end of the seat into the ghostly form of Carlotta.  My
misery overwhelmed me; and through my misery shot a swift pang of
remorse at having treated her harshly on that sweet and memorable
afternoon in May.

I turned the corner at Whitehall Place and looked down the
desolate gardens.  The benches were empty, the trees were bare,
"and no birds sang." I crossed the road.

The Hotel Metropole.  The great doors stood invitingly open, and
from the pavement one could see the warmth and colour of the
vestibule.  Here was staying the ArchDevil who had robbed me of
my life.  I stood for a moment under the portico shaking with
rage.  I must have lost consciousness for a few seconds for I do
not remember entering or mounting the stairs.  I found myself at
the bureau asking for Hamdi Effendi.  No, he had not left.  They
thought he was in the hotel.  A page despatched in search of him
departed with my card, bawling a number.  I hate these big
caravanserais where one is a mere number, as in a gaol.  "Would
to heaven it were a gaol," I muttered to myself, "and this were
the number of Hamdi Effendi!"

A lean man rose from a chair and, holding out his hand,
effusively saluted me by name.  I stared at him.  He recalled our
acquaintance at Etretat.  I fished him up from the deeps of a
previous incarnation and vaguely remembered him as a young
American floral decorator who used to preach to me the eternal
doctrine of hustle.  I shook hands with him and hoped that he was
well.

"Going very strong.  Never stronger.  Never so well as when I'm
full up with work.  But you don't hurry around enough in this
dear, sleepy old country.  Men lunch.  In New York all the lunch
one has time for is to swallow a plasmon lozenge in a street-car."

His high pitched voice shrieked bombastic platitude into my ears
for an illimitable time.  I answered occasionally with the fringe
of my mind.  Could my agonised state of being have remained
unperceived by any human creature save this young, hustling,
dollar-centred New York floral decorator?

"Since we met, guess how many times I've crossed the Atlantic.
Four times!"

Long-suffering Atlantic!

"And about yourself.  Still going _piano, piano_ with books and
things?"

"Yes, books and things," I echud.

The page came up and announced Hamdi's intention of immediate
appearance.

"And how is that charming young lady, your ward, Miss Carlotta?"
continued my tormentor.

"Yes," I answered hurriedly.  "A charming young lady.  You used
to give her sweets.  Have you noticed that a fondness for sugar
plums induces an equanimity of character?  It also spoils the
teeth.  That is why the front teeth of all American women are so
bad."

I must be endowed with the low cunning of the fox, who, I am
told, by a swift turn puts his pursuers off the scent.  The
learned term the rhetorical device an _ignoratio elenchi_.  My
young friend's patriotism rose in furious defence of his
countrywomen's beauty.  I looked round the luxuriously furnished
vestibule, wondering from which of the many doors the object of
my hatred would emerge, and my young friend's talk continued to
ruffle the fringe of my mind.

"I'm afraid you're expecting some one rather badly," he remarked
with piercing perceptiveness.

"A dull acquaintance," said I.  "I shall be sorry when his
arrival puts an end to our engaging conversation."

Then the lift door opened and Hamdi stepped out like the Devil in
an Alhambra ballet.

He looked at my card and looked at me.  He bowed politely.

"I did not know whom I should have the pleasure of seeing," said
he in his execrable French.  "In what way can I be of service to
Sir Marcus Ordeyne?"

"What have you done with Carlotta?" I asked, glaring at him.

His ignoble small-pox pitted face assumed an expression of bland
inquiry.

"Carlotta?"

"Yes," said I.  "Where have you taken her to?"

"Explain yourself, Monsieur," said Hamdi.  "Do I understand that
Lady Ordeyne has disappeared?"

"Tell me what you have done with her."

His crafty features grew satanic; his long fleshy nose squirmed
like the proboscis of one of Orcagna's fiends.

"Really, Monsieur," said he, with a hideous leer--oh, words
are impotent to express the ugliness of that face!  "Really,
Monsieur, supposing I had stolen Miladi, you would be the last
person I should inform of her whereabouts.  You are simple,
Monsieur.  I had always heard that England was a country of
arcadian innocence, so unlike my own black, wicked country, and
now--" he shrugged his shoulders blandly, '_j'en suis convaincu_."

"You may jeer, Hamdi Effendi," said I in a white passion of
anger.  "But the English police you will not find so arcadian."

"Ah, so you have been to the police?" said the suave villain.
"You have gone to Scotland--Scotland Place Scotland--n'importe.
They are investigating the affair?  I thank you for the friendly
warning."

"Warning!" I cried, choked with indignation.  He held up a soft,
fat palm.

"Ah--it is not a warning?  Then, Monsieur, I am afraid you have
committed an indiscretion which your friends in Scotland Place
will not pardon you.  You would not make a good police agent.  I
am of the profession, so I know."

I advanced a step.  He recoiled, casting a quick look backward at
the lift just then standing idle with open doors.

"Hamdi Effendi," I cried, "by the living God, if you do not
restore me my wife--"

But then I stopped short.  Hamdi had stepped quickly backward
into the lift, and given a sign to the attendant.  The door
slammed and all I could do was to shake my fist at Hamdi's boots
as they disappeared upwards.

I remember once in Italy seeing a cat playing with a partially
stunned bat which, flying low, she had brought to the ground.
She crouched, patted it, made it move a little, patted it again
and retired on her haunches preparing for a spring.  Suddenly the
bat shot vertically into the air.

I stared at the ascending lift with the cat's expression of
impotent dismay and stupefaction.  It was inconceivably
grotesque.  It brought into my tragedy an element of infernal
farce.  I became conscious of peals of laughter, and looking
round beheld the American doubled up in a saddlebag chair.  I
fled from the vestibule of the hotel clothed from head to foot in
derision.


I am at home, sitting at my work-table, walking restlessly about
the room, stepping out into the raw air on the balcony and
looking for a sign down the dark and silent road.  I curse myself
for my folly in entering the Hotel Metropole.  The damned Turk
held me in the palm of his hand.  He made mock of me to his
heart's content ....  And Carlotta is in his power.  I grow white
with terror when I think of _her_ terror.  She is somewhere,
locked up in a room, in this great city.  My God!  Where can she
be?

The police must find her.  London is not mediaeval Italy for
women to be gagged and carried off to inaccessible strongholds in
defiance of laws and government.  I repeat to myself that she
must come back, that the sober working of English institutions
will restore her to my arms, that my agony is a matter of a day
or two at most, that the special license obtained this morning
and now lying before me is not the document of irony it seems,
and that in a week's time we shall look back on this nightmare of
a day with a smile, and look forward to the future with laughter
in our hearts.

But to-night I am very lonely.  "Loneliness," says Epictetus, "is
a certain condition of the helpless man."  And I am helpless.
All my aid lies in the learning in those books; and all the
learning in all those books on all sides from floor to ceiling
cannot render me one infinitesimal grain of practical assistance.
If only Pasquale, man of action, swift intelligence, were here!
I can only trust to the trained methods of the unimaginative
machine who has set out to trace Carlotta by means of the scar on
her forehead and the mole behind her ear.  And meanwhile I am
very lonely.  My sole friend, to whom I could have turned, Mrs.
McMurray, is still at Bude.  She is to have a child, I
understand, in the near future, and will stay in Cornwall till
the confinement is over.  Her husband, even were he not amid the
midnight stress of his newspaper office, I should shrink from
seeking.  He is a Niagara of a man.  Judith--I can go to her no
more.  And though Antoinette has wept her heart out all day long,
poor soul, and Stenson has conveyed by his manner his respectful
sympathy, I cannot take counsel of my own servants.  I have
gathered into my arms the one-eyed cat, and buried my face in his
fur--where Carlotta's face has been buried.  "That's the way I
should like to be kissed!"  Oh, my dear, my dear, were you here
now, that is the way I should kiss you !

I have gone upstairs and wandered about her room.  Antoinette has
prepared it for her reception to-night, as usual.  The corner of
the bedclothes is turned down, and her night-dress, a gossamer
thing with cherry ribbons, laid out across the bed.  At the foot
lie the familiar red slippers with the audacious heels; her
dressing-gown is thrown in readiness over the back of a chair;
even the brass hot water can stands in the basin--and it is still
hot.  And I know that the foolish woman is wide-awake overhead
waiting for her darling.  I kissed the pillow still fragrant of
her where her head rested last night, and I went downstairs with
a lump in my throat.

Again I sit at my work-table and, to save myself from going mad
with suspense, jot down in my diary* the things that have
happened.  Put in bald words they scarcely seem credible.


* It will be borne in mind that I am writing these actual pages,
afterwards, at Verona, amplifying the rough notes in my diary. M.
O.


A sudden clattering, nerve-shaking, strident peal at the front-
door bell.

I flew down the stairs.  It was news of Carlotta.  It was
Carlotta herself brought back to me.  My heart swelled with joy
as if it would burst.  I knew that as I opened the door Carlotta
would fall laughing, weeping, sobbing into my arms.

I opened the door.  It was only a police officer in plain
clothes.

"Sir Marcus Ordeyne?"

"Yes."

"We have traced the young lady all right.  She left London by the
two-twenty Continental express from Victoria with Mr. Sebastian
Pasquale."


                         CHAPTER XVIII


November 1st.

Five days ago the blow fell, and I am only now recovering; only
now awakening to the horrible pain of it.

I have gone about like a man in a dream.  Blurred visages of men
with far-away voices have saluted me at the club.  Innumerable
lines of print which my eyes have scanned have been destitute of
meaning.  I have forced myself to the mechanical task of copying
piles of rough notes for my History; I have been able to bring
thereto not an atom of intelligence; popes, princes, painters are
a category of disassociated names, less evocative of ideas than
the columns in the Post Office London Directory.  I have stared
stupidly into the fire or at the dripping branches of the trees
opposite my windows.  I have walked the streets in dull misery.
I have sought solace in the Zoological Gardens.

There is a kindly brown bear who pleads humanly for buns, and her
I have fed into a sort of friendship.  I stand vacantly in front
of the cage finding in the beast an odd companionable sympathy.
She turns her head on one side, regards me with melting brown
eyes, and squatting on her haunches thrusts her paws beseechingly
through the bars.  Just so did Carlotta beseech and plead.  I
have bemused myself with gnostic and metempsychosic speculations.
Carlotta as an ordinary human being with an immortal soul did not
exist, and what I had known and loved was but a simulacrum of
female form containing an elemental spirit doomed to be ever
seeking a fresh habitat.  It was but the lingering ghost of the
humanised shell of air that was seen at Victoria station.  The
fateful spirit, untrammelled by the conventions of men and
actuated by destinies unintelligible to mortal mind, had informed
the carcass of this little brown bear, which looks at me so
strangely, so coaxingly, with Carlotta's eyes and Carlotta's
gestures.  I asked her yesterday to come back to me.  I said that
the house was empty; that the rooms ached for the want of her.  I
pleaded so passionately and the eyes before me so melted that I
thought her heart was touched.  But in the midst of it all
another visitor came up and the creature uttered a whining plaint
and put out her paw for buns--by which token I felt indeed that
it was Carlotta.


I have accepted the blow silently.  As yet I have told no one.  I
have made no inquiries.  When a man is betrayed by his best
friend and deserted by the woman he loves, time and solitude are
the only comforters.  Besides, to whom should I go for comfort?
I have lived too remote from my kind, and my kind heeds me not.

Not a line has reached me from Carlotta.  She has gone out of my
life as lightly and as remorselessly as she went out of Hamdi
Effendi's; as she went, for aught she knew, out of that of the
unhappy boy who lured her from Alexandretta.  If she heard I was
dead, I wonder whether she would say: "I am so glad!"

Whether the flight was planned between them, or whether Pasquale
waylaid her on her way to the Avenue Road and then and there
proposed that she should accompany him, I do not know.  It
matters very little.  She is gone.  That is the one awful fact
that signifies.  No explanations, pleas for forgiveness could
make me suffer less.  Were she different I might find it in my
heart to hate her.  This I cannot do.  How can one hate a thing
devoid of heart and soul?  But one can love it--God knows how
blindly.  So I have locked the door of Carlotta's room and the
key is in my possession.  It shall not be touched.  It shall
remain just as she left it--and I shall mourn for her as for one
dead.

For Pasquale--if I were of his own reversionary type, I should
follow him half across Europe till we met, and then one of us
would kill the other.  In one respect he resembles Carlotta.  He
is destitute of the moral sense.  How else to solve the enigma?
How else to reconcile his flamboyant chivalry towards the
consumptive washer-woman with the black treachery towards me, in
which even at that very moment his mind must have been steeped?
I knew that he had betrayed many, that where women were concerned
no considerations of honour or friendship had stood between him
and his desires; but I believed--for what reason save my own
egregious vanity, I know not--that for me he had a peculiar
regard.  I believed that it was an idiosyncrasy of this wolf to
look upon my sheepfold as sacred from his depredations.  I was
ashamed of any doubts that crossed my mind as to his loyalty, and
did not hesitate to thrust my lamb between his jaws.  And while
he was giving the lie direct to my faith, I, poor fool, in my
despair was seeking madly for his aid in the deliverance of my
darling from the power of the dog.

I have felt I owe Hamdi Effendi an apology; for it is well that,
in the midst of this buffoon tragedy I find myself playing, I
should observe occasionally the decencies of conduct.  But, on
the other hand, was he not amply repaid for moral injury by the
pure joy he must have felt while torturing me with his banter?
For all the deeper suffering, I am conscious of writhing under
lacerated vanity when I think of that grotesque and humiliating
blunder in the Hotel Metropole.


November 2d.

I have received news of the death of old Simon McQuhatty.  In my
few lucid moments of late I had been thinking of seeking his
kindly presence.  Now Gossip Death has taken him out across the
moor.  Now, dear old pagan, he is

            "Rolled round in earth's diurnal course
               With rocks and stones and trees."


November 3d.

Antoinette came up this morning with a large cardboard box
addressed to Carlotta.  The messenger who brought it was waiting
downstairs.

"I came to Monsieur to know whether I should send it back," said
Antoinette, on the verge of tears.

"No," said I, "leave it here."

From the furrier's label, I saw that the box contained some furs
I had ordered for Carlotta a fortnight ago--she shivered so, poor
child, in this wintry climate.

"But, Monsieur," began Antoinette, "the poor angel--"

"May want it in heaven," said I.

The good woman stared.

"We'll be like the ancient Egyptians, Antoinette," I explained,
"who placed food and wine and raiment and costly offerings in the
tombs of the departed, so that their shades could come and enjoy
them for all eternity.  We'll have to make believe, Antoinette,
that this is a tomb, for one can't rear a pyramid in London,
though it is a desert sufficiently vast; and the little second
floor room is the inner sanctuary where the body lies in silence
embalmed with sweet spices and swathed in endless bands of
linen."

"But Mademoiselle is not dead?" cried Antoinette, with a shiver.
"How can Monsieur talk of such things?  It makes me fear, the way
Monsieur speaks."

"It makes me fear, too, Antoinette," said I, gravely.

When she had gone I took the box of furs upstairs and laid it
unopened on Carlotta's bed and came away, relocking the door
behind me.


November 9th.

I have formed a great resolution.  I have devoted the week to the
envisagement of things, and while I lay awake last night the
solution came to me as something final and irrevocable.
Mistrusting the counsels of the night, when the brain is unduly
excited by nervous insomnia, I have applied the test of a day's
cold reason.

I have broken a woman's heart.  I have spurned the passionate
love of a woman who has been near and dear to me; a woman of
great nature; a woman of subtle brain who has been my chosen
companion, my equal partner in any intellectual path I chose to
tread; a sensitive lady, with all the graciousness of soul that
term conveys.  Heaven knows what a woman can see in me to love.
I look in the glass at my bony, hawk-like face, on which the
stamp of futility seems eternally set, and I am seized with a
prodigious wonder; but the fact remains that to me unlovely and
unworthy has been given that thing without price, a woman's love.
I remember Pasquale laughing merrily at this valuation.  He said
the love of women was as cheap as dirt, and the only use for it
was to make mud pies.  The damned cynical villain!  "Always
reflect," said he, on another occasion, "that although a man may
be as ugly as sin, the probability is that he is just as
pleasant.  Beauties will find hitherto unsuspected amenities in
Beasts till the end of time."  But I am such a poor and sorry
Beast, without the chance of a transformation; a commonplace
Beast, dull and didactic; a besotted, purblind, despicable Beast!
Yet Judith loved me.  Instead of thanking on my knees the high
gods for the boon conferred, I rejected it, and went mad for
craving of the infinitely lesser glory of Carlotta's baby lips
and gold-bronze hair.  I have broken Judith's heart.  I will
expiate the crime I have committed.

Expiate the crime!  The realisation of the meaning of the words
covers me with shame.  As if what I propose will be a sorry
penance!  That is the danger of a man thinking, as I have always
done, in metaphors.  It has given me my loose, indirect views of
life, of myself, of those around me.  If I had advice to offer to
a young man, I should say: "Learn to think straight."  Expiate,
indeed!  I will go to her and make confession.  I will tell her
that awful loneliness is crushing my soul.  I will kneel before
her and beseech her of her great woman's goodness to give me her
love again, and to be my helpmeet and my companion who will be
cherished with all that there is of loyalty in me to her life's
end.  She will pity me a little, for I have suffered, and I will
pity her tenderly, in deep sincerity, and our life together will
be based on that all-understanding which signifies all-
forgiveness.  And it shall be a real life together.  I used to
smile, in a superior way, at her dread of solitude.  Heaven
forgive me.  I did not then know its terrors.  It comforted for
the first few benumbed days, but now it is gathering around me
like a mysterious and appalling force.  I crave the human
presence in my home.  I need the woman's presence in my heart.

We shall live together then as man and wife, in defiance of the
world.  Let the moralists blame us.  We shall not care.  It will
make little social difference to Judith, and as for myself, have
I not already inflicted public outrage on society?  does not my
Aunt Jessica regard me as a wringer of the public conscience, and
does not my Cousin Rosalie mention me with a shudder of horror in
her tepid prayers?  If I really give them cause for reprobation
they will be neither wiser, nor better, nor sorrier.  And if the
baronetcy flickers out in unseemly odour, I for one shall know
that the odour is sweeter than that wherein it was lighted, when
my great-grandfather earned the radiance by services rendered at
Brighton to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent.  This is the
only way in which I can make Judith reparation, the only way in
which I can find comfort.  We shall travel.  Italy, beloved of
Judith, is calling me.  Probably Florence will be our settled
home.  I shall give up this house of madness.  The clean sweet
love of Judith will purify my heart of this poisonous passion,
and in the end there will be peace.


I have taken Carlotta's photograph from its frame and cast it
into the fire, thus burning her for her witchcraft.  I watched
the flames leap and curl.  The last look she gave me before they
licked away her face had its infinite allurement, its devilish
sorcery so intensified in the fierce yellow light, that the
yearning for her clutched me by the throat and shook me through
all my being.


But it is over now.  I have done with Carlotta.  If she thinks I
am going to sit and let the wind which comes over Primrose Hill
drive me mad like Gastibelza, _l'homme a la carabine_, in Victor
Hugo's poem, she is vastly mistaken.  From this hour henceforth I
swear she is nothing to me; I will eat and sleep and laugh as if
she had never existed.  Polyphemus, curled up in Carlotta's old
place on the sofa, regards me with his sardonic eye.  He is an
evil, incredulous, mocking beast, who a few centuries ago would
have been burned with his late mistress

I am sane and happier now that I have come to my irrevocable
determination.

To-morrow I go to Judith.


                          CHAPTER XIX


November 10th.


I had to ring twice before Judith's servant opened the flat door.

"Mrs. Mainwaring is engaged just at present, Sir Marcus."

"Ask her if I can come in and wait, as I have something of
importance to say to her."

She left me standing in the passage, a thing that had never
before occurred to me in Judith's establishment, and presently
returned with her answer.  Would I mind waiting in the dining-
room?  I entered.  The table was littered with sheets of her
statistical work and odd bits of silk' and lining.  A type-writer
stood at one end and a sewing-machine at the other.  On the
writing-desk by the window, in the midst of a mass of letters and
account-books, rested a large bowl filled with magnificent blooms
of white and yellow chrysanthemums.  A volume of Dante lay open
face downwards on the corner.  It did my heart good to see this
untidiness, so characteristic of Judith, so familiar, so
intimate.  She had taken her trouble bravely, I reflected.  The
ordinary daily task had not been left undone.  Through all she
had preserved her valiant sanity.  I felt rebuked for my own loss
of self-control.

I was about to turn away from the litter of the desk, when my eye
caught sight of an envelope bearing a French stamp and addressed
in Pasquale's unmistakable handwriting.  As there seemed to be a
letter inside, I did not take it up to examine it more closely.
The glance was enough to assure me that it came from Pasquale.
Why should he be corresponding with Judith?  I walked away
puzzled.  Was it a justification, a confession, a plea to her as
my friend to obtain my forgiveness?  If there is one thing more
irritating than another it is to light accidentally upon a
mystery affecting oneself in a friend's correspondence.  One can
no more probe deeply into it than one can steal the friend's
spoons.  It seems an indiscretion to have noticed it, an
unpardonable impertinence to subject it to conjecture.  In spite
of my abhorring the impulse of curiosity, the sweeping,
flaunting, swaggering handwriting of Pasquale worried me.

Judith came in, looking much as she had done on the occasion of
my last visit, worn and anxious, with a strange expression in her
eyes.

"I am sorry to have kept you waiting," she said, extending a
lifeless hand.

I raised it to my lips.

"I would have gladly waited all day to see you, Judith," I said.

"Really?"

She laughed in an odd way.

"And idle speech from me to you at the present time would be an
outrage," I answered.  "I have passed through much since I saw
you last."

"So have I," said Judith.  "More than you imagine.  Well," she
continued as I bowed my head accepting the rebuke, "what have you
got so important to tell me?"

"Much," said I.  "In the first place you must be aware of what
has happened, for I can't help seeing there a letter from
Pasquale."

She glanced swiftly at the desk and back again at me.

"Yes," she replied, "he is in Paris."

I was amazed at her nonchalance.

"Has he told you nothing?"

"Perhaps Sir Marcus Ordeyne would like to see his letter," she
said, ironically.

"You know perfectly well that I would not read it," said I.

Judith laughed again, and rolled her handkerchief into a little
ball between her nervous fingers.

"Forgive me," she said.  "I like to see the _grand seigneur_ in
you now and then.  It puts me in mind of happier days.  But about
Pasquale--the only thing he tells me is that he is not able to
execute a commission for me.  He told me on the night he drove me
home that he was going to Paris, and I asked him to get me some
cosmetic.  Carmine Badouin, if you want to know.  I have got to
rouge now before I am fit to be seen in the street.  I am quite
frank about it."

"Then you know nothing of Carlotta?" I cried.

"Carlotta?"

"She eloped with that double-dyed, damned, infernal villain, the
day after I saw you."

Judith looked at me for a moment, then closed her eyes and turned
her head away, resting her hand on the table.  My indignation
waxed hot against the scoundrel.  How dare he write casual
letters to Judith about Carmine Badouin with his treachery on his
conscience?  I know the terms of flippant grace in which the
knave couched this precious epistle.  And I could see Carlotta
reading over his shoulder and clapping her hands and cooing: "Oh,
that is so funny!"

When I had told Judith the outlines of the story, pacing up and
down the little room while she remained motionless by the table,
she put out her hand to me, and in a low voice, and with still
averted eyes said that she was sorry, deeply sorry.  Her tone
rang so true and loyal that my heart throbbed with quick
appreciation of her high nature, and I wrung her outstretched
hand.

"God bless you, Judith," I cried, fervently.  "Bless you for your
sweet sympathy.  Be sorry for me only as for a man who has passed
through the horrors of delirium.  But for me as I stand before
you now, I ask you not to be sorry.  I have come to bring you, if
I can, dear Judith, a measure of gladness, perhaps of happiness."

She wrenched herself free from me, and a terrified cry of
"Marcus!" checked my dithyrambic appeal.  She shrank away so that
a great corner of the dining-table separated us, and she stared
at me as though my words hats been the affrighting utterance of a
madman.

"Marcus!  What do you mean?" she cried, with an unnatural
shrillness in her voice.

"I mean," said I, "I mean--I mean that 'crushed by three days'
pressure, my three days' love lies slain.'  Time has withered him
at the root.  I have buried him deep in unconsecrated ground,
like a vampire, with a stake through his heart.  And I have come
back to you, Judith, humbly to crave your forgiveness and your
love--to tell you I have changed, dear--to offer you all I have
in the world if you will but take it--to give you my life, my
daily, hourly devotion.  My God!" I cried, "don't you believe
me?"

She still stared at me in a frightened way, leaning heavier on
the table.  Her lips twitched before they could frame the words

"Yes, I believe you.  You have never lied to me."

"Then in the name of love and heaven," I cried, "why do you look
at me like that?"

She trembled, evidently suppressing something with intense
effort, whether bitter laughter, indignation or a passionate
outburst I could not tell.

"You ask why?" she said, unsteadily.  "Because you seem like the
angel of the flaming vengeance."

At these astounding words it was my turn to look amazed.

"Vengeance?" I echud.  "What wrong have you done me or any living
creature?  Come, my dear," and I moved nearer by seating myself
on the corner of the table, close to the type-writer, and leaning
towards her, "let us look at this thing soberly.  If ever a man
had need of woman I have need of you.  I can live alone no
longer.  We must share one home henceforth together.  We can snap
our fingers at the world, you and I.  If you have anything to say
against the proposal, let us discuss it calmly."

Judith's slender figure vibrated like a cord strung to
breaking-point.  Her voice vibrated.

"Yes, let us discuss it calmly.  But not here.  The sight of you
sitting in the middle of my life, between the sewing-machine and
the type-writer, is getting on my nerves.  Let us go into the
drawing-room.  There is an atmosphere of calm there--" her voice
quavered in a queer little choke--"of sabbatical calm."

I slid quickly from the table and put my arm round her waist.

"Tell me, Judith, what is amiss with you."

She broke away from me roughly, thrusting me back.

"Nothing.  A woman's nothing, if you understand what that means.
Come into the drawing-room."

I opened the door; she passed out and I followed her along the
passage.  She preceded me into the drawing-room, and I stayed for
a moment to close the door, fumbling with the handle which has
been loose for some months.  When I turned and had made a couple
of steps forward, I halted involuntarily under the shock of a
considerable surprise.

We were not alone.  Standing on the hearth-rug, his hands behind
his back, his brows bent on me benevolently was a man in clerical
attire.  He looked ostentatiously, exaggeratedly clerical.  His
clerical frock-coat was of inordinate length; his boots were
aggravatingly clump-soled; by a very large white tie, masking the
edges of a turned-down collar, he proclaimed himself Evangelical.
An otherwise clean-shaven florid face was adorned with brown
side-whiskers growing rather long.  A bald, shiny head topped a
fringe of brown hair.

I stared at this unexpected gentleman for a second or two, and
then, recovering my self-possession, looked enquiringly at
Judith.

"Sir Marcus," she said, "let me introduce my husband, Mr. Rupert
Mainwaring."

Her husband!  This benevolent Evangelical parson her husband!
But the brilliant gallant who had dazzled her eyes?  The
dissolute scoundrel that had wrecked her life?  Where was he?
Dumfounded, I managed to bow politely enough, but my stupefaction
was covered by Judith rushing across the room and uttering a
strange sound which resolved itself into a shrill, hysterical
laugh as she reached the door which she opened and slammed behind
her.  I heard her scream hysterically in the passage; then the
slam of another door; and the silence told me that she had shut
herself in her bedroom.  Disregarding the new husband's presence,
I rang the bell, and the servant who had left her kitchen on
hearing the scream entered immediately.

"Go to your mistress.  She is ill," said I.

The maid hurriedly departed.  The parson and I looked at one
another.

"I am afraid," said I, "that my presence is unhappily an
intrusion.  I hope to make your better acquaintance on another
occasion."

"Oh, please don't go," said he, "my wife is only a little upset
and will soon recover.  I beg that you will excuse her.  Besides,
I should like to have a talk with you."

He offered me a chair, my own chair, the comfortable, broad-
seated Empire chair I had given Judith as a birthday present
years ago, the chair in which I had invariably sat.  He did it
with the manner of the master of the house, a most courteous
gentleman.  The situation was fantastic.  Some ingenious devil
must have conceived it by way of pandering to the after-dinner
humour of the high gods.  As I sat down I rubbed my eyes.  Was
this brown-whiskered, bald-headed clerical gentleman real?  The
rubbing of my eyes dispelled no hallucination.  He was flesh and
blood and still regarded me urbanely.  It was horrible.  The
desertion of the scoundrelly husband, who I thought was lost
somewhere in the cesspool of Europe, was the basis, the sanction
of the relations between Judith and myself; and here was this
reverend, respectable man apologising for his wife and begging me
to be seated in my own chair.  The remark of Judith's that I
should find sabbatical calm in the drawing-room occurred to me,
and I had to grip the arms of the chair to prevent myself from
joining Judith in her hysterics.

The appearance of the husband in his legendary colours of
rascality would have been a shock.  The sudden scattering of
my plans for Judith's happiness I should have viewed with
consternation.  But it would have been normal.  For him, however,
to appear in the guise of an Evangelical clergyman, the very last
kind of individual to be associated with Judith, was, I repeat,
horribly fantastic.

"I believe, Sir Marcus," said he, deliberately parting the tails
of his exaggerated frock-coat and sitting down near me, " that
you are a very great friend of my wife."

I murmured that I had known Mrs. Mainwaring for some years.

"You are doubtless acquainted with her unhappy history."

"I have heard her speak of it," said I.

"You must then share her surprise in seeing me here to-day.  I
should like to assure you, as representing her friends and
society and that sort of thing, as I have assured her, that I
have not taken this step without earnest prayer and seeking the
counsel of Almighty God."

I am by no means a bigoted pietist, but to hear a person talk
lightly about seeking the counsel of Almighty God jars upon my
sense of taste.  I stiffened at the sanctimonious tone in which
the words were uttered.

"You have without doubt very good reasons for coming back into
the circle of her life," said I.

"The best of all reasons," he replied, caressing a brown whisker,
"namely, that I am a Christian."

I liked him less and less.

"Is that the reason, may I ask, why you remained away from her
all these years?"

"I deserve the scoff," said he: "Those were days of sin.  I
deserve every humiliation that can be put upon me.  But I have
since found the grace of God.  I found it at three o'clock in the
afternoon on the eighth of January, eighteen hundred and--"

"Never mind the year," I interrupted.

My gorge rose.  The man was a sanctimonious Chadband.  He had
come with nefarious designs on Judith's slender capital.  I saw
knavery in the whites of his upturned eyes.

"I should be glad," I continued quickly, "if you would come to
the point of the conversation you desire to have with me.  I
presume it concerns Mrs. Mainwaring.  She has reconciled herself
to circumstances and has found means to regulate her life with a
certain measure of contentment and comfort until now, when you
suddenly introduce a disturbing factor.  You appear to wish to
tell me your reasons for doing so--and I can't see what the grace
of God has to do with it."

He sprang to his feet and shot out both hands in the awkward
gesture of an inspired English prophet.

"But it has everything to do with it!  It is the beginning and
end, core and kernel, root and branch of the matter.  It is the
grace of God that checked me in the full career of my wickedness.
It is the grace of God that has lighted my path ever since to
holier things.  It is the grace of God that has changed me from
what I was to what I am.  It is the grace of God that has brought
me here to ask pardon on my knees of the woman I have wronged.
The grace of God and of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, which came
upon me in a great light on that January afternoon even as it did
upon Saul of Tarsus.  The grace of God has everything to do with
it."

"Mr. Mainwaring," said I, "such talk is either blasphemous or--"

He did not allow me to state the alternative, but caught up the
word in a great cry.

"Blasphemous!  Why, man alive! for what are you taking me?  Do
you think this is some unholy jest?  Can't you see that I am in
deadly earnest?  Come and see me where I live--" he caught me by
the arm, as if he would drag me away then and there, "among the
poor in Hoxton.  You scarcely know where Hoxton is--I didn't when
I was a man of ease like yourself--that wilderness of grey
despair where the sun of the world scarcely shines, let alone the
Light of God.  Come and see for yourself, man, whether I am
lying!"

Then it dawned upon me that the man had been talking from
innermost depths, that he was almost terrifyingly sincere.

"I must ask you to pardon me," said I, "for appearing to doubt
your good faith.  You must attribute it to my entire
unfamiliarity with the terms of Evangelical piety."

He looked at me queerly for a moment, and then, in the quiet
tones of a man of the world, said, smiling pleasantly:

"Very many years ago I had the pleasure of knowing your
grandfather, the late baronet.  May I say that you remind me of
him?"

I have never heard an apology more gracefully and tactfully
accepted.  For an unregenerate second he had become the gallant
Rupert Mainwaring again, and showed me wherein might lie his
attraction.

"Pray be seated," said he, more gravely, "and allow me to
explain."

He unfolded his story.  It was well, said he, that an outsider (I
an outsider in that familiar room!) should hear it.  I was at
liberty to make it public.  Indeed, publicity was what he
earnestly craved.  As far as my memory serves me, for my wits
were whirling as I listened, the following is an epitome of his
narrative:

He had been a man of sin--not only in the vague ecclesiastical
sense, but in downright, practical earnest.  He had committed
every imaginable crime, save the odd few that lead to penal
servitude and the gallows.  He drank, he betrayed women, he
cheated at cards, he had an evil reputation on the turf.  His
companions were chosen from the harlotry and knavery of the
civilised world.  He had lured Judith from her first husband,
thus breaking his heart, poor man, so that he died soon after.
He had married Judith, and had deserted her for a barmaid whom in
her turn he had abandoned.  He wallowed, to use his own
expression, in the trough of iniquity.  He was, as I had always
understood, about as choice a blackguard as it would be possible
to meet outside a gaol.  One day a pretty girl, whom he had been
following in the street, unwittingly enticed him into a
revivalist meeting.  He described that meeting so vividly that
had my stupefied mind been capable of fresh emotions, I too might
have been converted at second hand by the revivalist preacher.
He repeated parts of the sermon, rose to his feet, waved his
arms, thundered out the commonplaces of Salvation Army
Christianity, as if he had made an amazing theological discovery.
It was pathetic.  It was ludicrous.  It was also inconceivably
painful.  At last he mopped his forehead and shiny head.

"Before that meeting was over I was on my knees praying beside
the girl whom I had designed to ruin.  I went into the streets a
converted man, filled with the grace of God.  I resolved to
devote my life to saving souls for Christ.  My old habits of sin
fell away from me like a garment.  I studied for the ministry.  I
am now in deacon's orders, and I am the incumbent of a little tin
mission church in Hoxton.  God moves in a mysterious way, Sir
Marcus."

"He is generally credited with doing so," said I, stupidly.

"You are doubtless wondering, Sir Marcus," he went on, "why I
placed such a long interval between my awakening and my
communicating with my wife.  I set myself a period of probation.
I desired to be assured of God's will.  It was essential that I
should test my strength of purpose, and my power of making a
life's atonement, as far as the things of this world are
concerned, for the wrongs I have inflicted on her.  I have come
now to offer her a Christian home."

I looked at him open-mouthed.

"Do you expect Judith to go and live with you as your wife, in
Hoxton?" I asked, bluntly.

"Why not?  She is my wife."

I rose and walked about the room in agitation.  Somehow such a
contingency had not entered my bewildered head.

"Why not, Sir Marcus?" he repeated.

"Because Judith isn't that kind of woman at all," I said,
desperately.  "She doesn't like Hoxton, and would be as much out
of place in a tin-mission church as I should be in a cavalry
charge."

"God will see to her fitness," said he, gravely.  "To him all
things are easy."

"But she has considerable philosophic doubt as to his personal
existence," I cried.

He smiled prophetically and waved away her doubt with a gesture.

"I have no fears on that score," he observed.

"But it is preposterous," I objected once more, changing my
ground; "Judith craves the arrears of gaiety and laughter which
your conduct caused life to leave owing to her.  She loves bright
dresses, cigarettes, and wine and the things that are anathema in
an Evangelical household."

"My wife will find the gaiety and laughter of holiness," replied
the fanatic.  "She will not be stinted of money to dress herself
with becoming modesty; and as for alcohol and tobacco, no one
knows better than myself how easy it is to give them up."

"You seem as merciless in your virtues as you were in your
vices," said I.

"I have to bring souls to Christ," he answered.

"That doesn't appear to be the way," I retorted, "to bring them."

"Pray remember, Sir Marcus," said he, bending his brows upon me,
"that I did not ask you for suggestions as to the conduct of my
ministry."

"The general methods you adopt in the case of your congregation,"
said I, "are matters of perfect indifference to me.  But I cannot
see Judith imprisoned for life in a tin church without a protest.
Your proposal reminds me of the Siennese who owed a victorious
general more than they could possibly repay.  The legend goes  that
they hanged him, in order to make him a saint after his death by
way of reward.  I object to this sort of canonisation of Judith.
And she will object, too.  You seem to leave her out of account
altogether.  She is mistress of her own actions.  She has a will
of her own.  She is not going to give up her comfortable flat off
the Tottenham Court Road in order to dwell in Hoxton.  She won't
go back to you under your conditions."

He smiled indulgently and held out his hand to signify that the
interview was over.

"She will, Sir Marcus."

Was there ever such a Torquemada of a creature?  I respect
religion.  I respect this man's intense conviction of the reality
of his conversion.  I can respect even the long frock coat and
the long brown whiskers, which in the case of so dashing a
worldling as Rupert Mainwaring were a deliberate and daily
mortification of the flesh.  But I hold in shuddering detestation
"the thumb-screw and the rack for the glory of the Lord," which
he cheerfully contemplated applying to Judith.

"Why on earth can't you let the poor woman alone?" I asked,
ignoring his hand.

"I am doing my duty to God and to her," said he.

"With the result that you have driven her into hysterics."

"She'll get over them," said he.

"I wish you good-day," said I.  "We might talk together for a
thousand years without understanding each other."

"Pardon me," he retorted, with the utmost urbanity.  "I
understand you perfectly."

He accompanied me to the dining-room where I had left my hat and
umbrella, and to the flat door which he politely opened.  When it
shut behind me I felt inclined to batter it open again and to
take Judith by main force from under his nose.  But I suppose I
am pusillanimous.  I found myself in the street brandishing my
umbrella like a flaming sword and vowing to perform all sorts of
Paladin exploits, which I knew in my heart were futile.

I hailed an omnibus in the Tottenham Court Road, and clambered to
the top, though a slight drizzle was falling.  Why I did it I
have not the remotest idea, for I abhor those locomotive engines
of exquisite discomfort.  I had no preconceived notion of
destination.  It was a moving thing that would carry me away from
the Tottenham Court Road, away from the Rev. Rupert Mainwaring,
away from myself.  I was the solitary occupant of the omnibus
roof.  The rain fell, softly, persistently, soakingly.  I laughed
aloud.

I recognised the predestined irony of things that at every corner
checks the course of the ineffectual man.


CBAPTER XX


November 11th.

I wrote Judith a long letter last night, urging her to disregard
the forfeited claims of her husband and to join her life
definitely with mine.  I was cynical enough to feel that if such
a proceeding annoyed the Rev. Rupert Mainwaring it would serve
him right.  The fact of a man's finding religion and abjuring
sack does not in itself exculpate him from wrongs which he has
inflicted on his fellow-creatures in unregenerate days.
Mainwaring deserved some punishment of which he seemed to have
had remarkably little; for, mind you, his sack-cloth and ashes at
Hoxton, although sincerely worn, are not much of a punishment to
a man in his exalted mood.  Now, on the contrary, Judith deserved
compensation, such as I alone was prepared to offer her in spite
of conventional morality and the feelings of the Rev. Rupert
Mainwaring.  Indeed, it seemed to be the only way of saving
Judith from being worried out of her life by frantic appeals to
embrace both himself and Primitive Christianity.  Her position
was that of Andromeda.  Mine that of an unheroic Perseus,
destined to deliver her from the monster--the monster whose lair
is a little tin mission church in Hoxton.

I wrote the letter in one of those periods of semi-vitality when
the pulses of emotion throb weakly, and sensitiveness is dulled.
To-day I have felt differently.  My nerves have been restrung.
Something ironically vulgar, sordidly tragic has seemed to creep
into my relations with Judith.

To my great surprise Judith brought her answer in person this
evening.  Sometimes they give me bread and sometimes a bit of soup
... But alas the house the house! Already we have five months
and one day to bring us the few junk we have in the street ...

My God, my God, what will become of us! - Oh God! ¡Unhappy woman!
- Visit cried so low.

Cyril pulled out a coin pocket and handed it. - What have you given
him - he asked his wife to hear. - A penny. - Give more. He took
a hard and gave it. - What have you given? - A hard. - Give
more. We have no children. God has protected us so far and will
continue to protect us. Cirilo threw the wallet and hand him a
bill of fifty pesetas. The woman, shocked and red with emotion and
joy, could not find words to thank.

Deshacía be in fervent blessings. - God will pay you, lady, God
will pay!

Blessed be the time that her mother has given birth!

Blessed milk has mamado ... - Go to our home tomorrow.

Now give my husband a card - said Visit -.

We have friends who are in a better position than us and we can put
her husband. Iban and away and they still remained the voice of
the poor woman who screamed incessantly: - God bless you, ladies!
Do not pass by his house ... unfortunately!

May God protect you, lady, may God protect you and you do not see
the land that makes you see the sky!

- I'm watching - Visit muttered while two tears sliding her
cheeks. The car awaited them below. Mounted on it and again
went to the bulb.

Before entering the cabinet that they had booked gave orders to
also serve lunch to the coachman. Went on, and a comedorcito nice
overlooking the river did the honors at the luncheon, which had
pre-selected dishes.

The walk, the air had awakened the appetite. Visit drank a
little more of the ordinary and was transposed a few moments on a
sofa, while her husband was reading the newspaper he had sent to
buy. - C'mon, now with the music elsewhere!

- Cried out to the blind rising and shaking laziness. - What
part? - Cyril asked laughing. - Adonde provide the best in
Madrid, the circus of Prince Alfonso.

And so it was verified quickly. They heard the concert on Sunday
afternoon there was celebrating spring and at night return to their
home, but not before giving a return to the confectionery
desserts buy food. - Good day ...! ¡Superior, daughter, superior!
- Cyril exclaimed after eating, reclined comfortably in an
armchair and sipping a cup of coffee a while sucking a sweet
box of snuff that the day before he had given Reynoso. - Have
you ever fun? Have you been happy with your wife - you answered
tour that also took coffee sitting next to him on a low chair. -
With my wife I would be happy if I lived in a zahurda eating black
bread and cabbage.

And while bent to kiss her hair. There was a long pause
as they both seemed that his taste enternecidos. - You know what
I'm thinking - she uttered after groping for his hand and squeezing
gently -.

Well I think if I was not blind you do not like as much
as you want ... I think you and I do not want me in this way. So
that we would not be so happy. - Perhaps it is as you think -
he replied again bent to kiss her -. But the life that would
regain the sight. - And I'm also thinking that the coming
winter we will spend even more than this, because we don Germán
Madrid and Elena, and even closer to us and Tristan Clara.
.. You see, you come to live in four steps from here, on the
streets of Arenal. Every night the theater is boring and
expensive: some will go to his house, or they come to ours. What
happy, right? What tertulitas intimate, pleasant, we will have
four here! At that moment the bell rang the door and the maid was
announcing to the gentleman Tristan. This appeared behind her.
Cyril and the face of the Tour is lit with a smile of joy.
The latter died, however, to note the serious face and entered
the youth. - Good night. When you hear the greeting, the smile
faded Also visit his fine ear for blind had noticed something
strange in the timbre voice. After asking for the health of a
few sentences and surface Tristan addressed quickly, but
emotionally calm tone, the great issue that drove him there.
- The object that brings me to this time (apart from the pleasure
I always see them in the department and with you) is a bit
strange, a little annoying ... perhaps also a bit ridiculous ...
But anyway, in this current world is not all nice and
unfortunately: you have to play as well as annoying and ridiculous,
and I turn to the present. Would like your kindness to tell me
if in the time it takes to have friendly relationship incurred
his displeasure by any act or omission that has some trouble, if
you have seen something in me that was not under an open and
fair friendship, or if you believe that they inadvertently caused
any injury. Visit Cyril and remained silent, stunned at this
strange speech. - I know - repeated after a moment, emphasizing
more words - if, in the course which hitherto has continued our
friendship you have any grievance against me. - I think the idle
question, Tristan - Cirilo said recovered -.

You know too that never gave us reason to anything other
than to estimate how much it is worth and regarded as one
of our good and loving friends. - I have not caused any damage of
an indirect way, that is, without me mind - absolutely none that I
know of. - Okay ...

Why did you conspire against me and make war? - Conspire against
you ...? ¿Making war? - Yes. Why hurt me in the shadows and working
cautiously in order to thwart my coming marriage?

- What are you saying - I understand - Tristan uttered unintentionally
made by Cyril amazement - that the affection they link to
relatives of Mr. Reynoso (even though the family is far away)
I do see the marriage of Clara and fancy little advantage over the
other for her relief.

I also understand that inspires me a secret antipathy ... their
boredom, they charge.

That happens quite often with those that circumstances impose
on us the obligation to treat ...

What I can not understand is that they have waited to the last
minute to make Clara please provide a link to show more illustrious
or his hostility to me ... It is true - said with bitter
irony - that _lo disorder is being managed and what is
actually deshace_. - Let me tell you, my friend Tristan, I do
not understand what you mean even a step you just give visiting
this sudden and unusual ... ie if I see you are angry and
feels that we have done some wrong in regard to his next marriage,
but more running I do not know where that grievance.

The same tour that I and we are so happy we feel so good that in
the wedding this time we talked about it with joy and that we
felicitábamos ... - Well, well, let it! - Tristan said with
asperity . Those words seemed to him the height of hypocrisy
and impudence of the .-- I need not tell you that the joy or
sadness of you as far as my wedding is concerned, but in themselves
are very important for me to have secondary. Can I get married
or remain single and live well or bad and be happy or unhappy with
any of these things a decisive influence on the happiness or sadness
of you ...

But if they do not affect their feelings can influence the actions.
We are all exposed to the sad life to heartbreak, to the wiles of
our enemies ... and the betrayal of our friends. - See what you're
saying, sir Aldama!

- Cyril handed losing patience and incorporated into the seat -.

You consider that these misgivings are you offending me and I've
not given any reason for this. - 'What is fixed is disorder and
what is done is rolled back - repeated smiling sarcastically Tristan
-.

So far I have said nothing offensive ... Has been nothing but
complaints from those who feel wounded. But I do not respond to
that later can not say something that really bothers him.
- Well, then immediately cut the conversation!

- Cyril exclaimed leaning with tense hands on the table to get up -.

You think a man of honor I know that regret having offended
those who ask no means to repair the offense. tour was also
set in place strong and Tristan did the same. - It is not noble
defense of his weakness to give vent to bitterness unwarranted hurt
and who never has done to you. - I repeat that I have not been
passed by the imagination never cause you any harm and that only a
malicious gossip somehow believe could make them and put so stubborn.
-- stubborn!

¡Stubborn! - Tristan cried hoarse voice and the anger -.

No gossip, no malicious. I can not believe that they have
bad intentions or is he trying to kid my own ears. In the end
everything is discovered.

For those who do not proceed with the loyalty world is transparent.

To see is to let the only thing that I came here, which is equal
to telling you that because I do not cheat and that they deserve
their scorn as false testimony of friendship ...

Now you are with God.

I have declared war ...

Okay, fight. Fight it, you in the shade, and I face to face and in
the light of day.

Good night.

And he had taken his hat on a chair so violently encasquetó like a
hurricane and left of the room.

Visit, stupor which had prevented him utter a word in this brief
scene, dropped back into his chair and began to mourn. - Oh dear,
one day as we had spent so happy!

Cirilo came together and responded to the forehead with bitterness:
- You see, dear, that no day can be called happy until they sound
the twelve o'clock.

IX trip Gustavo NÚÑEZ YOUR FRIEND AND ANOTHER SAD Next day received
a letter from Cyril Tristan.

Deserve him in terms that if his anger came from certain words that
were repeated insistence on having a conversation the previous
night, which is arranged _lo disorder is and what is actually
deshace_ Visit indeed remember talking to any given Marquis Lake.

These words refer to the project that was marquesa leaving
to go to Madrid to live with her son to his possessions of
Extremadura.

Lake said the marquis could testify to this if questioned.
Tristán already repented of his violence. Although the letter
did not entirely allay his doubts, he suggested that there might
be an error.

On the other hand understood the damage that could cause precipitation
in the minds of the Reynoso family. Cirilo responded to giving
excuses and save requesting reservation of what happened.
He came on the anniversary of the marriage of Reynoso, who always
celebrated with joy.

Only the second year ceased to be made by the recent death of Mrs.
Damaso, mother of Elena. Tristan kept his commitment to pushing
his friend Nuñez Sotillo previously announced long ago.

Clara received him with all he was capable of expansion as
circumspect. It was a close friend of one her heart and strove
to appear talkative and affectionate.

Helena, however, prevented him, and welcomed all the seriousness
that it was susceptible infant temperament and noisy.

Balanced so that the effort by both natures came to similar results.

But not spent much time with the different conditions of both
recover their rights. The live chat, ironic, sparkling Núñez
began to cause secret joy of a gentle lady Reynoso, his face began
to light up seriously and soon her pretty mouth to erupt into
loud laughter celebrating the charm of the painter almost always
malicious.

In contrast to the sweet, grave face of Clara quickly noted the
concern and the tedium that is so frivolous talk, so piquant
phrase is produced. Reynoso had put the table for lunch in an
island that was at the center of one of the two ponds in the large
estate purchased by him and added to Sotillo existed.

It was the smallest and was almost always empty, and she grew in
thickets of reeds and singing frogs. The friars, to whom the house
belonged in ancient times, had built for his pleasure on this
island a great gazebo made of granite columns as a Greek temple.
They were standing columns, but the roof was gone. Don
Germán, who had artistic instinct, refused to restore any of
the ruins that the time had caused grief in the construction
of the friars and all people of taste will applaud. The remains
of the abbey, the church, the gazebo and the walls were covered
with weeds and exhaled the sweet melancholy of things past. To
reach the islet of the gazebo was a stone bridge factory
sumptuous as all the other old buildings, but also deteriorated,
the floor, formed by large granite blocks, some of whom had been
freed. Around the colonnade crumbling some growing acacias and
everything overrun by grass and weeds. It was strange to contrast
the large table decorated to modern tastes, shining dishes, the
servants of fractions, with sadness and despair of those
ruins. Nunez found it highly original and warmly congratulated
by Elena had not only on this idea. They sat at the table over
the family, Tristan and Núñez, Cyril and visit the Marquesita
Lake, his sister the Countess of Peñarrubia that was happening a
few days at the Escorial with his mother and her daughter Araceli
Escudero, Narciso Luna, a popular and elegant in
the world away from Madrid, close friend of the Countess of
Peñarrubia, galeon Ruiz Díaz, firstborn of the Dukes of Real-Greeting
belonging to the summer's Escorial and lived in a lavish hotel
of its property, two friends of his sister Clara and her age about
the pharmacist Vilches, cousin of Helena, with his wife, the peasant
Barragan and a few other guests to the number of thirty.

The expense of the conversation hiciéronlo Tristan, Gustavo Núñez,
and the Countess of Peñarrubia Narciso Luna. The last three
were known and were dealt with closely, and Gustavo Narciso
and partners are dedicated tuteaban de la Peña. He was witty and
worship as we know, this is a vulgar man who often
substituted ingenuity with shamelessness. Impossible to know that
the years had: the same thing could be a young thirty year old who
renovated an old man of sixty, the pretty face creased, but no
channels in the beard or hair, so that at first glance the effect
of lead was stained, the voice and appearance crapuloso taken. -
Makes a number of time can not see a picture of you, Núñez - said
the Countess of Peñarrubia, please contact the painter laureate. -
Oh heavens!

What about you, Countess? - He exclaimed with shock comic fuss. -
What do you mean? - Replied the smiling lady. - I want to
tell you that I felt safe being a person of that kind of terrible
inquisition. .. But I see that it is not you ... The question that
has just become my shadow is black, is my punishment. I'm
not going anywhere that does not resonate in my ears ... Leave
home in the morning, a few steps and I am familiar with a gentleman
that I close my hand warmly. After a moment gets a little back
and exclaimed with an accent tough and hearty: - Man, that long
ago I do not see any picture of you! - Last year I painted for an
exhibition of Fine Arts -- contesto .-- And since last year you
had not painted any other - No, sir .-- But what will you be
painting .-- Nor ... The appearance of that gentleman, my
acquaintance, shrinks, his eyes take on a serious expression that
gives me sadness and awe .-- So what are you doing? - I do not
know what to say, hesitate and tremble. Unbraided a Countess
carcajada, showing some of the gold teeth mudded. - I am sorry and
I apologize humbly. You are right, there is nothing more
stupid that oversee the work of artists.

Glad of the outcome of their efforts when we offer them and not
pursue our haste. Peñarrubia of the bordering and, as we
know, in the forties. Ajada pretty face, though not devoid
of beauty, painted faces and dyed blond hair. - The
dominance of utilitarian ideas in our society - said Tristan -
the fever of achievement, social replaced happiness individual
tends to turn the machine into man. Once its role under the division
of labor it requires unremitting efforts. The industry must
address day and night in the manufacture of its products, the
military must never lose sight of the sword, he should not go a day
without delivering his speech, out there in the mining pit will
start the day and night of metal within the earth and the poet
composed his cabinet since the dawn God odes, elegies and epitalamios.
- But friend Tristan - Countess replied - I have heard that it works
is the only happy man. - True , that is what is being said.

Its inability to free itself from the working men have agreed
some time now that it is not a penalty, as stated in the Bible,
but an enjoyment. And they reason as follows: "If we aburriríamos
not trabajásemos. Then the work is not a curse but a blessing.
"The conclusion is not legitimate, as is observed at first sight.
The only thing I can say is that boredom is a shame for us more
than the job. - Well, I do not ever get bored, but when I'm cold
and the doctor makes me sweat in bed - Narciso Luna said: y The
sentence was welcomed by her friend to Peñarrubia. - Call you an
exceptional man - said Tristan guiding a disdainful look - because
life, for almost all humans, always oscillates between pity and
boredom .

When we are not dominating the tedium we are in full catastrophe.
- With your permission, dear Tristan - Núñez said - for me the
world is a very interesting comedy. The only thing I find
is that in the end fell a little ... the viewer. - Then there are
certain resources - Narciso Luna said directing a loving the
countess .-- As a young woman of twenty-five years makes it
happy. When we come to an old bottle of sherry in the same
age makes us the same effect. - But you hear - said one of the
girls from the Real-ear to greet his sister -, Narciso Luna is
young -- Of course - answered the other -. Have you not heard
that Marcela Peñarrubia has twenty-five years?

The two were rushed a laugh as crazy as all eyes turned towards them.

The Peñarrubia, which she suspected was the cause, they stuck a
long, cold look.

But the girls could not be suppressed ... Do not be ...! Come
on, who could not! - For me, with your permission as well, dear
Gustavo - Tristan said adopting the same jocular tone - I do not
think that life is an interesting comedy. I think that is
shocking and a tragedy or a farce not always funny. In the
first case we should leave the theater early. Strong emotions
Turban digestion. In the second we must strive to laugh ...
even to avoid losing money in the locality. - And our host,
the man whose happy marriage celebrated today, what you think
of life? - said the targeting of Peñarrubia Reynoso. - As I
had to struggle with her child almost from the respect and honor
like the old fighters.

Generally speaking ill of life those who are friendly shows from
the beginning of his career. Could it be that all men are
born with a hole for the trouble and not sedate empty when we
got to fill it again? I do not know, but I am convinced that there
is hardly any man whom God has not provided at some point in your
life means to a peaceful and secure existence, but few know how
to use it. We deliver high winds closed in like a wineskin Eolo
Ulysses King: we could walk through life without severe
setbacks and get to death without severe discomfort, but our
selfishness, our negligence or our curiosity excites us to unleash
the wineskin. Then the winds rushed out and dragged us through
to a thousand misfortunes and conflicts. Tristán was believed
touched by these words, and taking seriously, said security
impertinente: - All men of high spirit carried within it a great
fund melancholy.

The circumstances make this fund is manifested in one way or another.
When a man faces serious obstacles, envy, slander, hypocrisy
or destitution, has been in a violent and sometimes tragic, others
are soft or resignation of bitter irony. When a happy set of
circumstances not encountered in his life with no serious obstacles
that fund and therefore is believed to be there. It is a mistake.

There is always melancholy because this is the very marrow of
existence. - In good time you are melancholy men of high spirit -
Reynoso said - and that heritage is the joy of those who do not
reach certain heights.

But I think we are entitled to ask them not to disturb her with
vulgar hypochondria our existence, we do not agüen the party.
Although uttered these words in jocular tone, Elena, who knew her
husband, found in the inflection of the voice a little cholera.
In fact, Don was aware of the German scene of Tristan with his
friend and relative Cyril. The visit had been _en secreto_ Elena
and it also _en secreto_ him. For this reason our men began to
feel uneasy about the fate of his sister. If not for love, yet
frantic, that it professed to her fiancé might have thought
of wrecking her marriage. Helen was quick to cut the conversation.
- C'mon, enough philosophy! - Exclaimed with an accent cuddly -.

I am the gift in this day and nobody takes care of me for nothing.
If it were not for Núñez, I think I would have already died of
hunger and thirst.
Thus between two cowardices, one of which I must choose, stood I,
like the ass of Buridan.  I lit another cigarette and excogitated
the problem.  I smoked two cigarettes, walking up and down that
vast, chill apartment, while the air grew sickly sweet with the
smell of almonds, which intensified the physical repugnance the
first faint odour had occasioned.  I began to shiver with cold.
The stove had burned out before I entered, and I had not
considered it worth while to have it filled for the few minutes
that would remain to me to live.  I had not reckoned on the ass's
bundles of cowardice.

"I may as well be warm," thought I, "while I prove to my complete
satisfaction that it is more cowardly to live than to die.  There
is no very great hurry."

I caught up a travelling-rug with which I had tried to soften the
asperities of an imitation Louis XV couch, and throwing it over
my shoulders, resumed my pilgrimage.  I soon lost myself in the
problem and did not notice a corner of the rug gradually slipping
down towards the floor.

"I'll do it!" I cried at last, making a sudden dive towards the
table.  But the ironical corner of the rug had reached the
ground.  I stepped on it, tripped, and instinctively caught the
table to steady myself.  The table, a rickety gueridon,
overbalanced, and away rolled my uncorked phial of prussic acid
and fell into a hundred pieces on the tessellated floor.

"_Solvitur_," said I, grimly, "_ambulando_."

Looking back now, I am inclined to treat myself tenderly.
Whether I should have drunk the poison, if the accident had not
occurred, I cannot say.  At the moment of my rush I intended to
do so.  After the catastrophe, which I attributed to the curse of
ineffectuality that pursued me, I must confess that I was glad.
Not that life looked more attractive than before, but that the
decision had been taken out of my hands.  I could not go about
the shops of Verona buying prussic acid or revolvers or metres of
stout rope.  And my razors (without Stenson's care) were
benignantly blunt, and I would not condescend to braces.  I
groaned and pished and pshawed, but as it was written that I was
to live, I resigned myself to a barren and theoryless existence.

After a day or two the vital instinct asserted itself more
strongly.  I became inspired by an illuminating revelation.  I
had a preliminary aim in life.  I would go out into the world in
search of a theory.  When found I would apply it to the
regulation of the score and a half years during which I might
possibly expect to remain on this planet.  I must take my chances
of it leading me to the corpse of another Polyphemus.

As it struck me I should not find my theory in Italy, I packed up
my belongings and hastened from Verona.  At Naples I picked up a
Messageries Maritimes steamer and began a circular tour in the
Levant.  At Alexandretta I went ashore, and inquired my way to
the dwelling of the Prefect of Police.  I did not call on Hamdi
Effendi.  But I wandered round the walls and wondered in a moody,
heart-achey way where it was that Carlotta sat when Harry came
along and whistled her like a tame falcon to his arm.  It was a
white palace of a house with a closed balcony supported on rude
corbels and tightly shuttered.  At the back spread a large garden
surrounded by the famous wall.  There was no doubt that Hamdi was
a wealthy personage, and that Carlotta's nurture had been as
gentle as that of any lady in Syria.  But the place wherein
Carlotta's childhood had been sheltered had an air of
impenetrable mystery.  I stood baffled before it, as I had stood
so often before Carlotta's soul.  The result of this portion of
my search was the discovery, not of a new theory, but of an old
pain.  I went back to the ship in a despondent mood, and caused
deep distress to one of the gentlest creatures I have ever met.
He was a lean, elderly German, who no matter what the occasion or
what the temperature wore a long, tight-buttoned frock-coat, a
narrow black tie, and a little bluish-grey felt hat adorned with
a partridge's feather which gave him an air of forlorn
rakishness.  His name was Doctor Anastasius Dose, and he spent a
blameless life in travelling up and down the world, on behalf of
a Leipsic firm of which he was a member, in search of rare and
curious books.  For there are copies of books which have a well-
known pedigree like famous jewels, and whose acquisition, a
matter of infinite tact, gives rise, I was told by Herr Dose, to
the most exquisite thrill known to man.  He brought me on that
morose afternoon a copy of the "Synonima," in Italian and French,
of St. Fliscus, printed by Simon Magniagus of Milan in 1480, and
opened the vellum covers with careful fingers.

"In all the assemblage of human atoms that inhabit this vessel,"
said he, "there is but one who is imbued with reverence for the
past and a sense of the preciousness of the unique.  I need not
tell you, Herr Baronet, who are a scholar, that of this book only
two copies exist in this ink-sodden universe.  One is in the
University Library of Bologna; the other is before your eyes.  It
is also the only book known to have been printed by Magniagus.
See the beautiful, small Roman type--a masterpiece.  Ach, Herr
Baronet! to have accomplished one such work in a lifetime, and
then to sit among the blessed saints and look down on earth and
know that the two sole copies in existence are cherished by the
elect, what a reward, what eternal happiness!"

I turned over the pages.  The faint perfume of mouldy lore
ascended and I remembered the smell of the "Histoire des
Uscoques" in the Embankment Gardens.

"The _odor di femina_ in the nostrils of the scholar," said I.

"_Famina?_  Woman?" he cried, scandalised.

"Yes, my friend," said I.  "All things sublunar can be translated
into terms of woman.  St. Fliscus wrote because he hadn't a wife;
Simon Magniagus stopped printing because he got married and
devoted his existence to reproducing himself instead of St.
Fliscus."

"Ach, that is very interesting," said he.  "Could you tell me the
date of Magniagus's marriage?"

"I never heard of him till this moment, my dear Herr Doctor.  But
depend upon it, he was either married or was going to be married,
and she ran away from him and left him without the heart to print
for posterity, and when he took his seat among the saints she
said she was so glad; he was a stupid old ink-sodden fellow!"

He departed sorrowingly from the deck, clasping the precious
volume to his heart.  Allusive or discursive speech scared him
like indecency; and I had used his gem but as a peg whereon
flauntingly to hang it.  It took me three days to tame him and to
induce him to show me another of his treasures, recently acquired
in Athens.  Ioannes Georgius Godelmann's _Tractate de Lamiis_,
printed by Nicholas Bassaeus of Frankfurt.  I read him Keats's
poem about the young lady of Corinth, of which he had never heard.
His mental attitude towards it was the indulgent one of an old
diplomatist towards a child's woolly lamb.  For him literature
had never existed and printing ended in the year 1600.  But I was
sorry when he left me at Constantinople, where he counted on
striking the track of a Bohemian herbal, printed at Prague, and
never more to be read by any of the sons of man.  In the summer
he was going book-hunting in Iceland.  By chance I have learned
since that he died there.  Peace to his ashes!  For aught I could
see he dwelt in a mild stupor of happiness, absorbed in the
intoxication of a tremulous pursuit.  I wondered whether his soul
contained that antidote--the _odor di femina_.  Perhaps he met it
at Reykjavic and he died of dismay.

I thought that my landing at Alexandretta was alone responsible
for the continuance of my dotage, and hoped that fresh scenes
would banish Carlotta's distracting image.  But no, it was one of
the many vain reflections on which I based a false philosophy.
Whether in Beyrout, or the land of the "sweet singer of
Persephone," or Alexandria, or on the Cannebiere of Marseilles,
or in the queer half-Orient of Algiers whither a restless pursuit
of the Identical led me, or in Lisbon, or in the mountainous
republic of Andorre, where I hoped to find primitive wisdom and
to shape a theory from first principles, and whence I was
ironically driven by fleas--whether on land or sea, in cities or
in solitudes, the vanished hand harped on my heartstrings and
the voice that was still (as far as I was concerned) cooed its
dove-notes into my ears.

I remember overhearing myself described on a steamboat by a
pretty American girl of sixteen, as "a quaint gentle old guy who
talks awful rot which no one can understand, and is all the time
thinking about something else."  My sudden emergence from the
companion-way, where I was lighting a cigarette, brought red
confusion into the young person's cheeks.

"How old do you think I am?" I asked.

"Oh, about sixty," quoth the damsel.

"I'm glad I'm quaint and gentle, even though I do talk rot," said
I.

With the resourcefulness of her nation she linked her arm in mine
and started a confidential walk up and down the deck.

"You are just a dear," she remarked.

She could not have said more to Anastasius Dose had he been
there; as far as I can recollect he must just then have been
dying of the Inevitable in Iceland.  Perhaps the few months had
brought me to resemble him.  Instinctively I put my hand to my
head to reassure myself that I was not wearing a rakish little
soft felt hat with a partridge-feather, and I reflected with some
complacency that my rimless pince-nez did not give me the owlish
appearance produced by Anastasius Dose's great round, iron-rimmed
goggles.  From such crumbs of vanity are we sometimes reduced to
take comfort.

"I just want to know what you are," said my young American friend.

Shall I confess my attraction?  She brought a dim suggestion of
Carlotta.  She had Carlotta's colouring and Carlotta's candour.
But there the resemblance stopped.  The grey matter of her brain
had been distilled from the air of Wall Street, and there were
precious few things between earth and sky of which she hadn't
prescience.

"I'm a broken-down philosopher," said I.

" Oh, that's nothing.  So is everybody as soon as they get sense.
What did you make your money in?"

"I've not made any money," I answered, meekly.

"I thought all people who were knighted in your country had made
piles of money."

"Knighted!" I exclaimed.  "What on earth do you think a quaint
old guy like myself could possibly have done to get knighted?"

"Then you're a baronet," she said, severely.

"I assure you it is not my fault."

"I thought all baronets were wicked.  They are in the novels.
Somehow you don't look like a baronet.  You ought to have a black
moustache and an eyeglass and smoke a cigar and sneer.  But, say,
how do you fill up the time if you do nothing to make money?"

"I am going through the world," said I, "on an adventurous quest,
like a knight--or a baronet, if you will--of the Round Table.  I
am in quest of a Theory of Life."

"I guess I was born with it," cried young New York.

"I guess I'll die without finding it," said I.


London again.  My quiet house.  Antoinette and Stenson.  The
well-ordered routine of comfort.  My books.  The dog's-eared
manuscript of the "History of Renaissance Morals," unpacked by
Stenson and hid in its usual place on the writing-table.  Nothing
changed, yet everything utterly different.

A growing distaste for the forced acquaintanceships of travel and
a craving for home brought me back.  Save perhaps in health I had
profited little by my journeyings.  My bodily shell formed part
of strange landscapes and occurred in fortuitous gatherings of
men, but my heart was all the time in my Mausoleum by the
Regent's Park.  I was drawn thither by a force almost magnetic,
irresistible.  My two domestics welcomed me home, but no one
else.  Only my lawyers knew of my arrival.  With them alone had I
corresponded during the many months of my absence.  Stay; I did
write one letter to Mrs. McMurray while I was at Verona, in reply
to an enquiry as to what had become of Carlotta and myself.  I
answered courteously but briefly that Carlotta had run away with
Pasquale and that I should be abroad for an indefinite period.
But not even a letter from my lawyers awaited me.  I thought
somewhat wistfully that I would willingly have paid six and eight
pence for it.  But the feeling was momentary.

Then began a queer, untroubled life.  Without definite resolve I
became a recluse, living forlornly from day to day.  Like a bat I
avoided the outer sunshine and took my melancholy walks at night.
I had a pride in cherishing the habit of solitude.  Were it not
that I entertained a real dislike of roots and water and the damp
and manifold discomforts of a cave, with which form of habitat
the ministrations of Stenson and Antoinette would have been
inconsistent, I should have gone forth into the nearest approach
to a Thebaid I could discover.  I was, in fact, touched by the
mild mania of the hermit.  My club I never entered.  A line drawn
from east to west, a tangent at the lowest point of the
Zoological Gardens formed the southern boundary of my wanderings.
Once I spied in the distance that very kind soul, Mrs. McMurray,
and rushed into a providential omnibus, so as to avoid
recognition.  My History remained untouched.  The glamour
of theRenaissance had vanished.  For occupation I read the
Neo-Platonists, Thaumaturgy, Demonology and the like, which I had
always found a fascinating although futile study.  I regretted my
bowing acquaintance with modern science, which forbade my setting
up a laboratory with alembics and magic crystals wherewith to
conduct experiments for the finding of the Elixir Vitae and the
Philosopher's Stone.

I seldom read the newspapers.  I had an idea, like an eminent
personage of the period, that a sort of war was going on, but it
failed to interest me greatly.  I shrank from the noise of it.

"Monsieur," said Antoinette, "will get ill if he does not go out
into the sunshine."

"Monsieur," said I, "regards the sunshine as an impertinent
intrusion into a soul that loves the twilight."

If I had made the same remark to an Englishwoman, she would have
pitied me for a poor, half-witted gentleman.  But Antoinette has
her nation's instinctive appreciation of soul-states, and her
sympathy was none the less comprehending when she shook her head
mournfully and said that it was bad for the stomach.

"My good Antoinette," I remarked, harking back in my mind to a
speculation of other days, "if you go on worrying me in this
manner about my stomach, I will build a tower forty feet high in
the back garden, and live on top, and have my meals sent up by a
lift, and never come down again."

"Monsieur might as well be in Paradise," said Antoinette.

"Ah," said I.  And I thought of the bottle of prussic acid with
mingled sentiments.

All through these many months I had Judith dwelling, a pale
ghost, in the back of my mind.  We had parted so finally that
correspondence between us had seemed impertinent.  But although I
had not written to her, no small part of the infinite sadness
that had fallen upon my life was the shadow of her destiny.
Sweet, wine-loving Judith!  How many times did I picture her
sitting pinched and wistful in the little tin mission church at
Hoxton!  Had I, Marcus Ordeyne, condemned her to that
penitentiary?  Who can hold the balance of morals so truly as to
decide?

At last I received a letter from her on the anniversary of our
parting.  She had found salvation in a strange thing which she
called duty.  "I am fulfilling an appointed task," she wrote,
"and the measure of my success is the measure of my happiness.  I
am bringing consolation to a wayward and tormented spirit.  A
year has swept aside the petty feminine vanities, the opera-
glasses, so to speak, through which a woman complacently views
her influence over a man, and it has cleared my vision.  A year
has proved beyond mortal question that without me this wayward
and tormented spirit would fail.  I hold in my hands the very
soul of a man.  What more dare a woman ask of the high gods?  You
see I use your metaphors still.  Dearest of all dear friends, do
not pity me.  Beyond all the fires of love through which one
passes there is the star of Duty, and happy the individual who
can live in its serenity,"

This was astonishingly like the Theory of Life which I set out
from Verona to seek, and which had hitherto eluded me.  It was
not very new, or subtle, or inspiring.  But that is the way of
things.  No matter through what realms of the fantastic you may
travel, you arrive inevitably at the commonplace.


                          CHAPTER XXII


I answered Judith's letter.  After the long silence it seemed, at
first, strange to write to her; but soon I found myself opening
my heart as I had never done before to man or woman.  The fact
that, accident aside, we were never to meet again, drew the
spiritual elements in us nearer together, and the tone of her
letter loosened the bonds of my natural reserve.  I told her of
my past year of life, of the locked memorial chamber upstairs, of
the madness through which I had passed, of my weary pursuit of
the Theory, and of my attitude towards her solution of the
problem.  Having written the letter I felt comforted, knowing
that Judith would understand.

I finished it about six o'clock one afternoon, and shrinking from
giving it to Stenson to post, as it was the first private letter
I had written since my arrival in London, I took it myself to the
pillar-box.  The fresh air reproached me for the unreasonable
indoor life I had been leading, and invited me to remain outside.
It was already dark.  An early touch of frost in the November air
rendered it exhilarating.  I walked along the decorous,
residential roads of St. John's Wood feeling less remote from my
kind, more in sympathy with the humdrum dramas in progress behind
the rows of lighted windows.  Now and then a garden gate opened
and a man in evening dress, and a woman, a vague, dainty mass of
satin and frills and fur, emerged, stood for a moment in the
shaft of light cast by the open hall-door beyond, which framed
the white-capped and aproned parlour-maid, and entering a waiting
hansom, drove off into the darkness whither my speculative fancy
followed them.  Now and then silhouettes appeared upon the
window-blinds, especially on the upper floors, for it was the
dressing hour and the cares of the day were being thrown aside
with the workaday garments.  In one house, standing far back from
the road, the drawing-room curtains had not been drawn.  As I
passed, I saw a man tossing up a delighted child in his arms, and
the mother standing by. _Ay de mi!_  A commonplace of ten
thousand homes, when the man returns from his toil.  Yet it moved
me.  To earn one's bread; to perpetuate one's species; to create
duties and responsibilities; to meet them like a brave man; to
put the new generation upon the right path; to look back upon it
all and say, "I have fulfilled my functions," and pass forth
quietly into the eternal laboratory--is not that Life in its
truth and its essence?  And the reward?  The commonplace.  The
welcome of wife and children--and the tossing of a crowing babe
in one's arms.  And I had missed it all, lived outside it all.  I
had spoken blasphemously in my besotted ignorance of these sacred
common things, and verily I had my recompense in a desolate home
and a life of about as much use to humanity as that of St. Simeon
Stylites on top of his pillar.

So I walked along the streets on the track of the wisdom which
Judith had revealed to me, and I seemed to be on the point of
reaching it when I arrived at my own door.

"But what the deuce shall I do with it when I get it?" I said, as
I let myself in with my latch-key.

I had just put my stick in the stand and was taking off my
overcoat, when the door of the room next the diningroom opened,
and Antoinette rushed out upon me.

"Oh, Monsieur, Monsieur!" she cried, wringing her hands.  "Oh,
Monsieur!  How shall I tell you?"

The good soul broke into sobbing and weeping.

"What is the matter, Antoinette?" Z asked.

"Monsieur must not be angry.  Monsieur is good like the Bon Dieu.
But it will give pain to Monsieur."

"But what is it?" I cried, mystified.  "Have you spoiled the
dinner?"

I was a million miles from any anticipation of her answer.

_"Monsieur-she has come back!"_

I grew faint for a moment as from a blow over the heart.
Antoinette raised her great tear-stained face.

"Monsieur must not drive her away."

I pushed her gently aside and entered the little room which I had
furnished once as her boudoir.

On the couch sat Carlotta, white and pinched and poorly clad.  At
first I was only conscious of her great brown eyes fixed upon me,
the dog-like appeal of our first meeting intensified to
heart-breaking piteousness.  On seeing me she did not rise, but
cowered as if I would strike her.  I looked at her, unable to
speak.   Antoinette stood sobbing in the doorway.

"Well?" said I, at last.

"I have come home," said Carlotta.

"You have been away a long time," said I.

"Ye-es," said Carlotta.

"Why have you come?" I asked.

"I had no money," said Carlotta, with her expressive gesture of
upturned palms.  "I had nothing but that."  She pointed to a tiny
travelling bag.  "Everything else was at the Mont de Piete--the
pawnshop--and they would not keep me any longer at the pension.
I owed them for three weeks, and then they lent me money to buy
my ticket to London.  I said Seer Marcous would pay them back.
So I came home."

"But where--where is Pasquale?" I asked.

"He went five, six months ago.  He gave me some money and said he
would send some more.  But he did not send any.  He went to South
Africa.  He said there was a war and he wanted to fight, and he
said he was sick of me.  Oh, he was very unkind," she cried with
the quiver of her baby lips.  "I wish I had never seen him."

"Are you married?"

"No," said Carlotta.

"Damn him!" said I, between my teeth.

"He was going to marry me, but then he said it did not matter in
Paris.  At first he was so nice, but after a little--oh, Seer
Marcous dear, he was so cruel."

There was a short silence.  Antoinette wept by the door, uttering
little half-audible exclamations _"la pauvre petite, le cher
ange!"_

Carlotta regarded me wistfully.  I saw a new look of suffering in
her eyes.  For myself I felt numb with pain.

"What kind of a pension were you living in?" I asked, unutterable
horrors coming into my head.

"It was a French family, an old lady and two old daughters, and
one fat German professor.  Pasquale put me there.  It was very
respectable," she added, with a wan smile, "and so dull.  Madame
Champet would scarcely let me go into the street by myself."

"Thank heaven you did not fall into worse hands," said I.

Carlotta unpinned her old straw hat, quite a different garment
from the dainty head-wear she delighted in a year before, and
threw it on the couch beside her.  A tress of her glorious bronze
hair fell loose across her forehead, adding to the woebegone
expression of her face.  She rose, and as she did so I seemed to
notice a curious change in her.  She came to me with extended
hands.

"Seer Marcous--" she whispered.

I took her hands in mine.

"Oh, my dear," said I, "why did you leave me?"

"I was wicked.  And I was a little fool," said Carlotta.

I sighed, released her, walked a bit apart.  There was a blubber
from the egregious old woman in the threshold.

"Oh, Monsieur is not going to drive her away."

I turned upon her.

"Instead of standing there weeping like a fountain and doing
nothing, why aren't you getting Mademoiselle's room ready for
her?"

"Because Monsieur has the key," wailed Antoinette.

"That's true," said I.

Then I reflected on the futility of converting bedchambers into
mausoleums for the living.  The room shut up for a year would not
be habitable.  It would be damp and inch-deep in dust.

"Mademoiselle shall sleep in my room to-night," I said, "and
Stenson can make me up a bed and put what I want here.  Go and
arrange it with him."

Antoinette departed.  I turned to Carlotta.

"Are you very tired, my child?"

"Oh, yes--so tired."

"Why didn't you write, so that things could have been got ready
for you?"

"I don't know.  I was too unhappy.  Seer "Marcous--" she said
after a little pause and then stopped.

"Yes?"

"I am going to have a baby."

She said it in the old, childlike way, oblivious of difference of
sex; with her little foreign insistence on the final consonants.
I glanced hurriedly at her.  The fact was obvious.  She stood
with her hands helplessly outspread.  The pathos of her would
have wrung the heart of a devil.

"Thank God, you've come home," said I, huskily.

She began to cry softly.  I put my arm round her shoulders, and
comforted her.  She sobbed out incoherent things.  She wished she
had never seen Pasquale.  I was good.  She would stay with me
always.  She would never run away again.

I took her upstairs, and opened the door of her room with the key
that I had carried for a year on my bunch, and turned on the
electric light.

"See what are still usable of your old things," said I, "and I
will send Antoinette up to you."

She looked around her, somewhat puzzled.

"Why should I sleep in your room when this one is ready for me--
my night dress--even the hot water?"

"My dear," said I, "that hot water was put for you a year ago.
It must be cold now."

"And my red slippers--and my dressing-gown!" she cried,
quaveringly.

Then sinking in a heap on the floor beside the dusty bed, she
burst into a passion of tears.

I stole away and sent Antoinette to minister to her.

A year before I had raved and ranted, deeming life intolerable
and cursing the high gods; I suffered then, it is true; but I
hope I may never again go through the suffering of that first
night of Carlotta's return.  Even now I can close my eyes and
feel the icy grip on my heart.

She came down to dinner about an hour later, dressed in a pink
wrapper, one of the last things she had bought, which Antoinette
(as she explained to excuse her delay) had been airing before the
fire.  She sat opposite me, in her old place, penitent, subdued,
yet not shy or ill at ease.  Stenson waited on us, grave and
imperturbable as if we had put back the clock of time a
twelvemonth.  The only covert reference he made to the event was
to murmur discreetly in my ear:

"I have brought up a bottle of the Pommery, Sir Marcus, in the
hope you would drink some."

I was touched, for the good fellow had no other way of showing
his solicitude.

Carlotta allowed him to fill her glass.  She sipped the wine, and
declared that it did her good.  She was no longer a teetotaller,
she explained.  Once she drank too much, and the next day had a
headache.

"Why should one have a headache?"

"Nemesis," said I.

"What is Nemesis?"

I found myself answering her question in the old half-jesting
way.  And in her old way she replied:

"I do not understand."

How vividly familiar it was, and yet how agonisingly strange!

"Where is Polyphemus?" she asked.

"Dead," said I.

"Oh-h!  How did poor Polyphemus die?"

"He was smitten by Destiny at the end of the last act of a
farcical tragedy."

The ghost of a "_hou!_" came from Carlotta.  She composed herself
immediately.

"I often used to think of Polyphemus and Seer Marcous and
Antoinette," she said, musingly.  "And then I wished I was back.
I have been very wicked."

She put her elbows on the table, and framing her face with her
hands looked at me, and shook her head.

"Oh, you are good!  Oh, you are good!"

"Go on with your dinner, my child," said I, "and wonder at the
genius of Antoinette who has managed to cook it and look after
you at the same time."

She obeyed meekly.  I watched her eat.  She was famished.  I
learned that she had had nothing since the early morning coffee
and roll.  In spite of pain, I was curiously flattered by her
return.  I represented _something_ to her, after all--even though
the instinct of the prodigal cat had driven her hither.  I am
sure it had never crossed her mind that my doors might be shut
against her.  Her first words were, "I have come home."  The
first thing she did when we went into the drawing-room after
dinner was to fondle my hand and lay it against her cheek and
say, with a deep sigh:

"I am so happy."

However shallow her butterfly nature was, these things came from
its depths.  No man can help feeling pleased at a child's or an
animal's implicit trust in him.  And the pleasure is of the
purest.  He feels that unreasoning intuition has penetrated to
some latent germ of good in his nature, and for the moment he is
disarmed of evil.  Carlotta, then, came blindly to what was best
in me.  In her thoughts she sandwiched me between the cat and the
cook: well, in most sandwiches the mid-ingredient is the most
essential.

She curled herself up in the familiar sofa-corner, and as it was
a chilly night I sent for a wrap which I threw over her limbs.

"See, I have the dear red slippers," she remarked, arching her
instep.

"And I have my dear Carlotta," said I.

I drew my chair near her, and gradually I learned all the unhappy
story.

Pasquale had made love to her from the very first minute of their
acquaintance--even while I was hunting for the _L'Histoire
Comique de Francion_.  He had met her many times unknown to me.
They had corresponded, her letters being addressed to a little
stationer's shop close by.  She did not love him.  Of that I have
an absolute conviction.  But he was young, he was handsome, he
had the libertine's air and manner.  She was docile.  And she was
ever positively truthful.  If I had questioned her she would have
confessed frankly.  But I never questioned, as I never suspected.
I wondered sometimes at her readiness in quoting him.  I noticed
odd coincidences; but I was too ineffectual to draw inferences
from phenomena.  His appearance on the Paddington platform was
prearranged; his duchessa at Ealing a myth.

Apparently he had dallied with his fancy.  The fruit was his any
day for the plucking.  Perhaps a rudimentary sentiment of loyalty
towards me restrained him.  Who can tell?  The night of our
meeting with Hamdi brought the crisis.  The Turk's threats had
alarmed both Carlotta and myself.  It was necessary for him to
strike at once.  He saw her the next day--would to heaven I had
remained at home!--told her I was marrying her to save her from
Hamdi.  I loved the other woman.  He would save her equally well
from Hamdi.  The other woman met her soon after parting from
Pasquale and besought her to give me up.  She did not know what
to do.  Poor child, how should she have known?  On the previous
evening I had told her she was to marry me.  She was ready to
obey.  She went to bed thinking that she was to marry me.  In the
morning she went for her music lesson.  Pasquale was waiting for
her.  They walked for some distance down the road.  He hailed a
cab and drove away with her.

"He said he loved me," said Carlotta, "and he kissed me, and he
told me I must go away with him to Paris and marry him.  And I
felt all weak, like that--" she dropped her arms helplessly in an
expressive gesture, "and so what could I do?"

"Didn't you think, Carlotta, that I might be sorry--perhaps
unhappy?" I asked as gently as I could.

"He said you would be quite happy with the other woman."

"Did you believe him?"

"That's why I said I have been very wicked," Carlotta answered,
simply.

She went on with her story--an old, miserable, detestable,
execrable story.  At first all went merrily.  Then she fell ill
in Paris.  It was her first acquaintance with the northern
winter.  Her throat proved to be delicate and she was laid up
with bronchitis.  To men of Pasquale's type, a woman ill is of no
more use than a spavined horse or a broken-down motor-car.  More
than that, she becomes an infernal nuisance.  It was in his
temperament to perform sporadic acts of fantastic chivalry.  It
appealed to something romantic, theatrical, in his facile nature.
But to devote himself to a woman in sickness--that was different.
The fifteenth century Italian hated like the devil continued
association with pain.  He would have thrown his boots to a
beggar, but he would have danced in his palace over the dungeons
where his brother rotted in obscurity.

So poor Carlotta was neglected, and began to eat the bread of
disillusion.  When she got well, there was a faint recrudescence
of affection.  Has not this story been written a million
miserable times?  Why should I rend my heart again by retelling
it?  Wild rages, jealousies, quarrels, tears--

"And then one day he said, 'You damned little fool, I am sick to
death of you,' and he went away, and I never saw him again.  He
wrote and he sent his valet to put me in the pension."

"And yet, Carlotta," said I bitterly, "you would go back to him
if he sent for you?"

She sprang forward and gripped me by the arm--I was sitting quite
close to her--and her face wore the terror-stricken expression of
a child frightened with bogies.

"Go back?  After what he has done to me?  You would not send me
back?  Seer Marcous, darling, you will keep me with you?  I will
be good, good, good.  But go back to Pasquale?  Oh, no-o-o!"

She fell back in her sofa-corner, and fixed her great, deep
imploring eyes on me.

"My dear," said I, "you know this is your home as long as ever
you choose to stay in it--but--" and I stroked her hair gently--"
if he comes back when your child is born--his child--"

She drew herself up superbly.

"It is my child--my very, very own," cried Carlotta.  "It is
mine, mine--and I shall not allow any one to touch it--" and then
her face softened--"except Seer Marcous."


                         CHAPTER XXIII


Behold Carlotta again installed in my house which she regarded as
her home.  Heaven forbid that I should sow any doubt thereof in
her mind.

I had learned perhaps one lesson: the meaning of love.  The love
that is desire alone, though sung in all romance of all the ages,
is of the brute nature and is doomed to perish.  The love that
pardons, endures through wrong, contents itself in abnegation, is
of the imperishable things that draw weak man a little nearer to
the angels.  When Carlotta wept upon my shoulder during those few
first moments of her return I knew that all resentment was gone
from my heart, that it would have been a poor, ignoble thing.
Had she come back to me leprous of body and abominable of spirit,
it would not have mattered.  I would have forgiven her, loved
her, cherished her just the same.  It was a question, not of
reason, not of human pity, not of quixotism; not of any argument
or sentiment for which I could be responsible.  I was helpless,
obeying a reflex action of the soul.

The days passed tranquilly.  In spite of pain I felt an odd
happiness.  I had nothing selfishly to hope for.  Perhaps I had
aged five years in one, and I viewed life differently.  It was
enough for me that she had come home, to the haven where no harm
could befall her.  She was my appointed task, even as her husband
was Judith's.  I recognised in myself the man with the one
talent.  The deep wisdom of the parable can be taken to inmost
heart for comfort only by men of little destinies.  With infinite
love and patience to mould Carlotta into a sweet, good woman, a
wise mother of the child that was to be--that was the inglorious
task which Providence had set me to accomplish.  In its
proportion to the aggregate of human effort it was infinitesimal.
But who shall say that it was not worth the doing?  Save writing
a useless book, in what other sphere of sublunar energy could I
have been effectual?  I did not thus analyse my attitude at the
time; the man who does so is a poser, a mime to his own audience;
but looking back, I think I was guided by some such unformulated
considerations.

Although my hermit mania was in itself radically cured, yet I
altered nothing in my relations with the outside world.  I wrote
to Judith a brief account of what had occurred and received from
her a sympathetic answer.  My reading among the Mystics and
Thaumaturgists put me on the track of Arabic.  I found that
Carlotta knew enough of the language to give me elementary
instruction, and thus the whirligig of time brought in its
revenge by constituting me her pupil, to our joint edification.

After a while the unhappiness of the past seemed to have faded
from her mind.  She spoke little of Paris, less of the dull
pension, and never of Pasquale.  She bore towards him an animal's
silent animosity against a human being who has done it an
unforgettable injury.  On the other hand, as I have since
discovered, she was slowly developing, and had begun to realise
that in giving herself light-heartedly to a man whom she did not
love, she had committed a crime against her sex, for which she
had paid a heavy penalty: a sentiment, however, which did not
mitigate her resentment against him.  Often I saw her sitting
with knitted brows, her needlework idle on her lap, evidently
unravelling some complicated problem; presently she would either
shake her head sadly as if the intellectual process were too hard
for her and resume her needle, or if she happened to catch my
glance, she would start, smile reassuringly at me, and apply
herself with exaggerated zeal to her work.  These fits of
abstraction were not those of a woman speculating on mysteries of
the near future.  Such Carlotta also indulged in, and they were
easy to recognise, by the dreaminess of her eyes and the faint
smile flickering about her lips.  The moods of knitted brows were
periods of soul-travail, and I wondered what they would bring
forth.

One afternoon I came home and found her weeping over a book.
When I bent down to see what she was reading--she had acquired a
taste for novels during the dull pension time in Paris--she
caught my head with both hands.

"Oh, Seer Marcous, do you think they ought to make me wear a
great 'A'?"

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"Like Hester Prynne--see."

She showed me Nathaniel Hawthorne's "Scarlet Letter."

"What made you take this out of the shelves?"

"The title," she replied, simply.  "I am so fond of red things;
but I should not like that great red 'A'."

"Those were days," said I, "when people thought they could only
be good by being very cruel."

"They would have been more cruel if Hester had not loved the
minister," said Carlotta, looking at me wistfully.

"My dear little girl," said I, seeing whither her thoughts were
tending, "do not bother your brain with psychological problems."

"What are--?" began Carlotta.

I pinched the question, as it were, out of her cheek and smiled
and took away the book.

"They are a dreadful disease my little girl has been afflicted
with for some time.  When you sit and wrinkle your forehead like
this," and I scowled forbiddingly, whereat Carlotta laughed, "you
are suffering from acute psychological problem."

"Then I am thinking," said Carlotta, reflectively.

"Don't think too much, dear, just now," said I.  "It is best for
you to be happy and calm and contented.  Otherwise I'll have to
tell the doctor, and he'll give you the blackest and nastiest
physic you have ever tasted."

"To cure me of a what-you-call-it problem?"

"Yes," said I, emphatically.

"_Hou!_" laughed Carlotta in a superior way, "physic can't cure
that."

"You are relying on an exploded fallacy immortalised in a
hackneyed Shakespearian quotation," I remarked.

"Go on," said Carlotta, encouragingly.

"What do you mean?" I asked, taken aback.

"Oh, you darling Seer Marcous," cried Carlotta.  "It is so lovely
to hear you talk!"

So I went on talking, and the distress occasioned by the "Scarlet
Letter" was forgotten.

I have mentioned Carlotta's needlework.  This was undertaken at
the sapient instigation of Antoinette, who in her turn, I am
sure, neglected the ladle for the scissors, and cast many of her
duties upon the silent but sympathetic Stenson.  Carlotta herself
delighted in these preparations.  She was never happier than when
curled up on the sofa, a box of chocolates by her side, her work-
basket frothing over, like a great dish of _oeufs a la neige_,
with lawn or mull or what-not, and (I verily believe to complete
her content) my ungainly figure and hatchet-face within her
purview.  She would eat and sew industriously.  Sometimes she
would press too hard on a sweetmeat and with a little cry would
hold up a sticky finger and thumb.

"Look," she would say, puckering up her face.

And to save from soilure the dainty fabric she was working at, I
would rise and wipe her fingers with my handkerchief; whereupon
she would coo out the sweetest "thank you," in the world, and
perhaps hold up a diminutive garment.

"Isn't it pretty?"

"Yes, my dear," I would say, and I would turn aside wondering at
the exquisite refinements of pain that men were sometimes called
upon to bear.


At last the time came.  I sat up all night in a torture of
suspense, having got it into my foolish head that Carlotta might
die.  The doctor came upon me at six in the morning sitting half
frozen at the bottom of the stairs.  When he gave me his cheery
news he seemed to develop from a middle-aged, commonplace man
into a radiant archangel.

I met Antoinette soon afterwards, busy, important, exultant.  She
nevertheless graciously accorded me a brief interview.

"And to think, Monsieur," she exclaimed, as if the crowning
triumph of a million ions of evolution had at, last been
attained, "to think that it is a boy!"

"You would have been just as pleased if it had been a girl," said
I.

She shook her wise, fat head.  "Women _ca ne vaut pas grand'
chose._"

Let it be remembered that "women are of no great account" is a
sentiment expressed, not by me, but by Antoinette.  But all the
same I soon found myself a cipher in the house, where the
triumvirate of the negligible sex, Antoinette, the nurse and
Carlotta, reigned despotically.

To write much of Carlotta's happiness would be to treat of sacred
things at which I can only guess.  She dwelt in rapture.  The joy
and meaning of the universe were concentrated in the tiny bundle
of pink flesh that lay on her bosom.  I used to sit by her side
while she talked unwearyingly of him.  He was a thing of infinite
perfections.  He had such a lot of hair.

"She won't believe, sir," said the nurse, "that it will all drop
off and a new crop come."

"Oh-h!" said Carlotta.  "It can't be so cruel.  For it is my hair
--see, Seer Marcous, darling; isn't it just my hair?"

It was her great solicitude that the boy should resemble her.

"I don't know about his nose," she remarked critically.  "There
is so little of it yet and it is so soft--feel how soft it is.
But his eyes are brown like mine, and his mouth--now look, aren't
they just the same?"

She put her cheek next to the child's and invited me to compare
the two adjacent baby mouths.  They were, of a truth, very much
alike.

She was jealous of the baby, desirous of having it always with
her to tend and fondle, impatient of the nurse and Antoinette.
It was a thing so intensely hers that she resented other hands
touching it.  Oddly enough, of me she made an exception.  Nothing
delighted her more than to put the little creature into my
awkward and nervous arms, and watch me carry it about the room.
I think she wanted to give me something, and this share in the
babe was the most precious gift she could devise.

Of Pasquale she continued to say nothing.  In her intense joy of
motherhood he seemed to have become the dim creature of a dream.
I had registered the birth without consulting her--in the legal
names of the parents.

"What are you going to call him, Carlotta?" I asked one day.

"_Mon petit chou._  That's what Antoinette says.  It's a
beautiful name."

"There are many points in calling an infant one's little
cabbage," I admitted, "but soon he'll grow up to be as old as I
am, and--" I sighed, "who would call me their _petit chow_?"

Carlotta laughed.

"That is true.  We shall have to find a name."  She reflected for
a few moments; then put her arms round my neck and continued her
reflections.

"He shall be Marcus--another Marcus Ordeyne.  Then perhaps some
day he will be 'Seer Marcous' like you."

"Do you mean when I die?" I asked.

"Oh, not for years and years and years!" she cried, tightening
her clasp in alarm.  "But the child lives longer than the father.
It is fate.  He will live longer than I."

"Let us hope so, dear," I answered.  "But it is just because I am
not his father that he can't be Sir Marcus when I die.  He can
have my name; but my title--"

"Who will have it?"

"No one."

"It will die too?"

"It will be quite dead."

"You are his father, you know, _really_," she whispered.

"The law of England takes no count, unfortunately, of things of
the spirit," said I.

"What are things of the spirit?"

"The things, my dear," said I, "that you are beginning to
understand."  I bent down and kissed the child as it lay on her
lap.  "Poor little Marcus Ordeyne," I said.  "My poor quaintly
fathered little son, I'm afraid there is much trouble ahead of
you, but I'll do my best to help you through it."

"Bless you, dear," said Carlotta, softly.

I looked at her in wonder.  She had spoken for the first time
like a grown woman--like a woman with a soul.


A few weeks later.

We were sitting at breakfast.  The morning newspaper contained
the account of a battle and the lists of British officers killed.
I scanned as usual the melancholy columns, when a name among the
dead caught my eye--and I stared at it stupidly.  Pasquale was
dead, killed outright by a Boer bullet.  The wild, bright life was
ended.  It seemed a horrible thing, and, much as he had wronged
me, my first sentiment was one of dismay.  He was too gallant and
beautiful a creature for death.

Carlotta poured out my tea and came round with the cup which she
deposited by my side.  To prevent her peeping over my shoulder at
the paper, as she usually did, I laid it on the table; but her
quick eye had already read the great headlines.

"Great Battle.  British officers killed.  Oh, let me see, Seer
Marcous."

"No, dear," said I.  "Go and eat your breakfast."

She looked at me strangely.  I tried to smile; but as I am an
incompetent actor my grimace was a proclamation of
disingenuousness.

"Why shouldn't I read it?" she asked, quickly.

"Because I say you mustn't, Carlotta."

She continued to look at me.  She had suddenly grown pale.  I
stirred my tea and made a pretence of sipping it.

"Go on with your breakfast, my child," I repeated.

"There is something--something about him in the paper," said
Carlotta.  "He is a British officer."

In the face of her intuition further concealment appeared
useless.  Besides, sooner or later she would have to know.

"He is a British officer no longer, dear," said I.

"Is he dead?"

My mind flew back to an evening long ago--long, long ago it
seemed
--when another newspaper had told of another death, and my ears
caught the echo of the identical question that had then fallen
from her lips.  I dreaded lest she should say again, "I am so
glad."

I beckoned her to my side, and pointing with my finger to the
name watched her face anxiously.  She read, stared for a bit in
front of her and turned to me with a piteous look.  I drew her to
me, and she laid her face against my shoulder.

"I don't know why I'm crying, Seer Marcous, dear," she said,
after a while.

I made her drink some of my tea, but she would eat nothing, and
presently she went upstairs.  She had not said that she was glad.
She had wept and not known the reason for her tears.  I railed at
myself for my doubts of her.

She was subdued and thoughtful all the day.  In the evening,
instead of curling herself up in the sofa-corner among the
cushions, she sat on a stool by my feet as I read, one hand
supporting her chin, the other resting on my knee.

"I am glad he was a brave man," she said at last, alluding to
Pasquale for the first time since the morning.  "I like brave
men."

"_Dulce et decorum est._  He died for his country," said I.

"It does not hurt me now so much to think of him," said Carlotta.

I could not help feeling a miserable pang of jealousy at
Pasquale's posthumous rehabilitation as a hero in Carlotta's
heart.  Yet, was it not natural?  Was it not the way of women?  I
saw myself far remote from her, and though she never spoke of him
again I divined that her thoughts dwelt not untenderly on his
memory.  I was absurd, I know.  But I had begun almost to believe
in my make-believe paternity, and I was jealous of the rightful
claims of the dead man.

And yet had he lived he might have come back one day with his
conquering air and his irresistible laugh, and carried them both
away from me.  In sparing me this crowning humiliation I thanked
the high gods.

But never to this day has she mentioned his name again.


                          CHAPTER XXIV


How shall I set down that which happened not long afterwards?

The death of a baby is so commonplace, so unimportant.  Few
reasoning people, viewing the matter in the abstract, can do
otherwise than rejoice that a human being is saved from the
weariness of the tired years that make up life.  For who shall
disprove the pessimist's assertion that it is better not to have
been born than to come into the world, and that it is better to
die than to live?  But those from whom the single hope of their
existence is ravished find little consolation in reason.  Grief
is the most intensely egotistical of emotions.  I have lost all
that makes life beautiful to me.  Is not that enough for the
stricken soul?

To Carlotta it meant a passage through the valley of the shadow.
To me, at first, it meant the life of Carlotta, and then a blank
in my newly ordered scheme of things.  The curse of
ineffectuality still pursued me.  I had allotted to myself my
humble task--the development of the new generation in the form of
Carlotta's boy, and even that small usefulness was I denied by
Fate.

A chill, a touch of croup, an agonised watching, and the tiny
thing lay dead.  Antoinette and I had to drag it stone cold from
Carlotta's bosom.  I alone carried it to burial.  The little
white coffin rested on the opposite seat of the hired brougham,
and on it was a bunch of white flowers given by Antoinette.  In
the cemetery chapel another fragment of humanity awaited
sepulture, and the funeral service was read over both bodies.  I
stood alone by the little white coffin.  A crowd of mourners were
grouped beside the black one.  I glanced at the inscription as I
passed: "Jane Elliot, in the eighty-sixth year of her age."  The
officiant referred in the service to "our dear brother and
sister, here departed."  It was either an awful jest or an awful
verity.

My "quaintly fathered little son" had small need of my help
through the troubles of his life.  His mother needed all that I
could give.  Without me she would have died.  That I verily
believe.  I was her solitary plank in the welter wherein she
would have been submerged.  She clung to me--literally clung to
me.  I sat for hours with her grasp upon me.  To feel assured of
my physical presence alone seemed to bring her calm.

Recent as are those sleepless days and nights, their memory is
all confused.  The light burning dimly in the familiar chamber
which I had once sealed up as a tomb; the shadows on the wall;
the fevered face and great hollow eyes of Carlotta against the
pillows; her little hand clutching mine in desperation; the soft
tread of the nurse, that is all I remember.  And when she
recovered her wits and grew sane, although for a long time she
spoke little, and scarcely noticed me otherwise, she claimed me
by her side.  She was still dazed by the misery of her darkness.
It was only then that I realised the part the child had played in
her development.  Her nature had been stirred to the quick; the
capacity for emotion had been awakened.  She had left me without
a qualm.  She had given herself to Pasquale without a glimmer of
passion.  She had returned to me like a wounded animal seeking
its home.  For the child alone the passionate human love had
sprung flaming from the seed hidden in her soul.  And now the
child was dead, and the sun had gone from her sky, and she was
benumbed with the icy blackness of the world.

Then came a time when her speech was loosened and she talked to
me incessantly of the child, until one day she spoke of it as
living and clamoured for it, and relapsed into her fever.

At last one morning she awakened from a sound sleep and found me
watching; for I had relieved the nurse at six o'clock.  She
smiled at me for the first time since the child fell sick, and
took my hand and kissed it.

"It is like waking into heaven to see your face, Seer Marcous,
darling," she whispered.

"I hope heaven is peopled by a better-looking set of fellows," I
said.

"_Hou!_" laughed Carlotta.  "Don't you know you are beautiful?"

"You mustn't throw an old jest in my teeth, Carlotta," said I,
and I reminded her how she had once screamed with laughter when I
had told her I was very beautiful.

Carlotta listened patiently until I had ended, and then she said,
with a little sigh:

"You cannot understand, Seer Marcous, darling.  I have been
thinking of my little baby and the angels--and all the angels are
like you."

To cover the embarrassment my modesty underwent, I laughed and
drew the picture of myself with long flaxen hair and white wings.

"My angels hadn't got wings," said Carlotta, seriously.  "They
all wore dressing-gowns.  They were real angels.  And the one
that was most like you brought my baby in his arms for me to
kiss; and when he put it on a white cloud to sleep, and took me
up in his arms instead and carried me away, away, away through
the air, I didn't cry at leaving baby.  Wasn't that funny?  I
snuggled up close to him--like that"--she illustrated the action
of "snuggling" beneath the bed-clothes--"and it was so comfy."

The pale sunshine of a fine February morning filtered into the
room from behind the curtains.  I turned off the dimmed electric
lamp and let full daylight into the room.

"Oh!" cried Carlotta, turning to the window, "how lovely the good
sun is!  It is more like heaven than ever.  Do you know," she
added, mysteriously, "just before I woke it was all dark, and I
had lost my angels and I was looking for them."

I counselled her sagely to look for no more members of the
Hierarchy _en deshabille_, but to content herself with the
humbler denizens of this planet.  She pressed my hand.

"I'll try to be contented, Seer Marcous, darling."

She did her best, poor child, when I was by; but I heard that
often she would sit by a little pile of garments and take them up
one by one and cry her heart out--so that though she quickly
recovered, her cheeks remained wan and drawn, and pain lingered
in her eyes.  The weather changed to fog and damp and she spent
the days crouching by the fire, sometimes not stirring a muscle
for an hour together.  Her favourite seat was the fender-stool in
the drawing-room.  Her own boudoir downstairs, where she used to
receive instruction from the excellent Miss Griggs, she scarcely
entered.

She broke one of these fits suddenly and called me by her own pet
version of my name.  I looked up from the writing-table where I
was studying the Arabic grammar.

"Yes?"

"I have been thinking--oh, thinking, thinking so long.  I've been
thinking that you must love me very much."

"Yes, Carlotta," said I, with a half smile.  "I suppose I do."

"As much as I loved my baby," she said, seriously,

"I used to love you in a different way, perhaps,"

"And now?"

"Perhaps in the same sort of way, Carlotta."

"I loved my baby because it was mine," she remarked, looking at
the flames through one hand's delicate fingers.  "I wanted to do
everything for him and didn't want him to do anything for me.  I
would have died for him.  It is so strange.  Yes, I think you
must love me like that, Seer Marcous.  Why?"

"Because when I found you in the Embankment Gardens nearly two
years ago you were about as helpless as your little baby," I
replied, somewhat disingenuously.

Carlotta gave me a quick glance.

"You thought me then what you call an infernal nuisance.  Oh, I
know now.  I have grown wise.  But you were always good.  You
looked good when you sat on the seat.  You were reading a dirty
little book."

"_L'Histoire des Uscoques,_" I murmured.  How far away it seemed.

There was a pause.  I regarded her for a moment or two.  She was
sunk again in serious reflection.  I sighed--at the general
dismalness of life, I suppose--and resumed my Arabic.

"Seer Marcous."

"Yes?"

"Why didn't you drive me away when I came back?"

I shut up the Arabic grammar and went and sat beside her on the
fenderstool.

"My dear little girl--what a question!  How could I drive you
away from your own home?"

She flashed a queer, scared look at me, then at the fire, then at
me again and then burst out crying, her head and arms on her
knees.

I muttered a man's words of awkward comfort, saying something
about the baby.

"It isn't baby I'm crying about," sobbed Carlotta.  "It's me!
And it's you!  And it's all the things I'm beginning to
understand."

I patted her head and lit a cigarette and wandered about the
room, rather puzzled by Carlotta's psychological development, and
yet stirred by a faint thrill at her recognition of my affection.
At the same time the sad "too late, too late," was knelled in my
ears, and I thought of the might-have-been, and rode the merry-
go-round of regret's banalities.  I had grown old.  Passion had
died.  But it fought bravely, as the reluctant uncle saw it
when it cried, or was sad. And the aunt railed then more
than ever, they could not suffer. Wiseli My favorite was the
moment when it all away alone in his shed and grow quite to
the parent to think and say was his song. Then came a great
consolation in his heart. It is thought then to his
beautiful dream, and was quite sure that God him a path search,
as it showed the mother had. Sometimes it is considered how many
people in the world live, for the love of God to uphold and ways
willing to make.

And then he climbed the doubt on whether he might forget about all
the many. But there came to him like the good consolation
to the heart, so that the mother was up there in heaven,
and certainly the love God would ask his way not to forget.

Wiseli That made the then very confident and happy, and it has
never been so unhappy as on the first evening on the Ofenbank.
it slept every night with the happy confidence in the heart: ( "He
will also find a way where you can walk.") So the winter
passed, and the sunny spring came. The trees were green, and all
the meadows were full of flowers and white keys anemones. And in
the forest called the cuckoo funny, and beautiful, warm air moved
through the country and made all merry heart, so that everyone
wants to live like again. Wiselis also pleased the hearts of the
flowers and sunshine, if it is in the morning went to school and
then back to Buchenrain returned. Otherwise it was no
time to rejoice in it, because it now had to work hard. Each
moment that remains next to the school, had some work to be used.
And some half-day of the week had to stay at home and could not
go to school, because as much need to do, as the uncle and aunt
mainly said. The spring field work had begun, and the
garden was all hand to do. Because it had to help, and when
the aunt was outside, had to cook and wash the dishes afterwards,
the pig trough for the trim and into the barn carrying
across.
CHAPTER XXV


Again I sit on the housetop in Mogador on the Morocco coast,
where a month ago I began to write these latter pages.  Time has
passed quickly since that day.

I said then that on the previous afternoon something had
happened.  It was something which I might have foreseen, which,
in fact, with my habit of putting the telescope to my blind eye,
I obstinately had refused to foresee.  During our wanderings I
had watched the flowering of her splendid beauty as she drank in
health from the glow of her own Orient.  I had noted the widening
of her intellect, the quickening of her sympathies.  I had been
conscious of the expansion of her soul in the great silences when
the stars flamed over the infinite sea of sand.  But a growing
wistfulness that was no longer the old doglike pleading of her
glorious eyes, a gathering sadness that was not an aftermath of
grief for the child that had gone--into this, if I did remark it,
I did not choose to inquire.  Instead, I continued my study of
Arabic and cultivated the acquaintance of a learned Moor whose
conversation afforded--and still affords--me peculiar pleasure.
One of these days I shall make a book of his Table-talk.  But now
I have to tell of Carlotta.

She accepted with alacrity my proposal that morning to ride over
to the Palm Tree House for luncheon, as we had done several times
before.  To please me, I think, she had resolutely overcome her
natural indolence.  So much so that she had come to love the
nomad life of steamers and caravans, and had grown restless,
eager for fresh scenes, craving new impressions.  It was I who
had cried a halt at Mogador where this furnished house to let,
belonging to a German merchant absent in Europe, tempted me to
rest awhile.  I am not so young as Carlotta, and I awakened to
the fact of a circumambient universe so many years ago that I
have grown slumberous.  Carlotta, if left to herself, would have
gone on riding camels through Africa to the end of time.  She had
changed in many essentials.  Instead of regarding me as an
amiable purveyor of sweetmeats and other necessaries of life to
which by the grace of her being Carlotta she was entitled, she
treated me with human affection and sympathy, keeping her own
wants in the background, anxious only to anticipate mine.  But
she still loved sweetmeats and would eat horrible Moorish messes
with an avidity only equalled by my repugnance.  She was still
the same Carlotta.  On the other hand again, she had of late
abandoned her caressing habits.  If she laid her hand on my arm,
she did it timorously--whereat I would laugh and she would grow
confused.  Once she had driven me to frenzy with her fondling.
Those days had passed.  I told myself that I was as old as the
sphinx we had moralised over in Egypt.

We lunched, then, at the Palm Tree House and rode back in the
cool of the afternoon to Mogador.  We were alone, as we knew the
path across the tongue of desert, and had no need of a guide and
the rabble of sore-eyed urchins who, like their attendant flies,
infest the tourist on his journeyings.  On our right the desert
rose to meet a near horizon; on our left sandhills and boulders
cut off the view; ahead the shimmering line beyond which the sea
and city lay.  We were enveloped by solitude and stillness.  In
the clear African air objects detached themselves against the sky
with startling definition.

I had unconsciously ridden a bit ahead of Carlotta, thinking my
own thoughts, and sighing as a man often does sigh, for the vague
unattainable which is happiness.  Suddenly I missed her by my
side, and turning round saw a sight that made my heart beat with
its sheer beauty.  It was only Carlotta on her barbarically
betrapped and besaddled mule.  But it was Carlotta glorified in
colour.  She held above her head a cotton parasol, which she had
bought to her delight and my disgust in Mogador; an impossible
thing, all deep cherry reds and yellows; a hateful thing made for
a pantomime--or for this African afternoon.  Outspread and
luminous in the white sunlight its cherry reds and yellows
floated like translucences of wine above Carlotta's bronze hair
crowned by a white sun hat, her warm
flesh-tints, and the dazzling white of her surah silk blouse; the
whole picture cut out vivid against the indigo of the sky.  It
was a radiant vision.  I stared openmouthed, smitten with the
pang that sudden and transient loveliness can sometimes deal, as
Carlotta approached, her figure swaying with the jog of her
barbaric beast.  Her eyes were fixed on mine.  She halted, and
for a moment we looked at one another; and in those wonderful
eyes I saw for the first time a beautiful sadness, a spiritual
appeal.  The moment passed.  We started again, side by side,
neither speaking.  I did not look at her, conscious of a vague
trouble.  Things that I had thought dead stirred in my heart.

Presently like a dawn of infinite delicacy rose the city before
us.  Its fairy minarets and towers gleamed first white in an
atmosphere of pale amethyst toning through shades of green to the
blue of the zenith.  And the lazy sea lay at the city's foot a
pavement of lapis lazuli.  But all was faint, unreal.  Far, far
away a group of palms caught opalescent reflections.  A slight
breeze had sprung up, raising minute particles of sand which
caused the elfland on the horizon to quiver like a mirage.

"It is a dream-city," said I, in admiration.

Carlotta did not reply.  I thought she had not heard.  We jogged
on a little in silence.  At last she drew very close to me.

"Shall we ever get there?" she asked, pointing ahead with the
hand that held the reins.

"To Mogador?  Yes, I hope so," I answered with a laugh.  I
thought she was tired.

"No, not Mogador.  The dream-city--where every one wants to get."

"You have travelled far, my dear," said I, "to hanker now after
dream-cities and the unattainable.  I knew a little girl once who
would have asked: 'What is a dream-city?"

"She doesn't ask now because she knows," replied Carlotta.  "No.
We shall never get there.  It looks as if we were riding straight
into it--but when we get close, it will just be Mogador."

"Aren't you happy, Carlotta?" I asked.

"Are you, Seer Marcous?"

"I?  I am a philosopher, my child, and a happy philosopher would
be a _lusus naturae_, a freak, a subject for a Barnum & Bailey
Show.  If they caught him they would put him between the hairy
man and the living skeleton."

"I suppose I'm getting to be a philosopher, too," said Carlotta,
"and I hate it!  Sometimes I think I hate everything and
everybody
--save you, Seer Marcous, darling.  It's wicked of me.  I must
have been born wicked.  But I used to be happy.  I never wanted
to go to dream-cities.  I was just like a cat.  Like Polyphemus.
Do you remember Polyphemus?"

"Yes," said I.  And then set off my balance by this strange
conversation with Carlotta, I added: "I killed him."

She turned a startled face to me.

"You killed him?  Why?"

"He laughed at me because I was unhappy," said I.

"Through me?"

"Yes; through you.  But that's neither here nor there.  We were
not discussing the death of Polyphemus.  We were talking about
being philosophers, and you said that as a philosopher you hated
everything and everybodyexcept me.  Why do you exclude me,
Carlotta?"

We were riding so near together that my leg rubbed her saddle-
girth.  I looked hard at her.  She turned away her head and put
the pantomime parasol between us.  I heard a little choking sob.

"Let us get off--and sit down a little--I want to cry.

"The end of all feminine philosophy," I said, somewhat brutally.
"No.  It's getting late.  That's only Mogador in front of us.
Let us go to it."

Carlotta shifted her parasol quickly.

"What has happened to you, Seer Marcous?  You have never spoken
to me like that before."

"The very deuce seems to have happened," said I, angrily--though
why I should have felt angry, heaven only knows.  "First you turn
yourself into a Royal Academy picture with that unspeakable
umbrella of yours and the trumpery blue sky and sunshine, and
make my sentimental soul ache; and then you--"

"It's a very pretty umbrella," said Carlotta, looking upwards at
it demurely.

"Give it to me," I said.

She yielded it with her usual docility.  I cast it upon the
desert.  Being open it gave one or two silly rebounds, then lay
still.  Carlotta reined up her mule.

"Oh-h!" she said, in her old way.

I dismounted hurriedly, and helped her down and passed my arm
through the two bridles.

"My dear child," said I, "what is the meaning of all this?  Here
we have been living for months the most tranquil and unruffled
existence, and now suddenly you begin to talk about dream-cities
and the impossibility of getting there, and I turn angry and
heave parasols about Africa.  What is the meaning of it?"

The most extraordinary part of it was that I should be treating
Carlotta as a grown-up woman, after the fashion of the hero of a
modern French novel.  Perhaps I was younger than I thought.

She kept her eyes fixed downward.

"Why are you angry with me?" she asked in a low voice.

"I haven't the remotest idea," said I.

She lifted her eyelids slowly--oh, very, very slowly, glanced
quiveringly at me, while the shadow of a smile fluttered round
her lips.  I verily believe the baggage exulted in her feminine
heart.  I turned away, leading the two animals, and picked up the
parasol which I closed and restored to her.

"I thought you wanted to cry," I remarked.

"I can't," said Carlotta, plaintively.

"And you won't tell me why you exclude me from your universal
hatred?"

Carlotta dug up the sand with the point of her foot.  The sight
of it recalled the row of pink toes thrust unashamedly before my
eyes on the second day of her arrival in London.  An old hope, an
old fear, an old struggle renewed themselves.  She was more
adorably beautiful even than the Carlotta of the pink tus, and
spiritually she was reborn.  I heard her whisper:

"I can't."

Now I had sworn to myself all the oaths that a man can swear that
I should be Carlotta's grandfather to the end of time.  Hitherto
I had felt the part.  Now suddenly grey beard and slippered
pantaloons are cast aside and I am young again with a glow in my
heart which beats fast at her beauty.  I shut my teeth.

"No," said I to myself.  "The curtain shall not rise on that
farcical tragedy again."

I threw the reins on the neck of Carlotta's mule, which with its
companion had been regarding us with bland stupidity.

"I think we had better ride on, Carlotta," I said.  "Mount."

She meekly gave me her little foot and I hoisted her into the
saddle.

We did not exchange a word till we reached Mogador.  But each of
us felt that something had happened.

At dinner we met as usual.  Carlotta spoke somewhat feverishly of
our travels, and asked me numberless questions, betraying an
unprecedented thirst for information.  I never gave her
historical instruction with less zest.

After the meal we went onto the flat roof.  Carlotta poured out
my coffee at the small table beside the long Madeira cane chair
which was my accustomed seat.  The starlit night was blue and
languorous.  From some cafe came the monotonous strains of
Moorish music, the harsh strings and harsh men's voices softened
by the distance.  Carlotta took my coffee-cup when I had finished
and set it down in her granddaughterly way.  Then she stood in
front of me.

"Won't you make a little room for me on your chair, Seer Marcous,
darling?"

I shifted my feet from the foot-rest and she sat down.  I may
observe that I was not, in oriental bashawdom, occupying the one
and only chair on the housetop.

"Tell me about the stars," she said.

I knew what she meant.  She loved the old Greek myths; their
poetry, obscured though it was through my matter-of-fact prose,
appealed to her young imagination.  She was passing through an
exquisite phase of development.

I scanned the heavens for a text and found one in the Pleiades.
And I told her how these were seven daughters of Atlas and
Pleione who herself was the daughter of the Sea, and how they
were all pure maidens, save one, and were the companions of
Artemis; how Orion the hunter, who was afterwards slain by
Artemis and whose three-starred girdle gleamed up there in the
sky, pursued them with evil intent, and how they prayed the gods
for deliverance and were changed into the everlasting stars; and,
lastly, how the one who was not a maiden, for she loved a mortal,
shrank away from her sisters through shame and was invisible to
the eye of man.

"She was ashamed," said Carlotta in a low voice, "because she
loved some one afterwards, one of the gods, who would not look at
her because she had given herself to a mortal.  A woman then has
a fire here"--she clasped her hands to her bosom--"and wishes she
could burn away to nothing, nothing, just to air, and become
invisible."

She was rising hurriedly on the last word, but I brought my hands
down on her shoulders.

I signed this Augenblik the pardon of my brother, or I want as loud
as I can schreyer, tell the world what a man you are.

Angelo. Who will believe you, Isabella? Unbeflekter My name,
my tough life, my reputation in the state, my mere certificate
against you, your charges are so predominate that you do in your
own statement erstiken and after Verläumdung will stink.

The first step is done, and now I want my sensual Theil let
the reins.

She sighed contentedly.  "Seer Marcous--"

" You must call me Marcus now," said I, somewhat fatuously.

She shook her head as it lay on my shoulder.  "No.  You are
Marcus
--or Sir Marcus--to everybody.  To me you are always Seer
Marcous.  Seer Marcous, darling," she half whispered after a
pause.  "Once I did not know the difference between a god and a
mortal.  It was only that morning when I woke up--"

"You took me for a saint in a dressing-gown," said I.

"It's the same thing," she retorted.  And then taking up her
parable, she told me in her artless way the inner history of her
heart since that morning; but what she said is sacred.  Also, a
man feels himself to be a pitiful dog of a god when a woman
relates how she came to establish him on her High Altar.

Later we struck a lighter vein and spoke of the present, the
enchantment of the hour, the scented air, the African stars.

"It seems, my dear," said I, "that we have got to Nephelococcygia
after all."

"What is Nephelococcygia?" asked Carlotta.

I relented.  "It's a base Aristophanic libel on our dream-city,"
said I.


Thus out of evil has come good; out of pain has grown happiness;
out of horror has sprung an everlasting love.  Many a man will
say that in all my relations with Carlotta I have comported
myself as a fool, and that my marriage is the crowning folly.
Well, I pretend not unto wisdom.  Wisdom would have married me to
five thousand a year, a position in fashionable society, my
Cousin Dora and premature old age antecedent to eternal
destruction.  I hold that my salvation has lain the way of folly.
Again, it may be urged against me that I have squandered my life,
that with all my learning, such as it is, I have achieved
nothing.  I once thought so.  I boasted of it in my diary when I
complacently styled myself a waster in Earth's factory.  Oh, that
diary!  Let me here solemnly retract and abjure every crude and
idiot opinion and reflection of life set forth in that frenetic
record!  I regard myself not as a waster--I remember a passage in
Epictetus treating of the ways of Providence:

"For what else can I do, a lame old man, than sing hymns to God?
If then I were a nightingale I would do the part of a
nightingale: if I were a swan, I would do like a swan.  But now I
am a rational creature and I ought to praise God; this is my
work, I do it, nor will I desert this post so long as I am
allowed to keep it; and I exhort you to join in this same song."

No, I am neither nightingale nor swan, and cannot add, as they
do, to the beauty of the earth.  The lame old man has his
limitations; but within them, he can, by cleaving to his post and
praising God, fulfil his destiny.

Carlotta coming onto the housetop to summon me to lunch looks
over my shoulder as I write these words.

"But you are not a lame old man!" she cries in indignation.  "You
are the youngest and strongest and cleverest man in the world!"

"What am I to do with these miraculous gifts?" I ask, laughing.

"You are to become famous," she says, with conviction.

"Very well, my dear.  We will have to go to some new land where
attaining fame is easier for a beginner than in London; and we'll
send for Antoinette and Stenson to help us."

"That will be very nice," she observes.

So I am to become famous. _Ce que femme veut, Dieu le veut_.  And
Carlotta has got a soul of her own now and means to make the most
of it.  It will lead me upward somewhere.  He reached his house and
entered it without noise, almost like a stealth intruder. One of
the servants were astonished to see you when you cross a hallway
and apologized for not having warned the others. Don Germán
ordered everyone to remain calm."You are writing a lot of rubbish," says Carlotta.

"And a little truth.  The mixture is Life," I answer.