Taking stand under the circlet, there was scant room between it and the
blue handkerchief on his head; while the figure he presented, nude to
the waist, his black skin glistening with water, his trousers clinging
to his limbs, his nostrils dilating, his eyes jets of flame, his cruel
white teeth exposed--this figure the dullest fancy can evoke--and it
must have appeared to the guilty Greek a very genius of vengeance.

Withal, however, the armor and the dagger brought Demedes up to a
certain equality; and, as he showed no flinching, the promise of combat
was excellent. It happened, however, that while the two silently
regarded each other, Lael recognized the King, and unable to control
herself, gave a cry of joy, and started to him. Instinctively Demedes
extended a hand to hold her back; the giant saw the opening; two steps
so nearly simultaneous the movement was like a leap--and he had the
wrist of the other's armed hand in his grip. Words can convey no idea of
the outburst attending the assault--it was the hoarse inarticulate
falsetto of a dumb man signalizing a triumph. If the reader can think of
a tiger standing over him, its breath on his cheek, its roar in his
ears, something approximate to the effect is possible.

The Greek's cap fell off, and the dagger rattled to the floor. His
countenance knit with sudden pain--the terrible grip was crushing the
bones--yet he did not submit. With the free hand, he snatched the key
from his belt, and swung it to strike--the blow was intercepted--the key
wrenched away. Then Demedes' spirit forsook him--mortal terror showed in
his face turned gray as ashes, and in his eyes, enlarged yet ready to
burst from their sockets. He had not the gladiator's resignation under
judgment of death.

"Save me, O Princess, save me!... He is killing me.... My God--see--hear
--he is crushing my bones!... Save me!"

Lael was then behind the King, on her knees, thanking Heaven for rescue.
She heard the imploration, and, woman-like, sight of the awful agony
extinguished the memory of her wrongs.

"Spare him, Nilo, for my sake, spare him!" she cried.

It was not alone her wrongs that were forgotten--she forgot that the
avenger could not hear.

Had he heard, it is doubtful if he had obeyed; for we again remark he
was fighting less for her than for his master--or rather for her in his
master's interest. And besides, it was the moment of victory, when, of
all moments, the difference between the man born and reared under
Christian influences and the savage is most impressible.

While she was entreating him, he repeated the indescribable howl, and
catching Demedes bore him to the door and out of it. At the edge of the
landing, he twisted his fingers in the long locks of the screaming
wretch, whose boasted philosophy was of so little worth to him now that
he never thought of it--then he plunged him in the water, and held him
under until--enough, dear reader!

Lael did not go out. The inevitable was in the negro's face. Retreating
to the couch, she there covered her ears with her hands, trying to
escape the prayers the doomed man persisted to the last in addressing
her.

By and by Nilo returned alone.

He took the cloak from the floor, wrapped her in it, and signed her to
go with him; but the distresses she had endured, together with the
horrors of the scene just finished, left her half fainting. In his arms
she was a child. Almost before she knew it, he had placed her in the
boat. With a cord found in the house, he tied the poles behind the
vessel, and set out to find the stairs, the tell-tale lamp twinkling at
the bow.

Safely arrived there, the good fellow carried his fair charge up the
steps to the court--descending again, he brought the poles--going back
once more, he drew the boat on the lower platform. Then to hasten to the
street door, unbar it, and admit Sergius were scarce a minute's work.

The monk's amazement and delight at beholding Lael, and hers at sight of
him, require no labored telling. At that meeting, conventionalities were
not observed. He carried her into the passage, and gave her the keeper's
chair; after which, reminded of the programme so carefully laid out by
him, he returned with Nilo to the court, where the illumination in the
sky still dropped its relucent flush. Turning the King face to him he
asked:

"Where is the keeper?"

The King walked to the sedan, opened the door, and dragging the dead man
forth, flung him sprawling on the pavement.

Sergius stood speechless, seeing what the victor had not--arrests,
official inquests, and the dread machinery of the law started, with
results not in foresight except by Heaven. Before he had fairly
recovered, Nilo had the sedan out and the poles fixed to it, and in the
most cheerful, matter-of-fact manner signed him to take up the forward
ends.

"Where is the Greek?" the monk asked.

That also the King managed to answer.

"In the cistern--drowned!" exclaimed Sergius, converting the reply into
words.

The King drew himself up proudly.

"O Heavens! What will become of us?"

The exclamation signified a curtain rising upon a scene of prosecution
against which the Christian covered his face with his hands.... Again
Nilo brought him back to present duty.... In a short time Lael was in
the chair, and they bearing her off.

Sergius set out first for Uel's house. The time was near morning; but
for the conflagration the indications of dawn might have been seen in
the east. He was not long in getting to understand the awfulness of the
calamity the city had suffered, and that, with thousands of others, the
dwellings of Uel and the Prince of India were heaps of ashes on which
the gale was expending its undiminished strength.

What was to be done with Lael?

This Sergius answered by leading the way to the town residence of the
Princess Irene. There the little Jewess was received, while he took boat
and hurried to Therapia.

The Princess came down, and under her roof, Lael found sympathy, rest,
and safety. In due time also Uel's last testament reached her, with the
purse of jewels left by the Prince of India, and she then assumed
guardianship of the bereaved girl.


BOOK V

MIRZA


CHAPTER I

A COLD WIND FROM ADRIANOPLE


It is now the middle of February, 1451. Constantine has been Emperor a
trifle over three years, and proven himself a just man and a
conscientious ruler. How great he is remains for demonstration, since
nothing has occurred to him--nothing properly a trial of his higher
qualities.

In one respect the situation of the Emperor was peculiar. The highway
from Gallipoli to Adrianople, passing the ancient capital on the south,
belonged to the Turks, and they used it for every purpose--military,
commercial, governmental--used it as undisputedly within their domain,
leaving Constantine territorially surrounded, and with but one neighbor,
the Sultan Amurath.

Age had transformed the great Moslem; from dreams of conquest, he had
descended to dreams of peace in shaded halls and rose-sprent gardens,
with singers, story-tellers, and philosophers for companions, and women,
cousins of the houris, to carpet the way to Paradise; but for George
Castriot, [Footnote: Iskander-beg--Scanderbeg. _Vide_ GIBBON's _Roman
Empire._] he had abandoned the cimeter. Keeping terms of amity with such
a neighbor was easy--the Emperor had merely to be himself peaceful.
Moreover, when John Palaeologus died, the succession was disputed by
Demetrius, a brother to Constantine. Amurath was chosen arbitrator, and
he decided in favor of the latter, placing him under a bond of gratitude.

Thus secure in his foreign relations, the Emperor, on taking the throne,
addressed himself to finding a consort; of his efforts in that quest the
reader is already informed, leaving it to be remarked that the Georgian
Princess at last selected for him by Phranza died while journeying to
Constantinople. This, however, was business of the Emperor's own
inauguration, and in point of seriousness could not stand comparison
with another affair imposed upon him by inheritance--keeping the
religious factions domiciled in the capital from tearing each other to
pieces. The latter called for qualities he does not seem to have
possessed. He permitted the sectaries to bombard each other with
sermons, bulletins and excommunications which, on the ground of scandal
to religion, he should have promptly suppressed; his failure to do so
led to its inevitable result--the sectaries presently dominated him.

Now, however, the easy administration of the hitherto fortunate Emperor
is to vanish; two additional matters of the gravest import are thrust
upon him simultaneously, one domestic, the other foreign; and as both of
them become turning points in our story, it is advisable to attend to
them here.

When the reins of government fell from the hands of Amurath, they were
caught up by Mahommed; in other words, Mahommed is Sultan, and the old
regime, with its friendly policies and stately courtesies, is at an end,
imposing the necessity for a recast of the relations between the
Empires. What shall they be? Such is the foreign question.

Obviously, the subject being of vital interest to the Greek, it was for
him to take the initiative in bringing about the definitions desired.
With keen appreciation of the danger of the situation he addressed
himself to the task. Replying to a request presented through the
ambassador resident at Adrianople, Mahommed gave him solemn assurances
of his disposition to observe every existing treaty. The response seems
to have made him over-confident. Into the gilded council chamber at
Blacherne he drew his personal friends and official advisers, and heard
them with patience and dignity. At the close of a series of deliberative
sessions which had almost the continuity of one session, two measures
met his approval. Of these, the first was so extraordinary it is
impossible not to attribute its suggestion to Phranza, who, to the
immeasurable grief and disgust of our friend the venerable Dean, was now
returned, and in the exercise of his high office of Grand Chamberlain.

Allusion has been already made to the religious faith of the mother of
Mahommed. [Footnote: "For it was thought that his (Amurath's) eldest son
Mahomet, after the death of his father, would have embraced the
Christian Religion, being in his childhood instructed therein, as was
supposed, by his mother, the daughter of the Prince of Servia, a
Christian."--KNOLLES' _Turk. Hist._, 239, Vol. I.

"He (Mahommed) also entered into league with Constantinus Palaeologus,
the Emperor of Constantinople, and the other Princes of Grecia; as also
with the Despot of Servia, his Grandfather by the mother's side, as some
will have it; howbeit some others write that the Despot his daughter,
Amurath his wife (the Despot's daughter, Amurath's wife) was but his
Mother-in-law, whom he, under colour of Friendship, sent back again unto
her Father, after the death of Amurath, still allowing her a Princely
Dowery."--_Ibid_. 230.

On this very interesting point both Von Hammer and Gibbon are somewhat
obscure; the final argument, however, is from Phranza: "After the taking
of Constantinople, she (the Princess) fled to Mahomet II." (GIBBON'S
_Rom. Emp._, Note 52, 12.) The action is significant of a mother.
Mothers-in-law are not usually so doting.] The daughter of a Servian
prince, she is supposed to have been a Christian. After the interment of
Amurath, she had been returned to her native land. Her age was about
fifty. Clothed with full powers, the Grand Chamberlain was despatched to
Adrianople to propose a marriage between His Majesty, the Emperor, and
the Sultana mother. The fears and uncertainties besetting the Greek must
have been overwhelming.

The veteran diplomat was at the same time entrusted with another affair
which one would naturally think called for much less delicacy in
negotiation. There was in Constantinople then a refugee named Orchan, of
whose history little is known beyond the fact that he was a grandson of
Sultan Solyman. Sometime presumably in the reign of John Palaeologus,
the Prince appeared in the Greek capital as a pretender to the
Sultanate; and his claim must have had color of right, at least, since
he became the subject of a treaty between Amurath and his Byzantine
contemporary, the former binding himself to pay the latter an annual
stipend in aspers in consideration of the detention of the fugitive.

With respect to this mysterious person, the time was favorable, in the
opinion of the council, for demanding an increase of the stipend.
Instructions concerning the project were accordingly delivered to Lord
Phranza.

The High Commissioner was received with flattering distinction at
Adrianople. He of course presented himself first to the Grand Vizier,
Kalil Pacha, of whom the reader may take note, since, aside from his
reappearances in these pages, he is a genuine historic character. To
further acquaintance with him, it may be added that he was truly a
veteran in public affairs, a member of the great family to which the
vizierat descended almost in birthright, and a friend to the Greeks,
most likely from long association with Amurath, although he has suffered
severe aspersion on their account. Kalil advised Phranza to drop the
stipend. His master, he said, was not afraid of Orchan, if the latter
took the field as an open claimant, short work would be made of him. The
warning was disregarded. Phranza submitted his proposals to Mahommed
directly, and was surprised by his gentleness and suavity. There was no
scene whatever. On the contrary, the marriage overture was forwarded to
the Sultana with every indication of approval, nor was the demand
touching the stipend rejected; it was simply deferred. Phranza lingered
at the Turkish capital, pleased with the attentions shown him, and still
more with the character of the Sultan.

In the judgment of the Envoy the youthful monarch was the incarnation of
peace. What time he was not mourning the loss of his royal father, he
was studying designs for a palace, probably the Watch Tower of the World
(_Jehan Numa_), which he subsequently built in Adrianople.

Well for the trusting master in Blacherne, well for Christianity in the
East, could the credulous Phranza have looked in upon the amiable young
potentate during one of the nights of his residence in the Moslem
capital! He would have found him in a chamber of impenetrable privacy,
listening while the Prince of India proved the calculations of a
horoscope decisive of the favorable time for beginning war with the
Byzantines.

"Now, my Lord," he could have heard the Prince say, when the last of the
many tables had been refooted for the tenth time--"now we are ready for
the ultimate. We are agreed, if I mistake not"--this was not merely a
complimentary form of speech, for Mahommed, it should be borne in mind,
was himself deeply versed in the intricate and subtle science of
planetary prediction--"we are agreed that as thou art to essay the war
as its beginner, we should have the most favorable Ascendant,
determinable by the Lord, and the Planet or Planets therein or in
conjunction or aspect with the Lord; we are also agreed that the Lord of
the Seventh House is the Emperor of Constantinople; we are also agreed
that to have thee overcome thy adversary, the Emperor, it is better to
have the Ascendant in the House of one of the Superior Planets, Saturn,
Jupiter or Mars"--

"Jupiter would be good, O Prince," said Mahommed, intensely interested,
"yet I prefer Mars."

"My Lord is right again." The Seer hesitated slightly, then explained
with a deferential nod and smile: "I was near saying my Lord is always
right. Though some of the adepts have preferred Scorpio for the
Ascendant, because it is a fixed sign, Mars pleases me best; wherefore
toward him have I directed all my observations, seeking a time when he
shall certainly be better fortified than the Lord of the Seventh House,
as well as elevated above him in our figure of the Heavens."

Mahommed leaned far over toward the Prince, and said imperiously, his
eyes singularly bright: "And the ultimate--the time, the time, O Prince!
Hast thou found it? Allah forbid it be too soon!--There is so much to be
done--so much of preparation."

The Prince smiled while answering:

"My Lord is seeing a field of glory--his by reservation of destiny--and
I do not wonder at his impatience to go reaping in it; but" (he became
serious) "it is never to be forgotten--no, not even by the most exalted
of men--that the Planets march by order of Allah alone." ... Then taking
the last of the calculations from the table at his right hand, he
continued: "The Ascendant permits my Lord to begin the war next year."

Mahommed heard with hands clinched till the nails seemed burrowing in
the flesh of the palms.

"The day, O Prince!--the day--the hour!" he exclaimed.

Looking at the calculation, the Prince appeared to reply from it: "At
four o'clock, March twenty-sixth"--

"And the year?"

"Fourteen hundred and fifty-two."

"_Four o'clock, March twenty-sixth, fourteen hundred and fifty-two_,"
Mahommed repeated slowly, as if writing and verifying each word. Then he
cried with fervor: "There is no God but God!"

Twice he crossed the floor; after which, unwilling probably to submit
himself at that moment to observation by any man, he returned to the
Prince:

"Thou hast leave to retire; but keep within call. In this mighty
business who is worthier to be the first help of my hands than the
Messenger of the Stars?"

The Prince saluted and withdrew.

At length Phranza wearied of waiting, and being summoned home left the
two affairs in charge of an ambassador instructed to forego no
opportunity which might offer to press them to conclusions. Afterwhile
Mahommed went into Asia to suppress an insurrection in Caramania. The
Greek followed him from town to camp, until, tiring of the importunity,
the Sultan one day summoned him to his tent.

"Tell my excellent friend, the Lord of Constantinople, thy master, that
the Sultana Maria declines his offer of marriage."

"Well, my Lord," said the ambassador, touched by the brevity of the
communication, "did not the great lady deign an explanation?"

"She declined--that is all."

The ambassador hurried a courier to Constantinople with the answer. For
the first time he ventured to express a doubt of the Turk's sincerity.

He would have been a wiser man and infinitely more useful to his
sovereign, could he have heard Mahommed again in colloquy with the
Prince of India.

"How long am I to endure this dog of a _Gabour?_" [Footnote: Mahommed
always wrote and spoke of Byzantines as _Romans_, except when in passion;
then he called them _Gabours_.] asked the Sultan, angrily. "It was not
enough to waylay me in my palace; he pursued me into the field; now he
imbitters my bread, now at my bedside he drives sleep from me, now he
begrudges me time for prayer. How long, I say?"

The Prince answered quietly: "Until March twenty-sixth, fourteen hundred
and fifty-two."

"But if I put him to sleep, O Prince?"

"His master will send another in his place."

"Ah, but the interval! Will it not be so many days of rest?--so many
nights of unbroken sleep?"

"Has my Lord finished his census yet? Are his arsenals full? Has he his
ships, and sailors, and soldiers? Has he money according to the
estimate?"

"No."

"My Lord has said he must have cannon. Has he found an artificer to his
mind?"

Mahommed frowned.

"I will give my Lord a suggestion. Does it suit him to reply now to the
proposal of marriage, keeping the matter of the stipend open, he may
give half relief and still hold the Emperor, who stands more in need of
bezants than of a consort."

"Prince," said Mahommed, quickly, "as you go out send my secretary in."

"Despatch a messenger for the ambassador of my brother of Constantinople.
I will see him immediately."

This to the secretary.

And presently the ambassador had the matter for report above recited. In
the report he might have said with truth--a person styling himself
_Prince of India_ has risen to be Grand Vizier in fact, leaving the
title to Kalil.

These negotiations, lamentably barren of good results, were stretched
through half the year. But it is necessary to leave them for the time,
that we may return and see if the Emperor had better success in the
management of the domestic problem referred to as an inheritance.


CHAPTER II

A FIRE FROM THE HEGUMEN'S TOMB


The great fire burned its way broadly over two hills of the city,
stopping at the wall of the garden on the eastern front of Blacherne.
How it originated, how many houses were destroyed, how many of the
people perished in the flames and in the battle waged to extinguish
them, were subjects of unavailing inquiry through many days.

For relief of the homeless, Constantine opened his private coffers. He
also assumed personal direction of the removal of the debris cumbering
the unsightly blackened districts, and, animated by his example, the
whole population engaged zealously in the melancholy work. When Galata,
laying her jealousies aside, contributed money and sent companies of
laborers over to the assistance of her neighbor, it actually seemed as
if the long-forgotten age of Christian brotherhood was to be renewed.
But, alas! This unity, bred of so much suffering, so delightful as a
rest from factious alarms, so suggestive of angelic society and heavenly
conditions in general, disappeared--not slowly, but almost in a
twinkling.

It was afternoon of the second day after the fire. Having been on
horseback since early morning, the Emperor, in need of repose, had
returned to his palace; but met at the portal by an urgent request for
audience from the Princess Irene, he received her forthwith. The reader
can surmise the business she brought for consideration, and also the
amazement with which her royal kinsman heard of the discovery and rescue
of Lael. For a spell his self-possession forsook him. In anticipation of
the popular excitement likely to be aroused by the news, he summoned his
councillors, and after consultation, appointed a commission to
investigate the incident, first sending a guard to take possession of
the cistern.

Like their master, the commissioners had never heard of the first
profanation of the ancient reservoir; as a crime, consequently, this
repetition was to them original in all its aspects, and they addressed
themselves to the inquiry incredulously; but after listening to Sergius,
and to the details the little Jewess was able to give them, the
occurrence forced itself on their comprehension as more than a crime at
law--it took on the proportions and color of a conspiracy against
society and religion. Then its relative consequences presented
themselves. Who were concerned in it?

The name of Demedes startled them by suddenly opening a wide horizon of
conjecture. Some were primarily disposed to welcome the intelligence for
the opportunity it offered His Majesty to crush the Academy of Epicurus,
but a second thought cooled their ardor; insomuch that they began
drawing back in alarm. The Brotherhood of the St. James' was powerful,
and it would certainly resent any humiliation their venerable Hegumen
might sustain through the ignominious exposure of his son.

In great uncertainty, and not a little confusion, the commissionate body
hied from the Princess Irene to the cistern. While careful to hide it
from his associates, each of them went with a scarce admitted hope that
there would be a failure of the confirmations at least with respect to
the misguided Demedes; and not to lose sight of Nilo, in whom they
already discerned a serviceable scapegoat, they required him to go with
them.

The revelations call for a passing notice. In the court the body of the
keeper was found upon the pavement. The countenance looked the terror of
which the man died, and as a spectacle grimly prepared the beholders for
the disclosures which were to follow.

There was need of resolution to make the dismal ferriage from the lower
platform in the cistern, but it was done, Nilo at the oars. When the
visitors stepped on the landing of the "palace," their wonder was
unbounded. When they passed through the battered doorway, and standing
under the circlet, in which the lights were dead, gazed about them, they
knew not which was most astonishing, the courage of the majestic black
or the audacity of the projector of the villanous scheme. But where was
he? We may be sure there was no delay in the demand for him. While the
fishing tongs were being brought, the apartments were inspected, and a
list of their contents made. Then the party collected at the edge of the
landing. The secret hope was faint within them, for the confirmations so
far were positive, and the terrible negro, not in the least abashed, was
showing them where his enemy went down. They gave him the tongs, and at
the first plunge he grappled the body, and commenced raising it. They
crowded closer around him, awe-struck yet silently praying: Holy Mother,
grant it be any but the Hegumen's son! A white hand, the fingers gay
with rings, appeared above the water. The fisherman took hold of it, and
with a triumphant smile, drew the corpse out, and laid it face up for
better viewing. The garments were still bright, the gilded mail sparkled
bravely. One stooped with the light, and said immediately:

"It is he--Demedes!"

Then the commissioners looked at each other--there was no need of
speech--a fortunate thing, for at that instant there was nothing of
which they were more afraid.

Avoidance of the dreaded complications was now impossible--so at least
it seemed to them. Up in the keeper's room, whither they hurriedly
adjourned, it was resolved to despatch a messenger to His Majesty with
an informal statement of the discoveries, and a request for orders. The
unwillingness to assume responsibility was natural.

Constantine acted promptly, and with sharp discernment of the
opportunity afforded the mischief-makers. The offence was to the city,
and it should see the contempt in which the conspirators held it, the
danger escaped, and the provocation to the Most Righteous; if then there
were seditions, his conscience was acquit. He sent Phranza to break the
news to the Hegumen, and went in person to the Monastery, arriving
barely in time to receive the blessings of his reverend friend, who,
overcome by the shock, died in his arms. Returning sadly to Blacherne,
he ordered the corpses of the guilty men to be exposed for two days
before the door of the keeper's house, and the cistern thrown open for
visitation by all who desired to inspect the Palace of Darkness, as he
appropriately termed the floating tenement constructed with such wicked
intents. He also issued a proclamation for the suppression of the
Epicurean Academy, and appointed a day of Thanksgiving to God for the
early exposure of the conspiracy. Nilo he sent to a cell in the
Cynegion, ostensibly for future trial, but really to secure him from
danger; in his heart he admired the King's spirit, and hoped a day would
come when he could safely and suitably reward him.

On the part of the people the commotion which ensued was extraordinary.
They left the fire to its smouldering, and in steady currents marched
past the ghastly exhibits prepared for them in the street, looked at
them, shuddered, crossed themselves, and went their ways apparently
thankful for the swiftness of the judgment which had befallen; nor was
there one heard to criticise the Emperor's course. The malefactors were
dropped, like unclean clods, into the earth at night, without ceremony
or a mourner in attendance. Thus far all well.

At length the day of thanksgiving arrived. By general agreement, there
was not a sign of dissatisfaction to be seen. The most timorous of the
commissioners rested easy. Sancta Sophia was the place appointed for the
services, and Constantine had published his intention to be present. He
had donned the Basilean robes; his litter was at the door of the palace;
his guard of horse and foot was formed, when the officer on duty at the
gate down by the Port of Blacherne arrived with a startling report.

"Your Majesty," he said, unusually regardless of the ancient salutation,
"there is a great tumult in the city."

The imperial countenance became stern.

"This is a day of thanks to God for a great mercy; who dares profane it
by tumult?"

"I must speak from hearsay," the officer answered.... "The funeral of
the Hegumen of the St. James took place at daylight this morning"--

"Yes," said Constantine, sighing at the sad reminder, "I had intended to
assist the Brotherhood. But proceed."

"The Brothers, with large delegations from the other Monasteries, were
assembled at the tomb, when Gennadius appeared, and began to preach, and
he wrought upon his hearers until they pushed the coffin into the vault,
and dispersed through the streets, stirring up the people."

At this the Emperor yielded to his indignation.

"Now, by the trials and sufferings of the Most Christian Mother, are we
beasts insensible to destruction? Or idiots exempt from the penalties of
sin and impiety? And he--that genius of unrest--that master of foment--
God o' Mercy, what has he laid hold of to lead so many better men to
betray their vows and the beads at their belts? Tell me--speak--my
patience is nearly gone."

For an instant, be it said, the much tried Sovereign beheld a strong
hand move within reach, as offering itself for acceptance. No doubt he
saw it as it was intended, the symbol and suggestion of a policy. Pity
he did not take it! For then how much of mischance had been averted from
himself--Constantinople might not have been lost to the Christian
world--the Greek Church had saved its integrity by recognizing the union
with the Latins consummated at the Council of Florence--Christianity had
not been flung back for centuries in the East, its birthplace.

"Your Majesty," the officer returned, "I can report what I heard,
leaving its truth to investigation.... In his speech by the tomb
Gennadius admitted the awfulness of the crime attempted by Demedes, and
the justice of the punishment the young man suffered, its swiftness
proving it to have been directed by Heaven; but he declared its
conception was due to the Academy of Epicurus, and that there remained
nothing deserving study and penance except the continued toleration
without which the ungodly institution had passed quickly, as plagues fly
over cities purified against them. The crime, he said, was ended. Let
the dead bury the dead. But who were they responsible for grace to the
Academy? And he answered himself, my Lord, by naming the Church and the
State."

"Ah! He attacked the Church then?"

"No, my Lord, he excused it by saying it had been debauched by an
_azymite_ Patriarch, and while that servant of prostitution and
heresy controlled it, wickedness would be protected and go on
increasing."

"And the State--how dealt he with the State?"

"The Church he described as Samson; the Patriarch, as an uncomely
Delilah who had speciously shorn it of its strength and beauty; the
State, as a political prompter and coadjutor of the Delilah; and Rome, a
false God seeking to promote worship unto itself through the debased
Church and State."

"God o' Mercy!" Constantine exclaimed, involuntarily signing to the
sword-bearer at his back; but recovering himself, he asked with forced
moderation: "To the purpose of it all--the object. What did he propose
to the Brothers?"

"He called them lovers of God in the livery of Christ, and implored them
to gird up their loins, and stand for the religion of the Fathers, lest
it perish entirely."

"Did he tell them what to do?"

"Yes, my Lord."

A wistful, eager look appeared on the royal face, and behind it an
expectation that now there would be something to justify arrest and
exile at least--something politically treasonable.

"He referred next to the thanksgiving services appointed to-day in
Sancta Sophia, and declared it an opportunity from Heaven, sent them and
all the faithful in the city, to begin a crusade for reform; not by
resort to sword and spear, for they were weapons of hell, but by
refusing to assist the Patriarch with their presence. A vision had come
to him in the night, he said--an angel of the Lord with the Madonna of
Blacherne--advising him of the Divine will. Under his further urgency--
and my Lord knows his power of speech--the Brothers listening, the St.
James' and all present from the other Orders, broke up and took to the
streets, where they are now, exhorting the people not to go to the
Church, and there is reason to believe they will"--

"Enough," said the Emperor, with sudden resolution. "The good Gregory
shall not pray God singly and alone."

Turning to Phranza, he ordered him to summon the court for the occasion.
"Let not one stay away," he continued; "and they shall put on their best
robes and whole regalia; for, going in state myself, I have need of
their utmost splendor. It is my will, further, that the army be drawn
from their quarters to the Church, men, music, and flags, and the navies
from their ships. And give greeting to the Patriarch, and notify him,
lest he make haste. Aside from these preparations, I desire the
grumblers be left to pursue their course unmolested. The sincere and
holy amongst them will presently have return of clear light."

This counter project was entered upon energetically.

Shortly after noon the military bore down to the old Church, braying the
streets with horns, drums and cymbals, and when they were at order in
the immense auditorium, their banners hanging unfurled from the
galleries, the Emperor entered, with his court; in a word, the brave,
honest, white-haired Patriarch had company multitudinous and noble as he
could desire. None the less, however, Gennadius had his way also--_the
people took no part in the ceremony_.

After the celebration, Constantine, in his chambers up in Blacherne,
meditated upon the day and its outcome. Phranza was his sole attendant.

"My dear friend," the Emperor began, breaking a long silence, and much
disquieted, "was not my predecessor, the first Constantine, beset with
religious dissensions?"

"If we may credit history, my Lord, he certainly was."

"How did he manage them?"

"He called a Council."

"A Council truly--was that all?"

"I do not recollect anything more."

"It was this way, I think. He first settled the faith, and then provided
against dispute."

"How, my Lord?"

"Well, there was one Arius, a Libyan, Presbyter of a little church in
Alexandria called Baucalis, preacher of the Unity of God"--

"I remember him now."

"Of the Unity of God as opposed to the Trinity. Him the first Constantine
sent to prison for life, did he not?"

Thereupon Phranza understood the subject of his master's meditation; but
being of a timid soul, emasculated by much practice of diplomacy,
usually a tedious, waiting occupation, he hastened to reply: "Even so,
my Lord. Yet he could afford to be heroic. He had consolidated the
Church, and was holding the world in the hollow of his hand."

Constantine allowed a sigh to escape him, and lapsed into silence; when
next he spoke, it was to say slowly:

"Alas, my dear friend! The people were not there"--meaning at Sancta
Sophia. "I fear, I fear"--

"What, my Lord?"

Another sigh deeper than the first one: "I fear I am not a statesman,
but only a soldier, with nothing to give God and my Empire except a
sword and one poor life."

These details will help the reader to a fair understanding of the
domestic involvements which overtook the Emperor about the time Mahommed
ascended the Turkish throne, and they are to be considered in addition
to the negotiations in progress with the Sultan. And as it is important
to give an idea of their speeding, we remark further, that from the
afternoon of the solemnity in Sancta Sophia the discussion then forced
upon him went from bad to worse, until he was seriously deprived both of
popular sympathy and the support of the organized religious orders. The
success of the solemnity in point of display, and the measures resorted
to, were not merely offensive to Gennadius and his ally, the Duke
Notaras; they construed them as a challenge to a trial of strength, and
so vigorously did they avail themselves of their advantages that, before
the Emperor was aware of it, there were two distinct parties in the
city, one headed by Gennadius, the other by himself and Gregory the
Patriarch.

Month by month the bitterness intensified; month by month the imperial
party fell away until there was little of it left outside the court and
the army and navy, and even they were subjected to incessant inroads--
until, finally, it came to pass that the Emperor was doubtful whom to
trust. Thereupon, of course, the season for energetic repressive measures
vanished, never to return.

Personalities, abuse, denunciation, lying, and sometimes downright blows
took the place of debate in the struggle. One day religion was an
exciting cause; next day, politics. Throughout it all, however,
Gennadius was obviously the master-spirit. His methods were consummately
adapted to the genius of the Byzantines. By confining himself strictly
to the Church wrangle, he avoided furnishing the Emperor pretexts for
legal prosecution; at the same time he wrought with such cunning that in
the monasteries the very High Residence of Blacherne was spoken of as a
den of _azymites_, while Sancta Sophia was abandoned to the Patriarch. To
be seen in the purlieus of the latter was a signal for vulgar anathemas
and social ostracism. His habits meantime were of a sort to make him a
popular idol. He grew, if possible, more severely penitential; he fasted
and flagellated himself; he slept on the stony floor before his crucifix;
he seldom issued from his cell, and when visited there, was always
surprised at prayers, the burden of which was forgiveness for signing the
detested Articles of Union with the Latins. The physical suffering he
endured was not without solace; he had heavenly visions and was attended
by angels. If in his solitude he fainted, the Holy Virgin of Blacherne
ministered to him, and brought him back to life and labor. First an
ascetic, then a Prophet--such was his progression.

And Constantine was a witness to the imposture, and smarted under it;
still he held there was nothing for him but to temporize, for if he
ordered the seizure and banishment of the all-powerful hypocrite, he
could trust no one with the order. The time was dark as a starless night
to the high-spirited but too amiable monarch, and he watched and waited,
or rather watched and drifted, extending confidence to but two
counsellors, Phranza and the Princess Irene. Even in their company he
was not always comfortable, for, strange to say, the advice of the woman
was invariably heroic, and that of the man invariably weak and
accommodating.

From this sketch the tendencies of the government can be right plainly
estimated, leaving the suspicion of a difference between the first
Constantine and the last to grow as the evils grew.


CHAPTER III

MIRZA DOES AN ERRAND FOR MAHOMMED


Vegetation along the Bosphorus was just issuing from what may be called
its budded state. In the gardens and protected spots on the European
side white and yellow winged butterflies now and then appeared without
lighting, for as yet there was nothing attractive enough to keep them.
Like some great men of whom we occasionally hear, they were in the world
before their time. In other words the month of May was about a week old,
and there was a bright day to recommend it--bright, only a little too
much tinctured with March and April to be all enjoyable. The earth was
still spongy, the water cold, the air crisp, and the sun deceitful.

About ten o'clock in the morning Constantinopolitans lounging on the
sea-wall were surprised by explosive sounds from down the Marmora.
Afterwhile they located them, so to speak, on a galley off St. Stephano.
At stated intervals, pale blue smoke would burst from the vessel,
followed by a hurry-skurry of gulls in the vicinity, and then the roar,
muffled by distance. The age of artillery had not yet arrived;
nevertheless, cannon were quite well known to fame. Enterprising traders
from the West had sailed into the Golden Horn with samples of the new
arm on their decks; they were of such rude construction as to be unfit
for service other than saluting. [Footnote: Cannon were first made of
hooped iron, widest at the mouth. The process of casting them was just
coming in.] So, now, while the idlers on the wall were not alarmed, they
were curious to make out who the extravagant fellows were, and waited
for the flag to tell them.

The stranger passed swiftly, firing as it went; and as the canvas was
new and the hull freshly painted in white, it rode the waves to
appearances a very beautiful "thing of life;" but the flag told nothing
of its nationality. There were stripes on it diagonally set, green,
yellow, and red, the yellow in the middle.

"The owners are not Genoese"--such was the judgment on the wall.

"No, nor Venetian, for that is not a lion in the yellow."

"What, then, is it?"

Pursued thus, the galley, at length rounding Point Serail (Demetrius),
turned into the harbor. When opposite the tower of Galata, a last salute
was fired from her deck; then the two cities caught up the interest, and
being able to make out decisively that the sign in the yellow field of
the flag was but a coat-of-arms, they said emphatically:

"It is not a national ship--only a great Lord;" and thereupon the
question became self-inciting:

"Who is he?"

Hardly had the anchor taken hold in the muddy bed of the harbor in front
of the port of Blacherne, before a small boat put off from the strange
ship, manned by sailors clad in flowing white trousers, short sleeveless
jackets, and red turbans of a style remarkable for amplitude. An
officer, probably the sailing-master, went with them, and he, too, was
heavily turbaned. A gaping crowd on the landing received the visitor
when he stepped ashore and asked to see the captain of the guard. To
that dignitary he delivered a despatch handsomely enveloped in yellow
silk, saying, in imperfect Greek:

"My Lord, just arrived, prays you to read the enclosure, and send it
forward by suitable hand. He trusts to your knowledge of what the
proprieties require. He will await the reply on his galley."

The sailing-master saluted profoundly, resumed seat in his boat, and
started back to the ship, leaving the captain of the guard to open the
envelope and read the communication, which was substantially as follows:

"From the galley, St. Agostino, May 5, Year of our Blessed Saviour,
1451.

"The undersigned is a Christian Noble of Italy, more particularly from
his strong Castle Corti on the eastern coast of Italy, near the ancient
city of Brindisi. He offers lealty to His Most Christian Majesty, the
Emperor of Constantinople, Defender of the Faith according to the
crucified Son of God (to whom be honor and praise forevermore), and
humbly represents that he is a well-knighted soldier by profession,
having won his spurs in battle, and taken the accolade from the hand of
Calixtus the Third, Bishop of Rome, and, yet more worthily, His Holiness
the Pope: that the time being peaceful in his country, except as it was
rent by baronial feuds and forays not to his taste, he left it in search
of employment and honors abroad; that he made the pilgrimage to the Holy
Sepulchre first, and secured there a number of precious relics, which he
is solicitous of presenting to His Imperial Majesty; that from long
association with the Moslems, whom Heaven, in its wisdom impenetrable to
the understanding of men, permits to profane the Holy Land with their
presence and wicked guardianship, he acquired a speaking knowledge of
the Arabic and Turkish languages; that he engaged in warfare against
those enemies of God, having the powerful sanction therefor of His
Holiness aforesaid, by whose direction he occupied himself chiefly with
chastising the Berber pirates of Tripoli, from whom he took prisoners,
putting them at his oars, where some of them now are. With the august
city of Byzantium he has been acquainted many years through report, and,
if its fame be truly published, he desires to reside in it, possibly to
the end of his days. Wherefore he presumes to address this his
respectful petition, praying its submission to His Most Christian
Majesty, that he may be assured if the proposal be agreeable to the
royal pleasure, and in the meantime have quiet anchorage for his galley.

UGO, COUNT CORTI."

In the eyes of the captain of the guard the paper was singular, but
explicit; moreover, the request seemed superfluous, considering the
laxity prevalent with respect to the coming and going of persons of all
nativities and callings. To be sure, trade was not as it used to be,
and, thanks to the enterprise and cunning of the Galatanese across the
harbor, the revenues from importations were sadly curtailed; still the
old city had its markets, and the world was welcome to them. The
argument, however, which silenced the custodian's doubt was, that of the
few who rode to the gates in their own galleys and kept them there ready
to depart if their reception were in the least chilling, how many signed
themselves as did this one? Italian counts were famous fighters, and
generally had audiences wherever they knocked. So he concluded to send
the enclosure up to the Palace without the intermediation of the High
Admiral, a course which would at least save time.

While the affair is thus pending, we may return to Count Corti, and say
an essential word or two of him.

The cannon, it is to be remarked, was not the only novelty of the
galley. Over the stern, where the aplustre cast its shadow in ordinary
crafts, there was a pavilion-like structure, high-raised, flat-roofed,
and with small round windows in the sides. Quite likely the progressive
ship-builders at Palos and Genoa would have termed the new feature a
cabin. It was beyond cavil an improvement; and on this occasion the
proprietor utilized it as he well might. Since the first gun off St.
Stephano, he had held the roof, finding it the best position to get and
enjoy a view of the capital, or rather of the walls and crowned
eminences they had so long and all-sufficiently defended. A chair had
been considerately brought up and put at his service, but in witness of
the charm the spectacle had for him from the beginning, he did not once
resort to it.

If only to save ourselves description of the man, and rescue him from a
charge of intrusion into the body of our story, we think it better to
take the reader into confidence at once, and inform him that Count Corti
is in fact our former acquaintance Mirza, the Emir of the Hajj. The
difference between his situation now, and when we first had sight of him
on his horse under the yellow flag in the valley of Zaribah is
remarkable; yet he is the same in one particular at least--he was in
armor then, and he is still in armor--that is, he affects the same
visorless casque, with its cape of fine rings buckled under the chin,
the same shirt and overalls of pliable mail, the same shoes of
transverse iron scales working into each other telescopically when the
feet are in movement, the same golden spurs, and a surcoat in every
particular like the Emir's, except it is brick-dust red instead of
green. And this constancy in armor should not be accounted a vanity; it
was a habit acquired in the school of arms which graduated him, and
which he persisted in partly for the inurement, and partly as a mark of
respect for Mahommed, with whom the gleam and clink of steel well
fashioned and gracefully worn was a passion, out of which he evolved a
suite rivalling those kinsmen of the Buccleuch who--

"--quitted not their harness bright, Neither by day nor yet by night."

Returning once again. It was hoped when Mirza was first introduced that
every one who might chance to spend an evening over these pages would
perceive the possibilities he prefigured, and adopt him as a favorite;
wherefore the interest may be more pressing to know what he, an Islamite
supposably without guile, a Janissary of rank, lately so high in his
master's confidence, is doing here, offering lealty to the Most
Christian Emperor, and denouncing the followers of the Prophet as
enemies of God. The appearances are certainly against him.

The explanation due, if only for coherence in our narrative, would be
clearer did the reader review the part of the last conversation in the
White Castle between the Prince of India and Mahommed, in which the
latter is paternally advised to study the Greek capital, and keep
himself informed of events within its walls. Yet, inasmuch as there is a
current in reading which one once fairly into is loath to be pushed out
of, we may be forgiven for quoting a material passage or two.... "There
is much for my Lord to do"--the Prince says, speaking to his noble
eleve. "It is for him to think and act as if Constantinople were his
capital temporarily in possession of another.... It is for him to learn
the city within and without; its streets and edifices; its hills and
walls; its strong and weak places; its inhabitants, commerce, foreign
relations; the character of its ruler, his resources and policies; its
daily events; its cliques, clubs, and religious factions; especially is
it for him to foment the differences Latin and Greek already a fire
which has long been eating out to air in an inflammable house."...
Mahommed, it will be recollected, acceded to the counsel, and in
discussing the selection of a person suitable for the secret agency, the
Prince said: ... "He who undertakes it should enter Constantinople and
live there above suspicion. He must be crafty, intelligent, courtly in
manner, accomplished in arms, of high rank, and with means to carry his
state bravely; for not only ought he to be conspicuous in the
Hippodrome; he should be welcome in the salons and palaces; along with
other facilities, he must be provided to buy service in the Emperor's
bedroom and council chamber--nay, at his elbow. Mature of judgment, it
is of prime importance that he possess my Lord's confidence
unalterably."... And when the ambitious Turk demanded: "The man, Prince,
the man!"--the wily tutor responded: "My Lord has already named him."--
"I?"--"Only to-night my Lord spoke of him as a marvel."--"Mirza?"... The
Jew then proceeded: "Despatch him to Italy; let him appear in
Constantinople, embarked from a galley, habited like an Italian, and with
a suitable Italian title. He speaks Italian already, is fixed in his
religion, and in knightly honor. Not all the gifts at the despot's
disposal, nor the blandishments of society can shake his allegiance--he
worships my Lord."...

Mahommed demurred to the proposal, saying: "So has Mirza become a part
of me, I am scarcely myself without him."

Now he who has allowed himself to become interested in the bright young
Emir, and pauses to digest these excerpts, will be aware of a grave
concern for him. He foresees the outcome of the devotion to Mahommed
dwelt upon so strongly by the Prince of India. An order to undertake the
secret service will be accepted certainly as it is given. The very
assurance that it will be accepted begets solicitude in the affair. Did
Mahommed decide affirmatively? What were the instructions given? Having
thus settled the coherences, we move on with the narrative.

It will be remembered, further, that close after the departure of the
Princess Irene from the old Castle, Mahommed followed her to Therapia,
and, as an Arab story-teller, was favored with an extended private
audience in which he extolled himself to her at great length, and
actually assumed the role of a lover. What is yet more romantic, he came
away a lover in fact.

The circumstance is not to be lightly dismissed, for it was of
immeasurable effect upon the fortunes of the Emir, and--if we can be
excused for connecting an interest so stupendous with one so
comparatively trifling--the fate of Constantinople. Theretofore the
Turk's ambition had been the sole motive of his designs against that
city, and, though vigorous, driving, and possibly enough of itself to
have pushed him on, there might yet have been some delay in the
achievement. Ambition derived from genius is cautious in its first
movements, counts the cost, ponders the marches to be made and the means
to be employed, and is at times paralyzed by the simple contemplation of
failure; in other words, dread of loss of glory is not seldom more
powerful than the hope of glory. After the visit to Therapia, however,
love reenforced ambition; or rather the two passions possessed Mahommed,
and together they murdered his sleep. He became impatient and irritable;
the days were too short, the months too long. Constantinople absorbed
him. He thought of nothing else waking, and dreamed of nothing else.
Well for him his faith in astrology, for by it the Prince of India was
able to hold him to methodic preparation.

There were times when he was tempted to seize the Princess, and carry
her off. Her palace was undefended, and he had but to raid it at night.
Why not? There were two reasons, either of them sufficient: first, the
stern old Sultan, his father, was a just man, and friendly to the
Emperor Constantine; but still stronger, and probably the deterrent in
fact, he actually loved the Princess with a genuine romantic sentiment,
her happiness an equal motive--loved her for herself--a thing perfectly
consistent, for in the Oriental idea there is always One the Highest.

Now, it was very lover-like in Mahommed, his giving himself up to
thought of the Princess while gliding down the Bosphorus, after leaving
his safeguard on her gate. He closed his eyes against the mellow light
on the water, and, silently admitting her the perfection of womanhood,
held her image before him until it was indelible in memory--face,
figure, manner, even her dress and ornaments--until his longing for her
became a positive hunger of soul.

As if to give us an illustration of the mal-apropos in coincidence, his
august father had selected a bride for him, and he was on the road to
Adrianople to celebrate the nuptials when he stopped at the White
Castle. The maiden chosen was of a noble Turkish family, but harem born
and bred. She might be charming, a very queen in the Seraglio; but,
alas! the kinswoman of the Christian Emperor had furnished a glimpse of
attractions which the fiancee to whom he was going could never
attain--attractions of mind and manner more lasting than those of mere
person; and as he finished the comparison, he beat his breast, and cried
out: "Ah, the partiality of the Most Merciful! To clothe this Greek with
all the perfections, and deny her to me!"

Withal, there was a method in Mahommed's passion. Setting his face
sternly against violating his own safeguard by abducting the Princess,
he fell into revision of her conversation; and then a light broke in
upon him--a light and a road to his object.

He recalled with particularity her reply to the message delivered to
her, supposably from himself, containing his avowal that he loved her
the more because she was a Christian, and singled out of it these
words: ... "A wife I might become, not from temptation of gain or power,
or in surrender to love--I speak not in derision of the passion, since,
like the admitted virtues, it is from God--nay, Sheik, in illustration
of what may otherwise be of uncertain meaning to him, tell Prince
Mahommed I might become his wife could I, by so doing, save or help the
religion I profess."

This he took to pieces.... "'She might become a wife.' Good!... 'She
might become my wife'--on condition.... What condition?" ... He beat his
breast again, this time with a laugh.

The rowers looked at him in wonder. What cared he for them? He had
discovered a way to make her his.... "Constantinople is the Greek
Church," he muttered, with flashing eyes. "I will take the city for my
own glory--to her then the glory of saving the Church! On to
Constantinople!"

And from that moment the fate of the venerable metropolis may be said to
have been finally sealed.

Within an hour after his return to the White Castle, he summoned Mirza,
and surprised him by the exuberance of his joy. He threw his arm over
the Emir's shoulder, and walked with him, laughing and talking, like a
man in wine. His nature was of the kind which, for the escape of
feeling, required action as well as words. At length he sobered down.

"Here, Mirza," he said. "Stand here before me.... Thou lovest me, I
believe?"

Mirza answered upon his knee: "My Lord has said it."

"I believe thee.... Rise and take pen and paper, and write, standing
here before me." [Footnote: A Turkish calligraphist works on his feet as
frequently as on a chair, using a pen made of reed and India ink reduced
to fluid.]

From a table near by the materials were brought, and the Emir, again
upon his knees, wrote as his master dictated.

The paper need not be given in full. Enough that it covered with uncommon
literalness--for the Conqueror's memory was prodigious--the suggestions
of the Prince of India already quoted respecting the duties of the agent
in Constantinople. While writing, the Emir was variously moved; one
instant, his countenance was deeply flushed, and in the next very pale;
sometimes his hand trembled. Mahommed meantime kept close watch upon him,
and now he asked:

"What ails thee?"

"My Lord's will is my will," was the answer--"yet"--

"Out--speak out."

"My Lord is sending me from him, and I dread losing my place at his
right hand."

Mahommed laughed heartily.

"Lay the fear betime," he then said, gravely. "Where thou goest, though
out of reach of my right hand, there will my thought be. Hear--nay, at
my knee."

He laid the hand spoken of on Mirza's shoulder, and stooped towards him.
"Ah, my Saladin, thou wert never in love, I take it? Well--I am. Look
not up now, lest--lest thou think my bearded cheek hath changed to a
girl's."

Mirza did not look up, yet he knew his master was blushing.

"Where thou goest, I would give everything but the sword of Othman to be
every hour of the day, for she abideth there.... I see a ring on thy
hand--the ruby ring I gave thee the day thou didst unhorse the
uncircumcised deputy of Hunyades. Give it back to me. 'Tis well. See, I
place it on the third finger of my left hand. They say whoever looketh
at her is thenceforth her lover. I caution thee, and so long as this
ruby keepeth color unchanged, I shall know thou art keeping honor bright
with me--that thou lovest her, because thou canst not help it, yet for
my sake, and because I love her.... Look up now, my falcon--look up, and
pledge me."

"I pledge my Lord," Mirza answered.

"Now I will tell thee. She is that kinswoman of the _Gabour_ Emperor
Constantine whom we saw here the day of our arrival. Or didst thou see
her? I have forgotten."

"I did not, my Lord."

"Well, thou wilt know her at sight; for in grace and beauty I think she
must be a daughter of the houri this moment giving immortal drink to the
beloved of Allah, even the Prophet."

Mahommed changed his tone.

"The paper and the pen."

And taking them he signed the instructions, and the signature was the
same as that on the safeguard on the gate at Therapia.

"There--keep it well; for when thou gettest to Constantinople, thou wilt
become a Christian." He laughed again. "Mirza--the Mirza Mahommed swore
by, and appointed keeper of his heart's secret--he a Christian! This
will shift the sin of the apostasy to me."

Mirza took the paper.

"I have not chosen to write of the other matter. In what should it be
written, if at all, except in my blood--so close is it to me?... These
are the things I expect of thee. Art thou listening? She shall be to
thee as thine eye. Advise me of her health, and where she goes; with
whom she consorts; what she does and says; save her from harm: does one
speak ill of her, kill him, only do it in my name--and forget not, O my
Saladin!--as thou hopest a garden and a couch in Paradise--forget not
that in Constantinople, when I come, I am to receive her from thy hand
peerless in all things as I left her to-day.... Thou hast my will all
told. I will send money to thy room to-night, and thou wilt leave
to-night, lest, being seen making ready in the morning, some idiot
pursue thee with his wonder.... As thou art to be my other self, be it
royally. Kings never account to themselves.... Thou wantest now nothing
but this signet."

From his breast he drew a large ring, its emerald setting graven with
the signature at the bottom of the instructions, and gave it to him.

"Is there a Pacha or a Begler-bey, Governor of a city or a province,
property of my father, who refuseth thy demand after showing him this,
report him, and _Shintan_ will be more tolerable unto him than I,
when I have my own. It is all said. Go now.... We will speak of rewards
when next we meet.... Or stay! Thou art to communicate by way of this
Castle, and for that I will despatch a man to thee in Constantinople.
Remember--for every word thou sendest me of the city, I look for two of
her.... Here is my hand." Mirza kissed it, and departed.


CHAPTER IV

THE EMIR IN ITALY


We know now who Count Corti is, and the objects of his coming to
Constantinople--that he is a secret agent of Mahommed--that, summed up
in the fewest words, his business is to keep the city in observation,
and furnish reports which will be useful to his master in the preparation
the latter is making for its conquest. We also know he is charged with
very peculiar duties respecting the Princess Irene.

The most casual consideration of these revelations will make it apparent,
in the next place, that hereafter the Emir must be designated by his
Italian appellative in full or abbreviated. Before forsaking the old
name, there is lively need of information, whether as he now stands on
the deck of his galley, waiting the permissions prayed by him of the
Emperor Constantine, he is, aside from title, the same Mirza lately so
honored by Mahommed.

From the time the ship hove in sight of the city, he had kept his place
on the cabin. The sailors, looking up to him occasionally, supposed him
bound by the view, so motionless he stood, so steadfastly he gazed. Yet
in fact his countenance was not expressive of admiration or rapture. A
man with sound vision may have a mountain just before him and not see
it; he may be in the vortex of a battle deaf to its voices; a thought or
a feeling can occupy him in the crisis of his life to the exclusion of
every sense. If perchance it be so with the Emir now, he must have
undergone a change which only a powerful cause could have brought about.
He had been so content with his condition, so proud of his fame already
won, so happy in keeping prepared for the opportunities plainly in his
sight, so satisfied with his place in his master's confidence, so
delighted when that master laid a hand upon his shoulder and called him
familiarly, now his Saladin, and now his falcon.

Faithfully, as bidden, Mirza sallied from the White Castle the night of
his appointment to the agency in Constantinople. He spoke to no one of
his intention, for he well knew secrecy was the soul of the enterprise.
For the same reason, he bought of a dervish travelling with the Lord
Mahommed's suite a complete outfit, including the man's donkey and
donkey furniture. At break of day he was beyond the hills of the
Bosphorus, resolved to skirt the eastern shore of the Marmora and
Hellespont, from which the Greek population had been almost entirely
driven by the Turks, and at the Dardanelles take ship for Italy direct
as possible--a long route and trying--yet there was in it the total
disappearance from the eyes of acquaintances needful to success in his
venture. His disguise insured him from interruption on the road,
dervishes being sacred characters in the estimation of the Faithful, and
generally too poor to excite cupidity. A gray-frocked man, hooded,
coarsely sandalled, and with a blackened gourd at his girdle for the
alms he might receive from the devout, no Islamite meeting him would
ever suspect a large treasure in the ragged bundle on the back of the
patient animal plodding behind him like a tired dog.

The Dardanelles was a great stopping-place for merchants and tradesmen,
Greek, Venetian, Genoese. There Mirza provided himself with an Italian
suit, adopted the Italian tongue, and became Italian. He borrowed a
chart of the coast of Italy from a sailor, to determine the port at
which it would be advisable for him to land.

While settling this point, the conversation had with the Prince of India
in the latter's tent at Zaribah arose to mind, and he recalled with
particularity all that singular person said with reference to the accent
observable in his speech. He also went over the description he himself
had given the Prince of the house or castle from which he had been taken
in childhood. A woman had borne him outdoors, under a blue sky, along a
margin of white sand, an orchard on one hand, the sea on the other. He
remembered the report of the waves breaking on the shore, the olive-green
color of the trees in the orchard, and the battlemented gate of the
castle; whereupon the Prince said the description reminded him of the
eastern shore of Italy in the region of Brindisi.

It was a vague remark certainly; but now it made a deeper impression on
the Emir than at the moment of its utterance and pointed his attention
to Brindisi. The going to Italy, he argued, was really to get a warrant
for the character he was to assume in Constantinople; that is, to obtain
some knowledge of the country, its geography, political divisions,
cities, rulers, and present conditions generally, without which the
slightest cross-examination by any of the well-informed personages about
the Emperor would shatter his pretensions in an instant. Then it was he
fell into a most unusual mood.

Since the hour the turbaned rovers captured him he had not been assailed
by a desire to see or seek his country and family. Who was his father?
Was his mother living? Probably nothing could better define the
profundity of the system underlying the organization of the Janissaries
than that he had never asked those questions with a genuine care to have
them solved. What a suppression of the most ordinary instincts of nature!
How could it have been accomplished so completely? As a circumstance, its
tendency is to confirm the theory that men are creatures of education and
association.... Was his mother living? Did she remember him? Had she wept
for him? What sort of being was she? If living, how old would she be? And
he actually attempted a calculation. Calling himself twenty-six she might
not be over forty-five. That was not enough to dim her eyes or more than
slightly silver her hair; and as respects her heart, are not the
affections of a mother flowers for culling by Death alone?

Such reflections never fail effect. A tenderness of spirit is the first
token of their presence; then memory and imagination begin striving; the
latter to bring the beloved object back, and the former to surround it
with sweetest circumstances. They wrought with Mirza as with everybody
else. The yearning they excited in him was a surprise; presently he
determined to act on the Prince of India's suggestion, and betake
himself to the eastern coast of Italy.

The story of the sack of a castle was of a kind to have wide circulation;
at the same time this one was recent enough to be still in the memory of
persons living. Finding the place of its occurrence was the difficulty.
If in the vicinity of Brindisi--well, he would go and ask. The yearning
spoken of did not come alone; it had for companion, Conscience, as yet in
the background.

There were vessels bound for Venice. One was taking in water, after
which it would sail for Otranto. It seemed a fleet craft, with a fair
crew, and a complement of stout rowers. Otranto was south of Brindisi a
little way, and the castle he wanted to hear of might have been situated
between those cities. Who could tell? Besides, as an Italian nobleman,
to answer inquiry in Constantinople, he would have to locate himself
somewhere, and possibly the coast in question might accommodate him with
both a location and a title. The result was he took passage to Otranto.

While there he kept his role of traveller, but was studious, and picked
up a great fund of information bearing upon the part awaiting him. He
lived and dressed well, and affected religious circles. It was the day
when Italy was given over to the nobles--the day of robbers, fighting,
intrigues and usurpations--of free lances and bold banditti--of
government by the strong hand, of right determinable by might, of
ensanguined Guelphs and Ghibellines. Of these the Emir kept clear.

By chance he fell in with an old man of secondary rank in the city much
given to learning, an habitue of a library belonging to one of the
monasteries. It came out ere long that the venerable person was familiar
with the coast from Otranto to Brindisi, and beyond far as Polignano.

"It was in my sturdier days," the veteran said, with a dismal glance at
his shrunken hands. "The people along the shore were much harried by
Moslem pirates. Landing from their galleys, the depredators burned
habitations, slew the men, and carried off such women as they thought
would fetch a price. They even assaulted castles. At last we were driven
to the employment of a defensive guard cooperative on land and water. I
was a captain. Our fights with the rovers were frequent and fierce.
Neither side showed quarter."

The reminiscence stimulated Mirza to inquiry. He asked the old man if he
could mention a castle thus attacked.

"Yes, there was one belonging to Count Corti, a few leagues beyond
Brindisi. The Count defended himself, but was slain."

"Had he a family?"

"A wife and a boy child."

"What became of them?"

"By good chance the Countess was in Brindisi attending a fete; she
escaped, of course. The boy, two or three years of age, was made
prisoner, and never heard of afterwards."

A premonition seized Mirza.

"Is the Countess living?"

"Yes. She never entirely recovered from the shock, but built a house
near the site of the castle, and clearing a room in the ruins, turned it
into a chapel. Every morning and evening she goes there, and prays for
the soul of her husband, and the return of her lost boy."

"How long is it since the poor lady was so bereft?"

The narrator reflected, and replied: "Twenty-two or three years."

"May the castle be found?"

"Yes."

"Have you been to it?"

"Many times."

"How was it named?"

"After the Count--_Il Castillo di Corti_."

"Tell me something of its site."

"It is down close by the sea. A stone wall separates its front enclosure
from the beach. Sometimes the foam of the waves is dashed upon the wall.
Through a covered gate one looks out, and all is water. Standing on the
tower, all landward is orchard and orchard--olive and almond trees
intermixed. A great estate it was and is. The Countess, it is understood,
has a will executed; if the boy does not return before her death, the
Church is to be her legatee."

There was more of the conversation, covering a history of the Corti
family, honorable as it was old--the men famous warriors, the women
famous beauties.

Mirza dreamed through the night of the Countess, and awoke with a vague
consciousness that the wife of the Pacha, the grace of whose care had
been about him in childhood--a good woman, gentle and tender--was after
all but a representative of the mother who had given him birth, just as
on her part every mother is mercifully representative of God. Under
strong feeling he took boat for Brindisi.

There he had no trouble in confirming the statements of his Otranto
acquaintance. The Countess was still living, and the coast road
northwardly would bring him to the ruins of her castle. The journey did
not exceed five leagues.

What he might find at the castle, how long he would stay, what do, were
so uncertain--indeed everything in the connection was so dependent upon
conditions impossible of foresight, that he resolved to set out on foot.
To this course he was the more inclined by the mildness of the weather,
and the reputation of the region for freshness and beauty.

About noon he was fairly on the road. Persons whom he met--and they were
not all of the peasant class--seeing a traveller jaunty in plumed cap,
light blue camail, pointed buskins, and close-fitting hose the color of
the camail, sword at his side, and javelin in hand, stayed to observe
him long as he was in sight, never dreaming they were permitted to
behold a favorite of one of the bloody Mahounds of the East.

Over hill and down shallow vales: through stone-fenced lanes; now in the
shade of old trees; now along a seashore partially overflowed by languid
waves, he went, lighter in step than heart, for he was in the mood by no
means uncommon, when the spirit is prophesying evil unto itself. He was
sensible of the feeling, and for shame would catch the javelin in the
middle and whirl it about him defensively until it sung like a
spinning-wheel; at times he stopped and, with his fingers in his mouth,
whistled to a small bird as if it were a hunting hawk high in air.

Once, seeing a herd of goats around a house thatched and half-hidden in
vines, he asked for milk. A woman brought it to him, with a slice of
brown bread; and while he ate and drank, she stared at him in respectful
admiration; and when he paid her in gold, she said, courtesying low: "A
glad life to my Lord! I will pray the Madonna to make the wish good."
Poor creature! She had no idea she was blessing one in whose faith the
Prophet was nearer God than God's own Son.

At length the road made an abrupt turn to the right, bringing him to a
long stretch of sandy beach. Nearly as he could judge, it was time for
the castle to appear, and he was anxious to make it before sundown. Yet
in the angle of the wood he saw a wayside box of stone sheltering an
image of the Virgin, with the Holy Child in its arms. Besides being
sculptured better than usual, the figures were covered with flowers in
wreath and bouquet. A dressed slab in front of the structure, evidently
for the accommodation of worshippers, invited him to rest, and he took
the seat, and looking up at the mother, she appeared to be looking at
him. He continued his gaze, and presently the face lost its stony
appearance--stranger still, it smiled. It was illusion, of course, but
he arose startled, and moved on with quickened step. The impression went
with him. Why the smile? He did not believe in images: much less did he
believe in the Virgin, except as she was the subject of a goodly story.
And absorbed in the thought, he plodded on, leaving the sun to go down
unnoticed.

Thereupon the shadows thickened in the woods at his left hand, while the
sound of the incoming waves at his right increased as silence laid its
velvet finger with a stronger compress on all other pulsations. Here and
there a star peeped timidly through the purpling sky--now it was dusk--a
little later, it would be night--and yet no castle!

He pushed on more vigorously; not that he was afraid--fear and the
falcon of Mahommed had never made acquaintance--but he began to think of
a bed in the woods, and worse yet, he wanted the fast-going daylight to
help him decide if the castle when he came to it were indeed the castle
of his fathers. He had believed all along, if he could see the pile
once, his memory would revive and help him to recognition.

At last night fell, and there was darkness trebled on the land, and on
the sea darkness, except where ghostly lines of light stretched
themselves along the restless water. Should he go on?...

Then he heard a bell--one soft tone near by and silvery clear. He
halted. Was it of the earth? A hush deeper of the sound--and he was
wondering if another illusion were not upon him, when again the bell!

"Oh!" he muttered, "a trick of the monks in Otranto! Some soul is
passing."

He pressed forward, guided by the tolling. Suddenly the trees fell away,
and the road brought him to a stone wall heavily coped. On further, a
blackened mass arose in dim relief against the sky, with heavy merlons
on its top.

"It is the embattled gate!" he exclaimed, to himself--"the embattled
gate!--and here the beach!--and, O Allah! the waves there are making the
reports they used to!"

The bell now tolled with awful distinctness, filling him with unwonted
chills--tolled, as if to discourage his memory in its struggle to lift
itself out of a lapse apparently intended to be final as the grave--
tolled solemnly, as if his were the soul being rung into the next life. A
rush of forebodings threatened him with paralysis of will, and it was
only by a strong exertion he overcame it, and brought himself back to the
situation, and the question, What next?

Now Mirza was not a man to forego a purpose lightly. Emotional, but not
superstitious, he tried the sword, if it were loose in the scabbard, and
then, advancing the point of his javelin, entered the darkened gallery
of the gate. Just as he emerged from it on the inner side, the bell
tolled.

"A Moslem doth not well," he thought, silently repeating a saying of the
_jadis_, "to accept a Christian call to prayer; but," he answered in
self-excuse, "I am not going to prayer--I am seeking"--he stopped, for
very oddly, the face of the Virgin in the stone box back in the angle of
the road presented itself to him, and still more oddly, he felt firmer of
purpose seeing again the smile on the face. Then he finished the sentence
aloud--"my mother _who is a Christian._"

There was a jar in the conclusion, and he went back to find it, and
having found it, he was surprised. Up to that moment, he had not thought
of his mother a Christian. How came the words in his mouth now? Who
prompted them? And while he was hastily pondering the effect upon her of
the discovery that he himself was an Islamite, the image in the box
reoccurred to him, this time with the child in its arms; and thereupon
the mystery seemed to clear itself at once. "Mother and mother!" he
said. "What if my coming were the answer of one of them to the other's
prayer?"

The idea affected him; his spirit softened; the heat of tears sprang to
his eyelids; and the effort he made to rise above the unmanliness
engaged him so he failed to see the other severer and more lasting
struggle inevitable if the Countess were indeed the being to whom he
owed the highest earthly obligations--the struggle between natural
affection and honor, as the latter lay coiled up in the ties binding him
to Mahommed.

The condition, be it remarked, is ours; for from that last appearance of
the image by the wayside--from that instant, marking a new era in his
life--often as the night and its incidents recurred to him, he had never
a doubt of his relationship to the Countess. Indeed, not only was she
thenceforward his mother, but all the ground within the gate was his by
natal right, and the castle was the very castle from which he had been
carried away, over the body of his heroic father--_he was the Count
Corti_!

These observations will bring the reader to see more distinctly the
Emir's state after passing the gate. Of the surroundings, he beheld
nothing but shadows more or less dense and voluminous; the mournful
murmuring of the wind told him they belonged to trees and shrubbery in
clumps. The road he was on, although blurred, was serviceable as a
guide, and he pursued it until brought to a building so masked by night
the details were invisible. Following its upper line, relieved against
the gray sky, he made out a broken front and one tower massively
battlemented. A pavement split the road in two; crossing it, he came to
an opening, choked with timbers and bars of iron; surmisably the front
portal at present in disuse. He needed no explanation of its condition.
Fire and battle were familiars of his.

The bell tolled on. The sound, so passing sweet elsewhere, seemed to
issue from the yawning portal, leaving him to fancy the interior a
lumber of floors, galleries, and roofs in charred tumble down.

Mirza turned away presently, and took the left branch of the road; since
he could not get into the castle, he would go around it; and in doing
so, he borrowed from the distance traversed a conception of its
immensity, as well as of the importance the countship must have enjoyed
in its palmy days.

At length he gained the rear of the great pile. The wood there was more
open, and he was pleased with the sight of lights apparently gleaming
through windows, from which he inferred a hamlet pitched on a broken
site. Then he heard singing; and listening, never had human voices
seemed to him so impressively solemn. Were they coming or going?

Ere long a number of candles, very tall, and screened from the wind by
small lanterns of transparent paper, appeared on the summit of an
ascent; next moment the bearers of the candles were in view--boys
bareheaded and white frocked. As they began to descend the height, a
bevy of friars succeeded them, their round faces and tonsured crowns
glistening in ruddy contrast with their black habits. A choir of four
singers, three men and one woman, followed the monks. Then a linkman in
half armor strode across the summit, lighting the way for a figure, also
in black, which at once claimed Mirza's gaze.

As he stared at the figure, the account given him by the old captain in
Otranto flashed upon his memory. The widow of the murdered count had
cleared a room in the castle, and fitted it up as a chapel, and every
morning and evening she went thither to pray for the soul of her husband
and the return of her lost boy.

The words were alive with suggestions; but suggestions imply
uncertainty; wherefore they are not a reason for the absolute conviction
with which the Emir now said to himself:

"It is she--the Countess--my mother!"

There must be in every heart a store of prevision of which we are not
aware--occasions bring it out with such sudden and bewildering effect.

Everything--hymn, tolling bell, lights, boys, friars, procession--was
accessory to that veiled, slow-marching figure. And in habiliment,
movement, air, with what telling force it impersonated sorrow! On the
other hand, how deep and consuming the sorrow itself must be!

She--he beheld only her--descended the height without looking up or
around--a little stooped, yet tall and of dignified carriage--not old
nor yet young--a noble woman worthy reverence.

While he was making these comments, the procession reached the foot of
the ascent; then the boys and friars came between, and hid her from his
view.

"O Allah! and thou his Prophet!" he exclaimed. "Am I not to see her
face? Is she not to know me?"

Curiously the question had not presented itself before; neither when he
resolved to come, nor while on the way. To say truth, he had been all
the while intent on the one partial object--to see her. He had not
anticipated the awakening the sight might have upon his feelings.

"Am I not to discover myself to her? Is she never to know me?" he
repeated.

The lights in the hands of the boys were beginning to gleam along a
beaten road a short distance in front of the agitated Emir conducting to
the castle. He divined at once that the Countess was coming to the
chapel for the usual evening service, and that, by advancing to the side
of the road, he could get a near view of her as she passed. He started
forward impulsively, but after a few steps stopped, trembling like a
child imagining a ghost.

Now our conception of the man forbids us thinking him overcome by a
trifle, whether of the air or in the flesh. A change so extreme must
have been the work of a revelation of quick and powerful consequence--and
it was, although the first mention may excite a smile. In the gleam of
mental lightning--we venture on the term for want of another more
descriptive--he had been reminded of the business which brought him to
Italy.

Let us pause here, and see what the reminder means; if only because the
debonair Mirza, with whom we have been well pleased, is now to become
another person in name and character, commanding our sympathies as
before, but for a very different reason.

This was what the lightning gave him to see, and not darkly: If he
discovered himself to the Countess, he must expose his history from the
night the rovers carried him away. True, the tale might be given
generally, leaving its romance to thrill the motherly heart, and exalt
him the more; for to whom are heroes always the greatest heroes?
Unhappily steps in confession are like links in a chain, one leads to
another.... Could he, a Christian born, tell her he was an apostate? Or
if he told her, would it not be one more grief to the many she was
already breaking under--one, the most unendurable? And as to himself,
how could he more certainly provoke a forfeiture of her love?... She
would ask--if but to thank God for mercies--to what joyful accident his
return was owing? And then? Alas! with her kiss on his brow, could he
stand silent? More grievous yet, could he deceive her? If nothing is so
murderous of self-respect as falsehood, a new life begun with a lie
needs no prophet to predict its end. No, he must answer the truth. This
conviction was the ghost which set him trembling. An admission that he
was a Moslem would wound her, yet the hope of his conversion would
remain--nay, the labor in making the hope good might even renew her
interest in life; but to tell her he was in Italy to assist in the
overthrow of a Christian Emperor for the exaltation of an infidel--God
help him! Was ever such a monster as he would then become in her eyes?...
The consequences of that disclosure, moreover, were not to the Countess
and himself merely. With a sweep of wing one's fancy is alone capable of,
he was borne back to the White Castle, and beheld Mahommed. When before
did a Prince, contemplating an achievement which was to ring the world,
give trust with such absoluteness of faith? Poor Mirza! The sea rolled
indefinitely wide between the White Castle and this one of his fathers;
across it, nevertheless, he again heard the words: "As thou art to be my
other self, be it royally. Kings never account to themselves." If they
made betrayal horrible in thought, what would the fact be?...

Finally, last but not least of the reflections the lightning laid bare,
the Emir had been bred a soldier, and he loved war for itself and for
the glory it offered unlike every other glory. Was he to bid them both a
long farewell?

Poor Mirza! A few paragraphs back allusion was made to a struggle before
him between natural affection on one hand and honor on the other. Perhaps
it was obscurely stated; if so, here it is amended, and stripped of
conditions. He has found his mother. She is coming down the road--there,
behind the dancing lights, behind the friars, she is coming to pray for
him. Should he fly her recognition or betray his confiding master? Room
there may be to say the alternatives were a judgment upon him, but who
will deny him pity? ... There is often a suffering, sometimes an agony,
in indecision more wearing than disease, deadlier than sword-cuts.

The mournful pageant was now where its lights brought out parts of the
face of the smoke-stained building. With a loud clang a door was thrown
open, and a friar, in the black vestments usual in masses for the dead,
came out to receive the Countess. The interior behind him was dully
illuminated. A few minutes more, and the opportunity to see her face
would be lost. Still the Emir stood irresolute. Judge the fierceness of
the conflict in his breast!

At last he moved forward. The acolytes, with their great candles of
yellow wax, were going by as he gained the edge of the road. They looked
at him wonderingly. The friars, in Dominican cassocks, stared at him
also. Then the choir took its turn. The linkman at sight of him stopped
an instant, then marched on. The Emir really beheld none of them; his
eyes and thoughts were in waiting; and now--how his heart beat!--how
wistfully he gazed!--the Countess was before him, not three yards away.

Her garments, as said, were all black. A thick veil enveloped her head;
upon her breast her crossed hands shone ivory white. Two or three times
the right hand, in signing the cross, uncovered a ring upon the left--the
wedding ring probably. Her bearing was of a person not so old as
persecuted by an engrossing anguish. She did not once raise her face.

The Emir's heart was full of prayer.

"O Allah! It is my mother! If I may not speak to her, or kiss her feet--
if I may not call her mother--if I may not say, mother, mother, behold, I
am thy son come back--still, as thou art the Most Merciful! let me see
her face, and suffer her to see mine--once, O Allah! once, if nevermore!"

But the face remained covered--and so she passed, but in passing she
prayed. Though the voice was low, lie heard these words: "Oh, sweet
Mother! By the Blessed Son of thy love and passion, remember mine, I
beseech thee. Be with him, and bring him to me quickly. Miserable woman
that I am!"

The world, and she with it, swam in the tears he no longer tried to
stay. Stretching his arms toward her, he fell upon his knees, then upon
his face; and that the face was in the dust, he never minded. When he
looked up, she was gone on, the last of the procession. And he knew she
had not seen him.

He followed after. Everybody stood aside to let her enter the door
first. The friar received her; she went in, and directly the linkman
stood alone outside.

"Stay!" said the linkman, peremptorily. "Who art thou?"

Thus rudely challenged, the Emir awoke from his daze--awoke with all his
faculties clear.

"A gentleman of Otranto," he replied.

"What is thy pleasure?"

"Admit me to the chapel."

"Thou art a stranger, and the service is private. Or hast thou been
invited?"

"No."

"Thou canst not enter."

Again the world dropped into darkness before Mirza; but this time it was
from anger. The linkman never suspected his peril. Fortunately for him,
the voice of the female chorister issued from the doorway in tremulous
melody. Mirza listened, and became tranquillized. The voice sank next
into a sweet unearthly pleading, and completely subdued, he began
arguing with himself.... She had not seen him while he was in the dust
at her side, and now this repulse at the door--how were they to be taken
except as expressions of the will of Heaven?... There was plenty of
time--better go away, and return--perhaps to-morrow. He was not prepared
to prove his identity, if it were questioned.... There would be a
scene, and he shrank from it.... Yes, better retire now.... And he
turned to go. Not six steps away, the Countess reappeared to his excited
mind, exactly as she had passed praying for him--reappeared--

  ... "like the painting of a sorrow."

A revulsion of feeling seized him--he halted. Oh, the years she had
mourned for him! Her love was deep as the sea! Tears again--and without
thought of what he did--all aimlessly--he returned to the door.

"This castle was sacked and burned by pirates, was it not?" he asked the
linkman.

"Yes."

"They slew the Count Corti?"

"Yes."

"And carried off his son?"

"Yes."

"Had he other children?"

"No."

"What was the name of the boy?"

"Ugo."

"Well--in thy ear now--thou didst not well in shutting me out--_I am
that Ugo._"

Thereupon the Emir walked resolutely away.

A cry, shrill and broken, overtook him, issuing apparently from the door
of the chapel--a second time he heard it, more a moan than a shriek--and
thinking the linkman had given the alarm, he quickened his pace to a
run, and was soon out on the beach.

The breath of the sea was pleasant and assuring, and falling into a
walk, he turned his face toward Brindisi. But the cry pursued him. He
imagined the scene in the chapel--the distress of the Countess--the
breaking up of the service--the hurry of question--a consultation, and
possibly search for him. Every person in the procession but the Countess
had seen him; so the only open point in the affair was the one of
directest interest to her: Was it her son?

Undoubtedly the suffering lady would not rest until investigation was
exhausted. Failing to find the stranger about the castle, horsemen might
be sent out on the road. There is terrible energy in mother-love. These
reflections stimulated the Emir to haste. Sometimes he even ran; only at
the shrine of the Virgin and Child in the angle of the road did he halt.
There he cast himself upon the friendly slab to recover breath.

All this of course indicated a preference for Mahommed. And now he came
to a decision. He would proceed with the duty assigned him by the young
master; then, at the end, he would come back, and assert himself in his
native land.

He sat on the slab an hour or more. At intervals the outcry, which he
doubted not was his mother's, rang in his ears, and every time he heard
it, conscience attacked him with its whip of countless stings. Why
subject her to more misery? For what other outcome could there be to the
ceaseless contention of fears and hopes now hers? Oh, if she had only
seen him when he was so near her in the road! That she did not, was the
will of Allah, and the fatalistic Mohammedan teaching brought him a
measure of comfort. In further sooth, he had found a location and a
title. Thenceforward, and not fictitiously, he was the _Count Corti_; and
so entitling himself, he determined to make Brindisi, and take ship for
Genoa or Venice in the morning before a messenger could arrive from the
castle.

As he arose from the slab, a bird in housel for the night flew out of
the box. Its small cheep reminded him of the smile he had fancied on the
face of the Madonna, and how, a little later, the smile had, with such
timely suggestion of approval, woven itself into his thought of the
Countess. He looked up at the face again; but the night was over it like
a veil, and he went nearer, and laid his hand softly on the Child. That
which followed was not a miracle; only a consequence of the wisdom which
permits the enshrinement of a saintly woman and Holy Child as witnesses
of the Divine Goodness to humanity. He raised himself higher in the box,
and pushing aside a heap of faded floral offerings, kissed the foot of
the taller image, saying: "Thus would I have done to my mother." And
when he had climbed down, and was in the road, it seemed some one
answered him: "Go thy way! God and Allah are the same." We may now urge
the narrative. From Brindisi the Emir sailed to Venice. Two weeks in
"the glorious city in the sea" informed him of it thoroughly. While
there, he found, on the "ways" of an Adriatic builder, the galley in
which we have seen him at anchor in the Golden Horn. Leaving an order
for the employment of a sailing-master and crew when the vessel was
complete, he departed next for Rome. At Padua he procured the harness of
a man-at-arms of the period, and recruited a company of _condottieri_--
mercenary soldiers of every nationality. With all his sacerdotal
authority, Nicholas V., the Holy Father, was sorely tried in keeping his
States. The freebooters who unctuously kissed his hand to-day, did not
scruple, if opportunity favored, to plunder one of his towns tomorrow. It
befell that Count Corti--so the Emir styled himself--found a Papal castle
beleaguered by marauders, whom he dispersed, slaying their chief with his
own hand. Nicholas, in public audience, asked him to name the reward he
preferred.

"Knighthood at thy hands, first of all things," was the reply.

The Holy Father took a sword from one of his officers, and gave him the
_accolade_.

"What next, my son?"

"I am tired fighting men who ought to be Christians. Give me, I pray, thy
commission to make war upon the Barbary pirates who infest the seas."

This was granted him.

"What next?"

"Nothing, Holy Father, but thy blessing, and a certificate in good form,
and under seal, of these favors thou hast done me."

The certificate and the blessing were also granted.

The Count then dismissed his lances, and, hastening to Naples, embarked
for Venice. There he supplied himself with suits of the finest Milanese
armor he could obtain, and a wardrobe consisting of costumes such as
were in vogue with the gay gallants along the Grand Canal. Crossing to
Tripoli, he boarded a Moorish merchantman, and made prisoners of the
crew and rowers. The prize he gave to his Christian sailors, and sent
them home. Summoning his prisoners on deck, he addressed them in Arabic,
offering them high pay if they would serve him, and they gratefully
accepted his terms.

The Count then directed his prow to what is now Aleppo, with the purpose
of procuring Arab horses; and having purchased five of the purest blood,
he made sail for Constantinople.

We shall now, for a time, permit the title _Emir_ to lapse. The knight we
have seen on the deck of the new arrival in the Golden Horn viewing with
melancholy interest the cities on either side of the fairest harbor on
earth, is in easy English speech, _Count Corti_, the Italian.

Thus far the Count had been successful in his extraordinary mission, yet
he was not happy. He had made three discoveries during his journey--his
mother, his country, his religion. Ordinarily these relations--if we may
so call them--furnish men their greatest sum of contentment; sadly for
him, however, he had made a fourth finding, of itself sufficient to dash
all the others--in briefest term, he was not in condition to acknowledge
either of them. Unable to still the cry heard while retiring from his
father's ruined castle, he surrendered himself more and more to the
wisdom brought away from the box of the Madonna and Child in the angle
of the road to Brindisi--_God and Allah are the same._ Conscience
and a growing sense of misappropriated life were making Count Corti a
very different person from the light-hearted Emir of Mahommed.


CHAPTER V

THE PRINCESS IRENE IN TOWN


An oblong room divided in the middle crosswise by two fluted pillars of
pink-stained marble, light, delicately capped, and very graceful--between
the pillars a segmental arch--between the walls and the pillars square
ties;--the wall above the pillars elaborately scrolled;--three curtains
of woollen stuff uniformly Tyrian dyed filling the open places--the
central curtain drawn to the pillars, and held there by silken ropes
richly tasselled--the side curtains dropped;--a skylight for each
division of the room, and under each skylight an ample brazier dispensing
a comfortable degree of warmth;--floor laid in pink and saffron tiles;--
chairs with and without arms, some upholstered, all quaintly carved--to
each chair a rug harmoniously colored;--massive tables of carven wood,
the tops of burnished copper inlaid with blocks of jasper, mostly red and
yellow--on the tables murrhine pitchers vase-shaped, with crystal
drinking goblets about them;--the skylights conical and of clear glass;--
the walls panelled, a picture in every panel, and the raised margins and
the whole space outside done in arabesque of studied involution;--doors
opposite each other and bare;--such was the reception-room in the
town-house of the Princess Irene arranged for the winter.

On an armless chair in one of the divisions of the beautiful room, the
Princess sat, slightly bending over a piece of embroidery stretched upon
a frame. What with the accessories about her--the chair, a small table
at her right covered with the bright materials in use, the slanted
frame, and a flexible lion's skin under her feet--she was a picture once
seen never forgotten. The wonderful setting of the head and neck upon
the Phidian shoulders was admirably complemented by the long arms, bare,
round, and of the whiteness of an almond kernel freshly broken, the
hands, blue-veined and dimpled, and the fingers, tapering, pliant,
nimble, rapid, each seemingly possessed of a separate intelligence.

To the left of the Princess, a little removed, Lael half reclined
against a heap of cushions, pale, languid, and not wholly recovered from
the effects of the abduction by Demedes, the terrible doom which had
overtaken her father, and the disappearance of the Prince of India, the
latter unaccountable except upon the hypothesis of death in the great
fire. The dying prayer of the son of Jahdai had not failed with the
Princess Irene. Receiving the unfortunate girl from Sergius the day
after the rescue from the cistern, she accepted the guardianship, and
from that hour watched and tended her with maternal solicitude.

The other division of the room was occupied by attendants. They were
visible through the opening left by the drawn curtain; yet it is not to
be supposed they were under surveillance; on the contrary, their
presence in the house was purely voluntary. They read, sang, accepted
tasks in embroidery from their mistress, accompanied her abroad, loved
her--in a word, their service was in every respect compatible with high
rank, and in return they derived a certain education from her. For by
universal acknowledgment she was queen and arbiter in the social world
of Byzantium; in manner the mirror, in taste and fashion its very form.
Indeed, she was the subject of but one objection--her persistent protest
against the encumbrance of a veil.

With all her grave meditation, she never lectured her attendants,
knowing probably that sermons in example are more impressive than
sermons in words. In illustration of the freedom they enjoyed in her
presence and hearing, one of them, behind the curtain, touched a
stringed instrument--a cithern--and followed the prelude with a song of
Anacreontic vein.

      THE GOLDEN NOON.

    If my life were but a day--
      One morn, one night,
    With a golden noon for play,
      And I, of right,
    Could say what I would do
    With it--what would I do?

    Penance to me--e'en the stake,
      And late or soon!--
    Yet would Love remain to make
      That golden noon
    Delightful--I would do--
    Ah, Love, what would I do?

And when the singer ceased there was a merry round of applause.

The ripple thus awakened had scarcely subsided, when the ancient
Lysander opened one of the doors, and, after ringing the tiled floor
with the butt of his javelin, and bowing statelywise, announced Sergius.
Taking a nod from the Princess, he withdrew to give the visitor place.

Sergius went first to Irene, and silently kissed her hand; then, leaving
her to resume work, he drew a chair to Lael's side.

Under his respectful manner there was an ease which only an assurance of
welcome could have brought him. This is not to be taken in the sense of
familiarity; if he ever indulged that vulgarism--something quite out of
character with him--it was not in his intercourse with the Princess. She
did not require formality; she simply received courtesy from everybody,
even the Emperor, as a natural tribute. At the same time, Sergius was
nearer in her regard than any other person, for special reasons.

We have seen the sympathetic understanding between the two in the matter
of religion. We have seen, also, why she viewed him as a protege. Never
had one presented himself to her so gentle and unconventional never one
knowing so little of the world. With life all before him, with its ways
to learn, she saw he required an adviser through a period of tutelage,
and assumed the relation partly through a sense of duty, partly from
reverent recollection of Father Hilarion. These were arguments sound in
themselves; but two others had recently offered.

In the first place she was aware of the love which had arisen between
the monk and Lael. She had not striven to spy it out. Like children,
they had affected no disguise of their feeling; and while disallowing
the passion a place in her own breast, she did not deprecate or seek to
smother it in others. Far from that, in these, her wards, so to speak,
it was with her an affair of permissive interest. They were so lovable,
it seemed an order of nature they should love each other.

Next, the world was dealing harshly with Sergius; and though he strove
manfully to hide the fact, she saw he was suffering. He deserved well,
she thought, for his rescue of Lael, and for the opportunity given the
Emperor to break up the impiety founded by Demedes. Unhappily her
opinion was not subscribed in certain quarters. The powerful Brotherhood
of the St. James' amongst others was in an extreme state of exasperation
with him. They insisted he could have achieved the rescue without the
death of the Greek. They went so far as to accuse him of a double
murder--of the son first, then of the father. A terrible indictment! And
they were bold and open-mouthed. Out of respect for the Emperor, who was
equally outspoken in commendation of Sergius, they had not proceeded to
the point of expulsion. The young man was still of the Brotherhood;
nevertheless he did not venture to exercise any of the privileges of a
member. His cell was vacant. The five services of the day were held in
the chapel without him. In short, the Brotherhood were in wait for an
opportunity to visit him with their vengeance. In hope of a favorable
turn in the situation, he wore the habit of the Order, but it was his
only outward sign of fraternity. Without employment, miserable, he found
lodgment in the residence of the Patriarch, and what time he was not
studying, he haunted the old churches of the city, Sancta Sophia in
especial, and spent many hours a dreaming voyager on the Bosphorus.

The glad look which shone in the eyes of the invalid when Sergius took
seat by her was very noticeable; and when she reached him her hand, the
kiss he left upon it was of itself a declaration of tender feeling.

"I hope my little friend is better, to-day," he said, gravely.

"Yes, much better. The Princess says I may go out soon--the first real
spring day."

"That is good news. I wish I could hurry the spring. I have everything
ready to take you on the water--a perfect boat, and two master rowers.
Yesterday they carried me to the Black Sea and back, stopping for a
lunch of bread and figs at the foot of the Giants' Mountain. They boast
they can repeat the trip often as there are days in the week."

"Did you stop at the White Castle?" she asked, with a smile.

"No. Our noble Princess was not with me; and in her absence, I feared
the Governor might forget to be polite as formerly."

The gracious lady, listening, bent lower over the frame before her. She
knew so much more of the Governor than Lael did! But Lael then inquired:

"Where have you been to-day?"

"Well, my little friend, let me see if I can interest you.... This
morning I awoke betimes, and set myself to study. Oh, those chapters of
John--the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth. There is no need of
religious knowledge beyond them. Of the many things they make clear,
this is the clearest--the joys of eternal life lie in the saying of the
Lord, 'I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life; no man cometh unto the
Father but by Me.' ... After my hours of study, I went to see an old
church over in the low garden grounds beyond the aqueduct. Before I
could get through the doorway, a flock of goats had to pass out. I will
tell His Serenity what I beheld. Better the wreck be cleaned from the
face of the earth than desecrated. Holy ground once, holy ground
forever."

"Where is the Church?" the Princess inquired.

"In the low grounds between the aqueduct, and the gates of St. Romain
and Adrianople."

"It belongs to one of the Brotherhoods. They have farming right in the
soil."

"I am sorry to hear it."

As she turned to her work again, he went on with his account of himself.

"I had then two hours and more till noon, and was at loss what to do.
Finally I decided to go to the Port of Blacherne--a long walk, but not
too long, considering my motive.... Princess, have you heard of the
Italian newly arrived?"

"What of him, pray?"

"He is the talk of the city, and if the half told of him be true, we
must needs wonder. He travels in his own ship. Merchants have that
habit, but he is not a merchant. Kings do so, but he is not a king. He
came in saluting with a gun, in style becoming a great admiral; but if
he is an admiral, his nationality is a secret. He also flies an unknown
flag. They report him further as standing much on his deck in a suit of
armor glistening like silver. And what is he? Mouth speaketh unto mouth,
with no one to answer. They go then to his ship, pronouncing it the most
perfect thing of the kind ever seen in the harbor. Those who have rowed
around it say the sailors are not white men, but dark-faced creatures in
turbans and black beards, un-Christian and ugly-looking. Fishermen and
fruiterers have been permitted on deck--nobody else--and they, returning
alive, say the rowers, of whom they caught glimpses, are blacker than
the sailors. They also overheard strange noises below--voices not
human."

The countenance of the Princess during this recital gradually changed;
she seemed disposed to laugh at the exaggerations of the populace.

"So much for town-talk," Sergius continued. "To get sight of the ship,
and of the mysterious magnate, I walked across the city to the Port of
Blacherne, and was well rewarded. I found the ship drawn in to the quay,
and the work of unloading her in progress. Parties of porters were
attacking heaps of the cargo already on the landing. Where they were
taking the goods I could not learn. I saw five horses lifted out of the
hold, and led ashore over a bridge dropped from the vessel's side. Such
horses I never before beheld. Two were grays, two bays, and one
chestnut-colored. They looked at the sun with wide-open unwinking eyes;
they inhaled the air as it were something to drink; their coats shone
like silk; their manes were soft like the hair of children; their tails
flared out in the breeze like flags; and everybody exclaimed: 'Arabs,
Arabs!' There was a groom for each horse--tall men, lean, dust-hued,
turbaned, and in black gowns. At sight of the animals, an old Persian
who, from his appearance, might have been grandfather of the grooms,
begged permission--I could not understand the tongue he used--put his
arms around the necks of the animals, and kissed them between the eyes,
his own full of tears the while. I suppose they reminded him of his own
country.... Then two officers from the palace, representatives
doubtless of the Emperor, rode out of the gate in armor, and immediately
the stranger issued from his cabin, and came ashore. I confess I lost
interest in the horses, although he went to them and scanned them over,
lifting their feet and tapping their hoofs with the handle of a dagger.
By that time the two officers were dismounted; and approaching with
great ceremony, they notified him they had been sent by His Majesty to
receive and conduct him to assigned quarters. He replied to them in
excellent Greek, acknowledging His Majesty's graciousness, and the
pleasure he would have in their escort. From the cabin, two of his men
brought a complete equipment, and placed it on the chestnut steed. The
furniture was all sheen of satin and gold. Another attendant brought his
sword and shield; and after the sword was buckled around him, and the
shield at his back, he took hold of the saddle with both hands, and
swung himself into the seat with an ease remarkably in contrast with the
action of his Greek conductors, who, in mounting, were compelled to make
use of their stirrups. The cavalcade then passed the gate into the
city."

"You saw him closely?" Lael asked.

"To get to his horse, he passed near me as I am to you, my little
friend."

"What did he wear?"

"Oh, he was in armor. A cap of blue steel, with a silver spike on the
crown--neck and shoulders covered with a hood of mail--body in a shirt
of mail, a bead of silver in each link--limbs to the knees in mail. From
the knees down there were splints of steel inlaid with silver; his shoes
were of steel, and on the heels long golden spurs. The hood was clasped
under the chin, leaving the face exposed--a handsome face, eyes black
and bright, complexion olive, though slightly bloodless, expression
pleasant."

"How old is he?"

"Twenty-six or seven. Altogether he reminded me of what I have heard of
the warriors who used to go crusading."

"What following had he?"

This was from the Princess.

"I can only speak of what I saw--of the keepers of the horses, and of
the other men, whom, in my unfamiliarity with military fashions, I will
call equerry, armorer, and squire or page. What accounting is to be made
of the ship's company, I leave, O Princess, to your better knowledge."

"My inquiry was of his personal suite."

"Then I cannot give you a better answer; but if I may say so much, the
most unusual thing observable in his followers was, they were all
Orientals--not one of them had a Christian appearance."

"Well"--and the Princess laid her needle down for the first time--"I see
how easily a misunderstanding of the stranger may get abroad. Let me
tell what I know of him.... Directly he arrived, he despatched a letter
to His Majesty, giving an account of himself. He is a soldier by
profession, and a Christian; has spent much time in the Holy Land, where
he acquired several Eastern languages; obtained permission from the
Pontiff Nicholas to make war on the African pirates; manned his galley
with captives; and, not wishing to return to his native land and engage
in the baronial wars which prevail there at present, he offered his
services to His Majesty. He is an Italian nobleman, entitled _Count
Corti,_ and submitted to His Majesty a certificate, under the hand
and seal of the Holy Father, showing that the Holy Father knighted him,
and authorized his crusade against the infidels. The preference for a
following composed of Orientals is singular; but after all, it is only a
matter of taste. The day may come, dear Sergius, when the Christian
world will disapprove his method of getting title to servants; but it is
not here now.... If further discussion of the Count takes place in your
presence, you are at liberty to tell what I tell you. At Blacherne
yesterday I had the particulars, together with the other circumstance,
that the Emperor gladly accepted the Italian's overture, and assigned
him quarters in the Palace of Julian, with leave to moor his galley in
the port there. Few noble foreigners have sought our Empire bringing
better recommendations."

The fair lady then took up her needle, and was resuming work, when
Lysander entered, and, after thumping the floor, announced: "Three
o'clock."

The Princess silently arose, and passed out of the room; at the same
time there was a commotion behind the curtain, and presently the other
apartment was vacated. Sergius lingered a moment.

"Tell me now of yourself," Lael said, giving him her hand.

He kissed the hand fondly, and replied: "The clouds still hang low and
dark over me; but my faith is not shaken; they will blow away; and in
the meantime, dear little friend, the world is not all cheerless--you
love me."

"Yes, I love you," she said, with childish simplicity.

"The Brotherhood has elected a new Hegumen," he continued.

"A good man, I hope."

"The violence with which he denounced me was the chief argument in his
favor. But God is good. The Emperor, the Patriarch, and the Princess
Irene remain steadfast. Against them the Hegumen will be slow in
proceeding to my expulsion. I am not afraid. I will go on doing what I
think right. Time and patience are good angels to the unjustly accused.
But that any one should hold it a crime to have rescued you--O little
friend, dear soul! See the live coal which does not cease burning!"

"And Nilo?"

"He wants nothing in the way of comforts."

"I will go see the poor man the first thing when I get out."

"His cell in the Cynegion is well furnished. The officer in charge has
orders direct from the Emperor to see that he suffers no harm. I saw him
day before yesterday. He does not know why he is a prisoner, but behaves
quietly. I took him a supply of tools, and he passes the time making
things in use in his country, mostly implements of war and hunting. The
walls of his cell are hung with bows, arrows and lances of such curious
form that there is always quite a throng to see them. He actually
divides honor with Tamerlane, the king of the lions."

"It should be a very noble lion, for that."

Sergius, seeing her humor, went on: "You say truly, little friend. He
has in hand a net of strong thread and thousands of meshes already.
'What is it for?' I asked. In his pantomimic way he gave me to
understand: 'In my country we hunt lions with it.' 'How?' said I. And he
showed me two balls of lead, one in each corner of the net. Taking the
balls in his hands: 'Now we are in front of the game--now it springs at
us--up they go this way.' He gave the balls a peculiar toss which sent
them up and forward on separating lines. The woven threads spread out in
the air like a yellow mist, and I could see the result--the brute caught
in the meshes, and entangled. Then the brave fellow proceeded with his
pantomime. He threw himself to one side out of the way of the leap--drew
a sword, and stabbed and stabbed--and the triumph in his face told me
plainly enough. 'There--he is dead!' Just now he is engaged on another
work scarcely less interesting to him. A dealer in ivory sent him an
elephant's tusk, and he is covering it with the story of a campaign. You
see the warriors setting out on the march--in another picture they are
in battle--a cloud of arrows in flight--shields on arm--bows bent--and a
forest of spears. From the large end he is working down toward the
point. The finish will be a victory, and a return with captives and
plunder immeasurable.... He is well cared for; yet he keeps asking me
about his master the Prince of India. Where is he? When will he come?
When he turns to that subject I do not need words from him. His soul
gets into his eyes. I tell him the Prince is dead. He shakes his head:
'No, no!' and sweeping a circle in the air, he brings his hands to his
breast, as to say: 'No, he is travelling--he will come back for me.'"

Sergius had become so intent upon the description that he lost sight of
his hearer; but now a sob recalled him. Bending lower over the hand, he
caressed it more assiduously than ever, afraid to look into her face.
When at length the sobbing ceased, he arose and said, shamefacedly:

"O dear little friend, you forgive me, do you not?"

From his manner one would have thought he had committed an offence far
out of the pale of condonement.

"Poor Sergius," she said. "It is for me to think of you, not you of me."
He tried to look cheerful.

"It was stupid in me. I will be more careful. Your pardon is a sweet
gift to take away.... The Princess is going to Sancta Sophia, and she
may want me. To-morrow--until to-morrow--good-by."

This time he stooped, and kissed her on the forehead; next moment she
was alone.


CHAPTER VI

COUNT CORTI IN SANCTA SOPHIA


The Palace of Julian arose the chief embellishment of a large square
enclosure on the sea front southeast of the landmark at present called
the Burnt Column, and, like other imperial properties of the kind, it
was an aggregation of buildings irregular in form and style, and more or
less ornate and imposing. A garden stretched around it. The founder,
wanting private harborage for his galleys and swarm of lesser boats, dug
a basin just inside the city wall, and flooded it with pure Marmoran
water; then, for ingress and egress at his sovereign will, he slashed
the wall, and of the breach made the _Port of Julian_. [Footnote:
Only a shallow depression in the ground, faintly perpetuating the
outlines of the harbor, now marks the site of this royal residence.]

Count Corti found the Palace well preserved in and out. He had not
purposed hiding himself, yet it was desirable to keep his followers
apart much as possible; and for that a situation more to his wish could
scarcely have been chosen in the capital.

Issuing from the front door, a minute's walk through a section of the
garden brought him to a stairway defended on both sides with massive
balustrading. The flight ended in a spacious paved landing; whence,
looking back and up, he could see two immense columnar pedestals
surmounted by statues, while forward extended the basin, a sheet of
water on which, white and light as a gull, his galley rested. He had but
to call the watchman on its deck, and a small boat would come to him in
a trice. He congratulated himself upon the lodgement.

The portion of the Palace assigned him was in the south end; and,
although he enlisted a number of skilful upholsterers, a week and more
was industriously taken with interior arrangements for himself, and in
providing for the comfort and well-being of his horses; for it is to be
said in passing, he had caught enough of the spirit of the nomadic Turk
to rate the courser which was to bear him possibly through foughten
fields amongst the first in his affections. In this preparation, keeping
the scheme to which his master had devoted him ever present, he required
no teaching to point out the policy of giving his establishment an air
of permanence as well as splendor.

Occupied as he was, he had nevertheless snatched time to look in upon
the Hippodrome, and walk once around the Bucoleon and Sancta Sophia.
From a high pavilion overhanging his quarters, he had surveyed the
stretches of city in the west and southwest, sensible of a lively desire
to become intimately acquainted with the bizarre panorama of hills
behind hills, so wonderfully house and church crowned.

To say truth, however, the Count was anxious to hear from the Sultan
before beginning a career. The man who was to be sent to him might
appear any hour, making it advisable to keep close home. He had a report
of the journey to Italy, and of succeeding events, including his arrival
at Constantinople, ready draughted, and was impatient to forward it. A
word of approval from Mahommed would be to him like a new spirit given.
He counted upon it as a cure for his melancholia.

Viewing the galley one day, he looked across the basin to where the
guard of the Port was being changed, and was struck with the foreign air
of the officer of the relief. This, it happened, was singularly pertinent
to a problem which had been disturbing his active mind--how he could most
safely keep in communication with Mahommed, or, more particularly, how
the Sultan's messenger could come with the most freedom and go with the
least hindrance. A solution now presented itself. If the Emperor
intrusted the guardianship of the gate to one foreigner, why not to
another? In other words, why not have the duty committed to himself and
his people? Not improbably the charge might be proposed to him; he would
wait awhile, and see; if, however, he had to formally request it, could
anything be more plausibly suggestive than the relation between the
captaincy of that Port and residence in the Palace of Julian? The idea
was too natural to be refused; if granted, he was master of the
situation. It would be like holding the keys of the city. He could send
out and admit as need demanded; and then, if flight became imperative,
behold a line of retreat! Here was his galley--yonder the way out.

While he pondered the matter, a servant brought him notice of an officer
from Blacherne in waiting. Responding immediately, he found our ancient
friend the Dean in the reception room, bringing the announcement that
His Majesty the Emperor had appointed audience for him next day at noon;
or, if the hour was not entirely convenient, would the Count be pleased
to designate another? His Majesty was aware of the attention needful to
a satisfactory settlement in strange quarters, and had not interrupted
him earlier; for which he prayed pardon.

The Count accepted the time set; after which he conducted his visitor
through his apartments, omitting none of them; from the kitchen he even
carried him to the stable, whence he had the horses brought one by one.
Hospitality and confidence could go no further, and he was amply
rewarded. The important functionary was pleased with all he saw, and
with nothing more than Corti himself. There could not be a doubt of the
friendliness of the report he would take back to Blacherne. In short,
the Count's training in a court dominated by suspicion to a greater
degree even than the court in Constantinople was drawn upon most
successfully. A glass of wine at parting redolent with the perfume of
the richest Italian vintage fixed the new-comer's standing in the Dean's
heart. If there had been the least insufficiency in the emblazoned
certificate of the Holy Father, here was a swift witness in
confirmation.

The day was destined to be eventful to the Count. While he was
entertaining the Dean, the men on the deck of the galley, unused to
Byzantine customs, were startled by a cry, long, swelling, then
mournfully decadent. Glancing in the direction from which it came, they
saw a black boat sweeping through the water-way of the Port. A man of
dubious complexion, tall and lithe, his scant garments originally white,
now stiff with dirt of many hues, a ragged red head-cloth illy confining
his coarse black hair, stood in the bow shouting, and holding up a
wooden tray covered with fish. The sentinel to whom he thus offered the
stock shook his head, but allowed him to pass. At the galley's side
there was an interchange of stares between the sailors and the
fishermen--such the tenants of the black craft were--leaving it doubtful
which side was most astonished. Straightway the fellow in the bow opened
conversation, trying several tongues, till finally he essayed the
Arabic.

"Who are you?"

"Sailors."

"Where from?"

"Tripoli."

"Children of the Prophet?"

"We believe in Allah and the Last Day, and observe prayer, and pay the
appointed alms, and dread none but Allah; we are among the rightly
guided." [Footnote: Koran, IX. 18.]

"Blessed be Allah! May his name be exalted here and everywhere!" the
fisherman returned; adding immediately: "Whom serve you?"

"A _Scherif_ from Italy."

"How is he called?"

"The Count."

"Where is he?"

"In the Palace yonder."

"A Christian?"

"A Christian with an Eastern tongue; and he knows the hours of prayer,
and observes them."

"Does he reside here?"

"He is Lord of the Palace."

"When did he arrive?"

"Since the moon fulled."

"Does he want fish?"

The men on the ship laughed.

"Go ask him."

"That is his landing there?"

"Yes."

"All men who live down by the sea eat fish--when they can get them," the
dealer said, solemnly. Turning then to his rowers, he bade them:
"Forward to the landing."

There he stepped out, dextrously balanced the tray on his head, ascended
the stairs, and in front of the great house went persistently from door
to door until he came to that of the Count.

"Fish?" he asked the man who answered his knock.

"I will see."

The doorkeeper returned shortly, and said, "No."

"Are you a Moslem?" the fisherman inquired.

"Yes. Blessed be Allah for the right understanding!"

"So am I. Now let me see the master. I want to furnish him with fish for
the season."

"He is engaged."

"I will wait for him. Tell him my catch is this morning's--red mullets
and choice cuts from a royal sword-fish that leaped ten feet in the air
with the spear in his back."

Thereupon he deposited the tray, and took seat by it, much as to say,
Time is of no consequence to me. Ere long the Count appeared with the
Dean. He glanced at the tray, then at the fisherman--to the latter he
gave a second look.

"What beautiful fish!" he said, to the Dean.

"Yes, yes--there are no fish pastures like those of our Bosphorus."

"How do you call this kind?"

"Mullets--red mullets. The old Romans used to fatten them in tanks."

"I thought I had seen their like on our Italian coasts. How do you
prepare them for the table?"

"We fry them, Count, in olive oil--pure oil."

All this time Corti was studying the fisherman.

"What meal, pray, will fashion allow them to me dished?" he went on.

"For breakfast especially; though when you come to dine with His Majesty
do not be surprised to see them early in course."

"Pardon the detention, my Lord--I will make trial of these in the
morning." Then to the fisherman the Count said, carelessly: "Keep thy
place until I return."

Corti saw the Dean out of the eastern gate of the enclosure, and
returned.

"What, still here!" he said, to the dealer. "Well, go with the
doorkeeper to the kitchen. The cook will take what he needs for
to-morrow." Speaking to the doorkeeper then: "Bring the man to me. I am
fond of fishing, and should like to talk with him about his methods.
Sometime he may be willing to take me with him."

By and by the monger was shown into the Count's room, where there was a
table, with books and writing material--a corner room full lighted by
windows in the south and east. When they were alone, the two gazed at
each other.

"Ali, son of Abed-din!" said the Count. "Is it thou?"

"O Emir! All of me that is not fish is the Ali thou hast named."

"God is great!" the first exclaimed.

"Blessed be God!" the other answered.

They were acquaintances of long standing.

Then Ali took the red rag from his head, and from its folds produced a
strip of fine parchment with writing on it impervious to water. "Behold,
Emir! It is for thee."

The Count received the scrip and read:

"This is he I promised to send. He has money for thee. Thou mayst trust
him. Tell me this time of thyself first; then of her; but always after
of her first. My soul is scorching with impatience."

There was no date to the screed nor was it signed; yet the Count put it
to his forehead and lips. He knew the writing as he knew his own hand.

"O Ali!" he said, his eyes aglow. "Hereafter thou shalt be Ali the
Faithful, son of Abed-din the Faithful."

Ali replied with a rueful look: "It is well. What a time I have had
waiting for you! Much I fear my bones will never void the damps blown
into them by the winter winds, and I perched on the cross-sticks of a
floating _dallyan_.... I have money for you, O Emir! and the keeping it
has given me care more than enough to turn another man older than his
mother. I will bring it to-morrow; after which I shall say twenty prayers
to the Prophet--blessed be his name!--where now I say one."

"No, not to-morrow, Ali, but the day after when thou bringest me another
supply of fish. There is danger in coming too often--and for that, thou
must go now. Staying too long is dangerous as coming too often.... But
tell me of our master. Is he indeed the Sultan of Sultans he promised to
be? Is he well? Where is he? What is he doing?"

"Not so fast, O Emir, not so fast, I pray you! Better a double mouthful
of stale porpoise fat, with a fin bone in it, than so many questions at
once."

"Oh, but I have been so long in the slow-moving Christian world without
news!"

"Verily, O Emir, Padishah Mahommed will be greatest of the _Gabour_
eaters since Padishah Othman--that to your first. He is well. His bones
have reached their utmost limit, but his soul keeps growing--that to
your second. He holds himself at Adrianople. Men say he is building
mosques. I say he is building cannon to shoot bullets big as his
father's tomb; when they are fired, the faithful at Medina will hear the
noise, and think it thunder--that to your third. And as to his doing--
getting ready for war, meaning business for everybody, from the
Shiek-ul-Islam to the thieving tax-farmers of Bagdad--to the Kislar-Jinn
of Abad-on with them. He has the census finished, and now the Pachas go
listing the able-bodied, of whom they have half a million, with as many
more behind. They say the young master means to make a _sandjak_ of
unbelieving Europe."

"Enough, Ali!--the rest next time."

The Count went to the table, and from a secret drawer brought a package
wrapped in leather, and sealed carefully.

"This for our Lord--exalted be his name! How wilt thou take it?"

Ali laughed.

"In my tray to the boat, but the fish are fresh, and there are flowers
of worse odor in Cashmere. So, O Emir, for this once. Next time, and
thereafter, I will have a hiding-place ready."

"Now, Ali, farewell. Thy name shall be sweet in our master's ears as a
girl-song to the moon of Ramazan. I will see to it."

Ali took the package, and hid it in the bosom of his dirty shirt. When
he passed out of the front door, it lay undistinguishable under the fish
and fish meat; and he whispered to the Count in going: "I have an order
from the Governor of the White Castle for my unsold stock. God is
great!"

Corti, left alone, flung himself on a chair. He had word from Mahommed--
that upon which he counted so certainly as a charm in counteraction of
the depression taking possession of his spirit. There it was in his hand,
a declaration of confidence unheard of in an Oriental despot. Yet the
effect was wanting. Even as he sat thinking the despondency deepened. He
groped for the reason in vain. He strove for cheer in the big war of
which Ali had spoken--in the roar of cannon, like thunder in Medina--in
Europe a Sultanic _sandjak_. He could only smile at the exaggeration. In
fact, his trouble was the one common to every fine nature in a false
position. His business was to deceive and betray--whom? The degradation
was casting its shadow before. Heaven help when the eclipse should be
full!

For relief he read the screed again: "Tell me this time of thyself
first; then of _her_." ... Ah, yes, the kinswoman of the Emperor!
He must devise a way to her acquaintance, and speedily. And casting
about for it, he became restless, and finally resolved to go out into
the city. He sent for the chestnut Arab, and putting on the steel cap
and golden spurs had from the Holy Father was soon in the saddle.

It was about three o'clock afternoon, with a wind tempered to mildness
by a bright sun. The streets were thronged, while the balconies and
overhanging windows had their groups on the lookout for entertainment
and gossip. As may be fancied the knightly rider and gallant barb,
followed by a dark-skinned, turbaned servant in Moorish costume,
attracted attention. Neither master nor man appeared to give heed to the
eager looks and sometimes over-loud questions with which they were
pursued.

Turning northward presently, the Count caught sight of the dome of
Sancta Sophia. It seemed to him a vast, upturned silver bowl glistening
in the sky, and he drew rein involuntarily, wondering how it could be
upheld; then he was taken with a wish to go in, and study the problem.
Having heard from Mahommed, he was lord of his time, and here was noble
diversion.

In front of the venerable edifice, he gave his horse to the dark-faced
servant, and entered the outer court unattended.

A company, mixed apparently of every variety of persons, soldiers,
civilians, monks, and women, held the pavement in scattered groups; and
while he halted a moment to survey the exterior of the building, cold
and grimly plain from cornice to base, he became himself an object of
remark to them. About the same time a train of monastics, bareheaded,
and in long gray gowns, turned in from the street, chanting monotonously,
and in most intensely nasal tones. The Count, attracted by their pale
faces, hollow eyes and unkept beards, waited for them to cross the court.
Unkept their beards certainly were, but not white. This was the beginning
of the observation he afterward despatched to Mahommed: Only the walls of
Byzantium remain for her defence; the Church has absorbed her young men;
the sword is discarded for the rosary. Nor could he help remarking that
whereas the _frati_ of Italy were fat, rubicund, and jolly, these seemed
in search of death through the severest penitential methods. His thought
recurring to the house again, he remembered having heard how every hour
of every day from five o'clock in the morning to midnight was filled with
religious service of some kind in Sancta Sophia.

A few stone steps the full length of the court led up to five great
doors of bronze standing wide open; and as the train took one of the
latter and began to disappear, he chose another, and walked fast in
order to witness the entry. Brought thus into the immense vestibule, he
stopped, and at once forgot the gray brethren. Look where he might, at
the walls, and now up to the ceiling, every inch of space wore the
mellowed brightness of mosaic wrought in cubes of glass exquisitely
graduated in color. What could he do but stand and gaze at the Christ in
the act of judging the world? Such a cartoon had never entered his
imagination. The train was gone when he awoke ready to proceed.

There were then nine doors also of bronze conducting from the vestibule.
The central and larger one was nearest him. Pushed lightly, it swung
open on noiseless hinges; a step or two, and he stood in the nave or
auditorium of the Holy House.

The reader will doubtless remember how Duke Vlodomir, the grandson of
Olga, the Russian, coming to Constantinople to receive a bride, entered
Sancta Sophia the first time, and from being transfixed by what he saw
and heard, fell down a convert to Christianity. Not unlike was the
effect upon Corti. In a sense he, too, was an unbeliever semi-barbaric
in education. Many were the hours he had spent with Mahommed while the
latter, indulging his taste, built palaces and mosques on paper,
striving for vastness and original splendor. But what was the Prince's
utmost achievement in comparison with this interior? Had it been an
ocean grotto, another Caprian cave, bursting with all imaginable
revelations of light and color, he could not have been more deeply
impressed. Without architectural knowledge; acquainted with few of the
devices employed in edificial construction, and still less with the
mysterious power of combination peculiar to genius groping for effects
in form, dimensions, and arrangement of stone on stone with beautiful
and sublime intent; yet he had a soul to be intensely moved by such
effects when actually set before his eyes. He walked forward slowly four
or five steps from the door, looking with excited vision--not at details
or to detect the composition of any of the world of objects constituting
the view, or with a thought of height, breadth, depth, or value--the
marbles of the floor rich in multiformity and hues, and reflective as
motionless water, the historic pillars, the varied arches, the extending
galleries, the cornices, friezes, balustrades, crosses of gold, mosaics,
the windows and interlacing rays of light, brilliance here, shadows
yonder--the apse in the east, and the altar built up in it starry with
burning candles and glittering with prismatic gleams shot from precious
stones and metals in every conceivable form of grace--lamps, cups,
vases, candlesticks, cloths, banners, crucifixes, canopies, chairs,
Madonnas, Child Christs and Christs Crucified--and over all, over lesser
domes, over arches apparently swinging in the air, broad, high, near yet
far away, the dome of Sancta Sophia, defiant of imitation, like unto
itself alone, a younger sky within the elder--these, while he took those
few steps, merged and ran together in a unity which set his senses to
reeling, and made question and thought alike impossible.

How long the Count stood thus lost to himself in the glory and greatness
of the place, he never knew. The awakening was brought about by a strain
of choral music, which, pouring from the vicinity of the altar
somewhere, flooded the nave, vast as it was, from floor to dome. No
voice more fitting could be imagined; and it seemed addressing itself to
him especially. He trembled, and began to think.

First there came to him a comparison in which the Kaaba was a relative.
He recalled the day he fell dying at the corner under the Black Stone.
He saw the draped heap funereally dismal in the midst of the cloisters.
How bare and poor it seemed to him now! He remembered the visages and
howling of the demoniac wretches struggling to kiss the stone, though
with his own kiss he had just planted it with death. How different the
worship here! ... This, he thought next, was his mother's religion. And
what more natural than that he should see that mother descending to the
chapel in her widow's weeds to pray for him? Tears filled his eyes. His
heart arose chokingly in his throat. Why should not her religion be his?
It was the first time he had put the question to himself directly; and
he went further with it. What though Allah of the Islamite and Jehovah
of the Hebrew were the same?--What though the Koran and the Bible
proceeded from the same inspiration?--What though Mahomet and Christ
were alike Sons of God? There were differences in the worship,
differences in the personality of the worshippers. Why, except to allow
every man a choice according to his ideas of the proper and best in form
and companionship? And the spirit swelled within him as he asked, Who
are my brethren? They who stole me from my father's house, who slew my
father, who robbed my mother of the lights of life, and left her to the
darkness of mourning and the bitterness of ungratified hope--were not
they the brethren of my brethren?

At that moment an old man appeared before the altar with assistants in
rich canonicals. One placed on the elder's head what seemed a crown all
a mass of flaming jewels; another laid upon him a cloak of cloth of
gold; a third slipped a ring over one of his fingers; whereupon the
venerable celebrant drew nearer the altar, and, after a prayer, took up
a chalice and raised it as if in honor to an image of Christ on a cross
in the agonies of crucifixion. Then suddenly the choir poured its
triumphal thunder abroad until the floor, and galleries, and pendant
lamps seemed to vibrate. The assistants and worshippers sank upon their
knees, and ere he was aware the Count was in the same attitude of
devotion.

The posture consisted perfectly with policy, his mission considered.
Soon or late he would have to adopt every form and observance of
Christian worship. In this performance, however, there was no
premeditation, no calculation. In his exaltation of soul he fancied he
heard a voice passing with the tempestuous jubilation of the singers:
"On thy knees, O apostate! On thy knees! God is here!"

But his was a combative nature; and coming to himself, and not
understanding clearly the cause of his prostration, he presently arose.
Of the worshippers in sight, he alone was then standing, and the
sonorous music ringing on, he was beginning to doubt the propriety of
his action, when a number of women, unobserved before, issued from a
shaded corner at the right of the apse, fell into processional order,
and advanced slowly toward him.

One moved by herself in front. A reflection of her form upon the
polished floor lent uncertainty to her stature, and gave her an
appearance of walking on water. Those following were plainly her
attendants. They were all veiled; while a white mantle fell from her
left shoulder, its ends lost in the folds of the train of her gown,
leaving the head, face, and neck bare. Her manner, noticeable in the
distance even, was dignified without hauteur, simple, serious, free of
affectation. She was not thinking of herself.... Nearer--he heard no
foot-fall. Now and then she glided through slanting rays of soft, white
light cast from upper windows, and they seemed to derive ethereality
from her.... Nearer--and he could see the marvellous pose of the head,
and the action of the figure, never incarnation more graceful.... Yet
nearer--he beheld her face, in complexion a child's, in expression a
woman's. The eyes were downcast, the lips moved. She might have been the
theme of the music sweeping around her in acclamatory waves, drowning
the part she was carrying in suppressed murmur. He gazed steadfastly at
the countenance. The light upon the forehead was an increasing radiance,
like a star's refined by passage through the atmospheres of infinite
space. A man insensitive to beauty in woman never was, never will be.
Vows cannot alter nature; neither can monkish garbs nor years; and it is
knowledge of this which makes every woman willing to last sacrifices for
the gift; it is power to her, vulgarizing accessories like wealth,
coronets and thrones. With this confession in mind, words are not needed
to inform the reader of the thrills which assailed the Count while the
marvel approached.

The service was over as to her, and she was evidently seeking to retire
by the main door; but as he stood in front of it, she came within two or
three steps before noticing him. Then she stopped suddenly, astonished
by the figure in shining armor. A flush overspread her face; smiling at
her alarm, she spoke: "I pray pardon, Sir Knight, for disturbing thy
devotions."

"And I, fair lady, am grateful to Heaven that it placed me in thy way to
the door unintentionally."

He stepped aside, and she passed on and out.

The interior of the church, but a minute before so overwhelmingly
magnificent and impressive, became commonplace and dull. The singing
rolled on unheard. His eyes fixed on the door through which she went;
his sensations were as if awakening from a dream in which he had seen a
heavenly visitant, and been permitted to speak to it.

The spell ceased with the music; then, with swift returning sense, he
remembered Mahommed's saying: "Thou wilt know her at sight."

And he knew her--the _Her_ of the screed brought only that day by
Ali.

Nor less distinctly did he recall every incident of the parting with
Mahommed, every word, every injunction--the return of the ruby ring,
even then doubtless upon the imperious master's third finger, a subject
of hourly study--the further speech, "They say whoever looketh at her is
thenceforward her lover"--and the final charge, with its particulars,
concluding: "Forget not that in Constantinople, when I come, I am to
receive her from thy hand peerless in all things as I left her."

His shoes of steel were strangely heavy when he regained his horse at
the edge of the court. For the first time in years, he climbed into the
saddle using the stirrup like a man reft of youth. He would love the
woman--he could not help it. Did not every man love her at sight?

The idea colored everything as he rode slowly back to his quarters.

Dismounting at the door, it plied him with the repetition, _Every man
loves her at sight_.

He thought of training himself to hate her, but none the less through
the hours of the night he heard the refrain, _Every man loves her at
sight_.

In a clearer condition, his very inability to shut her out of mind,
despite his thousand efforts of will, would have taught him that another
judgment was upon him.

HE LOVED HER.


CHAPTER VII

COUNT CORTI TO MAHOMMED


At noon the days are a little more yellow, and the shadows a trifle
longer, while at evening the snows on the far mountains give the air a
coolness gently admonitory of the changing season; with these exceptions
there is scarcely a difference between the September to which we now
come and the closing stages of June.

Count Corti is fully settled in his position. Withal, however, he is
very miserable. A new light has been let in upon his being. He finds it
a severe trial to serve a Mahommedan, knowing himself a Christian born,
and still more difficult trying to be a Turk, knowing himself an
Italian. The stings grow sharper as experience makes it plainer that he
is nefariously helping those whom he ought to regard enemies destroy an
Emperor and people who never gave him offence. Worst of all, most
crushing to spirit, is his passion for the Princess Irene while under
obligations to Mahommed prohibitory of every hope, dream, and
self-promise ordinarily the sweetest incidents of love.

The person with a mental ailment curable by prompt decision, who yet
goes about debating what to do, will ere long find his will power so
weakened as to leave him a confirmed wreck. Count Corti seemed likely to
become an instance in point. The months since his visit to the paternal
castle in Italy, really the beginning of the conflicts tossing him now
here, now there, were full of warnings he could but hear; still he
continued his course.

His reports to Mahommed were frequent, and as they are of importance to
our story, we think it advisable to quote from some of them.

The following is from his first communication after the visit to Sancta
Sophia:

"I cast myself at your feet, O my Lord, praying Allah to keep you in
health, and strengthen the wise designs which occupy you incessantly....
You bade me always speak first of the kinswoman of the Emperor. Yesterday
I rode to the Church supreme in the veneration of the Greeks, erected, it
is said, by the Emperor Justinian. Its vastness amazed me, and, knowing
my Lord's love for such creations, I declare, were there no other
incentive to the conquest of this unbelieving city than the reduction of
Sancta Sophia to the religious usages of Islam, its possession would
alone justify my Lord's best effort, regardless of life and treasure. The
riches accumulated in it through the ages are incalculable; nevertheless
its splendors, dazzling as the sun, varied as a rainbow, sunk out of
sight when the Princess Irene passed me so near that I had a perfect view
of her. Her face is composed of the light of unnumbered stars. The union
of all the graces in her person is so far above words that Hafiz, my
Lord's prince of poets, would have been dumb before her, or, if he had
spoken, it would have been to say, She is the Song of Songs impossible to
verse. She spoke to me as she moved by, and her voice was the voice of
Love. Yet she had the dignity of a Queen governing the world through a
conqueror such as my Lord is to be. Then, the door having closed upon
her, I was ready to declare, as I now do, were there no other incentive
to the conquest of this unbelieving city than the possession of the
womanly perfections belonging to her, she would justify war to the
exhaustion of the universe. O my Lord, thou only art worthy of her! And
how infinite will be my happiness, if the Prophet through his powerful
intercessions with the Most Merciful, permits me to be the servant
instrumental in bringing her safely to thy arms!" This report concluded:

"By appointment of His Majesty, the Emperor, I had audience with him
yesterday at his High Residence, the Palace of Blacherne. The Court was
in full attendance, and, after my presentation to His Majesty, I was
introduced to its members. The ceremony was in charge of the Grand
Chamberlain, that Phranza with whom my Lord is acquainted. Much I feared
lest he should recognize me. Fortunately he is dull and philosophical,
and too much given to study of things abstract and far away to be
mindful of those close under his nose. Duke Notaras was there also. He
conversed with me about Italy. Fortunately I knew more about the
_Gabour_ country than he--its nobles, cities, manners, and present
conditions. He thanked me for information, and when he had my account of
the affair which brought me the invaluable certificate of the Bishop of
Rome he gave over sounding me. I have more reason to be watchful of him
than all the rest of the court; _so has the Emperor_. Phranza is a
man to be spared. Notaras is a man to be bowstrung.... I flatter myself
the Emperor is my friend. In another month I shall be intrenched in his
confidence. He is brave, but weak. An excellent general without
lieutenants, without soldiers, and too generous and trustful for a
politician, too religious for a statesman. His time is occupied entirely
with priests and priestly ceremonies. My Lord will appreciate the resort
which enabled me to encamp myself in his trust. Of the five Arab horses
I brought with me from Aleppo, I gave him one--a gray, superior to the
best he has in his stables. He and his courtiers descended in a body to
look at the barb and admire it."

From the third report:

"A dinner at the High Residence. There were present officers of the army
and navy, members of the Court, the Patriarch, a number of the
Clergy--Hegumen, as they are called--and the Princess Irene, with a
large suite of highborn ladies married and unmarried. His Majesty was
the Sun of the occasion, the Princess was the Moon. He sat on a raised
seat at one side of the table; she opposite him; the company according
to rank, on their right and left. I had eyes for the Moon only, thinking
how soon my Lord would be her source of light, and that her loveliness,
made up of every loveliness else in the world, would then be the fitting
complement of my Lord's glory.... His Majesty did me the honor to lead
me to her, and she did me the higher honor of permitting me to kiss her
hand. In further thought of what she was to my Lord, I was about making
her a salaam, but remembered myself--Italians are not given to that mode
of salutation, while the Greeks reserve it for the Emperor, or Basileus
as he is sometimes called.... She condescended to talk with me. Her
graces of mind are like those of her person--adorable.... I was very
deferent, and yielded the choice of topics. She chose two--religion and
arms. Had she been a man, she would have been a soldier; being a woman,
she is a religious devotee. There is nothing of which she is more
desirous than the restoration of the Holy Sepulchre to the Christian
powers. She asked me if it were true the Holy Father commissioned me to
make war on the Tripolitan pirates, and when I said yes, she replied
with a fervor truly engaging: 'The practice of arms would be the noblest
of occupations if it were given solely to crusading.' ... She then
adverted to the Holy Father. I infer from her speaking of the Bishop of
Rome as the Holy Father that she inclines to the party which believes
the Bishop rightfully the head of the Church. How did he look? Was he a
learned man? Did he set a becoming example to his Clergy? Was he liberal
and tolerant? If great calamity were to threaten Christianity in the
East, would he lend it material help?... My Lord will have a time
winning the Princess over to the Right Understanding; but in the fields
of Love who ever repented him of his labor? When my Lord was a boy, he
once amused himself training a raven and a bird of paradise to talk. The
raven at length came to say, 'O Allah, Allah!' The other bird was beyond
teaching, yet my Lord loved it the best, and excused his partiality:
'Oh, its feathers are so brilliant!'"

Again:

"A few days ago, I rode out of the Golden Gate, and turning to the
right, pursued along the great moat to the Gate St. Romain. The wall, or
rather the walls, of the city were on my right hand, and it is an
imposing work. The moat is in places so cumbered I doubt if it can be
everywhere flooded.... I bought some snow-water of a peddler, and
examined the Gate in and out. Its central position makes it a key of
first importance. Thence I journeyed on surveying the road and adjacent
country up far as the Adrianople gate.... I hope my Lord will find the
enclosed map of my reconnoissance satisfactory. It is at least
reliable."

Again:

"His Majesty indulged us with a hawking party. We rode to the Belgrade
forest from which Constantinople is chiefly though not entirely supplied
with water.... My Lord's Flower of Flowers, the Princess, was of the
company. I offered her my chestnut courser, but she preferred a jennet.
Remembering your instructions, O my Lord, I kept close to her bridle.
She rides wonderfully well; yet if she had fallen, how many prayers to
the Prophet, what amount of alms to the poor, would have availed me with
my Lord?... Riding is a lost art with the Greeks, if the ever possessed
it. The falcon killed a heron beyond a hill which none of them, except
the Emperor, dared cross in their saddles. Some day I will show them how
we of my Lord's loving ride.... The Princess came safely home."

Again:

"O my Lord in duty always!... I paid the usual daily visit to the
Princess, and kissed her hand upon my admission and departing. She has
this quality above other women--she is always the same. The planets
differ from her in that they are sometimes overcast by clouds.... From
her house, I rode to the imperial arsenal, situated in the ground story
of the Hippodrome, northern side. [Footnote: Professor E A Grosvenor.] It
is well stored with implements of offence and defence--mangonels,
balistas, arbalists, rams--cranes for repairing breaches--lances,
javelins, swords, axes, shields, scutums, pavises, armor--timber for
ships--cressets for night work--ironmonger machines--arquebuses, but of
antique patterns--quarrels and arrows in countless sheaves--bows of
every style. In brief, as my Lord's soul is dauntless, as he is an
eagle, which does not abandon the firmament scared by the gleam of a
huntsman's helmet in the valley, he can bear to hear that the Emperor
keeps prepared for the emergencies of war. Indeed, were His Majesty as
watchful in other respects, he would be dangerous. Who are to serve all
these stores? His native soldiers are not enough to make a bodyguard for
my Lord. Only the walls of Byzantium remain for her defence. The Church
has swallowed the young men; the sword is discarded for the rosary.
Unless the warriors of the West succor her, she will be an easy prey."

Again:

"My Lord enjoined me to be royal.... I have just returned from a sail up
the Bosphorus to the Black Sea in my galley. The decks were crowded with
guests. Under a silken pavilion pitched on the roof of my cabin, there
was a throne for the Princess Irene, and she shone as the central jewel
in a kingly crown.... We cast anchor in the bay of Therapia, and went
ashore to her palace and gardens. On the outside face of one of the
gate-columns, she showed me a brass plate. I recognized my Lord's
signature and safeguard, and came near saluting them with a
_rik'rath_, but restraining myself, asked her innocently, 'What it
was?' O my Lord, verily I congratulate you! She blushed, and cast down
her eyes, and her voice trembled while she answered: 'They say the
Prince Mahommed nailed it there.' 'What Prince Mahommed?' 'He who is now
Sultan of the Turks.' 'He has been here, then? Did you see him?' 'I saw
an Arab story-teller.' Her face was the hue of a scarlet poppy, and I
feared to go further than ask concerning the plate: 'What does it mean?'
And she returned: 'The Turks never go by without prostrating themselves
before it. They say it is notice to them that I, and my house and
grounds, are sacred from their intrusion.' And then I said: 'Amongst
peoples of the East and the Desert, down far as the Barbary coast, the
Sultan Mahommed has high fame for chivalry. His bounties to those once
fortunate enough to excite his regard are inexhaustible.' She would have
had me speak further of you, but out of caution, I was driven to declare
I knew nothing beyond the hearsay of the Islamites among whom I had been
here and there cast.... My Lord will not require me to describe the
palace by Therapia. He has seen it.... The Princess remained there. I
was at sore loss, not knowing how I could continue to make report of her
to my Lord, until, to my relief she invited me to visit her."

Again:

"I am glad to say, for my Lord's sake, that the October winds, sweeping
down from the Black Sea, have compelled his Princess to return to her
house in the city, where she will abide till the summer comes again. I
saw her to-day. The country life has retouched her cheeks with a
just-sufficient stain of red roses; her lips are scarlet, as if she had
been mincing fresh-blown bloom of pomegranates; her eyes are clear as a
crooning baby's; her neck is downy--round as a white dove's; in her
movements afoot, she reminds me of the swaying of a lily-stalk brushed
softly by butterflies and humming-birds, attracted to its open cup of
paradisean wax. Oh, if I could but tell her of my Lord!"...

This report was lengthy, and included the account of an episode more
personal to the Sultanic emissary than any before given his master. It
was dated October. The subjoined extracts may prove interesting.

... "Everybody in the East has heard of the Hippodrome, whither I went
one day last week, and again yesterday. It was the mighty edifice in
which Byzantine vanity aired itself through hundreds of years. But
little of it is now left standing. At the north end of an area probably
seventy paces wide, and four hundred long, is a defaced structure with a
ground floor containing the arsenal, and on that, boxes filled with
seats. A lesser building rises above the boxes which is said to have
been a palace called the _Kathisma_, from which the Emperor looked
down upon the various amusements of the people, such as chariot racing,
and battles between the Blue and Green factions. Around the area from
the _Kathisma_ lie hills of brick and marble--enough to build the
Palace as yet hid in my Lord's dreams, and a mosque to becomingly house
our Mohammedan religion. In the midst, marking a line central of the
race-course, are three relics--a square pillar quite a hundred feet
high, bare now, but covered once with plates of brass--an obelisk from
Egypt--and a twisted bronze column, representing three writhing
serpents, their heads in air. [Footnote: The Hippodrome was the popular
pleasure resort in Constantinople. Besides accommodating one hundred
thousand spectators, it was the most complete building for the purposes
of its erection ever known. The world--including old Rome--had been
robbed of statuary for the adornment of this extravaganza. Its enormous
level posed in great part upon a substructure of arches on arches, which
still exist. The opinion is quite general that it was destroyed by the
Turks, and that much of its material went to construct the Mosque
Sulymanie. The latter averment is doubtless correct; but it is only
justice to say that the Crusaders, so called Christians, who encamped in
Constantinople in 1204 were the real vandals. For pastime, merely, they
plied their battle-axes on the carvings, inscriptions, and vast
collection of statuary in marble and bronze found by them on the spinet,
and elsewhere in the edifice. When they departed, the Hippodrome was an
irreparable ruin--a convenient and lawful quarry.]... The present
Emperor does not honor the ruin with his presence; but the people come,
and sitting in the boxes under the KATHISMA, and standing on the heaps
near by, find diversion watching the officers and soldiers exercising
their horses along the area.... My Lord must know, in the next place,
that there is in the city a son of the Orchan who terms himself lawful
heir of Solyman of blessed memory--the Orchan pretender to my Lord's
throne, whom the Greeks have been keeping in mock confinement--the
Orchan who is the subject of the present Emperor's demand on my Lord for
an increase of the stipend heretofore paid for the impostor's support.
The son of the pretender, being a Turk, affects the martial practices
prevalent with us, and enjoys notoriety for accomplishments as a
horseman, and in the tourney play djerid. He is even accredited with an
intention of one day taking the field against my Lord--this when his
father, the old Orchan, dies.... When I entered the Hippodrome one day
last week, Orchan the younger occupied the arena before the Kathisma.
The boxes were well filled with spectators. Some officers of my
acquaintance were present, mounted like myself, and they accosted me
politely, and eulogized the performance. Afterwhile I joined in their
commendation, but ventured to say I had seen better exercise during my
sojourn among the infidels in the Holy Land. They asked me if I had any
skill. 'I cannot call it skill,' I said; 'but my instruction was from a
noble master, the Sheik of the Jordan.' Nothing would rest them then but
a trial. At length I assented on condition that the Turk would engage me
in a tourney or a combat without quarter--bow, cimeter, spear--on
horseback and in Moslem armor. They were astonished, but agreed to carry
the challenge.... Now, O my Lord, do not condemn me. My residence here
has extended into months, without an incident to break the peace. Your
pleasure is still my rule. I keep the custom of going about on horseback
and in armor. Once only--at His Majesty's dinner--I appeared in a
Venetian suit--a red mantle and hose, one leg black, the other yellow--
red-feathered cap, shoes with the long points chained to my knees. Was
there not danger of being mistaken for a strutting bird of show? If my
hand is cunning with weapons, should not the Greeks be taught it? How
better recommend myself to His Majesty of Blacherne? Then, what an
opportunity to rid my Lord of future annoyance! Old Orchan cannot live
much longer, while this cheeping chicken is young.... The son of the
pretender, being told I was an Italian, replied he would try a tourney
with me; if I proved worthy, he would consider the combat.... Yesterday
was the time for the meeting. There was a multitude out as witnesses, the
Emperor amongst others. He did not resort to the _Kathisma,_ but kept his
saddle, with a bodyguard of horsemen at his back. His mount was my gray
Arab.... We began with volting, demi-volting, jumping, wheeling in
retreat, throwing the horse. Orchan was a fumbler.... We took to bows
next, twelve arrows each. At full speed he put two bolts in the target,
and I twelve, all in the white ring.... Then spear against cimeter. I
offered him choice, and he took the spear. In the first career, the
blunted head of his weapon fell to the ground shorn off close behind the
ferrule. The spectators cheered and laughed, and growing angry, Orchan
shouted it was an accident, and challenged me to combat. I accepted, but
His Majesty interposed--we might conclude with the spear and sword in
tourney again.... My antagonist, charged with malicious intent, resolved
to kill me. I avoided his shaft, and as his horse bolted past on my left,
I pushed him with my shield, and knocked him from the saddle. They picked
him up bleeding nose and ears. His Majesty invited me to accompany him to
Blacherne.... I left the Hippodrome sorry not to have been permitted to
fight the vain fool; yet my repute in Constantinople is now undoubtedly
good--I am a soldier to be cultivated."

Again:

"His Majesty has placed me formally in charge of the gate in front of my
quarters. Communication with my Lord is now at all times easy. _The
keys of the city are in effect mine._ Nevertheless I shall continue
to patronize Ali. His fish are the freshest brought to market."

Again:

"O my Lord, the Princess Irene is well and keeps the morning colors in
her cheeks for you. Yet I found her quite distraught. There was
unwelcome news at the Palace from His Majesty's ambassador at
Adrianople. The Sultan had at last answered the demand for increase of
the Orchan stipend--not only was the increase refused, but the stipend
itself was withdrawn, and a peremptory order to that effect sent to the
province whence the fund has been all along collected.... I made a
calculation, with conclusion that my report of the tourney with young
Orchan reached my Lord's hand, and I now am patting myself on the back,
happy to believe it had something to do with my Lord's decision. The
imposition deserved to have its head blown off. Orchan is a dotard. His
son's ears are still impaired. In the fall the ground caught him crown
first. He will never ride again. The pretension is over.... I rode from
the Princess' house directly to Blacherne. The Grand Council was in
session: yet the Prefect of the Palace admitted me.... O my Lord, this
Constantine is a man, a warrior, an Emperor, surrounded by old women
afraid of their shadows. The subject of discussion when I went in was
the news from Adrianople. His Majesty was of opinion that your decision,
coupled with the order discontinuing the stipend, was sign of a hostile
intent. He was in favor of preparing for war. Phranza thought diplomacy
not yet spent. Notaras asked what preparations His Majesty had in mind.
His Majesty replied, buying cannon and powder, stocking the magazines
with provisions for a siege, increasing the navy, repairing the walls,
clearing out the moat. He would also send an embassy to the Bishop of
Rome, and through him appeal to the Christian powers of Europe for
assistance in men and money. Notaras rejoined instantly: 'Rather than a
Papal Legate in Constantinople, he would prefer a turbaned Turk.' The
Council broke up in confusion.... Verily, O my Lord, I pitied the
Emperor. So much courage, so much weakness! His capital and the slender
remnant of his empire are lost unless the _Gabours_ of Venice and
Italy come to his aid. Will they? The Holy Father, using the
opportunity, will try once more to bring the Eastern Church to its
knees, and failing, will leave it to its fate. If my Lord knocked at
these gates to-morrow, Notaras would open one of them, and I another....
Yet the Emperor will fight. He has the soul of a hero."

Again:

"The Princess Irene is inconsolable. Intensely Greek, and patriotic, and
not a little versed in politics, she sees nothing cheering in the
situation of the Empire. The vigils of night in her oratory are leaving
their traces on her face. Her eyes are worn with weeping. I find it
impossible not to sympathize with so much beauty tempered by so many
virtues. When the worst has befallen, perhaps my Lord will know how to
comfort her."

Finally:

"It is a week since I last wrote my Lord. Ali has been sick but keeps in
good humor, and says he will be well when Christian winds cease blowing
from Constantinople. He prays you to come and stop them.... The
diplomatic mishaps of the Emperor have quickened the religious feuds of
his subjects. The Latins everywhere quote the speech of Notaras in the
Council: 'Rather than a Papal Legate in Constantinople, I prefer a
turbaned Turk'--and denounce it as treason to God and the State. It
certainly represents the true feeling of the Greek clergy; yet they are
chary in defending the Duke.... The Princess is somewhat recovered,
although perceptibly paler than is her wont. She is longing for the
return of spring, and promises herself health and happiness in the
palace at Therapia.... To-morrow, she informs me, there is to be a
special grand service in Sancta Sophia. The Brotherhoods here and
elsewhere will be present. I will be there also. She hopes peace and
rest from doctrinal disputes will follow. We will see."

The extracts above given will help the reader to an idea of life in
Constantinople; more especially they portray the peculiar service
rendered by Corti during the months they cover.

There are two points in them deserving special notice: The warmth of
description indulged with respect to the Princess Irene and the betrayal
of the Emperor. It must not be supposed the Count was unaware of his
perfidy. He did his writing after night, when the city and his own
household were asleep; and the time was chosen, not merely for greater
security from discovery, but that no eye might see the remorse he
suffered. How often he broke off in the composition to pray for strength
to rescue his honor, and save himself from the inflictions of
conscience! There were caverns in the mountains and islands off in the
mid-seas: why not fly to them? Alas! He was now in a bondage which made
him weak as water. It was possible to desert Mahommed, but not the
Princess. The dangers thickening around the city were to her as well.
Telling her of them were useless; she would never abandon the old
Capital; and it was the perpetually recurring comparison of her strength
with his own weakness which wrought him his sharpest pangs. Writing of
her in poetic strain was easy, for he loved her above every earthly
consideration: but when he thought of the intent with which he
wrote--that he was serving the love of another, and basely scheming to
deliver her to him--there was no refuge in flight; recollection would go
with him to the ends of the earth--better death. Not yet--not yet--he
would argue. Heaven might send him a happy chance. So the weeks melted
into months, and he kept the weary way hoping against reason,
conspiring, betraying, demoralizing, sinking into despair.


CHAPTER VIII

OUR LORD'S CREED


Proceeding now to the special service mentioned in the extract from the
last report of Count Corti to Mahommed.

The nave of Sancta Sophia was in possession of a multitude composed of
all the Brotherhoods of the city, interspersed with visiting delegations
from the monasteries of the Islands and many of the hermitic colonies
settled in the mountains along the Asiatic shore of the Marmora. In the
galleries were many women; amongst them, on the right-hand side, the
Princess Irene. Her chair rested on a carpeted box a little removed from
the immense pilaster, and raised thus nearly to a level with the top of
the balustrade directly before her, she could easily overlook the floor
below, including the apse. From her position everybody appeared dwarfed;
yet she could see each figure quite well in the light of the forty
arched windows above the galleries.

On the floor the chancel, or space devoted to the altar, was separated
from the body of the nave by a railing of Corinthian brass, inside
which, at the left, she beheld the Emperor, in Basilean regalia, seated
on a throne--a very stately and imposing figure. Opposite him was the
chair of the Patriarch. Between the altar and the railing arose a
baldacchino, the canopy of white silk, the four supporting columns of
shining silver. Under the canopy, suspended by a cord, hung the vessel
of gold containing the Blessed Sacraments; and to the initiated it was a
sufficient publication of the object of the assemblage.

Outside the railing, facing the altar, stood the multitude. To get an
idea of its appearance, the reader has merely to remember the description
of the bands marching into the garden of Blacherne the night of the
_Pannychides_. There were the same gowns black and gray; the same
tonsured heads, and heads shock-haired; the same hoods and glistening
rosaries; the same gloomy, bearded faces; the same banners, oriflammes,
and ecclesiastical gonfalons, each with its community under it in a
distinctive group. Back further towards the entrances from the vestibule
was a promiscuous host of soldiers and civilians; having no part in the
service, they were there as spectators.

The ceremony was under the personal conduct of the Patriarch. Silence
being complete, the choir, invisible from the body of the nave, began
its magnificent rendition of the _Sanctus_--"Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of Sabaoth. Blessed is He who cometh in the name of the Lord.
Hosanna in the highest"--and during the singing, His Serenity was
clothed for the rite. Over his cassock, the deacons placed the surplice
of white linen, and over that again a stole stiff with gold embroidery.
He then walked slowly to the altar, and prayed; and when he had himself
communicated, he was led to the baldacchino, where he blessed the Body
and the Blood, and mixed them together in chalices, ready for delivery
to the company of servers kneeling about him. The Emperor, who, in
common with the communicants within and without the railing, had been on
his knees, arose now and took position before the altar in a prayerful
attitude; whereupon the Patriarch brought him a chalice on a small
paten, and he put it to his lips, while the choir rang the dome with
triumphal symphony.

His Serenity next returned to the baldacchino, and commenced giving the
cups to the servers; at the same time the gate leading from the chancel
to the nave was thrown open. Nor rustle of garment, nor stir of foot was
heard.

Then a black-gowned figure arose amidst a group not far from the gate,
and said, in a hoarse voice, muffled by the flaps of the hood covering
his head and face:

"We are here, O Serenity, by thy invitation--here to partake of the Holy
Eucharist--and I see thou art about sending it to us. Now not a few
present believe there is no grace in leavened bread, and others hold it
impiety to partake thereof. Wherefore tell us"--

The Patriarch looked once at the speaker; then, delivering the chalice,
signed the servers to follow him; next instant, he stood in the open
gateway, and with raised hands, cried out:

"Holy things to the holy!"

Repeating the ancient formula, he stepped aside to allow the cup-bearers
to pass into the nave; but they stood still, for there came a skurry of
sound not possible of location, so did it at the same moment seem to be
from the dome descending and from the floor going up to the dome. It was
the multitude rising from their knees.

Now the Patriarch, though feeble in body, was stout of soul and
ready-witted, as they usually are whose lives pass in combat and fierce
debate. Regarding the risen audience calmly, he betook himself to his
chair, and spoke to his assistants, who brought a plain chasuble, and
put it on him, covering the golden stole completely. When he again
appeared in the spaceway of the open gate, as he presently did, every
cleric and every layman in the church to whom he was visible understood
he took the interruption as a sacrilege from which he sought by the
change of attire to save himself.

"Whoso disturbs the Sacrament in celebration has need of cause for that
he does; for great is his offence whatever the cause."

The Patriarch's look and manner were void of provocation, except as one,
himself rudely disposed, might discover it in the humility somewhat too
studied.

"I heard my Brother--it would be an untruth to say I did not--and to go
acquit of deceit, I will answer him, God helping me. Let me say first,
while we have some differences in our faith, there are many things about
which we are agreed, the things in agreement outnumbering those in
difference; and of them not the least is the Real Presence once the
Sacraments are consecrated. Take heed, O Brethren! Do any of you deny
the Real Presence in the bread and wine of communion?"

No man made answer.

"It is as I said--not one. Look you, then, if I or you--if any of us be
tempted to anger or passionate speech, and this house, long dedicated to
the worship of God, and its traditions of holiness too numerous for
memory, and therefore of record only in the Books of Heaven, fail the
restraints due them, lo, Christ is here--Christ in Real Presence--Christ
our Lord in Body and Blood!"

The old man stood aside, pointing to the vessel under the baldacchino,
and there were sighs and sobs. Some shouted: "Blessed be the Son of
God!"

The sensation over, the Patriarch continued:

"O my Brother, take thou answer now. The bread is leavened. Is it
therefore less grace-giving?"

"No, no!" But the response was drowned by an affirmative yell so strong
there could be no doubt of the majority. The minority, however, was
obstinate, and ere long the groups disrupted, and it seemed every man
became a disputant. Now nothing serves anger like vain striving to be
heard. The Patriarch in deep concern stood in the gateway, exclaiming:
"Have a care, O Brethren, have a care! For now is Christ here!" And as
the babble kept increasing, the Emperor came to him.

"They are like to carry it to blows, O Serenity."

"Fear not, my son, God is here, and He is separating the wheat from the
chaff."

"But the blood shed will be on my conscience, and the _Panagia_"--

The aged Prelate was inflexible. "Nay, nay, not yet! They are Greeks.
Let them have it out. The day is young; and how often is shame the
miraculous parent of repentance."

Constantine returned to his throne, and remained there standing.

Meantime the tumult went on until, with shouting and gesticulating, and
running about, it seemed the assemblage was getting mad with drink.
Whether the contention was of one or many things, who may say? Well as
could be ascertained, one party, taking cue from the Patriarch,
denounced the interruption of the most sacred rite; the other
anathematized the attempt to impose leavened bread upon orthodox
communicants as a scheme of the devil and his arch-legate, the Bishop of
Rome. Men of the same opinions argued blindly with each other; while
genuine opposition was conducted with glaring eyes, swollen veins,
clinched hands, and voices high up in the leger lines of hate and
defiance. The timorous and disinclined were caught and held forcibly. In
a word, the scene was purely Byzantine, incredible of any other people.

The excitement afterwhile extended to the galleries, where, but that the
women were almost universally of the Greek faction, the same passion
would have prevailed; as it was, the gentle creatures screamed
_azymite, azymite_ in amazing disregard of the proprieties. The
Princess Irene, at first pained and mortified, kept her seat until
appearances became threatening; then she scanned the vast pit long and
anxiously; finally her wandering eyes fell upon the tall figure of
Sergius drawn out of the mass, but facing it from a position near the
gate of the brazen railing. Immediately she settled back in her chair.

To justify the emotion now possessing her, the reader must return to the
day the monk first presented himself at her palace near Therapia. He
must read again the confession, extorted from her by the second perusal
of Father Hilarion's letter, and be reminded of her education in the
venerated Father's religious ideas, by which her whole soul was adherent
to his conceptions of the Primitive Church of the Apostles. Nor less
must the reader suffer himself to be reminded of the consequences to
her--of the judgment of heresy upon her by both Latins and Greeks--of
her disposition to protest against the very madness now enacting before
her--of her longing, Oh, that I were a man!--of the fantasy that Heaven
had sent Sergius to her with the voice, learning, zeal, courage, and
passion of truth to enable her to challenge a hearing anywhere-of the
persistence with which she had since cared for and defended him, and
watched him in his studies, and shared them with him. Nor must the later
incident, the giving him a copy of the creed she had formulated--the
Creed of Nine Words--be omitted in the consideration.

Now indeed the reader can comprehend the Princess, and the emotions with
which she beheld the scene at her feet. The Patriarch's dramatic warning
of the Real Presence found in her a ready second; for keeping strictly
to Father Hilarion's distinction between a right Creed and a form or
ceremony for pious observance, the former essential to salvation, the
latter merely helpful to continence in the Creed, it was with her as if
Christ in glorified person stood there under the baldacchino. What
wonder if, from indignation at the madness of the assembly, the
insensate howling, the blasphemous rage, she passed to exaltation of
spirit, and fancied the time good for a reproclamation of the Primitive
Church?

Suddenly a sharper, fiercer explosion of rage arose from the floor, and
a rush ensued--the factions had come to blows!

Then the Patriarch yielded, and at a sign from the Emperor the choir
sang the _Sanctus_ anew. High and long sustained, the sublime
anthem rolled above the battle and its brutalism. The thousands heard
it, and halting, faced toward the apse, wondering what could be coming.
It even reached into the vortex of combat, and turned all the unengaged
there into peacemakers.

Another surprise still more effective succeeded. Boys with lighted
candles, followed by bearers of smoking censers, bareheaded and in
white, marched slowly from behind the altar toward the open gate,
outside which they parted right and left, and stopped fronting the
multitude. A broad banner hung to a cross-stick of gold, heavy with
fringing of gold, the top of the staff overhung with fresh flowers in
wreaths and garlands, the lower corners stayed by many streaming white
ribbons in the hands of as many holy men in white woollen chasubles
extending to the bare feet, appeared from the same retreat, carried by
two brethren known to every one as janitors of the sacred chapel on the
hill-front of Blacherne.

The Emperor, the Patriarch, the servers of the chalices, the whole body
of assistants inside the railing, fell upon their knees while the banner
was borne through the gate, and planted on the floor there. Its face was
frayed and dim with age, yet the figure of the woman upon it was plain
to sight, except as the faint gray smoke from the censers veiled it in a
vanishing cloud.

Then there was an outburst of many voices:

"The _Panagia!_ The _Panagia!_"

The feeling this time was reactionary.

"O Blessed Madonna!--Guardian of Constantinople!--Mother of God!--Christ
is here!--Hosannas to the Son and to the Immaculate Mother!" With these,
and other like exclamations, the mass precipitated itself forward, and,
crowding near the historic symbol, flung themselves on the floor before
it, grovelling and contrite, if not conquered.

The movement of the candle and censer bearers outside the gate forced
Sergius nearer it; so when the _Panagia_ was brought to a rest, he,
being much taller than its guardians, became an object of general
observation, and wishing to escape it if possible, he took off his high
hat; whereupon his hair, parted in the middle, dropped down his neck and
back fair and shining in the down-beating light.

This drew attention the more. Did any of the prostrate raise their eyes
to the Madonna on the banner, they must needs turn to him next; and
presently the superstitious souls, in the mood for miracles, began
whispering to each other:

"See--it is the Son--it is the Lord himself!"

And of a truth the likeness was startling; although in saying this, the
reader must remember the difference heretofore remarked between the
Greek and Latin ideals.

About that time Sergius looked up to the Princess, whose face shone out
of the shadows of the gallery with a positive radiance, and he was
electrified seeing her rise from her chair, and wave a hand to him.

He understood her. The hour long talked of, long prepared for, was at
last come--the hour of speech. The blood surged to his heart, leaving
him pallid as a dead man. He stooped lower, covered his eyes with his
hands, and prayed the wordless prayer of one who hastily commits himself
to God; and in the darkness behind his hands there was an illumination,
and in the midst of it a sentence in letters each a lambent flame--the
Creed of Father Hilarion and the Princess Irene--our Lord's Creed:

"I BELIEVE IN GOD, AND JESUS CHRIST, HIS SON."

This was his theme!

With no thought of self, no consciousness but of duty to be done,
trusting in God, he stood up, pushed gently through the kneeling boys
and guardians of the _Panagia_, and took position where all eyes
could look at the Blessed Mother slightly above him, and then to
himself, in such seeming the very Son. It might have been awe, it might
have been astonishment, it might have been presentiment; at all events,
the moaning, sobbing, praying, tossing of arms, beating of breasts, with
the other outward signs of remorse, grief and contrition grotesque and
pitiful alike subsided, and the Church, apse, nave and gallery, grew
silent--as if a wave had rushed in, and washed the life out of it.

"Men and brethren," he began, "I know not whence this courage to do
comes, unless it be from Heaven, nor at whose word I speak, if not that
Jesus of Nazareth, worker of miracles which God did by him anciently,
yet now here in Real Presence of Body and Blood, hearing what we say,
seeing what we do."

"Art thou not He?" asked a hermit, half risen in front of him, his wrap
of undressed goatskin fallen away from his naked shoulders.

"No; his servant only am I, even as thou art--his servant who would not
have forsaken him at Gethsemane, who would have given him drink on the
Cross, who would have watched at the door of his tomb until laid to
sleep by the Delivering Angel--his servant not afraid of Death, which,
being also his servant, will not pass me by for the work I now do, if
the work be not by his word."

The voice in this delivery was tremulous, and the manner so humble as to
take from the answer every trace of boastfulness. His face, when he
raised it, and looked out over the audience, was beautiful. The
spectacle offered him in return was thousands of people on their knees,
gazing at him undetermined whether to resent an intrusion or welcome a
messenger with glad tidings.

"Men and brethren," he continued, more firmly, casting the old
Scriptural address to the farthest auditor, "now are you in the anguish
of remorse; but who told you that you had offended to such a degree? See
you not the Spirit, sometimes called the Comforter, in you? Be at ease,
for unto us are repentance and pardon. There were who beat our dear
Lord, and spit upon him, and tore his beard; who laid him on a cross,
and nailed him to it with nails in his hands and feet; one wounded him
in the side with a spear; yet what did he, the Holy One and the Just?
Oh! if he forgave them glorying in their offences, will he be less
merciful to us repentant?"

Raising his head a little higher, the preacher proceeded, with increased
assurance:

"Let me speak freely unto you; for how can a man repent wholly, if the
cause of his sin be not laid bare that he may see and hate it?

"Now before our dear Lord departed out of the world, he left sayings,
simple even to children, instructing such as would be saved unto
everlasting life what they must do to be saved. Those sayings I call our
Lord's Creed, by him delivered unto his disciples, from whom we have
them: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life.' So we have the
First Article--belief in God. Again: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that believeth on me hath everlasting life.' Behold the Second
Article--belief in Christ.

"Now, for that the Son, and he who sent him, are at least in purpose
one, belief in either of them is declared sufficient; nevertheless it
may be simpler, if not safer, for us to cast the Two Articles together
in a single phrase; we have then a Creed which we may affirm was made
and left behind him by our Lord himself:

I BELIEVE IN GOD, AND JESUS CHRIST, HIS SON.

And when we sound it, lo! two conditions in all; and he who embraces
them, more is not required of him; he is already passed from death unto
life--everlasting life.

"This, brethren, is the citadel of our Christian faith; wherefore, to
strengthen it. What was the mission of Jesus Christ our Lord to the
world? Hear every one! What was the mission of our Lord Jesus Christ?
Why was he sent of God, and born into the world? Hearing the question,
take heed of the answer: He was sent of God for the salvation of men.
You have ears, hear; minds, think; nor shall one of you, the richest in
understanding of the Scriptures, in walk nearest the Sinless Example,
ever find another mission for him which is not an arraignment of the
love of his Father.

"Then, if it be true, as we all say, not one denying it, that our Lord
brought to his mission the perfected wisdom of his Father, how could he
have departed from the world leaving the way of salvation unmarked and
unlighted? Or, sent expressly to show us the way, himself the appointed
guide, what welcome can we suppose he would have had from his Father in
Heaven, if he had given the duty over to the angels? Or, knowing the
deceitfulness of the human heart, and its weakness and liability to
temptation, whence the necessity for his coming to us, what if he had
given the duty over to men, so much lower than the angels, and then gone
away? Rather than such a thought of him, let us believe, if the way had
been along the land, he would have planted it with inscribed hills; if
over the seas, he would have sown the seas with pillars of direction
above the waves; if through the air, he would have made it a path
effulgent with suns numerous as the stars. 'I am the Way,' he
said--meaning the way lies through me; and you may come to me in the
place I go to prepare for you, if only you believe in God and me. Men
and brethren, our Lord was true to his mission, and wise in the wisdom
of his Father."

At this the hermit in front of the preacher, uttering a shill cry,
spread his arms abroad, and quivered from head to foot. Many of those
near sprang forward to catch him.

"No, leave him alone," cried Sergius, "leave him alone. The cross he
took was heavy of itself; but upon the cross you heaped conditions
without sanction, making a burden of which he was like to die. At last
he sees how easy it is to go to his Master; that he has only to believe
in God and the Master. Leave him with the truth; it was sent to save,
not to kill."

The excitement over, Sergius resumed:

"I come now, brethren, to the cause of your affliction. I will show it
to you; that is to say, I will show you why you are divided amongst
yourselves, and resort to cruelty one unto another; as if murder would
help either side of the quarrel. I will show your disputes do not come
from anything said or done by our Lord, whose almost last prayer was
that all who believed in him might be made perfect in one.

"It is well known to you that our Lord did not found a Church during his
life on earth, but gave authority for it to his Apostles. It is known to
you also that what his Apostles founded was but a community: for such is
the description: 'And all that believed were together, and had all
things common; and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to
all men, as every man had need.' [Footnote: Acts ii. 44, 45.] And again:
'And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one
soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he
possessed was his own; but they had all things common.' 'Neither was
there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of
lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that
were sold, and laid them down at the apostles' feet: and distribution
was made unto every man according as he had need.' [Footnote: Acts iv.
32, 34, 35.] But in time this community became known as the Church; and
there was nothing of it except our Lord's Creed, in definition of the
Faith, and two ordinances for the Church--Baptism for the remission of
sins, that the baptized might receive the Comforter, and the Sacraments,
that believers, often as they partook of the Body and Blood of Christ,
might be reminded of him.

"Lo, now! In the space of three generations this Church, based upon this
simple Creed, became a power from Alexandria to Lodinum; and though
kings banded to tread it out; though day and night the smell of the
blood of the righteous spilt by them was an offence to God; though there
was no ingenuity more amongst men except to devise methods for the
torture of the steadfast--still the Church grew; and if you dig deep
enough for the reasons of its triumphant resistance, these are they:
there was Divine Life in the Creed, and the Community was perfect in
one; insomuch that the brethren quarrelled not among themselves; neither
was there jealousy, envy or rivalry among them; neither did they dispute
about immaterial things, such as which was the right mode of baptism, or
whether the bread should be leavened or unleavened, or whence the Holy
Ghost proceeded, whether from the Father or from the Father and Son
together; neither did the elders preach for a price, nor forsake a poor
flock for a rich one that their salaries might be increased, nor engage
in building costly tabernacles for the sweets of vanity in tall spires;
neither did any study the Scriptures seeking a text, or a form, or an
observance, on which to go out and draw from the life of the old
Community that they might set up a new one; and in their houses of God
there were never places for the men and yet other separate places for
the women of the congregation; neither did a supplicant for the mercy of
God look first at the garments of the neighbor next him lest the mercy
might lose a virtue because of a patch or a tatter. The Creed was too
plain for quibble or dispute; and there was no ambition in the Church
except who should best glorify Christ by living most obedient to his
commands. Thence came the perfection of unity in faith and works; and
all went well with the Primitive Church of the Apostles; and the Creed
was like unto the white horse seen by the seer of the final visions, and
the Church was like him who sat upon the horse, with a bow in his hand,
unto whom a crown was given; and he went forth conquering and to
conquer."

Here the audience was stirred uncontrollably; many fell forward upon
their faces; others wept, and the nave resounded with rejoicing. In one
quarter alone there was a hasty drawing together of men with frowning
brows, and that was where the gonfalon of the Brotherhood of the St.
James' was planted. The Hegumen, in the midst of the group, talked
excitedly, though in a low tone.

"I will not ask, brethren," Sergius said, in continuance, "if this
account of the Primitive Church be true; you all do know it true; yet I
will ask if one of you holds that the offending of which you would
repent--the anger, and bitter words, and the blows--was moved by
anything in our Lord's Creed, let him arise, before the Presence is
withdrawn, and say that he thinks. These, lending their ears, will hear
him, and so will God. What, will not one arise?

"It is not necessary that I remind you to what your silence commits you.
Rather suffer me to ask next, which of you will arise and declare, our
Lord his witness, that the Church of his present adherence is the same
Church the Apostles founded? You have minds, think; tongues, speak."

There was not so much as a rustle on the floor.

"It was well, brethren, that you kept silence; for, if one had said his
Church was the same Church the Apostles founded, how could he have
absolved himself of the fact that there are nowhere two parties each
claiming to be of the only true Church? Or did he assert both claimants
to be of the same Church, and it the only true one, then why the refusal
to partake of the Sacraments? Why a division amongst them at all? Have
you not heard the aforetime saying, 'Every kingdom divided against
itself is brought to desolation'?

"Men and brethren, let no man go hence thinking his Church, whichever it
be, is the Church of the Apostles. If he look for the community which
was the law of the old brotherhood, his search will be vain. If he look
for the unity, offspring of our Lord's last prayer, lo! jealousies,
hates, revilements, blows instead. No, your Creed is of men, not Christ,
and the semblance of Christ in it is a delusion and a snare." At this
the gonfalon of the St. James' was suddenly lifted up, and borne forward
to within a few feet of the gate, and the Hegumen, standing in front of
it, cried out:

"Serenity, the preacher is a heretic! I denounce"--

He could get no further; the multitude sprang to foot howling. The
Princess Irene, and the women in the galleries, also arose, she pale and
trembling. Peril to Sergius had not occurred to her when she gave him
the signal to speak. The calmness and resignation with which he looked
at his accuser reminded her of his Master before Pilate, and taking seat
again, she prayed for him, and the cause he was pleading.

At length, the Patriarch, waving his hand, said:

"Brethren, it may be Sergius, to whom we have been listening, has his
impulse of speech from the Spirit, even as he has declared. Let us be
patient and hear him."

Turning to Sergius, he bade him proceed.

"The three hundred Bishops and Presbyters from whom you have your Creeds,
[Footnote: _Encyclopedia Brit.,_ VI. 560.] O men and brethren"--so the
preacher continued--"took the Two Articles from our Lord's Creed, and
then they added others. Thus, which of you can find a text of our Lord
treating of his procession from the substance of God? Again, in what
passage has our Lord required belief in the personage of the Holy Ghost
as an article of faith essential to salvation? [Footnote: Four Creeds are
at present used in the Roman Catholic Church; viz., the Apostles' Creed,
the Nicene, the Athanasian, that of Pius IV--ADD. and AR., _Catholic
Dictionary,_ 232.] 'I am the Way,' said our Lord. 'No,' say the three
hundred, 'we are the way; and would you be saved, you must believe in us
not less than in God and his Son.'"

The auditors a moment before so fierce, even the Hegumen, gazed at the
preacher in a kind of awe; and there was no lessening of effect when his
manner underwent a change, his head slightly drooping and his voice
plaintive.

"The Spirit by whose support and urgency I have dared address you,
brethren, admonishes me that my task is nearly finished."

He took hold of the corner of the _Panagia;_ so all in view were
more than ever impressed with his likeness to their ideal of the Blessed
Master.

"The urgency seemed to me on account of your offence to the Real
Presence so graciously in our midst; for truly when we are in the depths
of penitence it is our nature to listen more kindly to what is imparted
for our good; wherefore, as you have minds, I beg you to think. If our
Lord did indeed leave a Creed containing the all in all for our
salvation, what meant he if not that it should stand in saving purity
until he came again in the glory of his going? And if he so intended,
and yet uninspired men have added other Articles to the simple faith he
asked of us, making it so much the harder for us to go to him in the
place he has prepared for us, are they not usurpers? And are not the
Articles which they have imposed to be passed by us as stratagems
dangerous to our souls?

"Again. The excellence of our Lord's Creed by which it may be always
known when in question, its wisdom superior to the devices of men, is
that it permits us to differ about matters outside of the faith without
weakening our relations to the Blessed Master or imperilling our lot in
his promises. Such matters, for example, as works, which are but
evidences of faith and forms of worship, and the administration of the
two ordinances of the Church, and God and his origin, and whether Heaven
be here or there, or like unto this or that. For truly our Lord knew us,
and that it was our nature to deal in subtleties and speculate of things
not intended we should know during this life; the thought of our minds
being restless and always running, like the waters of a river on their
way to the sea.

"Again, brethren. If the Church of the Apostles brought peace to its
members, so that they dwelt together, no one of them lacking or in need,
do not your experiences of to-day teach you wherein your Churches, being
those built upon the Creed of the three hundred Bishops, are unlike it?
Moreover, see you not if now you have several Churches, some amongst
you, the carping and ambitious, will go out and in turn set up new
Confessions of Faith, and at length so fill the earth with rival
Churches that religion will become a burden to the poor and a byword
with fools who delight in saying there is no God? In a village, how much
better one House of God, with one elder for its service, and always
open, than five or ten, each with a preacher for a price, and closed
from Sabbath to Sabbath? For that there must be discipline to keep the
faithful together, and to carry on the holy war against sin and its
strongholds and captains, how much better one Church in the strength of
unity than a hundred diversely named and divided against themselves?

"The Revelator, even that John who while in the Spirit was bidden.
'Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and
the things which shall be hereafter,' wrote, and at the end of his book
set a warning: 'If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this book.' I cannot see,
brethren, wherein that crime is greater than the addition of Articles to
our Lord's Creed; nor do I know any who have more reason to be afraid of
those threatened plagues than the priest or preacher who from pride or
ambition, or dread of losing his place or living, shall wilfully stand
in the way of a return to the Church of the Apostles and its unity.
Forasmuch as I also know what penitential life is, and how your minds
engage themselves in the solitude of your cells, I give you whereof to
think. Men and brethren, peace unto you all!"

The hermit knelt to the preacher, and kissed his hand, sobbing the
while; the auditors stared at each other doubtfully; but the Hegumen's
time was come. Advancing to the gate, he said:

"This man, O Serenity, is ours by right of fraternity. In thy hearing he
hath defamed the Creed which is the rock the Fathers chose for the
foundation of our most holy Church. He hath even essayed to make a Creed
of his own, and present it for our acceptance--thy acceptance, O
Serenity, and that of His Majesty, the only Christian Emperor, as well
as ours. And for those things, and because never before in the history
of our ancient and most notable Brotherhood hath there been an instance
of heresy so much as in thought, we demand the custody of this apostate
for trial and judgment. Give him to us to do with."

The Patriarch clasped his hands, and, shaking like a man struck with
palsy, turned his eyes upward as if asking counsel of Heaven. His doubt
and hesitation were obvious; and neighbor heard his neighbor's heart
beat; so did silence once more possess itself of the great auditorium.
The Princess Irene arose white with fear, and strove to catch the
Emperor's attention; but he, too, was in the bonds waiting on the
Patriarch.

Then from his place behind the Hegumen, Sergius spoke:

"Let not your heart be troubled, O Serenity. Give me to my Brotherhood.
If I am wrong, I deserve to die; but if I have spoken as the Spirit
directed me, God is powerful to save. I am not afraid of the trial."

The Patriarch gazed at him, his withered cheeks glistening with tears;
still he hesitated.

"Suffer me, O Serenity!"--thus Sergius again--"I would that thy
conscience may never be disquieted on my account; and now I ask not that
thou give me to my Brotherhood--I will go with them freely and of my own
accord." Speaking then to the Hegumen, he said: "No more, I pray. See, I
am ready to be taken as thou wilt."

The Hegumen gave him in charge of the brethren; and at his signal, the
gonfalon was raised and carried through the concourse, and out of one of
the doors, followed closely by the Brotherhood.

At the moment of starting, Sergius lifted his hands, and shouted so as
to be heard above the confusion: "Bear witness, O Serenity--and thou, O
Emperor! That no man may judge me an apostate, hear my confession: I
believe in God, and Jesus Christ, his Son."

Many of those present remained and partook of the Sacraments; far the
greater number hurried away, and it was not long until the house was
vacated.


CHAPTER IX

COUNT CORTI TO MAHOMMED


Extract:

"God is God, and Mahomet is his Prophet! May they keep my Lord in
health, and help him to all his heart's desires! ... It is now three days
since my eyes were gladdened by the presence of the Princess Irene; yet
I have been duteously regular in my calls at her house. To my inquiries,
her domestic has returned the same answer: 'The Princess is in her
chapel praying. She is sadly disturbed in mind, and excuses herself to
every one.' Knowing this information will excite my Lord's apprehension,
I beg him to accept the explanation of her ailments which I think most
probable.... My Lord will gratify me by graciously referring to the
account of the special meeting in Sancta Sophia which I had the honor to
forward the evening of the day of its occurrence. The conjecture there
advanced that the celebration of the Sacrament in highest form was a
stratagem of the Patriarch's looking to a reconciliation of the
factions, has been confirmed; and more--it has proved a failure. Its
effect has inflamed the fanaticism of the Greek party as never before.
Notaras, moved doubtless by Gennadius, induced them to suspect His
Majesty and the Patriarch of conniving at the wonderful sermon of the
monk Sergius; and, as the best rebuke in their power, the Brotherhood of
the St. James' erected a Tribunal of Judgment in their monastery last
night, and placed the preacher on trial. He defended himself, and drove
them to admit his points; that their Church is not the Primitive Church
of the Apostles, and that their Creed is an unwarranted enlargement of
the two Articles of Faith left by Jesus Christ for the salvation of the
world. Yet they pronounced him an apostate and a heretic of incendiary
purpose, and condemned him to the old lion in the Cynegion, Tamerlane,
famous these many years as a man-eater.... My Lord should also know of
the rumor in the city which attributes the Creed of Nine Words--'I
believe in God, and Jesus Christ, his Son'--to the Princess Irene; and
her action would seem to justify the story. Directly the meeting in
Sancta Sophia was over, she hastened to the Palace, and entreated His
Majesty to save the monk from his brethren. My Lord may well think the
Emperor disposed to grant her prayer; his feeling for her is warmer than
friendship. The gossips say he at one time proposed marriage to her. At
all events, being a tender-hearted man--too tender indeed for his high
position--it is easy imagining how such unparalleled beauty in tearful
distress must have moved him. Unhappily the political situation holds
him as in a vice. The Church is almost solidly against him; while of the
Brotherhoods this one of the St. James' has been his only stanch
adherent. What shall the poor man do? If he saves the preacher, he is
himself lost. It appears now she has been brought to understand he
cannot interfere. Thrown thus upon the mercy of Heaven, she has buried
herself in her oratory. Oh, the full Moon of full Moons! And alas! that
she should ever be overcast by a cloud, though it be not heavier than
the just-risen morning mist. My Lord--or Allah must come quickly!

       *       *       *       *       *

"O my Lord! In duty again and always!... Ali did not come yesterday. I
suppose the high winds were too unfriendly. So the despatch of that date
remained on my hands; and I now open it, and include a supplement....
This morning as usual I rode to the Princess' door. The servant gave me
the same report--his mistress was not receiving. It befalls therefore
that my Lord must take refuge in his work or in dreams of her--and may I
lay a suggestion at his feet, I advise the latter, for truly, if the
world is a garden, she is its Queen of Roses.... For the sake of the
love my Lord bears the Princess, and the love I bear my Lord, I did not
sleep last night, being haunted with thinking how I could be of service
to her. What is the use of strength and skill in arms if I cannot turn
them to account in her behalf as my Lord would have me?... On my way to
the Princess', I was told that the monk, who is the occasion of her
sorrow, his sentence being on her conscience, is to be turned in with
the lion to-morrow. As I rode away from her house in desperate strait,
not having it in power to tell my Lord anything of her, it occurred to
me to go see the Cynegion, where the judgment is to be publicly
executed. What if the Most Merciful should offer me an opportunity to do
the unhappy Princess something helpful? If I shrank from the lion, when
killing it would save her a grief, my Lord would never forgive me ... .
Here is a description of the Cynegion: The northwest wall of the city
drops from the height of Blacherne into a valley next the harbor or
Golden Horn, near which it meets the wall coming from the east. Right in
the angle formed by the intersection of the walls there is a gate, low,
very strong, and always closely guarded. Passing the gate, I found
myself in an enclosed field, the city wall on the east, wooded hills
south, and the harbor north. How far the enclosure extends up the shore
of the harbor, I cannot say exactly--possibly a half or three quarters
of a mile. The surface is level and grassy. Roads wind in and out of
clumps of selected shrubbery, with here and there an oak tree.
Kiosk-looking houses, generally red painted, are frequent, some with
roofs, some without. Upon examination I discovered the houses were for
the keeping of animals and birds. In one there was an exhibition of fish
and reptiles. But much the largest structure, called the Gallery, is
situated nearly in the centre of the enclosure; and it astonished me
with an interior in general arrangement like a Greek theatre, except it
is entirely circular and without a stage division. There is an arena,
like a sanded floor, apparently fifty paces in diameter, bounded by a
brick wall eighteen or twenty feet in height, and from the top of the
wall seats rise one above another for the accommodation of common
people; while for the Emperor I noticed a covered stand over on the
eastern side. The wall of the arena is broken at regular intervals by
doors heavily barred, leading into chambers anciently dens for ferocious
animals, but at present prisons for criminals of desperate character.
There are also a number of gates, one under the grand stand, the others
forming northern, southern and eastern entrances. From this, I am sure
my Lord can, if he cares to, draught the Cynegion, literally the
Menagerie, comprehending the whole enclosure, and the arena in the
middle of it, where the monk will to-morrow expiate his heresy. Formerly
combats in the nature of wagers of battle were appointed for the place,
and beasts were pitted against each other; but now the only bloody
amusement permitted in it is when a criminal or an offender against God
is given to the lion. On such occasions, they tell me, the open seats
and grand stands are crowded to their utmost capacities.... If the
description is tedious, I hope my Lord's pardon, for besides wishing to
give him an idea of the scene of the execution to-morrow, I thought to
serve him in the day he is looking forward to with so much interest,
when the locality will have to be considered with a view to military
approach. In furtherance of the latter object, I beg to put my Lord in
possession of the accompanying diagram of the Cynegion, observing
particularly its relation to the city; by attaching it to the drawings
heretofore sent him, he will be enabled to make a complete map of the
country adjacent to the landward wall.... Ali has just come in. As I
supposed, he was detained by the high winds. His mullets are perfection.
With them he brings a young sword-fish yet alive. I look at the mess,
and grieve that I cannot send a portion to my Lord for his breakfast.
However, a few days now, and he will come to his own; the sea with its
fish, and the land and all that belongs to it. The child of destiny can
afford to wait."


CHAPTER X

SERGIUS TO THE LION


About ten o'clock the day after the date of Count Corti's last
despatch--ten of the morning--a woman appeared on the landing in front
of Port St. Peter, and applied to a boatman for passage to the Cynegion.

She was thickly veiled, and wore an every-day overcloak of brown stuff
closely buttoned from her throat down. Her hands were gloved, and her
feet coarsely shod. In a word, her appearance was that of a female of
the middle class, poor but respectable.

The landing was thronged at the time. It seemed everybody wanted to get
to the menagerie at once. Boatmen were not lacking. Their craft, of all
known models, lay in solid block yards out, waiting turns to get in; and
while they waited, the lusty, half-naked fellows flirted their oars,
quarrelled with each other in good nature, Greek-like, and yelled
volleys at the slow bargain makers whose turns had arrived.

Twice the woman asked if she could have a seat.

"How many of you are there?" she was asked in reply.

"I am alone."

"You want the boat alone?"

"Yes."

"Well, that can't be. I have seats for several--and wife and four babies
at home told me to make the most I could out of them. It has been some
time since one has tried to look old Tamerlane in the eye, thinking to
scare him out of his dinner. The game used to be common; it's not so
now."

"But I will pay you for all the seats."

"Full five?"

"Yes."

"In advance?"

"Yes."

"Jump in, then--and get out your money--fifty-five noumias--while I push
through these howling water-dogs."

By the time the boat was clear of the pack, truly enough the passenger
was with the fare in hand.

"Look," she said, "here is a bezant."

At sight of the gold piece, the man's countenance darkened, and he
stopped rowing.

"I can't change that. You might as well have no money at all."

"Friend," she returned, "row me swiftly to the first gate of the
Cynegion, and the piece is yours."

"By my blessed patron! I'll make you think you are on a bird, and that
these oars are wings. Sit in the middle--that will do. Now!"

The fellow was stout, skilful, and in earnest. In a trice he was under
headway, going at racing speed. The boats in the harbor were moving in
two currents, one up, the other down; and it was noticeable those in the
first were laden with passengers, those of the latter empty. Evidently
the interest was at the further end of the line, and the day a holiday
to the two cities, Byzantium and Galata. Yet of the attractions on the
water and the shores, the woman took no heed; she said never a word
after the start; but sat with head bowed, and her face buried in her
hands. Occasionally, if the boatman had not been so intent on earning
the gold piece, he might have heard her sob. For some reason, the day
was not a holiday to her.

"We are nearly there," he at length said.

Without lifting the veil, she glanced at a low wall on the left-hand
shore, then at a landing, shaky from age and neglect, in front of a gate
in the wall; and seeing it densely blockaded, she spoke:

"Please put me ashore here. I have no time to lose."

The bank was soft and steep.

"You cannot make it."

"I can if you will give me your oar for a step."

"I will."

In a few minutes she was on land. Pausing then to toss the gold piece to
the boatman, she heard his thanks, and started hastily for the gate.
Within the Cynegion, she fell in with some persons walking rapidly, and
talking of the coming event as if it were a comedy.

"He is a Russian, you say?"

"Yes, and what is strange, he is the very man who got the Prince of
India's negro"--

"The giant?"

"Yes--who got him to drown that fine young fellow Demedes."

"Where is the negro now?"

"In a cell here."

"Why didn't they give him to the lion?"

"Oh, he had a friend--the Princess Irene."

"What is to be done with him?"

"Afterwhile, when the affair of the cistern is forgotten, he will be
given a purse, and set free."

"Pity! For what sport to have seen him in front of the old Tartar!"

"Yes, he's a fighter." In the midst of this conversation, the party came
in sight of the central building, externally a series of arches
supporting a deep cornice handsomely balustraded, and called the
Gallery.

"Here we are!--But see the people on the top! I was afraid we would be
too late. Let us hurry."

"Which gate?"

"The western--it's the nearest."

"Can't we get in under the grand stand?"

"No, it's guarded."

These loquacious persons turned off to make the western gate; but the
woman in brown kept on, and ere long was brought to the grand stand on
the north. An arched tunnel, amply wide, ran under it, with a gate at
the further end admitting directly to the arena. A soldier of the
foreign legion held the mouth of the tunnel.

"Good friend," she began, in a low, beseeching tone, "is the heretic who
is to suffer here yet?"

"He was brought out last night."

"Poor man! I am a friend of his"--her voice trembled--"may I see him?"

"My orders are to admit no one--and I do not know which cell he is in."

The supplicant, sobbing and wringing her hands, stood awhile silent.
Then a roar, very deep and hoarse, apparently from the arena, startled
her and she trembled.

"Tamerlane!" said the soldier.

"O God!" she exclaimed. "Is the lion turned in already?"

"Not yet. He is in his den. They have not fed him for three days."

She stayed her agitation, and asked: "What are your orders?"

"Not to admit any one."

"To the cells?"

"The cells, and the arena also."

"Oh, I see! You can let me stand at the gate yonder?"

"Well--yes. But if you are the monk's friend, why do you want to see him
die?"

She made no reply, but took from a pocket a bezant, and contrived to
throw its yellow gleam in the sentinel's eyes.

"Is the gate locked?"

"No, it is barred on this side."

"Does it open into the arena?"

"Yes."

"I do not ask you to violate your orders," she continued, calmly; "only
let me go to the gate, and see the man when he is brought out."

She offered him the money, and he took it, saying: "Very well. I can see
no harm in that. Go."

The gate in question was open barred, and permitted a view of nearly the
whole circular interior. The spectacle presented was so startling she
caught one of the bars for support. Throwing back the veil, she looked,
breathing sighs which were almost gasps. The arena was clear, and
thickly strewn with wet sand. There were the walls shutting it in, like
a pit, and on top of them, on the ascending seats back to the last
one--was it a cloud she beheld? A second glance, and she recognized the
body of spectators, men, women and children, compacted against the sky.
How many of them there were! Thousands and thousands! She clasped her
hands, and prayed.

Twelve o'clock was the hour for the expiation.

Waiting so wearily there at the gate--praying, sighing, weeping by
turns--the woman was soon forgotten by the sentinel. She had bought his
pity. In his eyes she was only a lover of the doomed monk. An hour
passed thus. If the soldier's theory were correct, if she were indeed a
poor love-lorn creature come to steal a last look at the unfortunate,
she eked small comfort from her study of the cloud of humanity on the
benches. Their jollity, their frequent laughter and hand-clapping
reached her in her retreat. "Merciful God!" she kept crying. "Are these
beings indeed in thy likeness?"

In a moment of wandering thought, she gave attention to the fastenings
of the gate, and observed the ends of the bar across it rested in double
iron sockets on the side toward her; to pass it, she had only to raise
the bar clear of the socket and push.

Afterwhile the door of a chamber nearly opposite her opened, and a man
stood in the aperture. He was very tall, gigantic even; and apparently
surprised by what he beheld, he stepped out to look at the benches,
whereat the light fell upon him and she saw he was black. His appearance
called for a roar of groans, and he retired, closing the door behind
him. Then there was an answering roar from a cell near by at her left.
The occupants of the benches applauded long and merrily, crying,
"Tamerlane! Tamerlane!" The woman shrank back terrified.

A little later another man entered the arena, from the western gate.
Going to the centre he looked carefully around him; as if content with
the inspection, he went next to a cell and knocked. Two persons
responded by coming out of the door; one an armed guardsman, the other a
monk. The latter wore a hat of clerical style, and a black gown dropping
to his bare feet, its sleeves of immoderate length completely muffling
his hands. Instantly the concourse on the benches arose. There was no
shouting--one might have supposed them all suddenly seized with
shuddering sympathy. But directly a word began passing from mouth to
mouth; at first, it was scarcely more than a murmur; soon it was a
byname on every tongue:

"The heretic! The heretic!"

The monk was Sergius.

His guard conducted him to the centre of the field, and, taking off his
hat, left him there. In going he let his gauntlet fall. Sergius picked
it up, and gave it to him; then calm, resigned, fearless, he turned to
the east, rested his hands on his breast palm to palm, closed his eyes,
and raised his face. He may have had a hope of rescue in reserve;
certain it is, they who saw him, taller of his long gown, his hair on
his shoulders and down his back, his head upturned, the sunlight a
radiant imprint on his forehead, and wanting only a nimbus to be the
Christ in apparition, ceased jeering him; it seemed to them that in a
moment, without effort, he had withdrawn his thoughts from this world,
and surrendered himself. They could see his lips move; but what they
supposed his last prayer was only a quiet recitation: "I believe in God,
and Jesus Christ, his Son."

The guard withdrawn, three sharp mots of a trumpet rang out from the
stand. A door at the left of the tunnel gate was then slowly raised;
whereupon a lion stalked out of the darkened depths, and stopped on the
edge of the den thus exposed, winking to accustom his eyes to the
day-splendor. He lingered there very leisurely, turning his ponderous
head from right to left and up and down, like a prisoner questioning if
he were indeed at liberty. Having viewed the sky and the benches, and
filled his deep chest with ample draughts of fresh air, suddenly
Tamerlane noticed the monk. The head rose higher, the ears erected, and,
snuffing like a hound, he fretted his shaggy mane; his yellow eyes
changed to coals alive, and he growled and lashed his sides with his
tail. A majestic figure was he now. "What is it?" he appeared asking
himself. "Prey or combat?" Still in a maze, he stepped out into the
arena, and shrinking close to the sand, inched forward creeping toward
the object of his wonder.

The spectators had opportunity to measure him, and drink their fill of
terror. The monk was a goodly specimen of manhood, young, tall, strong;
but a fig for his chances once this enemy struck him or set its teeth in
his flesh! An ox could not stand the momentum of that bulk of bone and
brawn. It were vain telling how many--not all of them women and
children--furtively studied the height of the wall enclosing the pit to
make sure of their own safety upon the seats.

Sergius meantime remained in prayer and recitation; he was prepared for
the attack, but as a non-resistant; if indeed he thought of battle, he
was not merely unarmed--the sleeves of his gown deprived him of the use
of his hands. From the man to the lion, from the lion to the man, the
multitude turned shivering, unable nevertheless to look away.

Presently the lion stopped, whined, and behaved uneasily. Was he afraid?
Such was the appearance when he began trotting around at the base of the
wall, halting before the gates, and seeking an escape. Under the
urgency, whatever it was, from the trot he broke into a gallop, without
so much as a glance at the monk.

A murmur descended from the benches. It was the people recovering from
their horror, and impatient. Ere long they became positive in
expression; in dread doubtless of losing the catastrophe of the show,
they yelled at the cowardly beast.

In the height of this tempest, the gate of the tunnel under the grand
stand opened quickly, and was as quickly shut. Death brings no deeper
hush than fell upon the assemblage then. A woman was crossing the sand
toward the monk! Round sped the lion, forward she went! Two victims!
Well worth the monster's hunger through the three days to be so
banqueted on the fourth!

There are no laws of behavior for such situations. Impulse and instinct
rush in and take possession. While the thousands held their breath, they
were all quickened to know who the intruder was.

She was robed in white, was bareheaded and barefooted. The dress, the
action, the seraphic face were not infrequent on the water, and
especially in the churches; recognition was instantaneous, and through
the eager crowded ranks the whisper flew:

"God o' Mercy! It is the Princess--the Princess Irene!"

Strong men covered their eyes, women fainted.

The grand stand had been given up to the St. James', and they and their
intimates filled it from the top seat to the bottom; and now directly
the identity became assured, toward them, or rather to the Hegumen
conspicuous in their midst, innumerable arms were outstretched,
seconding the cry: "Save her! Save her! Let the lion be killed!"

Easier said than done. Crediting the Brotherhood with lingering sparks
of humanity, the game was beyond their interference. The brute was lord.
Who dared go in and confront him?

About this time, the black man, of whom we have spoken, looked out of
his cell again. To him the pleading arms were turned. He saw the monk,
the Princess, and the lion making its furious circuit--saw them and
retreated, but a moment after reappeared, attired in the savageries
which were his delight. In the waist-belt he had a short sword, and over
his left shoulder a roll like a fisherman's net. And now he did not
retreat.

The Princess reached Sergius safely, and placing a hand on his arm,
brought him back, as it were, to life and the situation.

"Fly, little mother--by the way you came--fly!" he cried, in mighty
anguish. "O God! it is too late--too late."

Wringing his hands, he gave way to tears.

"No, I will not fly. Did I not bring you to this? Let death come to us
both. Better the quick work of the lion than the slow torture of
conscience. I will not fly! We will die together. I too believe in God
and Jesus Christ his Son."

She reached up, and rested her hand upon his shoulder. The repetition of
the Creed, and her companionship restored his courage, and smiling,
despite the tears on his cheeks, he said:

"Very well, little mother. The army of the martyrs will receive us, and
the dear Lord is at his mansion door to let us in."

The lion now ceased galloping. Stopping over in the west quarter of the
field, he turned his big burning eyes on the two thus resigning
themselves, and crouching, put himself in motion toward them; his mane
all on end; his jaws agape, their white armature whiter of the crimson
tongue lolling adrip below the lips. He had given up escape, and, his
curiosity sated, was bent upon his prey. The charge of cowardice had
been premature. The near thunder of his roaring was exultant and awful.

There was great ease of heart to the people when Nilo--for he it
was--taking position between the devoted pair and their enemy, shook the
net from his shoulder, and proceeded to give an example of his practice
with lions in the jungles of Kash-Cush.

Keeping the brute steadily eye to eye, he managed so that while
retaining the leaden balls tied to its disengaged corners one in each
hand, the net was presently in an extended roll on the ground before
him. Leaning forward then, his hands bent inwardly knuckle to knuckle at
his breast, his right foot advanced, the left behind the right ready to
carry him by a step left aside, he waited the attack--to the beholders,
a figure in shining ebony, giantesque in proportions, Phidian in grace.

Tamerlane stopped. What new wonder was this? And while making the study,
he settled flat on the sand, and sunk his roaring into uneasy whines and
growls.

By this time every one looking on understood Nilo's intent--that he
meant to bide the lion's leap, and catch and entangle him in the net.
What nerve and nicety of calculation--what certainty of eye--what
knowledge of the savage nature dealt with--what mastery of self, limb
and soul were required for the feat!

Just at this crisis there was a tumult in the grand stand. Those who
turned that way saw a man in glistening armor pushing through the
brethren there in most unceremonious sort. In haste to reach the front,
he stepped from bench to bench, knocking the gowned Churchmen right and
left as if they were but so many lay figures. On the edge of the wall,
he tossed his sword and shield into the arena, and next instant leaped
after them. Before astonishment was spent, before the dull of faculties
could comprehend the intruder, before minds could be made up to so much
as yell, he had fitted the shield to his arm, snatched up the sword, and
run to the point of danger. There, with quick understanding of the
negro's strategy, he took place behind him, but in front of the Princess
and the monk. His agility, cumbered though he was, his amazing spirit,
together with the thought that the fair woman had yet another champion
over whom the lion must go ere reaching her, wrought the whole multitude
into ecstasy. They sprang upon the benches, and their shouting was
impossible of interpretation except as an indication of a complete
revulsion of feeling. In fact, many who but a little before had cheered
the lion or cursed him for cowardice now prayed aloud for his victims.

The noise was not without effect on the veteran Tamerlane. He surveyed
the benches haughtily once, then set forward again, intent on Nilo.

The movement, in its sinuous, flexile gliding, resembled somewhat a
serpent's crawl. And now he neither roared nor growled. The lolling
tongue dragged the sand; the beating of the tail was like pounding with
a flail; the mane all erect trebly enlarged the head; and the eyes were
like live coals in a burning bush. The people hushed. Nilo stood firm;
thunder could as easily have diverted a statue; and behind him, not less
steadfast and watchful, Count Corti kept guard. Thirty feet away--
twenty-five--twenty--then the great beast stopped, collected himself,
and with an indescribable roar launched clear of the ground. Up, at the
same instant, and forward on divergent lines, went the leaden balls; the
netting they dragged after them had the appearance of yellow spray blown
suddenly in the air. When the monster touched the sand again, he was
completely enveloped.

The struggle which ensued--the gnashing of teeth, the bellowing, the
rolling and blind tossing and pitching, the labor with the mighty limbs,
the snapping of the net, the burrowing into the sand, the further and
more inextricable entanglement of the enraged brute may be left to
imagination. Almost before the spectators realized the altered
condition, Nilo was stabbing him with the short sword.

The well-directed steel at length accomplished the work, and the pride
of the Cynegion lay still in the bloody tangle--then the benches found
voice.

Amidst the uproar Count Corti went to Nilo.

"Who art thou?" he asked, in admiration.

The King smiled, and signified his inability to hear or speak. Whereupon
the Count led him to the Princess.

"Take heart, fair saint," he said. "The lion is dead, and thou art
safe."

She scarcely heard him.

He dropped upon his knee.

"The lion is dead, O Princess, and here is the hand which slew him--here
thy rescuer."

She looked her gratitude to Nilo--speak she could not.

"And thou, too," the Count continued, to the monk, "must have thanks for
him."

Sergius replied: "I give thee thanks, Nilo--and thou, noble Italian--I
am only a little less obliged to thee--thou wast ready with thy sword."

He paused, glanced at the grand stand, and went on: "It is plain to me,
Count Corti, that thou thinkest my trial happily ended. The beast is
dead truly; but yonder are some not less thirsty for blood. It is for
them to say what I must further endure. I am still the heretic they
adjudged me. Do thou therefore banish me from thy generous mind; then
thou canst give it entirely to her who is most in need of it. Remove the
Princess--find a chair for her, and leave me to God."

"What further can they do?" asked the Count. "Heaven hath decided the
trial in thy favor. Have they another lion?"

The propriety of the monk's suggestion was obvious; it was not becoming
for the Princess to remain in the public eye; besides, under reaction of
spirit, she was suffering.

"Have they another lion?" the Count repeated.

Anxious as he was to assist the Princess, he was not less anxious, if
there was further combat, to take part in it. The Count was essentially
a fighting man. The open door of Nilo's cell speedily attracted his
attention.

"Help me, sir monk. Yonder is a refuge for the Princess. Let us place
her in safety. I will return, and stay with thee. If the reverend
Christians, thy brethren in the grand stand, are not content, by
Allah"--he checked himself--"their cruelty would turn the stomach of a
Mohammedan."

A few minutes, and she was comfortably housed in the cell.

"Now, go to thy place; I will send for a chair, and rejoin thee."

At the tunnel gate, the Count was met by a number of the St. James', and
he forgot his errand.

"We have come," said one of them to Sergius, "to renew thy arrest."

"Be it so," Sergius replied; "lead on."

But Count Corti strode forward.

"By whose authority is this arrest renewed?" he demanded.

"Our Hegumen hath so ordered."

"It shall not be--no, by the Mother of your Christ, it shall not be
unless you bring me the written word of His Majesty making it lawful."

"The Hegumen"--

"I have said it, and I carry a sword"--the Count struck the hilt of the
weapon with his mailed hand, so the clang was heard on the benches. "I
have said it, and my sword says it. Go, tell thy Hegumen."

Then Sergius spoke:

"I pray you interfere not. The Heavenly Father who saved me this once is
powerful to save me often."

"Have done, sir monk," the Count returned, with increasing earnestness.
"Did I not hear thee say the same in thy holy Sancta Sophia, in such
wise that these deserved to cast themselves at thy feet? Instead, lo!
the lion there. And for the truth, which is the soul of the world as God
is its Maker--the Truth and the Maker being the same--it is not interest
in thee alone which moves me. She, thy patroness yonder, is my motive as
well. There are who will say she followed thee hither being thy lover;
but thou knowest better, and so do I. She came bidden by conscience, and
except thou live, there will be no ease of conscience for her--never.
Wherefore, sir monk, hold thy peace. Thou shalt no more go hence of
thine own will than these shall take thee against it.... Return, ye men
of blood--return to him who sent you, and tell him my sword vouches my
word, being so accustomed all these years I have been a man. Bring they
the written word of His Majesty, I will give way. Let them send to him."

The brethren stared at the Count. Had he not been willing to meet old
Tamerlane with that same sword? They turned about, and were near the
tunnel gate going to report, when it was thrown open with great force,
and the Emperor Constantine appeared on horseback, the horse bloody with
spurring and necked with foam. Riding to the Count he drew rein.

"Sir Count, where is my kinswoman?"

Corti kissed his hand.

"She is safe, Your Majesty--she is in the cell yonder."

The Emperor's eye fell upon the carcass of the lion.

"Thou didst it, Count?"

"No--this man did it."

The Emperor gazed at Nilo, thus designated, and taking a golden chain of
fine workmanship from his neck, he threw it over the black King's. At
the door of the cell, he dismounted; within, he kissed the Princess on
the forehead.

"A chair will be here directly."

"And Sergius?" she asked.

"The Brotherhood must forego their claim now. Heaven has signified its
will."

He thereupon entered into explanation. The necessity upon him was sore
and trying, else he had never surrendered Sergius to the Brotherhood. He
expected the Hegumen would subject him to discipline--imprisonment or
penance. He had even signed the order placing the lion at service,
supposing they meant merely a trial of the monk's constancy. Withal the
proceeding was so offensive he had refused to witness it. An officer
came to the palace with intelligence which led him to believe the worst
was really intended. To stop it summarily, he had ordered a horse and a
guard. Another officer reported the Princess in the arena with Sergius
and the lion. With that His Majesty had come at speed. And he was
grateful to God for the issue.

In a short time the sedan was brought, and the Princess borne to her
house.

Summoning the Brotherhood from the grand stand, the Emperor forbade
their pursuing Sergius further; the punishment had already been too
severe. The Hegumen protested. Constantine arose in genuine majesty, and
denouncing all clerical usurpations, he declared that for the future he
would be governed by his own judgment in whatever concerned the lives of
his subjects and the welfare of his empire. The declaration was heard by
the people on the benches.

By his order, Sergius was conducted to Blacherne, and next day installed
a janitor of the imperial Chapel; thus ending his connection with the
Brotherhood of the St. James'.

"Your Majesty," said Count Corti, at the conclusion of the scene in the
arena, "I pray a favor."

Constantine, by this time apprised of the Count's gallantry, bade him
speak.

"Give me the keeping of this negro."

"If you mean his release from prison, Sir Count, take him. He can have
no more suitable guardian. But it is to be remembered he came to the
city with one calling himself the Prince of India, and if at any time
that mysterious person reappears, the man is to be given back to his
master."

The Count regarded Nilo curiously--he was merely recalling the Prince.

"Your Majesty is most gracious. I accept the condition."

The captain of the guard, coming to the tunnel under the grand stand,
was addressed by the sentinel there.

"See--here are a dress, a pair of shoes, and a veil. I found them by the
gate there."

"How came they there?"

"A woman asked me to let her stand by the gate, and see the heretic when
they brought him out, and I gave her permission. She wore these things."

"The Princess Irene!" exclaimed the officer. "Very well. Send them to
me, and I will have her pleasure taken concerning them."

The Cynegion speedily returned to its customary state. But the expiation
remained in the public mind a date to which all manner of events in city
life was referred; none of them, however, of such consequence as the
loss to the Emperor of the allegiance of the St. James'. Thenceforth the
Brotherhoods were united against him.


BOOK VI

CONSTANTINE


CHAPTER I

THE SWORD OF SOLOMON


The current of our story takes us once more to the White Castle at the
mouth of the Sweet Waters of Asia.

It is the twenty-fifth of March, 1452. The weather, for some days cloudy
and tending to the tempestuous, changed at noon, permitting the sun to
show himself in a field of spotless blue. At the edge of the mountainous
steep above Roumeli Hissar, the day-giver lingered in his going down, as
loath to leave the life concentrated in the famous narrows in front of
the old Castle.

On the land, there was an army in waiting; therefore the city of tents
and brushwood booths extending from the shore back to the hills, and the
smoke pervading the perspective in every direction.

On the water, swinging to each other, crowding all the shallows of the
delta of the little river, reaching out into the sweep of the Bosphorus,
boats open and boats roofed--scows, barges, galleys oared and galleys
with masts--ships--a vast conglomerate raft.

About the camp, and to and fro on the raft, men went and came, like ants
in storing time. Two things, besides the locality, identified them--their
turbans, and the crescent and star in the red field of the flags they
displayed.

History, it would appear, takes pleasure in repetition. Full a thousand
years before this, a greater army had encamped on the banks of the same
Sweet Waters. Then it was of Persians; now it is of Turks; and curiously
there are no soldiers to be seen, but only working men, while the
flotilla is composed of carrying vessels; here boats laden with stone;
there boats with lime; yonder boats piled high with timber.

At length the sun, drawing the last ravelling of light after it,
disappeared. About that time, the sea gate in front of the Palace of
Julian down at Constantinople opened, and a boat passed out into the
Marmora. Five men plied the oars. Two sat near the stern. These latter
were Count Corti and Ali, son of Abed-din the Faithful.

Two hours prior, Ali, with a fresh catch of fish, entered the gate, and
finding no purchaser in the galley, pushed on to the landing, and thence
to the Palace.

"O Emir," he said, when admitted to the Count, "the Light of the World,
our Lord Mahommed is arrived."

The intelligence seemed to strike the Count with a sudden ague.

"Where is he?" he asked, his voice hollow as from a closed helmet. Ere
the other could answer, he added a saving clause: "May the love of Allah
be to him a staff of life!"

"He is at the White Castle with Mollahs, Pachas, and engineers a
host.... What a way they were in, rushing here and there, like squealing
swine, and hunting quarters, if but a crib to lie in and blow! Shintan
take them, beards, boots, and turbans! So have they lived on fat things,
slept on divans of down under hangings of silk, breathed perfumed airs
in crowded harems, Heaven knows if now they are even fit to stop an
arrow. They thought the old Castle of Bajazet-Ilderim another Jehan-Numa.
By the delights of Paradise, O Emir--ha, ha, ha!--it was good to see how
little the Light of the World cared for them! At the Castle, he took in
with him for household the ancient _Gabour_ Ortachi-Khalil and a Prince
of India, whom he calls his Messenger of the Stars; the rest were left to
shift for themselves till their tents arrive. Halting the Incomparables,
[Footnote: Janissaries.] out beyond Roumeli-Hissar, he summoned the Three
Tails, [Footnote: Pachas.] nearly dead from fatigue, having been in the
saddle since morning, and rode off with them fast as his Arab could
gallop across the country, and down the long hill behind Therapia,
drawing rein at the gate before the Palace of the Princess Irene."

"The Palace of the Princess Irene," the Count repeated. "What did he
there?"

"He dismounted, looked at the brass plate on the gate-post, went in, and
asked if she were at home. Being told she was yet in the city, he said:
'A message for her to be delivered to-night. Here is a purse to pay for
going. Tell her Aboo-Obeidah, the Singing Sheik'--only the Prophet knows
of such a Sheik--'has been here, bidden by Sultan Mahommed to see if
her house had been respected, and inquire if she has yet her health and
happiness.' With that, he called for his horse, and went through the
garden and up to the top of the promontory; then he returned to Hissar
faster than he went to Therapia; and when, to take boat for the White
Castle, he walked down the height, two of the Three Tails had to be
lifted from their saddles, so nearly dead were they."

Here Ali stopped to laugh.

"Pardon me, O Emir," he resumed, "if I say last what I should have said
first, it being the marrow of the bone I bring you.... Before sitting to
his pilaf, our Lord Mahommed sent me here. 'Thou knowest to get in and
out of the unbelieving city,' he said. 'Go privily to the Emir Mirza,
and bid him come to me to-night.'"

"What now, Ali?"

"My Lord was too wise to tell me."

"It is a great honor, Ali. I shall get ready immediately."

When the night was deep enough to veil the departure, the Count seated
himself in the fisher's boat, a great cloak covering his armor. Half a
mile below the Sweet Waters the party was halted.

"What is this, Ali?"

"The Lord Mahommed's galleys of war are down from the Black Sea. These
are their outlyers."

At the side of one of the vessels, the Count showed the Sultan's signet,
and there was no further interruption.

A few words now with respect to Corti.

He had become a Christian. Next, the bewilderment into which the first
sight of the Princess Irene had thrown him instead of passing off had
deepened into hopeless love.

And farther--Constantine, a genuine knight himself; in fact more knight
than statesman; delighting in arms, armor, hounds, horses, and martial
exercises, including tournaments, hawking, and hunting, found one
abiding regret on his throne--he could have a favorite but never a
comrade. The denial only stimulated the desire, until finally he
concluded to bring the Italian to Court for observation and trial, his
advancement to depend upon the fitness, tact, and capacity he might
develop.

One day an order was placed in the Count's hand, directing him to find
quarters at Blacherne. The Count saw the honor intended, and discerned
that acceptance would place him in better position to get information
for Mahommed, but what would the advantage avail if he were hindered in
forwarding his budget promptly?

No, the mastership of the gate was of most importance; besides which the
seclusion of the Julian residence was so favorable to the part he was
playing; literally he had no one there to make him afraid.

Upon receipt of the order he called for his horse, and rode to
Blacherne, where his argument of the necessity of keeping the Moslem
crew of his galley apart brought about a compromise. His Majesty would
require the Count's presence during the day, but permit him the nights
at Julian. He was also allowed to retain command of the gate.

A few months then found him in Constantine's confidence, the imperial
favorite. Yet more surprising as a coincidence, he actually became to
the Emperor what he had been to Mahommed. He fenced and jousted with
him, instructed him in riding, trained him to sword and bow. Every day
during certain hours he had his new master's life at mercy. With a
thrust of sword, stroke of battle-axe, or flash of an arrow, it was in
his power to rid Mahommed of an opponent concerning whom he wrote: "O my
Lord, I think you are his better, yet if ever you meet him in personal
encounter, have a care."

But the unexpected now happened to the Count. He came to have an
affection for this second lord which seriously interfered with his
obligations to the first one. Its coming about was simple. Association
with the Greek forced a comparison with the Turk. The latter's passion
was a tide before which the better gifts of God to rulers--mercy,
justice, discrimination, recognition of truth, loyalty, services--were
as willows in the sweep of a wave. Constantine, on the other hand, was
thoughtful, just, merciful, tender-hearted, indisposed to offend or to
fancy provocation intended. The difference between a man with and a man
without conscience--between a king all whose actuations are dominated by
religion and a king void of both conscience and religion--slowly but
surely, we say, the difference became apparent to the Count, and had its
inevitable consequences.

Such was the Count's new footing in Blacherne.

The changes wrought in his feeling were forwarded more than he was aware
by the standing accorded him in the reception-room of the Princess
Irene.

After the affair at the Cynegion he had the delicacy not to push himself
upon the attention of the noble lady. In preference he sent a servant
every morning to inquire after her health. Ere long he was the recipient
of an invitation to come in person; after which his visits increased in
frequency. Going to Blacherne, and coming from it, he stopped at her
house, and with every interview it seemed his passion for her
intensified.

Now it were not creditable to the young Princess' discernment to say she
was blind to his feeling; yet she was careful to conceal the discovery
from him, and still more careful not to encourage his hope. She placed
the favor shown him to the account of gratitude; at the same time she
admired him, and was deeply interested in the religious sentiment he was
beginning to manifest.

In the Count's first audience after the rescue from the lion, she
explained how she came to be drawn to the Cynegion. This led to detail
of her relations with Sergius, concluding with the declaration: "I gave
him the signal to speak in Sancta Sophia, and felt I could not live if
he died the death, sent to it by me."

"Princess," the Count replied, "I heard the monk's sermon in Sancta
Sophia, but did not know of your giving the signal. Has any one impugned
your motive in going to the Cynegion? Give me his name. My sword says
you did well."

"Count Corti, the Lord has taken care of His own."

"As you say, Princess Irene. Hear me before addressing yourself to
something else.... I remember the words of the Creed--or if I have them
wrong correct me: 'I believe in God, and Jesus Christ, his Son.'"

"It is word for word."

"Am I to understand you gave him the form?"

"The idea is Father Hilarion's."

"And the Two Articles. Are they indeed sayings of Jesus Christ?"

"Even so."

"Give me the book containing them."

Taking a New Testament from the table, she gave it to him.

"You will find the sayings easily. On the margins opposite them there
are markings illuminated in gold."

"Thanks, O Princess, most humbly. I will return the book."

"No, Count, it is yours."

An expression she did not understand darkened his face.

"Are you a Christian?" she asked.

He flushed deeply, and bowed while answering:

"My mother is a Christian."

That night Count Corti searched the book, and found that the strength of
faith underlying his mother's prayers for his return to her, and the
Princess' determination to die with the monk, were but Christian lights.

"Princess Irene," he said one day, "I have studied the book you gave me;
and knowing now who Christ is, I am ready to accept your Creed. Tell me
how I may know myself a believer?"

A lamp in the hollow of an alabaster vase glows through the
transparency; so her countenance responded to the joy behind it.

"Render obedience to His commands--do His will, O Count--then wilt thou
be a believer in Christ, and know it."

The darkness she had observed fall once before on his face obscured it
again, and he arose and went out in silence.

Brave he certainly was, and strong. Who could strike like him? He loved
opposition for the delight there was in overcoming it; yet in his
chamber that night he was never so weak. He resorted to the book, but
could not read. It seemed to accuse him. "Thou Islamite--thou son of
Mahomet, though born of a Christian, whom servest thou? Judas, what dost
thou in this city? Hypocrite--traitor--which is thy master, Mahomet or
Christ?"

He fell upon his knees, tore at his beard, buried his head in his arms.
He essayed prayer to Christ.

"Jesus--Mother of Jesus--O my mother!" he cried in agony.

The hour he was accustomed to give to Mahommed came round. He drew out
the writing materials. "The Princess"--thus he began a sentence, but
stopped--something caught hold of his heart--the speaking face of the
beloved woman appeared to him--her eyes were reproachful--her lips
moved--she spoke: "Count Corti, I am she whom thou lovest; but what dost
thou? Is it not enough to betray my kinsman? Thy courage--what makest
thou of it but wickedness? ... Write of me to thy master. Come every
day, and contrive that I speak, then tell him of it. Am I sick? Tell him
of it. Do I hold to this or that? Tell him. Am I shaken by visions of
ruin to my country? Tell him of them. What is thy love if not the
servant for hire of his love? Traitor--panderer!"

The Count pushed the table from him, and sprang to foot writhing. To
shut out the word abhorrent above all other words, he clapped his hands
tight over his ears--in vain.

"Panderer!"--he heard with his soul--"Panderer! When thou hast delivered
me to Mahommed, what is he to give thee? How much?"

Thus shame, like a wild dog, bayed at him. For relief he ran out into
the garden. And it was only the beginning of misery. Such the
introduction or first chapter, what of the catastrophe? He could not
sleep for shame.

In the morning he ordered his horse, but had not courage to go to
Blacherne. How could he look at the kindly face of the master he was
betraying? He thought of the Princess. Could he endure her salutation?
She whom he was under compact to deliver to Mahommed? A paroxysm of
despair seized him.

He rode to the Gate St. Romain, and out of it into the country. Gallop,
gallop--the steed was good--his best Arab, fleet and tireless. Noon
overtook him--few things else could--still he galloped. The earth turned
into a green ribbon under the flying hoofs, and there was relief in the
speed. The air, whisked through, was soothing. At length he came to a
wood, wild and interminable, Belgrade, though he knew it not, and
dismounting by a stream, he spent the day there. If now and then the
steed turned its eyes upon him, attracted by his sighs, groans and
prayer, there was at least no accusation in them. The solitude was
restful; and returning after nightfall, he entered the city through the
sortie under the Palace of Blacherne known as the Cercoporta.

It is well pain of spirit has its intermissions; otherwise long life
could not be; and if sleep bring them, so much the better.

Next day betimes, the Count was at Blacherne.

"I pray grace, O my Lord!" he said, speaking to the question in the
Emperor's look. "Yesterday I had to ride. This confinement in the city
deadens me. I rode all day."

The good, easy master sighed: "Would I had been with you, Count."

Thus he dismissed the truancy. But with the Princess it was a lengthy
chapter. If the Emperor was never so gracious, she seemed never so
charming. He wrote to Mahommed in the evening, and walked the garden the
residue of the night.

So weeks and months passed, and March came--even the night of the
twenty-fifth, with its order from the Sultan to the White Castle--an
interval of indecision, shame, and self-indictment. How many plans of
relief he formed who can say? Suicide he put by, a very last resort.
There was also a temptation to cut loose from Mahommed, and go boldly
over to the Emperor. That would be a truly Christian enlistment for the
approaching war; and aside from conformity to his present sympathies, it
would give him a right to wear the Princess' favor on his helmet. But a
fear shook the resort out of mind. Mahommed, whether successful or
defeated, would demand an explanation of him, possibly an accounting. He
knew the Sultan. Of all the schemes presented, the most plausible was
flight. There was the gate, and he its keeper, and beyond the gate, the
sunny Italian shore, and his father's castle. The seas and sailing
between were as green landscapes to a weary prisoner, and he saw in them
only the joy of going and freedom to do. Welcome, and to God the praise!
More than once he locked his portables of greatest value in the cabin of
the galley. But alas! He was in bonds. Life in Constantinople now
comprehended two of the ultimate excellencies to him, Princess Irene and
Christ--and their joinder in the argument he took to be no offence.

From one to another of these projects he passed, and they but served to
hide the flight of time. He was drifting--ahead, and not far, he heard
the thunder of coming events--yet he drifted.

In this condition, the most envied man in Constantinople and the most
wretched, the Sultan's order was delivered to him by Ali.

The time for decision was come. Tired--ashamed--angry with himself, he
determined to force the end.

The Count arrived at the Castle, was immediately admitted to the Sultan;
indeed, had he been less resolute, his master's promptitude would have
been a circumstance of disturbing significance.

Observation satisfied him Mahommed was in the field; for with all his
Epicureanism in times of peace, when a campaign was in progress the
Conqueror resolved himself into a soldierly example of indifference to
luxury. In other words, with respect to furnishment, the interior of the
old Castle presented its every day ruggedness.

One lamp fixed to the wall near the door of the audience chamber
struggled with the murk of a narrow passage, giving to view an assistant
chamberlain, an armed sentinel, and two jauntily attired pages in
waiting. Surrendering his sword to the chamberlain, the Count halted
before the door, while being announced; at the same time, he noticed a
man come out of a neighboring apartment clad in black velvet from head
to foot, followed closely by a servant. It was the Prince of India.

The mysterious person advanced slowly, his eyes fixed on the floor, his
velvet-shod feet giving out no sound. His air indicated deep reflection.
In previous encounters with him, the Count had been pleased; now his
sensations were of repugnance mixed with doubt and suspicion. He had not
time to account for the change. It may have had origin in the higher
prescience sometimes an endowment of the spirit by which we stand
advised of a friend or an enemy; most likely, however, it was a
consequence of the curious tales abroad in Constantinople; for at the
recognition up sprang the history of the Prince's connection with Lael,
and her abandonment by him, the more extraordinary from the evidences of
his attachment to her. Up sprang also the opinion of universal
prevalence in the city that he had perished in the great fire. What did
it all mean? What kind of man was he?

The servant carried a package wrapped in gold-embroidered green silk.

Coming near, the Prince raised his eyes--stopped--smiled--and said:

"Count Corti--or Mirza the Emir--which have I the honor of meeting?"

In spite of the offence he felt, Corti blushed, such a flood of light
did the salutation let in upon the falsity of his position. Far from
losing presence of mind, he perceived at once how intimately the Prince
stood in the councils of the Sultan.

"The Lord Mahommed must be heard before I can answer," he returned,
calmly.

In an instant the Prince became cordial.

"That was well answered," he said. "I am pleased to have my judgment of
you confirmed. Your mission has been a trying one, but you have
conducted it like a master. The Lord Mahommed has thanked me many times
that I suggested you for it. He is impatient to see you. We will go in
together."

Mahommed, in armor, was standing by a table on which were a bare
cimeter, a lamp brightly burning, and two large unrolled maps. In one of
the latter, the Count recognized Constantinople and its environs cast
together from his own surveys.

Retired a few steps were the two Viziers, Kalil Pacha and his rival,
Saganos Pacha, the Mollah Kourani, and the Sheik Akschem-sed-din. The
preaching of the Mollah had powerfully contributed to arousing the
fanatical spirit of the Sultan's Mohammedan subjects. The four were
standing in the attitude usual to Turkish officials in presence of a
superior, their heads bowed, their hands upon their stomachs. In
speaking, if they raised their eyes from the floor it was to shoot a
furtive glance, then drop them again.

"This is the grand design of the work by which you will be governed,"
Mahommed said to the counsellors, laying the finger points of his right
hand upon the map unknown to the Count, and speaking earnestly. "You
will take it, and make copies tonight; for if the stars fail not, I will
send the masons and their workmen to the other shore in the morning."

The advisers saluted--it would be difficult to say which of them with
the greatest unction.

Looking sharply at Kalil, the master asked: "You say you superintended
the running of the lines in person?"

Kalil saluted separately, and returned: "My Lord may depend upon the
survey."

"Very well. I wait now only the indication of Heaven that the time is
ripe for the movement. Is the Prince of India coming?"

"I am here, my Lord."

Mahommed turned as the Prince spoke, and let his eyes rest a moment upon
Count Corti, without a sign of recognition.

"Come forward, Prince," he said. "What is the message you bring me?"

"My Lord," the Prince replied, after prostration, "in the Hebrew
Scriptures there is a saying in proof of the influence the planets have
in the affairs of men: 'Then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by
the waters of Megiddo; they fought from heaven; the stars in their
courses fought against Sisera.' Now art thou truly Sultan of Sultans.
To-morrow--the twenty-sixth of March--will be memorable amongst days,
for then thou mayst begin the war with the perfidious Greek. From four
o'clock in the morning the stars which fought against Sisera will fight
for Mahommed. Let those who love him salute and rejoice."

The counsellors, dropping on their knees, fell forward, their faces on
their hands. The Prince of India did the same. Count Corti alone
remained standing, and Mahommed again observed him.

"Hear you," the latter said, to his officers. "Go assemble the masons
and their workmen, the masters of boats, and the chiefs charged with
duties. At four o'clock in the morning I will move against Europe. The
stars have said it, and their permission is my law. Rise!"

As his associates were moving backward with repeated genuflections, the
Prince of India spoke:

"O most favored of men! Let them stay a moment."

At a sign from the Sultan they halted; thereupon the Prince of India
beckoned Syama to come, and taking the package from his hands, he laid
it on the table.

"For my Lord Mahommed," he said.

"What is it?" Mahommed demanded.

"A sign of conquest.... My Lord knows King Solomon ruled the world in
his day, its soul of wisdom. At his death dominion did not depart from
him. The secret ministers in the earth, the air and the waters, obedient
to Allah, became his slaves. My Lord knows of whom I speak. Who can
resist them? ... In the tomb of Hiram, King of Tyre, the friend of King
Solomon, I found a sarcophagus. It was covered with a model in marble of
the Temple of the Hebrew Almighty God. Removing the lid, lo! the mummy
of Hiram, a crown upon its head, and at its feet the sword of Solomon, a
present without price. I brought it away, resolved to give it to him
whom the stars should elect for the overthrow of the superstitions
devised by Jesus, the bastard son of Joseph the carpenter of Nazareth....
Undo the wrappings, Lord Mahommed."

The Sultan obeyed, and laying the last fold of the cloth aside, drew
back staring, and with uplifted hands.

"Kalil--Kourani--Akschem-sed-din--all of you, come look. Tell me what it
is--it blinds me."

The sword of Solomon lay before them; its curved blade a gleam of
splendor, its scabbard a mass of brilliants, its hilt a ruby so pure we
may say it retained in its heart the life of a flame.

"Take it in hand, Lord Mahommed," said the Prince of India.

The young Sultan lifted the sword, and as he did so down a groove in its
back a stream of pearls started and ran, ringing musically, and would
not rest while he kept the blade in motion. He was speechless from
wonder.

"Now may my Lord march upon Constantinople, for the stars and every
secret minister of Solomon will fight for him."

So saying, the Prince knelt before the Sultan, and laid his lips on the
instep of his foot, adding: "Oh, my Lord! with that symbol in hand,
march, and surely as Tabor is among the mountains and Carmel by the sea,
so surely Christ will give place to Mahomet in Sancta Sophia. March at
four o'clock."

And the counsellors left kisses on the same instep, and departed.

Thence through the night the noises of preparation kept the space
between the hills of the narrows alive with echoes. At the hour
permitted by the stars--four o'clock--a cloud of boats cast loose from
the Asiatic shore, and with six thousand laborers, handmen to a thousand
master masons, crossed at racing speed to Europe. "God is God, and
Mahomet is his Prophet," they shouted. The vessels of burden, those with
lime, those with stone, those with wood, followed as they were called,
and unloading, hauled out, to give place to others.

Before sun up the lines of the triangular fort whose walls near
Roumeli-Hissar are yet intact, prospectively a landmark enduring as the
Pyramids, were defined and swarming with laborers. The three Pachas,
Kalil, Sarudje, and Saganos, superintended each a side of the work, and
over them all, active and fiercely zealous, moved Mahommed, the sword of
Solomon in his hand.

And there was no lack of material for the structure extensive as it was.
Asia furnished its quota, and Christian towns and churches on the
Bosphorus were remorselessly levelled for the stones in them; wherefore
the outer faces of the curtains and towers are yet speckled with marbles
in block, capital and column.

Thus Mahommed, taking his first step in the war so long a fervid dream,
made sure of his base of operations.

On the twenty-eighth of August, the work completed, from his camp on the
old Asometon promontory he reconnoitred the country up to the ditch of
Constantinople, and on the first of September betook himself to
Adrianople.


CHAPTER II

MAHOMMED AND COUNT CORTI MAKE A WAGER


Upon the retirement of the Prince of India and the counsellors, Mahommed
took seat by the table, and played with the sword of Solomon, making the
pearls travel up and down the groove in the blade, listening to their
low ringing, and searching for inscriptions. This went on until Count
Corti began to think himself forgotten. At length the Sultan, looking
under the guard, uttered an exclamation--looked again--and cried out:

"O Allah! It is true!--May I be forgiven for doubting him!--Come, Mirza,
come see if my eyes deceive me. Here at my side!"

The Count mastered his surprise, and was presently leaning over the
Sultan's shoulder.

"You remember, Mirza, we set out together studying Hebrew. Against your
will I carried you along with me until you knew the alphabet, and could
read a little. You preferred Italian, and when I brought the learned
men, and submitted to them that Hebrew was one of a family of tongues
more or less alike, and would have sent you with them to the Sidonian
coast for inscriptions, you refused. Do you remember?"

"My Lord, those were the happiest days of my life."

Mahommed laughed. "I kept you three days on bread and water, and let you
off then because I could not do without you.... But for the matter now.
Under this guard--look--are not the brilliants set in the form of
letters?"

Corti examined closely.

"Yes, yes; there are letters--I see them plainly--a name."

"Spell it."

"S-O-L-O-M-O-N."

"Then I have not deceived myself," Mahommed exclaimed. "Nor less has the
Prince of India deceived me." He grew more serious. "A marvellous man! I
cannot make him out. The more I do with him the more incomprehensible he
becomes. The long past is familiar to him as the present to me. He is
continually digging up things ages old, and amazing me with them.
Several times I have asked him when he was born, and he has always made
the same reply: 'I will tell when you are Lord of Constantinople.' ...
How he hates Christ and the Christians! ... This is indeed the sword
of Solomon--and he found it in the tomb of Hiram, and gives it to me as
the elect of the stars now. Ponder it, O Mirza! Now at the mid of the
night in which I whistle up my dogs of war to loose them on the
_Gabour_--How, Mirza--what ails you? Why that change of countenance? Is
he not a dog of an unbeliever? On your knees before me--I have more to
tell you than to ask. No, spurs are troublesome. To the door and bid the
keeper there bring a stool--and look lest the lock have an ear hanging to
it. Old Kalil, going out, though bowing, and lip-handing me, never took
his eyes off you."

The stool brought, Corti was about to sit.

"Take off your cap"--Mahommed spoke sternly--"for as you are not the
Mirza I sent away, I want to see your face while we talk. Sit here, in
the full of the light."

The Count seated, placed his hooded cap on the floor. He was perfectly
collected. Mahommed fingered the ruby hilt while searching the eyes
which as calmly searched his.

"How brave you are!" the Sultan began, but stopped. "Poor Mirza!" he
began again, his countenance softened. One would have said some tender
recollection was melting the shell of his heart. "Poor Mirza! I loved
you better than I loved my father, better than I loved my brothers, well
as I loved my mother--with a love surpassing all I ever knew but one,
and of that we will presently speak. If honor has a soul, it lives in
you, and the breath you draw is its wine, purer than the first expressage
of grapes from the Prophet's garden down by Medina. Your eyes look truth,
your tongue drips it as a broken honey-comb drips honey. You are truth as
God is God."

He was speaking sincerely.

"Fool--fool--that I let you go!--and I would not--no, by the rose-door
of Paradise and the golden stairs to the House of Allah, I would not had
I loved my full moon of full moons less. She was parted from me; and
with whose eyes could I see her so well as with yours, O my falcon? Who
else would report to me so truly her words? Love makes men and lions
mad; it possessed me; and I should have died of it but for your
ministering. Wherefore, O Mirza"--

The Count had been growing restive; now he spoke. "My Lord is about
committing himself to some pledge. He were wise, did he hear me first."

"Perhaps so," the Sultan rejoined, uncertainly, but added immediately:
"I will hear you."

"It is true, as my Lord said, I am not the Mirza he despatched to Italy.
The changes I have undergone are material; and in recounting them I
anticipate his anger. He sees before him the most wretched of men to
whom death would be mercy."

"Is it so bad? You were happy when you went away. Was not the mission to
your content?"

"My Lord's memory is a crystal cup from which nothing escapes--a cup
without a leak. He must recall how I prayed to stay with him."

"Yes, yes."

"My dread was prophetic."

"Tell me of the changes."

"I will--and truly as there is but one God, and he the father of life
and maker of things. First, then, the affection which at my going was my
Lord's, and which gave me to see him as the Light of the World, and the
perfection of glory in promise, is now divided."

"You mean there is another Light of the World? Be it so, and still you
leave me flattered. How far you had to travel before finding the other!
Who is he?"

"The Emperor of the Greeks."

"Constantine? Are his gifts so many and rich? The next."

"I am a Christian."

"Indeed? Perhaps you can tell me the difference between God and Allah.
Yesterday Kourani said they were the same."

"Nay, my Lord, the difference is between Christ and Mahomet."

"The mother of the one was a Jewess, the mother of the other an Arab--I
see. Go on."

The Count did not flinch. "My Lord, great as is your love of the
Princess Irene"--Mahommed half raised his hands, his brows knit, his
eyes filled with fire, but the Count continued composedly--"mine is
greater."

The Sultan recovered himself.

"The proof, the proof!" he said, his voice a little raised. "My love of
her is consuming me, but I see you alive."

"My Lord's demand is reasonable. I came here to make the avowal, and
die. Would my Lord so much?"

"You would die for the Princess?"

"My Lord has said it."

"Is there not something else in the urgency?"

"Yes--honor."

The Count's astonishment was unspeakable. He expected an outburst of
wrath unappeasable, a summons for an executioner; instead, Mahommed's
eyes became humid, and resting his elbow on the table, and his face on
the thumb and forefinger, he said, gazing sorrowfully:

"Ahmed was my little brother. His mother published before my father's
death, that my mother was a slave. She was working for her child
already, and I had him smothered in a bath. Cruel? God forgive me! It
was my duty to provide for the peace of my people. I had a right to take
care of myself; yet will I never be forgiven. Kismet!... I have had many
men slain since. I travel, going to mighty events beckoned by destiny.
The ordinary cheap soul cannot understand how necessary it is that my
path should be smooth and clear; for sometime I may want to run; and he
will amuse or avenge himself by stamping me in history a monster without
a soul. Kismet! ... But you, my poor Mirza, you should know me better.
You are my brother without guile. I am not afraid to love you. I do love
you. Let us see.... Your letters from Constantinople--I have them
all--told me so much more than you intended, I could not suspect your
fidelity. They prepared me for everything you have confessed. Hear how
in my mind I disposed of them point by point.... 'Mirza,' I said,
'pities the _Gabour_ Emperor; in the end he will love him. Loving a
hundred men is less miraculous in a man than loving one. He will make
comparisons. Why not? The _Gabour_ appeals to him through his
weakness, I through my strength. I would rather be feared than pitied.
Moreover, the _Gabour's_ day runs to its close, and as it closes,
mine opens. Pity never justified treason.' ... And I said, too, on
reading the despatch detailing your adventures in Italy: 'Poor Mirza!
now has he discovered he is an Italian, stolen when a child, and having
found his father's castle and his mother, a noble woman, he will become
a Christian, for so would I in his place.' Did I stop there? The wife of
the Pacha who received you from your abductors is in Broussa. I sent to
her asking if she had a keepsake or memento which would help prove your
family and country. See what she returned to me."

From under a cloth at the further end of the table, Mahommed drew a box,
and opening it, produced a collar of lace fastened with a cameo pin. On
the pin there was a graven figure.

"Tell me, Mirza, if you recognize the engraving." The Count took the
cameo, looked at it, and replied, with a shaking voice:

"The arms of the Corti! God be praised!"

"And here--what are these, and what the name on them?"

Mahommed gave him a pair of red morocco half-boots for a child, on
which, near the tops, a name was worked in silk.

"It is mine, my Lord--my name--'Ugo.'"

He cast himself before the Sultan, and embraced his knees, saying, in
snatches as best he could:

"I do not know what my Lord intends--whether he means I am to die or
live--if it be death, I pray him to complete his mercy by sending these
proofs to my mother"--

"Poor Mirza, arise! I prefer to have your face before me."

Directly the Count was reseated, Mahommed continued:

"And you, too, love the Princess Irene? You say you love her more than
I? And you thought I could not endure hearing you tell it? That I would
summon black Hassan with his bowstring? With all your opportunities,
your seeing and hearing her, as the days multiplied from tens to
hundreds, is it for me to teach you she will come to no man except as a
sacrifice? What great thing have you to offer her? While I--well, by
this sword of Solomon, to-morrow morning I set out to say to her: 'For
thy love, O my full Moon of full Moons, for thy love thou shalt have the
redemption of thy Church.'... And besides, did I not foresee your
passion? Courtiers stoop low and take pains to win favor; but no
courtier, not even a professional, intending merely to please me, could
have written of her as you did; and by that sign, O Mirza, I knew you
were in the extremity of passion. Offended? Not so, not so! I sent you
to take care of her--fight for her--die, if her need were so great. Of
whom might I expect such service but a lover? Did I not, the night of
our parting, foretell what would happen?" He paused gazing at the ruby
of the ring on his finger.

"See, Mirza! There has not been a waking hour since you left me but I
have looked at this jewel; and it has kept color faithfully. Often as I
beheld it, I said: 'Mirza loves her because he cannot help it; yet he is
keeping honor with me. Mirza is truth, as God is God. From his hand will
I receive her in Constantinople'"--

"O my Lord"--

"Peace, peace! The night wanes, and you have to return. Of what was I
speaking? Oh, yes"--

"But hear me, my Lord. At the risk of your displeasure I must speak."

"What is it?"

"In her presence my heart is always like to burst, yet, as I am to be
judged in the last great day, I have kept faith with my Lord. Once she
thanked me--it was after I offered myself to the lion--O Heaven! how
nearly I lost my honor! Oh, the agony of that silence! The anguish of
that remembrance! I have kept the faith, my Lord. But day by day now the
will to keep it grows weaker. All that holds me steadfast is my position
in Constantinople. What am I there?"

The Count buried his face in his hands, and through the links in his
surcoat the tremor which shook his body was apparent.

Mahommed waited.

"What am I there? Having come to see the goodness of the Emperor, I must
run daily to betray him. I am a Christian; yet as Judas sold his Master,
I am under compact to sell my religion. I love a noble woman, yet am
pledged to keep her safely, and deliver her to another. O my Lord, my
Lord! This cannot go on. Shame is a vulture, and it is tearing me--my
heart bleeds in its beak. Release me, or give me to death. If you love
me, release me."

"Poor Mirza!"

"My Lord, I am not afraid."

Mahommed struck the table violently, and his eyes glittered. "That ever
one should think I loved a coward! Yet more intolerable, that he whom I
have called brother should know me so little! Can it be, O Mirza, can it
be, you tell me these things imagining them new to me? ... Let me have
done. What we are saying would have become us ten years ago, not now. It
is unmanly. I had a purpose in sending for you.... Your mission in
Constantinople ends in the morning at four o'clock. In other words, O
Mirza, the condition passes from preparation for war with the _Gabour_ to
war. Observe now. You are a fighting man--a knight of skill and courage.
In the rencounters to which I am going--the sorties, the assaults, the
duels single and in force, the exchanges with all arms, bow, arbalist,
guns small and great, the mines and countermines--you cannot stay out.
You must fight. Is it not so?"

Corti's head arose, his countenance brightened.

"My Lord, I fear I run forward of your words--forgive me."

"Yes, give ear.... The question now is, whom will you fight--me or the
_Gabour?_"

"O my Lord"--

"Be quiet, I say. The issue is not whether you love me less. I prefer
you give him your best service."

"How, my Lord?"

"I am not speaking in contempt, but with full knowledge of your
superiority with weapons--of the many of mine who must go down before
you. And that you may not be under restraint of conscience or arm-tied
in the melee, I not only conclude your mission, but release you from
every obligation to me."

"Every obligation!"

"I know my words, Emir, yet I will leave nothing uncertain.... You will
go back to the city free of every obligation to me--arm-free, mind-free.
Be a Christian, if you like. Send me no more despatches advisory of the
Emperor"--

"And the Princess Irene, my Lord?"

Mahommed smiled at the Count's eagerness.

"Have patience, Mirza.... Of the moneys had from me, and the properties
heretofore mine in trust, goods, horses, arms, armor, the galley and its
crew, I give them to you without an accounting. You cannot deliver them
to me or dispose of them, except with an explanation which would weaken
your standing in Blacherne, if not undo you utterly. You have earned
them."

Corti's face reddened.

"With all my Lord's generosity, I cannot accept this favor. Honor"--

"Silence, Emir, and hear me. I have never been careless of your honor.
When you set out for Italy, preparatory to the mission at Constantinople,
you owed me duty, and there was no shame in the performance; but now--so
have the changes wrought--that which was honorable to Mirza the Emir is
scandalous to Count Corti. After four o'clock you will owe me no duty;
neither will you be in my service. From that hour Mirza, my falcon, will
cease to be. He will have vanished. Or if ever I know him more, it will
be as Count Corti, Christian, stranger, and enemy."

"Enemy--my Lord's enemy? Never!"

The Count protested with extended arms.

"Yes, circumstances will govern. And now the Princess Irene."

Mahommed paused; then, summoning his might of will, and giving it
expression in a look, he laid a forcible hand on the listener's
shoulder.

"Of her now.... I have devised a promotion for you, Emir. After to-night
we will be rivals."

Corti was speechless--he could only stare.

"By the rose-door of Paradise--the only oath fit for a lover--or, as
more becoming a knight, by this sword of Solomon, Emir, I mean the
rivalry to be becoming and just. I have an advantage of you. With women
rank and riches are as candles to moths. On the other side your advantage
is double; you are a Christian, and may be in her eyes day after day. And
not to leave you in mean condition, I give you the moneys and property
now in your possession; not as a payment--God forbid!--but for pride's
sake--my pride. Mahommed the Sultan may not dispute with a knight who has
only a sword."

"I have estates in Italy."

"They might as well be in the moon. I shall enclose Constantinople
before you could arrange with the Jews, and have money enough to buy a
feather for your cap. If this were less true, comes then the argument:
How can you dispose of the properties in hand, and quiet the gossips in
the _Gabour's_ palace? 'Where are your horses?' they will ask. What
answer have you? 'Where your galley?' Answer. 'Where your Mohammedan
crew?' Answer."

The Count yielded the debate, saying: "I cannot comprehend my Lord. Such
thing was never heard of before."

"Must men be restrained because the thing they wish to do was never
heard of before? Shall I not build a mosque with five minarets because
other builders stopped with three? ... To the sum of it all now.
Christian or Moslem, are you willing to refer our rivalry for the young
woman to God?"

"My wonder grows with listening to my Lord."

"Nay, this surprises you because it is new. I have had it in mind for
months. It did not come to me easily. It demanded self-denial--something
I am unused to.... Here it is--I am willing to call Heaven in, and let
it decide whether she shall be mine or yours--this lily of Paradise whom
all men love at sight. Dare you as much?"

The soldier spirit arose in the Count.

"Now or then, here or there, as my Lord may appoint. I am ready. He has
but to name his champion."

"I protest. The duel would be unequal. As well match a heron and a hawk.
There is a better way of making our appeal. Listen.... The walls of
Constantinople have never succumbed to attack. Hosts have dashed against
them, and fled or been lost. It may be so with me; but I will march, and
in my turn assault them, and thou defending with thy best might. If I am
beaten, if I retire, be the cause of failure this or that, we--you and
I, O Mirza--will call it a judgment of Heaven, and the Princess shall be
yours; but if I success and enter the city, it shall be a judgment no
less, and then"--Mahommed's eyes were full of fire--"then"--

"What then, my Lord?"

"Thou shalt see to her safety in the last struggle, and conduct her to
Sancta Sophia, and there deliver her to me as ordered by God."

Corti was never so agitated. He turned pale and red--he trembled
visibly.

Mahommed asked mockingly: "Is it Mirza I am treating with, or Count
Corti? Are Christians so unwilling to trust God?"

"But, my Lord, it is a wager you offer me."

"Call it so."

"And its conditions imply slavery for the Princess. Change them, my
Lord--allow her to be consulted and have her will, be the judgment this
or that."

Mahommed clinched his hands.

"Am I a brute? Did ever woman lay her head on my breast perforce?"

The Count replied, firmly:

"Such a condition would be against us both alike."

The Sultan struggled with himself a moment.

"Be it so," he rejoined. "The wager is my proposal, and I will go
through with it. Take the condition, Emir. If I win, she shall come to
me of her free will or not at all."

"A wife, my Lord?"

"In my love first, and in my household first--my Sultana."

The animation which then came to the Count was wonderful. He kissed
Mahommed's hand.

"Now has my Lord outdone himself in generosity. I accept. In no other
mode could the issue be made so absolutely a determination of Heaven."

Mahommed arose.

"We are agreed.--The interview is finished.--Ali is waiting for you."

He replaced the cover on the box containing the collar and the
half-boots.

"I will send these to the Countess your mother; for hereafter you are to
be to me Ugo, Count Corti.... My falcon hath cast its jess and hood.
Mirza is no more. Farewell Mirza."

Corti was deeply moved. Prostrating himself, he arose, and replied:

"I go hence more my Lord's lover than ever. Death to the stranger who in
my presence takes his name in vain."

As he was retiring, Mahommed spoke again:

"A word, Count.... In what we are going to, the comfort and safety of
the Princess Irene may require you to communicate with me. You have
ready wit for such emergencies. Leave me a suggestion."

Corti reflected an instant.

"The signal must proceed from me," he said. "My Lord will pitch his tent
in sight"--

"By Solomon, and this his sword, yes! Every _Gabour_ who dares look
over the wall shall see it while there is a hill abiding."

The Count bowed.

"I know my Lord, and give him this--God helping me, I will make myself
notorious to the besiegers as he will be to the besieged. If at any time
he sees my banderole, or if it be reported to him, let him look if my
shield be black; if so, he shall come himself with a shield the color of
mine, and place himself in my view. My Lord knows I make my own arrows.
If I shoot one black feathered, he must pick it up. The ferrule will be
of hollow lead covering a bit of scrip."

"Once more, Count Corti, the issue is with God. Good night."

Traversing the passage outside the door, the Count met the Prince of
India.

"An hour ago I would have entitled you Emir: but now"--the Prince smiled
while speaking--"I have stayed to thank Count Corti for his kindness to
my black friend Nilo."

"Your servant?"

"My friend and ally--Nilo the King.... If the Count desires to add to
the obligation, he will send the royal person to me with Ali when he
returns to-night."

"I will send him."

"Thanks, Count Corti."

The latter lingered, gazing into the large eyes and ruddy face,
expecting at least an inquiry after Lael. He received merely a bow, and
the words: "We will meet again."

Night was yet over the city, when Ali, having landed the Count, drew out
of the gate with Nilo. The gladness of the King at being restored to his
master can be easily fancied.


CHAPTER III

THE BLOODY HARVEST


In June, a few days after the completion of the enormous work begun by
Mahommed on the Asometon promontory, out of a gate attached to the High
Residence of Blacherne, familiarly known as the Caligaria, there issued
a small troop of horsemen of the imperial military establishment.

The leader of this party--ten in all--was Count Corti. Quite a body of
spectators witnessed the exit, and in their eyes he was the most gallant
knight they had ever seen. They cheered him as, turning to the right
after issuance from the gate, he plunged at a lively trot into the
ravine at the foot of the wall, practically an immense natural fosse.
"God and our Lady of Blacherne," they shouted, and continued shouting
while he was in sight, notwithstanding he did not so much as shake the
banderole on his lance in reply.

Of the Count's appearance this morning it is unnecessary to say more
than that he was in the suit of light armor habitual to him, and as an
indication of serious intent, bore, besides the lance, a hammer or
battle-axe fixed to his saddle-bow, a curved sword considerably longer,
though not so broad as a cimeter, a bow and quiver of arrows at his
back, and a small shield or buckler over the quiver. The favorite
chestnut Arab served him for mount, its head and neck clothed in
flexible mail. The nine men following were equipped like himself in
every particular, except that their heads were protected by
close-fitting conical caps, and instead of armor on their legs, they
wore flowing red trousers.

Of them it may be further remarked, their mode of riding, due to their
short stirrups, was indicative of folk akin to the Bedouin of the
Desert.

Upon returning from the last interview with Mahommed in the White
Castle, the Count had subjected the crew of his galley to rigorous trial
of fitness for land service. Nine of them he found excellent riders
after their fashion, and selecting them as the most promising, he
proceeded to instruct them in the use of the arms they were now bearing.
His object in this small organization was a support to rush in after him
rather than a battle front. That is, in a charge he was to be the
lance's point, and they the broadening of the lance's blade; while he
was engaged, intent on the foe before him, eight of them were to guard
him right and left, and, as the exigencies of combat might demand, open
and close in fan-like movement. The ninth man was a fighter in their
rear. In the simple manoeuvring of this order of battle he had practised
them diligently through the months. The skill attained was remarkable;
and the drilling having been in the Hippodrome, open to the public, the
concourse to see it had been encouraging.

In truth, the wager with Mahommed had supplied the Count with energy of
body and mind. He studied the chances of the contest, knowing how
swiftly it was coming, and believed it possible to defend the city
successfully. At all events, he would do his best, and if the judgment
were adverse, it should not be through default on his part.

The danger--and he discerned it with painful clearness--was in the
religious dissensions of the Greeks; still he fancied the first serious
blow struck by the Turks, the first bloodshed, would bring the factions
together, if only for the common safety.

It is well worth while here to ascertain the views and feelings of the
people whom Count Corti was thus making ready to defend. This may be
said of them generally: It seemed impossible to bring them to believe
the Sultan really intended war against the city.

"What if he does?" they argued. "Who but a young fool would think of
such a thing? If he comes, we will show him the banner of the Blessed
Lady from the walls."

