"O, yes," she answered, "I must get well; there is so much to do. But my
classes and my writing must be dropped for a while, I presume, unless
the doctor will let me take in some of my scholars, for, of course, I
cannot go out."

"Your arm must begin to heal before you can think of teaching, ever so
little. I have an idea, Miss Jorgensen, from what you have said of
yourself, that this necessity for repose, which is forced upon you, will
prove to be an excellent thing. Certainly, you were wearing out very
fast with your incessant labor."

"Perhaps so--I mean, perhaps inforced rest will not be bad for me; but,
O, there is such need to work! I can so poorly afford to be idle."

"What you say relieves my mind of a suspicion, which at first I
harbored, that the firing of that mischievous pistol was not wholly
accidental. I now see you wish to live and work. But why had you such a
weapon about you? Are you accustomed to fire-arms?"

"The mischief this one did me shows that I am not; and my having it
about me came from a fear I had of its doing worse mischief in the hands
of Mr. Hurst."

"Are affairs so desperate with him?"

"Please don't question me. I cannot answer you satisfactorily. Mr. Hurst
is in trouble, and the least that is said or known about him is the
best. And yet you wonder, no doubt, that I should interest myself about
a man who is compelled to act the part of a culprit. Well, I cannot tell
you why at present; and it would be a great relief to know that you
thought nothing more about it." This last she uttered rather petulantly,
which warned me that this conversation was doing her no good.

"Believe, then," I said, "that I have no interest in your affairs,
except the wish to promote your welfare. And I think I may venture to
affirm that everybody in the house is equally at your service when you
wish to command him or her."

"Thank you all; but I do not deserve your kindness; I have been so
ill-tempered. The truth is I cannot afford to have friends; friends pry
into one's affairs so mercilessly. Mrs. Mason tells me there is a new
boarder," she said, suddenly changing the subject.

I assented, and gave what I intended to be an amusing account of the
new-comers' conversation and manners.

"Was there anything said about me at dinner?" she asked, with a painful
consciousness of the opinion I might have of such a question.

"I do not think there was. We were all so taken up with the latest
acquisition that we forgot you for the time."

"May I ask this favor of you, to keep the conversation away from me as
much as possible? I am morbidly sensitive, I presume," she said, with a
poor attempt at a smile, "and I cannot keep from fancying, while I lie
here, what you are saying about me in the dining-room or parlor."

Of course, I hastened to disavow any disposition on the part of the
family to make her a subject of conversation, and even promised to
discountenance any reference to her whatever, if thereby she would be
made more comfortable; after which I bade her good-night, having
received the assurance that my visit had relieved her mind of several
torturing apprehensions.

The more I saw and thought of Miss Jorgensen, the more she interested
and puzzled me. I should have inclined to the opinion that she was a
little disturbed at times in her intellect, had it not been that there
was apparent so much "method in her madness;" this reflection always
bringing me back at last to the conclusion that her peculiarities could
all be accounted for upon the hypothesis she herself presented; too much
work and some great anxiety. The spectacle of this human mite fighting
the battle of life, not only for herself but for the strong man who
should have been her protector, worked so upon my imagination and my
sympathy that I found it difficult to keep the little woman out of my
thoughts.

I kept my word to her, discountenancing, as far as I could, the
discussion of her affairs, and in this effort Mrs. Mason co-operated
with me; but it was practically impossible to prevent the inquiries and
remarks of those of the family who were not so well informed concerning
her as we were. The new boarder, also, with that quick apprehension he
had of every subject, had caught enough to become interested in the
patient up-stairs, and daily made some inquiries concerning her
condition, and, as it appeared to me--grown a little morbid, like Miss
Jorgensen--was peculiarly adroit in extracting information.

Three weeks slipped away, and Miss Jorgensen had passed the most painful
period of suppuration and healing in her arm, and had promised to come
down-stairs next day to dine with the family. Mrs. Mason had just
communicated the news to us in her cheeriest tones, as if each
individual was interested in it, and was proceeding to turn out our
coffee, when a servant brought in the letters for the house and laid
them beside the tray, directly under the eye of the new boarder, who sat
on the landlady's left.

"'Miss Jorgensen," said he, reading the address of the topmost one. "A
very peculiar handwriting." Then taking up the letter, as if to further
examine the writing, I observed that he was studying the postmark as
well, which, being offended at his unmannerly curiosity, I sincerely
hoped was illegible. But that it was only too fatally plain will soon
appear.

With an air of _hauteur_ I seldom assumed, I recalled the servant, and
ordered the letter to be taken at once to Miss Jorgensen. Before leaving
the house I was informed that Miss Jorgensen wished to speak to me.

"Mr. Hurst has done a most imprudent thing!" she exclaimed, the moment I
was inside the door. "I ought to have published a 'personal,' or done
something to let him know I could not go to the post-office, and to
account for his not hearing from me."

"He has returned to the city?"

"Yes!" She fairly ground her teeth with rage at this "stupidity," as she
termed it. "He always does the very thing he ought never to have done,
and leaves undone the things most important to do. Of course he cannot
come here, and I can not go to him without incurring the greatest risk.
I really do not know what to do next."

Tears were now coursing down her pale cheeks--tears, it seemed, as much
of anger as of sorrow.

"Let him take care of himself," I said, rather hotly. "It is not your
province to care for him as you do."

She gave me an indescribable look. "What can you, what can any one know
about it? He may want money; how can he take care of himself in such
circumstances without money? I sent for you to contrive some plan by
which he can be communicated with. Do tell me at once what to do."

"How can I tell you, when, as you say, I do not know what is required.
You wish to see him, I presume?"

"How can I--O, I dislike so much to ask this of you--but _will_ you take
a message to him?" She asked this desperately, half expecting me to
decline, as decline I did.

"Miss Jorgensen, you are now able to ride. Shall I send a carriage for
you?"

"There may be those on the lookout who would instantly suspect my
purpose in going out in that way. On the contrary, nobody would suspect
you."

"Still, I might be observed, which would not be pleasant, I can imagine,
from what you leave me to surmise. No, Miss Jorgensen, much as I should
like to serve you personally, you must excuse me from connecting myself
in any way with Mr. Hurst; and if I might be allowed to offer advice, I
should say that, in justice to yourself, you ought to cut loose from him
at once."

Miss Jorgensen covered her face with one little emaciated hand, and sat
silent a few seconds. "Send me the carriage," she said, "and I will go."

"You forgive me?"

"You have been very good," she said. "I ought not have required more of
you. I will go at once; the sooner the better."

When I had reached the head of the stairs, I turned back again to her
door.

"Once more let me counsel you to free yourself from all connection with
Mr. Hurst. Why should you ruin your chances of happiness for one so
undeserving, as I must think he is? Keep away from him; let him shift
for himself."

"You don't know what you are talking about," she replied, with a touch
of the old fierceness. "I have no chances of happiness to lose. Please
go."

On my way down to the office I ordered a carriage.

What happened afterward I learned from Mrs. Mason and the evening
papers. Miss Jorgensen, dressed in deep black, with her face veiled,
entered the carriage, directing the driver to take her to the houses of
some of her pupils. At the corner of the street, a gentleman, who proved
to be our day-boarder, got upon the box with the driver, and remained
there while Miss Jorgensen made her calls. Finding him constantly there,
and becoming suspicious, she ordered the carriage home, and gave
directions to have it return an hour later to take her down town for
some shopping. At the time set, the carriage was in attendance, and
conveyed her to one of the principal stores in the city. After
re-entering the carriage, and giving her directions, our day-boarder
once more mounted the box, though unobserved by her, and was conveyed
with herself to the hiding-place of Mr. Hurst, contriving, by getting
down before the door was opened, to elude her observation.

Another carriage, containing officers of the police, was following in
the wake of this one, and drew up when Miss Jorgensen had entered the
house where Hurst was concealed. After waiting long enough to make it
certain that the person sought was within, the officers entered to
search and capture.

At the moment they entered Hurst's apartment, he was saying, with much
emotion, "If I can only reach China in safety, a way will be opened for
me--"

"Hush!" cried Miss Jorgensen, seeing the door opened, and by whom.

"All is over!" exclaimed Hurst. "I will never be taken to prison!" And,
drawing a revolver, he deliberately shot himself through the head.

Miss Jorgensen was brought back to Mrs. Mason's in a fainting condition,
and was ill for weeks afterward. That same evening our day-boarder
called, and while settling his board with Mrs. Mason, acknowledged that
he belonged to the detective police, and had for months been "working
up" the case of a bank-robber and forger who had escaped from one of the
eastern cities, and been lost to observation for a year and a half.

And we further learned in the same way, and ultimately from the lady
herself, that Miss Jorgensen was a myth, and that the little French
teacher was Madame ----, who had suffered, and toiled, and risked
everything for her unworthy husband, and who deserved rather to be
congratulated than condoled with upon his loss.

It is now a year since all this happened, and it is the common gossip of
our boarding-house that Mr. Quivey is devoted to the little dark-eyed
widow; and although Miss Flower still refers to "E. E." and "I. I.,"
nobody seems to be in the least disturbed by the allusion. When I say to
Quivey, "Make haste slowly, my dear fellow;" he returns: "Never fear, my
friend; I shall know when the time comes to speak."


SAM RICE'S ROMANCE.


The coach of Wells, Fargo & Co. stood before the door of Piney-woods
Station, and Sam Rice, the driver, was drawing on his lemon-colored
gloves with an air, for Sam was the pink of stage-drivers, from his high
white hat to his faultless French boots. Sad will it be when his
profession shall have been altogether superseded; and the coach-and-six,
with its gracious and graceful "whip," shall have been supplanted, on
all the principal lines of travel, by the iron-horse with its grimy
"driver" and train of thundering carriages.

The passengers had taken their seats--the one lady on the box--and Sam
Rice stood, chronometer held daintily between thumb and finger, waiting
for the second hand to come round the quarter of a minute, while the
grooms slipped the last strap of the harness into its buckle. At the
expiration of the quarter of a minute, as Sam stuck an unlighted cigar
between his lips and took hold of the box to pull himself up to his
seat, the good-natured landlady of Piney-woods Station called out, with
some officiousness:

"Mr. Rice, don't you want a match?"

"That's just what I've been looking for these ten years," responded Sam;
and at that instant his eyes were on a level with the lady's on the box,
so that he could not help seeing the roguish glint of them, which so far
disconcerted the usually self-possessed professor of the whip that he
heard not the landlady's laugh, but gathered up the reins in such a
hasty and careless manner as to cause Demon, the nigh-leader, to go off
with a bound that nearly threw the owner of the eyes out of her place.
The little flurry gave opportunity for Mrs. Dolly Page--that was the
lady's name--to drop her veil over her face, and for Sam Rice to show
his genteel handling of the ribbons, and conquer the unaccountable
disturbance of his pulses.

Sam had looked at the way-bill, not ten minutes before, to ascertain the
name of the pretty black-eyed woman seated at his left hand; and the
consciousness of so great a curiosity gratified, may have augmented his
unaccustomed embarrassment. Certain it is, Sam Rice had driven six
horses, on a ticklish mountain road, for four years, without missing a
trip; and had more than once encountered the "road-agents," without ever
yet delivering them an express box; had had old and young ladies, plain
and beautiful ones, to sit beside him, hundreds of times: yet this was
the first time he had consulted the way-bill, on his own account, to
find a lady's name. This one time, too, it had a _Mrs._ before it, which
prefix gave him a pang he was very unwilling to own. On the other hand,
Mrs. Dolly Page was clad in extremely deep black. Could she be in
mourning for Mr. Page? If Demon had an unusual number of starting fits
that afternoon, his driver was not altogether guiltless in the matter;
for what horse, so sensitive as he, would not have felt the magnetism of
something wrong behind him?

But as the mocking eyes kept hidden behind a veil, and the rich, musical
voice uttered not a word through a whole half-hour, which seemed an age
to Sam, he finally recovered himself so far as to say he believed he
would not smoke, after all; and thereupon returned the cigar, still
unlighted, to his pocket.

"I hope you do not deprive yourself of a luxury on my account," murmured
the soft voice.

"I guess this dust and sunshine is enough for a lady to stand, without
my smokin' in her face," returned Sam, politely, and glancing at the
veil.

"Still, I beg you will smoke, if you are accustomed," persisted the
cooing voice behind it. But Sam, to his praise be it spoken, refused to
add anything to the discomforts of a summer day's ride across the
mountains. His chivalry had its reward; for the lady thus favored,
feeling constrained to make some return for such consideration, began to
talk, in a vein that delighted her auditor, about horses--their points
and their traits--and, lastly, about their drivers.

"I have always fancied," said Mrs. Dolly Page, "that if I were a man I
should take to stage-driving as a profession. It seems to me a free and
manly calling, one that develops some of the best qualities of a man. Of
course, it has its drawbacks. One cannot always choose one's society on
a stage, and there are temptations to bad habits. Besides, there are
storms, and upsets, and all that sort of thing. I've often thought,"
continued Mrs. Dolly, "that we do not consider enough the hardships of
drivers, nor what we owe them. You've read that poem--the Post-boy's
Song:

    "'Like a shuttle thrown by the hand of Fate,
    Forward and back I go.'

"Well, it is just so. They do bring us our letters, full of good and ill
news, helping to weave the web of Fate for us; yet not to blame for what
tidings they bring, and always faithful to their duties, in storm or
shine."

"I shall like my profession better after what you have said of it,"
answered Sam, giving his whip a curl to make it touch the off-leader's
right ear. "I've done my duty mostly, and not complained of the
hardships, though once or twice I've been too beat out to get off the
box at the end of my drive; but that was in a long spell of bad weather,
when the roads was just awful, and the rain as cold as snow."

"Would you mind letting me hold the lines awhile?" asked the cooing
voice, at last. "I've driven a six-in-hand before."

Though decidedly startled, and averse to trusting his team to such a
pair of hands, Sam was compelled, by the psychic force of the little
woman, to yield up the reins. It was with fear and trembling that he
watched her handling of them for the first mile; but, as she really
seemed to know what she was about, his confidence increased, and he
watched her with admiration. Her veil was now up, her eyes were
sparkling, and cheeks glowing. She did not speak often, but, when she
did, it was always something piquant and graceful that she uttered. At
last, just as the station was in sight, she yielded up the lines, with a
deep-drawn sigh of satisfaction, apologizing for it by saying that her
hands, not being used to it, were tired. "I'm not sure," she added, "but
I shall take to the box, at last, as a steady thing."

"If you do," responded Sam, gallantly, "I hope you will drive on my
line."

"Thanks. I shall ask you for a reference, when I apply for the
situation."

There was then a halt, a supply of fresh horses, and a prompt, lively
start. But the afternoon was intensely hot, and the team soon sobered
down. Mrs. Page did not offer again to take the lines. She was overwarm
and weary, perhaps, quiet and a little sad, at any rate. Mr. Rice was
quiet, too, and thoughtful. The passengers inside were asleep. The coach
rattled along at a steady pace, with the dust so deep under the wheels
as to still their rumble. At intervals, a freight-wagon was passed,
drawn to one side, at a "turn-out," or a rabbit skipped across the road,
or a solitary horseman suggested alternately a "road-agent," or one of
James's heroes. Grand views presented themselves of wooded cliffs and
wild ravines. Tall pines threw lengthening shadows across the open
spaces on the mountain-sides. And so the afternoon wore away; and, when
the sun was setting, the passengers alighted for their supper at the
principal hotel of Lucky-dog--a mining-camp, pretty well up in the
Sierras.

"We both stop here," said Sam, as he helped the lady down from her high
position; letting her know by this remark that her destination was known
to him.

"I'm rather glad of that," she answered, frankly, with a little smile;
and, considering all that had transpired on that long drive, Sam was
certainly pardonable if he felt almost sure that her reason for being
glad was identical with his own.

Lucky-dog was one of those shambling, new camps, where one street serves
for a string on which two or three dozen ill-assorted tenements are
strung, every fifth one being a place intended for the relief of the
universal American thirst, though the liquids dispensed at these
beneficent institutions were observed rather to provoke than to abate
the dryness of their patrons. Eating-houses were even more frequent than
those which dispensed moisture to parched throats; so that, taking a
cursory view of the windows fronting on the street, the impression was
inevitably conveyed of the expected rush of famished armies, whose wants
this charitable community were only too willing to supply for a
sufficient consideration. The houses that were not eating and
drinking-houses were hotels, if we except occasional grocery and general
merchandise establishments. Into what out-of-the-way corners the
inhabitants were stowed, it was impossible to conjecture, until it was
discovered that the men lived at the places already inventoried, and
that women abode not at all in Lucky-dog--or if there were any, not more
than a half a dozen of them, and they lived in unaccustomed places.

The advent of Mrs. Page at the Silver Brick Hotel naturally made a
sensation. As assemblage of not less than fifty gentlemen of leisure
crowded about the entrance, each more intent than the other on getting a
look at the arrivals, and especially at this one arrival--whose age,
looks, name, business, and intentions in coming to Lucky-dog, were
discussed with great freedom. Sam Rice was closely questioned, but
proved reticent and non-committal. The landlord was besieged with
inquiries--the landlady, too--and all without anybody being made much
the wiser. There was the waybill, and there was the lady herself; put
that and that together, and make what you could of it.

Mrs. Dolly Page did not seem discomposed in the least by the evident
interest she inspired. With her black curls smoothly brushed, her black
robes immaculately neat, with a pretty color in her round cheeks, and a
quietly absorbed expression in her whole bearing, she endured the
concentrated gaze of fifty pairs of eyes during the whole of dinner,
without so much as one awkward movement, or the dropping of a fork or
teaspoon. So it was plain that the curious would be compelled to await
Mrs. Page's own time for developments.

But developments did not seem likely to come overwhelmingly. Mrs. Page
made a fast friend of the landlady of the Silver Brick, by means of
little household arts peculiarly her own, and, before a fortnight was
gone, had become as indispensable to all the boarders as she was to Mrs.
Shaughnessy herself. If she had a history, she kept it carefully from
curious ears. Mrs. Shaughnessy was evidently satisfied, and quite
challenged criticism of her favorite. Indeed, there was nothing to
criticise. It was generally understood that she was a widow, who had to
get on in the world as best she could, and thus the public sympathy was
secured, and an embargo laid upon gossip. To be sure, there were certain
men in Lucky-dog, of a class which has its representatives everywhere,
who regarded all unappropriated women, especially pretty women, very
much as the hunter regards game, and the more difficult the approach,
the more exciting the chase. But these moral Nimrods had not half the
chance with self-possessed Mrs. Dolly Page that they would have had with
a different style of woman. The grosser sort got a sudden _congé_; and
with the more refined sportsmen she coquetted just enough to show them
that two could play at a game of "make-believe," and then sent them off
with a lofty scorn edifying to behold--to the mingled admiration and
amusement of Mrs. Shaughnessy.

The only affair which seemed to have a kernel of seriousness in it, was
that of Mr. Samuel Rice. Regularly, when the stage was in, on Sam's
night, he paid his respects to Mrs. Page. And Mrs. Page always received
him with a graceful friendliness, asking after the horses, and even
sometimes going so far as to accompany him to their stables. On these
occasions she never failed to carry several lumps of sugar in her
pocket, which she fed to the handsome brutes off her own pink palm,
until there was not one of them she could not handle at her will.

Thus passed many weeks, until summer was drawing to a close. Two or
three times she had gone down to Piney-woods Station and back, on Sam's
coach, and always sat on the box, and drove a part of the way, but never
where her driving would excite remark. It is superfluous to state, that
on these occasions there was a happy heart beneath Sam's linen-duster,
or that the bantering remarks of his brother-drivers were borne with
smiling equanimity, not to say pride; for Sam was well aware that Mrs.
Dolly Page's brunette beauty, and his blonde-bearded style, together
furnished a not unpleasing _tableau_ of personal charms. Besides, Sam's
motto was, "Let those laugh who win;" and he seemed to himself to be on
the road to heights of happiness beyond the ken of ordinary
mortals--especially ordinary stage-drivers.

"I don't calkelate to drive stage more than a year or two longer," Sam
said to Mrs. Page, confidentially, on the return from their last trip
together to Piney-woods Station. "I've got a little place down in
Amador, and an interest in the Nip-and-tuck gold-mine, besides a few
hundreds in bank. I've a notion to settle down some day, in a cottage
with vines over the porch, with a little woman to tend the flowers in
the front-garden."

As if Sam's heightened color and shining eyes had not sufficiently
pointed this confession of his desires, it chanced that at this moment
the eyes of both were attracted to a way-side picture: a cottage, a
flower-bordered walk, a fair young woman standing at the gate, with a
crowing babe in her arms lifting its little white hands to the
sun-browned face of a stalwart young farmer who was smiling proudly on
the two. At this sudden apparition of his inmost thoughts, Sam's heart
gave a great bound, and there was a simultaneous ringing in his ears.
His first instinctive act was to crack his whip so fiercely as to set
the leaders off prancing; and when, by this diversion, he had partly
recovered self-possession to glance at the face of his companion, a new
embarrassment seized him when he discovered two little rivers of tears
running over the crimsoned cheeks. But a coach-box is not a convenient
place for sentiment to display itself; and, though the temptation was
great to inquire into the cause of the tears, with a view of offering
consolation, Sam prudently looked the other way, and maintained silence.
The reader, however, knows that those tears sank into the beholder's
soul, and caused to germinate countless tender thoughts and emotions,
which were, on some future occasion, to be laid upon the alter of his
devotion to Mrs. Dolly Page. And none the less, that, in a few minutes,
the eyes which shed them resumed their roguish brightness, and the lady
was totally unconscious of having heard, seen, or felt any
embarrassment. Sentiment between them was successfully _tabooed_, so far
as utterance was concerned, for that time. And so Sam found, somewhat to
his disappointment, it continued to fall out, that whenever he got upon
delicate ground, the lady was off like a humming-bird, darting hither
and yon, so that it was impossible to put a finger upon her, or get so
much as a look at her brilliant and restless wings. But nobody ever
tired of trying to find a humming-bird at rest; and so Sam never gave up
looking for the opportune moment of speaking his mind.

Meanwhile, Lucky-dog Camp was having a fresh sensation. An organized
band of gamblers, robbers, and "road-agents" had made a swoop upon its
property, of various kinds, and had succeeded in making off with it. The
very night after the ride just mentioned, the best horses in Sam Rice's
team were stolen, making it necessary to substitute what Sam called "a
pa'r of ornery cayuses." To put the climax to his misfortunes, the
"road-agents" attacked him next morning, when, the "ornery cayuses"
becoming unmanageable, Sam was forced to surrender the treasure-box, and
the passengers their bullion. The excitement in Lucky-dog was intense. A
vigilance committee, secretly organized, lay in waiting for the
offenders, and, after a week or two, made a capture of a well-known
sporting-man, whose presence in camp had for some time been regarded
with suspicion. Short shrift was afforded him. That same afternoon his
gentlemanly person swung dangling from a gnarled pine-tree limb, and his
frightened soul had fled into outer darkness.

When this event became known to Mrs. Dolly Page, she turned ghostly
white, and then fainted dead away. Mrs. Shanghnessy was very much
concerned for her friend; berating in round terms, the brutishness of
people who could talk of such things before a tender-hearted lady like
that. To Mr. Rice, particularly, she expatiated upon the coarseness of
certain people, and the refined sensitiveness of others; and Sam was
much inclined to agree with her, so far as her remarks applied to her
friend, who was not yet recovered sufficiently to be visible. Indeed,
Mrs. Page was not visible for so many days, that Sam's soul began to
long for her with a mighty longing. At length, she made her appearance,
considerably paler and thinner than was her wont; but doubly interesting
and lovely to the eyes of so partial an observer as Sam, who would
willingly have sheltered her weakness in his strong, manly arms. Sam,
naturally enough, would never have hinted at the event which had so
distressed her; but she relieved him of all embarrassment on that
subject, by saying to him almost at once:

"Mr. Rice, I am told they have not buried the man they hung, so
shockingly, the other day. They certainly will not leave him _there_?"
she added, with a shudder.

"I don't know--I suppose," stammered Sam, "it is their way, with them
fellows."

"But you will not allow it? You _cannot_ allow it!"--excitedly.

"I couldn't prevent them," said Sam, quite humbly.

"Mr. Rice," and her voice was at once a command and an entreaty, "you
_can_ and _must_ prevent it. You are not afraid? I will go with
you--this very night--and will help you. Don't say you will not; for I
cannot sleep until it is done. I have not slept for a week."

She looked so white and so wild, as she uttered this confession, that
Sam would have been the wretch he was not, to refuse her. So he said:

"Don't you fret. I'll bury him, if it troubles you so. But you needn't
go along. You couldn't; it's too far, and you're too weak,"--seeing how
she trembled.

"I am not weak--only nervous. I prefer to go along. But we must be
secret, I suppose? Oh!"--with a start that was indeed "nervous."

"Yes, we must be secret," said Sam; and he looked as if he did not half
like the business, but would not refuse.

"You are a good man, Mr. Rice, and I thank you." And with that, Mrs.
Dolly Page caught up one of his hands, and kissing it hastily, began to
cry, as she walked quickly away.

"Don't cry, and don't go until I have promised to do whatever you ask,
if it will make you well again," Sam said, following her to the door.

"Then call for me to take a walk with you to-night. The moon is full,
but no one will observe us. They would not think of our going
_there_,"--with another shudder--and she slipped away from his detaining
hand.

That evening Mr. Samuel Rice and Mrs. Page took a walk by moonlight.
Laughing gossips commented on it after their fashion; and disagreeable
gossips remarked that they came home very late, after _their_ fashion.
But nobody, they believed, saw where they went, or what they did. Yet
those two came from performing an act of Christian charity, each with a
sense of guilt and unworthiness very irritating to endure, albeit from
very different causes. One, because an unwelcome suspicion had thrust
itself into his mind; and the other----

The ground of Sam's suspicion was a photograph, which, in handling the
gambler's body somewhat awkwardly, by reason of its weight--Mrs. Page
had found, at the last, she could not render any assistance--had slipped
from some receptacle in its clothing. A hasty glance, under the full
light of the moon, had shown him the features of the lady who sat twelve
paces away, with her hands over her face. It is not always those that
sin who suffer most from the consciousness of sin; and Sam, perhaps,
with that hint of possible--nay, almost certain--wickedness in his
breast-pocket, was more burdened by the weight of it than many a
criminal about to suffer all the terrors of the law; for the woman that
he loved stood accused, if not convicted, before his conscience and her
own, and he could not condemn, because his heart refused to judge her.

When the two stood together under the light of the lamp in the deserted
parlor of the Silver Brick Hotel, the long silence which, by her quick
perceptions, had been recognized as accusing her, upon what evidence she
did not yet know, was at length broken by Sam's voice, husky with
agitation.

"Mrs. Page," he said, assuming an unconscious dignity of mien and
sternness of countenance, "I shall ask you some questions, sometime,
which you may not think quite polite. And you must answer me: you
understand. I'm bound to know the truth about this man."

"About this man!" Then he suspected her of connection with the wretched
criminal whose body had only just now been hidden from mocking eyes? How
much did he suspect? how much did he _know_? Her pale face and
frightened eyes seemed to ask these questions of him; but not a sound
escaped her lips. The imploring look, so strange upon her usually bright
face, touched all that was tender in Sam's romantic nature. In another
moment he would have recalled his demand, and trusted her infinitely;
but in that critical moment she fainted quite away, to his mingled
sorrow and alarm; and Mrs. Shaughnessy being summoned, Sam received a
wordy reprimand for having no more sense than to keep a sick woman up
half of the night; smarting under which undeserved censure, he retired,
to think over the events of the evening.

The hour of departure from Luckydog, for Sam's coach, was four o'clock
in the morning; and its driver was not a little surprised, when about to
mount the box, to discover Mrs. Page waiting to take a seat beside him.
After the adventure of the previous night, it was with some restraint
that he addressed her; and there was wanting, also, something of his
cheerful alacrity of manner, when he requested the stranger who had
taken the box-seat, to yield it to a lady. The stranger's mood seemed
uncongenial, for he declined to abdicate, intimating that there was room
for the lady between himself and the driver, if she insisted upon an
outside seat.

But Mrs. Page did not insist. She whispered Sam to open the coach-door,
and quietly took a seat inside; and Sam, with a sense of irritation very
unusual with him, climbed reluctantly to his place, giving the "cayuses"
the lash in a way that set them off on a keen run. By the time he had
gotten his team cooled down, the unusual mood had passed, and the
longing returned to hear the sweet voice, and watch the bright eyes that
had made his happiness on former occasions. Puzzled as he was, and
pained by the evidence he possessed of her connection, in some way, with
the victim of lynch-law, _that_ seemed like a dream in the clear, sunny
air of morning, while the more blissful past asserted its claim to be
considered reality. Not a lark, warbling its flute-notes by the
way-side, not a pretty bit of the familiar landscape, nor glimpse of
brook, that leaped sparkling down the mountain, but recalled some
charming utterance of Mrs. Dolly Page, as he first knew her; as he could
not now recognize her in the pale, nervous, and evidently suffering
woman, sitting, closely veiled, inside the coach.

Occupied with these thoughts, Sam felt a disagreeable shock when the
outside passenger--in a voice that contrasted roughly with that other
voice which was murmuring in his ear--began a remark about the mining
prospects of Lucky-dog.

"Some rich discoveries made in the neighborhood, eh? Did you ever try
your luck at mining?"

"Waal, no. I own a little stock, though," answered Sam, carelessly.

"In what mine?"

"In the Nip-and-tuck."

"Good mine, from all I hear about it. Never did any prospecting?" asked
the stranger, in that tone which denotes only a desire to make talk,
with a view to kill time.

"No," in the same tone.

"That's odd," stuffing a handful of cut tobacco into his mouth. "I'd
have sworn 'twas you I saw swinging a pick in the cañon east of camp
last night."

"I'm not much on picks," Sam returned, with a slowness that well
counterfeited indifference. "I was visiting a lady last evening, which is
a kind of prospecting more in my line."

"Yes, I understand; that lady inside the coach. She's a game one."

"It strikes me you're devilish free in your remarks," said Sam, becoming
irritated again.

"No offense meant, I'm sure. Take a cigar? We may as well talk this
matter over calmly, Mr. Rice. You see it's ten to one that you are
implicated in this business. Been very attentive to Mrs. Page. Made
several trips together. Let her handle your horses, so she could take
them out of the stable for them thieves. Buried her thieving, gambling
husband for her. You see the case _looks_ bad, anyway; though I'm
inclined to think you've just been made a tool of. I know she's a smart
one. Tain't often you find one smarter."

Sam's eyes scintillated. He was strangely minded to pitch the outside
passenger off the coach. The struggle in his breast between conviction
and resistance to conviction amounted to agony. He could not, in that
supreme moment, discriminate between the anger he felt at being falsely
accused, and the grief and rage of being so horrible disillusioned.
Their combined anguish paled his cheeks, and set his teeth on edge: of
all of which the outside passenger was coolly cognizant. As they were,
at that moment, in sight of the first station, he resumed.

"Let her get up here, if she wants to; I can ride inside. I don't want
to be hard on her; but mind, if you breathe a word to her about my being
an officer, I'll arrest you on suspicion. Let every tub stand on its own
bottom. If she's guilty, you can't help her, and don't want to, either;
if she's innocent, she'll come out all right, never fear. Are you on the
square, now?"

"Have you got a warrant?" asked Sam, in a low tone, as he wound the
lines around the break, previous to getting down.

"You bet! but I'm in no hurry to serve it. Piney-woods station 'ill do
just as well. Telegraph office there."

Mr. Rice was not in any haste this morning, being, as he said, ahead of
time. He invited Mrs. Page to take her usual place on the box, telling
her the gentleman had concluded to go inside; and brought her a glass of
water from the bar. While he was returning the glass, the passengers,
including him of the outside, being busied assuaging their thirst with
something stronger than water, a rattle of wheels and a clatter of hoofs
was heard, and, lo! Mrs. Dolly Page was discovered to be practicing her
favorite accomplishment of driving six-in-hand!

When the "outside" recovered from his momentary surprise, he clapped his
hand on the shoulder of Mr. Rice, and said, in a voice savage with spite
and disappointment:

"I arrest you, sir."

"Arrest and be d----d!" returned Sam. "If you had done your duty, you'd
have arrested _her_ while you had the chance."

"That's so--your head is level; and if you'll assist me in getting on to
Piney-woods station in time to catch the run-away--for she can't very
well drive beyond that station--I'll let you off."

"You'll wait till I'm on, I reckon. My horses can't go on that errand,
and you darsn't take the up-driver's team. Put that it your pipe and
smoke it, old smarty!"--and Sam's eyes emitted steel-blue lightnings,
though his face wore a fixed expression of smiling.

Upon inquiry, it was ascertained that horses might be procured a mile
back from the station; and, while the baffled officer, and such of the
passengers as could not wait until next day, went in pursuit of them,
Sam mounted one of the "cayuses," and made what haste he could after the
coach and Wells, Fargo & Company's express-box. Within a mile or less of
Piney-woods Station, he met the keeper, the grooms, and an odd man or
two, that chanced to have been about the place, all armed to the teeth,
who, when they saw him, halted in surprise.

"Why, we reckoned you was dead," said the head man, with an air of
disappointment.

"Dead?" repeated Sam. "Have you seen my coach?"

"That's all right, down to the station; and the plucky gal that druv it
told us all about the raid the 'road-agents' made on you. Whar's the
passengers? any of 'em killed?"

"Passengers are all right. Where is Mrs. Page?"

"She cried, an' tuk on awful about ye; an' borrered a hoss to ride right
on down the road to meet the other stage, an' let 'em know what's up."

"She did, did she?" said Sam, very thoughtfully. "Waal, that _is_ odd.
Why, she ran away with my team--that's what she did; and it's all a hoax
about the 'road-agents.' The passengers are back at the other station."

Sam had suddenly become "all things to all men," to a degree that
surprised himself. He was wrong about the horse, too, as was proven by
its return to its owner four days after. By the same hand came the
following letter to Mr. Samuel Rice:

    "DEAR MR. RICE: It was so good of you! I thank you more than I
    can say. I wish I could set myself right in your eyes, for I prize
    your friendship dearly--dearly; but I know that I cannot. It has not
    been all my fault. I was married to a bad, bad man, when I was only
    fifteen. He has ruined my life; but now he is dead, and I need not
    fear him. I _will_ hereafter live as a good woman should live. The
    tears run down my cheeks as I write you this farewell--as they did
    that day when I saw that sweet woman and her babe at the farm-house
    gate; and knew what was in your thought. Heaven send you such a wife.
    Good-bye, dear Mr. Rice, good-bye.

    "DOLLY PAGE!"

There are some men, as well as women, in this world, who could figure in
the _role_ of _Evangeline_, who have tender, loyal, and constant hearts.
Such a one was the driver of the Lucky-dog stage. But, though he sat on
that box for two years longer, and scrutinized every dark-eyed,
sweet-voiced lady-passenger who rode in his coach during that time,
often with an intense longing for a sight of the face he craved--it
never came. Out of the heaven of his life that star had vanished
forever, and nothing was left him but a soiled photograph, and a
tear-stained letter, worn with frequent folding and unfolding.


EL TESORO.


"Wimmen nater is cur'us nater, that I'll allow. But a feller kind o'
hankers arter 'em, fur all that. They're a mighty handy thing to hev
about a house."

The above oracular statement proceeded from the parched and puckered
lips of Sandy-haired Jim--one of the many "hands" employed on the
immense Tesoro Rancho, which covered miles of valley, besides extending
up on to the eastern flank of the Coast Range, and taking in
considerable tracts of woodland and mountain pasture. Long before, when
it acquired its name, under Spanish occupancy, there had been a rumor of
the existence of the precious metals in the mountains which formed a
portion of the grant; hence, its name, Tesoro, signifying _treasure_.
All search for, or belief in, gold mines, had been abandoned, even
before the land came into the possession of American owners, and now was
only spoken of in the light of a Spanish legend; but the name was
retained, partly as a geographical distinction of a large tract of
country, though it was sometimes called the Edwards Ranch, after its
present proprietor, and after the American fashion of pronunciation.

John Edwards had more than once said, in hearing of his men, that he
would give half the proceeds of the mine and an interest in the ranch,
to any one who would discover it and prove it to be of value; a remark
which was not without weight, especially with the herders and shepherds,
whose calling took them into the mountains a considerable portion of the
year. But as the offer of the proprietor never seemed to assume the air
of a business proposition, the men who might have been inflamed by it
with a prospecting fever, held in check their desire to acquire sudden
riches, and never looked very sharp at the "indications," which it was
easy sometimes to imagine they had found. But that is neither here nor
there with Sandy-haired Jim, who was not a cattle-herder, nor yet a
shepherd, but farmer or teamster, as the requirement was, at different
seasons of the year.

He was expressing himself concerning John Edwards' sister, who, just one
year ago, had come to set up domesticity in the house of her brother;
whereas, previous to her advent, John had "bach'd it" on the ranch, with
his men, for four or five years. Jim, and the chum to whom his remarks
were addressed, were roosting on a fence, after the manner of a certain
class of agriculturists, hailing usually from Missouri, and most
frequently from the county of Pike.

The pale December sunshine colored with a soft gold the light morning
haze which hung over the valley in which lay the Tesoro Rancho. In spite
of the year of drought which had scorched up the grain-fields, and given
a character of aridity to the landscape, it had a distinctive soft
beauty of tint and outline, seen in the favoring light we have
mentioned. Of all the fascinating pictures we remember to have seen, the
most remarkable was one of a desert scene, with nothing but the
stretches of yellow sand and the golden atmosphere for middle distance
and background, and, for a foreground, a white tent, with camels and
picturesquely costumed Arabs grouped before it. There was the sense of
infinite distance in it which is so satisfying to the mind, which the
few figures and broken lines intensified; and there was that witching
warmth and mellowness of coloring which does not belong to landscapes
where green and gray hues predominate.

Having said thus much about a picture, we have explained why Californian
views, even in our great, almost treeless valleys, grow so into our
hearts and imaginations, after the first dash of disappointment at not
finding them like the vernal vales of New England or central New York.
But Tesoro Rancho was not treeless. Great spreading oaks furnished just
the necessary dark-green tones in the valley landscape; and the
mountain-sides had multifarious shades of color, furnished by rocks and
trees, by shadows, and by the atmosphere itself.

It was no wonder, then, that sandy-haired Jim, sitting on a rail-fence,
in an attitude more curious than graceful, cast his glance often
unconsciously over the far valley-reaches, and up the mountain-sides,
with a dim perception of something pleasant in the view which his
thought took no cognizance of. In fact, for the last minute or two, his
gaze had been a silent one; and any observer might have pondered,
considering the sharpness of the perch beneath him, whether he might not
be making up his mind to descend from it as soon as his slow-working
mentality had had time to convey the decision of his brain to his
muscles.

At all events, that was what he did in answer to our mental query,
taking up the thread of his discourse where it was broken off, as
follows:

"Miss Edwards, neow (thar she is, a-comin down from the mount'in, with
her arms full of them 'zalias she's so fond of), she's a mighty peart
kind of a gal, and wuth a heap more to keep a man's house in good shape
than one o' them soft-lookin' Chinee. Them's my sentiments."

"That's _so_," responded his chum, seeming constitutionally disinclined
to a longer sentence.

"John Edwards has tuk to dressin' hisself nicer, and fixin' up the place
as he didn't used to when he bach'd it, I can tell ye! When I see her
bringin' her pianny, and her picturs, and books, and sich like traps, I
just told myself, 'Neow, John Edwards has got a pretty passel of trash
on his hands, I veow.' And I ment _her_ as well as the other
fol-de-rols. But, you bet your life, she's got more sense, two to one,
than ary one of us! It was a lucky day for Edwards when she came onto
this ranch, sure's you're born."

What further this equally philosophical and devoted admirer of Miss
Edwards might have said on this, to him, evidently interesting topic,
had he not been interrupted, will never be known. For the lady herself
appeared upon the scene, putting an end to her own praises, and
discovering to us, upon nearer view, that she added youth and grace, if
not absolute beauty, to her other qualities.

Checking the rapid lope of her horse, as she came near where the men
were standing, in attitudes of frank, if awkward, deference, she saluted
them with a cheerful "Good-morning," and drew rein beside them.

"Take Brownie by the head, and walk a little way with me, if you please,
James. I have something I wish to say to you," was the lady's low-voiced
command. A certain flush and pleased expression on honest Jim's ruddy
countenance reminded her instantly of the inherent vanity of man, and
when she next addressed her attendant it was as "Mr. Harris," for such,
indeed, was the surname of our lank Missourian, though not many of his
associates had ever heard it.

"How long have you been on this place, Mr. Harris?"

"Near onto six year, Miss Edwards," replied Jim.

"Did you know Mr. Charles Erskine, my brother's former partner?"

"Just as well as I know your brother, Miss."

"What became of him, after he left this place?"

"I couldn't rightly say, miss. Some said he went to the mines, up in
Idaho, and other folks said they'd seen him in 'Frisco: but I don't know
nary thing about him."

"He must be found, Mr. Harris. Do you think you could find him, if I
were to send you on such a mission? It is a very important one, and it
is not every one I would intrust it to."

The flush and the pleased look returned to Jim's face. "I'd do the best
I could, miss; and, mebbe, I'd do as well as another."

"That is what I was thinking, Mr. Harris. You have been a long time
here, and you are prompt and capable about your own business; so I
concluded I could trust you with mine. I am sure I was quite right."

Jim was going on to "swar she was," when Miss Edwards interrupted him,
to enlighten him further as to the requirements of "her business:" "I do
not wish my brother to know what errand I send you on. They had a
dreadful quarrel once, I believe; and he might not agree with me as to
the wisdom of what I am about to do. It will, therefore, be necessary
for you to ask John's permission to go on a visit to San Francisco, as
if it was for yourself you were going. The drought has left so little to
do that you can be spared, without embarrassment, until the rains begin.
I am going to have a grand festival at Christmas, and I would like you
to be home before that time. I will explain further when you have got
John's consent to your absence. Come to the house after, and ask if I
have any commission for you."

When Miss Edwards cantered off, leaving him alone in the road, Jim was
in a state of pleased bewilderment, not unmixed with an instinctive
jealousy.

"I do wonder, neow, what she wants with Charlie Erskine. He was a
powerful nice feller, and smart as lightnin'; but, somehow, he an'
Edwards never could hitch hosses. Erskine allus went too fast for steady
John, an' I doubt ef he didn't git him into some money troubles. I'd
like to know, though, what that girl's got to do about it. Wonder ef she
knowed him back in the States. Wimmen is cur'us, sure enough."

Jim's suggestion was the true one. Miss Edwards had known Charles
Erskine "back in the States," and when they parted last, it had been as
engaged lovers. When she left her home in the East to join her brother,
a speedy marriage with him had been in contemplation. But how often did
it happen, in old "steamer times," that wives left New York to join
husbands in San Francisco, only to find, on arrival at the end of a long
voyage, the dear ones hidden from sight in the grave, or the false ones
gone astray! And so it happened to Mary Edwards, that, when she set foot
on California soil, no lover appeared to welcome her, and her trembling
and blushing were turned to painful suspense and secret bitter tears.

Her brother had vouchsafed very little explanation; only declaring
Charles Erskine a scoundrel, who had nearly ruined him, and swearing he
should never set foot on Tesoro Rancho until every dollar of
indebtedness was paid. Poor Mary found it hard settling into a place so
new, and duties so unaccustomed; but her good sense and good spirits
conquered difficulties as they arose, until now she was quite inclined
to like the new life for its own sake. Her brother was kind, and
gathered about her every comfort and many luxuries; though, owing to
embarrassments into which Erskine had drawn him, and to the losses of a
year of drought, his purse was not overflowing. Such was the situation
of affairs on the December morning when our story opens.

Miss Edwards mentioned to her brother, during the day, that James Harris
had spoken of going to the city, and that she had some commissions for
him to perform. She had made up her mind to discountenance the heathen
habits into which everybody on the ranch had fallen. She had done all
she could to keep the men from going to bull-fights on the Sabbath, and
had offered to read the morning service, if the men would attend; and
now she was going to celebrate Christmas, though she realty did believe
that the people who never saw snow forgot that Christ was ever born! Yet
was he not born in a country very strongly resembling this very one
which ignored him?

John smiled, and offered no opposition; only bidding her remember not to
make her commissions to the city very expensive ones, and suggesting,
that, since she meant to be gay, she had better send some invitations to
certain of their friends.

"By the way John, do you know where Charles Erskine is?" Miss Edwards
asked, with much forced composure.

"The last I heard of him he was in San Francisco, lying dangerously
ill," answered John coldly.

"Oh, John!"

"Mary, you must hope nothing from that man. Don't waste your sympathies
on him, either; he'll never repay you the outgo."

"Tell me just one thing, John: Was Charles ever false to me? Tell me the
truth."

"I think he kept good faith with you. It is not that I complain of in
his conduct. The quarrel is strictly between us. He can never come here,
with my consent."

"But I can go to him," said Miss Edwards, very quietly.

And she did go--with Sandy-haired Jim for an escort, and her brother's
frowning face haunted her.

"If all is right," she said to him, at the very last, "I will be back to
keep Christmas with you. Think as well as you can of me, John,
and--good-by."

It will be seen, that, whatever Miss Edwards' little, womanly plan of
reconciliation had been, it was, as to details, all changed by the
information John had given her. What next she would do depended on
circumstances. It was, perhaps, a question of life and death. The long,
wearying, dusty stage-ride to San Francisco, passed like a disagreeable
dream; neither incident of heat by day, nor cold by night, or influence
of grand or lovely scenes, seemed to touch her consciousness. James
Harris, in his best clothes and best manners--the latter having a
certain gentle dignity about them that was born of the occasion--sat
beside her, and ministered assiduously to those personal wants which she
had forgotten in the absorption of her painful thoughts.

What Jim himself thought, if his mental processes could be called
thinking, it would be difficult to state. He was dimly conscious that in
his companion's mind there was a heavy trouble brooding; and conscious,
also, of a desire to alleviate it, as far as possible, though in what
way that might be done, he had not the remotest idea. There seemed an
immense gulf between her and him, over which he never could reach to
proffer consolation; and while he blindly groped in his own mind for
some hint of his duty, he was fain to be content with such personal
attentions as defending her from heat and cold, dust and fatigue, and
reminding her that eating and drinking were among the necessary
inconveniences of this life. After a couple of days spent in revolving
the case hopelessly in his brain, his thoughts at length shaped
themselves thus:

"Waal, neow, 'taint no concern of mine, to be sure; but I'm beound to
see this gal threough. She's captain of this train, an' only got ter
give her orders. I'll obey 'em, ef they take me to thunder. That's so, I
veow!" After which conclusion of the whole matter, Jim appeared more at
his ease in all respects. In truth, the most enlightened of us go to
school to just such mental struggles, with profit to our minds and
manners.

Arrived at San Francisco, Miss Edwards took quarters at a hotel,
determined before reporting herself to any of her acquaintance to first
find whether Charles Erskine was alive, and, if so, where he could be
found. What a wearisome search was that before traces of him were
discovered, in a cheap boarding-house, in a narrow, dirty street. And
what bitter disappointment it was to learn that he had gone away some
weeks before, as soon as he was able to be moved. To renew the search in
the city, to send telegrams in every direction, was the next effort,
which, like the first, proved fruitless; and, at the end of ten days
Miss Edwards made a few formal calls on her friends, concluded some
necessary purchases, and set out on her return to Tesoro Rancho,
exhausted in mind and body.

If Jim was careful of her comfort before, he was tender toward her now;
and the lady accepted the protecting care of the serving-man with a dull
sense of gratitude. She even smiled on him faintly, in a languid way,
but in a way that seemed to him to lessen the distance between them.
Jim's education had been going on rapidly during the last ten days. He
seemed to himself to be quite another man than the one who sat on the
fence with Missouri Joe, less than two weeks agone.

Perhaps Miss Edwards noticed the change, and innocently encouraged him
to aspire. We must not blame her if she did. This is what woman's
education makes of her. The most cultured women must be grateful and
flattering toward the rudest men, if circumstances throw them together.
Born to depend on somebody, they must depend on their inferiors when
their superiors are not at hand; must, in fact, assume an inferiority to
those inferiors. If they sometimes turn their heads with the dangerous
deference, what wonder!

Secure in the distance between them, Miss Edwards assumed that she could
safely defer to Sandy-haired Jim, if, as it seemed, he enjoyed the sense
of being her protector. Even had he been her equal, she would have said
to herself, "He knows my heart is breaking for another, and will respect
my grief." In this double security, she paid no heed to the devotion of
her companion, only thinking him the kindest and most awkward of good
and simple-minded men. That is just what any of us would have thought
about Sandy-haired Jim, gentle readers.

John Edwards received his sister with a grave kindliness, which
aggravated her grief. He would not ask her a question, nor give her the
smallest opportunity of appealing to his sympathies. She had undertaken
this business without his sanction, and without his sympathy she must
abide the consequences. Toward her, personally, he should ever feel and
act brotherly; but toward her foolish weakness for Erskine, he felt no
charity. He was surprised and pleased to see that his sister's spirit
was nearly equal to his own; for, though visibly "pale and pining,"
after the absurd fashion of women, she went about her duties and
recreations as usual, and prosecuted the threatened preparations for
Christmas with enthusiasm.

In some of these, it was necessary to employ the services of one of the
men, and Miss Edwards, without much thought of why, except that she was
used to him, singled out Jim as her assistant. To her surprise, he
excused himself, and begged to substitute Missouri Joe.

"You see, Miss Edwards, I've been a long time meanin' to take a trip
into the mount'ins. I allow it'll rain in less nor a week, an' then
it'll be too late; so ef you'll excuse me this onct, I'll promise to be
on hand next time, sure."

"Oh, certainly, Mr. Harris; Joe will do very well, no doubt; and there
is no need for you to make excuses. I thought you would like to assist
about these preparations, and I am sure you would, too; but go, by all
means, for, as you say, it must rain very soon, when it will be too
late."

"Thar's nothing I'd like better nor stayin' to work for you, Miss
Edwards," answered Jim, with some appearance of confusion; "but this
time I'm obleeged to go--I am, sure."

"Well, good-by, and good luck to you, Mr. Harris," Miss Edwards said,
pleasantly.

"Ef she only knowed what I'm a goin' fur!" muttered Jim to himself, as
he went to "catch up" his horse, and pack up two or three days' rations
of bread and meat. "But I ain't goin' to let on about it to a single
soul. It's best to keep this business to myself, I reckon. 'Peared like
'twas a hint of that kind she give me, the other day, when she said,
'The gods help them that help themselves, Mr. Harris.' Such a heap o'
sense as that gal's got! She's smarter'n John Edwards and me, and
Missouri Joe, to boot: but I'm a-gainin' on it a leetle--I'm a-gainin'
on it a leetle," concluded Jim, slowly, puckering his parched and
sunburnt lips into a significant expression of mystery.

What it was he was "gainin' on," did not appear, for the weight of his
thoughts had brought him to a dead-stand, a few feet from the fence, on
the hither side of which was the animal he contemplated riding. At this
juncture of entire absence of mind, the voice of John Edwards, hailing
him from the road, a little way off, dissolved the spell:

"I say, Jim," hallooed Edwards; "if you discover that mine, I will give
you half of it, and an interest in the ranch."

The words seemed to electrify the usually slow mind to which the idea
was addressed. Turning short about, Jim, in a score of long strides,
reached the fence separating him from Edwards.

"Will you put that in writin'?"

"To be sure, I will," answered John, nodding his head, with a puzzled
and ironical smile.

"I'll go to the house with ye, an' hev it done to onct," said Jim,
sententiously. "I hev about an hour to spar, I reckon."

John Edwards was struck by the unusual manner of the proverbially
deliberate man, who had served him with the same unvarying "slow and
sure" faithfulness for years; but he refrained from comments. Jim, in
his awkward way, proved to be more of a man of business than could have
been expected.

"I want a bond fur a deed, Mr. Edwards. That's the best way to settle
it, I reckon."

"That is as good a way as any; the discovery to be made within a certain
time."

"An' what interest in the ranch, Mr. Edwards?"

"Well, about the ranch," said John, thoughtfully, "I don't want to run
any risk of trading it off for nothing, and there will have to be
conditions attached to the transfer of any portion of that more than the
one of discovery of the mine. Let it be this way: that on the mine
proving by actual results to be worth a certain sum--say $50,000--the
deed shall be given to half the mine and one-third interest in the
ranch; the supposition being, that, if it is proved to be worth $50,000,
it is probably worth four times or ten times that amount."

"That's about it, I should say," returned Jim. "It's lib'ral in you, any
way, Mr. Edwards."

"The truth is, Harris," said Edwards, looking him steadily in the eye,
"I am in a devil of a pinch, that's the truth of it; and I am taking
gambling chances on this thing. I only hope you may earn your third of
the ranch. I'll not grudge it to you, if you do."

"Thank ye, sir. An' when them papers is made eout, I'll be off."

John handed him his papers half an hour afterward, which Jim prudently
took care to have witnessed. Miss Edwards being called in, signed her
name.

"So, this is what takes you to the mountains, Mr. Harris? I'm sure I
wish you good luck."

"You did that afore, miss; an' it came, right on the spot."

"I must be your 'wishing fairy,'" said she, laughing.

"I'll bring you a Christmas present, Miss Edwards, like as not," Jim
answered, coloring with delight at the thought.

"I hope you may. Thank you for the intention, any way."

"Are you going all alone, Harris?" asked Edwards, as he accompanied him
a short distance from the house. "It is not quite safe going alone, is
it? Have you any heirs, supposing you lose yourself or break your neck?"

Once more Jim was electrified with an idea. His light, gray eyes turned
on his questioner with a sudden flash of intelligence:

"I mought choose my heir, I reckon."

"Certainly."

"Mought we go back to the house, an' make a will?"

"Aren't you afraid turning back so often may spoil your luck?" asked
Edwards, laughing.

"Ef you think so, I'll never do it," answered Jim, soberly. "But I'll
tell you, onct fur all, who it is shall be my heir if any thing chance
me, an' I'll expect you'll act on the squar: that person is Miss Mary
Edwards, your own sister, an' you'll not go fur to dispute my will?"

"I've no right to dispute your will, whether I approve of it or not.
There will be no proof of it, however, and I could not make over your
property to my sister, should there be other heirs with a natural and
rightful claim to it. But you are not going to make your will just yet,
Harris; so, good-by. You'll be home on Christmas?"

"I reckon I will."

John Edwards turned back to the house, and to banter his sister on Jim
Harris's will, while that individual went about the business of his
journey. His spirits were in a strange state of half-elation,
half-depression. The depression was a natural consequence of the talk
about a will, and the elation was the result of a strong and sudden
faith which had sprung up in him in the success of his undertaking, and
of the achievements of every kind it would render possible.

"She's my 'wishin' fairy,' she said, an' she wished me luck twice. I got
the first stroke of it when John Edwards called to me across the field.
I've got him strong on that; an' I war a leetle surprised, too. He
wanted to make me look sharp, that's clar as mud. I'll look sharp, you
bet, John Edwards! Didn't her hand look purty when she wrote her name?
I've got her name to look at, any way." And at this stage of his
reverie, Jim drew from an inner breast-pocket the bond which Miss
Edwards had witnessed, and, after gazing at the signature for a moment
with moveless features, gave a shy, hasty glance all round him, and
pressed his parched and puckered lips on the paper.

The sentiment which caused this ebullition of emotion in Sandy-haired
Jim was one so dimly defined, so little understood, and so absolutely
pure in its nature, that had Miss Edwards been made aware of it, she
could only have seen in it the touching tribute which it was to abstract
womanliness--to the "wimmen nater," of which Jim was so frank an
admirer. The gulf which was between them had never yet been crossed,
even in imagination, though it is presumable; that, unknown to himself,
Jim was trembling on the verge of it at this moment, dragged thither by
the excitement of prospective wealth and the possibilities involved in
it, and by the recollection of the pleasant words and smiles of this, to
him, queen of women.

After this gush of romance--the first and only one Jim had ever been
guilty of--he returned the document to his pocket, and, with his
customary deliberation, proceeded to catch and mount his horse, and
before noon was on his way across the valley, toward that particular
gorge in the mountain where _el tesoro_ was supposed to be located. John
Edwards stood in the house door watching him ambling over the waste,
yellow plain, until Jim and his horse together appeared a mere speck in
the distance, when he went to talk over with his sister the late
transaction, and make some jesting remarks on the probability of the
desired discovery.

The days sped by, and there remained but two before Christmas. John and
his sister were consulting together over the arrangement of some
evergreen arches and wreaths of bay-leaves. Miss Edwards was explaining
where the floral ornaments should come in, where she would have this
picture, and where that, and how it would be best to light the rooms.

"I confess, John," she said, sitting down to braid the scarlet berries
of the native _arbutus_ into a wreath with the leaves of the California
nutmeg, "that I can not make it seem like winter or like Christmas, with
these open doors, these flowers, and this warm sunlight streaming in at
the windows. I do wish we could have a flurry of snow, to make it seem
like the holidays."

"Snow is out of the question; but I should be thankful for a good
rain-storm. If it does not rain soon, there will be another failure of
crops next year in all this part of the country."

"And then we should have to 'go down into Egypt for corn,' as the
Israelites used to. Do you feel very apprehensive, John?"

Before John could reply, his attention was diverted by a strange
arrival. Dismounting from Jim's horse was a man whom he did not at once
recognize, so shabby were his clothes, so worn and haggard his
appearance. With a feeling of vague uneasiness and curiosity, he
sauntered toward the gate, to give such greeting as seemed fit to the
stranger who came in this guise, yet riding a well-conditioned horse
belonging to one of his own men.

Miss Edwards, who had also recognized the animal, ran, impulsively, to
the door. She saw her brother advance to within a few feet of the
stranger, then turn abruptly on his heel and return toward the house.
The man thus contemptuously received, reeled, as if he would have
fallen, but caught at the gate-post, where he remained, leaning, as if
unable to walk.

"Who is it, John?" asked Miss Edwards, anxiously regarding her brother's
stern countenance; but he passed her, without a word.

A sudden pallor swept over her face, and she looked, for one moment, as
if she might have fainted; then, with a cry of, "Oh, John, John, be
merciful!" she ran after him, and threw her arms about him.

"Let me go, Mary," said he, hoarsely. "If you wish to see Charles
Erskine, you can do as you please. _I_ wash my hands of him."

"But, John, he is ill; he is suffering; he may die--and at your gate!"

"Let him die!"

It was then that the soul of Miss Edwards "stood up in her eyes, and
looked at" her brother. She withdrew her arms and turned mutely toward
the door, out of which she passed, with a proud, resolute, and rapid
tread. Without hesitation she did that which is so hard for a woman to
do--make advances toward the man with whom she had once been in tender
relations, but whose position has, for any reason, been made to appear
doubtful. She went to him, took him by the hand, and inquired, more
tremulously than she meant, what she could do for him.

"Mary!" answered the sick man, and then fainted quite away.

Miss Edwards had him conveyed to her own room, by the hands of Missouri
Joe and the Chinese cook, where she dispensed such restoratives as
finally brought back consciousness; and some slight nourishment being
administered, revealed the fact that exhaustion and famine, more than
disease, had reduced the invalid to his present condition; on becoming
aware of which fact, Miss Edwards grew suddenly embarrassed, and,
arranging everything for his comfort, was about to withdraw from the
apartment, when Erskine beckoned to her, and, fumbling in his pockets,
brought out several pieces of white quartz, thickly studded with yellow
metal, but of the value of which she had little conception.

"Take these to John," he said, "and tell him they are a peace-offering.
They came from _el tesoro_."

"You have seen James Harris; and he has discovered the mine!"

"I have seen no one. I discovered the mine myself."

"But the horse? It was Harris' horse you were riding."

"I did not know it; I found him, fortunately, when I could no longer
walk."

"Poor Charlie," whispered Miss Edwards, moved by that womanly weakness
which is always betraying the sex. She never knew how it was, but her
head sank on the pillow; and, when she remembered it afterward, she was
certain that, in the confusion of her ideas, he kissed her. Then she
fled from the room, and sought her brother everywhere, saying, over and
over, to herself, "Poor Jim! I wonder what has happened to him;" with
tears streaming from her eyes, which she piously attributed to
apprehensions for James Harris.

When John was found, and the "specimens" placed in his hands, he was
first incredulous, and then indignant; for it hurts a proud man to be
forced to change an opinion, or forgive an injury. The pressure of
circumstances being too strong for him, he relented so far as to see
Erskine, and talk over the discovery with him. What more the two men
talked of, never transpired; but Miss Edwards concluded that everything
was settled, as her brother gave orders concerning the entertainment of
his former partner, and looked and spoke with unusual vivacity for the
remainder of the day.

Many conjectures were formed concerning the fate of Sandy-haired Jim, by
the men on the ranch, who generally agreed that his horse would not
leave him, and that, if he were alive, he would be found not far from
the spot where Charles Erskine picked up the animal. From Erskine's
account, it appeared that he had been several weeks in the mountains,
prospecting, before he discovered the mine; by which time he was so
reduced in strength, through hardship and insufficient food, that it was
with difficulty he made his way down to the valley. Just at a time when
to proceed further seemed impossible, and when he had been absent two
days from the mine, he fell in with a riding-horse, quietly grazing, at
the foot of the mountain. Catching and mounting him, he rode, first
along the edge of the valley for some distance, to find, if possibly a
party were encamped there; but finding no one, started for his old home,
riding as long as his strength allowed, and dismounting quite often to
rest. In this way, three days and a half had passed, since the discovery
of the mine. Judging from where the horse was found, Harris must have
gone up on the other side of the ridge or spur, in which _el tesoro_ was
located. At all events, it was decided to send a party to look for him,
as, whether or not any accident had befallen him, he was now without the
means of reaching home; and, to provide for any emergencies, John
ordered the light wagon to be taken along, with certain other articles,
so suggestive of possible pain and calamity, that Miss Edwards felt her
blood chilled by the sight of them.

"He will be so disappointed," she said, "not to have been the discoverer
of the mine. John, you must make him a handsome present, and I will see
what I can do, to show my gratitude for his many kindnesses."

And then, happy in the presence of her lover, and the returning
cheerfulness of her brother, Miss Edwards forgot to give more than a
passing thought to James Harris, while she busied herself in the
preparations for a holiday, which, to her, would be doubly an
anniversary, ever afterward.

The clouds, which had been gathering for a storm, during the past week,
sent down a deluge of rain, on Christmas Eve, making it necessary to
light fires in the long-empty fire-places, and giving a truly festive
glow to the holiday adornments of the Edwards Rancho. The ranch hands
were dancing to the music of the "Arkansas Traveler," in their separate
quarters. John Edwards's half-dozen friends from the city, with two or
three of his sister's, and the now convalescent Charles Erskine, clothed
in a suit of borrowed broadcloth, were making mirth and music, after
their more refined fashion, in Miss Edwards's parlor.

At the hour when, according to tradition, the Bethlehem Babe was born,
Missouri Joe appeared at the door, and made a sign to the master of the
house.

"It's a pity, like," said Joe, softly, "to leave him out thar in the
storm."

"'Him!' Do you mean Harris? How is he?"

"The storm can't hurt him none," continued Joe; "an' it do not look
right to fetch him in yer, nor to 'tother house, no more."

"What is it, John?" Miss Edwards asked anxiously, looking over his
shoulder into the darkness. "Has Harris returned?"

"They have brought him," answered John; "and we must have him in here."

She shrank away, frightened and distressed, while the men brought what
remained of Sandy-haired Jim, and deposited it carefully on a wooden
bench in the hall. There was little to be told. The men had found him at
the foot of a precipice where he had fallen. Beside him was a heavy
nugget of pure gold, which he was evidently carrying when he fell. He
had not died immediately, for in his breast-pocket was found the bond,
with this indorsement, in pencil:

    "I hev lit onto the mine foller mi trail up the kenyon miss Mary
    edwards is mi air so help me God goodby.

    "JAMES HARRIS."

They buried him on Christmas Day; and Miss Edwards, smiling through her
quiet-flowing tears, adorned his coffin with evergreen-wreaths and
flowers. "I am glad to do this for him," she whispered to her lover,
"for if ever there was a heart into which Christ was born at its birth,
it was poor Jim's."


POEMS.


    A PAGAN REVERIE.

    Tell me, mother Nature! tender yet stern mother!
    In what nomenclature (fitlier than another)
    Can I laud and praise thee, entreat and implore thee;
    Ask thee what thy ways be, question yet adore thee.

    Over me thy heaven bends its royal arches;
    Through its vault the seven planets keep their marches:
    Rising, shining, setting, with no change or turning;
    Never once forgetting--wasted not with burning.

    On and on, unceasing, move the constellations,
    Lessening nor increasing since the birth of nations:
    Sun and moon unfailing keep their times and seasons,--
    But man, unavailing, pleads to thee for reasons.

    Why the great dumb mountains, why the ocean hoary--
    Even the babbling fountains, older are than story,
    And his life's duration's but a few short marches
    Of the constellations through the heavenly arches!

    Even the oaks of Mamre, and the palms of Kedar,
    (Praising thee with psalmry) and the stately cedar,
    Through the cycling ages, stinted not are growing,--
    While the holiest sages have not time for knowing.

    Mother whom we cherish, savage while so tender,
    Do the lilies perish mourning their lost splendor?
    Does the diamond shimmer brightlier that eternal
    Time makes nothing dimmer of its light supernal?

    Do the treasures hidden in earth's rocky bosom,
    Cry to men unbidden that they come and loose them?
    Is the dew of dawntide sad because the Summer
    Kissed to death the fawn-eyed Spring, the earlier comer?

    Would the golden vapors trooping over heaven,
    Quench the starry tapers of the sunless even?
    When the arrowy lightnings smite the rocks asunder,
    Do they shrink with frightenings from the bellowing thunder?

    Inconceivable Nature! these, thy inert creatures,
    With their sphinx-like stature, are of man the teachers;
    Silent, secret, passive, endless as the ages,
    'Gainst their forces massive fruitlessly he rages.

    Winds and waves misuse him, buffet and destroy him;
    Thorns and pebbles bruise him, heat and cold annoy him;
    Sting of insect maddens, snarl of beast affrights him;
    Shade of forest saddens, breath of flowers delights him.

    O thou great, mysterious mother of all mystery!
    At thy lips imperious man entreats his history.--
    Whence he came--and whither is his spirit fleeing:
    Ere it wandered hither had it other being:

    Will its subtile essence, passing through death's portal,
    Put on nobler presence in a life immortal?
    Or is man but matter, that a touch ungentle,
    Back again may shatter to forms elemental?

    Can mere atoms question how they feel sensation?
    Or dust make suggestion of its own creation?
    Yet if man were better than his base conditions,
    Could things baser fetter his sublime ambitions?

    What unknown conjunction of the pure etherial,
    With the form and function of the gross material,
    Gives the product mortal? whose immortal yearning
    Brings him to the portal of celestial learning.

    To the portal gleaming, where the waiting sphinxes,
    Humoring his dreaming, give him what he thinks is
    Key to the arcana--plausible equation
    Of the problems many in his incarnation.

    Pitiful delusion!--in no nomenclature--
    Maugre its profusion--O ambiguous nature!
    Can man find expression of his own relation
    To the great procession of facts in creation?

    Fruitless speculating! none may lift the curtain
    From the antedating ages and uncertain
    When what is was not, and tides of pristine being
    Beat on shores forgot, and all, as now, unseeing.

    Whence impelled or whither, or by what volition;
    Borne now here, now thither, in blind inanition.
    Out of this abysmal, nebulous dim distance,
    Haunted by a dismal, phantomic existence,

    Issued man?--a creature without inspiration,
    Gross of form and feature, dull of inclination?
    Or was his primordial self a something higher?
    Fresh from test and ordeal of elemental fire.

    Were these ages golden while the world was younger,
    When the giants olden knew not toil nor hunger?
    When no pain nor malice marred joy's full completeness,
    And life's honeyed chalice rapt the soul with sweetness?

    When the restless river of time loved to linger;
    Ere flesh felt the quiver of death's dissolving finger;
    When man's intuition led without deflection,
    To a sure fruition, and a full perfection.

    Individual man is ever new created:
    What his being's plan is, loosely predicated
    On the circumstances of his sole condition,
    Colored by the fancies borrowed from tradition.

    His creation gives him clue to nothing older:
    Naked, life receives him--wondering beholder
    Of the world about him--and ere aught is certain,
    Time and mystery flout him; and death drops the curtain.

    Man, the dreamer, groping after what he should be,
    Cheers himself with hoping to be what he would be:
    When he hopes no longer, with self-adulation,
    Fancies he was stronger at his first creation:

    Else--in him inhering powers of intellection--
    Death, by interfering with his mind's perfection,
    Itself gives security to restore life's treasure,
    Freed from all impurity and in endless measure.

    Thou, O Nature, knowest, yet no word is spoken.
    Time, that ever flowest, presses on unbroken:
    All in vain the sages toil with proof and question--
    The immemorial ages give no least suggestion.


    PASSING BY HELICON.

      My steps are turned away;
        Yet my eyes linger still,
      On their beloved hill,
        In one long, last survey:
    Gazing through tears that multiply the view,
          Their passionate adieu!

      O, joy-empurpled height,
        Down whose enchanted sides
        The rosy mist now glides,
      How can I loose thy sight?
    How can my eyes turn where my feet must go,
          Trailing their way in woe?

      Gone is my strength of heart;
        The roses that I brought
        From thy dear bowers, and thought
      To keep, since we must part--
    Thy thornless roses, sweeter until now,
          Than round Hymettus' brow.

      The golden-vested bees
        Find sweetest sweetness in--
        Such odors dwelt within
      The moist red hearts of these--
    Alas, no longer give out blissful breath,
          But odors rank with death.

      Their dewiness is dank;
        It chills my pallid arms,
        Once blushing 'neath their charms;
      And their green stems hang lank,
    Stricken with leprosy, and fair no more,
          But withered to the core.

      Vain thought! to bear along,
        Into this torrid track,
        Whence no one turneth back
      With his first wanderer's song
    Yet on his lips, thy odors and thy dews,
          To deck these dwarfed yews.

      No more within thy vales,
        Beside thy plashing wells,
        Where sweet Euterpe dwells
      With songs of nightingales,
    And sounds of flutes that make pale Silence glow,
          Shall I their rapture know.

      Farewell, ye stately palms!
        Clashing your cymbal tones,
        In thro' the mystic moans
      Of pines at solemn psalms:
    Ye myrtles, singing Love's inspired song,
          We part, and part for long!

      Farewell, majestic peaks!
        Whereon my listening soul
        Hath trembled to the roll
      Of thunders that Jove wreaks--
    And calm Minerva's oracles hath heard
          All more than now unstirred!

      Adieu, ye beds of bloom!
        No more shall zephyr bring
        To me, upon his wing,
      Your loveliest perfume;
    No more upon your pure, immortal dyes,
          Shall rest my happy eyes.

      I pass by; at thy foot,
        O, mount of my delight!
        Ere yet from out thy sight,
      I drop my voiceless lute:
    It is in vain to strive to carry hence
          Its olden eloquence.

      Your sacred groves no more
        My singing shall prolong,
        With echoes of my song,
      Doubling it o'er and o'er.
    Haunt of the muses, lost to wistful eyes,
          What dreams of thee shall rise!

      Rise but to be dispelled--
        For here where I am cast,
        Such visions may not last,
      By sterner fancies quelled:
    Relentless Nemesis my doom hath sent--
          This cruel banishment!


    LOST AT SEA.

    A fleet set sail upon a summer sea:
        'Tis now so long ago,
    I look no more to see my ships come home;
    But in that fleet sailed all 'twas dear to me.

    Ships never bore such precious freight as these,
        Please God, to any woe.
    His world is wide, and they may ride the foam,
    Secure from danger, in some unknown seas.

    But they have left me bankrupt on life's 'change;
        And daily I bestow
    Regretful tears upon the blank account,
    And with myself my losses rearrange.

    Oh, mystic wind of fate, dost hold my dower
        Where I may never know?
    Of all my treasure ventured what amount
    Will the sea send me in my parting hour!


    'TWAS JUNE, NOT I.

    "Come out into the garden, Maud;"
      In whispered tones young Percy said:
      He but repeated what he'd read
    That afternoon, with soft applaud:
    A snatch, which for my same name's sake,
      He caught, out of the sweet, soft song,
    A lover for his love did make,
      In half despite of some fond wrong:--
    And more he quoted, just to show
      How still the rhymes ran in his head,
      With visions of the roses red
    That on the poet's pen did grow.

    The poet's spell was on our blood;
      The spell of June was in the air;
    We felt, more than we understood,
      The charm of being young and fair.
    Where everything is fair and young--
      As on June eves doth fitly seem:
    The Earth herself lies in among
      The misty, azure fields of space,
    A bride, whose startled blushes glow
      Less flame-like through the shrouds of lace
    That sweeter all her beauties show.

    We walked and talked beneath the trees--
      Bird-haunted, flowering trees of June--
      The roses purpled in the moon:
    We breathed their fragrance on the breeze--
    Young Percy's voice is tuned to clear
    Deep tones, as if his heart were deep:
    This night it fluttered on my ear
    As young birds flutter in their sleep.
    My own voice faltered when I said
    How very sweet such hours must be
    With one we love. At that word he
    Shook like the aspen overhead:
    "Must be!" he drew me from the shade,
    To read my face to show his own:
    "Say _are_, dear Maud!"--my tongue was stayed;
    My pliant limbs seemed turned to stone.

    He held my hands I could not move--
    The nerveless palms together prest--
    And clasped them tightly to his breast;
    While in my heart the question strove.
    The fire-flies flashed like wandering stars--
    I thought some sprang from out his eyes:
    Surely some spirit makes or mars
    At will our earthly destinies!
    "Speak, Maud!"--at length I turned away:
    He must have thought it woman's fear;
    For, whispering softly in my ear
    Such gentle thanks as might allay
    Love's tender shame; left on my brow,
    And on each hand, a warm light kiss--
    I feel them burn there even now--
    But all my fetters fell at this.

    I spoke like an injured queen:
    It's our own defence when we're surprised--
    The way our weakness is disguised;
    I said things that I could not mean,
    Or ought not--since it was a lie
    That love had not been in my mind:
    'Twas in the air I breathed; the sky
    Shone love, and murmured it the wind.
    It had absorbed my soul with bliss;
    My blood ran love in every vein,
    And to have been beloved again
    Were heavenly!--so I thought till this
    Unlooked for answer to the prayer
    My heart was making with its might,
    Thus challenged, caught in sudden snare,
    Like two clouds meeting on a height,
    And, pausing first in short strange lull,
    Then bursting into awful storm,
    Opposing feelings multiform,
    Struggled in silence: and then full
    Of our blind woman-wrath, broke forth
    In stinging hail of sharp-edged ice,
    As freezing as the polar north,
    Yet maddening. O, the poor mean vice
    We women have been taught to call
    By virtue's name! the holy scorn
    We feel for lovers left love-lorn
      By our own coldness, or by the wall
      Of other love 'twixt them and us!

    The tempest past, I paused. He stood
    Silent,--and yet "Ungenerous!"
    Was hurled back, plainer than ere could
    His lips have said it, by his eyes
      Fire-flashing, and his pale, set face,
      Beautiful, and unmarred by trace
    Of aught save pain and pained surprise.
      --I quailed at last before that gaze,
      And even faintly owned my wrong:
    I said I "spoke in such amaze
      I could not choose words that belong
    To such occasions." Here he smiled,
      To cover one low, quick-drawn sigh:
      "June eves disturb us differently,"
    He said, at length; "and I, beguiled
    By something in the air, did do
      My Lady Maud unmeant offence;
    And, what is stranger far, she too,
    Under the baleful influence
    of this fair heaven"--he raised his eyes,
    And gestured proudly toward the stars--
    "Has done me wrong. Wrong, lady, mars
    God's purpose, written on these skies,
    Painted and uttered in this scene:
    Acknowledged in each secret heart;
    We both are wrong, you say; 'twould mean
    That we too should be wide apart--
    And so, adieu!"--with this he went.

    I sat down whitening in the moon,
    With heat as of a desert noon,
    Sending its fever vehement
    Across my brow, and through my frame--
    The fever of a wild regret--
    A vain regret without a name,
    In which both love and loathing met.

    Was this the same enchanted air
    I breathed one little hour ago?
    Did all these purple roses blow
    But yestermorn, so sweet, so fair?
    Was it _this_ eve that some one said
    "Come out into the garden, Maud?"
    And while the sleepy birds o'erhead
    Chirped out to know who walked abroad,
    Did _we_ admire the plumey flowers
    On the wide-branched catalpa trees,
    And locusts, scenting all the breeze;
    And call the balm-trees our bird-towers?
    Did _we_ recall the "black bat Night,"
    That flew before young Maud walked forth--
    And say this Night's wings were too bright
    For bats'--being feathered, from its birth,
    Like butterflies' with powdered gold:
    Still talking on, from gay to grave,
    And trembling lest some sudden wave
    Of the soul's deep, grown over-bold,
    Should sweep the barriers of reserve,
    And whelm us in tumultuous floods
    Of unknown power? What did unnerve
    Our frames, as if we walked with gods?
    Unless they, meaning to destroy,
    Had made us mad with a false heaven,
    Or drunk with wine and honey given
    Only for immortals to enjoy.

    Alas, I only knew that late
    I'd seemed in an enchanted sphere;
    That now I felt the web of fate
    Close round me, with a mortal fear.
    If only once the gods invite
    To banquets that are crowned with roses;
    After which the celestial closes
    Are barred to us; if in despite
    Of such high favor, arrogant
    We blindly choose to bide our time,
    Rejecting Heaven's--and ignorant
    What we have spurned, attempt to climb
    To heavenly places at our will--
    Finding no path thereto but one,
    Nemesis-guarded, where atone
    To heaven, all such as hopeful still,
    Press toward the mount,--yet find it strewn
    With corses, perished by the way,
    Of those who Fate did importune
    Too rashly, or her will gainsay.
    If _I_ have been thrust out from heaven,
    This night, for insolent disdain,
    Of putting a young god in pain,
    How shall I hope to be forgiven?
    Yet let me not be judged as one
    Who mocks at any high behest;
    My fault being that I kept the throne
    Of a JOVE vacant in my breast,
    And when APOLLO claimed the place
    I was too loyal to my Jove;
    Unmindful how the masks of love
    Transfigure all things to our face.

    Ah, well! if I have lost to fate
    The greatest boon that heaven disposes;
    And closed upon myself the gate
    To fields of bliss; 'tis on these roses,
    On this intoxicating air,
    The witching influence of the moon,
    The poet's rhymes that went in tune
    To the night's voices low and rare;
    To all, that goes to make such hours
    Like hasheesh-dreams. These did defy,
    With contrary fate-compelling power,
    The intended bliss;--'_twas June, not I_.


    LINES TO A LUMP OF VIRGIN GOLD.

    Dull, yellow, heavy, lustreless--
    With less of radiance than the burnished tress,
    Crumpled on Beauty's forehead: cloddish, cold,
    Kneaded together with the common mold!
    Worn by sharp contact with the fretted edges
    Of ancient drifts, or prisoned in deep ledges;
    Hidden within some mountain's rugged breast
    From man's desire and quest--
    Would thou could'st speak and tell the mystery
    That shrines thy history!

    Yet 'tis of little consequence,
    To-day, to know how thou wert made, or whence
    Earthquake and flood have brought thee: thou art here,
    At once the master that men love and fear--
    Whom they have sought by many strange devices,
    In ancient river-beds; in interstices
    Of hardest quartz; upon the wave-wet strand,
    Where curls the tawny sand
    By mountain torrents hurried to the main,
    And thence hurled back again:--

    Yes, suffered, dared, and patiently
    Offered up everything, O gold, to thee!--
    Home, wife and children, native soil, and all
    That once they deemed life's sweetest, at thy call;
    Fled over burning plains; in deserts fainted;
    Wearied for months at sea--yet ever painted
    Thee as the shining Mecca, that to gain
    Invalidated pain,
    Cured the sick soul--made nugatory evil
    Of man or devil.

    Alas, and well-a-day! we know
    What idle dreams were these that fooled men so.
    On yonder hillside sleep in nameless graves,
    To which they went untended, the poor slaves
    Of fruitless toil; the victims of a fever
    Called home-sickness--no remedy found ever;
    Or slain by vices that grow rankly where
    Men madly do and dare,
    In alternations of high hope and deep abysses
    Of recklessnesses.

    Painfully, and by violence:
    Even as heaven is taken, thou wert dragged whence
    Nature had hidden thee--whose face is worn
    With anxious furrows, and her bosom torn
    In the hard strife--and ever yet there lingers
    Upon these hills work for the "effacing fingers"
    Of time, the healer, who makes all things seem
    A half forgotten dream;
    Who smooths deep furrows and lone graves together,
    By touch of wind and weather.

    Thou heavy, lustreless, dull clod!
    Digged from the earth like a base common sod;
    I wonder at thee, and thy power to hold
    The world in bond to thee, thou yellow gold!
    Yet do I sadly own thy fascination,
    And would I gladly show my estimation
    By giving house-room to thee, if thou'lt come
    And cumber up my home;--
    I'd even promise not to call attention
    To these things that I mention!

    "The King can do no wrong," and thou
    Art King indeed to most of us, I trow.
    Thou'rt an enchanter, at whose sovereign will
    All that there is of progress, learning, skill,
    Of beauty, culture, grace--and I might even
    Include religion, though that flouts at heaven--
    Comes at thy bidding, flies before thy loss;--
    And yet men call thee dross!
    If thou art dross then I mistaken be
    Of thy identity.

    Ah, solid, weighty, beautiful!
    How could I first have said that thou wert dull?
    How could have wondered that men willingly
    Gave up their homes, and toiled and died for thee?
    Theirs was the martyrdom in which was planted
    A glorious State, by precious memories haunted:
    Ours is the comfort, ease, the power, the fame
    Of an exalted name:
    Theirs was the struggle of a proud ambition--
    Ours is the full fruition.

    Thou, yellow nugget, wert the star
    That drew these willing votaries from afar,
    'Twere wrong to call thee lustreless or base
    That lightest onward all the human race,
    Emblem art thou, in every song or story,
    Of highest excellence and brightest glory:
    Thou crown'st the angels, and enthronest Him
    Who made the cherubim:
    My reverend thought indeed is not withholden,
    O nugget golden!


    MAGDALENA.

    You say there's a Being all-loving,
      Whose nature is justice and pity;
    Could you say where you think he is roving?
      We have sought him from city to city,
    But he never is where we can find him,
      When outrage and sorrow beset us;
    It is strange we are always behind him,
      Or that He should forever forget us.

    But being a god, he is thinking
      Of the masculine side of the Human;
    And though just, it would surely be sinking
      The God to be thoughtful for woman.
    For him and by him was man made:
      Sole heir of the earth and its treasures;
    An after-thought, woman--the handmaid,
      Not of God, but of man and his pleasures.

    Should you say that man's God would reprove us,
      If we found him and showed him our bruises?
    It is dreary with no one to love us,
      Or to hold back the hand that abuses:
    Man's hand, that first led and caressed us,
      Man's lips, that first kissed and betrayed;--
    If his God could know how he's oppressed us,
      Do you think that we need be afraid?

    For we loved him--and he who stood nearest
      To God, who could doubt or disdain?
    When he swore by that God, and the dearest
      Of boons that he hoped to obtain
    Of that God, that he truly would keep us
      In his heart of hearts precious and only:
    Say, how could we think he would steep us
      In sorrow, and leave us thus lonely?

    But you see how it is: he has left us,
      This demi-god, heir of creation;
    Of our only good gifts has bereft us,
      And mocked at our mad desolation:
    Says that we knew that such oaths would be broken--
      Says we lured him to lie and betray;
    Quotes the word of his God as a token
      Of the law that makes woman his prey.

    And now what shall we do? We have given
      To this master our handmaiden's dower:
    Our beauty and youth, aye, and even
      Our souls have we left in his power.
    Though we thought when we loved him, that loving
      Made of woman an angel, not demon;
    We have found, to our fond faith's disproving,
      That love makes of woman a leman!

    Yes, we gave, and he took: took not merely
      What we gave, for his lying pretences:
    But our whole woman world, that so dearly
      We held by till then: our defences
    Of home, of fair fame; the affection
      Of parents and kindred; the human
    Delight of child-love; the protection
      That is everywhere owed to a woman.

    You say there's a Being all-loving,
      Whose nature is justice and pity:
    Could you say where you think he is roving?
      We have sought him from city to city.
    We have called unto him, our eyes streaming
      With the tears of our pain and despair:
    We have shouted unto him blaspheming,
      And whispered unto him in prayer.

    But he sleeps, or is absent, or lending
      His ear to man's prouder petition:
    And the black silence over us bending
      Scorches hot with the breath of perdition.
    For this fair world of man's, in which woman
      Pays for all that she gets with her beauty,
    Is a desert that starves out the human,
      When her charms charm not squarely with duty.

    For man were we made, says the preacher,
      To love him and serve him in meekness,
    Of man's God is man solely the teacher
      Interpreting unto our weakness:
    He the teacher, the master, dispenser
      Not only of law, but of living,
    Breaks his own law with us, then turns censor,
      Accusing, but never forgiving.

    Do you think that we have not been nursing
      Resentment for wrong and betrayal?
    From our hearts, filled with gall, rises cursing,
      To our own and our masters' dismayal.
    'Tis for this that we seek the all-loving,
      Whose nature is justice and pity;
    And we'll find Him, wherever he's roving,
      In country, in town, or in city.

    He must show us his justice, who made us;
      He must place sin where sin was conceived;
    We must know if man's God will upbraid us
      Because we both loved and believed.
    We must know if man's riches and power,
      His titles, crowns, sceptres and ermine,
    Weigh with God against womanhood's dower,
      Or whether man's guilt they determine.

    It would seem that man's God should restrain him,
      Or else should avenge our dishonor:
    Shall the cries of the hopeless not pain him,
      Or shall woman take all guilt upon her?
    Let us challenge the maker that made us;
      Let us cry to Christ, son of a woman;
    We shall learn if, when man has betrayed us,
      Heaven's justice accords with the human.

    We must know if because we were lowly,
      And kept in the place man assigned us,
    He could seek us with passions unholy
      And be free, while his penalties bind us.
    We would ask if his gold buys exemption,
      Or whether his manhood acquits him;
    How it is that we scarce find redemption
      For sins less than his self-law permits him.

    Do we dare the Almighty to question?
      Shall the clay to the potter appeal?
    To whom else shall we go with suggestion?
      Shall the vase not complain to the wheel?
    God answered Job out of the groaning
      Of thunder and whirlwind and hailing;
    Will he turn a deaf ear to our moaning,
      Or reply to our prayers with railing?

    Did you speak of a Christ who is tender--
      A deity born of a woman?
    Of the sorrowful, God and defender,
      And brother and friend of the human?
    Long ago He ascended to heaven,
      Long ago was His teaching forgotten;
    The lump has no longer the leaven,
      But is heavy, unwholesome and rotten.

    The gods are all man's, whom he praises
      For laws that make woman his creature;
    For the rest, theological mazes
      Furnish work for the salaried preacher.
    In the youth of the world it was better,
      We had deities then of our choosing;
    We could pray, though we wore then a fetter,
      To a GODDESS of binding and loosing.

    We could kneel in a grove or a temple,
      No man's heavy hand on our shoulder:
    Had in Pallas Athene example
      To make womanhood stronger and bolder.
    But the temples are broken and plundered,
      Sacred altars profanely o'erthrown;
    Where the oracle trembled and thundered,
      Are a cavern, a fount, and a stone.

    Yet we would of the Christ hear the story,
      'Twas familiar in days that are ended;
    His humility, purity, glory,
      Are they not into heaven ascended?
    We see naught but scorning and hating;
      We hear naught but threats and contemning:
    For your Christian is good and berating,
      And your sinner is first in condemning.

    Should you say that the Christ would reprove us,
      If we found him and told him our trouble?
    It is fearful with no one to love us,
      And our pain and despair growing double.
    It is mad'ning to feel we're excluded
      From the homes of the mothers that bore us;
    And that man, by no false arts deluded,
      May enter unchallenged before us.

    It is hard to be humble when trodden;
      We cannot be meek when oppressed;
    Nor pure while our souls are made sodden
      With loathing that can't be confessed;
    Or true, while our bread and our shelter
      By a lying pretence is obtained--
    Deceived, in deception we welter;
      By a touch are we evermore stained.

    O hard lot of woman! the creature
      Of a creature whose God is asleep,
    Or gone on a journey. You teach her
      She was made to sin, suffer, and weep;
    We wait for a new revelation,
      We cry for a God of our own;
    O God unrevealed, bring salvation,
      From our necks lift the collar of stone!


    REPOSE.

    I lay me down straight, with closed eyes,
      And pale hands folded across my breast,
    Thinking, unpained, of the sad surprise
      Of those who shall find me thus fall'n to rest;
    And the grief in their looks when they learn no endeavor,
    Can disturb my repose--for my sleep is forever.
    I know that a smile will lie hid in my eyes,
      Even a soft throb of joy stir the pulse in my breast,
    When they sit down to mourning, with tears and with sighs,
      And shudder at death, which to me is but rest.

    So sweet to be parted at once from our pain;
      To put off our care as a robe that is worn;
    To drop like a link broken out of a chain,
      And be lost in the sands by Time's tide overborne:
    And to know at my loss all the wildest regretting,
    Will be as a foot-print, washed out in forgetting.
    To be certain of this--that my faults perish first;
      That when they behold me so calmly asleep,
    They can but forgive me my errors at worst,
      And speak of my praises alone as they weep.

    "Whom the gods love die young," they will say;
      Though they should think it, they will not say so:
    "Whom the world pierces with thorns pass away,
      Grieving, yet asking and longing to go!"
    No, when they see how divine my repose is,
    They'll forget that my-life-path is not over roses;
    And they'll whisper together, with hands full of flowers,
      How always I loved them to wear on my breast;
    And strewing them over my bosom in showers,
      With hands shaken by sobs, leave me softly to rest.

    There is one who will come when the rest are away;
      One bud of a rose will he bring for my hair;
    He knows how I liked it, worn always that way,
      And his fingers will tremble while placing it there.
    Yes, he'll remember those soft June-day closes,
    When the sky was as flushed as our own crimson roses;
    He'll remember the flush on the sky and the flowers,
      And the red on my cheek where his lips had been prest;
    But the throes of his heart in the long, silent hours,
      Will disturb not my dreams, so profoundly I'll rest.

    So, all will forget, what to think of mere pain,
      That the heart now asleep in this solemn repose,
    Had contended with tempests of sorrow in vain,
      And gone down in the strife at the feet of its foes:
    They will choose to be mute when a deed I have done,
    Or a word I have spoke I can no more atone;
    They'll remember I loved them, was faithful and true;
      They'll not say what a wild will abode in my breast;
    But repeat to each other, as if they were new,
      Old stories of what did the loved one at rest.

    Ah! while I lie soothing my soul with this dream,
      The terror of waking comes back to my heart;
    Why is it not as I thus make it seem?
      Must I come back to the world, ere we part?
    Deep was the swoon of my spirit--why break it?
    Why bring me back to the struggles that shake it?
    Alas, there is room on my feet for fresh bruises--
      The flowers are not dead on my brow or my breast--
    When shall I learn "sweet adversity's uses,"
      And my tantalized spirit be truly at rest!


    ASPASIA.

    O, ye Athenians, drunken with self-praise,
      What dreams I had of you, beside the sea,
    In far Miletus! while the golden days
      Slid into silver nights, so sweet to me;
    For then I dreamed my day-dreams sweetly o'er,
      Fancying the touch of Pallas on my brow--
    Libations of both heart and wine did pour,
      And offered up my being with my vow.

    'Twas thus to Athens my heart drew at last
      My life, my soul, myself. Ah, well, I learn
    To love and loathe the bonds that hold me fast,
      Your captive and your conquerer in turn;
    Am I not shamed to match my charms with those
      Of fair boy-beauties? gentled for your love
    To match the freshness of the morning rose,
      And lisp in murmurs like the cooing dove.

    O, men of Athens! by the purple sea
      In far Miletus, when I dreamed of you,
    Watching the winged ships that invited me
      To follow their white track upon the blue;
    'Twas the desire to mate my lofty soul
      That drew me ever like a viewless chain
    Toward Homer's land of heroes, 'til I stole
      Away from home and dreams, to you and pain.

    I brought you beauty--but your _boys_ invade
      My woman's realm of love with girlish airs.
    I brought high gifts, and powers to persuade,
      To charm, to teach, with your philosophers.
    But knowledge is man's realm alone, you hold;
      And I who am your equal am cast down
    Level with those who sell themselves for gold--
      A crownless queen--a woman of the town!

    Ye vain Athenians, know this, that I
      By your hard laws am only made more free;
    Your unloved dames may sit at home and cry,
      But, being unwed, I meet you openly,
    A foreigner, you cannot wed with me;
      But I can win your hearts and sway your will,
    And make your free wives envious to see
      What power Aspasia wields, Milesian still.

    Who would not be beloved of Pericles?
      I could have had all Athens at my feet;
    And have them for my flatterers, when I please;
      Yet, one great man's great love is far more sweet!
    He is my proper mate as I am his--
      You see my young dreams were not all in vain--
    And I have tasted of ineffable bliss,
      If I am stung at times with fiery pain.

    It is not that I long to be a wife
      By your Athenian laws, and sit at home
    Behind a lattice, prisoner for life,
      With my lord left at liberty to roam;
    Nor is it that I crave the right to be
      At the symposium or the Agora known;
    My grievance is, that your proud dames to me
      Came to be taught, in secret and alone.

    They fear; what _do_ they fear? is't me or you?
      Am I not pure as any of them all?
    But your laws are against me; and 'tis true,
      If fame is lowering, I have had a fall!
    O, selfish men of Athens, shall the world
      Remember you, and pass my glory by?
    Nay, 'til from their proud heights your names are hurled,
      Mine shall blaze with them on your Grecian sky.

    Am I then boastful? It is half in scorn
      Of caring for your love, or for your praise,
    As women do, and must. Had I been born
      In this proud Athens, I had spent my days
    In jealousy of boys, and stolen hours
      With some Milesian, of a questioned place,
    Learning of her the use of woman's powers
      Usurped by men of this patrician race.

    Alas! I would I were a child again,
      Steeped in dream langours by the purple sea;
    And Athens but the vision it was then,
      Its great men good, its noble women free:
    That I in some winged ship should strive to fly
      To reach this goal, and founder and go down!
    O impious thought, how could I wish to die,
      With all that I have felt and learned unknown?

    Nay, I am glad to be to future times
      As much Athenian as is Pericles;
    Proud to be named by men of other climes
      The friend and pupil of great Socrates.
    What is the gossip of the city dames
      Behind their lattices to one like me?
    More glorious than their high patrician names
      I hold my privilege of being free!

    And yet I would that they were free as I;
      It angers me that women are so weak,
    Looking askance when ere they pass me by
      Lest on a chance their lords should see us speak;
    And coming next day to an audience
      In hope of learning to resemble me:
    They wish, they tell me, to learn eloquence--
      The lesson they should learn is _liberty_.

    O Athens, city of the beautiful,
      Home of all art, all elegance, all grace;
    Whose orators and poets sway the soul
      As the winds move the sea's unstable face;
    O wonderous city, nurse and home of mind,
      This is my oracle to you this day--
    No generous growth from starved roots will you find,
      But fruitless blossoms weakening to decay.

    You take my meaning? Sappho is no more,
      And no more Sapphos will be, in your time;
    The tree is dead on one side that before
      Ran with such burning sap of love and rhyme.
    Your glorious city is the utmost flower
      Of a one-sided culture, that will spend
    Itself upon itself, 'till, hour by hour,
      It runs its sources dry, and so must end.

    That race is doomed, behind whose lattices
      Its once free women are constrained to peer
    Upon the world of men with vacant eyes;
      It was not so in Homer's time, I hear.
    But Eastern slaves have eaten of your store,
      Till in your homes all eating bread are slaves;
    They're built into your walls, beside your door,
      And bend beneath your lofty architraves.

    A woman of the race that looks upon
      The sculptured emblems of captivity,
    Shall bear a slave or tyrant for a son;
      And none shall know the worth of liberty.
    Am I seditious?--Nay, then, I will keep
      My lesson for your dames when next they steal
    On tip-toe to an audience. Pray sleep
      Securely, and dream well: we wish your weal!

    Why, what vain prattle: but my heart is sore
      With thinking on the emptiness of things,
    And these Athenians, treacherous to the core,
      Who hung on Pericles with flatterings.
    I would indeed I were a little child,
      Resting my tired limbs on the sunny sands
    In far Miletus, where the airs blow mild,
      And countless looms throb under busy hands.

    The busy hand must calm the busy thought,
      And labor cool the passions of the hour;
    To the tired weaver, when his web is wrought,
      What signifies the party last in power?
    But here in Athens, 'twixt philosophers
      Who reason on the nature of the soul;
    And all the vain array of orators,
      Who strove to hold the people in control.

    Between the poets, artists, critics, all,
      Who form a faction or who found a school,
    We weave Penelope's web with hearts of gall,
      And my poor brain is oft the weary tool.
    Yet do I choose this life. What is to me
      Peace or good fame, away from all of these,
    But living death? I do choose liberty,
      And leave to Athens' dames their soulless ease.

    The time shall come, when Athens is no more,
      And you and all your gods have passed away;
    That other men, upon another shore,
      Shall from your errors learn a better way.
    To them eternal justice will reveal
      Eternal truth, and in its better light
    All that your legal falsehoods now conceal,
      Will stand forth clearly in the whole world's sight.


    A REPRIMAND.

    Behold my soul? She sits so far above you
      Your wildest dream has never glanced so high;
    Yet in the old-time when you said, "I love you,"
      How fairly we were mated, eye to eye
    How long we dallied on in flowery meadows,
      By languid lakes of purely sensuous dreams,
    Steeped in enchanted mists, beguiled by shadows,
      Casting sweet flowers upon loitering streams,
    My memory owns, and yours; mine with deep shame,
      Yours with a sigh that life is not the same.

    What parted us, to leave you in the valley
      And send me struggling to the mountain-top?
    Too weak for duty, even love failed to rally
      The manhood that should float your pinions up.
    On my spent feet are many half-healed bruises,
      My limbs are wasted with their heavy toil,
    But I have learned adversity's "sweet uses,"
      And brought my soul up pure through every soil;
    _Have I_ no right to scorn the man's dead power
      That leaves you far below me at this hour?

    Scorn you I do, while pitying even more
      The ignoble weakness of a strength debased.
    Do I yet mourn the faith that died of yore--
      The trust by timorous treachery effaced?
    Through all, and over all, my soul mounts free
      To heights of peace you cannot hope to gain,
    Sings to the stars its mountain minstrelsy,
      And smiles down proudly on your murky plain;
    'Tis vain to invite you--yet come up, come up,
      Conquer your way toward the mountain-top!


    TO MRS. ----.

    I cannot find the meaning out
      That lies in wrong and pain and strife;
    I know not why we grope through grief,
      Tear-blind, to touch the higher life.

    I see the world so subtly fair,
      My heart with beauty often aches;
    But ere I quiet this sweet pain,
      Some cross so presses, the heart breaks.

    To-day, this lovely golden day,
      When heaven and earth are steeped in calm;
    When every lightest air that blows,
      Sheds its delicious freight of balm.

    If I but ope my lips, I sob;
      If but an eyelid lift, I weep;
    I deprecate all good or ill,
      And only wish for endless sleep.

    For who, I ask, has set my feet
      In all these dark and troubled ways?
    And who denies my soul's desire,
      When with its might it cries and prays?

    In my unconscious veins there runs
      Perchance, some old ancestral taint;
    In Eve _I_ sinned: poor Eve and I!
      We each may utter one complaint:--

    One and the same--for knowledge came
      Too late to save _her_ paradise;
    And I my paradise have lost;
      Forsooth because _I_ am not wise.

    O vain traditions! small the aid
      We women gather from your lore:
    Why, when the world was lost, did death
      Not come our children's birth before?

    It had been better to have died,
      Sole prey of death, and ended so;
    Than to have dragged through endless time,
      One long, unbroken trail of woe.

    To suffer, yet not expiate;
      To die at last, yet not atone;
    To mourn our heirship to a guilt,
      Erased by innocent blood alone!

    You lift your hands in shocked surprise;
      You say enough I have not prayed:
    Can prayer go back through centuries,
      And change the web of fate one braid?

    Nay, own the truth, and say that we
      Are but the bonded slaves of doom;
    Unconscious to the cradle came,
      Unwilling must go to the tomb.

    Your woman's hands are void of help,
      Though my soul should be stung to death;
    Could I avert one pang from you,
      Imploring with my latest breath?

    And men!--we suffer any wrong
      That men, or mad, or blind, may do;--
    Let me alone in my despair!
      There is no help for me or you.

    I wait to find the meaning out
      That lies beyond the bitter end;
    Comfort yourself with 'wearying heaven,
      I ask no comfort, oh my friend!


    MOONLIGHT MEMORIES.

    Do thy chamber windows open east,
      Beloved, as did ours of old?
    And do you stand when day has ceased,
      Withdrawn thro' evening's porch of gold,
    And watch the pink flush fade above
      The hills on which the wan moon leans,
    Remembering the sweet girlish love
      That blest this hour in other scenes!

    I see your hand upon your heart--
      I see you dash away the tears--
    It is the same undying smart,
      That touched us in the long-gone years;
    And cannot pass away. You stand
      Your forehead to the window crest,
    And stifle sobs that no command
      Can keep from rising in your breast.

    Dear, balm is not for griefs like ours,
      Nor resurrection for dead hope:
    In vain we cover wounds with flowers,
      That grow upon life's western slope.
    Their leaves tho' bright, are hard, and dry,
      They have no soft and healing dew;
    The pansies of past spring-times lie
      Dead in the shadow of the yew.

    You feel this in your heart, and turn
      To pace the dimness of your room;
    But lo, like fire within an urn,
      The moonlight glows through all the gloom.
    It sooths you like a living touch,
      And spite of the slow-falling tears,
    Sweet memories crowd with oh, so much,
      Of all that girlhood's time endears.

    On nights like this, with such a moon,
      Full shining in a wintry sky;
    Or on the softer nights of June,
      When fleecy clouds fled thought-like by,
    Within our chamber opening east,
      With curtains from the window parted,
    With hands and cheeks together prest,
      We dreamed youth's glowing dreams, light-hearted.

    Or talked of that mysterious love
      That comes like fate to every soul:
    And vowed to hold our lives above,
      Perchance its sorrowful control.
    Alas, the very vow we made,
      To keep our lives from passion free,
    To wiser hearts well had betrayed
      Some future love's intensity.

    How well that youthful vow was kept,
      Is written on a deathless page--
    Vain all regrets, vain tears we've wept,
      The record lives from age to age.
    But one who "doeth all things well,"
      Who made us differ from the throng,
    Has it within his heart to quell
      This torturing pain of thirst, ere long.

    And you, whose soul is all aglow
      With fire Prometheus brought from heaven,
    Shall in some future surely know
      Joys for which high desires are given.
    Not always in a restless pain
      Shall beat your heart, or throb your brow;
    Not always shall you sigh in vain
      For hope's fruition, hidden now.

    Beloved, are your tear-drops dried?
      The moon is riding high above:--
    Though each from other's parted wide,
      We have not parted early love.
    And tho' you never are forgot,
      The moonrise in the east shall be
    The token that my evening thought
      Returns to home, and love and thee!


    VERSES FOR M----.

        The river on the east
    Ripples its azure flood within my sight;
        And, darting from the west,
    Are "sunset arrows," feathered with red light.
        The northern breeze has hung
    His wintry harp upon some giant pine;
        And the pale stars among,
    I see the star I love to name as mine:
        But toward the south I turn my eager eyes--
        Beyond its flushed horizon my heart lies.

        The snow-clad isles of ice,
    Launched by wild Boreas from a northern shore,
        Journey the way my eyes
    Turn with an envious longing evermore--
        Smiling back to the sky
    Its own pink blush, and, floating out of sight,
        Bear south the softest dye
    Of northern heavens, to fade in southern night:--
        My eyes but look the way my joys are gone,
        And the ice-islands travel not alone.

        The untrod fields of snow,
    Glow with the rosy blush of parting day;
        And fancy asks if so
    The snow is stained with sunset far away;
        And if some face, like mine,
    Its forehead pressed against the window-pane,
        Peers northward, with the shine
    Of the pole-star reflected in eyes' rain:
        "Ah yes," my heart says, "it is surely so;"
        And, like a bound bird, flutters hard to go.

        Sad eyes, that, blurred with tears,
    Gaze into darkness, gaze no more in vain
        Whence no loved face appears,
    And no voice comes to lull the heart's fond pain!
        Sad heart! restrain thy throbs,
    For beauty, like a presence out of heaven,
        Rests over all, and robs
    Sorrow of pain, and makes earth seem forgiven:--
        Twilight the fair eve ushers in with grace,
        And rose clouds melt for stars to take their place.


    AUTUMNALIA.

        The crimson color lays
    As bright as beauty's blush along the West;
        And a warm golden haze,
    Promising sheafs of ripe Autumnal days
        To crown the old year's crest.
    Hangs in mid air, a half-pellucid maze,
        Through which the sun at set,
    Grown round and rosy, looks with Bacchian blush,
        For an old wine-god meet--
    Whose brows are dripping with the grape-blood sweet,
        As if his southern flush
    Rejoiced him, in his northern-zone retreat.

        The amber-colored air
    Musical is with hum of tiny things
        Held idly, struggling there,
    As if the golden mist entangled were
        About the viewless wings,
    That beat out music on their gilded snare.

        If but a leaf, all gay
    With Autumn's gorgeous coloring, doth fall,
        Along its fluttering way
    A shrill alarum wakes a sharp dismay,
        And, answering to the call,
    The insect chorus swells and dies away
        With a fine piping noise.
    As if some younger singing notes cried out,
        As do mischievous boys--
    Startling their playmates with a pained voice,
        Or sudden thrilling shout,
    Followed by laughters, full of little joys.

        Perchance a lurking breeze
    Springs, just awakened to its wayward play,
        Tossing the sober trees
    Into a frolic maze of ecstasies,
        And snatching at the gay
    Banners of Autumn, strews them where it please.

        The sunset colors glow
    A second time in flame from out the wood,
        As bright and warm as though
    The vanished clouds had fallen, and lodged below
        Among the tree-tops, hued
    With all the colors of heaven's signal-bow.

        The fitful breezes die
    Into a gentle whisper, and then sleep;
        And sweetly, mournfully,
    Starting to sight, in the transparent sky,
        Lone in the upper deep,
    Sad Hesper pours its beams upon the eye;
        And for one little hour,
    Holds audience with the lesser lights of heaven;
        Then to its western bower
    Descends in sudden darkness, as the flower
        That at the fall of Even
    Shuts its bright eye, and yields to slumber's power.

        Soon, with a dusky face,
    Pensive and proud as an East Indian queen,
        And with a solemn grace,
    The moon ascends, and takes her royal place
        In the fair evening scene;
    While all the reverential stars, apace,
    Take up their march through the cool fields of space,
    And dead is the sweet Autumn day whose close we've seen.


    PALO SANTO.

    In the deep woods of Mexico,
      Where screams the "painted paraquet,"
    And mocking-birds flit to and fro,
      With borrowed notes they half forget;
    Where brilliant flowers and poisonous vines
      Are mingled in a firm embrace,
    And the same gaudy plant entwines
      Some reptile of a poisonous race;
    Where spreads the _Itos'_ icy shade,
      Benumbing, even in summer's heat,
    The thoughtless traveler who hath laid
      Himself to noonday slumbers sweet;--
    Where skulks unseen the beast of prey--
    The native robber glares and hides,--
      And treacherous death keeps watch alway
    On him who flies, or he who bides.

    In these deep tropic woods there grows
    A tree, whose tall and silvery bole
      Above the dusky forest shows,
      As shining as a saintly soul
    Among the souls of sinful men;--
    Lifting its milk-white flowers to heaven,
      And breathing incense out, as when
      The passing saints of earth are shriven.

    The skulking robber drops his eyes,
      And signs himself with holy cross,
    If, far between him and the skies,
      He sees its pearly blossoms toss.
    The wanderer halts to gaze upon
      The lovely vision, far or near,
    And smiles and sighs to think of one
      He wishes for the moment here.

    The Mexic native fears not fang
      Of poisonous serpent, vine, nor bee,
    If he may soothe the baleful pang
      With juices of this "holy tree."

    How do we all, in life's wild ways,
      Which oft we traverse lost and lone,
    Need that which heavenward draws the gaze,
      Some _Palo Santo_ of our own!


    A SUMMER DAY.

        Fade not, sweet day!
        Another hour like this--
        So full of tranquil bliss--
        May never come my way,
    I walk in paths so shadowed and so cold:
        But stay thou, darling hour,
        Nor stint thy gracious power
    To smile away the clouds that me enfold:
        Oh stay! when thou art gone,
        I shall be lost and lone.

        Lost, lone, and sad;
        And troubled more and more,
        By the dark ways, and sore,
        In which my feet are led;--
    Alas, my heart, it was not always so!
        Therefore, O happy day,
        Haste not to fade away,
    Nor let pale night chill all thy tender glow--
        Thy rosy mists, that steep
        The violet hills in sleep--

        Thy airs of gold,
        That over all the plain,
        And fields of ripened grain,
        A shimmering glory hold,--
    The soft fatigue-dress of the drowsy sun;
        Dreaming, as one who goes
        To peace, and sweet repose,
    After a battle hardly fought, and won:
        Even so, my heart, to-day,
        Dream all thy fears away.

        O happy tears,
        That everywhere I gaze,
        Jewel the golden maze,
        Flow on, till earth appears
    Worthy the soft perfection of this scene:
        Beat, heart, more soft and low,
        Creep, hurrying blood, more slow:
    Waste not one throb, to lose me the serene,
        Deep, satisfying bliss
        Of such an hour as this!

        How like our dream,
        Of that delightful rest
        God keepeth for the blest,
        This lovely peace doth seem;--
    Perchance, my heart, He sent this gracious day,
        That when the dark and cold,
        Thy doubtful steps enfold,
    Thou, may'st remember, and press on thy way,
        Nor faint midway the gloom
        That lies this side the tomb.

        All, all in vain,
        Sweet day, do I entreat
        To stay thy wingéd feet;
        The gloom, the cold, the pain,
    Gather me back as thou dost pale and fade;
        Yet in my heart I make
        A chamber for thy sake,
    And keep thy picture in warm color laid:--
        Thy memory, happy day,
        Thou can'st not take away.


    HE AND SHE.

    Under the pines sat a young man and maiden,
    "Love," said he; "life is sweet, think'st thou not so?"
    Sweet were her eyes, full of pictures of Aidenn,--
    "Life?" said she; "love is sweet; no more I know."

    Into the wide world the maid and her lover
    Wandered by pathways that sundered them far;
    From pine-groves to palm-groves, he flitted a rover,
    She tended his roses, and watched for his star.

    Oft he said softly, while melting eyes glistened,
    "Sweet is my life, love, with you ever near:"
    Morning and evening she waited and listened
    For a voice and a foot-step that never came near.

    Fainting at last, on her threshold she found him:
    "Life is but ashes, and bitter," he sighed.
    She, with her tender arms folded around him,
    Whispered--"But love is still sweet;" and so died.


    O WILD NOVEMBER WIND.

    O wild November wind, blow back to me
      The withered leaves, that drift adown the past;
    Waft me some murmur of the summer sea,
      On which youth's fairy fleet of dreams was cast;
    Return to me the beautiful No More--
      O wild November wind, restore, restore!

    November wind, in what dim, loathsome cave,
      Languish the tender-plumed gales of spring?
    No more their dances dimple o'er the wave,
      Nor freighted pinions song and perfume bring:
    Those gales are dead--that dimpling sea is dark;
      And cloudy ghosts clutch at each mist-like bark.

    O wild, wild wind, where are the summer airs
      That kissed the roses of the long-ago?
    Taking them captive--swooned in blissful snares--
      To let them perish. Now no roses blow
    In the waste gardens thou art laying bare:
      Where are my heart's bright roses, where, oh where?

    Thou hast no answer, thou unpitying gale?
      No gentle whisper from the past to me!
    No snatches of sweet song--no tender tale--
      No happy ripple of that summer sea;
    Are all my dreams wrecked on the nevermore?
      O wild November wind, restore, restore!


    BY THE SEA.

    Blue is the mist on the mountains,
      White is the fog on the sea;
    Ruby and gold is the sunset,--
      And Bertha is waiting for me.

    Down on the loathsome sand-beach,
      Her eyes as blue as the mist;
    Her brows as white as the sea-fog,--
      Bertha, whose lips I have kissed.

    Bertha, whose lips are like rubies,
      Whose hair is like coiléd gold;
    Whose sweet, rare smile is tenderer
      Than any legend of old.

    One morn, one noon, one sunset,
      Must pass before we meet;
    O wind and sail bear steady on,
      And bring me to her feet.

    The morn rose pale and sullen,
      The noon was still and dun;
    Across the storm at sunset,
      Came the boom of a signal-gun.

    Who treads the loathsome sand-beach,
      With wet, disordered hair;
    With garments tangled with sea-weed,
      And cheeks more pale than fair?

    O blue-eyed, white-browed maiden,
      He will keep love's tryst no more;
    His ship sailed safely into port--
      But on the heavenward shore.


    POLK COUNTY HILLS.

      November came that day,
      And all the air was gray
      With delicate mists, blown down
    From hill-tops by the south wind's balmy breath;
      And all the oaks were brown
      As Egypt's kings in death;
      The maple's crown of gold
      Laid tarnished on the wold;
    The alder and the ash, the aspen and the willow,
      Wore tattered suits of yellow.

      The soft October rains
      Had left some scarlet stains
    Of color on the landscape's neutral ground;
      Those fine ephemeral things,
      The winged motes of sound,
      That sing the "Harvest Home"
      Of ripe Autumn in the gloam
    Of the deep and bosky woods, in the field and by the river,
      Sang that day their best endeavor.

      I said: "In what sweet place
      Shall we meet face to face,
      Her loveliest self to see--
    Meet Nature at her sad autumnal rites,
      And learn the mystery
      Of her unnamed delights?"
      Then you said: "Let us go
      Where the late violets blow
    In hollows of the hills, under dead oak leaves hiding;--
      We'll find she's there abiding."

      Do we recall that day?
      Has its grace passed away?
      Its tenderest, dream-like tone,
    Like one of Turner's landscapes limned on air--
      Has its fine perfume flown
      And left the memory bare?
      Not so; its charm is still
      Over wood, vale and hill--
    The ferny odor sweet, the humming insect chorus,
      The spirit that before us

      Enticed us with delights
      To the blue, breezy hights.
      O, beautiful hills that stand
    Serene 'twixt earth and heaven, with the grace
      Of both to make you grand,--
      Your loveliness leaves place
      For nothing fairer; fair
      And complete beyond compare.
    O, lovely purple hills, O, first day of November,
      Be sure that I remember!


    WAITING.

    I cannot wean my wayward heart from waiting,
      Though the steps watched for never come anear;
    The wearying want clings to it unabating--
      The fruitless wish for presences once dear.

    No fairer eve e'er blessed a poet's vision;
      No softer airs e'er kissed a fevered brow;
    No scene more truly could be called Elysian,
      Than this which holds my gaze enchanted now.

    And yet I pine;--this beautiful completeness
      Is incomplete, to my desiring heart;
    'Tis Beauty's form, without her soul of sweetness--
      The pure, but chiseled loveliness of art.

    There is no longer pleasure in emotion.
      I envy those dead souls no touch can thrill;
    Who--"painted ships upon a painted ocean,"--
      Seem to be moved, yet are forever still.

    Where are they fled?--they whose delightful voices,
      Whose very footsteps had a charmed fall:
    No more, no more their sound my heart rejoices:
      Change, death, and distance part me now from all.

    And this fair evening, with remembrance teeming,
      Pierces my soul with every sharp regret;
    The sweetest beauty saddens to my seeming,
      Since all that's fair forbids me to forget.

    Eyes that have gazed upon yon silver crescent,
      'Till filled with light, then turned to gaze in mine,
    Lips that could clothe a fancy evanescent,
      In words whose magic thrilled the brain like wine:

    Hands that have wreathed June's roses in my tresses,
      And gathered violets to deck my breast,
    Where are ye now? I miss your dear caresses--
      I miss the lips, the eyes, that made me blest.

    Lonely I sit and watch the fitful burning
      Of prairie fires, far off, through gathering gloom;
    While the young moon, and one bright star returning
      Down the blue solitude, leave Night their room.

    Gone is the glimmer of the silent river;
      Hushed is the wind that sped the leaves to-day;
    Alone through silence falls the crystal shiver
      Of the sweet starlight, on its earthward way.

    And yet I wait, how vainly! for a token--
      A sigh, a touch, a whisper from the past;
    Alas, I listen for a word unspoken,
      And wail for arms that have embraced their last.

    I wish no more, as once I wished, each feeling
      To grow immortal in my happy breast;
    Since not to feel will leave no wounds for healing--
      The pulse that thrills not has no need of rest.

    As the conviction sinks into my spirit
      That my quick heart is doomed to death in life;
    Or that these pangs must pierce and never sear it,
      I am abandoned to despairing strife.

    To the lost life, alas! no more returning--
      In this to come no semblance of the past--
    Only to wait!--hoping this ceaseless yearning
      May, 'ere long, end--and rest may come at last.


    PALMA.

    What tellest thou to heaven,
    Thou royal tropic tree?
    At morn or noon or even,
    Proud dweller by the sea,
    What is thy song to heaven?

    The homesick heart that fainted
    In torrid sun and air,
    With peace becomes acquainted
    Beholding thee so fair--
    With joy becomes acquainted:

    And charms itself with fancies
    About thy kingly race--
    With gay and wild romances
    That mimic thee in grace--
    Of supple, glorious fancies.

    I feel thou art not tender,
    Scion of sun and sea--
    The wild-bird does not render
    To thee its minstrelsy--
    Fearing thou art not tender:

    But calm, serene and saintly,
    As highborn things should be:
    Who, if they love us faintly,
    Make us love reverently,
    Because they are so saintly.

    To be loved without loving,
    O proud and princely palm!
    Is to fancy our ship moving
    With the ocean at dead calm--
    The joy of love is loving.

    Because the Sun did sire thee,
    The Ocean nurse thy youth,
    Because the Stars desire thee,
    The warm winds whisper truth,
    Shall nothing ever fire thee?

    What is thy tale to heaven
    In the sultry tropic noon?
    What whisperest thou at even
    To the dusky Indian Moon--
    Has she sins to be forgiven?

    Keep all her secrets; loyal
    As only great souls are--
    As only souls most royal,
    To the flower or to the star
    Alike are purely loyal.

    O Palma, if thou hearest,
    Thou proud and princely tree!
    Thou knowest that my Dearest
    Is emblemed forth in thee--
    My kingly Palm, my Dearest.

    I am his Moon admiring,
    His wooing Wind, his Star;
    And I glory in desiring
    My Palm-tree from afar--
    Glad as happier lovers are,
    Am happy in desiring!


    MAKING MOAN.

          _I have learned how vainly given_
          _Life's most precious things may be._

                                                --Landon.


        O, Christ, to-night I bring
    A sad, weak heart, to lay before thy feet;
        Too sad, almost, to cling
        Even to Thee; too suffering,
    If Thou shouldst pierce me, to regard the sting;
    Too stunned to feel the pity I entreat
    Closing around me its embraces sweet.

        Shepherd, who gatherest up
    The weary ones from all the world's highways;
        And bringest them to sup
        Of Thy bread, and Thy blessed cup;
    If so Thou will, lay me within the scope
    Only of Thy great tenderness, that rays
    Too melting may not reach me from Thy face.

        Here let me lie, and press
    My forehead's pain out on Thy mantle's hem;
        And chide not my distress,
        For this, that I have loved thee less,
    In loving so much some, whose sordidness
    Has left me outcast, at the last, from them
    And their poor love, which I cannot contemn.

        No, cannot, even now,
    Put Thee before them in my broken heart.
        But, gentle Shepherd, Thou
        Dost even such as I allow
    The healing of Thy presence. Let my brow
    Be covered from thy sight, while I, apart,
    Brood over in dull pain my mortal hurt.


    CHILDHOOD.

    A child of scarcely seven years,
      Light haired, and fair as any lily;
    With pure eyes ready in their tears
      At chiding words, or glances chilly;
    And sudden smiles, as inly bright
      As lamps through alabaster shining,
    With ready mirth, and fancies light,
      Dashed with strange dreams of child-divining:
        A child in all infantile grace,
        Yet with the angel lingering in her face.

    A curious, eager, questioning child,
      Whose logic leads to naive conclusions;
    Her little knowledge reconciled
      To truth amid some odd confusions;
    Yet credulous, and loving much
      The problems hardest for her reason,
    Placing her lovely faith on such,
      And deeming disbelief a treason;
        Doubting that which she can disprove,
        And wisely trusting all the rest to love.

    Such graces dwell beside your hearth,
      And bless you in a priceless pleasure,
    Leaving no sweeter spot on earth
      Than that which holds your household treasure.
    No entertainment ever yet
      Had half the exquisite completeness--
    The gladness without one regret,
      You gather from your darling's sweetness:
        An angel sits beside the hearth
        Where e're an innocent child is found on earth.


    A LITTLE BIRD THAT EVERY ONE KNOWS.

    There's a little bird with a wondrous song--
    A little bird that every one knows--
    (Though it sings for the most part _under the rose_),
    That is petted and pampered wherever it goes,
    And nourished in bosoms gentle and strong.

    This petted bird has a crooked beak
    And eyes like live coals set in its head,
    A gray breast dappled with glowing red--
    DABBLED--not dappled, I should have said,
    From a fancy it has of which I shall speak.

    This eccentricity that I name
    Is, that whenever the bird would sing
    It darts its black head under its wing,
    And moistens its beak in--darling thing!--
    A human heart that is broken with shame.

    Then this cherished bird its song begins--
    Always begins its song one way--
    With two little dulcet words, THEY SAY,
    Carolled in such a charming way
    That the listener's heart it surely wins.

    This sweetest of songsters sits beside
    Every hearth in this Christian land,
    Ever so humble or never so grand,
    Gloating o'er crumbs which many a hand
    Gathers to nourish it, far and wide.

    Over each crumb that it gathers up
    It winningly carols those two soft words
    In the dulcet notes of the sweetest of birds,
    Darting its sharp beak under its wing
    As it might in a ruby drinking-cup.

    A delicate thing is our bird withal
    And owns but a fickle appetite,
    So that old and young take a keen delight
    In serving it ever, day and night,
    With the last gay heart now turned to gall.

    Thus, though a dainty dear, it sings
    In a very well-conditioned way
    A truly wonderful sort of lay,
    Whose burden is ever the same--THEY SAY--
    Darting its dabbled beak under its wings.


    WAYWARD LOVE.

    I leant above your chair last night,
      And on your brow once and again,
    I pressed a kiss as still and light
      As I would have your bosom's pain.
    You did not feel the gentle touch,
      It gave you neither grief nor pleasure,
    Though that caress held, oh, so much,
      Of love and blessing without measure.

    Thus ever when I see you sad,
      My heart toward you overflows;
    But when again you're gay and glad,
      I shrink back into cold repose,
    I know not why I like you best,
      O'erclouded by a passing sorrow--
    Unless because it gives a zest
      To the _insouciance_ of to-morrow.

    You're welcome to my light caress,
      And all the love that with it went;
    To live, and love you any less,
      Would rob me of my soul's content.
    Continue sometimes to be sad,
      That I may feel that pity tender,
    Which grieves for you, and yet is glad
      Of an excuse for love's surrender.


    A LYRIC OF LIFE.

    Said one to me: "I seem to be--
    Like a bird blown out to sea,
    In the hurricane's wild track--
    Lost, wing-weary, beating back
    Vainly toward a fading shore,
    It shall rest on nevermore."

    Said I: "Betide, some good ships ride,
    Over all the waters wide;
    Spread your wings upon the blast,
    Let it bear you far and fast:
    In some sea, serene and blue,
    Succor-ships are waiting you."

    This soul then said: "Would I were dead--
    Billows rolling o'er my head!
    Those that sail the ships will cast
    Storm-waifs back into the blast;
    Omens evil will they call
    What the hurricane lets fall."

    For my reply: "Beneath the sky
    Countless isles of beauty lie:
    Waifs upon the ocean thrown,
    After tossings long and lone,
    To those blessed shores have come,
    Finding there love, heaven, and home."

    This soul to me: "The seething sea,
    Tossing hungry under me,
    I fear to trust; the ships I fear;
    I see no isle of beauty near;
    The sun is blotted out--no more
    'Twill shine for me on any shore."

    Once more I said: "Be not afraid;
    Yield to the storm without a dread;
    For the tree, by tempests torn
    From its native soil, is borne
    Green, to where its ripened fruit
    Gives a sturdy forest-root.

    "That which we lose, we think we choose,
    Oft, from slavery to use.
    Shocks that break our chains, tho' rude,
    Open paths to highest good:
    Wise, my sister soul, is she
    Who takes of life the proffered key."


    FROM AN UNPUBLISHED POEM.

        "Nay, Hylas, I have come
    To where life's landscape takes a western slope,
    And breezes from the occidental shores
    Sigh thro' the thinning locks around my brow,
    And on my cheeks fan flickering summer fires.
    Oh, winged feet of Time, forget your flight,
    And let me dream of those rose-scented bowers
    That lapped my soul in youth's enchanted East!
    It needs no demon-essence of Hasheesh
    To flash _that_ sunrise glory in my eyes!--
    It needs no Flora to bring back those flowers--
    No gay Apollo to sound liquid reeds--
    No muse to consecrate the hills and streams--
    No God or oracle within those groves
    To render sacred all the emerald glooms:
    For here dwelt such bright angels as attend
    The innocent ways of youth's unsullied feet;
    And all the beautiful band of sinless hopes,
    Twining their crowns of pearl-white amaranth;
    And rosy, dream-draped, sapphire-eyed desires
    Whose twin-born deities were Truth and Faith
    Having their altars over all the land.
    Beauty held court within its vales by day,
    And Love made concert with the nightingales
    In singing 'mong the myrtles, starry eves."

        "You are inspired, Zobedia, your eyes
    Look not upon the present summer world,
    But see some mystery beyond the close
    Of this pale blue horizon."

        "Erewhile I wandered from this happy land.
    Crowned with its roses, wearing in my eyes
    Reflections of its shining glorious heaven,
    And bearing on my breast and in my hands
    Its violets, and lilies white and sweet,--
    Following the music floating in the air
    Made by the fall of founts, the voice of streams
    And murmur of the winds among the trees,
    I strayed in reveries of soft delight
    Beyond the bounds of this delicious East.

    "But oh, the splendors of that newer clime!
    It was as if those oriental dreams
    In which my soul was steeped to fervidness,
    Were here transmuted to their golden real
    With added glories for each shape or hue.
    The stately trees wore coronals of flowers
    That swung their censers in the mid-day sun:
    The pines and palms of my delightful east
    Chaunted their wild songs nearer to the stars;
    Even the roses had more exquisite hues,
    And for one blossom I had left behind
    I found a bower in this fragrant land.
    Bright birds, no larger than the costly gems
    The river bedded in their golden sands,
    Sparkle like prismal rain-drops 'mong the leaves;
    And others sang, or flashed their plumage gay
    Like rainbow fragments on my dazzled eyes.
    The sky had warmer teints: I could not tell
    Whether the heavens lent color to the flowers,
    Or but reflected that which glowed in them.
    The gales that blew from off the cloud-lost hills,
    Struck from the clambering vines Eolian songs,
    That mingled with the splashing noise of founts,
    In music such as stirs to passionate thought:
    This peerless land was thronged with souls like mine,
    Straying from East to South, impelled unseen,
    And lost, like mine, in its enchanted vales:--
    Souls that conversed apart in pairs, or sang
    Low breeze-like airs, more tender than sweet words;
    Save here and there a wanderer like myself,
    Dreaming alone, and dropping silent tears,
    Scarce knowing why, upon the little group
    Of Eastern flowers we had not yet resigned:--
    'Till one came softly smiling in my eyes,
    And dried their tears with radiance from his own.

    "At last it came--I knew not how it came--
    But a tornado swept this sunny South,
    And when I woke once more, I stood alone.
    My senses sickened at the dismal waste,
    And caring not, now all things bright were dead,
    That a volcano rolled its burning tide
    In fiery rivers far athwart the land,
    I turned my feet to aimless wanderings.
    The equatorial sun poured scorching beams,
    On my defenceless head. The burning winds
    Seemed drying up the blood within my veins.
    The straggling flowers that had outlived the storm
    Won but a feeble, half-contemptuous smile;
    And if a bird attempted a brief song,
    I closed my ears lest it should burst my brain.
    After much wandering I came at last
    To cooler skies and a less stifling air;
    And finally to this more temperate clime.
    Where every beauty is of milder type--
    Where the simoon nor tempest ever come,
    And I can soothe the fever of my soul
    In the bland breezes blowing from the West."


    NEVADA.

          Sphinx, down whose rugged face
    The sliding centuries their furrows cleave
    By sun and frost and cloud-burst; scarce to leave
          Perceptible a trace
          Of age or sorrow;
    Faint hints of yesterdays with no to-morrow;--
    My mind regards thee with a questioning eye,
          To know thy secret, high.

          If Theban mystery,
    With head of woman, soaring, bird-like wings
    And serpent's tail on lion's trunk, were things
          Puzzling in history;
          And men invented
    For it an origin which represented
    Chimera and a monster double-headed,
          By myths Phenician wedded--

          Their issue being this--
    This most chimerical and wonderous thing
    From whose dumb mouth not even the gods could wring
          Truth, nor antithesis:
          Then, what I think is,
    This creature--being chief among men's sphinxes--
    Is eloquent, and overflows with story,
          Beside thy silence hoary!

          Nevada!--desert waste!
    Mighty, and inhospitable, and stern;
    Hiding a meaning over which we yearn
          In eager, panting haste--
          Grasping and losing,
    Still being deluded ever by our choosing--
    Answer us Sphinx: What is thy meaning double
          But endless toil and trouble?

          Inscrutable, men strive
    To rend thy secret from thy rocky breast;
    Breaking their hearts, and periling heaven's rest
          For hopes that cannot thrive;
          Whilst unrelenting,
    Upon thy mountain throne, and unrepenting,
    Thou sittest, basking in a fervid sun,
          Seeing or hearing none.

          I sit beneath thy stars,
    The shallop moon beached on a bank of clouds--;
    And see thy mountains wrapped in shadowed shrouds,
          Glad that the darkness bars
          The day's suggestion--
    The endless repetition of one question;
    Glad that thy stony face I cannot see,
          Nevada--Mystery!


    THE VINE.

      "Too many clusters weaken the vine"--
      And that is why, on this morn in May,
    She who should walk doth weakly recline
      By the window whose view overlooks the Bay;
    While I and the "clusters" dance in the sun,
      Defying the breeze coming in from the sea,
      Mocking the bird-song and chasing the bee,
    Letting our fullness of mirth over-run,
      While the "Vine" at the window smiles down on our glee.

    If I should vow that these "clusters" are fair,
      So, you would say, are a million more;
    Ah, even jewels a rank must share--
      Not every diamond's a Koh-i-noor!
    Thus when our LILLIAN, needing but wings,
      Plays us the queen of the fairies, we deem
      Grace such as hers a bewildering dream--
    Her laughter, her gestures, a dozen things,
      Furnish our worshiping fondness a theme.

    Or when our ALICE, scarcely less tall,
      And none the less fair, tries her slim baby feet,
    Or a new has lisped, to the pride of us all,
      Smiling, we cry, "was aught ever so sweet?"
    Even wee BERTHA, turning her eyes,
      Searching and slow from one face to another--
    Wrinkling her brow in a comic surprise,
      And winking so soberly at her pale mother,
    For a baby, is wondrously pretty and wise!

    Well, _let_ the "vine" recline in the sun--
      Three such rare "clusters" in three short years,
    Have sapped the red wine in her veins that should run--
      For the choicest of species the gardener fears!
    LILLIAN, queen of the lilies shall be,
      Fair, tall and graceful--queenly in will;
    ALICE a Provence rose--rarely sweet she;
      BERTHA NARCISSA--white daffodil--
    And the "vine," once more strong, shall entwine around the three!


    WHAT THE SEA SAID TO ME.

    One evening as I sat beside the sea,
    A little rippling wave stole up to me,
    And whispered softly, yet impressively,
            The word Eternity:
    I smiled, that anything so small should utter,
    A word the ocean in its wrath might mutter;
    And with a mirthful fancy, vainly strove,
    To suit its cadence to some word of love--
    But all the little wave would say to me,
    Was, over and again, Eternity!

    After a time, the winds, from their dark caves,
    Arose, and wrestled with the swelling waves,
    Shrieking as doth a madman when he raves;
            Yet still Eternity
    Was spoken audibly unto my hearing;
    While foaming billows, their huge crests up-rearing,
    Rushed with a furious force upon the shore,
    That only answered with a sullen roar;
    As if it hoarsely echoed what the sea
    Said with such emphasis--Eternity!

    And by and by, the sky grew dun and dim;
    Soon all was darkness, save the foam's white gleam;
    And all was silence save the sea's deep hymn--
            That hymn Eternity:
    While some dread presence, all the darkness filling,
    Crept round my heart, its healthy pulses chilling;
    Making the night, so awful unto me,
    More fearful with that word Eternity.

    So that my spirit, trembling and afraid,
    Bowed down itself before its God, and prayed
    For His strong arm of terror to be stayed;
            And sighed Eternity
    From its white lips, as the dark sea, subsiding,
    Sank into broken murmurs; and the gliding
    Of the soothed waters seemed once more to me
    The whisper I first heard, Eternity.

    But now I mocked not what the ripple said:
    I only reverently bent my head,
    While the pure stars, unveiled, their lustre shed
            Upon the peaceful sea--
    And the mild moon, with a majestic motion,
    Uprose, and shed upon the murmuring ocean,
    Her calm and radiant glory, as if she
    Knew it the symbol of Eternity.


    HYMN.

    Down through the dark, my God,
      Reach me Thy hand;
    Guide me along the road
      I fail to understand.
    Blindly I grope my way,
      In doubt and fear,
    Uncertain when I pray
      If Thou art near.

    O, God, renew my trust,
      Hear when I cry;
    Out of the cloud and dust
      Lift me to thee on high.
    The crooked paths make plain,
      The burden light;
    Touch me and heal my pain,
      And clear my sight.

    O, take my hand in Thine,
      And lead me so
    That all my steps incline
      In Thy right way to go.
    Out of this awful night
      Some whisper send,
    That I may feel my God,
      My loving friend.

    O, let me feel and see
      Thy hand and face;
    And let me learn of Thee
      My true right place.
    For I am Thine, and Thou
      Art also mine.
    Unto Thy will I bow,
      Helper divine!


    DO YOU HEAR THE WOMEN PRAYING?

    [Read before the Women's Prayer League of Portland,
    Oregon, May 27, 1874.]

    Do you hear the women praying, oh my brothers?
      Do you hear what words they say?
    These, this free-born nation's wives and mothers,
      Bowing, where you proudly stand, to pray!
    Can you coldly look upon their faces,
      Pale, sad faces, seamed with frequent tears;
    See their hands uplifted in their places--
      Hands that toiled for all your boyhood's years?

    Can you see your wives and daughters pleading
      In the dust you spurn beneath your feet,
    Baring hearts for years in secret bleeding,
      To the scoffs and jestings of the street?
    Can you hear, and yet not heed the crying
      Of the children perishing for bread?
    Born in fear, not love, and daily dying,
      Cursed of God, they think, but cursed of _you_ instead?

    Do you hear the women praying, oh my brothers?
      Hear the oft-repeated burden of their prayer--
    Hear them asking for one boon above all others--
      _Not_ for vengeance on the wrongs they have to bear;
    But imploring, as their Lord did, "God forgive them,
      For they know not what they do;
    Strike the sin, but spare the sinners--save them"--
      Meaning, oh ye men and brothers, _you_!

    For your heels have ground the women's faces;
      You have coined their blood and tears for gold;
    Have betrayed their kisses and embraces--
      Returned their love with curses twentyfold;
    Made the wife's crown one of thorns and not of honor,
      Made her motherhood a pain and dread;
    Heaped life's toil unrecompensed upon her;
      Laid her sons upon her bosom, dead!

    Do you hear the women praying, oh my brothers?
      Have you not one word to say?
    Will a _just_ God be as gentle as these mothers,
      If you dare to say them nay?
    Oh, ye men, God waits for _you_ to answer
      The prayers that to him rise,
    He waits to know if _you_ are just ere _He_ is--
      There your deliverance lies!

    Rise and assert the manhood of this nation,
      Its courage, honor, might--
    Wipe off the dust of our humiliation--
      Dare nobly to do right!
    Shall women plead from out the dust forever?
      Will you not work, men, if you cannot pray?
    Hold up the suppliant hands with your endeavor,
      And seize the world's salvation while you may.

    Yes, from the eastern to the western ocean,
      The sound of prayer is heard;
    And in our hearts great billows of emotion
      At every breath are stirred.
    From mountain tops of prayer down to sin's valley
      The voice of women sounds the cry, "Come up!"
    O, men and brothers, heed that cry, and rally--
      Help us to dash to earth the deadly cup!


    "OUR LIFE IS TWOFOLD."

    Sweet, kiss my eyelids close, and let me lie,
    On this old-fashioned sofa, in the dim
    And purple twilight, shut out from the sky,
    Which is too garish for my softer whim.
    And while I, looking inward on my thought,
    Tell thee what phantoms thicken in its air.
    Twine thou thy gentle fingers, slumber-fraught,
    With the loose shreds of my disheveled hair:
    I shall see inly better if thou keep
    My outer senses in a charmed sleep.

    Sweet friend!--I love that pleasant name of friend--
    We walk not ever singly, through the world;
    But even as our shadow doth attend
    Our going in the sunshine, and is furled
    About us in the darkness--so that shade
    Which haunts our other self, is faintly seen
    Beside us in our gladness, and is made
    To wrap us coldly life's bright hours between.
    Unconsciously we court it. In our youth,
    While yet our morning sky is pink with joy,
    We, curious if our happiness be truth,
    Try to discern the shadow of alloy.
    O, I remember well the earliest time
    A sorrow touched me, and I nursed it then;
    Tho' but few summers of our northern clime
    Had sunned my growth among the souls of men.

    In an old wood, reputed for its age,
    And for its beauty wild and picturesque;
    The bound and goal of each day's pilgrimage,
    Where were all forms of graceful and grotesque;
    And countless hues, from the dark stately pine
    That whispered its wild mysteries to my ear,
    To the smooth silver of the birch-trees shine,
    Showing between the aspens straight and fair;
    With forest flowers, and delicate vines that crept
    From the rich soil far up among the trees,
    Seeking that light their boughs did intercept,
    And dalliance and caresses of the breeze.
    In midst of these, sheltered from sun and wind
    Glimmered a lake, in long and shining curves,
    Like a bright fillet that should serve to bind
    That scene to earth--if she the gem deserves!
    For gem it was, as proud upon her brow
    As jewels on the forehead of a queen;
    And one thought as one turned from it, of how
    Eve exiled, must have missed some just such scene.
    O, there I type my life! I used to sigh
    Sitting on this side, with my lap piled up
    With violets of the real sapphire dye,
    For the gay gold of the bright buttercup
    Spangling the green sod on the other side--
    For the lake's breadth was but an arrow's flight,
    And the brief distance did not serve to hide
    What yet could not be reached except by sight.

    Day after day I dreamed there, while my heart
    Gathered up knowledge in its childish way,
    Making fine pictures with unconscious art,
    And learning beauty more and more each day.
    Ever and ever haunted I that spot--
    Sitting in dells scooped out between the hills,
    That rising close around me, formed a grot
    Fragrant with ferns, and musical with rills.
    Far up above me grew the long-armed beech,
    Dropping its branches down in graceful bent;
    While farther up, beyond my utmost reach,
    Stood dusky hemlocks, crowning the ascent.
    And all about were sweeter sights and sounds
    Than elsewhere, but in poet's dream, abounds.

    Thus, and because my life was all too fair,
    I sought to color it with thoughts I nursed
    In sylvan solitudes: and in the air
    Of these soft, silent influences, I first
    Saw, or felt, rather, that the shadow fell
    Upon my pathway from the light behind--
    The light of youth's first joyousness. Ah, well,
    If it had stayed there, nor been more unkind!
    My earliest sorrow was a flower's death--
    At which I wept until my swollen eyes
    Refused to shed more tears--just that my wreath
    One morn in autumn lacked its choicest dyes.
    So, knowing what it was to have a loss,
    I went on losing, and the shadow grew
    Darker and longer, 'till it lies across
    My pathway to the measure of my view.
    We all remember sorrow's first impress--
    No matter whether we had cause to grieve,
    Or whether sad in very willfulness--
    The lesson is the same that we receive.
    And afterwards, when the great shadow falls--
    The tempest--when the lightning's flash reveals
    The darkness brooding o'er us, and appals
    Hope by the terror of the stroke it deals--
    _Then_, how the shadow hugs us in its fold!
    We see no light behind, and none to come;
    But dumbly shiver in the gloom and cold,
    Or with despair lie down, and wait our doom.

    Sweet, press thy cheek upon my own again--
    Even now my life's dark ghost is haunting nigh:
    Sing me to sleep with some old favorite strain--
    Some gentle poet's loving lullaby;
    For I would dream, and in my dream forget
    Our twofold life is full of shadows set.


    SOUVENIR.

    You ask me, "Do you think of me?"
      Dear, thoughts of thee are like this river,
    Which pours itself into the sea,
      Yet empties its own channel never.

    All other thoughts are like these sail
      Drifting the river's surface over;
    _They_ veer about with every gale--
      The _river_ keeps its course forever.

    So deep and still, so strong and true,
      The current of my soul sets thee-ward,
    Thy river I, my ocean you,
      And all myself am running seaward.


    I ONLY WISH TO KNOW.

    Pray do not take the kiss again
      I risked so much in getting,
    Nor let my blushes make you vain
      To your and my regretting.
    I'm sure I've heard your sex repeat
      A thousand times or so,
    That stolen kisses are most sweet--
      I only wished to know!

    I own 'twas not so neatly done
      As you know how to do it,
    And that the fright out-did the fun,
      But still I do not rue it.
    I can afford the extra beat
      My heart took at your "Oh!"
    Which plainly said _that_ kiss was sweet--
      _When I so wished to know!_

    Nay, I will not give back the kiss,
      Nor will I take a second;
    _Creme de la creme_ of pain and bliss
      This one shall e'er be reckoned.
    The pain was mine, the bliss was--_ours_,
      You smile to hear it so;
    But the same thought was surely yours,
      As I have cause to know.


    LINES WRITTEN IN AN ALBUM.

      The highest use of happy love is this;
        To make us loving to the loveless ones;
      Willing indeed to halve our meed of bliss,
        If our sweet plenty others' want atones:
    Of love's abundance may God give thee store,
    To spend in love's sweet charities, LENORE.


    LOVE'S FOOTSTEPS.

    I sang a song of olden times,
      Sitting upon our sacred hill--
      Sang it to feel my bosom thrill
    To the sweet pathos of its rhymes.

    I trilled the music o'er and o'er,
      And happy, gazed upon the scene,
      Thinking that there had never been
    So blue a sea, so fair a shore.

    A vague half dream was in my mind;
      I hardly saw how sat the sun;
      I noted not the day was gone
    The rosy western hills behind.

    'Till, soft as if Apollo blew
      For me the sweet Thessalian flute,
      I heard a sound which made me mute,
    And more than singing thrilled me through.

    THY STEP--well known and well beloved!
      No more I dreamed on shore or sea;
      I thought of, saw but only thee,
    Nor spoke, but blushed to be so moved.


    THE POET'S MINISTERS.

        POET.

    Oh, my soul! the draught is bitter
      Yet it must be sweetly drunken:
    Heart and soul! the grinding fetter
      Galls, yet have ye never shrunken:
    Heart and soul, and pining spirit,
      Fail me not! no coward weakness
    Such as ye are should inherit--
    Be ye strong even in your meekness.

    Born were ye to these strange uses,
      To brief joy and crushing ill,
    To small good and great abuses;
      Yet oh, yield not, till they kill.
    The stag wounded runneth steady
      With his blood in streams a-gushing;
    Soul and spirit, be ye ready
      For the arrows toward ye rushing.


        SPIRIT OF THE FLOWERS.

    Now what ails our gentle friend?
      In his eye a meaning double,
    Sorrow and defiance blend--
      Let us soothe him of his trouble.
    Poet! do not pass us by:
      See how we are robed to meet you;
    Heed you not our perfumed sigh?
      Heed you not how sweet we greet you?
    Ever since the breath of morn
      We have waited for your coming,
    Fearing when the bee's dull horn
      Round our quiet bower was humming:
    We have kept our sweets for thee--
      Poet, do not pass us by:
    Place us on thy breast, for see!
      By the sunset we must die.


        SPIRIT OF THE MOUNTAIN STREAM.

    Bathe thy pale face in the flood
      Which overflows this crystal fountain,
    Then to rouse thy sluggish blood,
      Seek its source far up the mountain.
    Note thou how the stream doth sing
      Its soft carol, low and light,
    To the jagged rocks that fling
      Mildew shadows, black and blight.
    Learn a lesson from the stream,
      Poet! though thy path may lie
    Hid forever from the gleam
      Of the blue and sunny sky,--
    Though thy way be steep and long,
      Sing thou still a cheerful song!


        SPIRIT OF BEAUTY.

    Come sister spirits, touch his eyelids newly,
      With that rare juice whose magic power it is,
    To give the rose-hue to those things which truly
      Wear the sad livery of ugliness.
    Oh, dignify the office of the meanest
      Of all God's manifold created things;
    And sprinkle his heart's wounds with the serenest
      Waters of sweetness, from our fabled springs.
    Oh, close him round with visions of all rareness,
      Make him see everything with smiling eye;
    Let all his dreams be unsurpassed for fairness,
      And what we feign out-charm reality.
    Come, sister spirits, up and do your duty;
    When the Poet pines, feast his soul with beauty.


        SPIRIT OF THE TREES.

    Let us wave our branches gently
      With a murmur low and loving;
    He will say we sang him quaintly
      Some old ballad, sweetly moving.
    'Tis of all the ways the surest
      To awake a poet's fancies,
    For he loves these things the purest--
      Sigh of leaves, and scent of pansies.
    He has loved us, we will love him,
      And will cheer his hour of sadness,
    Spirits, wave your boughs above him
      To a measure of soft gladness.


        SPIRIT OF LOVE.

    Ye gentle ministers, ye have done well,
      But 'tis for love that most the poet pineth,
    And till I spell him with my magic spell,
      In vain for him earth smiles or heaven shineth.
    Behold I touch his heart, and there upspring
      Blooms to his cheeks, and flashes to his eyes;
    His scornful lips upon the instant sing,
      And all his pulses leap with ecstasies.
    'Tis love the poet wants; he cannot live
    Without caressing and without caress,
      Which all to charity his fellows give;
    But I will wrap his soul in tenderness,
      And straightway from his lips will burst a song
      All loving hearts shall echo and prolong.


        POET.

    O Earth, and Sky, and Flowers, and Streams agushing,
      God made ye beautiful to make us blest:
    O bright-winged Songsters through the blue air rushing;
      O murmuring Tree-tops, by the winds carest;
    O Waves of Ocean, Ripples of the River,
      O Dew and Fragrance, Sunlight, and Starbeam,
    O blessed summer-sounds that round me quiver,
      Delights impassable that round me teem--
        Oh all things beautiful! God made ye so
        That the glad hearts of men might overflow!

    O Soul within me, whose wings sweep a lyre--
      God gave thee song that thou might'st give him praise;
    O Heart that glows with the Promethean fire,
      O Spirit whose fine chords some influence plays:
    O all sweet thoughts and beautiful emotions,
      O smiles and tears, and trembling and delight,
    Have ye not all part in the soul's devotions,
      To help it swell its anthem's happy height?
        Spirit of Love, of God, of inspiration,
        The poet's glad heart bursts in acclamation!


                      CHORUS OF SPIRITS.

              Ring every flower-bell on the wind,
                And let each insect louder sing;
              Let elfin "joy be unconfined;"
                And let the laughing fairies bring
              A wreath enchanted, and to bind
                Upon the Poet's worthy brow
              Heartsease and laurel, and a kind
                Of valley lily, white as snow;
              And fresh May-roses, branching long--
                Braid all these in a garland gay,
              To crown the Poet for his song,
              Sung in our haunts this summer day!


    SUNSET AT THE MOUTH OF THE COLUMBIA.

    There sinks the sun; like cavalier of old,
      Servant of crafty Spain,
    He flaunts his banner, barred with blood and gold,
      Wide o'er the western main,
    A thousand spear heads glint beyond the trees
      In columns bright and long:
    While kindling fancy hears upon the breeze
      The swell and shout of song.

    And yet, not here Spain's gay, adventurous host,
      Dipped sword or planted cross;
    The treasures guarded by this rock-bound coast,
      Counted them gain nor loss.
    The blue Columbia, sired by the eternal hills,
      And wedded with the sea;
    O'er golden sands, tithes from a thousand rills,
      Rolled in lone majesty--

    Through deep ravine, through burning, barren plain,
      Through wild and rocky strait,
    Through forest dark, and mountain rent in twain,
      Toward the sunset gate.
    While curious eyes, keen with the lust of gold,
      Caught not the informing gleam;
    These mighty breakers age on age have rolled
      To meet this mighty stream.

    Age after age these noble hills have kept,
      The same majestic lines:
    Age after age the horizon's edge been swept
      By fringe of pointed pines.
    Summers and Winters circling came and went,
      Bringing no change of scene;
    Unresting, and unhasting, and unspent,
      Dwelt nature here serene.

    Till God's own time to plant of Freedom's seed,
      In this selected soil;
    Denied forever unto blood and greed;
      But blest to honest toil.
    There sinks the sun. Gay Cavalier! no more
      His banners trail the sea,
    And all his legions shining on the shore
      Fade into mystery.

    The swelling tide laps on the shingly beach,
      Like any starving thing;
    And hungry breakers, white with wrath, upreach,
      In vain clamoring.
    The shadows fall; just level with mine eye
      Sweet Hesper stands and shines,
    And shines beneath an arc of golden sky,
      Pinked round with pointed pines.

    A noble scene! all breadth, deep tone and power,
      Suggesting glorious themes;
    Shaming the idler who would fill the hour
      With unsubstantial dreams.
    Be mine the dreams prophetic, shadowing forth
      The things that yet shall be,
    When through this gate the treasures of the North
      Flow outward to the sea.


    THE PASSING OF THE YEAR.

                       Worn and poor,
    The Old Year came to Eternity's door.
    Once, when his limbs were young and strong,
    From that shining portal came he forth,
    Led by the sound of shout and song,
    To the festive halls of jubilant earth;--
    Now, his allotted cycle o'er,
    He waited, spent, by the Golden Door.

            Faint and far--faint and far,
    Surging up soft between sun and star,
    Strains of revelry smote his ear;
    Musical murmurs from lyre and lute--
    Rising in choruses grand and clear,
    Sinking in cadences almost mute--
    Vexing the ear of him who sate
    Wearied beside the Shining Gate.

                    Sad and low,
    Flowed in an undertone of woe:
    Wailing among the moons it came,
    Sobbing in echoes against the stars;
    Smothered behind some comet's flame,
    Lost in the wind of the war-like Mars,
    --Mingling, ever and anon,
    With the music's swell a sigh or moan.

                       "As in a glass,
    Let the earth once before me pass,"
    The Old Year said; and space untold
    Vanished, till nothing came between;
    Folded away, crystal and gold,
    Nor azure air did intervene;
    "As in a glass" he saw the earth
    Decking a bier and waiting a birth.

    "You crown me dead," the Old Year said,
    "Before my parting hour is sped:
    O fickle, false, and reckless world!
    Time to Eternity may not haste;
    Not till the last Hour's wing is furled
    Within the gate my reign is past!
    O Earth! O World! fair, false and vain,
    I grieve not at my closing reign."

                       Yet spirit-sore
    The dead king noted a palace door;
    He saw the gay crowd gather in;
    He scanned the face of each passer by;
    Snowiest soul, and heart of sin;
    Tried and untried humanity:
    Age and Youth, Pleasure and Pain,
    Braided at chance in a motley skein.

                       "Ill betide
    Ye thankless ones!" the Old Year cried;
    "Have I not given you night and day,
    Over and over, score upon score,
    Wherein to live, and love, and pray,
    And suck the ripe world to its rotten core?
    Yet do you reek if my reign be done?
    E're I pass ye crown the newer one!
    At ball and rout ye dance and shout,
    Shutting men's cries of suffering out,
    That startle the white-tressed silences
    Musing beside the fount of light,
    In the eternal space, to press
    Their roses, each a nebula bright,
    More close to their lips serene,
    While ye wear this unconscious mein!"

                       "Even so."
    The revelers said: "We'll have naught of woe.
    Why should we mourn, who have our fill?
    Enough that the hungry wretches cry:
    We from our plenty cast at will
    Some crumbs to make their wet eyelids dry;
    But to the rich the world is fair--
    Why should we grovel in tears and prayer?"

                       In her innocent bliss,
    A fair bride said with sweet earnestness,
    "For the dead Year am I truly sad;
    Since in its happy and hopeful days,
    Every brief hour my heart was glad,
    And blessings were strewn in all my ways:
    Will it be so forevermore?
    Will the New Years bring of love new store?"

                       Youth and maid.
    Of their conscious blushes half afraid,
    Shunning each other's tell-tale eyes,
    Yet cherishing hopes too fond to own;
    Speed the Old Year with secret sighs;
    And smile that his time is overflown;
    Shall they not hear each other say
    "Dear Love!" ere the New Year's passed away?

                       "O, haste on!
    The year or the pleasure is dead that is gone!"
    Boasted the man of pomp and power;
    "That which we hold is alone the good;
    Give me new pleasures for every hour,
    And grieve over past joys ye who would--
    Joys that are fled are poor, I wis--
    Give me forever the newest bliss!"

                       "Wish me joy,"
    Girl-Beauty cried, with glances coy:
    "In the New Year a woman I;
    I'll then have jewels in my hair,
    And such rare webs as Princes buy
    Be none too choice for me to wear:
    I'll queen it as a beauty should,
    And not be won before I'm wooed!"

        "Poor and proud--poor and proud!"
    Sighed a student in the motley crowd--
    "I heard her whisper that aside:
    O fatal fairness, aping heaven
    When earthly most!--I'll not deride--
    God knows that were all good gifts given
    To me as lavishly as rain,
    I'd bring them to her feet again."

        "Here are the fools we use for tools;
    Bending their passion, ere it cools,
    To any need," the cynic said:
    "Lo, I will give him gold, and he
    Shall sell me brain as it were bread!
    His very soul I'll hold in fee
    For baubles that shall buy the hand
    Of the coldest woman in the land!"

                       Spirit sore,
    The Old Year cared to see no more;
    While, as he turned, he heard a moan--
    Frosty and keen was the wintry night--
    Prone on the marble paving-stone,
    Unwatched, unwept, a piteous sight,
    Starved and dying a poor wretch lay;
    Through the blast he heard him gasping say:

                       "O, Old Year!
    From sightless eyes you force this tear;
    Sorrows you've heaped upon my head,
    Losses you've gathered to drive me wild,
    All that I lived for, loved, are dead,--
    Brother and sister, wife and child,
    I, too, am perishing as well;
    I shall share the toll of your passing bell!"

                       Grieved, and sad,
    For the sins and woes the Human had,
    The Old Year strove to avert his eyes;
    But fly or turn wherever he would,
    On his vexed ear smote the mingled cries
    Of revel and new-made widowhood--
    Of grief that would not be comforted
    With the loved and beautiful lying dead.

                  Evermore, every hour,
    Rising from hovel, hall and tower,
    Swelling the strain of discontent;
    Gurgled the hopeless prayer for alms,
    Rung out the wild oath impotent;
    Echoed by some brief walls of calms,
    Straining the listener's shrinking ears,
    Like silence when thunderbolts are near.

    Across that calm, like gales of balm,
    Some low, sweet household voices came;
    Thrilling, like flute-notes straying out
    From land to sea, some stormy night,
    The ear that listens for the shout
    Of drowning boatmen lost to sight--
    And died away, again so soon
    The pulseless air seemed fallen in a swoon.

                          Once pure and clear,
    Clarion strains fell on his ear:
    The preacher shook the soulless creeds,
    And pierced men's hearts with arrowy words,
    Yet failed to stir them to good deeds:
    Their new-fledged thoughts, like July birds,
    Soared on the air and glanced away,
    Before the eloquent voice could stay.

                "'Tis very sad the man is mad,"
    The men and women gaily said;
    As they, laughing, thread their homeward road,
    Talking of other holidays;
    Of last year, how it rained or snowed;
    Who went abroad, who wed a blaze
    Of diamonds with his shoddy bride,
    On certain days--and who had died.

                          "Would I were dead,
    And vexed no more," the Old Year said:
    "In vain may the preacher pray and warn;
    The tinkling cymbals in your ears
    Turn every gracious word to scorn;
    Ye care not for the orphan's tears;
    Your sides are fed, and your bodies clad
    Is there anything heaven itself could add?"

            And then he sighed, as one who died,
    With a great wish unsatisfied;
    Around him like a wintry sea,
    Whose waves were nations, surged the world,
    Stormy, unstable, constantly
    Upheaved to be again down-hurled;
    Here struggled some for freedom; here
    Oppression rode in the high career.

                              In hot debate
    Men struggled, while the hours waxed late;
    Contending with the watchful zeal
    Of gladiators, trained to die;
    Yet not for life, nor country's weal,
    But that their names might hang on high
    As men who loved themselves, indeed,
    And robbed the State to satisfy their need!

                    Heads of snow, and eyes aglow
    With fires that youth might blush to know;
    And brows whose youthful fairness shamed
    The desperate thoughts that strove within;
    While each his cause exulting named
    As purest that the world had seen:
    All names they had to tickle honest ears,
    Reform, and Rights, and sweet Philanthropy's cares.

                    "Well-a-day! Well-a-day!"
    The Old Year strove to put away
    Sight and sound of the reckless earth;
    But soft! from out a cottage door,
    Sweet strains of neither grief nor mirth,
    Upon his dying ear did pour;
    "Give us, O God," the singers said,
    "As good a year as this one dead!"

    Pealing loud from sod to cloud,
    Earth's bell's rang out in a chorus proud;
    Great waves of music shook the air
    From organs pulsing with the sound;
    Hushed was the voice of sob and prayer,
    As time touched the eternal bound:
    To the dead monarch earth was dimmed,
    But the golden portals brighter beamed.

                    Sad no more,
    The Old Year reached the golden door,
    Just as the hours with crystal clang
    Aside the shining portals bent
    And murmuring 'mong the spheres there rang
    The chorus of earth's acknowledgment:
    One had passed out at the golden door,
    And one had gone in forevermore!

    THE END.