Produced by Tonya Allen, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


TRUE STORIES OF GREAT AMERICANS

CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS

BY

MILDRED STAPLEY


  Whatever can be known of earth we know,
    Sneered Europe's wise men, in their snail shells curled;
  No! said one man in Genoa, and that No
    Out of the dark created the New World.

--JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I COLUMBUS BEFRIENDED BY ROYALTY

CHAPTER II THE YOUTH OF COLUMBUS

CHAPTER III "LANDS IN THE WEST"

CHAPTER IV THE SOJOURN IN MADEIRA

CHAPTER V A SEASON OF WAITING

CHAPTER VI A RAY OF HOPE

CHAPTER VII ISABELLA DECIDES

CHAPTER VIII OFF AT LAST!

CHAPTER IX "LAND! LAND!"

CHAPTER X NATIVES OF THE NEW LAND

CHAPTER XI THE RETURN IN THE _NINA_

CHAPTER XII DAYS OF TRIUMPH

CHAPTER XIII PREPARING FOR A SECOND VOYAGE

CHAPTER XIV FINDING NEW ISLANDS

CHAPTER XV ON A SEA OF TROUBLES

CHAPTER XVI THE THIRD VOYAGE

CHAPTER XVII A RETURN IN DISGRACE

CHAPTER XVIII PUBLIC SYMPATHY

CHAPTER XIX THE LAST VOYAGE

CHAPTER XX THE COURAGE OF DIEGO MENDEZ

CHAPTER XXI "INTO PORT"


CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS


CHAPTER I

COLUMBUS BEFRIENDED BY ROYALTY


Spain, as every one knows, was the country behind the discovery of
America. Few people know, however, what an important part the beautiful
city of Granada played in that famous event. It was in October, 1492,
that Columbus first set foot on the New World and claimed it for Spain.
In January of that same year another territory had been added to that
same crown; for the brave soldier-sovereigns, Ferdinand and Isabella,
had conquered the Moorish kingdom of Granada in the south and made it
part of their own country.

Nearly eight hundred years before, the dark-skinned Moors had come over
from Africa and invaded the European peninsula which lies closest to the
Straits of Gibraltar, and the people of that peninsula had been battling
fiercely ever since to drive them back to where they came from. True,
the Moor had brought Arabian art and learning with him, but he had
brought also the Mohammedan religion, and _that_ was intolerable
not only to the Spaniards but to all Europeans. No Christian country
could brook the thought of this Asiatic creed flourishing on her soil,
so Spain soon set to work to get rid of it.

This war between the two religions began in the north near the Bay of
Biscay whither the Christians were finally pushed by the invaders. Each
century saw the Moors driven a little farther south toward the
Mediterranean, until Granada, where the lovely Sierra Nevadas rise, was
the last stronghold left them. Small wonder, then, that when Granada was
finally taken the Spanish nation was supremely happy. Small wonder that
they held a magnificent fete in their newly-won city in the "Snowy
Mountains." The vanquished Moorish king rode down from his mountain
citadel and handed its keys to Ferdinand and Isabella. Bells pealed,
banners waved, and the people cheered wildly as their victorious
sovereigns rode by.

And yet, so we are told by a writer who was present, in the midst of all
this rejoicing one man stood aside, sad and solitary. While all the
others felt that their uttermost desire had been granted in acquiring
the Moorish kingdom, _he_ knew that he could present them with a
far greater territory than Granada if only they would give him the
chance. What were these olive and orange groves beside the tropic
fertility of the shores he longed to reach, and which he would have
reached long ere this, he told himself regretfully, if only they had
helped him! What was the Christianizing of the few Moors who remained in
Spain compared with the Christianizing of all the undiscovered heathen
across the Atlantic!

And so on that eventful January 2, 1492, when a whole city was delirious
with joy,

  "There was crying in Granada
     when the sun was going down,
  Some calling on the Trinity--
     some calling on Mahoun.
  Here passed away the Koran--there
     in the Cross was borne--
  And here was heard the Christian bell--
     and there the Moorish horn."

On that great day of jubilee one man, a stranger, but as devout a
Christian as any of the conquerors, stood apart downcast, melancholy,
saddened by years of fruitless waiting for a few ships. That man was
Christopher Columbus.

When you know that Columbus was present by special invitation, that a
friend of the queen's had secured him the promise of an interview with
full consideration of his plans just as soon as the city surrendered,
you may think he should have looked happy and hopeful with the rest; but
the fact was, that for nearly seven years the monarchs had been holding
out promises, only to put him off, until his faith in princes had
dwindled to almost nothing.

But, as it happened, they really meant it this time. Moreover, it is
only fair to Ferdinand and Isabella to believe that they had always
meant it, but they had been so preoccupied with the enormous task of
welding poor Spain, long harassed by misrule and war, into a prosperous
nation, that they had neither time nor money for outside ventures.
Certain it is that when Granada was really conquered and they had their
first respite from worry, the man who was known at court as the "mad
Genoese" was summoned to expound his plan of sailing far out into the
west where he was certain of finding new lands.

Where this meeting took place is not known positively, but probably it
was in the palace called the Alhambra, a marvelous monument of Arabian
art which may be visited to-day. Columbus stood long in the exquisite
audience chamber, pleading and arguing fervently; then he came out
dejected, mounted his mule, and rode wearily away from Spain's new city;
for Spain, after listening attentively to his proposals, had most
emphatically refused to aid him. It was surely a sorry reward, you will
say, for his six years' waiting. And yet the man's courage was not
crushed; he started off for France, to try his luck with the French
king.

This is what had happened at the Spanish court. The great navigator
talked clearly and convincingly about the earth being round instead of
flat as most people still supposed; and how, since Europe, Asia, and
Africa covered about six sevenths of the globe's surface, and the
Atlantic Ocean the remaining seventh (here he quoted the prophet
Esdras), [Footnote: "Upon the third day thou didst command that the
waters should be gathered in the seventh part of the earth. Six parts
hast thou dried up and kept them to the intent that of these some being
planted of God and tilled might serve thee.... Upon the fifth day thou
saidst unto the seventh part where the waters were gathered that it
should bring forth living creatures, fowls and fishes, and so it came to
pass." Apocrypha, 2 Esdras vi. 42, 47.] any one by sailing due west must
surely come to land. So clear was his own vision of this land that he
almost saw it as he spoke; and his eloquence made his hearers almost see
it too. One after another they nodded their approval, and approval had
never before been won when he addressed a Spanish audience. But when
Archbishop Talavera, who was spokesman for King Ferdinand, asked the
would-be discoverer what reward he expected in case his voyage was
successful, the answer was so unexpected that nearly every man in the
room was indignant.

This answer is worth looking into carefully if one is to understand why
the Spanish nobility thought that Columbus drove a hard bargain. He
demanded of their Highnesses,

_First_: That he should be made Admiral over all seas and
territories he might discover, the office to continue for life and to
descend to his heirs forever, with all its dignities and salaries.

_Second_: That he should be made Viceroy and Governor-General of
all new territories, and should name the officers under him.

_Third_: That he should have one tenth part of all merchandise,
pearls, precious stones, gold, silver, or spices acquired by trade,
discovery, or any other method.

_Fourth_: That if any controversy or lawsuit should arise over such
goods, he or his officer should be the only judge in the matter.

_Fifth_: That in fitting out all expeditions for trade or discovery
he should be allowed to furnish one eighth of the cost and receive one
eighth of the profit.

On these conditions and no others would Christopher Columbus undertake
his perilous journey into unknown seas; and the grandees of Spain walked
indignantly away from him.

"Lord High Admiral!" murmured one. "An office second only to royalty!
This foreigner demands promotion over us who have been fighting and
draining our veins and our purses for Spain this many a year!"
"Governor-General with power to select his own deputies!" murmured
another. "Why, he would be monarch absolute! What proof has he ever
given that he knows how to govern!" "One tenth of all goods acquired by
trade _or any other method_," protested still another. "What other
method has he in mind?--robbery, piracy, murder, forsooth? And then,
when complaints of his 'other method' are made, he alone is to judge the
case! A sorry state of justice, indeed!"

Now, when you see this from the Spaniards' point of view, can you not
understand their indignation? Yet Columbus, too, had cause for
indignation. True, these soldiers of Spain had risked much, but on land,
and aided by powerful troops. _He_ was offering to go with a few
men on a small ship across a vast unexplored sea; and that seemed to him
a far greater undertaking than a campaign against the Moors. His
position was much like that of the modern inventor who resents having
the greater part of the profits of his invention given to those who
promote it. Columbus's friends, the few men who had encouraged him and
believed in him ever since he came to Spain, begged him to accept less,
but he was inflexible. He was prepared to make the biggest journey man
had ever dreamed of, and not one iota less would he take for it. But no
such rewards would Talavera promise, and thus ended the interview for
which Columbus had waited nearly seven years!

And so he rode away from the lovely Moorish city, weary and dejected,
yet hoping for better treatment when he should lay his plans before the
French king. His ride took him across the fertile Vega (plain) of
Granada and into a narrow mountain pass where the bleak Elvira Range
towers three thousand feet above the road. But smiling plain and
frowning mountain were alike to the brooding traveler. He noticed
neither; nor, when he started across the ancient stone bridge of Pinos,
did he notice that horsemen were galloping after him. They were Queen
Isabella's messengers sent to bid the bold navigator return. They
overtook him in the middle of the bridge, and then and there his trip to
France ended.

The queen, they told him, would accept his terms unconditionally. And
Isabella kept her word. The next time Christopher Columbus rode forth
from Granada it was not with bowed head and heavy heart, but with his
whole soul rejoicing. We may be sure that he turned back for a last
affectionate look at the lovely mountain city; for it had given him what
historians now call "the most important paper that ever sovereign put
pen to, "--a royal order for the long-desired ships and men with which to
discover "lands in the west."


CHAPTER II

THE YOUTH OF COLUMBUS


Having seen how that great event in Spanish history, the fall of
Granada, set the date for the discovery of America, let us see how it
was that a humble Italian sailor came to be present among all those
noble Spanish soldiers and statesmen. Let us see why he had brought to
Spain the idea of a round world, when most Spaniards still believed in a
flat one; and why his round world was perfectly safe to travel over,
even to its farthest point, while their flat one was edged with monsters
so terrible that no man had ever sought their evil acquaintance.

[Illustration: From "The Story of Columbus" by Elizabeth L. Seelys,
courtesy of D. Appleton and Company. THE GENOA HOME]

The amount of really reliable information which we possess concerning
the childhood of Christopher Columbus could be written in a few lines.
We do not know accurately the date of his birth, though it was probably
1451. Sixteen Italian cities have claimed him as a native; and of these
Genoa in northern Italy offers the best proofs. Papers still exist
showing that his father owned a little house there. Men who have studied
the life of Columbus, and who have written much about him, say that he
was born in the province, not the city, of Genoa; but Columbus himself
says in his diary that he was a native of Genoa city; and present-day
Genoese have even identified the very street where he was born and where
he played as a child--the Vico Dritto di Ponticello. In the wall of the
house in which he is believed to have lived is placed an iron tablet
containing an inscription in Latin. It tells us that "no house is more
to be honored than this, in which Christopher Columbus spent his boyhood
and his early youth."

More important than the exact spot of his birth would be a knowledge of
the sort of childhood he passed and of the forces that molded his
character. To learn this we must look into the condition of
civilization, and particularly of Italian civilization, in the middle
sixteenth century.

Columbus was born in a brilliant period known now as the Renaissance--a
French word meaning re-birth--which marks the beginning of modern
history. It followed a long, painful period known to us as the Dark
Ages, or Middle Ages, namely, the period between ancient and modern
times. In the Middle Ages humanity was very ignorant, hampered by all
sorts of evil superstitions; while the daily life of the people was
miserable and without comforts, lacking many things which we consider
necessities. Yet even in those far-away days things were improving,
because man has always felt the desire to make his lot better; and the
constant effort of these people of the Middle Ages led to that beautiful
awakening which we call the Renaissance.

One of the first glimmers of this new life may be said to have come from
the Crusades. The Europeans who had journeyed down into Asia to drive
the Mohammedans, or Saracens, out of the Holy Land, came back impressed
with the fact that these infidel Asiatics had more refinement and
courtesy than Christian Europe knew. The returning Crusaders introduced
some of this refinement into their own countries, and it caused people
to abandon some of their rude ways. Of course there were many more
influences working toward the great awakening, principally the growth of
commerce. All Europe became alive with the desire for progress; many new
things were invented, many old ones perfected; and before the
Renaissance ended it had given us some wonderful discoveries and
achievements--paper and printing; the mariner's compass; an
understanding of the solar system; oil painting, music, and literature;
and lastly, the New World.

Why, then, if it brought all these arts and inventions and discoveries,
do we not call it the birth, instead of the _re_-birth? Because
many of the beautiful elements of the Renaissance, such as art, science,
and poetry, enjoyment of life, freedom to investigate and study nature--
all these had existed in the days of ancient Greece and Rome; but after
the fall of Roman civilization it took the barbarian peoples of other
portions of Europe a long, long time to grow civilized, and to establish
some sort of order out of their jumbled affairs; and while they were
slowly learning lessons of government and nationality, the culture of
the antique world was lost sight of. When it was found again, when young
men wished to learn Latin and Greek so that they could read the long-
neglected books and poetry of the ancients, human life was made much
richer and happier.

This desire came first to the people of Italy. It was very natural, for
ancient Rome, where great learning had last flourished, was in Italy;
furthermore, the Italian peninsula, jutting out into the much-navigated
Mediterranean, was full of seaports, to which came vessels with the
merchandise, the language, and the legends of other countries; and when
we learn of other countries, we broaden our ideas.

Add to Italy's favorable geographical position the fact that her people
were unusually quick of intellect, and were gifted with great
imagination, and you will see how natural it was that the Renaissance
should have started there. Also, you will see why the great discoverer
was a very natural product of Italy and its Renaissance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Genoa, like other large Italian cities, was teeming with this new spirit
of investigation and adventure when Cristoforo Colombo (in his native
land his name was pronounced Cristof'oro Colom'bo) was born there or
first came there to live. Long before, Genoa had taken an active part in
the Crusades, and every Genoese child knew its story. It had carried on
victorious wars with other Italian seaports. It had an enormous
commerce. It had grown rich, it was so full of marble palaces and
churches, and it had such a glorious history, that its own people loved
to call it _Genova la Superba_ (Superb Genoa).

Although Cristoforo's family were humble people of little or no
education, the lad must have had, or made, many opportunities for
acquiring knowledge. Probably he _made_ them; for, as a boy in
those days generally followed his father's trade, Cristoforo must have
spent a good deal of time in "combing" wool; that is, in making the
tangled raw wool ready for weaving. Perhaps he was sent to school, the
school supported by the "Weavers' Guild." But between working at home
and going to school, he evidently made many little trips down to the
busy wharves.

Was there ever any spot more fascinating than the wharves in olden days
--in that far-off time when there were no books to read, and when a boy's
only chance of hearing about other countries was to go and talk to the
crew of each vessel that came into port? The men to whom our lad talked
had sailed the whole length and breadth of the biggest body of explored
water, the Mediterranean. Some had gone farther east, into the Black
Sea; and still others--bravest of all--had passed beyond the Straits of
Gibraltar and out on to the great unknown ocean. It was to these last,
we may be sure, that the adventurous boy listened most eagerly.

Those hardy sailors were the best possible professors for a boy who
intended to follow the sea. They were, doubtless, practical men who
never talked much about the sea-monsters and other nonsense that many
landsmen believed in; nor did they talk of the world being flat, with a
jumping-off place where the sun set. That belief was probably cherished
by men of book-learning only, who lived in convents and who never risked
their lives on the waves. Good men these monks were, and we are grateful
to them for keeping alive a little spark of learning during those long,
rude Middle Ages; but their ideas about the universe were not to be
compared in accuracy with the ideas of the practical mariners to whom
young Cristoforo talked on the gay, lively wharves of _Genova la
Superba_.

Many years after Columbus's death, his son Fernando wrote that his
father had studied geography (which was then called _cosmogony_) at
the University of Pavia. Columbus himself never referred to Pavia nor to
any other school; nor was it likely that poor parents could afford to
send the eldest of five children to spend a year at a far-off
university. Certain it is that he never went there after his seafaring
life began, for from then on his doings are quite clearly known; so we
must admit that while he may have had some teaching in childhood, what
little knowledge he possessed of geography and science were self-taught
in later years. The belief in a sphere-world was already very ancient,
but people who accepted it were generally pronounced either mad or
wicked. Long before, in the Greek and Roman days, certain teachers had
believed it without being called mad or wicked. As far back as the
fourth century B.C. a philosopher named Pythagoras had written that the
world was round. Later Plato, and next Aristotle, two very learned
Greeks, did the same; and still later, the Romans taught it. But Greece
and Rome fell; and during the Dark Ages, when the Greek and Roman ideas
were lost sight of, most people took it for granted that the world was
flat. After many centuries the "sphere" idea was resurrected and talked
about by a few landsmen, and believed in by many practical seamen; and
it is quite possible that the young Cristoforo had learned of the theory
of a sphere-world from Genoese navigators even before he went to sea.
Wherever the idea originated is insignificant compared with the fact
that, of all the men who held the same belief, Columbus alone had the
superb courage to sail forth and prove it true.

Columbus, writing bits of autobiography later, says that he took to the
sea at fourteen. If true, he did not remain a seafarer constantly, for
in 1472-73 he was again helping his father in the weaving or wool-
combing business in Genoa. Until he started on his famous voyage,
Columbus never kept a journal, and in his journal we find very little
about those early days in Genoa. While mentioning in this journal a trip
made when he was fourteen, Columbus neglects to state that he did not
definitely give up his father's trade to become a sailor until 1475.
Meanwhile he had worked as clerk in a Genoese bookshop. We know he must
have turned this last opportunity to good account. Printing was still a
very young art, but a few books had already found their way to Genoa,
and the young clerk must have pored over them eagerly and tried to
decipher the Latin in which they were printed.

At any rate, it is certain that in 1474 or 1475 Cristoforo hired out as
an ordinary sailor on a Mediterranean ship going to Chios, an island
east of Greece. In 1476 we find him among the sailors on some galleys
bound for England and attacked by pirates off the Portuguese Cape St.
Vincent.

About Columbus's connection with these pirates much romance has been
written,--so much, indeed, that the simple truth appears tame by
comparison. One of these two pirates was named Colombo, a name common
enough in Italy and France. Both pirates were of noble birth, but very
desperate characters, who terrorized the whole Mediterranean, and even
preyed on ships along the Atlantic coast. Columbus's son, Fernando, in
writing about his father, foolishly pretended that the discoverer and
the noble-born corsairs were of the same family; but the truth is, one
of the corsairs was French and the other Greek; they were not Italians
at all. Fernando further says that his father was sailing under them
when the battle off Cape St. Vincent was fought; that when the vessels
caught fire, his father clung to a piece of wreckage and was washed
ashore. Thus does Fernando explain the advent of Columbus into Portugal.
But all this took place years before Fernando was born.

What really appears to have happened is that Columbus was in much more
respectable, though less aristocratic, company. It was not on the side
of the pirates that he was fighting, but on the side of the shipowner
under whom he had hired, and whose merchandise he was bound to protect,
for the Genoese galleys were bound for England for trading purposes.
Some of the galleys were destroyed by the lawless Colombo, but our
Colombo appears to have been on one that escaped and put back into
Cadiz, in southern Spain, from which it later proceeded to England,
stopping first at Lisbon. This is a less picturesque version, perhaps,
than Fernando's, but certainly it shows Columbus in a more favorable
light. Late the next year, 1477, or early in 1478, Cristoforo went back
to Lisbon with a view to making it his home.

Besides this battle with corsairs, Columbus had many and varied
experiences during his sea trips, not gentle experiences either. Even on
the huge, palatial steamships of to-day the details of the common
seaman's life are harsh and rough; and we may be sure that on the tiny,
rudely furnished, poorly equipped sailboats of the fifteenth century it
was a thousand times harsher and rougher. Then, too, the work to be done
in and around the Mediterranean was no occupation for children; it
quickly turned lads into men. Carrying cargo was the least of a
shipowner's business; he was more often hiring out vessels and crews to
warring kings, to Portuguese who carried on a slave trade, or to fight
pirates, the dread of the Mediterranean. Slaves rowed the Mediterranean
galleys, and in the bow stood a man with a long lash to whip the slaves
into subjection. With all these matters did Christopher Columbus become
acquainted in the course of time, for they were everyday matters in the
maritime life of the fifteenth century; but stern though such
experiences were, they must have developed great personal courage in
Christopher, a quality he could have none too much of if he was to lead
unwilling, frightened sailors across the wide unknown sea.


CHAPTER III

"LANDS IN THE WEST"


By moving from Genoa to Lisbon, Columbus found himself in a much better
atmosphere for developing into a discoverer. The genius of a discoverer
lies in the fact that he yearns for the unknown; and Portugal faced the
Atlantic Ocean, that immense unexplored "Sea of Darkness" as it was then
called. Italy, as we know, was the greater country, but it faced the
Mediterranean, and every nook and corner of the Mediterranean were known
and explored.

For any man thirsting to learn more about geography and exploration,
there was no more vital spot in Europe than Lisbon in the fifteenth
century. Why it was so is such an interesting story that it must be
told. We have read how zealously the Spaniards had been striving for
centuries to drive out the Moors, whom they considered the arch enemies
of Christian Europe. Portugal, being equally near to Africa, was also
overrun by Moors, and for ages the Portuguese had been at war with them,
finally vanquishing them early in Columbus's century. A wise Portuguese
prince then decided on a scheme for breaking their power utterly; and
that was to wrest from them their enormous trade with Arabia and India;
for their trade made their wealth and their wealth was their power.

This trade was known as the Indian trade, and was carried on by overland
caravans up through Asia and Northern Africa to the Mediterranean
coasts. The goods brought into Europe by this means--gold, pearls,
spices, rare woods--naturally set Europe to thinking that the lands
producing them must be the most favored part of the world, and "the
Indies" stood for wealth of all kinds. No one knew precisely where "the
Indies" lay; no one knew about the Indian Ocean or the shape of Southern
Africa; "the Indies" was simply an indefinite term for the rich and
mysterious regions from which the caravans came.

The old maps of the fifteenth century show three different countries of
this name--Far India, beyond the Ganges River; Middle India, between the
Ganges and the Indus; and Lesser India, including both sides of the Red
Sea. On the African side of the Red Sea was located the legendary
kingdom of a great monarch known as Prester John. _Prester_ is a
shortening of Presbyter, for this John was a Christian priest as well as
a king. Ever since the twelfth century there had been stories circulated
through Europe about the enormously wealthy monarch who ruled over a
vast number of Christians "in the Indies." At first Prester John's
domain was supposed to be in Asia; later the legends shifted it over to
Africa, Abyssinia probably; and it was with this division of "India"
that the Portuguese Prince Henry hoped to establish a trade; not, at
first, by rounding Africa and sailing up its east coast to Abyssinia,
but by merely cruising down the coast of Western Africa till Abyssinia's
Atlantic shores were reached; for so vague was the geography of that
far-away day that Abyssinia was supposed to stretch from Ethiopia to the
Atlantic. "If," reasoned Prince Henry, "my sailors can feel their way
down Africa till they come to Prester John's territory, not only could
our nation secure the rich trade which now goes to the Moors, but we
could form a treaty with the African Christians and ask them to come to
Europe and help us should the Moors ever again advance against us." This
plan was approved by Pope Nicholas V., who sanctioned Prince Henry's
enterprise in the hope of "bringing the people of India, who are reputed
to honor Christ, to the aid of European Christians against Saracens and
other enemies." This projected exploration of the African coast by
"Henry the Navigator" was the whole foundation for the _mistaken
statements that Christopher Columbus was trying to find "a sea route to
India_." Prince Henry was trying to find a sea route to an African
India which he supposed lay about where Guinea lies; and as for
Christopher, he never undertook to find either this African India, nor
the true Asiatic India; _he only promised the Spanish sovereigns that
he would find "lands in the west_."

Having straightened out the long-lived confusion about "the short route
to India," let us see how Prince Henry went to work. Northern or
Mediterranean Africa was well known to Europe, but not the Atlantic
coast. There was an ancient belief that ships could not enter tropic
seas because the intensely hot sun drew up all the water and left only
the slimy ooze of the bottom of the ocean. Cape Nun, of Morocco, was the
most southerly point of Africa yet reached; and about it there was a
discouraging saying,

  "Who pass Cape Nun
   Must turn again or else be gone."

Prince Henry, who was called the "Protector of Studies in Portugal," did
not believe that rhyme, and determined to show how foolish and untrue it
was. His first step was to establish an observatory and a school for
navigation at Cape St. Vincent, the most westerly point of Europe and
the most southwesterly point of Portugal. To this observatory the prince
invited the most learned astronomers, geographers, and instrument-makers
then living, that they might all work together with him; and from the
little fishing village of Sagres, close to his great observatory, he
sent out sailors who, according to an old writer, "were well taught in
all rules which sailors ought to know, and provided with the best
instruments for navigation."

These expeditions began fifty years before Columbus came to Lisbon. Most
of them sailed south; out there had always been legends of lands in the
west, so westward some of them sailed and found the Azores and the
Madeira Islands. These last had been known to English navigators more
than a century before, but as England sent no people to occupy and claim
them, Portugal took possession of them.

How the ownership of all newly-found portions of the globe came to be
determined is worth looking into. Ever since the time of the Crusades it
was recognized as right that any European Christian ruler might seize
the land and property of any Asiatic infidel. If two or three Christian
rulers united to seize Mohammedan territory and were victorious, the
Pope was to decide which one should own it. But the Crusades were
unsuccessful, and so the question of ownership of land outside of Europe
never came up until Prince Henry sent out his discoverers. Then, in
order to make Portugal's claim very sure to whatever she might find,
Pope Martin V. issued an order that all land which might be discovered
between Cape Bojador (on the most southerly point of the Morocco coast)
and the Indies should belong to Portugal, no matter what navigator
discovered it. This was in 1479. Naturally, when his turn came to
navigate, Columbus would not be interested in taking the Portuguese
path, since, by papal order, he would have to turn over to Portugal
whatever he might discover.

But to return to Prince Henry. His successes began in 1422 when a
Portuguese captain pushed past the high promontory of Cape Nun and did
not "turn again" till he had gone far enough to see that the Southern
Atlantic was as full of water as the Northern. After that these brave
people kept sailing farther and farther south, down past Guinea and the
mouth of the Congo, always asking for the India of Prester John; but the
savage blacks at whose coasts they touched had never heard of it.
Finally Bartholomew Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope and proved that
the African India had no Atlantic coast; and he also proved that there
existed a southern hemisphere of great possibilities. Then the question
of reaching Asiatic India by sea loomed large in the Portuguese mind.
Vasco da Gama, following Dias around the Cape of Good Hope, crossed the
Indian Ocean and at last cast anchor in the dazzlingly rich city of
Calcutta, the real India.

This last did not happen, however, till 1498, six years after Columbus
discovered America. Long before this time the good Prince Henry had
died; and though he did not live to learn of this sea route to India, he
died knowing that the Madeiras and the Azores existed out in the open
sea, while Africa stretched far south of the Equator. His devotion to
navigation had imbued his countrymen with great enthusiasm, and placed
little Portugal at the head of European nations in maritime matters. Not
only did she discover how to sail to India, but to Siam, Java, China,
and Japan as well.

From Prince Henry's day, Lisbon became the city where all men interested
in the fascinating study of geography wished to dwell, in order that
they might exchange ideas with navigators and get employment under the
Crown. We can readily understand why Lisbon was a magnet to the
ambitious Christopher Columbus; and we may feel sure that had the brave,
intelligent "Protector of Studies in Portugal" been still alive when
Columbus formed his plan for discovery, the intrepid discoverer would
have been spared those weary years of waiting. He would have found
America ten years sooner, and it would have been the Portuguese, and not
the Spanish, flag that he would have carried westward to the New World.

Our young Genoese is supposed to have sailed to Iceland and even farther
into the Polar regions, probably after continuing that trip to Bristol
which the pirates interrupted off Cape St. Vincent. Many writers
consider that it was in Iceland where he heard rumors of "land in the
west." If the Iceland trip really was made, Christopher may indeed have
heard the story; for long before, Icelanders, and Norsemen also, had
discovered America.

These discoveries, as we now believe, took place in the far-away
eleventh century; but they made no impression on Europeans of that time,
because Iceland and Scandinavia were not in touch with other European
countries. Civilization then had the Mediterranean for its center, and
no one in Southern Europe ever heard of what the Icelanders or the
Norsemen were doing. But these northern peoples did not entirely lose
sight of their discoveries, for they sang about them from century to
century in quaint and beautiful ballads called sagas. It was not until
after Columbus revealed the west to European eyes that these sagas were
published; nevertheless, it is not improbable that, if Columbus landed
in Iceland, some inhabitant who knew the story of the far western
country told it to him. He never refers to it in his writings, however,
and one cannot help thinking that, if it really was true, he would have
mentioned it, at least to those whom he was trying to persuade to help
him. The only reference he ever made to the northern voyage is when
writing his journal in 1492, where he states,

"I have seen all the Levant (where the sun rises); and the Ponent (where
the sun sets); I have seen what is called The Northern Way, and England;
and I have sailed to Guinea."

Columbus's elder brother, Bartholomew, who was a map-maker and a serious
student of geography, also settled in Lisbon. The two either opened a
book-and-map shop, or at least they worked in one at odd times,
Christopher acting as a draftsman; for, as he himself quaintly expressed
it, "God had endowed me with ingenuity and manual skill in designing
spheres, and inscribing upon them in the proper places cities, rivers
and mountains, isles and ports." He appears to have tried to earn a
little money by commerce as well as by map-making. We have no exact
record of this, but it is thought that he borrowed capital for trading
purposes from rich Genoese merchants settled in Lisbon, and lost it.
This we conclude because, in his will, he ordered certain sums to be
paid to these merchants, without mentioning why. That he tried to add to
the small profits of map-making by trading with sea captains is not
surprising. We can only be sorry that he did not make a handsome profit
out of his ventures, enough for himself and for those who lent him
capital.

We have mentioned that all the men who had a scientific interest in
navigation tried to get to Lisbon. Among those whom Columbus may have
met there, was the great German cosmographer from Nuremburg, Martin
Behaim. Martin helped to improve the old-fashioned astrolabe, an
instrument for taking the altitude of the sun; more important still,
toward the end of 1492 he made the first globe, and indicated on it how
one might sail west and reach Asiatic India. This is the first record of
that idea which was later attributed to Columbus, but which Columbus
himself, until his return from his first voyage of discovery, never even
mentioned. Whether he and Martin Behaim talked together about the route
to India we shall never know. Probably they did not; for when
Christopher importuned later for ships, it was only for the purpose of
discovering "lands in the west" and not for finding a short route to
India. Columbus, though he knew how to draw maps and design spheres,
really possessed but little scientific knowledge. Intuition, plus
tenacity, always did more for him than science; and so it is likely that
he talked more with sailors than with scientists. While he may have
known the learned Behaim, certain it is that, from his earliest days in
Lisbon, he sought the society of men who had been out to the Azores or
to Madeira; men who told him the legends, plentiful enough on these
islands, of lands still farther out toward the setting sun, that no one
had yet ventured to visit.


CHAPTER IV

THE SOJOURN IN MADEIRA


Columbus had not been very long in Lisbon when he met, at church, a girl
named Felipa Monez Perestrello. Felipa was of noble birth; Christopher
was not; but he was handsome--tall, fair-haired, dignified,--and full of
earnestness in his views of life. Felipa consented to marry him.

Felipa must have been a most interesting companion for a man who loved
voyaging, for she had been born in the Madeiras. Her father, now dead,
had been appointed governor, by Prince Henry, of a little island called
Porto Santo, and Felipa and her mother (with whom the young couple went
to live) had many a tale to tell about that far outpost of the Atlantic.
This is probably what set Christopher yearning for the sea; and so,
about 1479, he and his wife and her mother, Senora Perestrello, all
sailed off for Porto Santo. The Senora must have liked her new son-in-
law's enthusiasm for the sea, for she gave him the charts and
instruments that had belonged to her husband; but as Governor
Perestrello had never been a navigator, these could not have been either
very numerous or very helpful.

From Porto Santo, Columbus made a voyage to Guinea and back; and after
that he and his family went to live on the larger island of Madeira.
There, according to many men who knew Columbus well, the following event
happened.

One day a storm-tossed little caravel, holding four sick, battered,
Portuguese sailors and a Spanish pilot, all of them little more than
living skeletons, was blown on the Madeira shore near where Christopher
dwelt. Their tale was a harrowing one. They had started, they said,
months before from the Canaries for the Madeiras, but had been blown
far, far, far, to the west; and then, when the wind quieted down so that
they could try to get back, their ship became disabled and their food
gave out. Starvation and exposure had nearly finished them; four, in
fact, died within a day or two; but the Spanish pilot, the one who had
kept his strength long enough to steer toward Madeira, lived longer. The
kind-hearted Christopher, who was devoured with curiosity, had had the
poor fellow carried to his own home. He and Felipa did all they could
for him, but their nursing could not restore him. The pilot, seeing that
he would never be able to make another voyage, added a last detail to
the story he first told; namely, that his ship had actually visited a
new land hundreds of miles out in the Atlantic Ocean! A proof of
Christopher's own suspicions! Can you not see him, the evening after his
talk with the pilot, standing at sunset on some high point of Madeira,
and looking wistfully out over the western water, saying, "I _must_
sail out there and find those lands. I know I can do it!" So he went
back to Lisbon to try.

Certain it is that Columbus's absorbing interest in the unknown,
mysterious west dates from his returning to Lisbon to live. Not only did
he talk earnestly with men who had interests in the Atlantic isles, he
studied all the available geographical works. Before the time came to
leave for Spain he had read the wonderful "Relation" (or Narrative) of
Marco Polo; the "Imago Mundi" (Image of the World) by Cardinal d'Ailly;
the "Historia Rerum" (History of Things) by Pope Pius II.; and he had
studied Ptolemy's "Geography." From this small library came all the
scientific knowledge, true and false, that Christopher ever had. From
these he built up whatever theories of the universe he may have laid
before the sovereigns of Spain.

Marco Polo, the Venetian, had traveled, as every one knows, across Asia
to Cathay (China) in the thirteenth century and had visited the Great
Khan or Emperor. On his return he wrote the "Relation," a most
exaggerated but fascinating account of the wealth of that remote land
and of Cipango (Japan) also, which the Chinese had told him about. The
"Imago Mundi" was certainly better reading for him, because less
exaggerated; whatever myths and fables it contained, it was not the sort
of book to turn a young man's thoughts toward amassing wealth. Instead,
its author had gathered together all that was known or seriously argued
concerning this world. On this curious old volume Christopher pinned his
entire faith. It became his bedside companion; and his copy of it, full
of notes in his own handwriting and in that of his brother Bartholomew
as well, may be seen to-day in the Columbian Library in Sevilla.

For centuries it has been asserted by men who have written about
Columbus that the most important event during his Lisbon days was his
correspondence with a learned astronomer named Paolo Toscanelli.
Columbus, they argue, having formed the plan of sailing west to discover
a route to the Indies (which Columbus never thought of doing at that
early day), wrote to ask Toscanelli's advice, and the wise Florentine
approved most heartily. It appears from the astronomer's letter that he
never dreamed, any more than did Columbus, that a whole continent lay
far off in the unexplored western ocean. He supposed the world to be
much smaller than it really is, with the ocean occupying only a seventh
of it; and that if one sailed three or four thousand miles west, he
would surely come to the islands of Cipango (pronounced in Italian Tchi-
pango), or Japan, lying off the mainland of Cathay or China. Toscanelli,
like Columbus, had read all about the Far East in Marco Polo's book, and
was convinced that if the Venetian had reached it by going east
overland, some one else might reach it by going west oversea.
Accordingly he encouraged the aspiring young explorer. He told Columbus,
furthermore, that he had talked with an ambassador from the Far East who
came to the court of Pope Eugenius IV. "I was often in the Ambassador's
company," he wrote, "and he told me of the immense rivers in his
country, and of two hundred cities with marble bridges upon the banks of
a single river." Of Cipango he wrote, "This island contains such an
abundance of precious stones and metals that the temples and royal
palaces are covered with plates of gold!"

The Toscanelli letter is dated 1474, and begins: "To Christopher
Columbus, Paul the Physician, health: I see thy noble and great desire
to go there where grow the spices." But the strange thing is that
Columbus never made use of it in pleading before kings, nor did he even
mention Toscanelli and the route to India. Neither in all his writings
can the name of Toscanelli be found; and it was not till after
Columbus's death (and Toscanelli's), when others began to write history,
that the document was made public. Most Columbian scholars therefore
doubt its genuineness, and think it was not written by Toscanelli in
1474, but by some one in Lisbon long after Columbus had actually made
his discovery.

In any case, the pilot's story was a far more likely factor in sending
Christopher west. Nor is it to his discredit that he was willing to risk
his life on a dying sailor's wild, improbable tale, rather than on an
astronomer's carefully worked out theory. Whether our navigator had
theories or not is of little consequence compared to the fact that he
had boldness, tenacity, and the spirit of adventure.

"The King of Portugal refused with blindness to second me in my projects
of maritime discovery."

So Christopher declares in his Journal; but in spite of his way of
putting it, King John did not blindly refuse to listen to him. Let us
see what, according to two Portuguese historians, really happened when,
on his return from Madeira about 1483, he solicited aid.

Columbus told the monarch, who himself knew a great deal about
navigation, but who was not nearly as intelligent as his uncle, Prince
Henry, how the persistent rumors he had heard at Madeira concerning land
in the west made him eager to undertake a western voyage of discovery;
and how, if only the king would give him a fleet and some sailors, he
would lead them out until they found "lands." The king, who was really
not so blind as Columbus thought, did not refuse, but said he must first
submit the idea to his Council for Geographical Affairs. This Council
consisted of two Jewish doctors and a bishop. The doctors were noted
students of geography, yet they declared the scheme to be impossible,
and Columbus to be a "visionary."

That such an answer could have been made by men whose nation had been so
bold on the sea for fifty years past is at first glance surprising. But
one must remember that the Portuguese had been merely feeling their way
along Africa. They had perfect confidence in a southern route that
hugged the shore. South was safe; but west beyond the Azores, where
there was no shore to hug, was quite another matter; they felt that
their own navigators, in finding the Azores, had reached the ultimate
limits in that direction. Their disagreement may not have been caused by
fear, but by realizing that the instruments and ships of the day were
not sufficient for such hazardous undertakings. This fact Columbus
realized too, and hence his greater bravery. Besides, argued the
Portuguese, would there be any profit at the end of the enterprise? They
felt sure that at the end of their own southern expeditions lay those
same rich (but vague) Indies which Arab merchants reached by going
overland southeast through Asia or south through Egypt; it was all "the
Indies" to them, and their navigators were sure to come in touch with
it. But who could possibly predict what would be reached far off in the
vast west! Why, they wondered, was this Italian so sure of himself (for
the story of the shipwrecked pilot had not yet come to their ears); and
why, they further wondered, should he ask such large rewards for finding
islands that would probably be nothing more than rocky points in the
ocean, like the Azores. No, they concluded, the Italian was a
"visionary," and the Council for Geographical Affairs advised the king
accordingly.

Seeing that nothing was to be gained by remaining in Portugal, and
having become involved soon after in some political trouble, Columbus
decided to leave for Spain, and offer to Ferdinand and Isabella the
western lands which King John of Portugal had refused.


CHAPTER V

A SEASON OF WAITING


Columbus by this time was about thirty-five. His reddish-brown hair had
turned white. He had no money; on the contrary, he was in debt. His good
wife Felipa had died, and he had to find some place where he could leave
his little son Diego while he went to court to ask for ships. Felipa had
a sister married to a Spaniard and living in Huelva. With this lady
Columbus decided to leave the boy.

They left Lisbon by ship, it is supposed; but instead of taking a ship
bound direct for Huelva, Christopher picked out one bound for Palos, a
port not far from Huelva; moreover, on landing, instead of conducting
the child at once to his aunt, he trudged a few miles back of Palos with
him to a lonely old convent among the sand dunes, called La Rabida
(pronounced Ra'bida). About his haste to reach this spot Christopher had
not breathed a word in the town where he had just landed; in fact, he
always remained silent about it; but it appears that he went there to
question a Portuguese monk named Marchena whom he had known in Portugal.
This monk was an excellent cartographer, or map-maker, and Christopher
wished to talk with him about the western lands.

This good monk may have already heard in Portugal about the pilot. At
any rate he was much interested in his visitor, and ordered that the
monks should feed the hungry little Diego while he and Diego's father
held council in one of the cool little cells of the convent.

"Tarry with us a while, Senor," said the monk, "and I will send for the
learned Doctor Fernandez of Palos, who has read much science, and for
the brave Captain Martin Alonzo Pinzon, who has made many voyages. Let
us hear what they have to say about the possibility of finding this
island which you believe to lie off in the western sea."

So a messenger was sent back over the dusty road to Palos, and soon
Doctor Garcia Fernandez, mounted on his mule, appeared at the gate of La
Rabida. The monks showed him in and made him acquainted with their
visitor. The doctor was at once impressed and saw that this was no
ordinary traveler. White hair surmounting a highly intelligent face,
dreaming eyes, inspired voice--this combination did not come every day
to La Rabida. He knew that the foreigner would prove interesting and he
proceeded to explain that his friend Martin Alonzo Pinzon could not
come, as he was at that moment away on a voyage.

"But you must remain with us till he comes back," declared the monk
Marchena, "for no man in all Spain is more experienced in matters of
navigation. You must tell him about this island you propose to
discover." And Fernandez, when he heard Christopher's tale, said the
same thing. Thus it was that little Diego never got to his aunt in
Huelva; for by the time Martin Alonzo had returned, the monks had grown
so fond of the child, and were so impressed with the great future that
lay before his inspired father, that they offered to keep him and
educate him free of all expense. This offer Columbus was glad to accept.

The man whose return Columbus awaited in the hospitable monastery of La
Rabida belonged to the most influential family of Palos. For generations
the Pinzons had all been sailor-merchants and had amassed considerable
wealth. The head of the family still sailed the seas; and as, in Palos
and in near-by Huelva, many Portuguese lived who boasted about the
discoveries their country had made, his interest had been much piqued by
their talk. He was educated and open-minded. Moreover, he was considered
the best navigator of all who sailed from that important maritime region
of Huelva.

When Pinzon got back to Palos, he learned that the monks of La Rabida
had been eagerly awaiting him, in order that he might meet their
interesting visitor. Off he hastened; and from the moment he and
Columbus met, each recognized in the other a master spirit. Whether or
not Columbus and Marchena told Pinzon at that time the story of the
pilot is not known; but certainly he heard it later. We only know that
they talked of lands to be discovered in the west, and that Pinzon
offered to go on the expedition as captain in case Columbus should be
successful in getting permission and help from the Spanish sovereigns.

From La Rabida Columbus went to the large and important city of Sevilla,
carrying letters of introduction from the monk Marchena. In Sevilla he
had an interview with the powerful Duke of Medina Sidonia who was much
interested in his project at first, but soon gave it up. Next he met the
Duke of Medina Celi, who was even more powerful, and with whom Columbus
spent a year while waiting for a favorable opportunity to lay his plans
before the court. When the proper moment came, the duke acquainted the
queen with Columbus's matter, and she in answer invited the would-be
explorer to come to Cordova. This was in January, 1486.

It has often been stated that Columbus, while still in Lisbon, had
applied both to Genoa and to Venice for aid. This is no longer believed,
as no proofs can be found. There is, however, some reason for believing
that he sent his brother Bartholomew to England and France to urge the
matter. Columbus himself nowhere gives the details of these missions,
though he does say, in a letter to the Spanish monarchs, "In order to
serve your Highnesses, I listened neither to England nor France, whose
princes wrote me letters." Another bit of evidence regarding the French
appeal is a letter, written after the discovery, by the Duke of Medina
Celi to Cardinal Mendoza. Cardinal Mendoza was King Ferdinand's prime
minister, and the duke, having befriended Columbus soon after his
arrival from Portugal, and again some years afterward, asked a favor of
the cardinal, saying, "You must remember that I prevented Columbus from
going into the service of France and held him here in Spain."

Perhaps some scholar may some day unearth the correspondence between
Columbus and the French king; but at present we have only the hints
given above, along with the fact that Columbus, when finally dismissed
from Granada in 1492, started for France.

In describing Columbus's suit in Spain the names of great churchmen--
cardinals, bishops, priests, monks,--will frequently appear, and it will
be well to understand why his fate so often lay in their hands. During
the Dark Ages the only people who received any education were the
clergy. Their education gave them great power over the ignorant; and
even after the dawn of the Renaissance, when other classes began to
demand education, the clergy were still looked up to as possessing the
bulk of the world's wisdom.

Thus every king's counselors were mostly churchmen. If those
ecclesiastics had always tried to deserve their reputation for wisdom,
it might have been a good arrangement. Unfortunately, some were narrow-
minded and gave their king bad advice; happily, some were wise and good
as well as powerful, and a few of this sort in Spain helped Christopher
Columbus to make his dreams come true.

Many writers speak bitterly of the way in which King Ferdinand and Queen
Isabella temporized with Columbus. It was hard, indeed, for a man
burning up with a great and glorious plan to be kept so long from
executing it; but a glance into Spanish affairs at the moment when the
man brought his idea into Spain will show that its rulers were not so
culpable after all. We have already seen how long and how vigorously the
sovereigns were pushing the Moorish war; but this was not their only
anxiety. Spain's finances, owing to the misrule of previous kings, were
in a very bad way. To get money, taxes were raised; and high taxes, as
we know, always cause dissatisfaction among the people. Then, too, a
death-dealing pestilence swept over the land and claimed thousands of
victims.

This is only a partial account of Spain's woes at the time when the man
with the idea arrived; but it shows clearly how the king and queen may
have been too busy and too worried to give much time or money to a
"dreaming foreigner." They gave him just enough of each to keep up his
hopes and prevent him from going elsewhere. Columbus himself must have
realized that he had not come at a fortunate time, and that there was
nothing to do but to wait patiently.

Spain in those days had no capital. Both Ferdinand and Isabella led the
army and established themselves in whatever city was most convenient for
their military operations. At the time they heard, through the Duke of
Medina Celi, of the Genoese navigator who had a great plan for discovery
to unfold to them, they were in the ancient city of Cordova; but, even
after requesting that Columbus be sent to Cordova, they could not give
much heed to him because they had to hasten to the Moorish frontier and
open their campaign against the kingdom of Granada. After a time they
returned to Cordova, but only to start immediately for the north, where
one of their nobles had raised a rebellion. During these months, all
that Columbus could do to further his cause was to make the acquaintance
of a favorite of the king named Alonzo de Quintanilla. This gentleman
proved friendly, and invited Columbus to accompany him to the city of
Salamanca. The court was to pass the winter there, and Quintanilla hoped
to secure an audience for his new friend.

He was successful. Columbus spoke to King Ferdinand, and spoke
eloquently. He himself has described his enthusiasm by saying he felt
"kindled with fire from on high." This fire, unfortunately, did not
spread to his listener. The man to whom Columbus spoke was not given to
warm impulses. On the contrary, he was cold and shrewd. He never decided
matters hastily; least of all a matter that involved expenses. We do not
know exactly what answer Ferdinand made to the impassioned pleader, but
we do know that he first sought the opinions of the learned men of
Salamanca.

Concerning these opinions there are contradictory reports, just as there
are about all of Columbus's actions in Spain. Some say that the
ecclesiastics (who were also professors at the renowned university in
Salamanca) and a few scientific men besides met in the Convent of San
Esteban (St. Stephen) to discuss Columbus's project. To-day the monks in
San Esteban show tourists the very room in which the meeting was held;
yet there is not an atom of real proof that any such meeting took place
there. We only know that an informal gathering was called, and that
whoever the professors and churchmen were who listened to Columbus's
story, they were mostly narrow-minded; they had no imagination. Instead
of trying to see the bigness and the wonder of his belief, they looked
at Columbus suspiciously and said that they could find no mention of a
_round_ world in the Bible, and it was heresy to believe anything
that could not be found in the Bible. Others, believing in the sphere,
still could not find in Christopher's reference to the rumors current in
Madeira sufficient reason for giving him ships to test the truth of
those rumors.

Certainly the majority looked upon him as either a heretic or a foolish
dreamer, or perhaps a bold adventurer trying to get money from their
king; but happily a few believed in him, argued on his side, and became
his steadfast friends. The most noted of these was the learned monk,
Diego de Deza. He was intelligent, broad-minded, and generous; and
though he was not able to prevail upon the other professors nor upon the
king, still it must have helped Columbus's cause to have such a
distinguished churchman for his friend.

In the spring of 1487 the monarchs left Salamanca without giving a
definite answer to the anxious man. They were about to begin a campaign
against the Moors in Malaga, down on the Mediterranean coast, and
thither Columbus followed them. Once, when there was a lull in the
siege, he was summoned to the royal tent. Again no definite answer was
given, but again he made a powerful friend. This time it was the
Marchioness of Moya, the queen's dearest companion; and when, soon
after, this lady was wounded by a Moorish assassin who mistook her for
the queen, we may be sure that Isabella's affection deepened; and that,
in gratitude, she listened readily when the kind-hearted marchioness
praised the Genoese navigator.

From the surrender of Malaga until that of Granada, the last Moorish
city, Ferdinand and Isabella were ever busy,--sometimes in the south
with their armies, sometimes attending to general government affairs in
various cities of the north. All this time they were having hard work to
raise war funds. It would not be strange, therefore, if they felt unable
to spend money on Columbus's doubtful scheme, or if they told him that
it would be impossible further to consider his project until the Moorish
war should terminate.


CHAPTER VI

A RAY OF HOPE


Until the Moorish war should end!

Imagine the disappointment of this man who had been trying for years to
prove that lands lay far across the Atlantic, yet no one cared enough
about his grand idea to give him a few ships! Who could tell when the
Moorish war would end? And who could tell whether it would end in favor
of the Spanish? Why, he must have asked himself, should he, no longer
young, wait to see?

Accordingly, in the spring of 1488 he wrote, so he says, to the king of
Portugal asking permission to return. King John not only invited him to
come back, but promised that no one should be allowed to bring any
lawsuit against him. This refers, perhaps, to the sums Columbus had
borrowed for trading purposes and had lost. About the same time came a
message from the English king, whom Bartholomew Columbus had visited.
Neither letter contained any definite promise of assistance; but the
mere fact that other countries were interested caused Ferdinand and
Isabella some anxiety. They must have considered how humiliating it
would be for them to turn away this opportunity that was knocking at
their door, and send it to rival kingdoms. They decided, war or no war,
to have all the learned men of Spain come together and listen to the
Italian's project. If a majority of these wise men thought the voyage
might prove profitable, then they would immediately give Columbus the
necessary ships and men. Accordingly they issued three important orders:
one, bidding Columbus to appear before a learned council in Sevilla;
another, commanding every town through which he might pass in reaching
Sevilla to give him hospitality; a third, commanding Sevilla itself to
give him lodging and to treat him as if he were a government official.
All this must have looked so promising, so much in earnest, that
Columbus willingly put off his return to Portugal. In spite of the
narrow-mindedness he had encountered in the learned men of Salamanca, he
started off, full of hope, to talk to the same sort of learned men of
Sevilla. But it all came to naught. For some reason now unknown the
meeting was postponed; and the summer campaign starting soon after, the
government had other matters to consider.

In August of that year, 1488, Columbus's younger son Fernando, whose
mother was a Spanish woman, was born in Cordova, and soon after the
father appears to have returned to Lisbon.

Here again we do not know what happened; the only proof we have that he
made the journey at all is a memorandum written by him in his copy of
the "Imago Mundi." It is dated Lisbon, December, 1488, and states that
Bartholomew Dias had just rounded southern Africa--the Cape of Good
Hope. Whether Columbus made another fruitless appeal to Portugal we
shall never know. We only know that, instead of going from Lisbon to
England, he went back to procrastinating Spain. That he came back by
King Ferdinand's summons is almost positive, for another royal decree
was issued for every city through which he passed to furnish him with
board and lodging at the king's expense. This was in May, 1489, which
means that another summer campaign was in progress when Columbus entered
Spain. The monarchs who took the trouble to bring him back had no time
for his project after he reached Spain.

For almost two years, that is, till the end of 1491, the waiting
navigator again resided with the Duke of Medina Celi who still had faith
in his proposed explorations.

The duke was by far the most powerful friend Columbus had made in Spain,
for he possessed and governed a large principality that was practically
independent of the Crown. He lived in royal splendor and held court like
a king. When Spain went to war, the duke could fit out a whole army from
his own dominions and send them forth under his own banner to fight for
the king. Columbus must have felt greatly encouraged over retaining the
good will of such a mighty personage; indeed, the duke himself was quite
rich enough to give the necessary ships.

But, somehow, he failed to do so; probably because he feared that the
sovereigns might object to having a private individual steal away the
glory they themselves had no time to reap. Our navigator, again
disheartened because the years were slipping away, announced to his host
that he would start for France. At this the duke wrote to the queen
personally, telling her what a pity it would be to let France have the
profits of such a discovery. Also, he wrote a very kind letter of
commendation for Columbus to take to her Majesty, a letter which is
still preserved; but even with this powerful backing Columbus got no
help, as we shall see.

The monarchs, having conquered most of the Moorish cities, were
preparing to lay siege to the last stronghold, Granada. Columbus craved
an answer from them before the siege began. They requested Bishop
Talavera to immediately obtain opinions from the wisest men he could
reach, and report their verdict. The majority of wise men, it is sad to
relate, again pronounced Columbus's enterprise vain and impossible; the
Atlantic Ocean could not be crossed; but the minority, headed by the
wise monk, Diego de Deza of Salamanca, who was now tutor to young Prince
John, upheld it vigorously, and told the queen that the plan was
perfectly feasible. The poor sovereigns, who were neither scientists nor
churchmen, but merely hard-working soldiers and governors, did not know
which view to take. Again they evaded a positive answer, making the war
their excuse; and again Columbus, indignant at their evasion, determined
to go to France.

Right here we come to one of the most picturesque incidents in this
checkered life,--an incident that takes us again to that hot, dusty,
southwestern corner where we saw him first enter Spain with the child
trudging by his side.

Columbus appears to have decided that, before starting for France, it
would be well to remove Diego from La Rabida and place him with the baby
step-brother Fernando in Cordova, so that Fernando's mother might bring
up the two lads together. With this end in view, he again presented
himself (and again afoot, for he was far too poor to ride a mule) before
the gate of the low, white monastery near Palos. The first time he had
rung that bell it was with hope in his heart; this time he was dejected.
He had no hope, so far as Spain was concerned. The good monk Marchena
had certainly done his best, but it had come to naught. There was
nothing left but to thank them all and get to France as soon as
possible. So mused Christopher sadly as he waited for the gate to open.

But Christopher did not know that there had recently come to La Rabida a
new prior or chief monk. This prior, whose name was Juan Perez
(pronounced Hwan Pair'eth), possessed, fortunately, an imagination and a
certain amount of influence at court. Having imagination, he loved an
occasional bit of news from the outside world. Therefore, when he heard
a stranger talking to the monks in the outer courtyard, he listened.

"That man is no ordinary beggar asking alms," said the sympathetic prior
to himself. "He seems to be a foreigner, and he is talking about the
king and queen, and the conquest of Malaga; and now he is asking for our
little pupil Diego--why, it is the child's father!--I must go and speak
to him myself!" and out he went and joined the group in the courtyard.

And so it came about that as soon as Christopher had greeted his boy,
now grown into a tall, intelligent lad of ten or eleven, he repaired to
the cell of Juan Perez and told all that had happened to him during his
various sojourns at court. At last (for Christopher was very wordy) he
came to his final dismissal. "They say the Atlantic cannot be crossed,"
he cried desperately, "but I say it can! Aye, and I shall do it, too!"

Never had such stirring words rung out in that peaceful little cell. The
prior himself caught their electricity and became quite excited.
Although the monk Marchena appears to have left the convent before
Christopher's second coming, the prior had learned all about the Italian
navigator from the other brothers. The story had interested him greatly,
for he too had studied geography; and now, as the Italian stood before
him, declaring that he would find those western lands, the prior
realized that it would be a pity for Spain to allow the man to carry his
idea off to France.

"Linger yet a few days with us, senor," he urged, "that I may learn from
Pinzon and Doctor Fernandez what they think of your scheme. If they
still regard it favorably, I myself will go to the queen, in your
behalf."

Perhaps just here the senor shook his head sadly and said, "No, no; it
is not worth the trouble. The queen is interested only in the Moorish
war. Not even the great Diego de Deza, nor the Marchioness of Moya, nor
the Duke of Medina Celi, have been able to prevail on her."

And perhaps just here the good prior smiled knowingly and replied
modestly, "I once had the honor of being Queen Isabella's confessor, and
had great influence with her. If"--and here he leaned close to
Christopher and whispered something--"I think I might persuade her."

We did not catch that whispered sentence quite clearly, but we believe
it to have been, "If I tell her the story of the shipwrecked pilot." Up
to this time Christopher had not referred to it in his pleadings, for
fear, perhaps, that it would sound too improbable; but down in this
corner of Spain, where all men followed the sea, the story had got about
(whether through the monk Marchena, or through sailors who had been to
Madeira, is uncertain) and nearly everybody believed it. So now Juan
Perez appears to have persuaded Christopher to use it as a last
argument. This we may reasonably conclude, since the Rabida monk's
intercession with the queen succeeded where all previous efforts had
failed.

Martin Alonzo Pinzon, it turns out, is in Rome; so Christopher has to
wait until his return. Another delay, but he is well used to that.
Meanwhile he turns it to profit by making trips to Palos, Huelva,
Moguer, and other ports where he can question sailors newly returned
from the west. For half a dozen years he has been out of touch with
mariners and their doings, and these trips must have given him deep
pleasure. For this is his true place,--among men who have known the
rough hardships of seafaring life, and not among grandees and courtiers.
He breathes in the salt air and chats with every man he meets. A pilot
of Palos, Pedro de Velasco by name, tells him that he too once thought
of going into the west, but after sailing one hundred and fifty leagues
southwest of Fayal (one of the Azores), and seeing nothing but banks of
seaweed, he turned north and then northwest, only to again turn back;
but he is sure, he adds, that _if only he had kept on_ he would
have found land.

Christopher, also, as we know, is quite sure of it, and says so. Another
day, in a seaport near Cadiz, he meets another pilot who tells him that
he sailed far west from the Irish coast and saw the shores of Tartary!
Christopher probably has some doubts of this, so he merely shrugs his
shoulders and walks off. He is impatient for Martin Alonzo Pinzon to
return. It is disturbing to learn that other men have been getting
nearer and nearer to _his_ land.

At last Pinzon comes and announces, to add to Christopher's uneasiness,
that he has been searching in the Pope's library, in Rome, for
information regarding that enormously rich Asiatic island called
Cipango. As they all sit in the little cell at La Rabida, talking about
the proposed western voyage of discovery, Pinzon cannot help throwing in
a word occasionally about Cipango. He has been reading Marco Polo, and
Japan, or Cipango, is very much on his mind. Perhaps on Christopher's,
also, but _he_ is content to stick to his "western lands." About
this scheme the two men of Palos, Pinzon and Doctor Fernandez, are as
enthusiastic as ever; Martin Alonzo Pinzon repeats his offer to sail as
captain of one of the ships; he even goes further, for he offers to
advance money for the venture in case the Crown is unwilling or unable
to provide the entire sum necessary. All this sounds very promising to
the good prior, who vows that he is willing to speak with the queen if
Christopher will give up forever his idea of going to France. It is a
last ray of hope to the discouraged man, and he agrees.

And so that very day a courier started out from the white monastery
among the dark pine trees to find the queen at Granada, and give her
Friar Juan's letter craving an interview on "an important matter." In
those days it took two weeks, at least, for a courier to ride from Palos
to Granada and back. On the fourteenth day, we may be sure, the prior
and his guest kept scanning the eastern horizon anxiously. That very
evening the man returned. He brought a royal letter granting the monk's
request.

"Splendid!" cried the old monk. "I shall start this very night! Find me
a mule, some one."

So everybody scurried around the neighborhood to see who would lend the
prior a mule; and finally a man of Moguer said he would spare his beast
awhile, though he never would have lent him to any other man than the
good prior of La Rabida! Then he ventured to hope that the prior would
not ride him too hard; as if any one, even an enthusiast helping to
discover America, could ride a mule "too hard"!

By midnight the mule was brought up, and off started the prior, followed
by the good wishes of everybody who was in the secret. Queen Isabella
received him the moment he arrived at her camp of Santa Fe (Holy Faith)
below the walls of Granada. With intense fervor he pleaded Columbus's
cause. The Marchioness of Moya--the lady who had been wounded by the
Moor at Malaga in mistake for the queen--was present, and she added her
persuasions. The result was that Isabella not only commanded Columbus to
appear before her, but she sent him money to buy suitable court raiment
and to travel to Granada in comfort. How happy Friar Juan must have been
when he sent the following letter back by royal courier to the waiting
guest in La Rabida:--

"All has turned out well. Far from despising your project, the queen has
adopted it from this time. My heart swims in a sea of comfort and my
spirit leaps with joy in the Lord. Start at once, for the queen waits
for you, and I more than she. Commend me to the prayers of my good
brethren and of your little boy Diego."

What a dear, human, lovable old gentleman was that Rabida prior! May his
spirit still "leap with joy in the Lord!"

Columbus was buoyed up again. To be sure the queen promised nothing
definite; but she had always told him that she would give him more
attention when the war was over, and the courier declared that things
were going very badly for the beleaguered Moorish city of Granada. It
was the enemy's last citadel and, said he, it could not hold out much
longer. Columbus, perhaps, took the news with moderation, for he was
used to having things go wrong; but if only for the sake of the good
brethren, he must have tried to look happy as he put on his new garments
and rode out of La Rabida for Granada.


CHAPTER VII

ISABELLA DECIDES


We have now come to that famous Granada interview described in the first
chapter,--a moment so important that Columbus, when he decided to keep a
journal, opened it with this paragraph:--

"In the present year, 1492, after Your Highnesses had concluded that
warfare in the great city of Granada where I saw the royal banners of
Your Highnesses placed by force of arms on the towers of the Alhambra,
and where I beheld the Moorish King go forth from the gates of his
city...."

How Columbus arrived during the surrender we have already seen; how
everybody of importance at the Spanish court--priests, military leaders,
and government officials--gathered to hear him speak; and how, for the
first time, the majority of his listeners were won over to his unpopular
ideas. We know, too, how their admiration turned to distrust when he
demanded large rewards should his voyage of discovery be successful; and
we know how he was obstinate, and rode away, only to be overtaken by the
queen's messenger at Pinos bridge below the high Elvira Mountains and
brought back. And this is how Queen Isabella happened to recall him.

Those friends who had been encouraging him for the last few years were
deeply distressed over his departure and over the bad impression he had
left at court. They felt that their beloved country was losing a
wonderful opportunity of becoming the foremost power in Europe. England,
France, Italy, all were greater than Spain because they had been forging
ahead while Spain had been hampered by Moorish wars. Even Portugal,
Spain's very small neighbor, had forged ahead by reason of her unequaled
maritime enterprise. One of these countries was sure to grow even more
important through giving Columbus a few ships and a few titles. Said
this little group to each other, "No matter what the man's price, Spain
will have to pay it!"

Luis de Santangel, treasurer of King Ferdinand's realm of Aragon,
determined to go and talk it over with the queen who, apparently, had
not been present at the recent hearing of Columbus. To apply further to
Ferdinand would have been useless, for he had vowed he would have
nothing more to do with the matter. Isabella possessed more imagination
than her husband, and to this imagination Santangel thought he could
appeal.

First he pointed out that Columbus's very stubbornness about rewards
might be taken as proof that he was certain to find whatever he promised
to find; then he reminded her that the navigator was a very devout man,
and that in his enterprise there was a strong religious motive; should
he discover new lands, not only would their heathen population be
converted to Christianity, but their commerce would make Spain so
wealthy that she could undertake a new crusade and conquer the infidels
who held the Holy Sepulchre. This possibility impressed Isabella
profoundly, for she and her husband were the stanchest defenders of
Christianity in all Europe. Now that Santangel had roused her
imagination, he proceeded to make the whole matter clear by a practical
suggestion as to ways and means. He reminded his royal listener that
Columbus had offered to raise one eighth of the expense of the
expedition (Columbus having repeated the offer made at La Rabida by
Pinzon); and as for the remainder, he, Santangel, would be responsible
for it. Either he would lend it himself (he belonged to one of the rich
Jewish families that had become Christian) or he would induce King
Ferdinand to allow it to be taken from the Aragon treasury and repaid
later. (Ferdinand, apparently, was not such an unmanageable person,
after all.)

Right here is where the story of Isabella pledging her jewels would come
in if there were sufficient reasons for believing it, but there is
little proof of it; indeed, rather more against it. Not only did
Santangel show the queen how the money could be obtained otherwise, but,
as she had already pledged much of her jewelry in Valencia and Barcelona
in order to aid the Moorish war, her husband's treasurer would surely
have deterred her from parting with more. However, she was now so
enthusiastic over Columbus's affair that she undoubtedly would have made
some such offer had no other means of raising the money been found.

The queen knew that her husband disapproved of the would-be discoverer's
high terms; she knew that all the grandees of the kingdom disapproved;
she knew that the expedition might end in failure and bring down
ridicule on her head; and yet she rose and cried in ringing tones,
"Bring the man back! I will undertake this thing for my own crown of
Castile."

Isabella, we must remember, was queen of Castile and Leon, and Ferdinand
was king of Aragon, each still ruling his own portion, although their
marriage had united these portions into one kingdom. Hence, though
Ferdinand had lost interest in Columbus's affair, Isabella was quite
free to aid him. It was to commemorate her personal venture that later,
after they had allowed Columbus to adopt a coat of arms, some poet wrote
on its reverse side the famous couplet which excluded Aragon from a
share in the discovery:--

  A Castilla y a Leon
  Nuevo mundo dio Colon.

  To Castile and to Leon
  Columbus gave a new world.

The great moment having come when a Spanish sovereign cried out, "Bring
the man back! The thing shall be done!" it was done. Columbus, on
hearing these things from the messengers, turned his mule back to
Granada. The necessary papers were drawn up to provide ships and men;
also, an order creating Christopher Columbus, or Cristobal Colon as he
was called in Spain, Admiral and Viceroy, and granting all the other
demands he had made in the event of his voyage being successful. Even
the reluctant Ferdinand now fell in with his wife's schemes and signed
the order along with her.

The preparing of these papers took some time. Columbus had returned to
Granada in late December, 1491, and it was not until April 17 the
following year that "the greatest paper monarch ever put pen to" was
signed. The fact that it refers to discoveries _already made_ and
discoveries to be made in the Ocean Sea is our strongest reason for
believing that the pilot's story had been laid before the sovereigns.
Christopher's long years of uncertainty were ended; the man's great
perseverance had won out at last; and the weary petitioner who, some
months before, had ridden doubtingly forth from La Rabida now rode back,
bursting with joy, to fall on the good prior's neck and weep out his
gratitude.


CHAPTER VIII

OFF AT LAST!


Oddly enough, the ships Columbus was to take on his voyage were,
according to royal command, to be supplied by that very seaport of Palos
by which he is supposed to have entered Spain. Palos, Huelva, and
Moguer, all thriving maritime cities in Columbus's day, are grouped at
the mouth of the Rio Tinto. _Tinto_ means deep-colored, like wine;
and as this river flows through the richest copper region in the whole
world, it is not surprising that its waters are reddish, nor that the
copper trade enriched the neighboring towns. How the now unimportant
Palos at the mouth of the Rio Tinto came to be chosen as the seaport
from which Columbus should embark is an amusing story.

Some time before, its inhabitants had, through disobedience or some
other offense, incurred the displeasure of their sovereigns. By way of
punishment, the Crown ordered that Palos should fit out two caravels at
its own expense and lend them to the government for a year whenever the
government should call for them. The royal intention was, no doubt, to
use the boats against Naples and Sicily, which they hoped to conquer
after finishing the Moorish war. But when they decided finally to help
Columbus, they remembered the punishment due Palos, and called upon it
to give the two caravels to "Cristobal Colon, our captain, going into
certain parts of the Ocean Sea on matters pertaining to our service."

Thus while Ferdinand and Isabella meant to punish the little town, they
instead conferred a great honor upon it. Little did Columbus dream, the
day on which he and his boy approached it so empty-handed five years
before, that he was to make it forever famous. Palos to-day is a
miserably poor, humble little place; but its people, especially the
Pinzon family who still live there, are very proud that it was the
starting-point of the momentous voyage of discovery; and hundreds of
tourists visit it who never know that the sovereigns had intended
punishing, instead of glorifying, the port.

In May, 1492, however, when Columbus returned from Granada, the Palos
inhabitants did not see any glory at all! They saw nothing but the heavy
penalty. Not only did this royal command mean that every citizen of
Palos must furnish money to buy the ships and pay the crew, it meant
that the ships and crew would never come back again from the "Sea of
Darkness"! An expedition through the well-known Mediterranean to Sicily
or Naples would have seemed like a pleasure trip compared with the
terrifying one now contemplated! They were handing over the equipment to
a madman! Poor little Palos was filled with misgiving, and we may be
sure that Columbus, as he passed through the streets, was looked upon as
the common enemy.

The royal decree ordered Palos to have its contribution ready in ten
days; meanwhile, a third caravel was to be bought; but so violently were
the people of Palos opposed to the enterprise that not a single ship-
owner would sell his vessel. Another difficulty was to get a crew of
experienced seamen. With very few exceptions, sailors were afraid to go
out on the unexplored Atlantic Ocean beyond the Azores. Spanish sailors
had not had the excellent schooling of those in Portugal, where, for
seventy years or more, expeditions had been going out to discover new
lands and coming back safely.

Columbus, therefore, found it difficult to induce the sea-going men of
Palos to share his enthusiasm. This difficulty of getting a crew
together must have been foreseen at court, for the royal secretary
issued an order intended to help Columbus, but which instead hurt his
cause and proved most unwise. The curious order in question was to the
effect that all criminals who would sign for the expedition would be
"privileged from arrest or further imprisonment for any offense or crime
committed by them up to this date, and during the time they might be on
the voyage, and for two months after their return from the voyage."

To criminals, apparently, being devoured by monsters rimming the western
Atlantic appeared a better fate than languishing in a cruel Spanish
prison, for the first men who enlisted were from this class. A more
unfortunate method of recruiting a crew could hardly be imagined. Such
men were undesirable, not only because of their lawless character, but
also because they had never before sailed on a ship; and the more this
class rallied to the front, the more the respectable sailors of Palos,
Moguer, Huelva, and other adjacent towns hung back. To go forth into the
unknown was bad enough; to go there in the society of malefactors was
even worse.

Here again Juan Perez, the good priest of La Rabida, and Pinzon, the
friendly navigator of Palos, came forward and helped. Friar Juan went
among the population exhorting them to have faith in Columbus as
_he_ had faith in him; he explained to them all that he understood
of geography, and how, according to his understanding, the Italian was
sure to succeed. As we know, a priest was often the only educated man in
an entire community, and was looked up to accordingly; and so Friar Juan
was able to persuade several respectable men to enter Columbus's
service. As for Pinzon, both his moral and his practical support were so
great that it is doubtful whether the expedition could have been
arranged without him. Long before, at the Rabida conference, he had
offered to go as captain; now he induced his two brothers to sign also.
Palos, seeing three members of its most important family ready to go,
took heart. Pinzon next helped to find the three vessels needed, and put
them in order. One of these ships belonged to Juan de la Cosa, a well-
known pilot, and Juan himself was prevailed upon to sail with it. (Later
this Juan became a great explorer and made the first map of the New
World.) Another and less fortunate purchase was of a vessel whose owners
regretted the sale the moment they had parted with her; so down they
went to where the calkers and painters were making her seaworthy for the
voyage, and tried to persuade them to do everything just as badly as it
could be done. One can readily see that these were hard days for
Christopher Columbus. The preparations that Queen Isabella expected
would take only ten days took ten long weeks.

[Illustration: THE THREE CARAVELS OF COLUMBUS.]

When finally ready, Columbus's little fleet consisted of three caravels
--the _Santa Maria_, the _Pinta_, and the _Nina_
(pronounced Neen'ya). A caravel was a small, roundish, stubby sort of
craft, galley-rigged, with a double tower at the stern and a single one
in the bow. It was much used in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
for the herring fisheries which took men far from the coast; and when
the Portuguese tried to find far-off India, they too used the caravel
form of vessel.

The largest vessel of the "Discovery Fleet" was only sixty-five or
seventy feet long by about twenty feet in breadth, and of one hundred
tons' burden; Columbus having purposely chosen small ships because they
would be better adapted for going close to shore and up rivers. Only the
_Santa Maria_ was decked amidships, the others had their cabins at
either end. The cross was painted on all the sails. Columbus commanded
the _Santa Maria_, with Juan de la Cosa as pilot; Martin Alonzo
Pinzon took the _Pinta_, and his brother Vincente (pronounced Vin-
then'tay) took the _Nina_.

All told, one hundred men went forth on the famous voyage (although some
writers put it at one hundred and twenty) and a number of these had
never been to sea before. Among the hundred was a notary to draw up all
papers of ownership (when it came to dividing Columbus's tenth part of
the gold, precious stones, etc., that should be found); a historian, to
keep an official record of all that should occur; a metallurgist, to
examine ores; and an orientalist, learned in foreign tongues, who would
interpret what the western peoples might say to the newcomers who
claimed the heathen lands for Spain. Besides these, there were two other
learned men--a physician and a surgeon. Columbus himself was to act as
map-maker and chart-maker. Strange to say, there is no record of a
priest accompanying the expedition.

The great seriousness of the undertaking was felt more and more in Palos
as work on the little caravels progressed. People spoke of it in awed
tones and shook their heads dismally. Every day during the last week or
two all the crew went religiously and faithfully to church. Columbus,
being a religious man, no doubt approved of this; yet it surely would
have sent him forth in better spirits if his crew had looked upon his
venture more light-heartedly, and less as if they were foredoomed to
destruction.

Now that we know the sort of men and ships that were to take part in
this mighty enterprise, let us see the sort of charts and maps and
instruments our navigator carried along; for until one understands these
somewhat, one cannot realize the bravery it took to set out across the
Atlantic in 1492. First, as to maps. Now that this world of ours has
been so thoroughly explored that every bit of land and water is named
and accurately noted, it is difficult for us to understand how the
inaccurate, incomplete, fifteenth-century map could have been of any use
whatever to an explorer. But we must always remember that our Genoese
had a rich imagination. Our maps leave nothing to the imagination,
either of the man who makes them or of us who look at them. Fifteenth-
century maps, on the contrary, were a positive feast for the fifteenth-
century imagination! Their wild beasts and queer legends fascinated as
well as terrified. Their three distinct Indies, two in Asia and one in
Africa, offered every sailor who was intrepid enough a chance to reach
that region of wealth. The latest and most accurate map, marking the
Portuguese discoveries, would really have been helpful to any one who
had not the "Go West" idea so firmly fixed in his mind; but in that one
direction it marked no routes farther than the Madeiras and the Azores.
All beyond these islands was wholly imagination.

It was the same with the sea-charts; no soundings or currents were
marked. As to instruments, there were the lodestone and the compass,
which had been known and used for several centuries; and the astrolabe,
a recent improvement on the primitive quadrant for taking the altitude
of the sun. The hourglass was the time measurer. In short, in that
wonderful fifteenth century, when the surface of the world was doubled,
there was nothing scientific about navigation.

Beyond these slight aids, Christopher Columbus had to rely on an
imperfect knowledge of astronomy and on those practical observations of
wind and weather and water that he had made during his own voyages. Such
slender equipment, plus the tub-like little caravels, would not have
invited many men to try unknown waters, unless such men had
Christopher's blessed gifts of imagination and persistency.

At last the solemn hour has come to those quaking Palos souls. It is
early dawn of August 3, and a Friday at that! The _Santa Maria_ and
the _Pinta_ and the _Nina_ are moored out in the copper-
colored river, ready to go with the tide. Last night the last sack of
flour and the last barrel of wine came aboard; likewise, the last
straggler of the crew, for they must be ready for the early tide. It is
still quite dark, and on the shore all Palos appears to be running about
with lanterns. Friar Juan is there to wring the hands of the one-time
wanderer who came to his gate, and to assure him that one of the Rabida
monks will conduct Columbus's little son Diego safely to Cordova.
Columbus is rowed out to the largest ship. He gives the command and
those ashore hear the pulling up of anchors, the hoisting of sails, and
the cutting of moorings. Then the flags are raised--the Admiral's with a
great cross in the center--and down the murky Tinto go the three little
caravels with their unwilling, frightened, human freight. Those on shore
turn tearfully into church to pray; and those aboard watch the dim
outline of Palos fade away; by and by they notice that the reddish Tinto
has become the blue ocean sparkling in the early sunshine; but no
sparkle enters their timid souls. They can only keep looking longingly
backward till the last tawny rocks of Spain and Portugal are left
behind, and then there is nothing to do but sigh and mutter a dismal
prayer. But Christopher's prayer is one of thankfulness.


CHAPTER IX

"LAND! LAND!"


On the fourth day out from Palos the _Pinta's_ rudder became loose,
and unless the damage could be speedily repaired the ship would soon be
a prey to current and wind. The _Pinta_ was the vessel whose owners
repented having sold her. No wonder then that Columbus suspected the
rascals of having bribed the crew to tamper with the rudder, in the hope
of forcing their ship to put back into Palos. But he would not put back,
he declared. Martin Pinzon was commanding the _Pinta_, and Martin
knew what to do with perverse rudders and perverse men. He immediately
set to work to have the damage repaired. The ship's carpenter must have
done his work very badly, however, for the following day the rudder was
again disabled. Still Columbus would not turn back and risk the chance
of all his crew deserting him. Instead, he continued sailing southwest
to the Canaries--the point from which the shipwrecked pilot was supposed
to have started on his unexpected trip across the Atlantic. These
beautiful islands, from which the imposing peak of Teneriffe rises, had
been known to the ancients as "The Fortunate Isles"; Spain now owned
them and had colonized them, and after the great discovery they became a
regular stopping-place for western-bound vessels.

When Columbus came to repair the rudder, he found the entire ship to be
in even worse order than he had supposed. She was full of leaks, and her
poor sails were not of the right shape to respond to heavy ocean
breezes. He would have given her up altogether could he have found
another boat to take her place; but the sparsely settled Canaries of
1492 were not the much-visited winter resort that they are to-day; no
big ships were then in the harbors; and so there was nothing to do but
patch up the _Pinta_ and change the shape of her sails.

While this was being done, Columbus's waiting crew became acquainted
with the Spanish colonists, and with very good results; for these
islanders had a curious delusion to the effect that every year, at a
certain season, they _saw_ land far off to the west. Men were very
credulous in those days. It is probable that their "land" was nothing
more than clouds which, owing to certain winds of that particular
region, lie low on the horizon for a long time; but the people of the
Canaries, and of the Madeiras too, all firmly believed they saw Antilla
and the other "western lands" of legend; and Columbus, nodding his head
wisely, told how the king of Portugal had shown him some reeds, as large
as those of India, that had been washed up on the western shore of the
Azores. "We shall find land seven hundred and fifty leagues from here,"
he repeated over and over, for that was the distance the pilot said he
had gone. So sure was Columbus that, on leaving the islands, he handed
each pilot sealed instructions to cease navigating during the night
after they had gone seven hundred leagues.

The tales and delusions that flourished in the Canaries put heart into
the crew, so when the little squadron again set forth on September 6 the
men were less hostile to the expedition.

Some excitement was given to this fresh start by a rumor, brought from
one of the islands, that Portuguese ships were seeking the Spanish
fleet, in order to punish Columbus for having sailed in the service of
Spain instead of Portugal. As the pursuers never were seen by the
Spanish ships, that story, too, may have been some islander's delusion;
but it made the crew believe that Columbus's undertaking must look
promising to the great navigating Portuguese nation, or they would not
be jealous of Spain's enterprise.

More than a month had now passed since Columbus had left Palos, and only
a hundred miles out from the African coast were accomplished! Was ever a
man subjected to more delays than our patient discoverer! And now, when
at last he was ready to start due west, a strong head sea prevailed for
two days and would not let them push forward. So that it was actually
not until September 8 that the voyage toward the "western lands" may be
said to have begun.

We have mentioned that Columbus kept a diary on this voyage. He was, in
fact, a prodigious writer, having left behind him when he died a vast
quantity of memoirs, letters, and even good verse; and besides these,
maps and charts in great numbers. No matter how trying the day had been,
with fractious crews and boisterous ocean, no matter how little sleep
the anxious commander had had the night before, no matter how much the
ill-smelling swinging lamp in his cabin rocked about, he never failed to
write in his journal.

This precious manuscript was long in the possession of Columbus's friend
Bartolome de las Casas, who borrowed it because he was writing a history
of Columbus and wished to get all the information, possible in the
navigator's own words.

Las Casas was a monk who spent his life in befriending the Indians. When
quite old, he ceased journeying to the New World and stayed at home
writing history. He copied a great deal of Columbus's diary word for
word, and what he did not actually copy he put into other words. In this
way, although the original log of the _Santa Maria_ no longer
exists, its contents have been saved for us, and we know the daily
happenings on that first trip across the Atlantic.

Nearly every day some little phenomenon was observed which kept up the
spirits of the crew. On September 13 one of them saw a bright-colored
bird, and the sight encouraged everybody; for instead of thinking that
it had flown unusually far out from its African home, they thought it
belonged to the new land they were soon to see. Three days later they
saw large patches of seaweed and judged they would soon see at least a
tiny island. On the 18th the mended _Pinta_, which had run ahead of
the other two boats, reported that a large flock of birds had flown
past; next day two pelicans hovered around, and all the sailors declared
that a pelican never flew more than sixty or seventy miles from home. On
September 21 a whale was seen--"an indication of land," wrote the
commander, "as whales always keep near the coast." The next day there
was a strong head wind, and though it kept them back from the promised
land, Columbus was glad it blew. "This head wind was very necessary for
me," he wrote, "because the crew dreaded that they might never meet in
these seas with a fair wind to drive them back to Spain."

Soon they were passing through the Sargasso Sea (named from the
Portuguese word meaning "floating seaweed"). Its thick masses of
drifting vegetation reassured them, for the silly legend that it could
surround and embed a ship had not then found believers. Many years after
it was discovered that several undercurrents met there and died down,
leaving all their seaweed to linger on the calm, currentless surface.
But back in 1492 the thicker the seaweed, the surer were those sailors
that it indicated land.

Birds and seaweed, seaweed and birds, for over two weeks. Then on
September 25 the monotony was broken. Captain Martin Pinzon called out
from the _Pinta_ that he saw land. Columbus says that when he heard
this shout, he fell on his knees and thanked God. Scanning the horizon,
he too thought he saw land; all of the next day they sailed with every
eye fixed on a far-off line of mountains which never appeared any
nearer. At last the supposed mountains literally rose and rolled away!
It was nothing but low-lying clouds, such as those the Canary Islanders
had mistaken for _terra firma_.

Christopher's heart must have sunk, for they had come over seven hundred
leagues, and for two days he had supposed he was gazing on the island of
his search.

In spite of this disappointment they kept on, for a plant floated by
that had roots which had grown in the earth; also a piece of wood that
had been rudely carved by man; and the number of birds kept increasing.
One can readily see how even the most skeptical man on the expedition
should have felt sure by this time that the man whom he used to consider
a mild maniac was in truth a very wise person. And perhaps the crew did
feel it; but also they felt angry at those signs that mocked them day
after day by never coming true. They grumbled; and the more the signs
increased the more they grumbled; till finally one morning Columbus came
on deck and found that his own helmsman had turned the _Santa
Maria_ eastward, and all the crew were standing by in menacing
attitudes.

The other two ships, as we have seen, were commanded by the Pinzon
brothers; and they, being natives of Palos, had secured all the
respectable Palos men who were willing to enlist; but Columbus had only
the worst element--the jail-birds and loafers from other towns. And here
they stood, saying plainly by their manner, "We are going back! What are
you going to do about it?"

We don't know exactly what he did do about it; Martin Alonzo Pinzon sent
him advice to "hang a few of the rebels; and if you can't manage to hang
them, I and my brothers will row to your ship and do it." But
Christopher appears to have handled the situation without their help,
and without hanging any one; for soon the helmsman swung the _Santa
Maria_ around again. On October 10 trouble broke out afresh, and
Columbus makes this entry in his diary:--

"The crew, not being able to stand the length of the voyage, complained
to me, but I reanimated them."

By October 10 the voyage had lasted some seventy days! No wonder the
crew needed to be "reanimated." Yet, there were the birds flying out to
them, bringing their message of hope, if only the poor frightened men
could have had more faith! The Pinzons meanwhile were having less
trouble; for when their sailors wished to turn back because nothing had
been found seven hundred and fifty leagues west of the Canaries, Martin
Alonzo told them all the absurd tales he had read about Cipango, and
promised them, if only they went ahead, that its wealth would make their
fortune. This appears to have hushed their murmuring; but Christopher
had no such flowery promises to hold forth.

Martin Pinzon, having observed a few days before that most of the birds
flew from the southwest rather than the exact west, suggested to
Columbus that land probably lay nearer in that direction; and Columbus,
to please him, changed his course. It is interesting to speculate on
what might have happened had Pinzon not interfered, for the fleet, by
continuing due west, would have shortly entered the Gulf Stream, and
this strong current would surely have borne them northward to a landing
on the coast of the future United States. But this was not to be. On
Pinzon's advice the rudders were set for the southwest, and nothing
happened for several days except that same passing of birds. On October
11 a fresh green branch floated by; and Columbus, after dark had fallen,
declared he saw a light moving at a distance.

Calling two of his sailors, he pointed it out to them. One agreed that
there was certainly a light bobbing up and down, but the other insisted
that he could see nothing. Columbus did not feel sure enough of his
"light" to claim that it meant land, so he called the ships together and
reminded the crews that their sovereigns had offered to the one who
should first see the shore a pension of ten thousand maravedis (about
twenty-five dollars) a year. In addition, he himself would give a
further reward of a silk doublet. This caused them all to keep a sharp
watch; but land it surely meant, that fitful light which Columbus saw,
for that very night--or about two o'clock in the morning of October 12
--Rodrigo de Triana, a sailor on the _Pinta_, shouted "_Tierra!
Tierra!_" and sure enough, as the dawn grew brighter, there lay a
lovely little green island stretched before their sea-weary eyes!

Who can imagine the tremendous emotions of that famous October morning!
Here were a hundred men who had just demonstrated that the world was
round; for by sailing west they had reached the east--if, as many were
ready to believe, they had come to Martin Alonzo's Cipango! The world
really _was_ a sphere! and at no point in rounding it had they been
in danger of falling off! Here they stood, that marvelous morning of
October 12, on Cipango or some other island off Asia, as they supposed,
with the soles of their feet against the feet of those back in Palos,
and the fact did not even make them feel dizzy. We who have always known
that the earth is a sphere with a marvelous force in its center drawing
toward it all objects on the surface; we who have always known that
ships by the thousands cross the great oceans from one continent to
another; we who have always known that the whole inhabited earth has
long since been explored,--we who were born to such an accumulation of
knowledge can never realize what was the amazement, the joy, of that
little handful of men who, after three lonely months on the unknown
ocean, at last reached unsuspected land.

And the humble Genoese sailor man,--what were his emotions on the great
morning that transformed him into Don Cristobal Colon, Admiral and
Viceroy under their Highnesses, the king and queen of Spain. Let us hope
that he did not think too much about these titles, for we ourselves
don't think about them at all. We are only trying to grasp the joy it
must have given him to know that he had been true to his grand purpose;
that he had waited and suffered for it; and that now, after declaring he
could find lands in the unknown ocean, he had found them. Quite right
was he to put on his scarlet cloak for going ashore, for he had
conquered the terrors of the deep!

How eagerly they all clambered into the small boats and rowed toward the
shore, Columbus and the Pinzon brothers and the notary in the first boat
load. The new Admiral carried the royal standard, and when they leaped
ashore, he planted it in the ground and took possession of the island
for Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain. Then on a little hill they put up a
wooden cross and all knelt before it and poured out their gratitude to
God.


CHAPTER X

NATIVES OF THE NEW LAND


Columbus christened his little coral island San Salvador. The natives
called it Guanahani; but should you look for it on your map you may not
find it under either its native or its Spanish name, for there was no
way, at that early date, of making an accurate map of the whole Bahama
group, and the name San Salvador somehow became shifted in time to
another island. Thus was the original landfall long lost sight of, and
no two writers could agree on the subject. Recently, however, the most
careful students have decided upon the reef now called Watling's Island,
to-day an English possession, as Columbus's first landing-place.

When you see that it is but a tiny dot in the ocean, you may think it an
insignificant spot to have been the scene of the most momentous event of
the Renaissance; you may feel inclined to scold at that well-meaning
Martin Pinzon for asking to have the rudders changed in order to find
his Cipango. But it must be remembered that to have found anything at
all was an unparalleled feat; and furthermore, that wee San Salvador was
not the end of Columbus's expedition; it was merely the beginning,
merely the lighting of that great torch of enterprise and investigation
which was not to be extinguished till the whole American continent and
the whole Pacific Ocean had been explored and mapped out. Columbus that
day started an electric current through the brain of every European
mariner. To discover something across the Atlantic was henceforth in the
very air, and the results were tremendous.

But to return to those happy Spanish sailors who on that October morn of
1492 at last planted their feet on _terra firma_. To explore the
little island did not take long. They found it to be full of green trees
and strange luscious fruits. There were no beasts, large or small, only
gay parrots. The natives, guiltless of clothing, were gentle creatures
who supposed their strange visitors had come from Heaven and reverenced
them accordingly. As the two groups stood looking at each other for the
first time, the natives must have been by far the more astonished.
Spanish eyes were used to races other than the white; they all knew the
brownish Moor; and alas, many of them knew the black Ethiopian too; for,
once the Portuguese started slave-snatching down the African coast, the
Spaniards became their customers, so that by this time, 1492, there were
a good many African slaves in Spain. But the Bahama natives knew of no
race but their own; so what could these undreamed-of visitors be but
divine? Here is Columbus's own description of what happened when the
white man and the red man had scraped acquaintance with each other:--

"As I saw that they were very friendly to us, and perceived that they
could be much more easily converted to our holy faith by gentle means
than by force, I presented them with some red caps and strings of beads
to wear upon the neck, and many other trifles of small value, wherewith
they were much delighted and became greatly attached to us. Afterwards
they came swimming to the boats, bringing parrots, balls of cotton
thread, javelins, and many other things which they exchanged for glass
beads and hawks' bells, which trade was carried on with the utmost good
will. But they seemed on the whole a very poor people. They all were
completely naked. All whom I saw were young, not above thirty years of
age, well made and with fine shapes and faces; their hair short and
coarse like that of a horse's tail, combed towards the forehead except a
small portion which they suffer to hang down behind and never cut. Some
paint themselves with black, others with white, others with red, others
with such colors as they can find. Some paint the face, some the whole
body. Others only the eyes, others only the nose. Weapons they have
none; nor are they acquainted with them. For I showed them swords which
they grasped by the blades and cut themselves through ignorance. They
have no iron, their javelins being without it, and no thing more than
sticks with fishbones or other thing at the ends. I saw some men with
scars of wounds upon their bodies and inquired by signs the cause of
these. They answered me by signs that other people came from islands in
the neighborhood and tried to make prisoners of them and they defended
themselves. ....It appears to me that these people are ingenious and
would make very good servants, and I am of the opinion that they would
readily become Christians as they appear to have no religion. They very
quickly learn such words as are spoken to them. If it please our Lord, I
intend at my return to carry home six of them to your Highnesses that
they may learn our language."

In this brief entry in the Admiral's diary there is a whole volume to
those who can read between the lines, and a painful volume too, as much
history is. Glass beads and little tinkling bells, you see, were all
ready to be distributed from the caravels; a proof that Columbus had not
expected to reach the Asiatic Indies, for those Indians were known to be
sharp and experienced traders. How did Columbus happen to know that it
would be wise to carry rubbish along with him? Ah, that was something
found out when he left Porto Santo to accompany the Portuguese
expedition to Guinea; had he not seen the Portuguese commander exchange
ounces of bright beads for pounds of ivory and gold?

And so he, Christopher Columbus, came prepared for similar trade in his
western lands; the world, we see, was hunting for bargains, trying to
get much for little in the fifteenth century, just as it still is in the
twentieth! Then again, look at the Admiral's innocent remark, "I think
they would make excellent servants." That is still the rule to-day; the
trained man sees in the untrained only a servant. It was perfectly
natural that the Spanish eye should instantly see that little island
converted into a Spanish plantation with those simple, gentle creatures
who "learn easily" working it. And lastly, let us look into this
sentence: "I intend taking some of them home to show your Majesties." It
never occurred to the Admiral to add, "if they are willing to come with
me." Indeed, it seldom occurred to any Christian of Christopher
Columbus's day that a non-Christian, and especially a savage one, had
the same human instincts as a Christian, and that he would have
preferred staying in his own land and with his own family. Out of that
horrible but common mistake grew up the whole miserable business of
kidnapping, buying, and selling human beings. Let us not be too greatly
shocked at our fifteenth-century hero for talking so unfeelingly.
Remember, it was only about fifty years ago that we saw the last of
slavery in these United States, and even then it died hard. Christopher
was, on most moral questions, merely a man of his time, a fact to be
kept in mind as we read of his later voyages.

"They answered me by signs," wrote Columbus. In other words, the
linguist of the expedition, the man learned in Asiatic tongues, had not
been able to make himself understood on San Salvador; and neither was he
when they sailed on among the other islands. Clearly, these little
specks of land in the ocean were not the large and extravagantly rich
island of Japan which Martin Alonzo Pinzon had hoped to find. When
Columbus asked these friendly people for "Cipango," they looked blank
and shook their heads; so did all the other islanders he met during his
three months' cruise among the West Indies. All of the new-found people
were of the same race, spoke the same language, and were equally
ignorant of Cipango and Cathay and India,--lands of rich cities and
temples and marble bridges, and pearls and gold. Columbus had found only
"a poor people," with no clothes and hardly a sign of a golden ornament.
True, when he "inquired by signs" where their few golden trinkets came
from, they pointed vaguely to the south as if some richer land lay
there. And so the Admiral, as we must now call him, never gave up hope.
If, as Pinzon still believed, they had discovered Asiatic islands,
somewhere on the mainland he must surely come upon those treasures which
the Moors had been bringing overland by caravan for centuries past. He
could not go for the treasure this trip; this was nothing more than a
simple voyage of discovery; but he would come and find the wealth that
would enable the Spanish monarchs to undertake a new crusade to the Holy
Land.

October ran into November and November into December, and the Admiral
was still finding islands. He had come, on October 21, to such a far-
reaching coast that he agreed with Martin Pinzon that it must be the
mainland, or Cathay, and started eagerly to follow it west. But the
natives near the shore were timid and fled at the approach of the
strangers. No splendid cities of marble palaces, nor even any mean
little villages of huts, were in sight; so two of the sailors were sent
inland to explore and find the capital of the country. After three days
the explorers returned and reported that all they had seen were many,
many naked savages who dwelt in tiny huts of wood and straw, and who had
the curious custom of rolling up a large dry leaf called tobago,
lighting it at one end, and drawing the smoke up through their nostrils.
Obviously, another "poor people" like those of San Salvador; they were
not the rich and civilized Chinese that Marco Polo had written about.
Neither capital nor king had they, and their land, they told the
explorers, was surrounded by water. They called it Colba. It was, in
fact, the modern Cuba which Columbus had discovered.

Instead of continuing west along Cuba's northern shore till he came to
the end of it, the Admiral preferred to turn east and see what lay in
that direction. It was one of the few times when Columbus's good
judgment in navigation deserted him; for had he kept west he might have
learned from the natives that what we call Florida lay beyond, and
Florida was the continent; or, even if the natives had nothing to
communicate, west would have been the logical direction for him to take
after leaving the extremity of Cuba, had he fully shared Pinzon's belief
that Asia lay beyond the islands. But no, without waiting to get to the
extremity of Cuba, Columbus retraced his course east, as if expecting to
find there the one, definite thing which, according to his friend, Las
Casas, he had come to find.

On November 12 he writes: "A canoe came out to the ship with sixteen
young men; five of them climbed aboard, whom I ordered to be kept so as
to have them with us; I then sent ashore to one of the houses and took
seven women and three children; this I did in order that the five men
might tolerate their captivity better with company." No doubt he treated
the natives kindly, but one can readily understand that their families
and friends back on the island must have felt outraged at this conduct
on the white man's part.

The strange thing is that Columbus, so wise in many ways, did not
understand it too, in spite of the miserably mean ideas which prevailed
in his day regarding the heathen. But the very fact that he notes so
frankly how he captured the natives shows that neither he, nor those who
were to read his journal, had any scruples on the subject. All moral
considerations aside, it was tactless indeed to treat the natives thus
in islands where he hoped to have his own men kindly received.

On Cuba the boats were calked and scraped, and the Admiral superintended
the operations. He was always a busy, busy man, on land or sea. Being a
great lover of nature, he left this nautical business for a while and
traveled a few days inland; and of every native he met he asked that
same question that he had been asking among all these lovely islands,
"Is there any gold or pearls or spices?" No, that land lies west, far
west; thus Columbus understood the sign answer; but after following a
native in that direction for a long time, he had to give it up, for the
time being. When he returned to the beach, Martin Pinzon showed him a
big stick of cinnamon wood for which, in his absence, one of the sailors
had traded a handful of beads.

"The native had quantities of it," Martin assured his Admiral.

"Then why didn't the sailor get it all?"

"Because," and here Martin grew malicious, "you ordered that they could
trade only a little, so that you could do most of it yourself!"

And now the native had gone, and the rueful Admiral never saw him nor
his cinnamon again!

At last, sailing along Cuba, he came to its end; and from there he could
see another island eighteen leagues off. This was what we call Haiti, or
San Domingo. The ships sailed over to Haiti, and the Admiral was so
pleased with its aspect that he christened it Hispaniola, or little
Hispania, which is Latin for Spain; but as Spain is called by its own
people Espana, Hispaniola soon became Espanola.


CHAPTER XI

THE RETURN IN THE NINA


Espanola, or Haiti, the name we know it by, evidently corresponded to
all of the Admiral's preconceived notions of what he was to find in the
western waters. He describes it in his diary as the loveliest island
they had yet seen; its thousands of trees "seemed to reach to Heaven."
Any one who had lived long in Spain, where trees are few and small, must
have taken great delight in the sight of a real forest, and so Columbus
wrote much on the beauties of Haiti. Scratch away with your pen, good
Admiral, and tell us about the trees, and the lovely nights that are
like May in Cordova, and the gold mine which the natives say is on the
island. Enjoy the spot while you may, for bitter days are coming when
its very name will sadden you. Could you but see into the unknown future
as clearly as you saw into the unknown west, you would hurry away from
lovely "little Spain" as fast as your rickety caravel would take you!
Troubles in plenty are awaiting you!

But the skillfulest mariner cannot know what to-morrow may bring forth.
How was even an "Admiral of the Ocean Seas" to know that when he went to
bed on Christmas Eve, his helmsman would soon sneak from his post and
hand the rudder to a little cabin-boy. The night was calm and warm, as
December generally is in those southern waters. The Admiral had been up
night and day when cruising along the Cuban coast, and now thought he
might safely take a few hours' repose. Few hours, indeed, for soon after
midnight he hears the cabin-boy screaming "danger!" A strong,
unsuspected current has carried the tiller out of his weak hands, and
the _Santa Maria_ is scraping on a sandy bottom. Instantly the
Admiral is on deck, and the disobedient helmsman is roused from his
sleep. At once Columbus sees that their only possible salvation is to
launch the ship's boat and lay out an anchor well astern; he orders the
helmsman and another sailor--for they are all rushing on deck now--to do
so. But the minute they touch water the frightened, contemptible
creatures row quickly away and ask the _Nina_ to take them aboard.
The _Santa Maria_ grates a little farther down into the sand bar
and swings sidewise. Columbus orders them to cut the mainmast away,
hoping to steady her some, but it proves useless; the ship's seams are
opening; the water is rushing in; they must abandon her to her fate. So
they all follow that cur of a helmsman and crowd on to the _Nina_.
Did ever a Christmas morning dawn more dismally?

The island of Haiti had several kings or caciques. The one who lived
near the Admiral's landing place had been extremely friendly to his
strange visitors, and when in the morning he saw their sad plight, he
sent all the people of the town out in large canoes to unload the ship.
He himself came down to the shore and took every precaution that the
goods should be brought safely to land and cared for. The next day,
Wednesday, December 26, the diary recorded:--

"At sunrise the king visited the Admiral on board the _Nina_ and
entreated him not to indulge in grief, for he would give him all he had;
that he had already assigned the wrecked Spaniards on shore two large
houses, and if necessary would grant others and as many canoes as could
be used in bringing the goods and crews to land--which in fact he had
been doing all the day before without the slightest trifle being
purloined."

Nor did his aid end here; when Columbus decided to build a fort and
storehouse out of the _Santa Maria's_ timbers, the natives helped
in that too.

In the fort it was decided to leave about forty men "with a provision of
bread and wine for more than a year, seed for planting, the long boat of
the ship, a calker, a carpenter, a gunner, and many other persons who
have earnestly desired to serve your Highnesses and oblige me by
remaining here and searching for the gold mine."

Columbus was, in short, planting the first settlement in the New World.
As the disaster had occurred on Christmas morning, he called the town
"La Navidad" (the Nativity). To govern it he left a trusty friend, Diego
de Arana, whose sister was little Fernando's mother. Columbus drew up a
few excellent rules for the conduct of his colonists, and made them a
wise address besides. Then he loaded a gun and fired it into the hull of
his stranded ship, just "to strike terror into the natives and make them
friendly to the Spaniards left behind." This done, he said good-by to
the colony, telling them how he hoped to find, on his return from
Castile, a ton of gold and spices collected by them in their trade with
the natives; and "in such abundance that before three years the king and
queen may undertake the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre."

On January 4, 1493, just a year after Columbus had been dismissed from
Granada for asking to be made Admiral and Viceroy of the undiscovered
lands in the west, he turned his back on those lands now discovered and
started home. Not, however, with three ships, for we have learned what
happened to the _Santa Maria_; not even with two ships, for we have
_not_ yet learned what happened to the _Pinta_, which Martin
Pinzon commanded. Martin had deserted a month before the shipwreck. Yes,
that good and capable navigator, who had helped so much to get the
expedition started, had struck off with his picked Palos men on a
different course, without asking leave from his Admiral. Nor was this
all; for according to the Journal, Martin had "by his language and
actions occasioned many other troubles." Columbus professes that
Pinzon's conduct mystified him. It was on November 21 that the
_Pinta_ started off. Columbus could not believe his eyes, he says.
Thinking that the ship must soon come back, all that night he "burned a
torch, because the night was clear and there was a nice little breeze by
which Martin could have come had he wished." But Martin did not wish. He
still had hopes, perhaps, of finding Cipango before returning to Spain.

And so, on January 4, when Columbus gave the pilot orders to set the
rudder for home, there was left only the smallest caravel of all, the
_Nina_. They kept on among the islands, frequently landing, and had
many more adventures before they struck the open sea. Always they asked
for gold, and sometimes they learned that it could be procured by
journeying "eastward," but more often, "west." In one place they had a
new experience--a shower of unfriendly arrows. In another island the
soil and trees so nearly corresponded to what Columbus and Pinzon had
read of Cipango that Columbus believed for a moment that he had reached
Martin's cherished goal; to be sure, there were no golden temples to be
seen, but Columbus, always hopeful, was willing to believe that these
lay farther inland, near the gold mines. Resolved to investigate on his
next voyage, he made accurate notes so as to find this same beautiful
harbor again. But the natives who gathered around explained, by signs,
that the island was small, and that there were no palaces or bridges.
While lingering here, the most remarkable thing happened; for another
European caravel led by another explorer entered! Of course it was the
_Pinta_ whose captain had been trying to find either Cipango or the
mainland. There was nothing for Martin to do but to appear friendly and
pretend that his ship had drifted away and got lost. Columbus accepted
the excuse, and both ships started direct for home. The last of the
Bahamas faded from sight that same day, January 16, and the two tiny
caravels were again the only moving objects on the vast, but no longer
unknown, Atlantic Ocean.

For nearly a month, that is, until February 13, the passage was calm and
monotonous; and as the _Pinta_ was in bad shape again every one was
relieved to find the weather so quiet; but on the 13th the wind rose and
rose till it lashed the sea into a fury. All day the sailors labored
with the angry waves that kept dashing over the decks; and all that
night the two lonely little ships kept signaling to each other until
they were swept too far apart. When day broke, the _Pinta_ was
nowhere to be seen and was sorrowfully given up for lost. But there was
no time to mourn; this day was even worse than yesterday, and the
Admiral and his sailors, after the custom of their time, made vows that
if only the Virgin would intercede with Heaven and save them, they would
make a pilgrimage to her shrine of Guadalupe, far north of Sevilla, or
go as penitents in procession to the first church they came to after
reaching land.

In spite of these appeals, the danger increased every minute, and we may
well imagine the agony of the little crew. The intrepid Columbus, who
had accomplished a marvelous thing, a feat which would stagger all
Europe, seemed destined to go down in mid-ocean with his great
discovery! Here was the _Pinta_ sunk and the _Nina_ likely to
follow her any minute! Europe would never know that land lay west of her
across the Atlantic! And all those timid, doubting men in Spain, who had
opposed the expedition from the very first, would shake their heads and
say, "Poor men, the sea monsters on the ocean's rim have gobbled them
up!" It must have taken every bit of heart out of the brave Admiral to
think that Spain would never know how gloriously he had succeeded.

Down into his dark cabin he went, and there, while the little
_Nina_ staggered and pitched on the mountainous waves, he steadied
his swinging lantern with one hand, and with the other hastily wrote on
a parchment what he had done. This he tied in waterproofed cloth, placed
it in a wooden cask, and threw it overboard. Then, for fear it might
never be washed ashore, he hurriedly prepared a second cask and lashed
it to the deck, hoping that the little caravel, even if he and all his
men perished, might toss about till it reached the Azores, which he
judged must be near. And sure enough, next morning land was in sight,
and the sailors shouted for joy though the storm still raged. It was not
until the 18th that the sea had subsided sufficiently for them to
approach the rocky coast. When finally they were able to cast anchor,
they found they were at Santa Maria, one of the Azores group.

The Azores, you will remember, were inhabited by Portuguese. Columbus,
knowing there would surely be a church there dedicated to the Virgin,
sent half the crew ashore to make the penitential procession they had
vowed; but this first boat load were promptly made prisoners by the
Portuguese. What a sad reward for religious men who were trying to keep
a vow! The governor of the island then ordered Columbus to come ashore
and be made prisoner also, which you may be sure he did not do. There
was much angry arguing back and forth, for Spain and Portugal were old
enemies; but finally the Portuguese governor dropped his high-
handedness, sent back the prisoners, and the poor storm-tossed little
_Nina_ bravely set out again to cover the many remaining miles
between her and Spain.

Even after all their hardships and their sorrow over the loss of their
friends on the _Pinta_, the unhappy mariners were not to be left in
peace. After a few days another violent storm beat against them and
buffeted them for days, while a terrific wind came and tore their sails
away. The poor little _Nina_, bare-poled, was now driven helpless
before the gale. And yet, marvelous to relate, she did not founder, but
kept afloat, and on the morning of March 4, sailors and Admiral saw land
not far away.

"The Madeiras!" cried some, just as they had cried before when off the
Azores.

"Spain!" cried others, more hopefully.

"The Rock of Cintra, near Lisbon!" cried their Admiral, whose power of
gauging distances, considering his lack of instruments, was little short
of marvelous. And Cintra it was. Again chance brought him to an
unfriendly coast, and gave him no choice but to run into the mouth of
the Portuguese river Tagus for shelter.

Like wildfire the report ran up and down the coast that a ship had just
returned across the Atlantic from the Indies (for the Spanish sailors
called the new islands the Indies of Antilla) and of course the ship was
full of treasure! In command of this ship was Christopher Columbus, the
very man whom King John of Portugal had refused to aid years before!
Hundreds of small boats surrounded the little caravel, and the curious
Portuguese clambered aboard and asked, among their many eager questions,
to be shown the treasures and "Los Indios." The commander of a
Portuguese man-of-war anchored near assumed a bullying attitude and
ordered Columbus to come aboard the warship and explain why he had dared
to cruise among Portugal's possessions. Columbus, more tactful than
usual, replied that, being now an Admiral of Spain, it was his duty to
remain on his vessel. Meanwhile, he dispatched a courier to the monarchs
of Spain with the great tidings; while from the king of Portugal he
begged permission to land, and sent word, _not_ that he had, as
people were saying, discovered an Atlantic route to the Indies, but that
he had sailed to the fabled islands of Antilla in the far Atlantic.

In answer, the king gave permission to land at Lisbon, and invited
Columbus to court. Columbus may not have wished to go there, but a royal
invitation was a command. On entering the king's presence, the great
explorer saw many of the noblemen who, years before, had advised their
monarch not to aid him. Our Admiral is not to be blamed, therefore, if
he took a deep delight in painting his new world in the rosiest colors
possible. His story made king and courtiers feel uncomfortably foolish
for not having been willing to take the risk Spain had taken. It was a
bitter pill for poor King John to swallow, and straightway his scheming
old brain began to hatch a pretext for getting the new lands for
himself.

"Pope Martin V.," he reminded his visitor, "conceded to the Crown of
Portugal all lands that might be discovered between Cape Bojador and the
Indies, and your new discovery therefore belongs to me rather than to
Spain."

"Quite right," murmured his courtiers. Then, when Columbus declared he
had sailed west and not south, that Spain herself had warned him to keep
clear of Portugal's possessions, and that the lands he had discovered
were merely Atlantic islands, they all insisted that "the Indies were
the Indies, and belonged by papal authority to Portugal!"

Oh, those shifting, indiscriminate, fifteenth-century Indies which
Europe invented to explain the unknown world! What misunderstandings
resulted from the vague term! Columbus, again tactful, stopped boasting
now, and merely observed that he had never heard of this papal treaty,
and that the monarchs would have to settle it between themselves. Then
he took his departure, with every show of kindliness from the king,
including a royal escort. The minute he was gone those courtly, crafty
heads all got together and told the king that most likely the man was
merely a boaster, but, lest he might have discovered territory for
Spain, why not hurriedly send out a Portuguese fleet to seize the new
islands ere Spain could make good her claim? Some even whispered
something about assassination.

Let us hope that King John turned a deaf ear to them. At any rate,
Columbus was not assassinated, perhaps because he thought it safer to
trust to his battered little _Nina_ than to cross Portugal by land.
Hurrying aboard, he hoisted anchor and started for Palos.

It was on a Friday that Columbus had left Palos; it was likewise on
Friday that he had left the Canaries after mending the _Pinta's_
rudder; on Friday he had taken leave of the little settlement of La
Navidad away back in Haiti, and now it was on Friday, the 15th of March,
that he dropped anchor in the friendly port of Palos.

For the astounded population it was as if the dead had come to life.
Every family whose relations had accompanied the expedition had given
the sailors up for lost; and lo! here was the man who had led them to
their death, bringing a caravel into port. True, forty of the men had
been left across the water, and as many more perhaps were under it. Only
one ship had come back; but it brought with it the amazing proof that
the Atlantic could be crossed! Shops were closed, everybody went to
church and rendered praise; bells pealed forth, and the "mad Genoese"
was the greatest hero that ever lived; then, as if to give the scene a
happy ending, just before sunset of that same famous day, the
_Pinta_, which had _not_ been shipwrecked off the Azores at
all, also sailed into the Rio Tinto. Thus did the punishment of Palos
end in her witnessing the greatest day of the fifteenth century.


CHAPTER XII

DAYS OF TRIUMPH


Before following our happy Admiral into the presence of the king and
queen, let us remain in Palos a little moment with that other courageous
navigator, Martin Alonzo Pinzon. Poor Martin was not happy; in fact, he
was very miserable. He had slunk from his storm-battered caravel and
into his house without saying a word to any one. His wife, overjoyed at
seeing him, threw her arms around him.

"Oh, my good Martin!" she exclaimed, "we were mourning you as dead!
Cristobal Colon believed that you and your _Pinta_ had gone to the
bottom off the Azores!"

"I only wish I had!" groaned Martin, dejectedly. "I only wish I had!"

Perhaps you think he was repenting too deeply of that insubordination
off the coast of Cuba, 'way back in November. No, it was not that;
Martin had another matter to regret now, more's the pity; for he was a
good sailor and a brave, energetic man, ready to risk his life and his
money in the discovery. He knew that, next to Columbus, he had played
the most important part in the discovery, and he now realized that he
was not to share the honor in what he considered the right proportion.
He felt ill-used; moreover his health was shattered.

When the two vessels became separated in the storm off the Azores, he
concluded just what the Admiral concluded--that the other ship had gone
down. He considered it a miracle that even one of those mere scraps of
wood, lashed about in a furious sea, should have stayed afloat; but both
of them,--no! two miracles could never happen in one night!

And so when he scanned the horizon next morning and saw no _Nina_,
and when he kept peering all that day through the storm and the little
_Nina_ never came in sight, a mean idea made its way into Captain
Pinzon's brain; and it grew and grew until it became a definite, well-
arranged plan.

"The Admiral has gone down with all aboard," he reasoned to himself.
"Now, if my ship ever reaches Spain, why shouldn't I say that when
Columbus failed to find land seven hundred leagues west of the Canaries,
where he expected to find it, I persuaded him to accompany me still
farther, and led him to Cipango."

Martin kept nursing this plan of robbing the dead Admiral of glory,
until one morning he found himself off the Spanish coast just north of
the Portuguese border. Into the little port of Bayona he put, and wrote
a letter, and hired a courier to deliver it; that done, he sailed south
along Portugal for Palos, probably passing the mouth of the Tagus only a
few hours after Columbus, bound for the same port, had turned out into
the Atlantic. Martin Pinzon may thank his luck that the Nina started
home before him. Imagine his utter shame and confusion had _he_
been the first to enter Palos with his perverted news!

As it was, things were bad enough. He heard the Palos bells ringing, and
saw the people thronging along the shore to look at the wonderful little
boat that had traveled in such far waters; his heart sank. The Admiral
was home, and he, Martin Pinzon, _he_ had sent from Bayona to their
Majesties a letter in which were certain false statements. No wonder he
sneaked off of his ship in the dusk and wrapped his cape high around his
face and hurried to his house. No wonder he felt no happiness in seeing
his good wife again, and could only groan and groan.

Martin went to bed--his spirits were very low, and the stormy passage
had racked his old body as well; so he lay down; and the next day he
could not get up, nor the next; and when, in due time, a royal letter
came, thanking him for the aid he had given Columbus, but reproaching
him for statements he had made which did not agree with those of the
Admiral concerning the voyage, then Martin never wanted to get up again;
he had himself carried to La Rabida, where he died in a few days, the
good friars comforting him. So no more of Martin Alonzo Pinzon, whose
end was inglorious, but whose courage and enterprise were later
remembered gratefully by Spain; for Charles V., Queen Isabella's
grandson, made public acknowledgment of Pinzon's great services in
discovering the New World.

And now to pleasanter things. What has the Admiral been doing since the
Palos bells pealed out their joyous welcome to him? First, of course, he
greeted the good Friar Juan Perez. And next he dispatched another letter
to court announcing his discovery. In fact, he sent several letters;
for, as we know, he was an energetic letter-writer; one to their
Majesties, one to Luis de Santangel, King Ferdinand's treasurer, who had
urged the queen to help him, and one to another friend at court. Here is
the beginning of the Santangel letter:--

Senor:

As I know you will have pleasure in the great success which Our Lord
hath given me in my voyage, I write you this by which you shall know
that in thirty-three days I passed over to the Indies where I found very
many islands peopled with inhabitants beyond number.

"I passed over to the Indies." says the letter. The writer, we see, has
decided to give his islands the vague general name that Europe applied
to all unknown, distant lands--the Indies. Christopher was always ready
to take a chance. If, as he had probably begun to hope, the western path
might ultimately lead to India, why not at once adopt that important
name?

His letters sent off to court by fast courier, the Admiral himself said
good-by to Friar Juan and leisurely followed them. Ferdinand and
Isabella, at this time, happened to be in the remotest possible point
from Palos, in Barcelona, the great seaport of northeastern Spain. It
was a long, long land journey for a seaman to make, but Christopher
Columbus did not mind, for every step of it was glory and triumph. He
who had once wandered over this same land from city to city, obscure,
suspected of being either a visionary or an adventurer, had returned as
a great personage, an Admiral of Spain, a Viceroy, a Governor; and, best
of all, a practical discoverer instead of a mere dreamer. Every town he
passed through acclaimed him a most wonderful man.

Besides, he had brought them proofs of his discovery--those six strange
people called "Indians"; these, along with an iguana and some red
flamingoes, parrots, and unfamiliar plants, were exhibited in every
town, and every town gaped in wonder, and crowded close to get a view of
the Admiral and his _Indios_, and to whisper in awed tones, "and
there is much gold, too, but he is not showing that!"

All this was very gratifying to the Admiral; but even more so was his
reception when he arrived finally at Barcelona. Here he was met at the
city gates by a brilliant company of _caballeros_, or Spanish
nobility, who escorted him and his extraordinary procession through the
streets of the quaint old town. We may be sure that the authorities made
the most of what the discoverer had brought back; the Indians were
ordered to decorate themselves with every kind of color and every kind
of feather. The tropical plants were borne aloft, and it was rumored
that merely to touch them would heal any sort of malady.

Most imposing of all, there was shown a table on which was every golden
bracelet and ornament that had been collected. To be sure, these were
not numerous, but everybody hinted to everybody else that they were but
a few articles out of Columbus's well-filled treasure-ship. The
discoverer himself, richly clad, mounted on a fine horse, and surrounded
by gorgeously accoutered _caballeros_, brought up the rear of this
unique procession. What shouting as he passed! and later what reverent
thanksgiving! Barcelona was no insignificant little port like Palos, to
be stupefied at the wonder of it; Barcelona was one of the richest and
most prosperous seaports of Europe, and could look upon the discovery
intelligently; and precisely because she herself had learned the lesson
that trade meant wealth, she rejoiced that this wonderful new avenue of
commerce had been opened for Spain.

The display over, the king and queen invited Columbus to tell his story.
Now had arrived the most critical moment since his return; but our
Admiral, it is to be regretted, did not realize it, else he would have
been more guarded in what he said. He should have told a straightforward
tale of what he had done, without one word of exaggeration; but
Christopher had a fervid Italian imagination and could never resist
exaggerating. So, instead of dwelling on the one stupendous, thrilling
fact that he had sailed three thousand miles into the fearsome west and
discovered new lands; instead of making them feel that he was great
because of what he _had_ done, and letting it go at that, the
foolish man filled his narrative with absurd promises of miracles he
would perform in the future. But none of it did seem absurd to him! He
had persuaded himself, by this time, that west of his poor, uncivilized
islands lay richer countries; and so he did not hesitate to assure the
sovereigns that he had discovered a land of enormous wealth, and that if
they would equip another expedition, he stood ready to promise them any
quantity of gold, drugs, and cotton, as well as legions of people to be
converted to Christianity.

Indeed, he went much further, and made a solemn vow that he, from his
own personal profits in the discovery, would furnish, within seven
years, an army of four thousand horse and fifty thousand foot for the
purpose of reclaiming the Holy Sepulchre! Imagine a man pledging this,
just because he had gathered a few gold bracelets! And yet, as he stood
there in all the glamour of the court, with a whole nation regarding him
as a wonder, he was so carried away by the situation that he probably
actually saw himself leading a triumphant crusade! As for the king and
queen, so deeply affected were they that they fell on their knees then
and there and poured forth their thanks to God.

The good Bartolome de las Casas (the priest who devoted his life to the
Indians) was present and has described this memorable interview.
Columbus, he says, was very dignified and very impressive with his snow-
white hair and rich garments. A modest smile flitted across his face "as
if he enjoyed the state and glory in which he came." When he approached
the monarchs, they arose to greet him as though he were the greatest
hidalgo in the land; and when he dropped on his knee to kiss their
hands, they bade him rise and seat himself in their presence. Surely
this was a great day for the humble Genoese sailor. He was _Don_
Cristobal henceforth, with the right to select a noble coat of arms. For
his sake his brothers Bartholomew and Diego (James) were to receive
appointments, and his son Diego was to be brought to court and educated.
Then, after securing the welfare of these members of his family,
Columbus wrote to his old father, the wool-comber in Genoa, and sent him
some money.

All this shows his good heart toward his own people; for toward one not
his own was he guilty of an ignoble act. It was to that sailor Rodrigo,
of the _Pinta_, who had been the first to sight land early on the
morning of October 12. When Columbus was asked to whom the queen's
promised reward of ten thousand maravedis should go, he replied, "To
myself." Surely it could not have been because he wanted the money for
its own sake; it did not equal twenty-five dollars, and he had already
received a goodly sum on arriving in Barcelona; it must have been that
he could not bear to share the glory with another, and so told himself
that the light he saw bobbing up and down early that night was carried
by a human being, and the human being must have been in a canoe, near
the island. On the strength of this argument he claimed the money
Rodrigo had expected to receive.


CHAPTER XIII

PREPARING FOR A SECOND VOYAGE


Once the story of the first voyage had been digested, all thoughts were
turned toward preparations for the next. Indeed, while Columbus was
still in Sevilla on his way to Barcelona he had received a letter from
the monarchs asking him what they could do to help him accomplish a
second voyage, and he had sent them a list of his needs in the way of
men, ships, and supplies. This the royal officers now brought out and
the sovereigns went over it carefully with their new Admiral.

Now began the test of Don Cristobal Colon, _not_ as an intrepid
mariner, but as a business man cooperating with other business men in
the colonizing, Christianizing, and commercializing of the new
territories. In this matter he was to be associated with the powerful
Juan de Fonseca. This Bishop Fonseca was very keen and efficient, but
worldly, and vindictive toward those who opposed him in any way. To keep
his good will needed much tact. He was not long in deciding that the
great navigator had neither tact nor business ability; so he snubbed him
accordingly, and made his path a hard one.

Knowing, as we do, that to-day Spain possesses not an inch of territory
in the New World she discovered and opened up, that other nations have
reaped where she sowed, we are prone to conclude that it was all bad
management on her part. But this is not entirely true. So far as
colonizing could be managed from the home country, Spain faced her new
responsibility with great energy. Immediately a sort of board of trade,
or bureau of discovery, was organized, with the capable Bishop Fonseca
at its head. This was called the Casa de Contratacion and its
headquarters were at Sevilla; for Sevilla, though fifty miles up the
Guadalquivir River, is practically a seaport. Cadiz was appointed the
official harbor for vessels plying between Spain and the Indies. This
meant the decline of proud Barcelona, but naturally a port nearer the
Atlantic had to be chosen. Customhouses were established in Cadiz, and
special licenses were issued to intending traders. Botanists were called
upon to decide which Spanish fruits and vegetables might best be
transplanted to the new islands; arrangements were made for shipping
horses (which were lacking there), also sheep and cows.

Plans were soon drawn up for towns and cities--not mere log-cabin
villages such as the later English and Dutch colonists were content
with--and a handsome cathedral was to be begun in Haiti, and filled
with paintings and carvings and other works of art. In fact, no material
detail was overlooked to make the new settlements worthy of their mother
country. Where the effort failed was in selecting the men to be sent
out, not in the things sent. If only the proper individuals had been
sent to Columbus's islands, all these other details might have taken
care of themselves in the course of time.

The second expedition was to be on a very large scale. It had to be
assembled quickly lest other nations, learning of the discovery, or the
one nation that had already learned of it, might get there first;
wherefore Fonseca and Columbus were authorized to buy, at their own
price, any boat lying in any port of Andalusia that was suitable for the
long journey; if its owner protested against the price named, they had
authority to seize it. The same system applied to provisions and other
equipment for the voyage--these must be given at the government's price,
else the government, represented by Columbus and Fonseca, would seize
them. Lastly, these two could compel any mariner to embark on the fleet,
and could fix his wages, whether he wished to go or not.

The money for this second expedition came from a source which Spain has
no reason to be proud of today, but which she had small reason to be
ashamed of in the sixteenth century. It was the confiscated wealth of
the Jews who, as enemies of Christianity, had been banished from the
kingdom the year before. Columbus's "one eighth of the expense," which
by the contract of Santa Fe he was bound to supply, he had no means of
furnishing, since he had not yet reached lands rich enough to yield it.

It was at the end of May that Columbus left Barcelona, hoping soon to
embark again for his "Indies." There was indeed every reason for haste,
since King John of Portugal had lost no time in presenting his claims to
Rome.

We have already mentioned the important part which prelates played in
the affairs of their countries. Similarly, the Pope played an important
part in international affairs; and that is why a Pope had made the
Portuguese treaty of 1470, and why King John now sought its enforcement
by the present Pope. But Ferdinand and Isabella also were hurrying
messengers to Rome. The pontiff at this time happened to be not an
Italian but a Spaniard, Alexander Borgia, born a subject of Ferdinand's
own kingdom of Aragon. Ferdinand knew well how to judge this shrewd
Aragonese character, and what arguments were most likely to appeal to
it. He told the Spanish ambassadors to say that Spain would immediately
set to work to convert the vast new lands to Christianity; that the
Spanish explorers would take great care not to intrude into Portugal's
African Indies, which shows how confused geography still was in
everybody's mind; and that, whatever the Pope's decision, Spain would
defend her discoveries from any other claimant. This being made clear,
the ambassadors were to present Ferdinand and Isabella's supplication
that a papal bull, or decree, might be issued, granting them all lands
discovered in the past and future by their Admiral Don Cristobal Colon.
Ferdinand of Spain being now a much more powerful king than John of
Portugal, the Pope granted all that Spain asked, but was careful not to
admit that Columbus had discovered the real India; for the bull refers
only to "insulae et terra firma remota et incognita" or "islands and a
remote and unknown mainland."

Meanwhile, all sorts of intrigues were going on between the two
monarchs. John had spies at Ferdinand's court to discover the
negotiations with Rome, and others to find out how Columbus's
preparations were getting along; Ferdinand also sent spies to Portugal.
These reported a Portuguese plan for seizing the western lands before
Columbus could return to them. This came to nothing, however, through
John's fear of the Pope; and well for Spain that John did fear the power
of Rome, for it took Columbus so long to gather his second fleet that
there would have been ample time for the Portuguese mariners to cross
the Atlantic ahead of him.

The very measures that had been devised to help the second departure
retarded it. Shipowners and provision dealers, in spite of royal orders,
fought for fair prices and would not sell; and as for assembling crews
for the ships, the difficulty was _not_, as in the first
expedition, in getting men to go, but in keeping them back. If only
Columbus had not talked gold, gold, gold! If only he could have
refrained from exaggerating, and had simply stated that he had found
some wild islands whose people had not a glimmering of civilization and
who possessed but few golden trinkets! Had he not deceived the people
and himself, only those would have joined the expedition who had the
true, fine, adventurous spirit; or those who, seeking a new home, wished
to settle down in new territory and develop it; but instead, men thought
only of the vast wealth to be easily picked up--they would not even have
to dig for it! Thus the expedition attracted mainly men of doubtful
character who wanted to become rich quickly. Others offered themselves
who wanted nothing more than excitement and novelty; others had dark
schemes of breaking away from all restraint, once they reached the new
land, and carrying on any sort of robbery or traffic that might offer
profit; while still others were priests who thought only of converting
the heathen. If ever men engaged upon an undertaking that required
endurance, hard work, sound common sense, and a practical knowledge of
how to tackle any task that might present itself, this was the occasion.
Yet the men who came forward lacked exactly these indispensable
qualities.

No doubt Columbus and Fonseca picked the best of them; but the
misfortune was that Columbus, who should have known what the business
ahead of them required, did not know how to judge men; and the shrewd
archbishop, who _did_ know how to judge men, had no idea what the
occasion was going to demand of them; and thus they chose men for the
second trip to the new lands who were utterly unsuitable.

Nearly all the two thousand who applied for permission to sail were
personally interviewed by the Admiral, which must have taken much time;
besides, he was busy buying wheat and flour, hard biscuit, salt pork and
fish, cheese, peas, beans, lentils, wine, oil, and vinegar, as well as
honey, almonds, and raisins for Don Cristobal's own table. It was just
about the same food that a sailing vessel would carry to-day, with the
exception of tea and coffee; for Portugal had not then discovered the
lands from which these two beverages were to be introduced into Europe.

All these preparations were watched by two eager-faced boys who no doubt
often said to each other, "I hope father will think us old enough to go
with him on his next voyage!" For the Admiral had brought little Diego
and Fernando along to Sevilla and Cadiz, so that he might see them every
day before the long separation.

Finally, on September 25, 1493, all was ready and the anchors were
hoisted. How different it was from that first fearful sailing out of
Palos in 1492. This time the fleet was magnificent; seventeen vessels,
all newly calked and painted; about fifteen hundred men, all happy and
hopeful; and on shore, instead of a populace wringing its hands in
dismay, a populace cheering and making music and flying banners, and
actually envying the lucky ones who were starting off to the wonderful
new lands where they could pick up gold!


CHAPTER XIV

FINDING NEW ISLANDS


With the departure of this second expedition for the "western lands"
Columbus's brief season of glory ended. Neither home-comings nor
departures would ever be the same for him again; for behind him he left
a few jealous enemies, potent to do him harm, and with him he took men
of such unstable character that more enmity was sure to spring up. These
last he held with a firm hand as long as the voyage lasted; Christopher
could always control men at sea, but on land it was another matter. Even
though _he_ might have clear notions of the difficulty of planting
a colony in new territory, how would these adventurers, and these high-
born young gentlemen who had never worked, and these hundred wretched
stowaways who, after Columbus had refused to take them, had hidden in
the vessels until well out to sea--how would all these behave when it
was time to fell trees, build houses, dig ditches, and cut roads? And
then again, good Admiral, why did you make the great mistake of bringing
no women colonists with you? How could men found homes and work when
there were no wives and little ones to be housed and fed?

Of the better sort who accompanied this second expedition there were a
few, but only a few, solid, reliable individuals whose society must have
been a comfort to the Admiral; among them, the faithful Juan de la Cosa,
the Palos pilot; James Columbus, or as the Spaniards called him, Diego
Colon, faithful to his celebrated brother, but unfortunately somewhat
stupid; Antonio de las Casas, father of the young priest who later
became the champion of the Indians and who wrote Columbus's biography;
Juan Ponce de Leon, an intrepid aristocrat who was destined to discover
Florida; and Doctor Chanca, a physician and botanist who was to write an
account of the vegetables and fruits of the western lands. These
vegetables included the "good tasting roots either boiled or baked"
which we know as potatoes. Most daring of all the company was a young
nobleman named Alonzo de Ojeda. Alonzo was a real adventurer, willing to
face any danger or hazard.

Columbus, on leaving Spain, again headed for the Canaries, this time for
the purpose of taking on sheep, goats, swine, and other domestic animals
to stock the new lands; then off again for the real business of crossing
the Atlantic. Gold being the thought uppermost in every mind--even in
the mind of the Admiral--the rudders were set southwest for the
Caribbean Islands.

These, the natives of Haiti had told him, were full of gold; at least,
that is how Columbus interpreted the signs the Haitians made when he
asked for gold; and so, instead of hurrying to cheer up those forty men
he left at La Navidad, he steered to a point considerably south of Haiti
and reached the Caribbeans precisely; which, it will be seen, was a far
greater test of nautical skill than merely to sail anywhere into the
west, as he had done on the first voyage.

The sea nearly all the way across was deliciously smooth and the trade
wind soft and steady; only once was there bad weather; very bad while it
lasted and very terrifying to those who had never before been at sea;
but it happened that, during the storm, the electric phenomenon known as
the Light of St. Elmo was seen over the rigging of the _Mari-ga-
lan'te_, the Admiral's ship, and all that horde of superstitious men
were reassured and considered it a sign that the expedition was divine
protection.

Yet a little later, when the water supply ran low, and when there were
so many leaks in the vessels that the pumps were working constantly,
they began to grumble. But Columbus, who was a magician at reckoning sea
distance, laughed at their alarm and said to them, "Drink all the water
you like; we shall reach land in forty-eight hours." Next day no land
appeared, but still he spoke confidently and ordered them to take in
sail and slow down. That was at sunset, on Saturday, November 2; Sunday
morning, November 3, the sun rose on a beautiful verdant island only a
few leagues ahead of them. The magician had fairly scented land from
afar!

This little island, Dominica he called it, had no harbor; but what did
that matter since another island lay alongside it, to the north. Here
they landed and took possession in the name of Spain--not only of the
one island but of five or six more which were visible from a little
hill. On this spot, which they christened Marigalante, there were no
inhabitants; so, after waiting only long enough to feast on new,
luscious fruits, they sailed to the next island, which they called
Guadaloupe.

And here the Spaniards began to learn what real savagery meant. Only
women and children appeared to inhabit the island, and these fled inland
at the strangers' approach. This afforded an excellent opportunity for
the visitors to look into the native huts and see how these wild people
lived. Hammocks of netting, earthenware dishes, and woven cotton cloth
were found; but along with these rudiments of civilization something
else was found that made the Europeans look at each other in horror--
human bones left from a recent feast!

The next day they landed at a different island, for these Caribbeans all
lie close together. Here the deplorable business of kidnapping began
again, and quite legitimately, the Spaniards thought, for were not the
miserable creatures cannibals? A young boy and three women were
captured, and from these Columbus learned that the people of the two
islands he first visited, along with a third he had not yet come to, had
formed a league among themselves to make war on the remainder of the
islands. That was why all the men happened to be absent at the time of
the Spanish landing. They had gone off in their canoes to capture women
as wives, and men and children to be killed and eaten!

The fact that the warriors of this island were absent emboldened a party
of nine Spaniards to penetrate inland in search of gold; secretly, too,
without the Admiral's knowledge or consent. Night came and the nine men
had not returned. The crew were naturally anxious to leave the island
before its man-eating population returned, but the majority were willing
to await their lost companions. Next day Alonzo de Ojeda, who said he
was not afraid of cannibals, led a search party clear across the island,
but without success; not until the third anxious day had passed did the
gold seekers get back to the ship. They had paid dearly for their
adventure, having been utterly lost in a tangled forest, without food,
torn and scratched by brambles, and fearing all the time that the fleet
would give them up for dead and sail without them.

A week having now been passed among the cannibals, Columbus decided to
give up gold-hunting and go and greet the colony at La Navidad. His
captives told him that the mainland lay south, and had he not grown
anxious about the men he had left the year before, he might have sailed
south and found South America; but instead he headed north, stopping
sometimes at intermediate islands. Once again they tried capturing some
natives whom they saw on the shore, but these Carib women were wonderful
archers, and a number of them who managed to upset their canoe and swim
for liberty shot arrows as they swam. Two of the Spaniards were thus
wounded.

Not until the 22d of November did the fleet come in sight of Haiti--
about a month later than if they had come direct from the Canaries. Many
islands, including Porto Rico, had been discovered and named before they
finally touched Espanola and began sailing along its northern coast to
where the _Santa Maria_ had been wrecked. Although no gold had been
found, all the men on the boats were confident that quantities of it
would have been collected during the year by the men at La Navidad; and
so great content reigned on all the ships.

While the fleet was still some distance away, one of the captured Haiti
Indians who had made the voyage to Spain and back was sent ashore to
tell Chief Guacanagari and the colony of the Admiral's return. This
Indian messenger, having been converted to Christianity and having
learned to speak Spanish, was expected to be of great use in the present
expedition. Before sending him ashore they dressed him handsomely and
covered him with showy trinkets that would impress his countrymen. But
the real impression was to come from his telling his tribe what a
powerful people the Spaniards were and how advisable it would be to
receive them kindly. This attended to, the converted Indian was to
rejoin the ship at La Navidad, where Columbus would richly reward him
for his services. Our simple Columbus, who loved Spain's civilization
and power, entertained great hopes of the Indian's mission, and never
suspected that this savage preferred his native island; and that, once
he set foot on it, he would never again risk himself in the presence of
white men!

The Admiral next stopped at the mouth of a stream where, on his previous
voyage, he had heard of gold. The party who went ashore to search for it
soon came back aghast. They had found, instead, two bodies lashed to a
stake in the form of a cross. The men were hardly recognizable, but the
scraps of clothing looked Spanish. The ominous news ran from ship to
ship and gloom began to settle over the entire expedition.

Columbus, much disturbed, hastened on to La Navidad. On approaching the
spot his crew fired a cannon and shouted, but no response came. They
landed; but it was to find the fortress a blackened ruin and the whole
settlement destroyed. Even the stout-hearted Admiral was now utterly
dejected.

After a spell of grieving came a ray of hope. Perhaps Diego de Arana and
his other friends were not all dead; perhaps the treacherous natives had
merely driven them off. He had told Diego to keep the gold they gathered
hidden in a well, so that, in case of attack, it would be safe; and off
Columbus started to hunt for the well. No amount of searching revealed
it; instead, another painful sight, a few dead Spaniards; that was all.

Inland, far away from his original abode, the king was found who had so
kindly helped Columbus when the _Santa Maria_ was wrecked--King
Guacanagari. From him came the only account ever obtained of the fate of
the colony; a true account apparently, for later investigations
confirmed it. The Spaniards, with the exception of their leader, Arana,
had behaved very badly toward each other and toward the natives. They
wanted wives, and had stolen all the young women from Guacanagari's
village and then had fought with each other for the prettiest. Having
obtained wives, some deserted the little European colony and went to
live as savages among the Indians. Others had gone to find the gold
mines, which quest took them to the eastern part of the island where the
fierce chief Caonabo ruled. So enraged was this chief at their invasion
that he not only killed _them_, but descended upon their
compatriots at La Navidad, and attacked them one night when all was
still and peaceful. Guacanagari heard the savage war whoops, and out of
friendship for the Admiral he tried to drive off the assailants, but he
himself was wounded and his house was burned. The Spanish fort was
fired; the inmates rushed out, only to be butchered or driven into the
sea and drowned. Not one man escaped.

Thus ended Columbus's second trip westward across the Atlantic. What a
landing! Blackened ruins, dead bodies, the enmity of the natives, and--
no gold; all this where he had hoped to be greeted by happy, prosperous
men. Here were the first fruits of his great discovery; here the first
sample of Spanish ability at colonizing; here the first specimen of what
the white man could do in a new and peaceful land; and our great
Admiral, thinking of the mixed band he had brought out from Spain to
colonize, dropped his head and covered his face with his hands.

All were anxious to leave the scene of this tragedy; but before they
left, the native king, Guacanagari, who appeared as friendly as ever,
expressed a desire to visit Columbus's ship. While on it he managed to
talk with the Caribbean Indians who were aboard. That night the
captives, including a woman whom the Spaniards had named Catalina, made
their escape and were picked up in waiting canoes. Next day when
Columbus sent to Guacanagari to demand their return, the king and his
whole village had disappeared. It would appear that this simple savage
had grown into a far shrewder person than his European host since that
Christmas night when the _Santa Maria_ ran aground.

La Navidad having disappeared, the next concern was to found another
settlement. A point some distance east was chosen, where a beautiful
green vega, or plain, stretched far back from the shore. The city was to
be called Isabella, in honor of the queen who had made possible the
discovery of the new lands. Streets were laid out, a fine church and a
storehouse were planned to be built of stone, and many private houses,
to be built of wood or adobe or any convenient material, were to be
constructed. All this was very fine in plan; but when the men were
called upon to do the hard manual labor that is required for building a
town and planting gardens and fields in an utter wilderness, many of
them murmured. They had not come to do hard work, they had come to pick
up nuggets of gold. Besides, many were ill after the long diet of salted
food and musty bread; even Columbus himself fell ill upon landing, and
could not rise from his bed for weeks; and although all this time he
continued to direct the work of town building, it progressed but slowly.

So there lay the great Christopher Columbus, bedridden and empty-handed,
at the moment when he hoped to be sending back to Spain the gold and
other precious substances collected by the men of his first settlement.
What should he write to the sovereigns waiting for news? He could not
bear to write the sad truth and tell them how all his hopes, and theirs,
had come to naught. If only he could have known, or surmised, that his
islands fringed a magnificent new continent that had never even been
dreamed of by civilized man, his worry might have ceased; for surely a
man who had found a new world for Spain need not have found gold
besides; but he knew nothing of the continent as yet; and remembering
the extravagant promises made in Barcelona, he decided to postpone
writing the letter home to Spain until he should make another attempt to
find gold.

Accordingly, he sent two expeditions to different parts of the island to
find the mines which, according to his understanding of the natives'
sign language, must exist. Alonzo de Ojeda and the other captain he sent
out returned each with a little gold; and this slight find was
sufficient to set Columbus's fervid imagination at work again. He sent a
rosy account of the island to the monarchs, and repeated his former
promise to soon send home shiploads of gold and other treasures. And no
wonder that he and so many others wished for gold; for it is written in
his journal, "Gold is the most precious of all substances; gold
constitutes treasure; he who possesses it has all the needs of this
world as well as the price for rescuing souls from Purgatory and
introducing them into Paradise." If gold could do all that, who would
not try to possess it?

But so far as his letter to the monarchs went, Columbus knew, even while
writing it, that real gold and the promise of gold were two very
different things. His promises could never fill up the empty hold of the
ship that was going back to Spain; and so, failing the rich cargo which
the men of La Navidad were to have gathered, Columbus bethought himself
of some other way in which his discoveries might bring money to the
Spanish Crown. The plan he hit upon was the plan of a sick,
disappointed, desperate man, as will be seen from a portion of his
letter. The letter, intended for the sovereigns, was addressed, as was
the custom, to their secretary.

"Considering what need we have for cattle and beasts of burden ... their
Highnesses might authorize a suitable number of caravels to come here
every year to bring over said cattle and provisions. These cattle might
be paid for with _slaves_ taken from among the Caribbeans, who are
a wild people fit for any work, well built and very intelligent; and
who, when they have got rid of the cruel habits to which they have been
accustomed, will be better than any other kind of slaves."

Horrible, all this, we say, but it was the fifteenth century. Slavery
had existed for ages, and many still believed in it, for men like the
good Las Casas were few. Moreover, Columbus was tormented by a feeling
of not having "made good." He had promised his sovereigns all sorts of
wealth, and instead he had been able to collect only an insignificant
amount of gold trinkets on Haiti. Desperate for some other source of
wealth, in an evil moment he advised slave-catching.

Besides considering himself to have fallen short in the royal eyes, he
was hounded by the complaints and taunts of the men who had accompanied
him. They hated work, so he tried to appease them by giving them
authority to enslave the natives; and, as our good Las Casas wisely
remarks, "Since men never fall into a single error ... without a greater
one by and by following," so it fell out that the Spaniards were cruel
masters and the natives revolted; to subdue them harsher and harsher
measures were used; not till most of them had been killed did the
remaining ones yield submissively.


CHAPTER XV

ON A SEA OF TROUBLES


In the new colony of Isabella things went badly from the very start. Its
governor comforted himself by thinking that he could still put himself
right with everybody by pushing farther west and discovering whether the
Asiatic mainland--which Martin Alonzo Pinzon had always insisted lay
back of the islands--was really there. Accordingly, Columbus took a crew
of men and departed April 24, 1494, leaving his brother Diego in command
of the colony. Never had Columbus done a more unwise thing than to leave
Isabella at that moment. Not one single lesson of self-help and
cooperation had his men yet learned; and of course they reproached him
with their troubles. The root of it all was disappointment. They had
come for wealth and ease, and had found poverty and hardship. They even
threatened to seize the ships in the harbor and sail off, leaving the
two brothers alone on the island; yet, knowing all this, Columbus
decided to go off and continue his discoveries!

Again he just escaped finding the mainland. On sailing west from
Isabella and reaching Cuba at the nearest point to Haiti, he decided to
coast along its southern shore. He had gone along its northern shore on
his first voyage, and had turned back instead of continuing toward the
continent. This time he took the southern coast, pushing west for about
a month and a half, and again turning back when he was not more than two
hundred miles from Central America. The natives whom he questioned told
him, as on his first visit to Cuba, that their land was surrounded by
water; but Alonzo de Ojeda, who was with Columbus, said, "These are a
stupid race who think that all the world is an island, and do not know
what a continent is!" Columbus too did not wish to believe the savages;
he preferred to believe that Cuba was the continent. Yet as a navigator
Columbus was honest, and no doubt would have gone farther and proved the
natives right had he not been pestered by a grumbling crew. His men were
dissatisfied at the long tropic voyage which never appeared to bring
them one inch nearer wealth, and they clamored to return to Isabella. So
mutinous did they become that he decided to turn back, but it was with a
heavy heart. Again he must write to the sovereigns and report that he
had not yet found a land of wealth. The very thought of this next letter
made him miserable.

In fact, our enterprising Admiral was in a very bad way by this time. We
recall how he was ill when the new settlement of Isabella was started,
and how he nevertheless personally superintended the work. Always a
tremendous worker on sea or land, always at his post, meeting his heavy
responsibilities as best he knew how, it was nothing but work and worry
for the harassed Christopher Columbus; and now when he, a sick man, had
undertaken this voyage to the mainland, the natives had declared that
Cuba was only a big island!

Columbus lay down in his bunk, broken-hearted. A fever seized him and he
raved for several days; and in his ravings he hit upon a plan which was
so childish that one would laugh were it not also so pitiful. He decided
to write that he had discovered the mainland of Asia, but not yet
Cathay, as Cathay lay far inland. To prove that Cuba was really Asia, he
called together his crew of eighty men and made them swear before a
notary that not only had they cruised along the mainland, but they had
learned that it was possible to return from Cuba to Spain by land. This
statement being duly sworn to and sealed, the crew were informed that if
any one of them should ever deny this, his tongue would be torn out to
prevent his repeating the lie.

This time they did not keep so close to the shore. By going farther out
they discovered the Isle of Pines, also the pretty little group known as
"The Queen's Gardens," and Jamaica, later to be the scene of much woe.
Always islands, islands, islands! Among some of them navigation was very
dangerous, and the Admiral, still ill, never left the deck for several
days and nights. At last he broke down and could not move from his bed.
The minute this happened the crew, who had not the slightest interest in
discovering beautiful islands, hurried direct to their countrymen in
Isabella.

Poor Admiral! Poor men! If only they could have forgotten all about the
riches of Cathay, and could have realized the wonder and the honor of
being the first white men to gaze on all these lovely spots, these bits
of earth straight from the hand of God, how their hearts might have
welled with joy and thanksgiving! But no, it was a dissatisfied, heavy-
hearted body of men who came back empty-handed to Isabella on September
29, and reported that in all their five months' absence they had seen
nothing but savage islands.

Now let us see what mischief had been brewing in the colony during their
absence. Columbus, before leaving, had commanded the military governor
to place himself at the head of four hundred men and scour the island
for provisions. Instead of following these orders, the military
governor, without Diego Columbus's leave, went aboard the first ship
sailing for Spain. In other words, he deserted. The remainder, on
learning this, made a raid on the nearest natives and stole their food
and their wives; and the natives naturally took revenge.

It was while the outraged Indians were gathering in large numbers to
destroy Isabella that Columbus returned. A sad state of affairs to greet
a sick man, and especially when the trouble was all of Spanish making.
But there was no time to spend in asking whose fault it was. Their lives
were at stake. Isabella might soon share the horrible fate of La
Navidad. Columbus hurriedly mustered his men--less than two hundred--and
divided them into two companies. One of these he himself commanded, and
the other was under his older brother, Bartholomew, who had arrived from
Spain during the expedition to Cuba. The Spaniards were clad in armor.
The natives were naked and had no guns, and though they were far more
numerous than the Europeans, they were soon overcome.

One of the powerful chiefs, however, still remained unsubdued at the
head of his forces in the interior of the island. This was the chief
Caonabo, already mentioned as the one who had avenged his wrongs on the
offenders at La Navidad. Soon he too was captured by Alonzo de Ojeda
through the clever ruse of sending him a present. Then came a little
more fighting, and the men who had come to convert the savages to
Christianity obtained absolute control of the island of Haiti. The
enslaved natives, we are told, wove their sorrows into mournful ballads
which they droned out desolately as they tilled the fields of their
harsh masters.

But even with the natives subjugated there was still much discontent
among Columbus's men. There being no gold to pick up and sell, by
tilling the land only could they live; and even to farm profitably takes
years of experience. For everything that went wrong, they blamed the man
who had brought them to the New World, and similarly his brothers who
had come to help him govern.

Whenever a ship returned to Spain the miserable colonists sent back
letters full of bitter upbraidings against the man who had led them into
poverty and hardship. Also one of the priests had gone home, and
straight to court, to make a thousand complaints. The military governor
who had deserted the colony did the same thing, adding, "There is no
gold in the Indies of Antilla, and all the Admiral said about his
discoveries was mere sham and banter."

We have already mentioned that, from the moment Columbus started on this
second voyage, enemies at home began to do him harm. When, therefore,
all these tales reached Spain, they fell on ready ears. Even Queen
Isabella, who had always championed Columbus, had grown to see that his
discretion and general common sense fell very far short of his courage
and his navigating ability. The royal pair, therefore, decided that the
whole matter must be investigated.

A man who had accompanied Columbus on his first voyage was appointed by
the monarchs to go as Royal Commissioner to Haiti and question Columbus
about the condition of the colony. This man was selected because of his
supposed kindly feelings to the Admiral, the latter having recommended
him to the queen for excellent conduct on that trying first voyage. The
queen, we see, thus endeavored to make the inquiry as easy and friendly
as possible for the great navigator. But the Royal Commissioner, Don
Juan Agnado, acted like many another man suddenly vested with authority;
he carried it with a higher hand than kings themselves! Arriving at
Isabella at the moment when the Admiral was trying to capture the chief
Caonabo in the interior of the island, Agnado snubbed Bartholomew
Columbus, threw several officials into prison, put himself at the head
of the garrison, and announced that he was going inland after the
Admiral!

On his making this show of insolent power, every one believed that he
was to be the new governor, and that he had been authorized even to put
Columbus to death. At once they gave way to all the meanness of their
natures and, in order to gain favor with the new viceroy, they began
bitterly denouncing the old.

Columbus, who had received word of Agnado's advent into Isabella,
hurried to meet him there. Seeing himself in a sorry plight, he told
Agnado that he would immediately go back to Spain and answer his
sovereigns' inquiries in person. This was in October, 1495. But all
sorts of ill luck prevented his going. A frightful hurricane tore over
the island and sank the four vessels which Agnado had brought; then a
wanderer came in with tales of a real gold mine in the south of the
island and the report had to be investigated. Next, the several forts
which had been built had to be strengthened and stocked with provisions;
so that it was not till March, 1496, that the Admiral was ready to sail.
Only two caravels now remained in Isabella harbor. One of these was the
faithful little _Nina_; and on her the weary Admiral returned to
Spain.


CHAPTER XVI

THE THIRD VOYAGE


Columbus's second voyage home from his western lands was even more
stormy and threatening than his first had been, but the little
_Nina_ remained stanch as ever. Besides frightful weather to try
his soul, Columbus was taking home two hundred broken-down, disheartened
colonists who could no longer endure the hardships of the New World.
Even the prospect of going home did not improve their tempers. When the
food ran low, colonists and crew threatened to kill and eat the captive
natives in the hold. Columbus managed to pacify them all, however, but
it must have used up every bit of energy in his worn body.

When, after this tempestuous voyage, the _Nina_ and the other
little caravel put into Cadiz harbor on June 11, 1496, there was more
humiliation. Crowds collected to greet the gold gatherers; but the
unhappy men who crawled off the vessels were paupers--wrecks--mere
living skeletons. The very sight of them brought down curses on
Christopher Columbus. The man who had dreamed of coming back with a ship
full of gold, and being acclaimed by the cheers of the populace, came
back instead with the royal displeasure hanging over his head and curses
ringing in his ears!

The court was settled, at that time, in the north near Valladolid, and
thither Columbus went to plead his case. All along the way he displayed
his Indians and tropical plants and little golden ornaments, but the
inhabitants were less curious than before. In the picture of this
greatest and most illustrious discoverer trying to gain favor with
critical crowds by showing them a few naked savages and a few bits of
gold, there is something pitiful. For Columbus knew, and the crowds
knew, that he was in disfavor, and he was dejected by the fear of an
unfriendly reception.

What a relief it must have been to him when, instead, he found himself
graciously received. Not a word did the sovereigns utter of their
dissatisfaction, either over the affairs of the colony or the small
amount of gold. He told them all about his trip along Cuba and the new
islands found; and of course he could not refrain from telling them that
just before he left Hispaniola _real_ gold mines had been
discovered from which they might "confidently expect large returns."
They thanked him for his new discoveries and showed him many marks of
favor. Instead of paying attention to the many complaints which had been
made against Bartolome Colon, they told the Admiral that his brother
might remain vice-governor for life. A little later they told him they
would take his young son Fernando into the royal household and educate
him, and after a time they began to make plans for a third voyage. How
much better it all turned out than he had been led to expect from
Agnado's conduct!

For his next voyage Columbus asked for eight ships and the sovereigns
complied. More than three hundred men were to be sent out, paid by the
Crown; and as many more, if they would volunteer to go without pay, were
promised a third of the gold they got out of the mines, besides a share
in other products.

All these fair promises, where he had been expecting disgrace, must have
lifted a load from Columbus's mind; but he was soon to find, as in years
gone by, that a long time may elapse between promise and fulfillment.
Months and months rolled slowly away and Columbus was still kept waiting
in Spain.

It is possible that Ferdinand and Isabella wanted to see what the colony
could do without him; or perhaps there really was no other reason than
that given, that Spain herself needed every available ship at that time.
First, she was sending a great expedition against Naples; being at war
with France also, she needed a fleet to guard her own seacoast. Further,
as a brilliant marriage had been arranged between two of the royal
children of Spain and two of the royal children of Burgundy, there was
extra need of ships to carry these princes, in suitable state, across
the Bay of Biscay. Indeed, these various Spanish plans called not only
for ships, but money; and yet the government managed finally to set
aside six million maravedis for Columbus's use. Before he could begin to
spend it, however, Ferdinand took it back again, and under circumstances
that were very mortifying to the waiting Columbus.

Just after the royal treasurer was ordered to put this sum at the
Admiral's disposal, word came to court that Pedro Nino had arrived from
Espanola with ships laden with gold!

"There now," cried Christopher in glee, "did I not tell you gold was
sure to come?"

"Well then," craftily reasoned King Ferdinand, "hasten you to Cadiz with
an order to Pedro Nino to pay the government's share over to you for
your ships, and I will keep these six million maravedis in my own
treasury for war expenses."

But it all turned out to be a sorry joke on the part of Captain Pedro
Nino. His ships were full of slaves which, he laughingly declared, he
expected to turn into gold in the slave market.

Thus was Columbus, weary with long waiting, left without any
appropriation at all; and Bishop Fonseca laughing at him whenever he
observed his eagerness to be off!

In this quarter the impatient Admiral found much hindrance and no
sympathy. Not only did Fonseca himself exhibit indifference to
Columbus's work, but his secretary did the same. Furthermore, contrary
to the terms of Columbus's contract, by which he was to have a monopoly
of Indian discovery, Fonseca (on royal order, of course) began giving
licenses to other navigators, and the intrepid Columbus saw his coveted
prize slipping through his hands.

In all matters relating to government and administration, Bishop Fonseca
was a far wiser man than the great navigator. Fonseca possessed the best
education a man could receive in that day. His training in the great
church organization had given him skill in reading character. He soon
saw that Columbus had but little ability outside of navigation; and we
wish that, instead of despising him, he had been big enough and kindly
enough to say: "Good friend, give up all connection with that struggling
colony of Hispaniola. Let me send out a more competent man than yourself
to handle it, and do you devote your energies entirely to discovery.
That alone shall be your work. Carry it as far as you can, for you are
not young and the day will come when you can sail no more."

If a sympathetic, convincing, friendly voice had whispered this good
advice to the harassed governor of Espanola, what a load of trouble it
might have lifted from his heart. But Bishop Fonseca, unfortunately, was
not the man to help another in his hour of trouble. He merely treated
Columbus coldly and put every sort of obstacle in his way.

Ships and men were at last ready to sail from Cadiz on May 30, 1498. It
happened that ten days before Vasco da Gama, following the Portuguese
track around Africa, had left the coast and gone across the Indian
Ocean, reaching the rich mainland of the real India--the brilliant,
civilized city of Calcutta. Let us be thankful for poor Columbus's sake
that there were no cables in those days to apprise him of the fact, else
he might have felt even more keenly what a poor showing his own
discovery had made.

His fleet this time consisted of six vessels. They stopped as usual at
the Canaries, then went farther south to the Cape Verde Islands. Thus a
whole month passed before they were ready to cross the Atlantic.

On leaving the Cape Verdes, the Admiral decided to send his best captain
with three of the ships due west to Haiti,--this because the Isabella
colony was in sore need of provisions. Meanwhile he himself would lead
the other three farther south and discover new lands; for he had
received a letter in Spain from a gem expert saying, "Go to hot lands
for precious stones."

Knowing nothing of currents and calms around the equator in July, he
conducted his three ships into such a strong northern ocean current that
he had to change his course before ever they reached the equator. Next
they lay becalmed for eight days in the most cruel heat imaginable. The
provisions were spoiling; the men's tempers were spoiling, too; and so,
on the last day of July, judging that they must be south of the
Caribbean Islands, Columbus gave up all thought of new investigations
and started northwest for Hispaniola. By the new course land was soon
sighted, a much larger island than any of the Caribbeans. Out of it rose
three imposing mountain peaks; and accordingly it was christened _La
Trinidad_ (the Trinity) after the custom of religious naming that
prevailed.

Columbus's ships, having shrunken and cracked in the heat of the voyage,
were much in need of repair. After cruising around the south and west
shore, Looking in vain for a harbor where he could patch up his ships
and take on water, he at last found a suitable spot near Point Alcatraz.
Here the necessary repairs were made, and, as the Spaniards worked on
their boats, they could look across to a low strip of land in the west--
the coast, did they but suspect it, of an unheard-of continent nearly as
large as all Europe!

Thinking it another island, they sailed over to it when the boats were
mended. The Admiral was suffering torture with eyestrain (small wonder,
one would say who has seen those hundreds of cramped pages he wrote), so
he called a reliable man and ordered him to conduct a party ashore and
take possession in the name of their sovereigns. He himself, he said,
would lie down awhile in his dark cabin, for the glare of the tropic sun
made his eyes ache cruelly. That is how it happened that, on August 10,
1498, the Admiral lost the chance of putting foot on the vast mainland
of South America.

Back came the party from shore after a few hours to report that the
natives appeared very intelligent, that their land was called Paria,
that they wore a little gold which came (as usual) from "the west," and
that they wore strings of pearls that were gathered a little farther
south on the Paria coast. At last, pearls! How it must have encouraged
our ever hopeful Admiral!

So now, though they did not suspect it, the great continent of South
America was discovered. They sailed south along its shore for a time,
hoping to find the pearls, but the farther they went the rougher the
great waves became,--mountainous, indeed,--forming actual lofty ridges
on the surface of the sea. Of this phenomenon Columbus wrote home to the
monarchs, "I shuddered lest the waters should have upset the vessel when
they came under its bows." The rush, as we now know, was made partly by
the delta of the Orinoco River and partly by the African current
squeezing itself into the narrow space between the continent and the
southern end of Trinidad, after which it curls itself into the Gulf of
Mexico and comes out again as the Gulf Stream.

Columbus, after buffeting these dangerous waters as long as he could,
turned north again along Trinidad and emerged out of the Gulf of Paria,
leaving the pearls behind him. Instead of landing and looking to see if
the natives spoke the truth, he started a hopeful letter to the
sovereigns, telling them what rich pearl fisheries he had discovered.
This time, however, Christopher's imagination really ran close to the
facts, for at their next landing, on the island of Margarita, north of
Venezuela, they actually bartered three pounds of large pearls from the
natives! Then they headed northwest for Haiti, reaching it the last of
August, 1498.

Nearly two and one half years had passed since he and Agnado had left
the island in the hands of their successor, Bartholomew Columbus. During
that time no change for the better had come to it. The mistakes on the
part of officers, and the rebellions on the part of the people, now made
a longer list than ever. Not a man among them, from Bartholomew down to
the meanest commoner, appeared to know how to build up a well-ordered,
self-respecting community. The spirit of cooperation was entirely
lacking. No one thought of the common good, only of his own interests;
and those in power had not been trained to handle large groups of men
who needed wise directing. In those days, and especially in Spain, the
general education was not the sort to develop each individual man toward
self-reliance, but to make him part of a big organization where he need
not think for himself, but need merely obey orders. If, then, those
appointed to issue the orders were not men of wisdom and sense, things
were bound to go wrong. Bartholomew Columbus, whom the sovereigns had
appointed lord lieutenant for life, had not been a very wise governor,
as will soon be apparent.

It was only a little while before the Admiral sailed home with Agnado
that gold mines had been discovered on the south coast of Espanola.
Bartholomew was therefore instructed to take a certain number of men to
the south coast and establish a seaport at the nearest suitable point to
the mines. That was how the present town of Santo Domingo (now shortened
into San Domingo) came into existence, a town that in time grew to be so
important that it gave its name to the whole island.

In order to start building San Domingo, Bartholomew, or, as he should be
styled, Don Bartolome, took nearly all the working population out of
Isabella. The only ones left were those engaged in building two caravels
which the Admiral had started constructing. The men under Don Bartolome
appear to have entered into building the new port with fairly good will;
for there really was a little gold in the vicinity, and they had been
promised payment for their services. If Don Bartolome had stuck to his
post, everything might have gone well; but scarcely were the first few
houses completed when he decided, most unwisely, to make an expedition
far into the west of the island, where there was supposed to be a rich
Indian kingdom called Xaragua. Of course when Bartolome reached Xaragua,
he found the tribe to be, as usual, a "poor people." He could collect no
golden tribute from them, and had to take their offer of produce
instead, which, he told them, they must have ready within a certain
time. Then he rode off to see how the men left behind at Isabella were
getting on.

There, since the day when he had taken away the best (that is, the most
industrious) men to work in San Domingo, those remaining had known
nothing but misfortune. Many had died; and of those left, many were ill
and all were discontented. Unluckily, Don Bartolome was not the man to
offer much sympathy or even to stay and put things in order. Instead, he
left this first American town to its fate and started on to the second.
All the way across the island to San Domingo he kept demanding tribute
from the natives he passed. The poor creatures, though they well knew
the malignant power of the Spaniards, determined to make one more
attempt at resistance. The result was that most of them were killed or
taken captive. By this time the tribute of Xaragua was to be ready, and
Don Bartolome went after it and did not continue on to the new seaport
of San Domingo.

While he was gone, his younger brother Diego was left in command of the
eastern part of the island. Diego was far less of a disciplinarian than
either Cristobal or Bartolome, and the Spaniards themselves now
revolted. In this they were led by a man named Francisco Roldan whom the
Admiral had appointed chief-justice. Roldan gathered about him nearly
all the well men on the island, taking them from their work in the mines
and on the new town. Once banded together, these rebels rode and tramped
all over the center of the island, stealing food wherever they could
find it. It happened that while they were in the west, near the coast of
those same regions of Xaragua where Bartholomew was, along came the
three caravels laden with food which Columbus had sent direct from the
Cape Verde Islands.

Columbus had instructed the commander of this little fleet to coast
along the southern shore till he found the new seaport which Bartholomew
was building; but somehow the commander missed it, and sailed much
farther west and into the very territory where the Roldan rebels were.
Knowing nothing of their disloyalty, he sent a large number of men
ashore to inquire for San Domingo. These, as ill luck would have it,
fell in with Roldan and his men. We may readily imagine the
conversations that ensued.

"Don't go to the town," the malefactors warned the newcomers. "It is
nothing but work, work, work, and no pay. We are supposed to be paid out
of the gold found, but the amount is so small that not a grain of it
ever reaches us! Better stay here and go from one Indian village to
another, taking food and golden ornaments from the natives." And the
shore party, instead of searching for San Domingo, stayed with Roldan.

The three caravels then continued their search, but never reached San
Domingo till a few days after Columbus himself had come up from South
America.


CHAPTER XVII

A RETURN IN DISGRACE


What a discouraging state of affairs to greet the returning "Governor-
General and Viceroy of all the Lands Discovered in the Western Seas!"
What comfort were all these titles that Columbus stood out for so
obstinately, when half his colonists had joined a rebel leader and the
other half were sick and hungry!

By this time Roldan's army was so large that Christopher and his brother
had to admit to each other that there was no chance of subduing the
insurrection by force. In truth, there was no "force"; for those who
were not ill, even the newcomers, were all grumbling against the
government. So there was nothing to do but make a treaty with the rebel
leader, as if he had been the lawful ruler of a state; and in this
treaty he had everything his own way. Columbus had humbly to agree to
give two vessels to carry the discontented ones back to Spain; to fill
these vessels with ample provisions, and to agree to write a letter to
the monarchs stating that Roldan and his men were in no way to blame for
the trouble. Here was humiliation indeed! Fancy a high official of the
Crown being forced to such an undignified treaty with one who had
rebelled against his authority!

But even this did not end the trouble. Columbus could not get the
vessels ready in time, and so the malefactors became more vexatious than
ever. Later another treaty was made, still more humiliating to the
Admiral, for he had to promise, first, that those of Roldan's men who
were most anxious to return should be sent to Spain immediately; second,
that those who chose to remain should receive gifts of land and houses;
third, that he, Columbus, would issue a public proclamation stating that
all that had happened had been caused by the false reports of bad men;
and fourth, that Roldan the leader should remain chief-justice for the
rest of his life! Roldan now condescended to return to San Domingo and
sit in the judge's seat.

No sooner was this turbulent leader appeased than another rebel arose.
This time, sad to say, it was the brave Alonzo de Ojeda. Because he had
succeeded in taking the chief Caonabo prisoner, Columbus had rewarded
and honored him by making him captain of a voyage of discovery among the
islands. All this time, no doubt, Ojeda was loyal to his Admiral; but he
had recently made a trip home to Spain, where, from his friend Bishop
Fonseca, he had learned many things, false as well as true, that
poisoned his mind against his great leader. So he in turn gathered the
discontented into a threatening band.

"I have word from Spain," he told them, "that our good queen lies dying.
She is the only friend Cristobal Colon has; and you may be sure that the
minute she is dead I can easily arrange to have her favorite removed if
you will all rally around me." Many, of course, lent ear to his
treacherous talk, and these had many a skirmish with the few who were
faithful to Columbus.

Ojeda, besides sneering at and opposing the Admiral's authority, wrote
letters back to Fonseca telling him all sorts of unfavorable things
concerning Columbus and his brothers. All the rebels, in truth, were
sending back complaints, for the old and the new world sent little
packet ships monthly. What they did not write was told in Spain by those
of Roldan's men whom Columbus had sent home. Some indeed went straight
to the king himself with their stories, with the result that the queen
had to agree with her husband, who had never been much interested in
Columbus and his savages, that the whole matter must be thoroughly
investigated.

Yet, even after consenting to court-martial Columbus, as it were, the
queen delayed the proceeding as long as possible, as if trying to give
her viceroy time to straighten out his situation. But sad tales of
misrule still kept coming from Espanola, and finally, after more than a
year of waiting, the monarchs sent out Don Francisco de Bobadilla (Boba-
deel'ya) with a letter that began:--

        *       *       *       *       *

Don Cristobal Colon, our Admiral of the Ocean:

We have ordered the Comendador Francisco de Bobadilla, the bearer of
this, that he speak to you on our part certain things which he will tell
you. We pray you give him faith and credence, and act accordingly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Christopher, however, was not permitted to give the royal commissioner
faith and credence, for the simple reason that Bobadilla did not show
him the letter. We have already read of the high-handed manner in which
Juan de Agnado acted some years before when sent out to investigate;
but, by comparison with Bobadilla, Agnado had been gentleness itself.
Bobadilla was a stern and rigorous churchman, comendador, or commander,
of one of the famous religious-military orders in Spain. He could
tolerate nothing short of the strictest and most unquestioning obedience
to authority. He also had a great respect for high birth, and he, like
Bishop Fonseca, could never forget that Christopher Columbus was of
humble origin. Both Fonseca and Bobadilla would have been astounded had
they dreamed that their principal claim to remembrance by coming ages
would be from their reluctant association with a certain illustrious man
"of humble origin."

It was on August 23, 1499, that Bobadilla's ship entered the mouth of
the little river on which San Domingo was situated; and on seeing on
either side of the settlement a gallows, and on either gallows the body
of a high-born Spaniard lately executed for rebellion, the sight did not
incline him to feel kindly toward the low-born governor who had executed
them. Columbus and his brother Bartholomew were in the interior at the
time, and Bobadilla had no intention of awaiting their return, so eager
was he to show his power.

Next morning, when all the colony had gathered in church for mass, he
read them the royal letter authorizing him to inquire into the
administration of the Viceroy. The letter stated that their Majesties
empowered Bobadilla to seize evil-doers and their property, and that the
Admiral and all others in authority must aid him in doing so.

Columbus had left his brother Diego in charge of the colony; and Diego,
though weak as a ruler, was strong in words when Bobadilla ordered him
to hand over the remainder of the rebels for trial, together with
evidence against them. Diego replied that the prisoners were held by
order of the viceroy, and that the viceroy's authority was higher than
the comendador's. Such an answer was not likely to mollify the royal
commissioner.

The next morning after mass he opened a second letter and read it to the
colonists, a letter which the monarchs told him to open only in case
Columbus refused to submit to him. This document proclaimed the bearer,
Don Francisco Bobadilla, governor of all the islands. He immediately
took the oath of office, and then opened and read to the astonished
populace a third royal letter in which Christopher Columbus was
commanded to hand over all papers and property belonging to the Crown.

The discontented colonists saw that the day of reckoning had come for
their unpopular governor. They exulted in it; and Bobadilla, who
realized the satisfactory impression he was making, then and there
opened a fourth letter which commanded that he, Bobadilla, should
straightway pay all arrears of wages to the men who had worked on San
Domingo. As nearly all the men had gone unpaid for a long time past
(owing to utter lack of funds), when they heard this last proclamation,
they hailed Bobadilla as a benefactor, and his narrow, mean soul swelled
with pride.

To be sure, the monarchs really had issued all these letters; but
Bobadilla was to read and act upon the second and third letters only in
case Columbus refused to obey the first; and here, without giving
Columbus any opportunity to speak for himself, Bobadilla had gone to the
extreme limit of his powers. It makes one recall Shakespeare's lines
about

    "Man, proud man,
  Drest in a little brief authority....
  Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
  As make the angels weep."

By the end of the second day the new governor had seized the Admiral's
house. Next he sent a search party to find the two brothers and bid them
return. This Christopher and Bartholomew did at once; and Bobadilla,
whose noble birth had not given him a noble soul, treated the grumblers
and talebearers of San Domingo to the shameful sight of the Discoverer
of the New World marching in chains to prison!

While Columbus had not been a successful ruler, it must be borne in mind
that the men he was expected to rule were a most ungovernable lot. But
even so, it is difficult to believe that among them all there was not
one big enough to forget that the man who had been an unsatisfactory
colonial governor had been the bravest explorer ever known. But no, they
were pitiless. His own cook was ordered to fasten the chains on him. The
onlookers exulted in his disgrace; and their outcries were so loud and
so bitter that Columbus and his brothers expected every moment to be put
to death.

Bobadilla lost no time in deciding what to do with his prisoners. They
must be put out of the way, but not by death. Instead, he ordered a
nobleman named Villejo to take them at once to Spain. When Villejo, with
some soldiers, entered the cell in order to remove the prisoners to the
ship, Columbus thought he was to be escorted to the scaffold. "I see I
am to die," he said calmly. Villejo, who seems to have been the only man
in San Domingo with an ounce of humanity in him, answered kindly, "I am
to escort you to a ship, Your Excellency, and then home to Spain."

As they marched to the shore, a rabble followed, shouting every insult
imaginable. And thus did Christopher Columbus sail away, for the third
time, from the island which he had found so quiet and peaceful that he
once wrote, "The nights are lovely, like May nights in Cordova." Here
was a change indeed!

When the caravel was under way, Villejo offered to remove the Admiral's
shackles.

"No," answered Columbus, with dignity, "their Majesties gave Bobadilla
authority to put me in irons; they alone must issue the authority to
take the irons off."

And so in irons the greatest discoverer the world has ever known made
his sixth crossing of the Atlantic. And in irons he landed in Cadiz in
November, 1500.


CHAPTER XVIII

PUBLIC SYMPATHY


We have just seen Columbus land in chains at Cadiz. We next see him
free, traveling in great splendor to that scene of his first successful
interview with Isabella--Granada. What had happened meanwhile to lift
him out of misery and disgrace? Simply what always happens when a really
great man is too harshly punished, a reaction in the public mind.

In all Spain Columbus had hardly a friend; yet when the people of Cadiz
saw him leave Villejo's ship in chains, they were moved with deepest
sympathy. They began telling each other that, no matter what his faults
might be, he had been the first man deliberately to put out across the
dreaded Atlantic and reveal to the world that land, and not monsters,
lay on the other side. Had any one else ever begged, during seven years,
for the privilege thus to risk his life for the benefit of Spain in
particular, and all mankind in general? Even the Portuguese, greatest of
exploring nations, had only hugged the African coast cautiously; but
this man had sailed straight away from land into the setting sun. Even
landsmen appreciated the fine courage that required.

And the first man bold enough to wish to go out and unravel the mystery
of the west now walked in chains from a Spanish ship to a Spanish
prison! It was monstrous ingratitude, all declared; and they did not
hesitate to show their sympathy. The story of his disgrace traveled
rapidly, and everywhere it brought out the better nature of the Spanish
people, who accordingly denounced this harsh treatment by their
sovereigns.

And what had Columbus himself done to help matters along? The wisest
thing that he could have done; he had refrained from writing to
Ferdinand and Isabella. His silence spoke in his favor; for they did not
learn what had happened till a lady-in-waiting at court, a friend of
Columbus and of the queen, received a letter which Columbus had written
during the voyage, and which the good Villejo sent off by a trusty
messenger the minute the ship reached Spain. This lady carried the
shocking news to the queen, perhaps even read the whole letter to her;
if so, Isabella must have winced at this passage: "I have been wounded
extremely by the fact that a man should have been sent out to make
inquiry into my conduct who knew that if he sent home a very aggravated
account against me, he could remain himself at the head of the
government."

Hardly had the queen heard this letter when there came a report from
Villejo containing the same story of Bobadilla's brutal haste in dealing
with the Admiral. And directly after this came an inquiry from the
alcalde (mayor) of Cadiz asking what he should do with his distinguished
prisoner.

Isabella saw it was all too true; Bobadilla had gone to the uttermost
limit of authority without even waiting to try less offensive measures.
She saw that she had selected a very unworthy person for the delicate
task of removing a great man from office. Even Ferdinand, who, as we
have seen, had no great opinion of Columbus, was grieved over the
unhappy affair. Immediately they dispatched a courier to the alcalde
with instructions to set the Admiral free, and to treat him with every
consideration. Then they invited Columbus to come to them at court, and
ordered a credit of two thousand ducats for him, a large sum in those
days, for it was equal to about ten thousand dollars in our money. This
they did without even waiting to hear Bobadilla's side of the story.

Columbus reached Granada in December, 1500; nine years precisely after
the memorable journey that Friar Juan Perez had caused him to make to
the same place. As on his return from the second voyage, when he was
expecting royal reproaches, he received instead only the kindest
treatment. Both Ferdinand and Isabella made him feel, instantly, that,
whatever had gone wrong, they knew his worth and considered him a
distinguished man.

So overcome was he by this magnanimity that it was some minutes before
the white-haired, worn-out man could control his feelings sufficiently
to tell his story. Finally, however, he managed to speak. He admitted
all that had gone amiss in Espanola and said his only excuse was his
inexperience in governing. (Ah, good Admiral, if only you had remembered
your inexperience on that January day in that same city of Granada, when
you insisted on being made Viceroy of all the lands you might discover!)

The queen, while she pitied Columbus profoundly in his distress, was too
wise a woman to let her pity run away with her prudence; so she answered
cautiously:--

"Common report accuses you of acting with a degree of severity quite
unsuitable for an infant colony, and likely to incite rebellion in it.
But the thing I find hardest to pardon is your reducing to slavery many
Indians who had done nothing to deserve such a fate. This was contrary
to my express orders. As ill fortune willed it, just at the time that
news came to me of this breach of my instructions, everybody was
complaining of you; no one spoke a word in your favor. I felt obliged to
send a commissioner to the Indies to investigate and give me a true
report, and, if necessary, to put limits to the authority you were
accused of overstepping. If he found you guilty of the charges against
you, he was to relieve you of the government and send you to Spain to
give an account of your stewardship. This was the extent of his
commission. I find that I have made a bad choice in my agent, and I
shall take care to make an example of Bobadilla so as to warn others not
to exceed their power. But I cannot promise at once to reinstate you as
governor. As to your rank of Admiral, I never intended to deprive you of
it. But you must abide your time and trust in me."

Isabella's reply is a model of fairness and prudence so far as Columbus
is concerned, but it is hardly fair to Bobadilla. The comendador had
been brutal, it is true; but it was not true that he had gone beyond the
extent of his commission. His brutality consisted in pouncing upon the
offender without any preliminaries whatever. Yet it turned out that, in
acting thus, he did the best possible thing for Columbus's subsequent
treatment. There is no doubt that had he proceeded slowly, with a fair
and formal inquiry into all the complaints against the Admiral, it would
have been clearly shown that, from the very beginning, everything had
gone wrong in the colony. The Indians, once friendly, were now bitter
against the Spaniards. The colonists were a bad lot, but Columbus
himself had examined and accepted most of them before the ships left
Spain.

If mistakes were committed while he was absent exploring Cuba, they were
made by his brothers and by those whom he himself had selected to rule
in his absence. All of this evidence would have been against Columbus,
who in consequence would have been deposed as governor and sent home to
answer Bobadilla's charges before a royal court of inquiry. Arriving as
a man disgraced after a fair trial, nobody's sympathies would have been
stirred. It was precisely because Bobadilla had acted like a brute
instead of like a wise judge that everybody denounced him and pitied his
victim.

Considering all this, and considering that Columbus himself had admitted
his "inexperience in government" to the queen, it is astonishing to
learn that he was deeply hurt because she did not reinstate him
instantly as ruler of the island! Experience had taught the great
discoverer but little. At a moment when he should have fallen on his
knees in thankfulness because he would never again have to be
responsible for that colony of vicious men, he instead felt hurt! He
wanted to return and start the whole sorry business over again.
Moreover, he protested, as indeed he had been doing for years, because
other navigators were imploring the monarchs to break their contract
giving _him_ a monopoly of western exploration, and to allow them
to undertake voyages, asking no government assistance whatsoever. Now
was the time for him to say, "It is to Spain's interest that she send as
many explorers as possible over to these new lands, in order that we may
quickly determine how many islands there really are, and whether what I
last visited was the mainland; only, pray let me hasten back free from
every responsibility except that of a navigator; so that I, who so
justly deserve the first chance of exploring the new lands, may get
there ahead of these others who are clamoring to go."

Had Columbus been businesslike enough to make this proposition to the
monarchs, he need not have died in ignorance of the prodigious fact that
he had discovered a great continent undreamed-of by Europeans. But,
instead of renouncing his monopoly, he complained that licenses had been
granted to others to sail west in violation of the agreement that he
alone, and his descendants after him, should sail among the new lands.
This attitude annoyed King Ferdinand exceedingly.

For Columbus to hope to keep this monopoly in his own family was
madness; as by this time other countries, having heard of his opening up
the way, had sent out explorers to plant their standards. John and
Sebastian Cabot had gone out from Bristol, England, to Newfoundland, and
had discovered, in June, 1497, the North American continent before
Columbus had touched South America. Early in 1499 one of the pilots who
had accompanied Columbus on his Cuban trip secured a license, and not
only explored the Central American coast for several hundred miles, but
traded his European trifles and gewgaws with the natives for gold and
silver, returning to Spain with real profits.

That same year, 1499, Vicente Pinzon of Palos, who with his brother
Martin had made the first voyage, also secured a license and sailed
southwest over the equator, discovering the Amazon River and taking
possession of Brazil for Spain. Our adventurous acquaintance Ojeda also
had been busy. When the Paria pearls arrived in Sevilla, he asked his
friend Fonseca to show him both the pearls and Columbus's map of
Trinidad and the neighboring coast. Although Ojeda had recently been in
open rebellion against the Admiral in Haiti, as we have seen, Fonseca
did not hesitate to let him see where the pearl land lay; and so Ojeda,
with an Italian named Vespucci, whom we shall meet later, sailed to
Paria and gathered its wealth.

Also, in this year so great for navigation, a Portuguese fleet of
thirteen ships set out from Lisbon to round the Cape of Good Hope. In
trying to escape the long calms which had beset Bartolome Dias in the
Gulf of Guinea, Pedro Cabral, commander of the fleet, struck out quite
far from the Morocco coast and got into the Equatorial Current. The
existence of this powerful westward current had never been suspected by
either Spanish or Portuguese mariners. Wind and current combining,
Cabral and his captains found themselves, in about a month's time, on
the coast of Brazil near the present Rio de Janeiro. Thus a current
never before known carried them to land never before known. And thus for
the second time, if the shipwrecked pilot told the truth, America was
discovered by accident.

All this had given Europe some idea of the vastness of the world to the
west. If Columbus was to bring his own discoveries to a glorious finish,
it was high time that, instead of quibbling over maintaining a contract,
he should have given up the empty honors that were to have been his, and
have asked only for permission to hurry back and discover more land.

Ferdinand, who now saw that the islands would need not one but a dozen
governors if ever they were to be colonized and developed, would not
hear of reinstating Columbus as governor. The most the monarchs would
give him in the way of satisfaction was that Bobadilla should be removed
and another man, who had had nothing to do thus far with the quarrels of
the New World, should be appointed for two years. This new governor,
whose name was Nicolas de Ovando, was specially instructed to protect
Columbus's profits in the colony, if profits there should ever be.
Orders were given that the property of Columbus and his brothers, which
Bobadilla had confiscated, was to be restored; and whenever gold was
found and smelted, Columbus's share was to be put aside for him. This
proved that the sovereigns intended to be just to Columbus, but the
latter was nevertheless much depressed over his lost dignities.

The Comendador Ovando, of the famous religious order called the Knights
of Alcantara, was appointed to succeed Bobadilla, and began his
preparations with certain definite and practical ideas on the subject of
colonizing. He was the first to see that respectable married men with
their wives and children were needed to give the settlement character;
so he offered, or asked the sovereigns to offer, proper inducement to
married men. He also secured as many trained workers as possible--
artisans and craftsmen. His other measures appear less wise; that is, he
felt he must go in state and dignity, else the people would not regard
his authority; so he took many body servants and house servants, and
rich priestly robes, for he relied a great deal on the appearance of
power. No less than thirty-five vessels would suffice to carry his
twenty-five hundred passengers (among them Bartolome de las Casas) to
San Domingo; and when he started in all his state, the heart of Columbus
was sad and sore.

"Ah," thought he, "if only _I_ had had decent men, instead of jail-
birds and loafers!" and he pondered sadly on his many misfortunes.

And still the monarchs kept him waiting and would not furnish him with a
fleet. While he was waiting came the bitter and disquieting news that
Portuguese explorers were returning in a stream from the Indian Ocean
with exceedingly rich cargoes, all justly traded for in the markets of
Calcutta. Why, he groaned, had _his_ India been so barren of
riches?

He began to ponder over all the theories he had read concerning the
geography of the world, and to wonder what his discoveries might really
be. If it dawned upon him that he had struck islands fringing on
absolutely new, unsuspected land, he appears to have dismissed the
extraordinary idea, and to have come back to Martin Alonzo Pinzon's
theory that he, by sailing west over the globe, had come to Asiatic
regions. It must be so, he argued. Marco Polo had made known the fact
that an ocean bounded Asia on the east, and that ocean must be the
Atlantic, which continued across to Europe. The Indian Ocean which the
Portuguese had crossed must be the southern part of the Atlantic, where
it curved around Asia's southern shores. Ah, if only he could reach it!
If only he had sailed straight for the rich mainland, instead of wasting
his time on those pretty islands, inhabited only by a "poor people"!

He began to recall how the land north of the Gulf of Paria stretched far
west; how the southern shore of Cuba stretched far west; how the
currents of the Caribbean Sea indicated, by the fact that they had
washed Cuba, Haiti, and Porto Rico into their long narrow east-and-west
shape that somewhere in the west they passed through a strait which
separated some large island from southeastern Asia; and that strait must
lead into the Indian Ocean--the very ocean the Portuguese were now
sailing so profitably! He wisely resolved to linger no longer in Spain,
importuning for his lost governorship, but to undertake a fourth voyage
and find this passage.

Good reasoning, all this about "the strait," if only facts had been
geographically correct; and a brave determination, too, for an old man
afflicted with rheumatism and fever and bad sight to resolve to put out
once more on that boisterous ocean. We salute you, Don Cristobal! You
are a true navigator, never afraid of hardships and labor and perplexing
problems. Even had you not discovered America for us, we still would
salute you, because you were a tremendous worker!

Full of his new plan, Columbus left beautiful Granada where he had spent
two empty years and went to Sevilla. King Ferdinand readily granted him
four ships, for the Admiral Cristobal Colon, off on a voyage of
discovery, was not nearly so troublesome as the deposed governor and
viceroy, lingering around the court to obtain his lost title and
revenues.

The fitting out of the ships restored his spirits considerably. Whenever
Christopher had to do with boats and sea preparations he was in his
element. He now grew optimistic, and, with his usual fatal habit of
promising great results, he told his Sevilla acquaintances that he
expected to circumnavigate the world. Fatal habit, yes; but it meant
that he still kept that rich imagination, without which he never would
have made his first voyage.

Meanwhile, he realized that he was getting old, and that he might never
come back from this trip. His thoughts often turned to his native Genoa,
where he had played so happily as a child in the Vico Dritto di
Ponticello; so, one day he sat down and generously wrote to the
authorities of Genoa that, should his claims against the Spanish Crown
ever be settled, a part of his money was to be used in paying the
Genoese tax on wheat and wine, so that the poor might buy these two
staples at a lower price.

Finally all was ready; four small, weather-beaten ships; a crew of one
hundred and fifty men and boys; a few months' provisions. His brother
Bartholomew, not very willingly, and his son Fernando, almost too
eagerly, accompanied him. This, his fourth and last voyage, started from
Cadiz on May 9, 1502.


CHAPTER XIX

THE LAST VOYAGE


Fernando Columbus, though only a lad of fourteen, noted every new
experience with intelligent delight. He had his father's passion for
writing things down. As it was the result of personal observation,
Fernando's account of the fourth voyage may be accepted as more reliable
than many other items he has left us concerning the Admiral's history.

Among other things, Fernando says that the little fleet intended
starting its search at the outlet of the Gulf of Paria, and then
following the land west until they came to the straits leading into the
Indian Ocean; but while approaching the Caribbean Islands, his father
discovered that one of the vessels was in need of repairs; for which
reason he headed for San Domingo, where he hoped to purchase a better
caravel.

As Columbus had been told _not_ to stop there till his return trip,
he sent one of the faster ships ahead with a letter to Governor Ovando,
explaining that he wanted to buy another ship, and also that he was
seeking protection from a hurricane that he saw approaching. Knowing the
peculiarities of weather in those regions, he was so sure of the storm
that he advised Ovando to hold back any vessels that might be about to
depart for Spain.

Our weather-wise old Admiral was not mistaken in his prophecy. A furious
West Indian hurricane broke on the last day of June; but his poor little
ships, instead of lying safe in the shelter of San Domingo harbor, were
exposed to all the ravages of the storm. Why? Because Ovando had refused
to let him enter the port! A cruel insult; but the Admiral was too busy
just then to brood over it. He must hastily draw in under the lee of the
land and wait for the hurricane to pass.

It was not the sort that passed, for it stayed and stayed till it was
worn out by its own fury. "Eighty-eight days," Columbus wrote to his
sovereign, "did this fearful tempest continue, during which I was at sea
and saw neither sun nor stars. My ships lay exposed with sails torn; and
anchors, cables, rigging, boats, and a quantity of provisions lost....
Other tempests have I experienced, but none of so long duration or so
frightful as this."

And all this perilous time, when men and vessels narrowly escaped going
to the bottom, the discoverer of the New World was denied the privilege
of the only seaport in it! It makes one's blood boil, even to-day, to
think that at San Domingo the Comendador Ovando and the whole group of
ungrateful landsmen went safely to bed every night in the very houses
that they had hated Columbus for making them build, while he was lashing
about on the furious waves, thinking his other three ships lost, and
expecting every minute a similar fate for his own!

The eighty-eight days, fortunately, were not continuously stormy; there
were occasional lulls. It was the end of June when Columbus had asked
for shelter; not till the middle of July did the first clear weather
come. Then the scattered, battered boats reunited as by a miracle, and
found themselves near the "Queen's Garden" islands south of Cuba. Let us
leave them there patching their boats and enjoying a bit of sunshine
while we see what has been happening at ungrateful San Domingo.

Ovando had been on the island a month and a half when Columbus came
along asking permission to land. Whether this was refused through the
new governor's ugly nature alone, or whether he believed Columbus's
prophecy of bad weather merely an excuse to land, is not known. Certain
it is that, although the Spanish monarchs thought San Domingo could get
along better without the Admiral, they never intended him to be turned
off when a violent hurricane was pending. Ovando evidently did not
believe in the hurricane; besides, he did not want Columbus to find out
that the new governors were managing no better than he had managed. In
this respect there was nothing to be proud of, else Ovando would surely
have believed in the hurricane. Bobadilla had been a miserable failure;
and he himself had not been there long enough to make any improvements,
except the detestable one of sending for African negroes to replace
Indian slaves!

One thing, however, had turned out a little better than any one
expected, and that was the gold mine near which the town of San Domingo
had been built. When Columbus's warning about the storm came, eighteen
caravels lay in the harbor ready to start for Spain with eighteen
hundredweight of gold. One nugget alone, Las Casas tells us, weighed
thirty-five pounds. Out of all this treasure, Columbus's share was forty
pounds, and that was set aside and loaded on the poorest, leakiest
caravel of the lot, called _The Needle_, to be sent to Spain and to
remain there until he should appear to claim it.

Ovando, like Columbus, wanted the colony to appear profitable in the
eyes of the monarchs, and was eager to start off this first golden
cargo, also all the spoils he had filched from the natives since his
arrival. Then, too, the Comendador Bobadilla was already aboard, and
Ovando was eager to be rid of him and also of Francisco Roldan, who
never had been, and never could be, of use in any colony; so Ovando,
when he read Columbus's warning, threw back his head and exclaimed,
"Nonsense! Let them start just the same!"

And start they did; and scarcely were the vessels out of sight when the
hurricane broke. Of the eighteen ships only one ever got to Spain. Three
returned much damaged to San Domingo. The others went down. The one
vessel that reached Spain was the leaky little tub called _The
Needle_, laden with the Admiral's gold! Thus the same storm that sent
many of his San Domingo enemies to a watery grave saved for him the
first profits he received from the island. It would be some satisfaction
to learn that Ovando was rebuked for his cruelty and stupidity; but
there is no record of such a reprimand. Perhaps no one even knew that
Ovando had been warned. As for the wholesale shipwreck, people merely
looked at such things piously in those days, and said, "It is the will
of Heaven!"

When the first lull came in that devastating storm, Columbus found
himself south of Cuba among the little "Garden" group. It was the third
time he had had a chance to sail along the Cuban coast and discover
whether it really was an island, as the natives said, or whether it was
the mainland, as he had forced his sailors to swear while on the Cuban
voyage when his brain was full of fever. Again he let the problem go
unsolved; the object of this fourth voyage was to find the straits
leading into the Indian Ocean. Having failed to begin his search from
Trinidad by following South America westward, as originally planned, he
expected he would come to the straits by following Cuba's southern shore
in the same direction, if Cuba, as he hoped, was a great strip of land
projecting eastward from the continent. And yet, instead of sailing
along Cuba, or returning to the Gulf of Paria and hugging the land
westward, he suddenly decided to put out southwest into the open sea.
This seems to us a foolish course, for no matter at what point he struck
land, how would he know whether to explore to the left or right for his
straits? Why this least desirable of three courses was taken neither the
Admiral nor his son explained in their diaries. Of course he found
land,--the Honduras coast; but of course he had no means of knowing what
relation it had either to Cuba or to the land around the Gulf of Paria.
Thus the poor Admiral lost his last chance of arriving at any just
conclusions of the magnitude of his discovery.

Before reaching this Honduras coast they stopped at the Isle of Pines,
where they saw natives in comfortable-looking house boats; that is, huge
canoes sixty feet long, cut from a single mahogany tree, and with a
roofed caboose amidships. These natives wore plenty of gold ornaments
and woven clothing; they had copper hatchets and sharp blades of flint;
and they used a sort of money for buying and selling. In other words, it
was the nearest approach to civilization that Columbus had ever seen in
his new lands. He tried by signs to ask about all these things, and the
natives pointed west as the place from which their house boat had come.
But so keen was Columbus for "the straits" to the Indian Ocean that even
gold could not divert him this time; he refused to proceed due west, and
thus failed to discover Mexico, the richest region the Spaniards were
ever to find on the North American continent.

From the Isle of Pines, the Admiral put out again into the open sea,
southwest, and the moment he had cleared land terrific storms were
encountered. Worse still, when he neared the coast which he named
Honduras, the currents were so violent that his boats could hardly make
headway against them. All July and August thunder and lightning were
incessant. Timbers creaked and strained till each minute it appeared as
if they must have reached the breaking point. Meanwhile the Admiral was
enduring the tortures of rheumatism and could not leave his bed; and so,
up on deck where the gales and the waves swept free, he ordered them to
rig a little cabin of sailcloth; there he lay and directed every move of
his crew. One minute he saw his terrified seamen clinging to masts or
slipping over wet decks; another, hauling in the mere shreds of sails
that were left. One minute he heard them vowing pilgrimages and penances
if only they might be saved; another, denouncing the madman who brought
them to these terrible waters.

But the sick man did not heed all this; his business was to bring them
out alive if possible; so he kept a clear head and issued his orders.
Whenever he became discouraged, he looked across the wave-washed decks
to the comforting sight of a slender lad of fourteen, brought up
delicately at court, but now turning to with a will and helping the
sailors with every rough, heavy task. How proud the Admiral must have
felt when he wrote in his journal, "It was as if Fernando had been at
sea eighty years!"

At last they rounded a point where better weather greeted them, and in
thankfulness Columbus called it Cape Gracias a Dios (Thanks to God). But
straightway came another blow. On the very first day when they could
catch their breath and cease struggling against wind and current and
rain, their spirits were again dashed. A rowboat went near the mouth of
a river to take on fresh water, and the river came out with a gush,
upset the boat, and drowned the men in it. So our sick Admiral, who was
drawing a map of the coast, and had just finished writing "Thanks to
God," marks down the rushing river and names it "Rio de Desastre" (River
of Disaster).

Just below Gracias Cape the current divided into two, one part flowing
west, the other south; this latter was followed. Sailing down the
Mosquito Coast they came, toward the end of September, to a pleasant
spot which Columbus called "The Garden," or El Jardin (pronounced Khar-
deen'), and where the natives appeared to be more intelligent than any
he had yet seen. Continuing south, he came to Caribaro Bay, where the
people wore many flat ornaments of beaten gold. As if they could detect,
from afar, the gold lust in the European eye, the poor creatures
brandished their weapons to keep the strange-looking visitors from
landing; but it was of no avail. Land they did, and traded seventeen
gold disks for just three tinkly bells! The voyagers asked, of course,
where the gold came from, and were told from Veragua, a little farther
south. For once the sign language was correctly understood. Veragua
actually existed. The Spaniards found it just west of the Isthmus of
Darien.

Here plenty more gold was seen. "In two days," wrote Columbus, "I saw
more indications of near-by gold mines than I had seen in four years in
Hispaniola." Not only did he see the precious metal, but he heard that
"ten days inland" lived tribes who possessed quantities of gold and
silver. And then the natives spoke of something far more wonderful, had
Columbus but known it, than gold; for they said, also, that ten days'
tramp westward lay a vast sea. This, Columbus concluded, must be the
immense river Ganges; and his tired brain began figuring how, by a
little "tramping west," and a little river boating, and then some more
tramping, a Spaniard could get from Darien back to Spain, provided the
Moslems did not murder him on the way!

But he was not seeking for gold on this trip. He did not march ten days
inland. He turned a deaf ear to it and to all his importuning crew and
went searching for his "strait"; by which steadfastness of purpose he
just missed discovering the Pacific Ocean. It has been said that Fate
was always a little niggardly with Columbus, and never was it truer than
at this moment when she at last deafened his ear to the tale of gold and
sent him south.

All November and December he continued coasting along South America. But
his greedy crew could never forget the sight of those Veragua natives
actually smelting gold. The men became sulky and clamored to go back;
and furthermore, the ships were too worm-eaten and too covered with
barnacles to proceed. On December 5, in order to take the gold-seekers
back to Darien, he reluctantly gave over his search for the passage to
the Indian Ocean. But the minute he turned north new gales began to
blow. These continued so furiously that in a whole month they progressed
barely a hundred miles. All this time they were nearly starved; about
the only provisions left were their rotten biscuits and these were, as
Fernando tells us, so disgusting to look upon that "many waited till
night to eat their sop."

At last the famished party got back to Veragua. Eighty men landed with
the idea of forming a settlement under Bartolome Colon. They had the
good sense to act in the friendliest manner to the native chief; but he
was not the simple-minded creature that Guacanagari was, over in Haiti.
He saw at once that they wanted gold, so he nodded obligingly, and
indicated by signs that he would lead them to the gold mines. And he
did; but they proved to be the small, worked-out mines of a neighboring
chief who drove the intruders off. Back they went to the first chief's
land and began to build a stockade. The first chief still appeared
friendly enough, but a very clever young Spaniard named Diego Mendez
happened to prowl through the undergrowth to the Indian village and saw
the warriors sharpening their knives and making ready to attack the
uninvited settlers. Off rushed Diego to tell Don Bartolome; and he,
believing that "the best defense is a sharp attack," rushed to the
village, captured the chief and many warriors, and sent them captive
aboard the waiting caravels. The chief, however, succeeded in jumping
over the side, diving to the bottom, and swimming ashore.

It was then quite dark and none saw him come to the surface, but the
next day he had another force ready to defy them. Of his fellow-
prisoners who had been thrust into the hold, some managed to throw open
a hatchway, overpower the guard, and likewise plunge into the sea. The
sailors hurriedly pushed back the hatchway so that no more might climb
out on deck; but next morning it was discovered that all those who had
not escaped were dead. They had committed suicide rather than be carried
off by the ruthless strangers.

All this time there was such a rough sea that no small boats could get
ashore from the caravels to obtain news of the eighty colonists under
Bartolome. At last a sailor offered to swim to land; when he came back,
it was with the news that this settlement had gone the way of Isabella
and San Domingo, for half its men had mutinied. The gold did not seem
worth fighting for where natives were so hostile that a man could not
even pick fruit from a tree and eat it! Columbus saw that there was
nothing to do but get the men back on the boats and abandon all thought
of colonizing what he had already named Costa Rica (Rich Coast).

But to carry out this decision for a while appeared impossible; the
waves were too high for any boat to venture out; but at last the clever
Diego Mendez, by lashing two canoes together into a sort of raft, got
near enough to shore to rescue Don Bartolome and his men and stores.
When Diego had succeeded in this perilous task, his Admiral was so
grateful that, in the presence of all the men, he kissed him on both
cheeks, a mark of great respect in those days. Ah, if only Christopher
had found such a stanch, capable friend earlier in his career!

Ever since they reached the mainland Columbus had been suffering
torments with rheumatism. Now to add to his agonies a fever attacked
him. Along with these ills, and the murmurings of his hungry men, one of
the ships was wrecked; and after they had rescued its men and
provisions, and were about to find room for them on another ship, this
other ship was discovered to be too worm-eaten and disabled to continue
the voyage. Columbus, in all his pain, directed the removal of men and
goods to the best two caravels. This done, he started for San Domingo,
turning his back on his last chance to find the passage to India--the
broad Pacific Ocean--if only he had crossed the isthmus between!


CHAPTER XX

THE COURAGE OF DIEGO MENDEZ


At last they were clear of the most disastrous landing that Columbus had
ever made. What you have read is but the bare sketch of a chapter in his
life that was crowded thick with misfortunes and even horrors. And yet,
strange to say, on this detestable coast is the only settlement in the
New World that perpetuates the great discoverer's name, the town of
Colon, at the Atlantic terminus of the Panama Canal.

The Admiral's health was now ruined, for fevers, sleeplessness, gout,
and eyestrain kept him in constant pain, and at times made even that
strong mind of his a little queer and wobbly. But on one point at least
it remained alert and lucid,--he still could think out his course
clearly. With a view to avoiding the treacherous winds and coastwise
currents that had previously wrought such havoc with his ships, he set
his rudders due east on leaving Veragua; his idea being to sail first
east and then north to San Domingo.

Straightway the crews became alarmed, thinking he meant to return direct
to Spain, in spite of the fact that the ships were too rotten for the
long trip. But no; the Admiral hoped, besides escaping currents, to
mystify them as to the geographical position of the gold coast.
Remembering how Alonzo de Ojeda had gone back and reaped riches from the
pearl coast, and how Pedro Nino, that captain who brought slaves to
Cadiz and sent word that he had brought a cargo of gold, and also been
to Paria, Christopher decided to zigzag about in such a manner that no
one could ever find his way back to the gold country ten days inland
from Darien. Suffering and misfortune were surely telling on the
Admiral's mind, else he would never have written this childish note:
"None of them [the crew] could explain whither I went nor whence I came;
they did not know the way to return thither."

But all the time his men grumbled, and could not understand why they
were starting for Spain on crazy, crumbling ships, when San Domingo lay
so much nearer. Every day they murmured louder, till at last the Admiral
foolishly humored them by heading due north; the result was that he
turned too soon and found himself in a new current he had never met
before. This current carried them past Hispaniola westward again to
those same "Gardens of the Queen." The series of storms that here
overtook the two battered little ships were almost as bad as those that
met them on their last approach to Hispaniola. Anchors were lost and the
men kept the ships from sinking only by the constant use of "three pumps
and all their pots and kettles." By the 23d of June they had drifted
over to Jamaica. The crews were worn out by their hard work to keep
afloat. It seemed as if human endurance could stand no more. Many were
badly bruised from being dashed down on the decks like bits of wood
before the gales; they had had no dry clothing on for days; their hearts
were faint, their stomachs fainter, for they had had nothing to eat and
drink for some time but black wormy bread and vinegar. How, we ask
ourselves as we sit in our comfortable, solid houses, did they endure
it? And yet there was even worse to come!

The Admiral saw that even "three pumps and all their pots and kettles"
could not keep the water bailed out of the leaky boats. The only thing
he could do was to run his ships aground. The first harbor he tried was
so barren on every side that starvation stared them in the face; so they
pushed on a little farther, the exhausted men again bailing steadily,
till they entered a greener spot, now called Don Christopher's Cove. Not
a minute too soon did they reach it. Once the ships were grounded on the
sandy beach, the tide soon filled the hulls with water. The weary men
had to turn to and build cabins on the forecastles; and here at last
they managed to keep dry, and to lie down and rest.

Their first thought was how to get food. The resourceful Diego Mendez
offered to tramp over the island and trade whatever personal articles
the sailors had left for foodstuffs. In this he was successful; he
secured more than food; he exchanged the clothing on his own back for a
large canoe and six rowers, and returned by sea. The next aid Mendez
rendered the shipwrecked men showed even finer heroism than his lashing
the canoes together to rescue Bartholomew. He offered to go in an open
rowboat all the way from Jamaica to Haiti and ask Ovando to send a
rescue vessel!

Look at a map of the West Indies and see what this offer meant! Two
hundred miles to the western point of Haiti, two hundred more to the
governor at San Domingo, and this, too, across a sea frequented by
perilous hurricanes. It was a magnificent piece of volunteer work! Not
one chance in a hundred did Diego Mendez have of reaching his
destination, and he knew it; yet he offered to take the risk. One of his
shipmates caught some of his valorous spirit and offered to accompany
him; and the six native rowers, of course, had no choice but to go.

Mendez was as practical and ingenious as he was brave. He fastened
weatherboards along the rim of the canoe to prevent shipping water; he
fitted it with a mast and sail, and coated it with tar; and while he was
doing it the Admiral wrote a brief, businesslike letter to Ovando,
telling of the sad plight they were in; he also wrote a long, rambling
letter, full of evidence of feeble-mindedness, to the monarchs. These
letters Mendez was to take with him.

But Mendez, to every one's dismay, came back again in a few days,--came
back alone and with boat and oars smashed. While waiting at the eastern
point of Jamaica for a favorable wind to take them over to Haiti, they
were surrounded by hostile natives and captured. The six rowers escaped,
and the companion of Mendez was probably killed instantly; but while the
savages were debating how to kill and cook Mendez, he managed to dash
away, jump in his huge canoe, and push off!

The shipwrecked party felt crushed indeed. Their last hope of rescue was
gone; but no--Diego Mendez offered to start all over again, if only Don
Bartolome would march with an armed force along the shore till there
came a favorable moment in the weather for Diego to push across to
Haiti.

This precaution saved the intrepid Diego a second surprise from
cannibals; but the passage, after leaving Jamaica, was torture. So
intense was the heat, that he and his Indian rowers were forced to take
turns jumping overboard and swimming alongside the canoe in order to
cool off. The Indians, like children, wanted to drink all the water at
once. In spite of warning, they emptied the kegs the second night, and
then lay down on the bottom of the canoe, panting for more. Diego and
his Spanish companion did the rowing till the Indians were rested a bit.
Then Diego brought out two more kegs of water which he had artfully
hidden under his seat, gave them all a drink, and set them to work
again. Late that second night the moon came up, not out of the sea, but
behind the jagged rock that lies ten miles off the western end of Haiti.
Blessed sight! What new courage it put into the tired rowers; how eager
they were to make the rock by sunrise so as to lie in its shade all that
August day of 1503, instead of blistering under the torrid sun in an
open boat. Surely, if ever men deserved to lie all day in the shade, it
was these brave fellows who were trying to save Christopher Columbus.

From this point Mendez went on with his six rowers till he found the
governor; but before going into that matter, let me tell you how proud,
and justly proud, Diego Mendez was all his life of this canoe trip. He
lived to be an old man (in the city of Valladolid), and when he felt
himself nearing the end, he asked his relatives to mark his grave by a
tombstone, "in the center of which let a canoe be carved (which is a
piece of wood hollowed out in which the Indians navigate), because in
such a boat I navigated some three hundred leagues; and let some letters
be carved above it saying _canoa_."

Quite right of you, Diego Mendez, to wish posterity to know of your
plucky voyage. We hope your relatives gave you the coveted tombstone;
and we hope, also, that they carved, on its reverse side, that of all
the men who ever served Don Cristobal Colon, you were the most loyal and
the most valiant.

The Admiral, in writing an account of what happened on the Jamaica beach
while Mendez was seeking aid, says:--

"At the request of the king's treasurer, I took two brothers with me to
the Indies--one as captain, the other as auditor. Both were without any
capacity for their work, yet became more and more vain. I forgave them
many incivilities. They rebelled openly on Jamaica, at which I was as
much astonished as if the sun should go black."

Yet why, we ask, should Columbus have been so astonished? Had he ever
known much else from those under him but incivility and rebellion?

Ever since Mendez left in August the men had been looking in vain for
his return. Autumn and winter and spring wore away, and as the natives
had grown tired of feeding them, the shipwrecked crew were now mere
skeletons. Of course they blamed the pain-racked Admiral because Mendez
had not returned with succor; and of course they were constantly
quarreling among themselves. One day the captain who had commanded the
vessel that went to pieces near Darien came into the cabin where the
sick Admiral lay, and grumbled and quarreled and said he was going to
seize canoes from the Indians and make his way to Haiti. It was
Francisco Porras, one of the two brothers foisted on Columbus by their
relative, the king's treasurer, who wanted to get rid of them.

Porras and forty-one of the discontented voyagers actually started for
Haiti, but a short time on the rough sea sent them back ashore. They
next formed themselves into a raiding party and outraged the natives in
every possible way, falsely saying that they did so by order of the
Admiral. This so angered the Indians that they marched down to Don
Christopher's Cove, surrounded the beached ships, and threatened to kill
every Spaniard there.

It so happened that there was to be an eclipse of the moon that night,
and Columbus suddenly recalled it and turned the fact to good use. He
told the angry natives that the power that had made the moon and the
stars was very displeased with them and would prove it that very night
by darkening the moon. The childish creatures decided to wait before
attacking and see if the Admiral spoke the truth. When the eclipse
really started, they became terrified and sent their chiefs to ask
Columbus's pardon; Columbus promptly declared that the light of the moon
would return if the Indians would faithfully promise to treat the
Spaniards kindly and supply them with food. The credulous creatures
hastened to procure it; and as they brought it to the shore, the moon
kindly emerged from the black shadow that had covered it. Result, the
Indians believed Columbus to be a superior being and from that time on
they fed him and his men well. This eclipse was on February 29, 1504.

But even with plenty of food the months of waiting were long and dreary.
Had the brave Diego Mendez gone to the bottom? He must have perished,
thought the Admiral, for surely if he had reached San Domingo alive even
the harsh Comendador Ovando could not have refused to send aid to
stranded countrymen on a savage island! But why not, good Admiral? Had
not this same Ovando refused to let you enter the harbor of San Domingo
last year when the frightful hurricane was gathering?

Yet that was what happened. Ovando, whose heart, if he ever had one, had
shriveled to the size of a mustard grain, practically refused to send
help. On hearing Mendez' tale he said he was sorry for the Admiral and
his men, but he did not say he would send them a ship. Mendez kept at
him, telling him very emphatically that the one hundred and thirty
stranded Spaniards would certainly die unless soon rescued; still Ovando
said he was sorry, but did not offer to send relief. Instead, scoundrel
that he was, he _did_ send a small caravel, very small indeed, so
that it could not accommodate the forlorn men, and could not carry them
any provisions. The captain, one of Roldan's rebels, was carefully
instructed merely to see if Columbus and his shipmates were still alive,
and then to come back and report. The Roldan rebel took his caravel to
Don Christopher's Cove, rowed out in a small trailer until within
shouting distance of the two rotting hulks on the beach, and yelled out
that Governor Ovando was very sorry to learn from Mendez that the
Admiral and his party were in trouble, and regretted that he had no ship
large enough to send to their rescue. And then the villain sailed back
to his villainous master.

Imagine this studied, impudent message to a group of men whose eyes had
been straining for months to see a relief ship head their way! Imagine
sending such a message to the most illustrious discoverer the world has
ever known! A more dastardly bit of cruelty hardly exists in history!

This expedition was kept secret from Diego Mendez, however; and Diego,
still storming about because nothing was being done, went among the
populace of San Domingo and declared that it was a base, shameful
business to leave a sick old man to perish on a savage island,
especially when that old man had discovered all these lands for Spain.
The people, though many of them had been the sick old man's enemies in
bygone days, and though they never suspected the greatness of Columbus,
agreed. They even began to clamor that Columbus should be rescued; but
it was not until they had clamored long and urgently that their knightly
governor sent a ship.

On June 25, 1504, exactly one year after Columbus had beached his two
remaining caravels, the relief ship came in sight. "Never in my life,"
wrote Christopher, "did I experience so joyful a day!" and we may well
believe it.

On the 15th of August the party reached San Domingo after their long
suffering and hardships. Ovando, seeing how popular sympathy had turned
towards the sick Admiral, decided to secure a little popular favor
himself out of the incident by inviting the discoverer to stay in his
own house, that is, the governor's house, which really had belonged to
Columbus. There Columbus learned that the agent appointed to set aside
his share of the island profits had not done so; also, as Ovando wanted
to punish Captain Porras, who had rebelled on Jamaica, while Columbus
preferred to deal with the matter himself, host and guest disagreed.

Too proud to remain an unwelcome guest in Ovando's house, Columbus
collected what he could of the money due him, and prepared to go home to
Spain. Two vessels were purchased, one for Bartholomew and one for
Fernando and himself. Again Columbus proceeded with the familiar
business of calking ships, buying provisions, and engaging a crew. In
less than a month he was off again from San Domingo on the last voyage
he was ever to make. On September 12, 1504, the ships weighed anchor and
pointed away from the "western lands" which Christopher Columbus had
made known to Europe. The white-haired old man, we may be sure, stood
long on deck gazing backward as the scene of his triumph and his
humiliation faded from sight. Never again could he undertake a voyage of
discovery, for he was now a confirmed invalid. Cipango, Cathay, and "the
strait" to the Indian Ocean were not for him; so it was with many a
heartburn that his poor old eyes strained toward the fading islands.

His ill luck held out to the end. The first day a sudden storm broke
with a crash and carried away his masts. With the utmost difficulty he
and Fernando got into a small boat and clambered on board Bartholomew's
vessel, the disabled boat being sent back to San Domingo. Still the sea
would show him no mercy. Hardly had he crawled into a berth than another
tempest came, and another and another, one unending, pitiless fury all
across the ocean, till our great man must have thought that old Atlantic
hated him for having solved her mysteries. The ship appeared to leap and
stagger every minute of the time, and the Admiral was too ill to take
command. Bartholomew was doing his best and little Fernando was helping;
running down to his father for orders, scurrying up to his uncle with
directions. What a struggle for life it was! And it was repeated every
single day till November 7, when the crippled little caravel put into
the harbor of San Lucar near Cadiz. Christopher Columbus's last voyage
was over. No bells pealed out to greet him; no flags were flung to the
breeze; but at least he had the glory of knowing in his heart that he
had conquered that grim, unknown, menacing Atlantic Ocean which man had
feared since the beginning of time.


CHAPTER XXI

"INTO PORT"


The merciless storm that had beaten Columbus across the ocean swept over
Spain after he landed. He had gone as far north as Sevilla, intending to
proceed from there to court, which was being held at Medina del Campo,
in Old Castile; but illness overcame him, and for three months he lay
bedridden in the Sevillan monastery called Las Cuevas.

Besides his rheumatism, and all the other ills that might arise from two
and a half years of exposure and bad food, an event happened, a few days
after his return to Spain, that crushed him utterly. This was the death
of his best friend, the only one to whom he could look for securing his
rights in "the Indies," where Ovando and other enemies had conspired to
rob him of his share of profits in the colonies. The great Queen
Isabella had passed away on November 26, 1504, in the lonely castle at
Medina del Campo. In these two lives, though they had walked such
different paths, there was much resemblance. The queen, like Columbus,
had known a life of unceasing hard work and anxiety; like Columbus she
had striven for a great purpose and had triumphed; her purpose being the
driving out of the Moor, and the establishment of Spain as a world
power; like Columbus, she had made mistakes, and like Columbus, she had
known much sorrow. There was a strong bond of sympathy between these
two, and the news of the queen's death was a great blow to the bedridden
old man in Sevilla.

Isabella had asked to be buried in Granada, the city she had labored so
hard to win for Christianity, and from the day the little funeral party
set out from Medina to the day they arrived at Granada, three weeks
later, a frightful tempest raged that swept away bridges, flooded
rivers, and made roads impassable. All the time poor Columbus, as he lay
ill in the monastery, listened to the storm and thought of that mournful
party tramping with their solemn burden down to the city where he and
Isabella had both gained a victory. Maybe he envied the worker who had
passed away first, for he sadly wrote to his son Diego, "Our tired lady
now lies beyond the desires of this rough and wearisome world."

But Columbus himself was not yet out of this "wearisome world," and was
troubling his weary brain far too much about its petty details. From his
fourth voyage he had returned much poorer than he ever expected to be at
the end of his sea-going life. The little money he had been able to
collect from his plantation in Espanola had been used to equip the ships
that brought him home, and to pay his sailors; for this was a point on
which he was always most scrupulous. When his ready money was thus used
up, the good monks of Las Cuevas had to provide for his necessities
until finally the banks advanced money on the strength of his claims
against the Crown. After the death of Isabella these claims had small
chance of being considered to his full satisfaction, for Ferdinand
argued that the contract of Granada was, owing to the vast extent of the
new lands, impossible for either the Crown on the one hand or Columbus
on the other to fulfill. That rascally Porras, who had caused so much
trouble during the Jamaica days, was at court, filling everybody's ears
with slanderous stories about the Admiral during the days when the
Admiral himself was wearying Ferdinand with a constant stream of
letters. Every day that he was able to sit up he wrote long appeals for
"his rights" and his property. Not only did he present his claims for
recognition and reward, but he told how badly things had been going in
San Domingo under Ovando; how the comendador was hated by all for his
tyranny and for the favoritism he showed; and how things would soon come
to a sorry pass in the colony unless a better governor were quickly
appointed; and then, poor man, deluded with the idea that he could set
things right, he asked to be reinstated as governor! Good Christopher!
can you not realize that your work is done now, for better or worse? Can
you not let others solve the great problems across the ocean? Can you
not see that you have been greatest of them all, and that nothing more
is required of you? And as for all the dignities and titles and
properties that should be yours, according to the Granada contract, we
know you want them only to pass them on to your boy, Diego; but never
mind him; you are leaving him a name that will grow greater and greater
through the coming ages; a name that is a magnificent inheritance for
any child.

About this time the sick man received a visit which brightened him a
great deal, a visit from the man who, never intending any harm, was
destined to soon assume the greatest honor which the world could have
given Columbus--the honor of naming the newly discovered lands Columbia,
instead of America.

Americo Vespucci was an Italian from Florence who, in 1492 or 1493, came
to Sevilla to carry on a commercial business. Here he learned of
Columbus's first voyage and became eager to make a trip himself to the
new lands. It was a Florentine friend of Americo's who fitted out
Columbus's second expedition; but this Florentine died before the
vessels were ready, and Americo continued the work. More than this;
seeing, when the king canceled Columbus's monopoly, a chance for himself
to win glory, he hastened off with one of the new expeditions. He
claimed that they reached a continental coast on June 16, 1497, which
was earlier than Columbus had reached Para, and eight days before Cabot
touched at the northern edge of the new continent. We have only
Americo's own account of the voyage, and his statements are so
inaccurate that many students refuse to believe him the real discoverer
of South America.

Of Americo's second voyage, however, we have reliable information, for
it was made in the company of Alonzo de Ojeda, that one-time friend of
Columbus who later rebelled against him at Espanola. Vespucci sent a
letter to a friend in Florence describing his voyages and saying that
the continent he had reached "ought to be considered a new world because
it had never before been seen by European eyes." His second letter,
written from Portugal in September, 1504, to another friend, was used by
Martin Waldseemuller, a German professor who was then collecting all the
information he could gather to make up a book on geography.

Martin Waldseemuller divided the globe into four large parts or
continents--Europe, Asia, Africa, and the newly discovered fourth part,
which he suggested "ought to be called America, because Americus
discovered it." This professor, like most learned men of his time, wrote
in Latin; and in Latin the Italian name Americo is Americus; the
feminine form of Americus is America, which was used because it was
customary to christen countries with feminine names. As nobody else had
yet suggested a name for the vast new lands in the west, the German's
christening of 1507 was adopted for the country which should have been
called Columbia, in justice to the man who first had the splendid
courage to sail to it across the untraveled waters and reveal its
existence to Europe. Had Columbus lived to know that this was going to
happen, it would have been one more grievance and one more act of
ingratitude added to his already long list; but at the time that Americo
Vespucci visited his countryman who lay ill in Sevilla, neither one of
them was thinking about a name for the far-away lands. They merely
talked over their voyages as any two sailors might. As Vespucci was now
looked up to as a practical, new-world traveler and trader, and the
Admiral was lonely and forgotten, it shows a kind feeling on the
visitor's part to have looked him up. When Americo left to go to court,
Columbus gave him this letter to carry to Diego, who was still in the
royal service:--

        *       *       *       *       *

My dear son:

Within two days I have talked with Vespucci. He has always manifested a
friendly disposition towards me. Fortune has not always favored him and
in this he is not different from many others. He left me full of kindest
purposes towards me and will do anything he can (at court). I did not
know what to tell him to do to help me, because I knew not why he had
been called there.

       *       *       *       *       *

In February, 1505, a royal order was issued to the effect that Don
Cristobal Colon be furnished with a mule to ride to court, then being
held in Segovia. To ride a mule in those days necessitated a royal
permit, for every Spaniard preferred mules to horses. The government
hoped that horses would be in more general use if the use of mules was
restricted.

The Admiral's long rest with the monks of Las Cuevas had apparently
improved his health, for, as this royal permit proves, he applied for a
mule and went to Segovia; from there, that same year, he followed the
king to Salamanca and later to Valladolid. Segovia, Salamanca,
Valladolid! All bleak, harsh places in winter, and fiery hot ones in
summer. Our poor Admiral left pleasant Sevilla and exposed his worn old
body to icy blasts and burning suns all for naught; for, as Las Casas
writes:--

"The more he petitioned, the more the king was bland in avoiding any
conclusion; he hoped, by wearing out the patience of the Admiral, to
induce him to accept some estates in Castile instead of his powers in
the Indies; but Columbus rejected these offers with indignation."

The Admiral could not be made to see that the Granada contract was
impossible; that Ferdinand had signed it only because he never expected
the voyage to be successful; and that now, when men were beginning to
believe Americo's assertion that a whole continent lay off in the west,
it was preposterous that one family should hope to be its governor and
viceroy and to control its trade. No, Columbus could only go on
reiterating that it was so written down in Granada, away back in April,
1492.

So King Ferdinand merely shrugged his shoulders and referred the matter
to a learned council who talked about it a long, long time, hoping the
sick old man might meanwhile die; and at last the sick, tired,
troublesome old man obliged them, and left all the business of "shares"
and "profits" for his son Diego to settle several years after by
bringing suit against the Crown. Toward the end of 1505 and the
beginning of 1506 the Admiral became very ill. He was in Valladolid, and
he realized that he could travel no more; so he secured for himself, or
perhaps Diego secured for him, as comfortable a lodging as possible in a
street now called the Calle Colon, and determined not to move about any
more. We, accustomed to heat and a dozen other comforts in our
dwellings, would not consider the house in the Calle Colon, with its
cold stone floors and walls, a suitable place for a rheumatic, broken-
down old man; but it was the typical solid, substantial residence of its
day; and the only pity is that the city of Valladolid permitted it to be
torn down a few years ago to make room for a row of flats.

Even in icy Valladolid, winter with its discomfort comes to an end at
last. One May day, when spring sunshine was warming up the stone chamber
where the old Admiral lay, he called for a pen and put the last touches
to his will. All the titles he still hoped to get back were for Diego;
and should Diego die without a son, Fernando was to be Admiral; and if
Fernando should have no son, the loyal brother Bartholomew, who had
shared those horrible days of disappointment and disaster off in the
Indies, was to be Admiral. (Brother Diego had no need of an inheritance,
for he had become a monk.) Part of the moneys due Columbus, if ever
collected, were to be spent on that long-dreamed-of Crusade to recover
the Holy Sepulchre. His remains were to be taken out to San Domingo.
These were a few of the instructions he left.

The next day, May 20, 1506, came another whisper of springtide, and the
faithful Diego Mendez, who "navigated three hundred leagues in a canoe,"
came to see him; his sons, Diego and Fernando, too, and his brother
Bartholomew; and as the dim old eyes saw these affectionate faces
bending over him, he counseled Diego always to love his younger brother
Fernando, as he had always loved Bartholomew; and Diego pressed his hand
and promised. Then the old man rested quietly for a time. He was clad in
the frock of a Franciscan monk, the same sort of frock that good Friar
Juan Perez wore when he welcomed him to La Rabida.

They opened the window to let in the May warmth, and Christopher sniffed
feebly. Did he recall the beautiful climate of Haiti which he said was
"like May in Cordova"? Let us hope, at least, that it was peaceful
recollections like this that flitted through his vanishing senses, and
not recollections of the horrible hurricanes and insurrections and
shipwrecks and prisons that made up part of his eventful life. He made
no sound, not even a whisper, so we will never know what thoughts the
May warmth brought to him. We only know that after a while he crossed
his hands peacefully on his breast and murmured, "Into thy hands, O
Lord, I commit my spirit." A moment later and the great Admiral passed
forth on his last voyage into the unknown.

The event on May 20, 1506, passed unheeded. A life had ended whose
results were more stupendous than those of any other human life ever
lived. Yet Valladolid took no notice of Columbus's death; neither did
Spain. The nation was too busy watching the men who had practical plans
for colonizing the new lands, and turning them into profit, to concern
itself with the death of the one brave soul who had found the path.
Indeed, Cristobal Colon was really forgotten before his death; yet he
was living on, as every great spirit lives on, in the ambitions of the
men who were endeavoring to push his work still further. When, a few
years after his death, Balboa first saw the Pacific stretching far, far
off to Asia, and when in another few years the whole globe had been
circumnavigated, from Spain back again to Spain, only then did the
vastness of Columbus's discovery begin to be appreciated. Europe at last
realized that, during all her centuries of civilization, when she had
thought herself mistress of the world, she had in fact known but half of
it. As this truth took shape in men's minds, the humble, forgotten
Genoese began to come into his own. They saw that he had done more than
risk his life on the western ocean; he had sent a thrill through every
brave, adventurous heart, and this at a moment of the world's
development when such seed was sure to take root. Christopher Columbus,
one of the greatest products of the Renaissance, had carried that
Renaissance to a glorious climax.