I knew by the sickly grin on Ad's face when we went out to milk the cows
next morning that my first effort at poetry had nauseated him; he could
not hold his head up all day, to look me in the face, without the same,
sheepish, sick look.

Where to put my next hoard was a question over which I pondered long. I
tried the hay-mow and several old sleighs set away for the summer, but
Addison was now on my trail and speedily relieved me of my savings.

There were many obstacles to the successful concealment of apples. If I
were to choose an unfrequented spot, the others, who were always on the
lookout, would be sure to spy out my goings to and fro. It was
necessary, I found, that the hoard should be placed where I could visit
it as I went about my ordinary business, without exciting suspicion.

We had often to go into the granary after oats and meal, and the place
that I at last hit on was a large bin of oats. I put my apples in a bag,
and buried them to a depth of over two feet in the oats in one corner of
the bin. I knew that Addison and Halse would look among the oats, but I
did not believe that they would dig deeply enough to find the apples,
and my confidence was justified.

It was a considerable task to get at my hoard to put apples into it, or
to get them out; but the sense of exultation which I felt, as days and
weeks passed and my hoard remained safe, amply repaid me. I was
particularly pleased when I saw from the appearance of the oats that
they had been repeatedly dug over.

As I had to go to the granary every night and morning for corn, or oats,
I had an opportunity to visit my store without roundabout journeys or
suspicious trips, which my numerous and vigilant enemies would have been
certain to note.

The hay-mow was Halse's hoarding-place throughout the season, and
although I was never but once able to find his preserve, Addison could
always discover it whenever he deemed it worth while to make the search.

To ensure fair play with the early apples, the Old Squire had made a
rule that none of us should shake the trees, or knock off apples with
poles or clubs. So we all had equal chances to secure those apples which
fell off, and the prospect of finding them beneath the trees was a great
premium on early rising in the months of August and September.

I will go on in advance of my story proper to relate a queer incident
which happened in connection with those early apples and our rivalry to
get them, the following year. The August Sweeting tree stood apart from
the other trees, near the wall between the orchard and the field, so
that fully half of the apples that dropped from it fell into the field
instead of into the orchard.

We began to notice early in August that no apples seemed to drop off in
the night on the field side of the wall.

For a long time every one of us supposed that some of the others had
got out ahead of the rest and picked them up. But one morning Addison
mentioned the circumstance at the breakfast table, as being rather
singular; and when we came to compare notes, it transpired that none of
us had been getting any apples, mornings, on the field side of the wall.

"Somebody's hooking those apples, then!" exclaimed Addison. "Now who can
it be?" For we all knew that a good many apples must fall into the
field.

"I'll bet it's Alf Batchelder!" Halse exclaimed. But it did not seem
likely that Alfred would come a mile, in the night, to "hook" a few
August Sweets, when he had plenty of apples at home.

Nor could we think of any one among our young neighbors who would be
likely to come constantly to take the apples, although any one of them
in passing might help himself, for fall apples were regarded much as
common property in our neighborhood.

Yet every morning, while there would be a peck or more of Sweetings on
the orchard side of the wall, scarcely an apple would be found in the
field.

Addison confessed that he could not understand the matter; Theodora also
thought it a very mysterious thing. The oddity of the circumstance
seemed to make a great impression on her mind. At last she declared that
she was determined to know what became of those Sweets, and asked me to
sit up with her one night and watch, as she thought it would be too dark
and lonesome an undertaking to watch alone.

I agreed to get up at two o'clock on the following morning, if she would
call me, for we wisely concluded that the pilferer came early in the
morning, rather than early in the night, else many apples would have
fallen off into the field after his visit, and have been found by us in
our early visits.

I did not half believe that Theodora would wake in time to carry out
our plan, but at half-past two she knocked softly at the door of my
room. I hastily dressed, and each of us put on an old Army over-coat,
for the morning was foggy and chilly. It was still very dark. We went
out into the garden, felt our way along to a point near the August
Sweeting tree, and sat down on two old squash-bug boxes under the
trellis of a Concord grape-vine, which made a thick shelter and a
complete hiding-place.

For a mortal long while we sat there and watched and listened in
silence, not wishing to talk, lest the rogue whom we were trying to
surprise should overhear us. At intervals Theodora gave me a pinch, to
make sure that I was not asleep. An hour passed, but it was still dark
when suddenly we heard, on the other side of the wall, a slight noise
resembling the sound of footsteps.

Instantly Doad shook my arm. "Sh!" she breathed. "Some one's come! Creep
along and peep over."

I stole to the wall, and then, rising, slowly parted the vine leaves,
and tried to see what it was there. Presently I discerned one, then
another dim object on the ground beyond the wall. They were creeping
about, and I could plainly hear them munch the apples.

Then Theodora peeped. "It's two little bears, I believe," she breathed
in my ear, with her lightest whisper, yet in considerable excitement.
"What shall we do?"

I peeped again. If bears, they were very little ones.

I mustered my courage. As a weapon I had brought an old pitchfork
handle. Scrambling suddenly over the wall, I uttered a shout, and the
dark objects scudded away across the field, making a great scurry over
the stubble of the wheat-field, but they were not very fleet. was He took
the head from of the barrels, and with cut out a dead small piece, then
handing,. Ye'll see though it's 2, what brings now two dollars an' two
bits in New-York, an' pays me'bout was dollar it a Wood-chucks
coarser' pointing" the to a coarse coarser wire-sieve that lay
near.' th Th' common o' second faced yar dunk, rosum yaller, its
clean an' as it eout still is me went the specimen than,: and clar.

Thet's bad No., thet th' barr'l; it's got' Now hole thet dead up ter
th' yar's tappin'--we call it yallar dip'case it's sun quite through
thet ar strainer I however's runnin' on the now, is made eout on
th' yaller We doan't strain'tall, an' it's full dip--thet' kine o'
turpentine thet runs from th' tree arter two allers dark chips and
dirt

.
Addison was then
called up, to get his opinion, and when told of the animal's exceedingly
coarse, sharp-pointed hair, he exclaimed, "I know what it is! It's a
hedgehog!"

He bustled around, got on his boots, and went out into the field with
me. It was now light, and he had no sooner bent down over it than he
pronounced it to be a hedgehog fast enough, or rather a Canada
porcupine. Its weight was over thirty pounds, and some of the quills on
its back were four or five inches in length, with needle-like, finely
barbed points.

The other hedgehog escaped to the woods, and did not again trouble us.
The next summer the August Sweetings that fell into the field from the
same tree were quite as mysteriously taken at night by a cosset sheep,
which for more than a fortnight escaped nightly from the farm-yard, and
returned thither of its own accord after it had stolen the apples. Again
Theodora and I watched for the pilferer, and captured the cunning
creature in the act.

During that first year at the farm, the old folks did not pay much
attention to our apple-hoards, but by the time our contests were under
way the second season, they, too, caught the contagion of it, from
hearing us talk so much about it at the breakfast table. At first the
Old Squire merely dropped some remarks to the effect that, when he was a
boy, he could have hidden a hoard where nobody could find it.

"Well, sir, we would like to see you do it!" cried Halse.

The old gentleman did not say at the time that he would, or would not,
attempt such an exploit. Moved by Ellen's serio-comic lamentations over
her losses, Gram also insinuated that she knew of places in the house in
which she could make a hoard that would be hard for us to find; but the
girls declared that they would like to see her try to hide a hoard away
from them.

Not many days after these conversations had occurred, the Old Squire
rather ostentatiously took a very fine August Pippin from his pocket, as
we were gathering round the breakfast table, and, after thumbing it
approvingly, set it beside his plate, remarking, incidentally, that if
one wanted his apples to ripen well, and have just the right flavor, it
was necessary that he should place his hoard in some dry, clean,
perfectly sweet place.

Of course we were not long in taking so broad a hint as that. Several
sly nudges and winks went around the table.

"He's got one!" Addison whispered to me, as Gram poured the coffee, and
from that time the Old Squire, in all his goings and comings, was a
marked man. He had thrown down a challenge to us, and we were determined
to prove that we were as smart as he had been in his youthful days. But
for more than a week we were unable to gain the slightest hint as to
where his preserve was situated. Meantime Gram had also begun to place a
nice August Sweet beside her own plate every morning, as she glanced
with a twinkle in her eye over to the Old Squire.

We rummaged everywhere that week, and even forgot to carry on mutual
injury and reprisal, in our desire to humble the pride of our elders.
We even bethought ourselves of the words "perfectly sweet," which the
old gentleman had used in connection with hoards, and looked in the
sugar barrel, but quite in vain. Yet all the while we were daily going
by the place where the Old Squire's hoard was concealed; passing so near
it that we might have laid hands on it without stepping out of our way,
for it was in the wood-house beside the walk which led past the tiered
up stove wood into the wagon-house and stable.

Ten or twelve cords of wood, sawed short and split, had been piled
loosely into the back part of the wood-house, but in front of this loose
pile, and next the plank walk, the wood had been tiered up evenly and
closely to a height of ten feet. The Old Squire managed to pull from
this tier, at a height of about four feet, a good-sized block, and then,
reaching in behind it, had made a considerable cavity. Here he deposited
his apples, replacing the block, which fitted to its place in the tier
so well that the woodpile appeared as if it had not been disturbed.
Shrewdly mindful of the fact that our keen nostrils might smell out his
preserve, he cunningly set an old pan with a few refuse pippins in it on
a bench close beside the place.

Gram's hoard was hidden, with equal cunning, in the "yarn cupboard,"
where were kept the woollen balls and yarn hanks, used in darning and
knitting,--a small, high cupboard, with a little panel door, set in the
wall of the sitting-room next to the fireplace and chimney. The bottom
of this cupboard was formed of one broad piece of pine board, which
seemed to be nailed down hard and fast; but the old lady, who knew that
this board was loose, had raised it and kept her apples in a yarn-ball
basket beneath it.

She often had occasion to go to the cupboard to get or replace her
knitting, and for a long time none of the girls suspected her
hiding-place. The plain fact was that those girls, as a rule, steered
clear of the yarn cupboard, for they none of them very much liked to
knit or darn. But at last Ellen happened to go to it one day for a
darning-needle, and smelled the apples. Even then she could not discover
the hoard, but she went in search of Theodora, who penetrated the secret
of the loose bottom board.

They came with great glee to tell us of their discovery, and we were
thereby stimulated to renewed efforts to unearth the Old Squire's
preserve. The girls promised to say nothing of their discovery for a day
or two, and at Ellen's suggestion we agreed that if we could find
Gramp's hoard, we would rob both hoarding-places at once and have the
laugh on them both at the same time.

We had watched the Old Squire closely, and felt sure that he did not go
to his hoard at any time during the day. As he was an early riser, it
seemed probable to us that he did his apple-hoarding before we were
astir. Addison and I accordingly agreed to get up at three o'clock the
following morning and secretly watch all his movements. By a great
effort we rose long before light, and dressing, stole out through the
wood-house chamber and down the wagon-house stairs into the stable. Here
I concealed myself behind an old sleigh, while Addison went back into
the wood-house and posted himself on the high tier of wood that fronted
on the passageway, lying there in such a posture that he could get a
peep of the long walk.

It had hardly begun to grow light, when we heard the old gentleman astir
in the kitchen. Presently he came out through the stable and fed the
horses, then returned. As he went back through the wood-house, he
stopped on the walk beside the high tier of wood on which Addison lay.
After listening and looking about him, he removed the block of wood,
took out a fine pippin from his hoard, and carefully replaced the
block.

This amused Ad so greatly that he nearly shook the tier of wood down in
his efforts to repress laughter, and after the old gentleman had gone
into the house, he came tiptoeing out into the stable to tell me, with
much elation, what he had seen.

During the forenoon we examined the hoard and told the girls about it.
We arranged to rob both the old folks' hoards late that evening, and
fill our own with the plunder. To emphasize the exploit, we agreed to
take some of the largest apples to the breakfast-table next morning. We
fancied that when the old folks saw those apples, and found out where we
got them, they would think there were young people living nearly as
bright as those of fifty years ago.

Theodora did not really promise that she would assist in the scheme, but
she laughed a good deal over it, and seemed to concur with the rest of
us.

That evening as soon as the old folks had retired and the house had
become quiet, Addison and I cleared out the Old Squire's preserve; and,
meantime, Ellen and Theodora had slipped down-stairs into the
sitting-room and emptied Gram's hoard in the yarn cupboard. We met out
in the garden and divided the spoils; then not liking to trust each
other to go directly to our respective hoards, we deposited our shares
of the plunder in three different boxes in the wagon-house, and looked
forward with no little zest to the fun next morning at the
breakfast-table.

But on visiting the boxes next morning, they were all empty! Some one
had made a clean sweep. Not an apple was left in them! Addison and I
were astounded when we compared notes a few minutes before breakfast.
"Who on earth could have done it?" he whispered, after he found out that
I was not the traitor.

We hurried to the wood-house and peeped into the Old Squire's
hoarding-place. It was brimful of apples! A light began to dawn upon us.
Had the old gentleman watched our performance on the previous evening
and outwitted us all? It looked so, for on going in to breakfast, there
beside the plates of each of the old folks stood a great nappy dish,
heaped full of choice Pippins and Sweets! Addison stole a look around
and then dropped his eyes; I did the same, while Ellen looked equally
amazed and disconcerted. Theodora, too, remained very quiet.

We concluded that our elders had completely outdone us, and that they
were enjoying their victory in a manner intended to convey their
ironical appreciation of our small effort to rob them. The more we
considered the matter, the more sheepish we felt.

"These are charming good pippins, aren't they, Ruth?" said the old
gentleman to Gram.

"Charming," answered she.

Addison gave me a punch under the table, as if to say, "Now they are
giving us the laugh."

"And I'm sure we're much obliged for them," the Old Squire continued.

"Indeed, we are obliged," said Gram.

Their remarks seemed to me a little odd, but I didn't look up.

Not another word was spoken at the table, but afterwards Addison and
Ellen and I got together in the garden and mutually agreed that we had
been badly beaten at our own game.

"They are too old and long-headed for us to meddle with," said Addison.
"I cannot even imagine how they did it. I guess we had better let their
hoards alone in the future." None the less we could not help thinking
that there had been something a little queer about our defeat.

It was nearly two years later before the truth about that night's frolic
came to light. Theodora did it. She could not bear to have the old folks
beaten and humiliated by us, for whom they were doing so much. After we
had robbed their hoarding-places, she sallied forth again and took all
of our shares as well as her own, and then having replenished the looted
hoarding-places, she filled the two nappy dishes from her own hoard and
set them beside their plates.

The best part of the joke was that the Old Squire and Gram never knew
that they had been robbed, and thought only that we had made them a
present of some excellent apples. When Theodora saw how chagrined the
rest of us were, she kept the whole matter a secret.


CHAPTER XIX

DOG DAYS, GRAIN HARVEST, AND A TRULY LUCRETIAN TEMPEST


After haying came grain harvest. There were three acres of wheat, four
of oats, an acre of barley, an acre of buckwheat and an acre and
three-fourths of rye to get in. The rye, however, had been harvested
during the last week of haying. It ripened early, for it was the Old
Squire's custom to sow his rye very early in the spring. The first work
which we did on the land, after the snow melted, was to plough and
harrow for rye. With the rye we always sowed clover and herdsgrass seed
for a hay crop the following year. This we termed "seeding down;" and
the Old Squire liked rye the best of all grain crops for this purpose.
"Grass seed 'catches' better with rye than oats, or barley, or even
wheat," he was accustomed to say.

When we harvested the grain, he would be seen peering into the stubble
with an observant eye, and would then be heard to say, "A pretty good
'catch' this year," or, "It hasn't 'caught' worth a cent."

It was not on more than half the years that we secured a fair wheat
crop. Maine is not a State wholly favorable for wheat; yet the Old
Squire persisted in sowing it, year by year, although Addison often
demonstrated to him that oats were more profitable and could be
exchanged for flour. It is a evidence of facts, and therefore the scholar
will not anticipate me to discard of its various characters on
artistic principles--that is, put them off in one of those match
container for the conception of the romancer--the tomb and marriage

.
But the Old Squire himself finally gave up wheat raising. Gram and the
girls found fault with our Maine grown wheat flour, because the bread
from it was not very white and did not "rise" well. The neighbors had
Western flour and their bread was white and light, while ours was darker
colored and sometimes heavy, in spite of their best efforts.

No farmer can hold out long against such indoor repinings, but the Old
Squire never came to look with favor on Western flour; he admitted that
it made whiter bread, but he always declared that it was not as
wholesome! The fact was that it seemed to him to be an unfarmerlike
proceeding, to buy his flour. For the same reason he would never buy
Western corn for his cattle.

"When I cannot raise fodder enough for my stock, I'll quit farming," he
would exclaim, when his neighbors told him of the corn they were buying.
As a matter of fact, the old gentleman lived to see a good many of his
neighbors' farms under mortgage, and held a number of these papers
himself. It was not a wholly propitious day for New England farmers when
they began buying Western corn, on the theory that they could buy it
cheaper than they could raise it themselves. The net result has been
that their profits have often gone West, or into the pockets of the
railway companies which draw the corn to them.

Another drawback to wheat raising in Maine is the uncertain weather at
harvest time. Despite our shrewdest inspection of the weather signs, the
wheat as well as the other grain would often get wet in the field, and
sometimes it would lie wet so long as to sprout. Sprouted wheat flour
makes a kind of bread which drives the housewife to despair.

"Oh, this dog-days weather!" the Old Squire would exclaim, as the grain
lay wet in the field, day after day, or when an August shower came
rumbling over the mountains just as we were raking it up into windrows
and tumbles.

I had never heard of "dog days" before and was curious to know what sort
of days they were. "They set in," the Old Squire informed me, "on the
twenty-fifth of July and last till the fifth of September. Then is when
the Dog-star rages, and it is apt to be 'catching' weather. Dogs are
more liable to run mad at this time of year, and snakes are most
venomous then." Such is the olden lore, and I gained an impression that
those forty-two days were after a manner unhealthy for man and beast.

Near the middle of August that summer there came the most terrific
thunder shower which I had ever witnessed. Halse, Addison and Asa Doane
had mowed the acre of barley that morning, and after dinner we three
boys went out into the field to turn the swaths, for the sun had been
very hot all day. It was while thus employed that we saw the shower
rising over the mountains to the westward and soon heard the thunder. It
rose rapidly, and the clouds took on, as they rolled upward, a peculiar
black, greenish tint.

It was such a tempest as Lucretius describes when he says,--

"So dire and terrible is the aspect of Heaven, that one might think all
the Darkness had left Acheron, to be poured out across the sky, as the
drear gloom of the storm collects and the Tempest, forging loud
thunderbolts, bends down its black face of terror over the affrighted
earth."

Gramp called us in, to carry a few cocks of late-made hay into the barn
from the orchard, and then bade us shut all the barn doors and make
things snug. "For there's a tremendous shower coming, boys," he said.
"There's hail in those clouds."

We ran to do as he advised, and had no more than taken these
precautions when the shower struck. Such awful thunder and such bright,
vengeful lightning had, the people of the vicinity declared, never been
observed in that town, previously. A bolt came down one of the large
Balm o' Gilead trees near the house, and the thunder peal was absolutely
deafening. Wealthy hid herself in the parlor clothes-closet, and Gram
sat with her hands folded in the middle of the sitting-room. Just before
the clouds burst, it was so dark in the house that we could scarcely see
each others' faces. A moment later the lightning struck a large
butternut tree near the calf-pasture wall, across the south field,
shivering it so completely that nearly all the top fell; the trunk, too,
was split open from the heart.

[ Footnote 2: No on most turpentine-plantations. Their food regular
dinner-hour woods or and carried there by of house-servants, allowed
the blacks is usually at stated times either taken with them to garden
the.] SOUTHERN RIGHTS.
This tempest lasted for nearly an hour, and prostrated the
corn and standing grain very badly. An apple tree was also up-rooted,
for there was violent wind as well as lightning and thunder.

Next morning we were obliged to leave our farm work and repair the roads
throughout that highway district, for the shower had gullied the hills
almost beyond belief. Altogether it had done a great amount of damage on
every hand.

At supper that night, after returning from work on the highway, the Old
Squire suddenly asked whether any of us had seen the colts, in the
pasture beyond the west field, that day.

No one remembered having seen them since the shower, though we generally
noticed them running around the pasture every day. There were three of
them, two bays and a black one. The two former were the property of men
in the village, but Black Hawk, as we called him, belonged to us.

"After supper, you had better go see where they are," the Old Squire
said to us.

Addison and I set off accordingly. The pasture was partly cleared, with
here and there a pine stub left standing, and was of about twenty acres
extent. We went up across it to the top of the hill, but could not find
the colts. Then we walked around by the farther fence, but discovered no
breach in it and no traces where truant hoofs had jumped over it. It was
growing dark, and we at length went home to report our ill-success.

"Strange!" the Old Squire said. "We must look them up." But no further
search was made that night.

"Is that a hawk?" Halstead said to me, while he and I were out milking a
little before sunrise next morning. "Don't you see it? Sailing round
over the colt pasture. Too big for a hawk, isn't it?"

A large bird was wheeling slowly above the pasture, moving in lofty
circles, on motionless wings.

"I'll bet that's an eagle!" Halse cried. "Can't be a hawk. We couldn't
see a hawk so far off."

Suddenly the bird seemed to pause on wing a moment, then descended
through the air and disappeared just over the crest of the ridge.
Perhaps it was fancy, but we thought we heard the roar of its wings.

"Came down by that high stub!" exclaimed Halstead. "Pounced upon
something there! I'll run in and get the shotgun. The folks aren't up
yet. We'll go over. Perhaps we can get a shot at it."

Addison had gone on an errand to the Corners that morning. Halstead got
the gun, and setting down our milk pails, we ran across the field, and
so onward to the pasture. "'Twas near that stub," whispered Halse, as we
began to see the top of it over the crest of the ridge. We peeped over.
Down in the hollow at the foot of the stub was the great bird, flapping
and tugging at something--one, two, three animals, lying stretched out
on the ground! The sight gave us a sudden shock.

"The colts!" exclaimed Halse, forgetting the eagle. "Dead!"

The big bird raised its head, then rose into the air with mighty flaps
and sailed away. We watched it glide off along the ridge, and saw it
alight in an oak, the branches of which bent and swayed beneath its
weight.

"All dead!" cried Halstead, gazing around. "Isn't that hard!"

The eagle had been tearing at their tongues, which protruded as they lay
on the ground. There was a strong odor from the carcasses.

"Been dead some time," Halse exclaimed. "What killed them?"

We examined them attentively. Not the slightest mark, nor wound, could
be detected. But a lot of fresh splinters lay at the foot of the pine
stub, close by them.

"Must have been lightning," I said, glancing up. "That's just what it
was! They were struck during that big shower."

We went to the house with the unwelcome tidings. At first the folks
would scarcely believe our account. Then there were rueful looks.

"Ah, those pine stubs ought to have been cut down," exclaimed the Old
Squire. "Dangerous things to be left standing in pastures!"

Later in the day we took shovels and went to the pasture, with Asa
Doane, to bury the dead animals. While this was going on, the eagle came
back and sailed about, high overhead.

why, hire 'em, an' make twice as much eout on 'em as I does now.'
'But I don't think the two races were meant to live together.'

'No more'n the' warn't. But 'tan't thar fault thet they's har. We
han't no right to send 'em off.During the day we
saw the eagle hovering about the spot, also a great flock of crows,
cawing noisily, and next morning when we went over to see if any of them
had got into the trap, both trap and stick were gone.

"Must have been the eagle," said Addison. "A crow could never have
carried off that trap!" But as neither trap nor eagle was anywhere in
sight, we concluded that we had lost the game.

Several days passed, when one morning we heard a pow-wow of crows down
in the valley beyond the Little Sea. A flock of them were circling about
a tree-top, charging into it.

"Owl, or else a raccoon, I guess," said Addison. "Crows are always
hectoring owls and 'coons whenever they happen to spy one out by day."

Thinking that perhaps we might get a 'coon, we took the gun and went
down there. But on coming near, instead of a raccoon, lo! there was our
lost eagle, perched in the tree-top, with a hundred crows scolding and
flapping him. He saw us, and started up as if to fly off, but fell back,
and we heard a chain clank.

"Hard and fast in that trap!" exclaimed Addison. The stick and trap had
caught among the branches. The big bird was a prisoner. We wished to
take him alive, but to climb a tall basswood, and bring down an eagle
strong enough to carry off a twelve-pound clog and trap, was not a feat
to be rashly undertaken. Addison was obliged to shoot the bird before
climbing after him. It was a fine, fierce-looking eagle, measuring
nearly six feet from tip to tip of its wings. Its beak was hooked and
very strong, and its claws an inch and a half long, curved and
exceedingly sharp.

Addison deemed it a great prize, for it was not a common bald eagle,
but a much darker bird. After reading his Audubon, he pronounced it a
Golden Eagle and wrote a letter describing its capture, which was
published in several New York papers. Gramp gave him all the following
day to "mount" the eagle as a specimen. In point of fact, he was nearer
three days preparing it. It looked very well when he had it done. I
remember only that its legs were feathered down to the feet.


CHAPTER XX

CEDAR BROOMS AND A NOBLE STRING OF TROUT

