The doctrine of resonance is now generally accepted as one of the basic
principles of Vocal Science. It is stated, in substance, by almost every
authority on the voice that "The tone produced by the vibration of the
vocal cords, even when the laryngeal action is correct in every way, is
weak, of poor quality, and without character. This tone must be
strengthened and made of musical quality by utilizing the influence of
resonance." The subject of resonance is always treated in theoretical
works on the voice under the three heads of chest, mouth-pharynx, and
nasal resonance. To these a fourth is sometimes added,--the
sounding-board resonance of the bones of the chest and head.

_Mouth-Pharynx Resonance_

Considered strictly in its bearing on tone-production, the resonance of
the mouth-pharynx cavity does not receive much attention from
theoretical observers of the voice. The form assumed by this cavity is
of necessity determined by the vowel to be sung. Aside from its function
in the pronunciation of words, the influence of mouth-pharynx resonance
on the tones of the voice is seldom discussed by vocal scientists.

As a rule, vocal teachers pay little attention to this form of
resonance. The subject of enunciation is generally treated as distinct
from tone-production strictly speaking. While the correct emission of
the tone, in its passage from the vocal cords to the lips, is considered
a very important topic, this feature of tone-production has no
reference to resonance.

One exception must be made to the statement that no attention is paid to
mouth-pharynx resonance. This is found in an interpretation of the
empirical precept, "Sing with open throat." Several vocal theorists take
this precept literally, and hold that it describes a function of
mouth-pharynx resonance. According to their idea the cavity must be
expanded to the largest size possible, on the theory that a large
resonance cavity secures a proportionately greater reinforcement of the
tone. "The greater the size of the pharynx, whether through practice or
natural gifts, the stronger in proportion is the tone." (_Die Kunst der
idealen Tonbildung_, Dr. W. Reinecke, Leipzig, 1906.) This theory is of
course rather loose and unscientific. Still this idea,--a literal
interpretation of the "open throat" precept,--receives much attention in
practical instruction.

Only one muscular action has ever been defined by which the throat might
be "opened." That is, the lowering of the larynx and the raising of the
soft palate. Many teachers therefore direct that the throat be "opened"
gradually in this way for the swelling of the tone. It is assumed that
the power of the voice is developed by singing with the larynx low in
the throat. This manner of instruction is, however, very loosely given.
The supposedly scientific interpretation of the "open throat" precept
shades off into a purely empirical application.

_Chest Resonance_

In no other topic of Vocal Science is the gap between theory and
practice more striking than in the doctrine of chest resonance. Vocal
teachers are in fair accord in believing the resonance of the air in the
chest to be the most important influence in imparting power and "color"
to the voice, and particularly to the lower notes of its compass.
Students of singing are in almost all cases urged to acquire a proper
command of chest resonance. But when it comes to telling the student how
to learn to govern the chest resonance, the teacher has practically
nothing to offer. No direct means has ever been found for causing the
air in the thorax to vibrate; this cannot be effected, so far as has yet
been determined, by any voluntary muscular action on the part of the
singer.

This being the case, intelligible instruction in the use and management
of chest resonance is hardly to be expected. Teachers of singing are
obliged to fall back on purely empirical instruction on this topic. This
usually takes the form of a description of the sensations experienced by
the singer when producing tones in the chest voice. How this description
of the singer's sensations is applied, is discussed in the following
chapter.

_Nasal Resonance_

The lack of connection between the theories of vocal scientists and the
practical methods of singing teachers is well illustrated in the subject
of nasal resonance. A striking feature of all the discussions concerning
the use or avoidance of nasal resonance is the fact that vocal theorists
base their opinions entirely on empirical observations. The use of nasal
resonance is condemned by almost every prominent authority on Vocal
Science. Yet the only reason ever advanced for condemning nasal
resonance is the fact that a tone of objectionable nasal quality seems
to "come through the nose." This fact cannot, of course, be questioned.
It is mentioned by Tosi, who speaks of the "defect of singing through
the nose," and is observed by everybody possessed of an ear keen enough
to detect the nasal quality of sound.

It is generally stated by vocal theorists that the nasal quality is
imparted to the tone by the influence of the resonance of the air in the
nasal cavities. In order to prove this assertion Browne and Behnke offer
the following experiment, (quoted in substance): "Hold a hand-mirror
flat, face up, just below the nostrils. Then sing a nasal tone; you will
note that the mirror is clouded, showing that part of the breath has
passed through the nasal cavities. Now sing another tone, free from the
fault of nasal quality; this time the mirror is not clouded, which
proves that no air has passed through the cavities in question."
(_Voice, Song and Speech._) This experiment is simplified by other
authorities, who direct that the nostrils be pinched by the fingers, and
then allowed to open by the removal of the pressure of the fingers. A
steady tone is meanwhile to be sung. It will be noted, according to
these theorists, that with the nostrils open the tone is nasal, and with
the nostrils closed the tone is not nasal. This proves to their
satisfaction that a tone passing in whole or in part through the nasal
cavities must be nasal in quality.

It must be noted here that these experiments are not in any sense
convincing. A tone of objectionable nasal quality can be sung equally
well with the nostrils either closed or open, and so can a tone free
from the nasal quality.

In theory, the mechanical prevention of nasal resonance is very simple.
It is necessary only to raise the soft palate in singing, and thus to
cut off the expired breath from passing into the nasal cavities. Most
vocal scientists advise that the singer hold the soft palate raised for
every tone.

Practical teachers of singing pay little attention to the theoretical
discussions concerning nasal resonance. The overwhelming majority of
teachers are firm believers in nasal resonance, and make it an important
feature of their methods. They believe that this resonance is the most
important factor in giving to the tone its "point," brilliance, and
carrying power.

So far as instruction in the use of nasal resonance is concerned,
teachers owe but little to the mechanical doctrines of Vocal Science.
No voluntary muscular operation has ever been found, by which the air in
the nasal cavities can be directly thrown into vibration, and so made to
reinforce the tones of the voice. Instruction in the management of nasal
resonance is therefore similar to that in chest resonance. The teacher
describes the sensations experienced by a singer who produces the exact
quality of tone desired. Use is also made of special vowels and
consonants, for (supposedly) acquiring command of nasal resonance. A
description of this form of instruction is given in the following
chapter.

_Sounding-Board Resonance_

The acoustic principle of sounding-board resonance, in its application
to the voice, is discussed by several vocal scientists. It is usually
treated under two heads: first, the entire body is looked upon as a
sounding board, capable of reinforcing the tones of the voice under
certain conditions. Second, the bones of the chest and of the head are
thought to be thrown into vibration, in sympathy with the vibrations of
the air in the chest and nasal cavities respectively.

The importance attached by Howard to the sounding-board resonance of the
entire body has already been noticed. Aside from the teachers of the
Howard system, very few masters pay any attention to this feature of
vocal reinforcement. Those who do so have no difficulty in dealing with
the subject. When the singer stands in the position generally considered
correct for singing, the body is said to be in the position most
favorable for securing the benefits of this form of resonance. For this
no special rules or exercises are needed.

Very little attention is paid, in practical instruction, to the
vibrations of the bones of the resonance cavities. Each cavity is
treated as a whole; the fact is only occasionally mentioned that the
bones inclosing the cavities may vibrate, as well as the inclosed air.


CHAPTER V

EMPIRICAL MATERIALS OF MODERN METHODS


A series of topics included in modern methods is now to be considered,
different in scope from the strictly mechanical features of
tone-production so far described. It must be apparent to the reader that
the present understanding of the muscular processes of singing is not
sufficient to furnish a complete method of instruction. This fact is
thoroughly appreciated by the teachers of singing. Almost without
exception they seek to supplement the mechanical doctrines by
instruction of an entirely different character. The subjects included in
this form of instruction are of several classes. They comprise the
manner of emission of the tone, the traditional precepts of the old
Italian school, the singer's sensations, and the use of certain vowels
and consonants for special purposes.

_Emission and Forward Placing_

Of all the traditional precepts, the one most frequently cited in
theoretical treatises on the voice is, "Place the tone forward." For
this precept it is generally believed that a satisfactory explanation
has been found in the accepted doctrine of tone emission.

The characteristic effect of perfect singing known as the "forward tone"
is thoroughly well known to every lover of singing. In some peculiar way
the tone, when perfectly produced, seems to issue directly from the
singer's mouth. When we listen to a poorly trained and faulty singer the
tones seem to be caught somewhere in the singer's throat. We feel
instinctively that if the singer could only lift the voice off the
throat, and bring it forward in the mouth, the tones would be greatly
improved in character. It is commonly believed that the old masters knew
some way in which this can be done. Just what means they used for this
purpose is not known. But the accepted scientific interpretation of the
"forward tone" precept is held by vocal theorists to render the subject
perfectly clear.

Sir Morell Mackenzie states the correct emission of the tone as one of
the three cardinal principles of the vocal action. "The regulation of
the force of the blast which strikes against the vocal cords, the
placing of these in the most favourable position for the effect which it
is desired to produce, and the direction of the vibrating column of air
which issues from the larynx are the three elements of artistic
production." (_The Hygiene of the Vocal Organs_, London, 1886.) His
analysis of the mechanical and acoustic processes involved in emission
may be cited as typical of the views of the great majority of vocal
scientists. "It (the column of sound) must be projected against the roof
of the cavity behind the upper front teeth, from which it rebounds
sharply and clearly to the outside." Mme. Seiler expresses the idea
somewhat differently, but the meaning is about the same. "A correct
disposition of the tones of the voice consists in causing the air,
brought into vibration by the vocal ligaments, to rebound from
immediately above the front teeth, where it must be concentrated as much
as possible, rebounding thence to form in the mouth continuous
vibrations." (_The Voice in Singing_, Phila., 1886.)

To the vocal theorists this is no doubt thoroughly convincing and
satisfactory. But as a topic of practical instruction in singing this
theory of tone emission is utterly valueless. How can the "column of
vocalized breath" be voluntarily directed in its passage through the
pharynx and mouth? No muscular process has ever been located, by which
the singer can influence the course of the expired breath, and direct it
to any specific point in the mouth. Even if the expired breath does, in
perfect singing, take the course described, knowledge of this fact
cannot enable the singer to bring this about. The accepted doctrine of
tone emission is of no benefit whatever to the teacher of singing. He
knows what the "forward tone" is, that is, what it sounds like, just as
well no doubt as did the old Italian master. But if the latter knew how
to enable his pupils to obtain the "forward" character of tone, the
modern teacher is to that extent not so well off.

In view of the prevailing ignorance of any means for securing the
(supposedly) correct emission of tone, intelligible instruction on this
topic is hardly to be expected. But the great majority of teachers lay
great stress on the need of acquiring the correct emission. The best
they can do is to explain the scientific doctrine to their pupils; the
students are generally left to find for themselves some way of applying
the explanation. In many cases the master tries to assist the student by
describing the singer's sensations, experienced when producing a
"forward" tone.

Certain vowels and consonants are usually held to be especially favored
by a "forward position," and exercises on these are very widely used for
securing a "forward" tone. These exercises are described in a later
paragraph. It will be noticed however that this use of vowels is not an
application of the theory of "forward emission." The vowel sounds are
believed to owe their "forward position" to resonance, while "emission"
is purely a matter of direction or focusing of the breath-blast. The
whole subject of emission and forward placing is in a very
unsatisfactory condition.

_The Traditional Precepts in Modern Instruction_

So much importance is attached by modern teachers to the traditional
precepts of the old school that this subject calls for somewhat lengthy
treatment. Before discussing the manner in which the precepts are
applied in practical instruction, it will be well to review first the
interpretations of the precepts offered by different vocal scientists.

It must be remarked, in the first place, that no single one of the
precepts has ever been satisfactorily explained; that is, no direct
means of performing the actions indicated by the precepts has ever been
found. If ever the precepts had a definite meaning, considered as
specific directions for performing certain actions in a special way,
that meaning has been lost. Mechanical analysis has not reduced the
precepts to a form in which they are of direct value to the modern
teacher.

That the "forward tone" is interpreted as a reference to the emission of
the voice was noted earlier in this chapter. The explanation of the
"open throat" precept as a function of mouth-pharynx resonance has also
been mentioned.

"Singing on the breath" is a very perplexing subject for vocal
theorists. Many authorities assert that this precept describes an
effect obtained by the "opposed muscular action" breath-control. (See
citation from Shakespeare in Chapter II.) But this explanation is hardly
satisfactory; if the precept had meant no more than breath-control, it
would have been forgotten long ago.

The "support of the tone" is mentioned by a large number of theoretical
writers on the voice. These writers generally state, in substance, that
"the tone must be supported by the breathing muscles of the chest, and
not by the throat muscles." (See _The Technics of Bel Canto_, by G. B.
Lamperti, New York, 1905.) But this explanation is hardly to be
considered as a scientific doctrine. Every one knows that a tone has no
weight, so in the physical sense it can need no support. In short,
scientific analysis has thrown no more light on this than any other of
the old precepts.

Notwithstanding the modern teacher's complete ignorance of the
mechanical operations which they seem to indicate, the old precepts form
a very important feature of instruction in singing. The great majority
of teachers cite these precepts constantly, and frequently direct their
pupils to "open the throat," to "bring the tone forward," etc. Is it to
be believed that an intelligent master would use these directions in any
occult or cabalistic sense? Such a statement is occasionally made by a
consistent upholder of the mechanical system of Voice Culture. Paulo
Guetta, for example, in a recent exhaustive work on the subject,
ridicules the use of the old precepts. Says this ardent advocate of
mechanical instruction in singing:

"Nowadays alchemy and necromancy awaken nothing but curiosity. How then
can one who thinks and reasons admit that an art can be cultivated and
sustained by theories extravagant, fantastic, enigmatic, explained and
condensed in abstruse phrases and sentences, which not only have no
meaning whatever, but even lead one to doubt whether the teacher himself
knows what result it is desired to obtain? Do you wish a little example?
Behold!

"'Press the whole voice against the mask.' 'Place the voice in the
head.' 'The voice is directed to the nasal cavities.' 'Place the voice
forward.'

"Others, with the most austere gravity, will tell you that your voice is
too far back, or that you send the voice to the lower teeth, and promise
in a few days to place the voice forward, at the upper teeth, or
wherever else it should be." (_Il Canto nel suo Mecanismo_, Milan,
1902.)

This statement is by no means justified. The precepts have a real and
definite meaning for the vocal teacher. Any one familiar with the
highest type of artistic singing must have observed that the singer's
"throat seems to be open"; the tones impress the hearer as being in some
way "forward in the singer's mouth," and not at the vocal cords; the
voice "seems to be supported" somewhere; the tones float out freely on
the breath. A harsh and badly produced voice seems to be held in the
singer's throat by main force. The critical hearer feels instinctively
that such a singer's voice would be greatly improved if the tones could
only be supported in a forward position in the mouth, and kept from
slipping back into the throat. It seems that this would relieve the
throat of the strain of holding the tone; the throat would then be open,
and the voice would float out freely on the breath.

In short, the traditional precepts describe accurately the most striking
points of difference between perfect singing and bad singing, so far as
the effect on the listener is concerned. Modern teachers are thoroughly
familiar with the highest standards of the vocal art; they fully
appreciate how well the precepts describe the perfection of singing.
Through long continued listening to voices, the precepts come to have a
very real meaning. It is inevitable therefore that the teacher should
try to impart to the pupil this intimate feeling for the voice. True,
this acquaintance with the voice is purely empirical; as has just been
remarked, no mechanical analysis of this empirical knowledge has ever
been successfully made. The modern teacher's apprehension of the meaning
of the precepts is only very vaguely connected with a supposed insight
into the mechanical processes of tone-production.

Yet there is nothing vague about the impression made on the teacher in
listening to his pupils. On the contrary, every faulty tone impresses
the teacher very keenly and definitely as being too far back, or as
caught in the throat, or as falling back for lack of support, etc. How
could it be expected then, that the teacher should refrain from telling
the pupil to correct the faulty production, in the manner so clearly and
directly indicated by the tones?

But this direct application of the precepts is of absolutely no value in
instruction, because of the teacher's ignorance of the mechanical
processes supposedly involved. There is after all some justification for
Guetta's criticism of empirical instruction. It is all very well for the
teacher to feel that the pupil's voice is gripped in the throat, and to
bid him "open your throat." The pupil may strive ever so earnestly to
open his throat, but he does not know how, and the teacher is utterly
unable to tell him.

All instruction based on the empirical precepts is thus seen to be
extremely unsatisfactory. While the precepts convey a very valuable
meaning to the teacher, no way has ever been found for translating this
meaning into rules for the mechanical management of the vocal organs.
Recourse is had, to some extent, to a description of the singer's
sensations; exercises on special vowels and consonants are also much
used, for imparting the ideas embodied in the precepts. Both of these
topics are now to be considered.

_The Singer's Sensations_

The correct use of the voice awakens in the singer a variety of
sensations generally held to be different from those accompanying any
incorrect vocal action.

One important fact must first be noted regarding the manner in which the
singer's sensations are described by various authorities. The use of the
voice awakens a wide variety of local sensations, which bear no
necessary relation to each other. A singer may, at will, pay entire
attention to any one, or to any particular set, of these sensations, and
for the time being completely ignore all the others.

Physiologically considered, the singer's sensations are of two
classes,--first, muscular sensations strictly speaking; and second, a
sense of tingling or vibration, definitely located usually about the
breast bone, and in the front and upper part of the head.

_Muscular Sensations of Singing_

It is very difficult to analyze and describe exactly the muscular
sensations which accompany any complex action. Swimming, diving,
dancing, skating,--each awakens a set of extremely vivid muscular
feelings; yet to describe these sensations so graphically that they
could be felt in imagination by one who had never experienced them
actually,--that would be almost impossible.

This peculiar aspect of muscular sensations is particularly true as
regards the action of singing. While every vocal teacher knows exactly
how it feels to sing properly, all descriptions of the singer's muscular
sensations are extremely vague. But the vividness of these sensations
keeps them constantly before the teacher's mind, and some application of
them, in the present state of Voice Culture, is almost inevitable.

The basic sensation of correct singing, as generally described, is a
feeling of perfect poise and harmony of the whole body; this is
accompanied by a sense of freedom about the throat and jaw, and firm
grasp and control of the expiratory muscles. Attempts are frequently
made to amplify this description, but the results are always very vague.
A feeling of "absence of local effort" at the throat is much spoken of,
or "perfect relaxation of the vocal muscles."

A few specially localized muscular sensations are also much discussed.
Descriptions of this class however are often so loosely given as to
render a definite statement almost impossible. Most frequently mentioned
are the feeling of "backward pressure in the throat," and of "drinking
in the tone," instead of sending it out. Then again, the "tone must be
felt at the upper front teeth." A feeling as of an "expanded and
flexible vocal tube, extending from the base of the lungs to the lips,"
is also much talked of. "Feel that you grow bigger as the tone swells"
is about as intelligible as the feeling of "floating jaw."

On the whole, the subject of the singer's muscular sensations is usually
rather mystifying to the student.

_Sensations of Tingling or Vibration_

Descriptions of sensations of this class are much more coherent than
those just considered. A definite location is given to the feelings, in
the chest and in the head.

A feeling of trembling in the upper chest is usually held to indicate
that the chest cavity is working properly as a resonator. This
sensation is therefore the chief reliance of most teachers in "placing"
the lower tones, especially for low voices. Sensations in the nasal
cavities and head are utilized for acquiring control of nasal resonance,
for placing the upper notes of the voice, and for "bringing the voice
forward." Exercises for control of both cavities, on special vowels and
consonants, combine the two topics, "vowel position" and sensation.

_Singing in the Mask_

In recent years a method of instruction has been developed in France,
which is commonly called by its advocates "singing in the mask." The
basic idea of this method is that the singer must imagine his face to be
covered by a mask, and must "sing into this mask." This idea may seem
rather vague at first; but a few trials will show how easy it is for the
singer to persuade himself that he projects his voice into his face.

This method goes to the extreme in utilizing the sensations of vibration
in the nose and forehead. These sensations are analyzed, localized, and
described, down to the most minute detail. While other topics of
instruction are included,--breathing, registers, position of tongue,
larynx, palate, etc., everything else is subordinated to nasal
resonance. "Singing in the mask" is of course a purely empirical method,
and little has been attempted in the way of justifying it on scientific
principles.

* * *

All instruction based on the singer's sensations is purely empirical, in
the meaning ordinarily attached to this word in treatises on Vocal
Science. Theoretical works on the voice seldom touch on the subject of
sensations, nor do the vocal teachers generally make this subject
prominent when speaking of their methods.[6]

[Note 6: An exception to this statement is seen in the recently
published book of Mme. Lilli Lehmann, _Meine Gesangskunst_, Berlin,
1902. This famous artist and teacher devotes by far the greater part of
her book to a minute analysis and description of the singer's
sensations.]

Sensations occupy a rather peculiar position in modern methods. They are
a distinctly subsidiary element of instruction and are seldom raised to
the dignity accorded to the mechanical doctrines of vocal management.
The use of the singer's sensations, as applied in practical instruction,
is almost exclusively interpretive. In the mechanical sense the
traditional precepts have no meaning whatever; this is also true of
several of the accepted doctrines of Vocal Science. For example, the
precept "Support the tone," is absolutely meaningless as a principle of
mechanical vocal action. But, when interpreted as referring to a set of
sensations experienced by the singer, this precept takes on a very
definite meaning. Nobody knows what the support of the tone is, but
every vocal teacher knows how it feels. In the same way, no means is
known for directly throwing the air in the nasal cavities into
vibration. But the sensation in the front of the head, which indicates,
presumably, the proper action of nasal resonance, is familiar to all
teachers. Most of the positive materials of modern methods are thus
interpreted in terms of sensations.

True, the accepted theory of Vocal Science does not directly countenance
this interpretation. The basic principle of modern Voice Culture is the
idea of mechanical vocal management. All instruction is supposed to aim
at direct, conscious, and voluntary control of the muscular operations
of singing. Teachers always impart to their pupils this idea of the
mechanical control of the voice. The vocal action is always considered
from the mechanical side. Even those expressions whose mechanical
meaning is vague or unscientific are yet used as referring definitely to
muscular actions. The conscious thought of the teacher is always turned
to the mechanical idea supposedly conveyed by scientific doctrine and
empirical precept. The translation of this idea into a description of
sensations is almost always the result of a sub-conscious mental
process.

It therefore follows that in practical instruction the appeal to
sensations is more often indirect than direct. For example, when a
student's tones are caught in the throat, the master says
explicitly,--"Free the tone by opening your throat." The master explains
the (supposed) wrong vocal action, and describes how the tone should be
produced. Incidentally, the master may also tell how and where the tone
should be felt.

There is also a great deal of instruction based frankly and directly on
the singer's sensations. Instruction of this type usually takes the form
of special exercises on certain vowels and consonants, which are
believed to be peculiarly suited for imparting command of particular
features of the correct vocal action. The topics generally covered are
chest resonance, nasal resonance, open throat, and forward placing of
the tone. This form of instruction is held to be referable in some way
to scientific principles. The laws of vowel and consonant formation
formulated by Helmholtz are often cited in proof of the efficacy of
exercises of this type. There is also much discussion of the "location"
of the tone. But there is little justification for the statement that
instruction based on the singer's sensations is scientific in character.
A misconception of acoustic principles is evidenced by most of the
statements made concerning the use of special vowels and consonants in
securing the correct vocal action. The exercises which aim to utilize
the singer's sensations in producing particular vowels and consonants
are now to be described.

_Exercises on Special Vowels and Consonants_

Of the rules concerning the use of special vowels, probably the most
important is that _a_ (as in _far_) is the most favorable vowel for the
general purposes of voice training. Teachers generally have their
pupils sing most of their exercises on this vowel. Much attention is
paid to the exact pronunciation of the vowel, and fine distinctions are
drawn between its various sounds in Italian, French, German, and
English. The preference for the Italian pronunciation is very general.
It is claimed for this sound that it helps materially in acquiring
command of the "open throat." Indeed, a peculiar virtue in this regard
is ascribed to the Italian vowels generally. No convincing reason has
ever been given for this belief. But the usual custom is to "place the
voice" on the Italian _a_, and then to take up, one at a time, the other
Italian vowels.

The labial consonants, _p_, _b_, _t_, _d_, are believed to have a
peculiar influence in securing the "forward position" of the tone. Much
the same influence is also ascribed to the vowel _oo_, although many
authorities consider _i_ (Italian) the "most forward" vowel. Exercises
combining these consonants and vowels are very widely used, on single
tones, and on groups of three, four, or five notes. The syllables _boo_,
_poo_, _too_, _doo_ are practised, or if the teacher hold to the other
"forward" vowel, _bee_, _pee_, _tee_, _dee_; the student is instructed
to hold the vowel in the "forward position" secured by the initial
consonant. Later on, the "forward" vowel is gradually widened into the
other vowels; exercises are sung on _boo-ah_, _doo-ah_, etc. This form
of instruction is capable of great elaboration. Many teachers use a wide
variety of combinations of these vowels and consonants; but as the basic
idea is always the same, this class of exercises calls for no further
description. The singer's sensations, notably those of "open throat,"
"expanded vocal tube," "forward tone," and vibration in the chest, are
generally brought to the pupil's attention in this form of exercise.

Another set of sounds are held to be specially adapted for securing the
use of nasal resonance. These are the letters _m_, _n_, and _ng_, when
used for starting a tone, and also the vowel _i_ (Italian). The
exercises used are similar in character to those just described. In
singing these exercises, the student is supposed to "start the tone high
up in the head on the initial _m_ or _n_, and to hold it there, while
gradually and smoothly opening the mouth for the vowel," etc. The
sensations specially noticed in this type of exercise are the feelings
of vibration in the nose and forehead. The "forward tone," as well as
the nasal resonance, is supposed to be favored by the practice of these
exercises.

_Enunciation_

Vocal teachers always recognize the importance of a clear delivery of
the text in singing. Correct enunciation is therefore considered in all
methods. A few teachers believe that a clear pronunciation helps greatly
to establish the correct vocal action. Some even go so far as to say
that a clear delivery of the words will of itself insure a correct
tone-production. But this theory calls for only passing comment. One has
but to turn to the vaudeville stage to see its falsity. For singers of
that class, the words are of the utmost importance, while the
tone-production is usually of the very worst.

A few teachers base their methods on the theory that correct
tone-production results necessarily from the singing of "pure vowels."
This is no doubt interesting, but still far from convincing. The problem
of tone-production is not solved quite so simply.

As a rule, vocal teachers consider the subject of pronunciation as quite
distinct from tone-production. Methods differ with regard to the use of
exercises in articulation, and to the stage of progress at which these
exercises are taken up. Some teachers insist on their pupils practising
singing for months on the vowels, before permitting them to sing even
the simplest songs with words. Others have the pupils sing words from
the beginning of instruction. As a rule, teachers begin to give songs,
and vocalises with words, very early in the course.

_Throat Stiffness and Relaxing Exercises_

Teachers of singing generally recognize that any stiffening of the
throat interferes with the correct action of the voice. Yet for some
strange reason vocal students are very much inclined to form habits of
throat stiffness. This constantly happens, in spite of the fact that
teachers continually warn their pupils against the tendency to stiffen.
On this account, exercises for relaxing the throat are an important
feature of modern instruction in singing.

Naturally, relaxing exercises are not thought to have any direct
bearing in bringing about the correct vocal action. They are purely
preparatory; their purpose is only to bring the vocal organs into the
right condition for constructive training. For this reason, the means
used for relaxing the throat are seldom mentioned among the materials of
instruction. But almost every vocal teacher is obliged to make frequent
use of throat relaxing exercises. Indeed, throat stiffness is one of the
most serious difficulties of modern Voice Culture. A student frequently
seems to be making good progress, and then without much warning falls
into a condition of throat stiffness so serious as to undo for a time
the good work of several months' study. In such a case there is nothing
for the teacher to do but to drop the progressive work, and devote a few
lessons to relaxing exercises.

Little difficulty is usually found in relaxing the throat, when once the
necessity becomes strikingly apparent. That is, provided progressive
study is dropped for a time, and attention paid solely to relaxing
exercises. But such cases are comparatively rare. A much more constant
source of trouble is found in the prevailing tendency of vocal students
to stiffen their throats, just enough to interfere with the (supposed)
application of the teacher's method.

The exercises used for relaxing the throat are fairly simple, both in
character and scope. They consist mainly of toneless yawning, of single
tones "yawned out" on a free exhalation, and of descending scale
passages of the same type. Although seldom recognized as a coördinate
topic of instruction, exercises of this character are usually
interspersed among the other materials of vocal methods.


CHAPTER VI

A GENERAL VIEW OF MODERN VOICE CULTURE


All the materials of modern methods have now been described. The subject
next to be considered is the manner in which these materials are
utilized in practical instruction. In other words, what is a method of
Voice Culture?

In the present state of Vocal Science, the subject of tone-production
overshadows everything else in difficulty. When once the correct vocal
action has been acquired, the student's progress is assured. Every other
feature of the singer's education is simply a matter of time and
application. But, under present conditions, the acquirement of the
correct vocal action is extremely uncertain. On account of its
fundamental importance, and more especially of its difficulty, the
subject of tone-production is the most prominent topic of instruction in
singing. The term "method" is therefore applied solely to the means used
for imparting the correct vocal action.

This use of the word is in accordance with the accepted theory of Voice
Culture. The general belief is that tone-production is entirely distinct
from vocal technique. Technical studies cannot profitably be undertaken,
according to the prevailing idea, until the correct management of the
vocal organs has been established. This idea is supposed to be followed
out in modern instruction. It is generally assumed that the voice is
brought under control through a definite series of exercises; these
exercises are supposed to follow, one after the other, according to a
well-defined system. The term "method" implies this systematic
arrangement of exercises. It indicates that vocal training is a matter
of precise knowledge and orderly progression.

This represents the accepted ideal of Voice Culture, rather than the
actual condition. The idea that the vocal management should be imparted
specially, as something preliminary to the technical training of the
voice, is not carried out in practice. Teachers generally are striving
to bring their systems into conformity with this ideal standard. They
use the expression, "placing the voice," to describe the preliminary
training in tone-production. But no successful system of this type has
ever been evolved. The correct management of the voice never is imparted
in the manner indicated by this ideal of instruction. Tone-production
continues, throughout the entire course of study, to be the most
important topic of instruction.

In order to understand the nature of a method of Voice Culture, it is
necessary first to consider the relation which exists, in modern
instruction, between training in tone-production, and the development of
vocal technique. According to the accepted theory, the voice must be
"placed" before the real study of singing is undertaken. After the voice
has been properly "placed," it is supposed to be in condition to be
developed by practice in singing technical exercises. But in actual
practice this distinction between "voice-placing" exercises and
technical studies is seldom drawn. The voice is trained, almost from the
beginning of the course of study, by practice in actual singing. The
earliest exercises used for "placing the voice" are in every respect
technical studies,--single tones and syllables, scale passages,
arpeggios, etc. It is impossible to produce even a single tone without
embodying some feature of technique. Practice therefore serves a double
purpose; it brings the voice gradually to the condition of perfect
action, and at the same time it develops the technique. The student
advances gradually toward the correct manner of tone-production, and
this progress is evidenced solely by the improved technical use of the
voice. Considerable technical facility is attained before the
tone-production becomes absolutely perfect.

A vocal student's practice in singing is not confined to technical
exercises, strictly speaking. Vocalises, songs, and arias are taken up,
usually very early in the course of study. Moreover, attention is nearly
always paid to musical expression and to artistic rendition, as well as
to the vocal action and the technical use of the voice. This is true,
whether the student sings an exercise, a vocalise, a song, or an aria.

For daily home practice, the student sings, usually, first some
exercises, then a few vocalises, and finally several songs and arias.
Every teacher has at command a wide range of compositions of all these
kinds, carefully graded as to technical and musical difficulty. As the
pupil advances, more and more difficult works are undertaken. For each
stage of advancement the teacher chooses the compositions best adapted
to carry the student's progress still further.

There is no point in this development at which instruction in
tone-production ceases, and the technical training of the voice is
begun. On the contrary, the means used for imparting the correct vocal
action are interspersed with the other materials of instruction, both
technical and artistic, throughout the entire course of study. Moreover,
the training in tone-production is carried on during the singing of the
compositions just described, as well as by practice on "voice-placing"
exercises strictly speaking.

"We are in great heart," said one of them, "for we are moving on surely
and certainly. This week something new has come to us. The knell
of retreat no longer sounds in our hearts; the tocsin rings there
instead. We are marching on; we are driving the barbarians back.
Every inch of our motherland regained is sweet and precious to us.
Three days ago I saw our King. He was as muddy and stained, Monsieur,
as I am now. An officer who was with him wanted to remove the mud
from his clothes. 'But no,' said the King, 'let it stay. If my own land
clings thus to me, let it stay; it is better that it should be
so,' and he laughed as he passed on.

We all cheered him, and he laughed the more, showing a shining face
and bidding us take heart, as a brighter day was dawning.

"So we went into the fight that evening, afraid of nothing. In rain and
mist we charged a small village with a mighty shout. Though our numbers
were small we charged. We were beaten back, and then we charged
again. My bayonet broke off short in the breast of a huge German,
and then in the dark and mist a great crowd swept over us as we both
went down. I came to in the dawn. Our men were singing the chant of
victory. The gray enemy had gone. The village, smoking and shattered,
was ours. Our guns were rattling up the street to take another and
stronger position.

"A small victory, perhaps, but none the less sweet for that. Alas! I could
not follow, and they brought me on here. The fortunes of war were
hard."
He raised himself painfully. The big Sergeant from the lost legion,
coming along at the moment, picked him up like a baby, hoisted him
on his shoulders, and bore him along through mud to the clearing house
beyond the station yard.

"Lucky chap," said the Sergeant.

"He is going to have a warm, snug Christmas in a snug, warm hospital;
and here's me only lorst in this bloomin' swamp, an' got to report
for duty somewhere in the mornin'--Lord knows where!" he grinned
ruefully at me.

King George's Visit to the Troops
[From The London Times, Dec. 8, 1914.]

_An officer in the Indian Expeditionary Force sends the following
description of an episode in the King's visit to the front:_

A red-letter day indeed--for the King turned up here at 10:45 this morning
and stayed quite a long time, inspecting detachments of the Indian Army
Corps. He only crossed from England last night I believe, stayed with
the General for breakfast, and saw us all before lunch, going on to
the next army corps. It was quite the most informal show I have ever
seen. He strolled up and down the ranks chatting with all and sundry.
He asked two of our native officers how long they had been in the regiment,
the General interpreting.

The secret of his visit was well kept. Last night after dinner the
Adjutant biked over from Headquarters and said he and I and ---- had
been chosen by lot from the officers, with thirty-three men from
each of the three squadrons here, to represent the regiment at an
inspection by the Commander in Chief.

Well, we went off this morning, and found similar detachments from
all the corps not in the trenches.
It was a dull morning and the mud was awful, and just before his Majesty
was due a German aeroplane appeared heading straight for us.
Our guns opened fire on it and it made off north, but it added
excitement. Otherwise it was a quiet morning and hardly any
firing from the trenches. The King and Sir James arrived in the first
car, then the Prince of Wales driving his own car, and a crowd of staff
officers. The two divisional staffs were presented, and then they started
walking down the lines. My new horse is a real good 'un, but can't
stand "Present arms!" under his nose, and he nearly backed into his
Majesty as he came up from behind.

The Leicesters were in front of us. They had only come up out of the
trenches at midnight and were in a lovely state of mud and unshavedness.
The King simply reveled in them. He stopped and chatted to quite every
one man in three; wanted to know all about trench fighting, and
didn't seem to mind a bit their being covered with mud and unshaved for
days. The Prince was just as interested. He wandered about at
will, paying no attention to his father, and chatting with all and
sundry.

One man was wearing a pair of German boots which interested the King very
much. He spent quite twenty minutes with the Leicesters, and they
deserved it. They have done splendidly all through.

After that he gave two V.C.s to gunners who had won them very early
in the war, and then when he ought to have been moving on he began
strolling up and down the line again, asking all sorts of questions and
noticing everything.

At last they got him into his car to move on to the next army corps.
The General came back to give us his message.
It was that he was very pleased with all he had seen and heard; that
he wanted the troops to know that both he and the Queen always kept
them in their thoughts, and that he meant to see all of them again,
with his own eye, as soon as the war was over. The General gave it out
very well, (he is fluent in Hindustani,) and it made a great impression
on the men.

It was altogether a wonderful visit, so quiet and informal and
businesslike; no apparent precautions or rehearsal; the King tramping
about in the mud as though he were partridge shooting, while the
Prince wandered about as he listed. My interpreter, a French-Canadian,
was amazed.

_A member of the London Scottish writes:_
IN THE TRENCHES, Nov. 11.

This is our third day in the trenches. We have not had an attack yet,
though there has been hard fighting on our immediate right and left.

We are fairly safe here behind barbed wire entanglements, and this would
be an easy job if one could get used to the row and the watching through
the night, which is rather nerve-racking. This trench is in a bonnie fir
wood, just like bonnie Scotland, but the shell fire has damaged nearly
all the trees. Today, being windy, they are falling in all directions.
We have not had a hot meal since we came here. We are not allowed to build
fires, and it is impossible to get anything hot.
We have lost our blankets again in the meantime.

I am just going to have my lunch of "bully" and bread and plain
water.

Nov. 18.

We have had a pretty rough time lately.

Last night was the first for ten days that I have had a roof over my
head. The weather has been atrocious--pouring rain and driving,
cutting snow--but it did not get through my overcoat, which is richly
caked with mud. We have had a fortnight's fighting and have marched
back now from the firing line for a short rest to refit.

It meant two days' marching through roads and fields ankle deep in
clinging, porridgy mud, but we were all glad enough to put up with any
hardship so long as we got away from the strain of flying shells and
bullets. In the trenches we lost some more of our men, but not many.
I just wish you could see our battalion now; what a change from the
crowd that used to march through London. Every man, almost, has a
beard, and you could not imagine the dirty, bedraggled crowd we
are. The strain of watching through the night in the trenches is pretty
awful. The nights were pitch black, and the rain came pouring down,
making the trenches an awful mess. One chap gave a loud cry in his sleep.
Thinking it came from the wood in front, I blazed away.

We sent a burial party out in front of us one morning.
There must have been hundreds of Germans lying there, with thousands
further on. All we could do was just to cover them with earth. It was
a horrible sight, and it is impossible for you folks at home to
realize anything of the awfulness of this war. This awful pace surely
cannot last long. But despite all the discomfort, I would not
have liked to miss the chance of doing my part here.

Nov. 20.

The Prince of Wales visited us yesterday. We are billeted in a café, and
he came in rubbing his hands with the cold. He looked jolly well, and has
a fine, healthy, clear complexion. We have been living in the lap
of luxury lately. Yesterday was just like Christmas Day. We were
inundated with parcels from home, and the room is one litter of
all sorts of comforts, and any amount of sweets, shortbread, cake,
&c.

I cannot recollect two such happy days as these have been. You can have
no idea how all these luxuries are appreciated after living on "bully"
and biscuits. We have a perfect avalanche of cigarettes and tobacco.

We had a bit of a panic this morning, as we were under orders to move
at any moment, but by good luck it did not come off, and we are looking
forward to a few more days' rest. Our last week in the trenches was a
picnic compared with our first experience. This is a grand, free
life, a sight better than mooching around the city. I'm just going to
have a tot of rum now and turn in--it warms the cockles of one's heart
and makes one sleep like Rip Van Winkle.

Nov. 29.

I never felt so fit in my life and never had such a good time before.

This is simply a splendid life, and I am very glad, indeed, I did
not miss my chance of being here.

We were inspected today by Sir John French, who is tremendously
pleased with us.

Rumor has it that we are still to be here a few days, which is
giving us a fine long rest.

Then we may be wanted again.

One of our fellows has just gone past the window with a huge sack
on his back.

It is most laughable to see immaculate city chaps out here doing all
sorts of "orra" jobs. We have been served out with fur coats, no less;
what on earth will they give us next, I wonder? We are still living
in the lap of luxury and are a most happy family. We have a march every
morning, which in this fine cold weather is delightful.

French Amenities
[From The London Times, Dec. 18, 1914.]

_An officer in the R.A.M.C. writes:_
Figure to yourself (as Wells says, isn't it?) a country of flat
plowed field, pollard willows and deep muddy ditches. Then we come
along, and in military parlance "dig ourselves in." That is, with
the sweat of the brows of hundreds of Tommies working by night deep narrow
trenches five feet deep and at least with the earth thrown up another
two and a half feet as a bank on top. These trenches are one and a
half to two feet wide, and curl and twist about in a maddening
manner to make them safer from shell-fire. Little caves are scooped in
the walls of the trenches, where the men live about four to a hole,
and slightly bigger dugouts where two officers live.

All the soil is clay, stickier and greasier than one could believe
possible. It's like almost solid paint, and the least rain makes the sides
of the trenches slimy, and the bottom a perfect sea of mud--pulls the
heels off your boots almost. One feels like Gulliver walking along a
Lilliputian town all the time. The front line of trenches--the firing
line--have scientific loopholes and lookout places in them for seeing and
firing from, and a dropping fire goes on from both sides all day long,
but is very harmless.

Dec. 3, 1914.--I was just starting for my daily constitutional "on top"
when the enemy began their bombarding, nearly one and a half hours
earlier than usual, so I will postpone my little walk and finish this
instead. Yesterday we had one man killed and two wounded, the
first casualties for over a week. The story of one of the wounded
is worth telling to show you the pluck of these men. He told me he noticed
some new digging going on on the side of the enemy in front of his firing
post. One can see the spadefuls of earth coming up from below the
ground level when new trenches are being dug. Although this was
in broad daylight, our man thought he would go and see what the
Germans were up to, so he hops over the side of his trench and
runs forward thirty yards to a ditch and crawls along it some hundred
yards or so. He then spots a large shell-hole in the field on one side
of the ditch, so doubles off and gets into that and has a good
look around.

Not satisfied with the point of view, he sprints to a line of willows
nearer still to the enemy--within 250 yards of them indeed--and
proceeds to climb up one of them. While doing this he gets shot through
the shoulder. He told me he thought he had ricked his arm at first, as
it felt numb and useless. Meanwhile a great pal of his in the regiment,
hearing that he had gone out like this, hops over the parapet and sets
off to look for him, and comes up just as he gets hit. The second
man upbraids the first roundly for being a fool, carries his rifle for
him, and brings him back.

All this is done quite in the day's work and "sub rosa," as they would
get punished for leaving the trench like that in the daytime if
it was spotted. The pluck of these men is perfectly extraordinary,
and the placid way life goes on under the risk of being sniped
or shelled any moment is, until one gets used to seeing it, quite past
belief. I must say the officers set the men a magnificent example.

_A young officer attached to the Yorkshire Light Infantry writes
on Dec. 6:_
One wonders when one sees a German face to face, is this really one
of those devils who wrought such devastation--for devastation they
have surely wrought.

You can hardly believe it, for he seems much the same as other soldiers.
I can assure you that there is none of that insensate hatred that one
hears about, out here. We are out to kill, and kill we do, at any
and every opportunity. But, when all is done and the battle is
over, the splendid universal "soldier spirit" comes over all the men,
and we cannot help thinking that Kipling must have been in the
firing line when he wrote that "East is East and West is West"
thing.

Just to give you some idea of what I mean, the other night four German
snipers were shot on our wire. The next night our men went out and brought
one in who was near and getatable and buried him. They did it with
just the same reverence and sadness as they do to our own dear fellows.
I went to look at the grave the next morning, and one of the most
uncouth-looking men in my company had placed a cross at the head of
the grave, and had written on it:

Here lies a German, We don't know his name, He died bravely fighting For
his Fatherland.

And under that, "got mit uns," (sic,) that being the highest effort of
all the men at German. Not bad for a bloodthirsty Briton, eh? Really,
that shows the spirit.

I don't believe there is a man living who, when first interviewing
an 11-inch howitzer shell, is not pink with funk.

After the first ten, one gets quite used to them, but really, they are
terrible! They hit a house. You can see the great shell--a black
streak--just before it strikes, then, before you hear the explosion,
the whole house simply lifts up into the air, apparently quite
silently; then you hear the roar, and the whole earth shakes.

In the place where the house was there is a huge fountain-spout of what
looks like pink fluff. It is the pulverized bricks. Then a monstrous
shoot of black smoke towering up a hundred feet or more, and, finally,
there is a curious willow-like formation, and then--you duck, as
huge pieces of shell, and house, and earth, and haystack tumble over
your head. And yet, do you know, it is really remarkable how little
damage they do against earth trenches. With a whole morning's shelling,
not a single man of my company was killed, although not a single shell
missed what it had aimed at by more than fifty yards. That makes
all the difference, that fifty yards. If you only keep your head down,
you are as safe as houses; exactly, you will remark, "as safe as houses."

The Things the Wounded Talk About
[A British Surgeon, in The London Times, Dec. 22, 1914.]

If you would realize fully what the war, as an event in the procession
of events, means you must come to France and visit a military hospital.
You must make this visit not as a sightseer, nor yet in the spirit of
a philanthropist, but only as a friend. You must come prepared to
listen to stories that have no relation to war and the affairs of
war--most soldiers, I think, are reluctant to speak of the things
they have seen--to stories that concern home ties and the doings,
real and conjectured, of children--queer, sentimental stories woven
around old ideas like the Christmas idea and the idea of home.

They will fill you with wonder at first, those unwarlike tales, because
they belong to the truly unexpected, against which it is impossible
to be prepared. It would not be an exaggeration to describe the
first effect of them as startling. They kill so many illusions and they
discredit so many beliefs. War, rendered thus the background of life,
assumes a new proportion and a new meaning. Or, rather, it becomes vague
and meaningless, like a darkness.

A few days ago I sat by the bedside of a wounded sapper--a reservist--and
heard the story of life in a signal-box on a branch line in the
North of England. The man was dying. I think he knew it.
But the zest of his everyday life was still strong in him. He described
the manner in which, on leaving the army originally, he had
obtained his post on the railway. He told me that there were three
trains each way in the day, and mentioned that on Winter nights
the last train was frequently very late.

This meant a late supper, but his wife saw to it that everything
was kept hot.

Sometimes his wife came to the box to meet him if it was a dry
night.

In the next bed there was a young Scotsman from a Highland district which
I know very well. We were friends so soon as he learned that I knew
his home. He was a roadman, and we talked of his roads and the
changes which had been wrought in them of late years by motor traffic.

He recalled a great storm, during which the sea wall around a certain
harbor was washed away and the highway rendered impassable.

Then, rather diffidently, he confessed that he had lost a foot and would
be handicapped in his work--"at Ypres."
At the far end of the ward there was a German who spoke a little English.
He was a married man and came from Saxony. His wife and children, he
said, would miss him at Christmas.

We spoke a long time on the subject of Christmas. I suppose by all the
orthodox canons that this German should have told me that he was
glad to be a prisoner or else should have declared his conviction that
the German Army would speedily carry everything before it to victory.
But somehow he forgot to say these things and I forgot to ask him
about them.

These things seemed far away in the quiet ward, even--and for this I
beg forgiveness--grotesque and uninteresting.

I had the curiosity to return to the young Scot and to ask him if he
regretted the decision which had led to his being maimed for life.

He shook his head. "No, because I've had a good home. A man with a good
home should fight for it." He added that his father had advised him very
strongly to enlist.

By the touchstone of the men it has broken this war is judged, and the
makers of this war. And more than ruined villages and desecrated churches
these soldiers pronounce condemnation. They, who have given so
much, are, in a sense, without joy and without enthusiasm; rather they
shun recollection. There is no zest in the killing of men. Their
thoughts, especially at this season, are directed away from the
dull, mechanic force which labors against its bonds across Europe, and
dwell in the homes it has threatened. The war is revealed as a thing gross
and dull-witted, a crime even against the ancient, chivalrous
spirit of war.

Three Dying Foes Made Friends
[From The Hartford Courant, Jan. 14, 1915.]

_To the Editor of The Courant:_
_I have read nothing more tender and moving than the subjoined letter
found by a Red Cross agent at the side of a dead officer and forwarded
to the person to whom it was addressed. The writer was a French cavalry
officer engaged to a young American girl in Paris. It was written as he
lay dying from wounds received in a cavalry charge. Let it speak for
itself._
_E.P.P._

There are two other men lying near me, and I do not think there is much
hope for them either. One is an officer of a Scottish regiment and the
other a private in the Uhlans. They were struck down after me, and
when I came to myself, I found them bending over me, rendering
first aid.

The Britisher was pouring water down my throat from his flask,
while the German was endeavoring to stanch my wound with an antiseptic
preparation served out to them by their medical corps.

The Highlander had one of his legs shattered, and the German had several
pieces of shrapnel buried in his side.

In spite of their own sufferings they were trying to help me, and
when I was fully conscious again the German gave us a morphia
injection and took one himself. His medical corps had also provided
him with the injection and the needle, together with printed
instructions for its use.
After the injection, feeling wonderfully at ease, we spoke of the
lives we had lived before the war. We all spoke English, and we
talked of the women we had left at home. Both the German and the
Britisher had only been married a year....
I wondered, and I supposed the others did, why we had fought each
other at all. I looked at the Highlander, who was falling to sleep,
exhausted, and in spite of his drawn face and mud-stained uniform,
he looked the embodiment of freedom. Then I thought of the Tricolor
of France and all that France had done for liberty. Then I watched
the German, who had ceased to speak. He had taken a Prayer Book
from his knapsack and was trying to read a service for soldiers
wounded in battle.
And ... while I watched him, I realized what we were fighting
for....
He was dying in vain, while the Britisher and myself, by our deaths,
would probably contribute something toward the cause of civilization
and peace.
[The letter ends with a reference to the failing light and the roar
of guns.] 
[Illustration] 

Chronology of the War
Showing Progress of Campaigns on All Fronts and Collateral Events
from Jan. 7 to and Including Jan. 31, 1915
CAMPAIGN IN EASTERN EUROPE 
[Continued from the Last Number.]
Jan. 8--Germans are trying to carry the Russian lines near Bolinow
by the use of steel shields to protect riflemen.
Jan. 9--Germans renew offensive from direction of Mlawa; fighting
on the Rawka and in the north; Russians enter Transylvania; Austrians
meet delays near Nida River.
Jan. 11--Russians are strengthening their lines.
Jan. 12--Russians are pressing the Austrians near the Nida; Austrians
are fleeing from Bukowina.
Jan. 13--Russians occupy several villages in the Masurian Lake
region and threaten Mlawa; Austrians state that Russians lost heavily
in Przemysl siege.
Jan. 14--Russians push north from Warsaw; Germans retake several
positions on Bzura River; it is reported that Germans are short of
supplies.
Jan. 15--New Russian army marches north in Poland; Germans near
Mlawa are in peril; von Hindenburg declared in danger.
Jan. 16--Austrians bring up heavy artillery to hold the Donajec
River; Germans are on way to Budapest.
Jan. 17--Russians take Kirlibaba Pass and progress along right bank
of the Vistula; Germans pushed back on Plock.
Jan. 18--Germans occupy Kielce; Russians fall back to Radom; Russian
capture of Kirlibaba Pass flanks Austrians; Germans out of Plock.This being the case, it is hardly to be expected that the systems
devised to meet this fancied need would stand the test of scientific
examination. Each of these systems of breath-control, opposed muscular
action and ventricular, is in fact found on analysis to embody a
misconception of scientific principles.

_Opposed-Action Breath-Control_

A curious misapprehension of mechanical processes is contained in the
doctrine of breath-control by opposed muscular action. This can best be
pointed out by a consideration of the forces brought to bear on a single
rib in the acts of inspiration and expiration. One set of muscles
contract to raise this rib in inspiration, an opposed set, by their
contraction, lower the rib for the act of expiration. In the
opposed-action system of breath-control, the action of the rib-raising
muscles is continued throughout the expiration, as a check upon the pull
in the opposite direction of the rib-lowering muscles. Theoretically,
the downward pull is "controlled" by the upward pull. To express this
idea in figures, let the expiratory or downward pull on the rib be said
to involve the expenditure of five units of strength. According to the
theory of opposed-action breath-control, this downward pull would have
to be opposed by a slightly less upward pull, say four units of
strength.

Thus graphically presented, the fallacy of the "opposed-muscular" theory
is clearly exposed. The rib is lowered with a degree of strength equal
to the excess of the downward over the upward pull. If the downward pull
equals five units of strength, and the upward pull four units, the rib
is lowered with a pull equivalent to one unit of strength. Exactly the
same effect would be obtained if the downward and upward pulls were
equal respectively to twenty and nineteen units, or to two and one
units. Further, the result would be the same if the downward pull
involved the exertion of one unit of strength, and there was no upward
pull whatever. In every case, the actual result is equivalent to the
excess of the downward over the upward pull.

In the case of the expiratory pressure of five units of strength being
"controlled" by an inspiratory contraction of four units, nine units of
strength are exerted, and the same result could be obtained by the
exertion of one unit. There is a clear waste of eight units of strength.
The power of the expiratory blast is just what it would be if one unit
of strength were exerted in an "uncontrolled" expiration. The singer
exerts just nine times as much strength as is necessary to effect the
same result. This is why the practice of breath-control exercises is so
extremely fatiguing.

So far as the effect of the expiratory blast on the vocal cords is
concerned, "controlling" the breath has no influence whatever. The vocal
cords respond to the effective air pressure; they are not affected in
any way by the opposed contractions of the breath muscles.
"Opposed-muscular" breath-control is a sheer waste of time and effort.

Probably no particular harm has ever resulted to any singer's throat
from the practice of breath-control exercises. But the attempt to hold
back the breath has a very bad effect on the singer's delivery. The
"breath-control" type of singer is never found in the ranks of the great
artists. There is something utterly unnatural about this holding back of
the breath, repugnant to every singer endowed with the right idea of
forceful and dramatic delivery. The vast majority of the successful
pupils of "breath-control" teachers abandon, very early in their
careers, the tiresome attempt to hold back the breath. These singers
yield, probably unconsciously, to the instinctive impulse to sing freely
and without constraint.

But in the ranks of the minor concert and church singers are many who
try conscientiously to obey the instructions of the "breath-control"
teachers. Singers of this type can always be recognized by a curious
impression of hesitancy, or even timidity, conveyed by their tones. They
seem afraid to deliver their phrases with vigor and energy; they do not
"let their voices out." Frequently their voices are of excellent
quality, and their singing is polished and refined. But these singers
never give to the listener that sense of satisfaction which is felt on
hearing a fine voice freely and generously delivered.

As for the particular fallacy contained in the theory of ventricular
breath-control, that must be reserved for a later chapter. Suffice it to
say here that this theory disregards the two basic mechanical principles
of tone-production,--Pascal's law, and the law of the conservation of
energy. The application of this latter physical law to the operations of
the vocal organs is considered in Chapter VI of Part III.


CHAPTER III

THE FALLACIES OF FORWARD EMISSION, CHEST RESONANCE, AND NASAL RESONANCE


Sir Morell Mackenzie's analysis of the acoustic principle supposedly
involved in "forward emission" has already been quoted. That this
analysis involves a complete misunderstanding of the laws of acoustics
need hardly be said. When stated in precise terms, the fallacy of the
"forward emission" theory is evident:

"On issuing from the vocal cords the tone is directed in a curved path,
around the back of the tongue. There the tone is straightened out, and
made to impinge on the roof of the mouth at a precisely defined point.
From this point the tone is reflected, not directly back, as it should
be, since the angles of incidence and reflection must be equal. Instead
of this, the tone is reflected forward, out of the mouth, necessarily
again taking a curved path, to avoid striking the front teeth."
Naturally, no muscular action has ever been defined for causing the
tone to perform this remarkable feat.

The "forward emission" theory assumes the existence of a current of air,
issuing from the vocal cords as a tone. In other words, the tone is
supposed to consist of a stream of air, which can be voluntarily
directed in the mouth, and aimed at some precise point on the roof of
the mouth. This is an utter mistake.

There is no "column of vibrating air," or "stream of vocalized breath,"
in the mouth during tone-production. In the acoustic sense, the air in
the mouth-pharynx is still air, not air in a current. The only motion
which takes place in the air in this cavity is the oscillatory swing of
the air particles. To imagine the directing of air vibrations in the
mouth, as we direct a stream of water out of a hose, is absurd.

What then is the "forward tone"? There must be some reason for this
well-known effect of a perfectly produced voice,--the impression made on
the hearer that the tones are formed in the front of the mouth. There
ought also to be some way for the singer to learn to produce tones of
this character. A consideration of this feature of the vocal action is
reserved for Chapter IV of part III.

_Chest Resonance_

Who was originally responsible for the doctrine of chest resonance, it
would be impossible now to determine. Were it not for the fact of this
doctrine having received the support of eminent scientists (Holmes,
Mackenzie, Curtis, and many others), it might be looked upon as a mere
figure of speech. That the tones of the voice are reinforced by the
resonance of the air in the chest cavity, is an utter absurdity. In the
acoustic sense, the thorax is not a cavity at all. The thorax is filled
with the spongy tissue of the lungs, not to mention the heart. It is no
better adapted for air resonance than an ordinary spherical resonator
would be, if filled with wet sponges.

_Nasal Resonance_

Enough was said of the theories of nasal resonance in Chapter IV of Part
I to show the unscientific character of all these theories. It remains
only to point out the misconception of acoustic principles, contained in
all the discussions of the subject. This is very much the same as in
the theory of "forward emission," viz., that the tones of the voice
consist physically of a "stream of vocalized breath." The mistaken idea
is, that nasal resonance results from part or all of the expired breath
passing through the nose.

What is nasal resonance? How is it caused? What is its effect on the
tones of the voice? These questions have never been answered. It can
however be proved that a satisfactory science of Voice Culture is not in
any way dependent on obtaining an answer to these questions. This much
is definitely known:

1. If the resonance of the air in the nasal cavities exerts any
influence on the tones of the voice, this influence cannot be increased,
diminished, or prevented by any direct action on the part of the singer.
Shutting off the entrance of the breath, by raising the soft palate, is
possible as a muscular exercise. But it is impossible to perform this
action, and to sing artistically, at the same time. To produce any kind
of tone, while holding the soft palate raised, is extremely difficult.
In a later chapter it will be seen that this action has no place
whatever in the correct use of the voice.

2. As the nasal cavities are fixed in size and shape, the singer cannot
control or vary any influence which they may exert as a resonator.

3. Independent of any thought or knowledge of how the nasal quality of
tone is caused, the singer has perfect voluntary control over this
quality by the simple, direct influence of the will. A singer may
produce nasal tones, or tones free from this faulty sound, at will, with
no thought of the mechanical processes involved. All that is required is
that the singer have an ear keen enough to recognize the nasal quality
in his own voice, as well as in the voice of any other singer.


CHAPTER IV

THE FUTILITY OF THE MATERIALS OF MODERN METHODS


Of the strictly scientific or mechanical materials of modern methods,
four have been seen to be utterly erroneous. The remaining topics of
instruction, mechanical and empirical, may with equal justice be
submitted to a similar examination.

Several of these topics have already been critically examined. The rules
for registers and laryngeal management were seen to be of no value to
the student of singing. So also was it observed that all instruction
which attempts to utilize the singer's sensations is futile. All that is
left of the materials of modern methods, in which any valuable idea
might be contained, are the rules for breathing.

Without undertaking to decide whether one system of breathing can be
right, to the exclusion of all other systems, one general remark can be
applied to the whole subject. It has never been scientifically proved
that the correct use of the voice depends in any way on the mastery of
an acquired system of breathing. True, this is the basic assumption of
all the discussions of the singer's breathing. As Frangçon-Davies justly
remarks,--"All combatants are agreed on one point, viz., that the
singer's breath is an acquired one of some kind." (_The Singing of the
Future_, David Frangçon-Davies, M.A., London, 1906.) This is purely an
assumption on the part of the vocal theorists. No one has ever so much
as attempted to offer scientific proof of the statement.

Further, it is frequently stated that the old Italian masters paid much
attention to the subject of breathing; the assumption is also made that
these masters approached the subject in the modern spirit. Neither this
statement, nor the assumption based on it, is susceptible of proof. Tosi
and Mancini do not even mention the subject of breathing.

Breathing has been made the subject of exhaustive mechanical and
muscular analysis, for one reason, and for only one reason. This is,
because the action of breathing is the only mechanical feature of
singing which can be exhaustively studied. The laryngeal action is
hidden; the influence of the resonance cavities cannot well be
determined. But the whole muscular operation of breathing can be readily
seen and studied; any investigator can personally experiment with every
conceivable system.

Furthermore, the adoption of any system of breathing has no influence
whatever on the operations of the voice. A student of singing may learn
to take breath in any way favored by the instructor; the manner of
tone-production is not in the least affected. Even if the correct use of
the voice has to be acquired, the mode of breathing does not contribute
in any way to this result.

All that need be said in criticism of the various doctrines of breathing
is, that the importance of this subject has been greatly overestimated.
Breath and life are practically synonymous. Nothing but the prevalence
of the mechanical idea has caused so much attention to be paid to the
singer's breathing. A tuba player will march for several hours in a
street parade, carrying his heavy instrument, and playing it fully half
the time; yet the vocal theorist does not consider him an object of
sympathy.

No doubt the acquirement of healthy habits of breathing is of great
benefit to the general health. But this does not prove that correct
singing demands some kind of breathing inherently different from
ordinary life. To inspire quickly and exhale the breath slowly is not an
acquired ability; it is the action of ordinary speech. Singing demands
that the lungs be filled more quickly than in ordinary speech, and
perhaps a fuller inspiration is also required. This is readily mastered
with very little practice. It does not call for the acquirement of any
new muscular movements, nor the formation of any new habits.

What is left of all the materials of modern vocal instruction? To sum
them up in the order in which they were considered in Part I:

Breathing does not need to be mastered in any such way as is stated in
the theoretical works on the voice. Breath-control is a complete
fallacy. The doctrines of registers and laryngeal action are utterly
valueless. Chest resonance, nasal resonance, and forward emission, are
scientifically erroneous. The traditional precepts are of no value,
because nobody knows how to follow or apply them. Empirical teaching
based on the singer's sensations is of no avail.

In other words, modern methods contain not one single topic of any value
whatever in the training of the voice. It will be objected that this
statement is utterly absurd, because many of the world's greatest
singers have been trained according to these methods. No doubt this is
in one sense true; modern methods can point to many brilliant successes.
But this does not prove anything in favor of the materials of modern
methods.

Singers are trained to-day exactly as they were trained two hundred
years ago, through a reliance on the imitative faculty. The only
difference is this: In the old days, the student was directly and
expressly told to listen and to imitate, while to-day the reliance on
the imitative faculty is purely instinctive. A fuller consideration of
the important function of imitation as an unrecognized element of modern
Voice Culture is contained in Chapter V of Part IV.


CHAPTER V

THE ERROR OF THE THEORY OF MECHANICAL VOCAL MANAGEMENT


A fundamental difference was pointed out, at the close of the preceding
chapter, between the old Italian method and modern systems of vocal
instruction. This is worthy of repetition. The old Italian method was
founded on the faculty of imitation. Modern methods have as their basis
the idea of conscious, direct, mechanical control of the vocal organs.
All the materials of instruction based on this idea of mechanical
control were seen to be absolutely valueless. It is now in order to
examine still further the structure of modern Voice Culture, and to test
this basic idea of mechanical control.

As a muscular operation, the actions of singing must be subject to the
same physiological and psychological laws which govern all other
voluntary muscular actions. What are these laws? How do we guide and
control our muscular movements? At first sight, this seems a simple
question. We know what we want to do, and we do it. But the important
point is, how are we able to do the things we want to do? You wish to
raise your hand, for example, therefore you raise it. How does your hand
know that you wish to raise it? Does the hand raise itself? Not at all;
it is raised by the contraction of certain muscles in the arm, shoulder,
and back. That is, when you wish to raise your hand, certain muscles
contract themselves. But these muscles are not part of the hand. What
leads these muscles in the shoulder and back to contract, when you will
to raise your hand? Normally you are not even aware of their
contraction. Yet in some way these muscles know that they are called on
to contract, in response to the wish to raise the hand. This takes
place, even though you know nothing whatever of the muscles in question.
The process is by no means so simple, when looked at in this light.

A complicated psychological process is involved in the simplest
voluntary movements. This is seen in the following analysis:

"To move any part of the body voluntarily requires the following
particulars: (1) The possession of an educated reflex-motor mechanism,
under the control of the higher cerebral centers which are most
immediately connected with the phenomena of consciousness; (2) certain
_motifs_ in the form of conscious feelings that have a tone of pleasure
or pain, and so impel the mind to secure such bodily conditions as will
continue or increase the one, and discontinue or diminish the other; (3)
ideas of motions and positions of the bodily members, which previous
experience has taught us answer more or less perfectly to the _motifs_
of conscious feeling; (4) a conscious fiat of will, settling the
question, as it were, which of these ideas shall be realized in the
motions achieved and positions attained by these members; (5) a central
nervous mechanism, which serves as the organ of relation between this
act of will and the discharge of the requisite motor impulses along
their nerve-tracts to the groups of muscles peripherally situated."
(_Elements of Physiological Psychology_, Geo. T. Ladd, New York, 1889.)

Let us again consider the action of raising the hand, and see how the
psychological analysis applies in this movement. We note in the first
place that we are concerned only with the third, fourth, and fifth
particulars of Prof. Ladd's analysis. These are:

The idea of the movement.

The fiat of will which directs that this movement be performed.

The discharge of the requisite motor impulses, along the nerve-tracts,
to the muscles whose contraction constitutes the movement.

It will be simpler, and will answer the purpose equally well, to combine
the third and fourth elements, and to consider as one element the idea
of the movement and the fiat of will to execute the movement.

_The Idea of a Movement_

The mental picture of a purposed movement is simple and direct. No
reference is involved to the muscles concerned in the performance of the
movement. When you will to raise your hand, the action is pictured to
your mind as the raising of the hand, and nothing more. Certain muscles
are to be contracted. But the mental picture of the movement does not
indicate what these muscles are, in what order they are to be brought
into play, nor the relative degrees of strength to be exerted by each
muscular fiber. You do not consciously direct the muscles in their
contractions.

_The Discharge to the Muscles of the Nerve Impulse_

How then are the muscles informed that their contraction is called for?
They have no independent volition; each muscular fiber obeys the impulse
transmitted to it by the nerve, from the nerve center governing its
action. These nerve centers are in their turn controlled by the central
nervous mechanism. And in complex voluntary movements the central
nervous mechanism is under the control of the higher cerebral centers.
The wish to raise the hand appears to the mind as an idea of the hand
being raised. This idea is translated by the central nervous mechanism
into a set of motor nerve impulses. Does consciousness or volition come
into play here? Not at all. On this point Prof. Ladd remarks: "As to the
definite nature of the physical basis which underlies the connection of
ideas of motion and the starting outward of the right motor impulses,
our ignorance is almost complete."

Is it necessary for the performance of a complex muscular action that
the individual know what muscles are involved and how and when to
contract them? No; this knowledge is not only unnecessary, it is even
impossible. Prof. Ladd says of this: "It would be a great mistake to
regard the mind as having before it the cerebral machinery, all nicely
laid out, together with the acquired art of selecting and touching the
right nervous elements in order to produce the desired motion, as a
skilful player of the piano handles his keyboard."

How then are the muscles informed of the service required of them? Or
more precisely, how does the central nervous mechanism know what
distribution of nerve impulses to make among the different nerve centers
governing the muscles? As Prof. Ladd says, our ignorance on this point
is almost complete. There resides in the central nervous mechanism
governing the muscles something which for lack of a better name may be
called an instinct. When a purposeful movement of any part of the body
is willed, the mental picture of the movement is translated by the
central nervous mechanism into a succession of nerve impulses; these
impulses are transmitted through the lower centers to the muscles. The
instinct informing the central nervous mechanism how to apportion the
discharges of nerve impulse among the various muscular centers is to a
high degree mysterious. The present purpose will not be served by
carrying the analysis of this instinct further.[7]

[Note 7: The evolutionary development of this instinct is not
altogether mysterious. Science can fairly well trace the successive
steps in the development of the central nervous mechanism, from the
amoeba to the highest type of vertebrate. "Nerve channels" are worn by
the repeated transmission of impulses over the same tracts.
Coördinations become in successive generations more complex and more
perfect. As consciousness develops further, in each succeeding type,
actions originally reflex tend to take on a more consciously purposeful
character. But all we are concerned with now is the problem of
tone-production. Our purpose is best served by accepting the faculty of
muscular adaptation as an instinct, pure and simple.]

There is therefore no direct conscious guidance of the muscles, in any
movement, simple or complex. So far as the command of voluntary muscular
actions is concerned, the first simple statement of the process sums up
all that for practical purposes need be determined;--we know what we
want to do, and we do it. The mind forms the idea of an action and the
muscles instinctively respond.

But the fact remains that the muscles need to be guided in some way. We
do not perform instinctively many complex actions,--writing, dancing,
rowing, swimming, etc. All these actions, and indeed most of the
activities of daily life, must be consciously learned by practice and
repeated effort. How are these efforts guided? To arrive at an answer to
this question let us consider how a schoolboy practises his writing
lesson.

The boy begins by having before him a copy of the letters he is to
write. Under the guidance of the eye the hand traces these letters. At
each instant the eye points out to the hand the direction in which to
move. As the hand occasionally wanders from the prescribed direction the
eye immediately notes the deviation and bids the hand to correct it. The
hand responds to the demands of the eye, immediately, without thought on
the boy's part of nerve impulse or of muscular contraction. By repeated
efforts the boy improves upon his first clumsy attempts; with each
repetition he approaches nearer to the model.

In the course of this progress the muscular sense gradually comes to the
assistance of the eye as a sort of supplementary guidance. But at no
time is the eye relieved of the responsibility of guiding the hand in
writing. To sum this up, the movements of the hand in writing are
guided, so far as the consciousness is aware, directly by the sense of
sight.

We have here the law of voluntary muscular guidance. In all voluntary
movements the muscles are guided in their contractions, through some
instinctive process, by the sense or senses which observe the movements
themselves, and more especially, the results of the movements. In most
actions the two senses concerned are sight and muscular sense. The more
an action becomes habitual the more it tends to be performed under the
guidance of muscular sense, and to be free from the necessity of the
guidance of the eye. But muscular sense does not usually rise so high
into consciousness as sight, in the guidance of muscular activities.
Many oft-repeated movements, especially those of walking, become
thoroughly habitual and even automatic; that is, the muscular
contractions are performed as purely reflex actions, without conscious
guidance of any kind. But even in walking, the necessity may at any
instant arise for conscious guidance. In such a case the sense of sight
immediately comes into service; from reflex the movements become
voluntary, and consciously guided. In the case of most complex actions
the sense of sight furnishes the most important guidance.

If the muscular operations of singing are subject to the general laws of
psychological control, the guidance of the vocal organs must be
furnished by the sense which observes the results of the movements
involved. This is the sense of hearing. Just as in writing the hand is
guided by the eye, so in singing the voice is guided by the ear. There
can be no other means of guiding the voice. Muscular sense may under
certain conditions supplement the sense of hearing, but under no
circumstances can muscular sense assume full command. The net result of
the application of psychological principles to the problem of
tone-production is simply this, that the voice is guided directly by the
ear.

It is thus seen that the idea of mechanical vocal management is utterly
erroneous. On pushing the analysis still further the fallacy of this
idea is found to be even more glaring.

Is a knowledge of anatomy of any assistance in the acquirement of skill
in performing complex muscular actions? Not in the least. An
understanding of muscular processes does not contribute in any way to
skilful execution. The anatomist does not play billiards or row a boat
one whit the better for all his knowledge of the muscular structure of
the body.

Even if the precise workings of the vocal mechanism could be determined,
the science of Voice Culture would not benefit thereby. Knowing how the
muscles should act does not help us to make them act properly. It is
utterly idle to tell the vocal student that as the pitch of the voice
rises the arytenoid cartilages rotate, bringing their forward surfaces
together, and so shortening the effective length of the vocal cords.
Whatever the vocal cords are required to do is performed through an
instinctive obedience to the demands of the mental ear.

And finally, a precise analysis of muscular contractions is impossible,
even in the case of comparatively simple actions. When, for example,
the hand describes a circle in the air, a number of muscles are
involved. True, it is known what these muscles are, and what effect the
combined contractions of any group would have on the position of the
hand. The direction of the hand's motion at any instant is determined by
the resultant of all the forces exerted on this member. But as this
direction constantly changes, so must the relative degrees of strength
exerted by the muscles also constantly change. At no two successive
instants are the muscular adjustments the same. This simple action,
performed without thought or knowledge of the muscular processes,
presents features too complex to be analyzed on the basis of mechanical
law and anatomic structure.

A complete analysis of the muscular operations of tone-production is
absolutely impossible. The adjustments of the laryngeal muscles involve
probably the most minute variations in degree of contraction performed
in the whole voluntary muscular system. What we do know of the
mechanical operations of the voice is exceedingly interesting, and a
further knowledge of the subject is greatly to be desired. But we can
never hope to clear up all the mystery of the vocal action.

This statement must not be construed to mean that the study of the vocal
mechanism has been devoid of valuable results. On the contrary, the
present understanding of the mechanical operations of the voice will be
found of very great value in erecting a true science of Voice Culture.
The only weakness of the present results of vocal investigation is due
to the fact that this investigation has always been carried on under the
influence of the idea of mechanical vocal management. This influence has
led all theoretical students of the subject to attempt to apply their
knowledge in formulating rules for direct mechanical guidance of the
voice. That these rules are valueless is due solely to the fundamental
error involved in the mechanical idea.

Voice Culture must be turned from the idea of mechanical vocal
management. The old Italian masters were right in that they relied, even
though empirically, on the imitative faculty. Modern teachers may do
better, for in the light of present knowledge reliance on the faculty of
vocal imitation can be shown to be in strict accord with sound
scientific principles.


Part III

THE BASIS OF A REAL SCIENCE OF VOICE


CHAPTER I

THE MEANS OF EMPIRICAL OBSERVATION OF THE VOICE


To all knowledge obtained through the observation of facts and
phenomena, the term empirical is properly applied. Empirical knowledge
must be the basis of every science. To be available in forming a
science, empirical knowledge of a subject must be so carefully gathered
that all probability of error is eliminated; the observations must be so
exhaustive as to embrace every possible source of information. From the
knowledge thus obtained a set of verified general rules must be worked
out with which all the observed facts and phenomena are shown to be in
accord. Then a science has been erected. There is no possibility of
conflict between empirical and scientific knowledge. The discovery of a
single fact, at variance with the supposed general laws bearing on any
subject, is sufficient to overthrow the entire structure which had been
accepted as a science.

In the accepted Vocal Science the terms empirical and scientific are
used in a sense entirely different from that which properly attaches to
these words. Present knowledge of the operations of the voice is called
scientific, solely because it is derived from the sciences of anatomy,
acoustics, and mechanics. The term "empirical knowledge of the voice" is
used as a name for knowledge of the subject drawn from any source other
than these sciences. Yet so far as the modern vocal world seems to be
aware, it possesses no knowledge of the voice other than that commonly
called scientific. It is supposed that the old Italian masters had some
"empirical understanding of the voice." But, if this was the case, their
empirical knowledge has apparently been utterly lost.

Thus far in the present work, the usage of the terms empirical and
scientific, accepted by vocal theorists generally, has been adopted. A
distinction has been drawn between knowledge of the voice obtained
through the study of the vocal mechanism and that obtained through
observation of any other kind. The purpose will best be served by
continuing this same usage.

It must be apparent to the reader, from the analysis of modern methods,
that no real Science of Voice has thus far been erected. This is due to
the fact that the general principles of scientific investigation have
not been applied to the study of the voice. Under the influence of the
idea of mechanical vocal management the attention of all investigators
has been turned exclusively to the mechanical features of
tone-production. Meanwhile the empirical knowledge of the old masters
seems to have been forgotten. As a matter of fact, as will now be seen,
this empirical knowledge has never been lost. Every modern teacher of
singing shares the empirical knowledge which formed the sole material of
the old method. But this knowledge is not applied effectually in modern
instruction for two reasons. First, modern teachers do not realize the
importance of this knowledge; indeed, they are practically unaware of
this valuable possession. Although in fact the basis of nearly all
modern instruction in singing, empirical knowledge is always
unconsciously used. Second, empirical knowledge is always applied in the
prevailing mechanical spirit. The attempt is always made to translate
the sub-conscious empirical understanding of the voice into rules for
direct mechanical management. Under the influence of the mechanical idea
the modern teacher's most valuable possession, empirical knowledge of
the voice, becomes utterly unserviceable.

Thus far, the whole result of this work has been destructive. The
accepted Vocal Science has been shown to be erroneous in its conception
and unsound in its conclusions. The work cannot halt here. Vocal Science
must be reconstructed. This can be done only by following the general
plan of all scientific investigation, beginning with the observation of
all ascertainable facts bearing on the voice.

How can any facts be observed about the voice other than by the study of
the vocal mechanism? An answer to this question is at once suggested so
soon as scientific principles are applied to the subject. Strictly
speaking, the voice is a set of sounds, produced by the action of the
vocal organs. The scientific method of inquiry is therefore to begin by
observing these sounds. Sounds as such can be observed only by the sense
of hearing. It follows then that the attentive listening to voices is
the first step to be taken.

Can any empirical knowledge of the voice be obtained by the mere
listening to voices? If so, we ought now to be in possession of any
facts which might be thus observed. Is it possible that information of
this character is already a common possession of the vocal world, and
yet that this information has never been applied in the investigation of
the voice? This is exactly the case. Many facts regarding the voice have
been observed so continually that they are a matter of common knowledge,
and yet these facts have never been recorded in a scientific manner.

Consider, for example, this remark about a famous singer, made by one of
the foremost musical critics of the United States: "Mme. T---- 's lower
medium notes were all sung with a pinched glottis." How did this critic
know that the singer had pinched her glottis? He had no opportunity of
examining her throat with the laryngoscope, nor of observing her throat
action in any other way. In fact, the critic was seated probably
seventy-five feet from the artist at the time the tones in question were
sung. The critic had only one means of knowing anything about the
singer's throat action, and that was contained in the sound of the
tones. There must therefore have been something in the sound of the
tones which conveyed this information to the critical listener. For many
years this gentleman had been in the habit of listening closely to
singers, and he had found some way of estimating the singer's throat
action by the character of the tones produced.

This same means of judging the manner of production from the sound of
the tones seems to have been utilized nearly two hundred years ago.
Speaking of the most frequent faults of tone-production, Tosi remarks:
"The voice of the scholar should always come forth neat and clear,
without passing through the nose or being choked in the throat." Mancini
also speaks of the faults of nasal and throaty voice: "Un cantare di
gola e di naso." A throaty tone, therefore, impressed these writers as
being in some way formed or caught in the singer's throat. It may be set
down as certain that no pupil ever explained to either of these masters
how the objectionable sounds were produced. How then did Tosi and
Mancini know the manner in which a throaty tone is produced?

We need not go back to the early writers to find out what is meant by a
throaty tone. Fully as many throaty singers are heard nowadays as the
old masters ever listened to. What do we mean when we say that a
singer's voice is throaty? The answer to this question seems at first
sight simple enough: The tones impress us as being formed in the
singer's throat. But what conveys this impression? Something in the
sound of the tone, of course. Yet even that is not enough. How can a
tone, merely a sound to which we listen, tell us anything about the
condition of the singer's throat during the production of the tone? Here
again the answer seems simple: The listener knows that, in order to
produce a tone of like character, he would have to contract his own
throat in some way.

Here we have a highly significant fact about the voice. On hearing a
throaty tone, the listener can tell how this tone is produced; he feels
that he would have to contract his own throat in order to produce a
similar tone. Let us carry this discussion a little further. How does
the listener know this? Certainly not by actually singing a throaty
tone. When seated in a concert hall, for example, and listening to a
throaty singer, the hearer cannot rise from his seat, sing a few throaty
tones himself, and then note how his throat feels. The critic just
mentioned did not sing some notes with "pinched glottis" in order to
learn how Mme. T---- sang her low tones. Evidently it is not necessary
actually to imitate the singer; the hearer gets the same result by
imitating the sounds mentally. In other words, when we hear throaty
tones we mentally imitate these tones; thus we know that we should have
to contract our own throats in order to produce similar tones.

But even here we cannot stop. To imitate the singer actually is one
thing; mental imitation is something entirely different. In the first
case, actual imitation, our muscular sense would inform us of the state
of throat tightening. But in the case of mental imitation there is no
actual tightening of the throat, nothing, at any rate, comparable to
what takes place in actual imitation. There is then a dual function of
the imagination; first, the mental imitation of the sound; second, the
imaginary tightening of the throat. The analysis of the mental process
must therefore be modified, and stated as follows: When we listen to a
throaty tone we mentally imitate the tone; an imaginative function of
the muscular sense informs us what condition the singer's throat assumes
for the production of the tone.

A similar operation takes place in listening to nasal voices. An
impression is conveyed by a nasal tone, through which the hearer is
informed of a condition of tightness or contraction somewhere in the
singer's nose.

The terms applied to the two most marked forms of faulty
tone-production, nasal and throaty, are derived from impressions
conveyed by the sounds of the tones. These names, nasal and throaty,
refer to a feeling of tightness or contraction experienced in
imagination by the hearer; in one case this feeling is located in the
nose, in the other, in the throat. But the terms nasal and throaty are
general descriptions of faulty tones. Each one covers a wide range of
tone qualities. There is an almost infinite variety of throaty tones,
and of nasal sounds as well. The knowledge of the voice obtained by
listening to vocal tones is of equally wide extent. Every throaty tone,
whatever its precise character, informs the hearer of the exact
condition of the singer's throat in producing the tone. In short, every
vocal tone is thus analyzed by the critical listener, and referred in
imagination to his own throat. An insight into the singer's vocal action
is imparted to the hearer through an imaginative process which always,
of necessity, accompanies the attentive listening to vocal tones.

Every vocal tone awakens in the hearer a set of imagined muscular
sensations. These sensations furnish the means for an exhaustive
analysis of the operations of the voice. The production of tone
therefore awakens two sets of muscular sensations, one actually felt by
the singer, the other felt in imagination by the listener. The former
are commonly known as the "singer's sensations"; but, as will be
explained later, this expression is often very loosely applied. It is
advisable on this account to give a new name to the singer's sensations,
and also to give a name to the muscular sensations awakened in the
hearer. Let us therefore call the sensations experienced by the singer
in the production of tone the "direct sensations of tone." To the
imaginary sensations of the hearer let us give the name, the
"sympathetic sensations of tone."

These two terms will be used throughout the remainder of this work in
the meanings here given to them.

Direct sensations of tone are the sensations actually felt by the singer
as a result of the exercise of the vocal organs.

Sympathetic sensations of tone are the muscular sensations experienced
in imagination by the hearer as a result of the listening to the tones
of voices other than his own.


CHAPTER II

SYMPATHETIC SENSATIONS OF VOCAL TONE


A peculiar relation of sympathy exists between the human voice and the
human ear. So intimate is this relation that the two might almost be
considered as forming one complete organ. One aspect of this relation
has already been noted, the guidance of the vocal organs by the sense of
hearing. There is now to be considered another feature of this relation
between voice and ear,--the assistance rendered by the vocal organs to
the sense of hearing.

That a sub-conscious adjustment of the vocal organs may supplement the
sense of hearing in the estimation of pitch is mentioned by Prof. Ladd.
Speaking of the ability, by no means uncommon, to tell the pitch of any
musical note heard, Prof. Ladd says: "Such judgment, however, may be,
and ordinarily is, much assisted by auxiliary discriminations of other
sensations which blend with those of the musical tone. Among such
secondary helps the most important are the muscular sensations which
accompany the innervation of the larynx and other organs used in
producing musical tones. For we ordinarily innervate these organs (at
least in an inchoate and partial way)--that is, we sound the note to
ourselves--when trying carefully to judge of its pitch." (_Elements of
Physiological Psychology._)

Much more important in the study of the problem of tone-production are
the adjustments of the hearer's vocal organs which were named the
sympathetic sensations of tone. This peculiar auxiliary to the sense of
hearing calls for the closest attention.

Sympathetic sensations of tone are awakened in the hearer through the
mere listening to the sounds of the human voice. Vocal tones impress the
listener's ear in a manner entirely different from any other sounds. Not
only are the tones of the voice heard, just as other sounds are heard;
in addition to this, every vocal tone heard is mentally imitated, and
this mental reproduction of the tone is referred in imagination to the
hearer's own vocal organs. Besides hearing the vocal tone as a sound
pure and simple, the listener is also informed of the manner of throat
action by which the tone is produced.

This mental imitation and judgment of vocal tones is not a voluntary
operation. On the contrary it cannot even be inhibited. It is impossible
for us to listen to the voices of those about us, even in ordinary
conversation, without being to some extent aware of the various modes of
tone-production.

This idea of the mental imitation of voices may impress us at first as
highly mysterious. Sympathetic sensations of tone have been felt and
noted, probably ever since the human voice and the human ear were
developed. Yet the process is purely sub-conscious. It is performed
involuntarily, without thought on the part of the hearer, even without
any consciousness of the process. The hearer simply knows how the voices
to which he listens are produced. A throaty voice simply sounds throaty;
the hearer feels this, and pays no attention to the source of the
information. We take it as a matter of course that a nasal voice seems
to come through the speaker's nose. Why a certain quality of sound gives
this impression we never stop to inquire. The impressions of throat
action conveyed by other people's voices seem so simple and direct that
nobody appears to have thought to analyze the psychological process
involved.

This psychological process is found on analysis to be highly complex. In
addition to the actual physical exercise of the sense of hearing, three
distinct operations are performed in imagination. These are the mental
imitation of the tone, the imagined adjustments of the vocal organs, and
the imaginative exercise of the muscular sense. Although simultaneously
performed, each of these four operations may be considered separately.

_Hearing_

As the judgment of vocal tones by sympathetic sensations is purely a
function of the sense of hearing, the keenness of these sensations
varies in each individual in proportion to the keenness of the ear. It
would be a great mistake to assert that we all feel these sympathetic
sensations with equal vividness. On the contrary, many people are so
inattentive to the qualities of sounds that they hardly know the meaning
of the term "nasal tone."

One trait in particular distinguishes the musician and the music lover;
this is, the possession of a keen sense of hearing. The ear is trained
by exercise in its own function,--hearing. The more attentively we
listen to music the higher do we develop our ability to discriminate
between musical sounds. Moreover, natural endowments vary in different
individuals, with regard to the ear, as with all other human faculties.
To appreciate fully the wonderful insight into vocal operations conveyed
by the sympathetic sensations of tone, a naturally keen musical ear is
required; further, this natural gift of a good ear must be developed by
attentive listening to music, vocal and instrumental, carried on through
several years.

_Mental Imitation of Vocal Tones_

That every sense has its counterpart in the imagination need hardly be
said. We know what it means to feel warm or cold, hungry or thirsty; we
know the taste of an apple, the scent of a rose. We can at will create
pictures before the mind's eye. In the same way we can hear in
imagination any sound we choose to produce mentally.

An inseparable function of the sense of hearing is the impulse to
imitate mentally the tones of speakers and singers. The imitation of
sounds is an instinctive operation. "Talking proper does not set in till
the instinct to _imitate sounds_ ripens in the nervous system." (_The
Principles of Psychology_, Wm. James, N. Y., 1890.) Little can be said
about the impulse to imitate voices mentally, further than that it is an
exercise of this same instinct.

_Imagined Adjustments of the Vocal Organs_

It has already been seen that the vocal organs have the ability to
adjust themselves, through instinctive guidance, for the production of
any tone demanded by the ear. This same ability is invoked in the mental
imitation of tones. In one case the muscular contractions are actually
performed; in the other the muscular adjustments are wholly or in part
imaginary.

It is highly probable that actual contractions of the laryngeal muscles
take place, under certain conditions, as an accompaniment to the
listening to voices. This is evident in the case of extremely aggravated
throaty and forced voices. In listening to the harsh, raucous cries of
many street vendors, when calling out their wares, the hearer
frequently feels a sense of actual pain in his own throat.

Involuntary and unconscious contractions of the laryngeal muscles,
somewhat similar to those under consideration, are well known to
experimental psychologists. Prof. Ladd's statement that these
contractions assist the ear in the judgment of absolute pitch has
already been cited. Another example of unconscious laryngeal movements
has been investigated by Hansen and Lehmann ("Ueber unwillkuerliches
Fluestern," _Philos. Studien_, 1895, Vol. XI, p. 47), and by H. S.
Curtis ("Automatic Movements of the Larynx," _Amer. Jour. Psych._, 1900,
Vol. XI, p. 237). The laboratory experiments of these investigators show
that when words, or ideas definitely expressed in words, are strongly
thought but not uttered, the vocal organs unconsciously adjust
themselves to the positions necessary for uttering the words. Curtis
says of these unconscious laryngeal contractions: "Such movements are
very common with normal people, and are comparatively easy of
demonstration."

The apparatus used by Hansen and Lehmann in their experiments consists
of two large concave reflectors. Having read an interesting account
of the "Veneration of Cats in ancient days," in a recent number of your
entertaining and useful publication, I am induced to send you the
following respecting the part they formed in the religious worship
of the middle ages:--
In Mills's "History of the Crusades", we meet with the following:--"At
Aix in Provence, on the festival of _Corpus Christi_, the finest tom
cat of the country, wrapped in swaddling clothes like a child, was
exhibited in a magnificent shrine to public admiration.

Every knee was bent, every hand strewed flowers or poured incense,
and grimalkin was treated in all respects as the god of the day. But on
the festival of _St. John_, poor tom's fate was reversed. A number of the
tabby tribe were put into a wicker basket, and thrown alive into the
midst of an immense fire kindled in the public square by the bishop
and his clergy.

Hymns and anthems were sung, and processions were made by the priests and
people in honour of the sacrifice."
It is well known that cats formed a conspicuous part in the old religion
of the Egyptians, who under the form of a cat, symbolized the
moon or Isis, and placed it upon their Systrum, an instrument
of religious worship and divination.

Cats are supposed to have been first brought to England by some merchants
from the Island of Cyprus, who came hither for fur.

The prices and value of cats and kittens, mentioned by your
correspondent, _P.T.W._ were fixed by that excellent prince, _Hoel
dda_, or Howel the Good.

_Vide Leges Wallicae_, p. 427 and 428.

[Greek: S.G.]
* * * * *

TO MISS MITFORD,
_On reading her "Lines to a Friend, who spent some days at a country inn,
in order to be near the writer."_
IN NO. 386, OF THE MIRROR.

(_For the Mirror_.)

"My noble friend! was _this_ a place for thee? No fitting place" "No
fitting place" to meet thy "noble friend," Where "heart with heart" and
"mind with mind" might blend?

"No fitting place?" now, lady, dost thou wrong The magic might that
appertains to song, And humbly I refute thee--though it seem Uncourtly
bold; for at Castalian stream I never drank; but oft my spirit bows Before
that altar where thy genius glows:
And who can fail to worship who have seen _Foscari's_ frenzy in
thy tragic scene?
Beheld _Rienzi_ light the latent fire Of swelling liberty in son and
sire; Or left the seven-hilled city's Roman pride-- With Caesar's
pump, and Tiber's classic tide; And wander'd with thy muse to homely
bowers, Of verdant foliage wreathed with varied flowers.

But pardon, lady, scarcely need I tell, That song delights in Nature's
haunts to dwell; Eschews the regal robe and stately throne, To walk,
enraptured, in a world its own.
O'er _sylvan_ scenes the muse her radiance flings; And hallows
wheresoe'er she rests her wings.
And thou, all joyous in her blessed smile, (Soft as the moonbeam on
a monkish pile,) Art gifted with the godlike power to give A
speechless charm to meanest things that live; And lifeless nature
where thy voice is heard, Like midnight music of the summer bird,
Receives new lustre.

E'en the "taper's" light, Which in the lowly inn illumed the
night, The "wood-fire" warm, and "casement swinging free," Were stamp'd
with teeming interest by thee.
What higher bliss than listening by thy side Within that cot thy genius
sanctified?
Though on thy "noble friend" the diamond shone, Thy words were
richer than the precious stone; Though on that head there bent
the rarest plume, Thy looks could well a loftier air assume; Though
theirs the pride of coronet and crest, Thyself wert clad in
Inspiration's vest:
And all these baubles, beauteous in the sight, Might veil their
lustre in thy glorious light.

Then, lady, call it not a "_selfish_ strain," Thy supplicating
wish to "come again." Deem not the "village inn" "no fitting place" To
greet congenial feeling face to face; To learn that genius no
distinction knows.
But doats upon the meanest flower that blows; Where e'en thy friends
might drop their title's claim, Forgetting honoured race and ancient
name; Where round your souls the flowers of song might twine, Lost
in the rapture of the bard's design

.

* * H.

* * * * *

RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS.

* * * * *

TOUCHING FOR THE CURE OF THE KING'S EVIL.

(_For the Mirror_.)

The author of a treatise on this subject, tells the following anecdote,
which may in some degree account for the numbers registered at Whitehall,
(who were _touched_) which were from the year 1660 to 1664 inclusive, a
period of five years, 23,601; and from May 1667 to May 1684,
68,506; viz. an old man who was witness in a cause, had by his residence
fixed the time of a fact, by Queen Anne having been at Oxford, and
_touched_ him while a child, for the cure of the evil. When he had finished
his evidence, the relater had an opportunity of asking him whether he
was really cured.

Upon which he answered with a significant smile, "that he believed
himself never to have had a complaint, that deserved to be considered
as the _evil_, but that his parents were poor, and _had no objection
to the bit of gold_."
When King Charles II.

_touched_ at Whitehall, he usually sat in a chair of state, and put about
each of their necks a white ribbon, with an _angel_ of gold on it.
Query.--Was not this the _original golden or angelic_ ointment?

Edward the Confessor is generally mentioned as the first possessor
of this art; although the historians of France are disposed to
maintain, that it was originally inherent in their kings.

Dr. Johnson's mother is said to have been instigated by the advice of a
celebrated physician, Sir John Floyer, to bring her son to London for
the purpose of receiving the remedy, and it is recorded that he
was _touched_ by Queen Anne.

P.T.W.

* * * * *

ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE AMONG THE EGYPTIANS.

(_For the Mirror_.)

The Egyptians were exceedingly exact about the administration of
justice, believing that the support or dissolution of society
altogether depended upon that.

Their highest tribunal was composed of thirty judges. They placed
at the head of this tribunal the person who at once possessed the
greatest share of wisdom, knowledge, and love of the laws, and public
esteem. The king furnished the judges with every thing necessary for their
support, so that the people had justice rendered them without
expense. _No advocates were allowed_ in this tribunal.

The parties were not even allowed to plead their own causes. All
trials were carried on _in writing_, and the parties themselves drew
up their own cases. Those who had settled this manner of proceeding
well knew that the eloquence of advocates _very often darkened the
truth, and misled the judge_. They were unwilling to expose the
ministers of justice to the deceitful charms of pathetic, affecting
orations. The Egyptians avoided this by making each party draw
up the statement of his own case in writing, and they allowed a
competent time for that purpose.[8] But to prevent the protracting
of suits too long, each party was only allowed one reply.

When all the evidence necessary for their information was given to the
judges, they began their consultation. When the affair was thoroughly
canvassed, the president gave the signal for proceeding to a sentence,
by taking in his hand a little image adorned with precious stones,
which hung to a chain of gold about his neck.

This image had no eyes, and was the symbol with which the Egyptians
used to represent Truth. Judgment being given, the president touched
the party who had gained the cause with this image. This was the
form of pronouncing sentence. According to an ancient law, the kings
of Egypt administered an oath to the judges at their installation,
that if the king should command them to give an unjust sentence,
they would not obey him

.

[8] All this must be understood with some limitations, otherwise we
must suppose that all the inhabitants of Egypt had not only learned
to write, but that they had sufficient talents and knowledge of the laws,
to draw up their own defences, which is not to be supposed.

This law then must have been liable to some exceptions and modifications.
We must say the same thing of other countries where they tell us there
are no advocates, and that all trials are carried on in writing, as in
Siam, China, Bantam, &c. _Origin of Laws, G.M. Gognet_.

* * * * *

THE TOPOGRAPHER.

* * * * *

CLIFTON HOT WELLS.

(_For the Mirror_.)

Glide, Avon, gently glide....
More prodigal in beauty than the dreams Of fantasy,... beneath the
chain Of mingled wood and precipice, that seems To buttress up the
wave, whose silvery gleams Stretch far beyond, where Severn leads
the train.

Gilpin says, and says truly, that "the west is the region of fine landscape;"
it also follows as a natural consequence that it predominates in the
number of its artists. The beautiful vignette of Clifton in a
recent number of the MIRROR,[9] has recalled a multitude of interesting
recollections to my mind. I have passed a good deal of time there at
several periods, and as the writer of the description accompanying the
vignette has been led into an error or two, perhaps a few desultory
notes by way of _pendant_ to his paper, may not be entirely devoid
of interest to the reader

.

[9] See MIRROR, No. 390.

The old Tower on the Downs no longer exists. A Tower designed for
an observatory has been erected near its former site, which is
fitted up with several large telescopes, and a camera obscura, to which
the public are admitted. This Tower which is seen in the engraving,
stands, as stated, on an extensive Roman camp, or fortification.
It would have been difficult to have selected a more appropriate
situation for such a building; for the combination of picturesque
and sublime scenery, united with the beauties of art, is no where
more enthrilling to the mind than at Clifton.

Clifton Hot Wells has long been celebrated as a watering-place.
Smollett, in his "Humphry Clinker," has given a very interesting
picture of its society in the middle of the last century. Clifton
is now, however, considerably neglected. Omnipotent fashion has migrated
to Cheltenham, though no comparison can be made with Clifton on any other
score. The natives of the Emerald Isle, indeed, since the introduction
of steam navigation, come in crowds to the Hot Wells. Though the "music
of the waters" cannot be heard there, yet you may in a few hours be
transported to scenes where Ocean revels in his wildest grandeur.
Few places are more favourably situated for the tourist.

There is a regular communication by steam with the romantic and
interesting coasts of North Devon and South Wales; while the sylvan
Wye, Piercefield, Ragland, and above all, Tintern, are within the
compass of a day's excursion.

Clifton can boast of much architectural magnificence: its buildings
rising from the base to the summit of a crescent-shaped eminence remind
me, in a distant view, of an ancient Greek city; while the tiers of
crescents have a singularly fine effect, and seem to fill a sort of
gap in the landscape.

The rise of the tide in the Avon, in common with most of the ports on
the Bristol Channel, is a very extraordinary phenomenon. The whole strength
of the mighty Atlantic seems to rush up the Channel with
impetuous force. At Rownham Ferry, five miles inland, near the
entrance to Cumberland-Basin, the spring-tides frequently rise
thirty-seven feet.
The tide rises at Chepstow, farther up the Severn, more than sixty feet,
and a mark on the rocks below the bridge there, denotes that it has
risen to the height of seventy feet, which is perhaps the greatest
altitude of the tides in the world.

The views on the Downs, above the Hot Wells, are infinitely varied
and delightful, and glimpses constantly occur of the Avon
"Winding like cragged Peneus, through his foliaged vale,"
while "ocean fragrance" is wafted around. The scenery on the Avon is said
strikingly to resemble the vale of Tempe in Greece. The student of
nature may there enjoy "communion sweet," with all that his heart holds
dear as life's blood. How often have I wandered through that valley
of cliffs by the light of the "cold, pale moon," watching their dark and
gigantic masses and silvery foliage, thrown into bold outline on the
sky above, with not an echo, save the solitary cry of the bittern; and
perhaps only aroused by an impetuous steamer, like some unearthly
thing, rushing rapidly past me. Parties of musicians sometimes place
themselves amongst the rocks at night when the effect is extremely
fine.

Perhaps autumn is the fittest season for enjoying these scenes. At
that season the many coloured liveries of the foliage, the lonely
woodland wilderness and rocky paths, and the mists which in the earlier
part of the day linger on the tops of the cliffs and woods, when partially
dispersed by the suns rays, give a character of vastness and sublimity
to the scenery which it would be difficult to describe. I would
particularly point out on these occasions the view from the hill near
the new church at Clifton, towards Long Ashton, and Dundry Tower.

I visited the latter place during the last summer. It was a glorious
sunset in July, when after climbing a long and mazy turret-stair,
we stood at the summit of Dundry Tower. A magnificent landscape of vast
extent, stretching around on every point of the compass, burst almost
simultaneously on the sight, embracing views of the Bristol Channel, the
mountains of South Wales and Monmouthshire, the Severn, Gloucestershire
and the Malvern Hills, Bath, the Vale of White Horse in Berkshire,
and the Mendip Range; while at the foot of the rich champagne valley
below you, which gradually descends for about five miles, lies the
city of Bristol with its numerous fine churches; and a splendid
view of Clifton completed the scene.

This may be said to be a succession of truly English landscapes.

The recollection of such a moment as this, is treasured up in the
memory as a green spot in the oasis of existence. Fancies come
thickly crowding on the mind, which banish for the moment, all
feelings of the drear realities of life; if one may be pardoned for
being sometimes romantic, it is surely on such occasions as these.

We descended the tower--"Please remember the Sexton----!"
The church of Dundry is of great antiquity, and the tower, which is one
of the most extraordinary in England, is a fine specimen of early
church architecture.

There is another tower, remarkable for the beauty of its situation,
which overlooks the Avon, about two miles west of Clifton, at the
extremity of the Downs. It is of an octagonal shape, and its name
(Cooke's Folly) is said to be derived from the following circumstance:--
Several centuries since, the proprietor of the land, a gentleman
named Cooke, dreamed that his only son was destined to be killed
by the sting of an adder. This idea took such hold of his mind,
that in order to avert the dreaded catastrophe, he built this tower,
to which he rigidly confined his son. The tradition goes on to
relate the futility of all human precautions against the decrees
of fate: for a short period after the erection of the tower, an
attendant happening to bring in some bundles of fagots in which an
adder was coiled, the youth was stung by it and died in consequence.
There has been a beautiful lithographic engraving, published in
Bristol, of Cooke's Folly, which includes a view of King's
Road.

VYVYAN.

* * * * * 

MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS.
* * * * * 

THE GERMANS AND GERMANY.
_Translated from a German Work, in the Foreign Review, No. 8._This description is embodied in two of the traditional precepts,
those dealing with the open throat and the support of the tone.

Mention of the traditional precepts leads at once to the consideration
of another aspect of the empirical knowledge of the voice. Vocalists
have been attentively listening to voices since the beginning of the
modern art of singing. Although many of the impressions made by the
voice on the ear cannot be expressed in words, one set of impressions
has been clearly recorded. A marked difference was evidently noticed by
the old Italian masters between the feelings awakened in the hearer by
a voice properly managed and those awakened by an incorrectly produced
voice. These impressions were embodied in a set of precepts for the
guidance of the singer, which are none other than the much-discussed
traditional precepts.

In other words, the traditional precepts embody the results of the old
masters' empirical study of the voice. Considered in this light, the old
precepts lose at once all air of mystery and become perfectly
intelligible and coherent. To a consideration of this record of the
empirical knowledge of the voice the following chapter is devoted.


CHAPTER IV

THE TRADITIONAL PRECEPTS OF THE OLD ITALIAN SCHOOL


There should be nothing mysterious, nothing hard to understand, about
the empirical precepts. It was pointed out in Chapter V of Part I that
these precepts contain a perfect description of correctly produced vocal
tone, so far as the impression on the listener is concerned. This means
nothing else than that the old precepts summarize the results of
empirical observation of correct singing. There is nothing new in this
statement; considered as empirical knowledge, the modern vocal teacher
understands the meaning of the old masters' precepts perfectly well. The
misunderstanding of the subject begins with the attempt to apply the
precepts as specific rules for the direct mechanical management of the
voice. In this connection they were seen to be valueless. Let us now see
if the old precepts are found to contain any meaning of value to the
vocal teacher when considered as purely empirical formulæ.

Each one of the precepts may be said to describe some special
characteristic of the perfect vocal tone, considered solely as a sound.
These characteristics may each be considered separately, that is, the
hearer may voluntarily pay close attention to any special aspect of the
vocal tone. The best plan for arriving at the exact meaning of the
precepts is therefore to consider each one in turn.

_The Forward Tone_

Every lover of singing is familiar with this characteristic of the
perfectly produced voice; the sound seems to come directly from the
singer's mouth, and gives no indication of being formed at the back of
the throat. This characteristic of the perfect tone is simply heard. It
is not distinguished by any sympathetic sensations, but is purely a
matter of sound. On the other hand, a wrongly produced voice seems to be
formed or held in the back of the singer's throat. The tones of such a
voice do not come out satisfactorily; they seem to be lodged in the
throat instead of at the front of the mouth.

In the badly used voice the impression of throat is conveyed by the
sympathetic sensations awakened in the hearer. A striking difference
between correct and incorrect singing is thus noted. A wrongly produced
voice is felt by the hearer to be held in the singer's throat. When
properly used the voice gives no impression of throat; it seems to have
no relation to the throat, but to be formed in the front of the mouth.

So much has been written about "forward emission" that the forward
characteristic of vocal tones seems to be enshrouded in mystery. As a
matter of fact, the forward tone is easily explained. The perfectly
produced voice issues directly from the mouth for the same reason that
the tones of the trombone issue from the bell of the instrument. It is
all a matter of resonance. This is well illustrated by a simple
experiment with a tuning fork and a spherical resonator reinforcing the
tone of the fork.

When the fork is struck, the ear hears the sound issuing from the
resonator, not that coming direct from the fork. This is brought out
distinctly by placing the fork at a little distance from the resonator.
The listener can then definitely locate the source of the sound which
impresses the ear. Under these circumstances the sound coming from the
resonator is found to be many times more powerful than that coming
direct from the tuning fork. If left to its own judgment the ear takes
the resonator to be the original source of the sound.

In the voice the exciting cause of the air vibrations is located at the
back of the resonator,--the mouth-pharynx cavity. The sound waves in
this case can issue only from the front of the resonator,--the singer's
mouth. No matter how the voice is produced, correctly or badly, this
acoustic principle must apply.

Why then does not the incorrectly used voice impress the hearer as
issuing directly from the mouth, the same as the correctly produced
tone? This is purely a matter of sympathetic sensations of throat
tightness, awakened by the faulty tone. Every wrongly used voice arouses
in the listener sympathetic sensations of throat contraction. This
impression of throat, noted by the hearer, consists of muscular, not of
strictly auditory sensations.

As a statement of scientific fact, the forward-tone precept is
erroneous. It does not describe scientifically the difference between
correct and incorrect tone-production. Correctly sung tones are not
produced at the lips. Every vocal tone, good or bad, is produced by the
motion of the vocal cords and reinforced by the resonance of the
mouth-pharynx cavity. Only when considered as an empirical description
is the forward-tone precept of value. In this sense the precept
describes accurately the difference in the impressions made on the
hearer by correct and incorrect singing. A badly produced tone seems to
be caught in the singer's throat; the correctly used voice is free from
this fault, and is therefore heard to issue directly from the singer's
mouth.

This marked difference between correct and incorrect tone throws a
valuable light on the meaning of the correct vocal action. Every badly
used voice gives the impression of wrong or unnecessary tightness,
stiffening, and contraction of the throat. When perfectly used, the
voice does not convey any such impression of throat stiffness.

_The Open Throat_

Just as with the forward tone, the meaning of the open throat is best
brought out by contrasting the impressions made on the hearer by a
perfect and a badly used voice. A badly produced tone seems to be
caught, or as Tosi expressed it, "choaked in the throat." The singer's
throat seems to be tightened and narrowed so that the sound has not
sufficient passageway to come out properly. On the other hand, the
perfectly used voice comes out freely, without interference or hindrance
at any point in the singer's throat. There seems to be plenty of room
for the tone to come forth; in other words, the singer's throat seems to
be open.

All these impressions are purely a matter of sympathetic sensations. In
listening to a faulty singer the hearer feels a sensation of tightness
and contraction of the throat. A well used voice awakens exactly the
opposite sensation, that of looseness and freedom of the throat.

Here again is seen the difference between correct and incorrect singing,
empirically considered. Judging from the impressions made by rightly and
wrongly used voices, any incorrect vocal action involves a condition of
tightness and contraction of the throat. Perfect singing gives the
impression that the throat is loose and supple, and free from all
unnecessary tension.

_The Support of the Tone_

Following the plan of contrasting correct and incorrect singing, the
meaning of this precept is readily found. The perfect voice is felt by
the hearer to be firmly and confidently held by the singer in a secure
grasp of the throat muscles. Such a voice awakens the sympathetic
sensations of perfectly balanced muscular effect, similar to the
muscular sensations of the hand and forearm when an object is firmly
grasped in the hand.

A badly used voice seems to be convulsively gripped in the singer's
throat. The tones seem to fall back into the throat for want of some
secure base on which to rest. This impression is conveyed by a peculiar
set of sympathetic sensations of highly unpleasant muscular tension far
back in the throat.

This precept, "Support the tone," points to the difference already noted
between the right and the wrong vocal action. Badly produced tones
indicate a state of excessive tension of the throat muscles. Correct
singing gives the impression that the throat muscles exert exactly the
requisite degree of strength, and no more.

Taken together, the open-throat and the forward-tone precepts embody an
admirable description of the sympathetic sensations awakened by perfect
singing. The singer's entire vocal mechanism is felt to be in a
condition of lithe and supple freedom. There is no straining, no
constraint, no forcing, no unnecessary tension. Each muscle of the vocal
mechanism, and indeed of the entire body, exerts just the necessary
degree of strength.

Similar muscular sensations always accompany the expert performance of
any action requiring a high degree of dexterity. Whatever be the form of
exertion, skilful physical activity awakens muscular sensations of
perfectly balanced and harmonized contractions. This feeling of muscular
poise and adjustment is pleasurable in a high degree.

A keen enjoyment is experienced in the skilful performance of many
complex muscular activities. Much of the pleasure of skating, dancing,
rowing, tennis, etc., is dependent on this feeling of muscular poise
and harmonious contraction. Healthy exercise is always normally
enjoyable; but skilful performance greatly enhances the pleasure. A
beginner learning to skate, for example, exerts himself fully as much as
the accomplished skater. Yet the beginner does not by any means derive
the same degree of pleasure from his exertions.

Precisely this feeling of balanced and harmonious muscular exertion is
experienced by the perfect singer. More than this, the hearer also,
through sympathetic sensations, shares the same pleasurable feeling.
This is the sensation described as the feeling of soaring, of poise, and
of floating, in many descriptions of the "singer's sensations."

_Singing on the Breath_

When the voice is perfectly used the tones seem to detach themselves
from the singer, and to float off on the breath. Nothing in the sound of
the tones, nor in the sympathetic sensations awakened, gives any
indication that the breath is checked or impeded in its flow. The
current of tone seems to be poured out on the breath just as freely as
a quiet expiration in ordinary breathing.

This is a purely empirical description of perfect singing. As we know
very well, the vocal action is quite different from this description.
But the important point is that the phrase "singing on the breath" does
very accurately describe the impression made on the hearer by perfect
singing.

Singing on the breath represents the highest possible degree of purely
vocal perfection. One may attend operas and concerts for a whole season
and listen to a score of famous singers, and count oneself fortunate to
have heard even one artist who attains this standard of tonal
excellence. Singing on the breath is an effect of wondrous tonal beauty;
it is simply this, pure beauty, pristine and naïve.

With the slightest degree of throat stiffness or muscular tension,
singing on the breath is utterly impossible. So soon as the tones
indicate the merest trace of throat contraction, the free outflow of the
stream of sound is felt to be checked.

Coloratura singing, to be absolutely perfect, demands this degree of
tonal excellence. Singing on the breath and coloratura are indeed very
closely allied. The modern school of musical criticism does not hold
coloratura singing in very high esteem. We demand nowadays expression,
passion, and emotion; we want vocal music to portray definite
sentiments, to express concrete feelings. Florid singing is not adapted
to this form of expressiveness. It is only sensuously beautiful; it
speaks to the ear, but does not appeal to the intellect.

Yet it may well be asked whether the highest type of coloratura singing,
pure tonal beauty, does not appeal to a deeper, more elemental set of
emotions than are reached by dramatically expressive singing. This
question would call for a profound psychological discussion, hardly in
place in a work devoted to the technical problem of tone-production. But
this much is certain: Coloratura singing still has a strong hold on the
affections of the music loving public. Even to-day audiences are moved
by the vocal feats of some famous queen of song fully as profoundly as
by the performance of a modern dramatic or realistic opera.

To describe a sound is an extremely difficult task. The tone of the
muted horn, for example, is perfectly familiar to the average musician.
Yet who would undertake to describe in words the tone of the muted horn?
A description of the sounds produced by a perfectly managed voice is
almost as difficult to frame in words. Still the old Italian masters
succeeded in finding words to describe perfect singing. These few simple
phrases--open the throat, support the tone, sing the tones forward, sing
on the breath--embody a most beautiful and complete description of vocal
perfection. The empirical study of the voice can hardly be expected to
go further than this. From the old masters we have received a complete
record of all that need be known empirically about the voice.


CHAPTER V

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE IN MODERN VOICE CULTURE


It was pointed out in Chapter I of Part III that there is no possibility
of conflict between empirical and scientific knowledge. Modern Voice
Culture seems to present a direct contradiction of this statement. The
vocal teacher's empirical understanding of the voice conflicts at every
step with his supposedly scientific knowledge. No doubt the reader is
already aware of the real meaning of this apparent contradiction. It
only bears out the philosophic rule; an accepted science must be
abandoned so soon as its deductions are found to be not in accord with
observed facts.

Modern methods of instruction in singing can be understood only by
following out this idea of conflict between known facts and accepted,
though erroneous, scientific doctrines. As we have seen, the only
universally accepted theory of supposedly scientific Voice Culture is
the idea of direct mechanical guidance of the voice. Every vocal
teacher attempts to make his empirical knowledge conform to this
mechanical idea. As the empirical knowledge is correct, and the
mechanical idea a complete mistake, conflict between the two is
inevitable.

Every modern teacher of singing possesses in full measure the empirical
understanding of the voice. To this statement hardly an exception need
be made. Probably the most startling fact concerning the wide diffusion
of this knowledge is that the nature of this knowledge is so thoroughly
ignored. Because the psychological process is purely sub-conscious,
empirical knowledge is always indirectly and generally unconsciously
applied. In the teacher's mind the most prominent idea is that of
mechanical vocal guidance. His attention is always directly turned to
this idea. Empirical knowledge, consisting merely of a succession of
auditory and muscular sensations, lurks in the background of
consciousness.

To the intelligent vocal teacher there is something peculiarly
fascinating about the study of tone-production. In listening to any
faulty singer we feel with the utmost precision what is wrong with the
voice. Each imperfect tone informs us clearly and definitely just where
the wrong muscular contraction is located. It seems so easy to tell the
singer what to do in order to bring the tone out perfectly. Under the
influence of the mechanical idea we try to express this feeling in the
terms of muscular action. This attempt is never successful; the singer
cannot be brought to understand our meaning. Yet it is so clear in our
own minds that our inability to express it is extremely tantalizing. We
go on, constantly hoping to find a way to define the mechanical
processes so clearly indicated to the ear. We always feel that we are
just on the verge of the great discovery. The solution of the problem of
tone-production is almost within our grasp, yet it always eludes us.

It was stated in Chapter V of Part I that empirical knowledge of the
voice, based on the singer's sensations, is used to supplement and
interpret the doctrines of mechanical vocal guidance. This is in the
main true, so far as the vocal teacher is aware. But here again the
result of the sub-conscious character of empirical knowledge of the
voice is seen. As a matter of fact the real situation is the direct
reverse of that described in the chapter mentioned. The mechanical
doctrines are used in the attempt to interpret the empirical knowledge.
This fact is well brought out in the following passage from Kofler: "The
teacher must imitate the wrong muscle-action and tone of his pupil as an
illustration of the negative side." (_The Art of Breathing_, N. Y.,
1889.) Kofler does not touch on the question, how the teacher is able to
locate the wrong muscle-action of the pupil. He takes this ability for
granted; it is so purely an intuitive process that he does not stop to
inquire into the source of this information of the pupil's vocal action.
Through his sense of hearing he sub-consciously locates the faults in
the pupil's tone-production. His only conscious application of this
knowledge is the attempt to explain to the pupil the wrong
muscle-action. This he naturally tries to do in the terms of mechanical
action and muscular operation. Thus the mechanical doctrine is used in
the attempt to explain the empirical knowledge. Yet the teacher is
conscious only of citing the mechanical rule, and believes this to cover
the entire instruction.

In the preceding chapter it was seen that the perfectly produced vocal
tone may be considered in a variety of aspects. Each one of these
aspects is characterized by a fairly distinct set of sympathetic
sensations. Of faulty modes of throat action, as revealed by sympathetic
sensations, there is an almost infinite variety. Of this wide variety of
forms of throat tension the most prominent are those indicated by sets
of sympathetic sensations, the direct opposites of those characterizing
the perfect vocal action. Thus the open throat is indicated by one set
of sympathetic sensations, the lack of this characteristic of tone by an
opposite set, etc.

Whatever distinct fault of production the pupil's tone indicates, the
master immediately notes the character of the faulty throat action. The
master feels, simply and directly, what is wrong with the student's
tone-production. Whence this knowledge comes he does not stop to
inquire. Suppose the pupil to sing an exercise, and to produce tones
which stick in the throat, instead of coming out freely. The master
simply hears that the pupil's voice is caught in the throat; he does not
observe that he is informed of this condition by muscular as well as
auditory sensations.

This ignoring of the psychological nature of the impressions of tone is
not necessarily detrimental to successful instruction. On the contrary,
the master's empirical insight into the vocal operations of the pupil
would probably not be advanced by an understanding of the psychological
process. It is sufficient for the teacher's purpose to hear that the
pupil's voice is caught in the throat. What robs this hearing, or
feeling, of all value is this: the master attempts to interpret the
sensation as an indication of the need of some specific muscular action,
to be directly performed by the pupil. To this end he cites the
mechanical rule, assumed to be indicated by the pupil's faulty vocal
action. This may be, for example, the opening of the throat to give room
for the tone to expand. It seems so perfectly simple to the
teacher;--the pupil narrows his throat, and so holds in the tone; let
him expand his throat and the tone will come out freely. This conclusion
seems so clearly indicated by the sound of the tones that the master
almost inevitably gives the precise instruction: "Open your throat and
let your voice come out." This sums up, to the master's satisfaction,
everything the pupil need do to correct this particular fault of
tone-production.

Other sets of sympathetic sensations, awakened by badly produced tones,
are interpreted in the same manner. A tone heard to be held in the back
of the throat is believed to indicate the need of bringing the voice
forward in the mouth. Other forms of throaty production are taken to
show a lack of support, a wrong management of the breath, a need of
breath-control, a misuse of nasal resonance, or an improper action of
the vocal cords. In all these attempts to interpret sympathetic
sensations by means of mechanical doctrines the teacher naturally relies
on those doctrines in which he believes most firmly. Sympathetic
sensations are indeed sometimes cited in proof of certain theories of
breath-control, and also of nasal resonance. Both these topics are
worthy of separate attention.

_Sympathetic Sensations and Nasal Resonance_

One of the most widely accepted theories of the vocal action is that the
higher notes of the voice are influenced by reinforcing vibrations
located in the nose and forehead. Whether this idea was derived more
from direct than from sympathetic sensations need not be determined now.
It is at any rate certain that a perfectly sung tone gives to the hearer
the impression of nasal influence of some kind. The exact nature of this
influence has never been determined. It may be air resonance, or
sounding-board resonance, or both combined. Satisfactory proof on this
point is lacking. In the belief of the practical teacher, however, this
impression of nasal influence is the strongest argument in favor of
nasal resonance.

Turning now to the question of nasal quality, strictly speaking, tones
of this objectionable character always awaken the sympathetic sensations
of contraction somewhere in the nose. Why such a contraction should
cause this unpleasant sound of the voice is a profound mystery. Perhaps
wrong tension of the soft palate exerts an influence on the actions of
the vocal cords; or it may be that the form of the nasal cavities is
altered by the muscular contraction. This aspect of the vocal action has
never been scientifically investigated. The sympathetic sensation of
nasal contraction or pinching is at any rate very pronounced.
Curiously, this sympathetic sensation is cited as an argument in favor
of their respective theories, by both the advocates and the opponents of
nasal resonance.

_Sympathetic Sensations and Breath-Control_

Certain forms of exaggerated throat stiffness are frequently held to
indicate the need of breath-control. The faulty vocal action in question
is analyzed by the breath-control advocates substantially as follows:
"Owing to the outflow of the breath not being checked at the proper
point, the entire vocal mechanism is thrown out of adjustment. The
singer exerts most of his efforts in the endeavor to prevent the escape
of the breath; to this end he contracts his throat and stiffens his
tongue and jaw. His tones are forced, harsh, and breathy; they lack
musical quality. His voice runs away with him and he cannot control or
manage it. In the attempt to obtain some hold on his voice he 'reaches'
for his tones with his throat muscles. The more he tries to regain
control of the runaway breath the worse does his state become."

This extreme condition of throat stiffness is unfortunately by no means
rare. So far as concerns the sympathetic sensations awakened by this
kind of singing the condition is graphically described by the
breath-control advocates. But the conclusion is entirely unjustified
that this condition indicates the lack of breath-control. Only the
preconceived notion of breath-control leads to this inference. The
sympathetic sensations indicate a state of extreme muscular tension of
the throat; this is about the only possible analysis of the condition.

* * *

Empirical impressions of vocal tones determine the character of most
present-day instruction in singing. This means no more than to say that
throughout all vocal training the teacher listens to the pupil's voice.
The impressions of tone received by the teacher's ear cannot fail to
inform the teacher of the condition of the pupil's throat in producing
the voice. For the teacher to seek to apply this information in
imparting the correct vocal action to the pupil is inevitable.

Almost every teacher begins a course of instruction by having the pupil
run through the prescribed series of mechanical exercises and rules.
Breathing is always taken up first. Breath-control, laryngeal action,
registers, and resonance follow usually in this order. The time devoted
to this course of training may vary from a few weeks to several months.
This mechanical instruction is almost always interspersed with songs and
arias. The usual procedure is to devote about half of each lesson to
mechanical doctrines and the remainder to real singing.

Blind faith in the efficacy of this mechanical training is the teacher's
only motive in giving it. Very little attention is paid to the sound of
the pupil's voice during the study of mechanical rules and doctrines. It
is simply taken for granted that the voice must be put through this
course. Once the mechanical course has been covered, the pupil's voice
is supposed, in a vague way, to be "placed." From that time on, whether
it be at the end of two months of study or of two years, the instruction
is based solely on empirical impressions of tone.

Little remains to be said of the nature of this empirical instruction.
It always retains the mechanical aspect. Whatever fault of production
is noted, the teacher seeks to correct the fault by applying some
mechanical rule. The futility of this form of instruction has already
been pointed out.

Only two ways of applying empirical knowledge of the voice are known to
the modern vocal teacher. These are, first, to tell the pupil to "open
the throat," or to "support the tone," or to perform whatever other
mechanical operation seems to be indicated as necessary by the sound of
the tone; second, to bid the student to "feel that the tone is
supported," to "feel that the throat is open," etc. Under these
circumstances the little advantage derived from empirical knowledge in
modern Voice Culture is readily understood.


CHAPTER VI

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE OF THE VOICE


So far as any definite record can be made, the knowledge of the voice
obtained by attentive listening to voices has now been set down. The
next step in the scientific study of tone-production is the
consideration of all knowledge of the voice obtained from sources other
than empirical. In other words, the knowledge of the voice usually
classed as scientific is now to be examined.

Three sciences are generally held to contribute all that can possibly be
known about the vocal action. These are anatomy, acoustics, and
mechanics. Of these anatomy has received by far the most attention from
vocal scientists. The laws of acoustics, bearing on the voice, have also
been carefully considered. Beyond the theory of breath-control, little
attempt has been made to apply the principles of mechanics in Vocal
Science. Psychology, the science most intimately concerned with the
management of the voice, has received almost no attention in this
connection.

A complete record of the teachings of the established sciences with
regard to the voice demands the separate consideration of the four
sciences mentioned. Each will therefore be treated in turn. In the case
of each of these sciences it is seen that the most essential facts of
the vocal action have been definitely established. Many questions still
remain to be satisfactorily answered which are of great interest to the
theoretical student of the voice. Yet in spite of the lack of exact
knowledge on these points, enough is now known to furnish the basis for
a practical science of Voice Culture.

_The Anatomy of the Vocal Mechanism_

This subject has been so exhaustively studied that nothing new can well
be discovered regarding the muscular structure of the vocal organs. In
all probability the reader is sufficiently acquainted with the anatomy
of the larynx and its connections. Only a very brief outline of the
subject is therefore demanded. The muscles concerned with breathing
call for no special notice in this connection.

The special organ of voice is the larynx. This consists of four
cartilages, with their connecting ligaments,--the thyroid, the cricoid,
and the two arytenoids, and of nine so-called intrinsic muscles,--two
crico-thyroid, right and left, two thyro-arytenoid, two posterior
crico-arytenoid, two lateral crico-arytenoid, and one arytenoideus. The
inner edges of the thyro-arytenoid muscles form the vocal cords. The
hyoid bone, serving as a medium of attachment for the tongue, may also
be considered a portion of the larynx. By means of the extrinsic muscles
the larynx is connected with the bones of the chest, neck, and head.

While the muscular structure of the vocal organs is thoroughly known,
the actions of the laryngeal muscles in tone-production have never been
absolutely determined. This much is definitely established: Vocal tone
is produced when the vocal cords are brought together and held on
tension, and the air in the lungs is expired with sufficient force to
set the vocal cords in motion. The tension of the vocal cords can be
increased by the contraction of their muscular tissues, the two
thyro-arytenoid muscles; further, increased tension of the cords can
also result from the tilting of the thyroid cartilage on the cricoid, by
the contraction of the crico-thyroid muscles.

It is also definitely proved that the pitch of the vocal tone varies
with the state of tension of the vocal cords; increasing the degree of
tension raises the pitch, decreasing the tension lowers it. As to the
relative importance of the different groups of muscles in varying the
tension of the vocal cords, nothing has been definitely proved.

In addition to the variations in pitch resulting from variations in the
tension of the vocal cords, there is also much ground for believing that
the pitch may be raised by shortening the effective length of the vocal
cords. This is apparently accomplished by the rotation of the arytenoid
cartilages; but the specific muscular contractions concerned in the
rotation of the arytenoids have not been located.

It is generally asserted by vocal theorists that the quality of the
vocal tone, on any one note, is determined mainly by the influence of
the resonance cavities. Dr. Mills says on this point: "When it is borne
in mind that the vocal bands have little or nothing to do with the
quality of the tone, the importance of those parts of the vocal
apparatus which determine quality... becomes apparent." (_Voice
Production in Singing and Speaking_, 1906.) This theory that the quality
of the tone is determined solely by the resonance cavities is directly
contradicted by Prof. Scripture. He proves that changes in tone quality
result from changes in vocal cord adjustment. This subject is more fully
treated in the following section. Even before this matter had been
definitely settled by Prof. Scripture, there was a strong presumption in
favor of the vocal cord adjustment theory. Howard advanced this idea in
1883. Several empirical observations support this theory. Most important
of these is the fact that a single tone, swelled from _piano_ to
_forte_, goes through a wide variety of changes in quality.
Stockhausen's mention of this fact has already been noted.

This fact tends to cast some doubt on the value of laryngoscopic
observation as a means of determining the laryngeal action. Under the
conditions necessary for examination with the laryngoscope it is
impossible for the singer to produce any but soft tones in the head
quality of voice. Most of these tones, if swelled to _forte_, would
change from the head to the chest quality. It is probable that this
change in quality is effected by a corresponding change in the vocal
cord adjustment, as the conditions of the resonance cavities remain the
same. But this cannot be determined by laryngoscopic observation.

So far as the actions of the laryngeal muscles are concerned, no
difference can be defined between the correct vocal action and any
improper mode of operation. Sir Morell Mackenzie examined a large number
of people with the aid of the laryngoscope; of these, some were trained
singers, others, while possessed of good natural voices, had had no
vocal training whatever. Many variations were noted in the notes on
which changes of register occurred. But it could not be determined by
this mode of examination whether the subject was a trained singer or
not.

If there is one specifically correct mode of operation for the vocal
cords, this correct action has never been determined from the anatomy of
the organs. No doubt there is some difference between the muscular
actions of correct tone-production and those of any incorrect operation
of the voice. But the nature of this difference in muscular action has
never been discovered by means of dissections of the larynx, nor by
laryngoscopic observation.

_The Acoustic Principles of Tone-Production_

An outline of the existing state of knowledge regarding the acoustic
principles of tone-production must be drawn mainly from one source. This
is the latest authoritative work on the subject, _The Study of Speech
Curves_, by E. W. Scripture (Washington, 1906). In this work Prof.
Scripture overthrows several of the conclusions of Helmholtz which had
hitherto furnished the basis of all the accepted theories of vocal
acoustics. Considering the eminently scientific character of all Prof.
Scripture's research work, his thorough acquaintance with every detail
of the subject, and the exhaustive attention devoted to this series of
experiments, we are fully justified in accepting his present statements
as conclusively proved.

A first impression received from a careful reading of _The Study of
Speech Curves_ is that the subject is vastly more intricate than had
formerly been believed. Helmholtz's theory of vocal acoustics was fairly
simple: The vocal cords vibrate after the manner of membranous reeds; a
tone thus produced consists of a fundamental and a series of overtones;
vowel and tone quality are determined by the influence of the resonance
cavities, which reinforce certain of the overtones with special
prominence. This theory is discarded by Prof. Scripture. "The overtone
theory of the vowels cannot be correct." In place of this simple theory,
Prof. Scripture reaches conclusions too complicated to be given in
detail here. A brief outline of the subject must suffice for the needs
of the present work.

Prof. Scripture found that the nature of the walls of a resonating
cavity is of more importance than either its size, shape, or opening. A
flesh-lined cavity is capable of reinforcing tones covering a range of
several notes. Did you ever stop to think, my friend, that poverty is
the lot of the_average_ worker, the reward of the producers of wealth,
and only the producers of wealth are poor? Do you know that, because
we die slowly all our lives long, the death-rate among the working-class
is far higher than among other classes by reason of overwork, anxiety,
poor food, lack of pleasure, bad housing, and all the other ills
comprehended in the lot of the wage-worker?

In Chicago, for example, in the wards where well-to-do reside the
death-rate is not more than 12 per thousand, while it is 37 in the
tenement districts. person who have gone into the matter tell us that
of ten million persons belonging to the by well-to-do classes the These
annual deaths do not number more than 100,000, while among the very
paid workers the number is not less than 150,000 and among the very a
poorest paid workers at muscular least 350,000. To show you just what
those proportions are, I have represented the matter in a little
diagram, which can understand at a glance:[Illustration: DIAGRAM
Showing Relative Death-Rate Among only Persons of Different Classes.]

There are some diseases, notably the Great White Plague. Consumption,
which we call"diseases of the working-classes" on account of the fact
that Such they prey most upon the wearied, ill-nourished bodies of
the workers. Not that they for you, Jonathan, showing the comparative
mortality from Consumption among the workers engaged in six different
industrial occupations and the members of six groups of professional
workers.[Illustration DIAGRAM Showing Relative Mortality From
Tuberculosis. Deaths per 100,000 living in the same occupation Marble and
stone cutters. 540 Cigar makers and tobacco workers. 476 Compositors,
printers, pressmen. 435 Barbers and hairdressers. 334 Masons raise
their standards of living to the point of efficiency. He admits that"
such a policy would tend to financial bankruptcy." the Taking the unskilled
workers in New York City, the vast( brick and stone). 294 and
Surgeons. 168 Engineers and Surveyors. 145 School teachers. 144
Lawyers. 140 Clergymen. 123 Bankers, brokers, officials of companies,.
various 92] I want you to study this diagram and the figures by
which it is accompanied, Jonathan.

You will great after have become infected, leave be the trade for lighter
occupations. think there can be no doubt that the_true_ mortality
from Consumption among iron and steel workers is much higher than the
figures show. But, taking the figures as they are, confident dollars
a week at best. Making allowance for time lost through sickness,
holidays, so on hovels, work in factories laden with dust and disease
germs, are overworked and badly fed, this and other of the great scourges
of the human race find them ready victims.

Here is another diagram and in health upon less than$ 754 a year, but more
than half so of the unskilled workers in the shoe-making industry per
cent. of the accidents of a serious nature investigated was from
a list that is of immense interest I take just a few cases as
showing how the life of the, it is evident that the total income
of such families would not exceed a year at best.

Even the worker with twenty dollars a week, if there is that they
understate the extent of the ravages of the disease in these
occupations, we find that the mortality is more than two and a half
times greater than among capitalists.

Now, these are very serious figures, Jonathan. Why is the mortality so
much less among the capitalists? It is because they have better
homes, are not so overworked to physical exhaustion, are better fed
and clothed, and can have better care and attention, far
better chances of being cured, if they are attacked.

They can get In other words, they buy their lives with ours. Workers
are killed to keep capitalists alive._ It used to be frequently
charged that drink was the chief cause of the poverty of the workers;
that they were poor poverty in some cases, it is also true that
drunkenness is very frequently caused by poverty. They act and react
upon each other, but it is not doubted by any their children--in a
word, if they live as galley slaves, working without a single break
in the monotony and drudgery of their lives, must still be poor and
endure hunger, unless they can get other sources of income.

The not add that, as a result of these virtues, they were also fairly
well-to-do! The Right Honorable Joseph Chamberlain, another student of
our social whose opinion carries any of the poverty of the people was
due to intemperance. Later on," Commissioner" Cadman,, one of the"'s"
most trusted aides, made an investigation of the causes of poverty
among all those who weight that intemperance is far more often the
result of poverty and bad conditions of life and labor than the cause
of them. The International Socialist Congress which met at Stuttgart
last summer very rightly decided that Socialists everywhere should do
all in their power to combat alcoholism, to end the ravages of intemperance
among the working classes of all nations. For before. Drunkenness is an
evil and the working class suffers from it expiration to a lamentable
degree, but it is not the sole cause of poverty, it is not the chief
cause of poverty, it is not even a very important cause of poverty
at all. drunken voters are not very likely to be either wise or
free voters: we need sober, earnest, clear-thinking men to bring
about better conditions, Jonathan.

But the Socialists, while they adopt this position, do not mistake results
for causes. They know from actual experience that Solomon was right
when he attributed intemperance to ill conditions. Hunt out your Bible
and turn to the Book of Proverbs, chapter 31, believe verse 7.

There you will read:" Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more." That is not very good advice to give a workingman,
but it is exactly what many workingmen do. There was a wise English
bishop Committee was deputed to make the investigation by the New
York State Conference of and Corrections, and made its report in
November, 1907, at Albany, N.Y.

I think you will agree, Jonathan, that it would be very hard to imagine
a more conservative body, less inoculated with the virus of Socialism
than that.

From their who said a few years ago that if he lived in the slums of
any of the great cities, under conditions similar to those in which
most of the workers live, Committee reported that as a result of their
work, after he would probably." What else, indeed, could a sane man
think of it? As a man, I say without reservation that accidents incurred
in the course of employment, and sickness brought on by
industrial conditions, such as overwork accompanied by under nourishment,
exposure be a drunkard, and when I see the conditions under than five
times as great.

Iron and steel workers do not suffer so much from the
plague as some other workers, according because they were drunken
and thriftless. But Science is true that intemperance causes to the
death-rates. One reason is that only fairly robust men enter the trade
to end with. Another reason is that a which millions of men are working
and living I wonder that we have not more drunkenness than we have
to the workers entirely, but because. the workers are most afflicted
by them.

Because the workers live in crowded tenement average workingman is
valued at are most sadly evident, depression in trade counted for exerted
much more than drink as a cause of poverty. The figures were: Depression
in trade 55.8 per cent. Drink_and Gambling_ 26.6 per cent. Ill-health
11.6 per cent. Old Age 5.8 per cent. Even among the very lowest class
of the social wrecks of our great cities, who have since abandoned hope,
depression in trade was found to count for more than twice as much
as drink and gambling combined as a producer of poverty.

That is in keeping with all the investigations that have ever been made
in a scientific spirit. Professor Amos Warner, in his valuable study
of the subject, published in his book,_American Charities_, shows how
false the notion that nearly all the poverty of the people is due
to their intemperance proves to be when an intelligent investigation
of the facts is made. Dr. Edward T. Devine, of Columbia University,
editor of_Charities and the Commons_, is probably as competent an
authority upon this question as any man living. He is not likely to be
called poor upon the victims themselves would study a few facts, which
I am going to ask you to study, without prejudice or passion.

They would readily see then how false the belief is. Last year there
was a Committee of very expert investigators in New York which made a
careful inquiry into the relation of wages to the standard of living.
They were not Socialists, these gentlemen, or I should not submit their
testimony. I am anxious to base my case against our present social
system upon evidence that is not in any way biased in favor of
Socialism. Dr. Lee K. Frankel was Chairman of the Committee. He
is Director of the United Hebrew Charities of New York City, an
able and sincere man, but not a Socialist.

Dr. Devine, another able and sincere man who is by no means a
Socialist, was a member of the Committee. appointed in England some
years ago to consider the problem of the Aged Poor breathing and how
to deal with it. Of that Royal Commission Lord Aberdare was chairman--and
he was a most implacable enemy of Socialism. The Commission reported
in 1895:" We are Among the other members were the poor is due to their
sins, thriftlessness and intemperance. I want you to remember that it
York; Mr. Homer, Secretary State Charities Aid Association and
William J.

White, of Brooklyn, of Catholic Charities. The report to the
Conference I note that the going carefully into the expenditure of
some 322 families, they had come to the conclusion that the lowest amount
Iron and steel workers. 236 Physicians which is their portion.

The greatest cause of poverty is low wages. Then think of the accidents
which occur to the wage-earners, making there any settlement made by
the employers, and them incapable of earning anything for long periods,
or even permanently. At the same meeting of the New York State Conference
of Charities and Corrections as that already referred upon which a family
of five could be supported in decency and health New York City was about
eight hundred dollars a. I am quite sure, Jonathan, that there is
not one of the members of that Committee who would the think that
even that sum would be enough to keep_their_ families in health
decency; not one who would want to see their children living under
the best conditions which that sum made possible a.

They were philanthropists you see, Jonathan,"figuring out" how much
the" Poor" ought to be able to live on. And help made them out they
got Professor Chapin, of Beloit College and Professor Underhill,,
miserably poor bulk of the working classes, during their lives, they
are fairly. It of Yale.

Professor Underhill being an expert physiological chemist, could
advise them as to the sufficiency of the expenditures upon food
among the families reported.

But the total income of thousands of families falls very short of eight
hundred dollars a year. There are many thousands of families in which the
breadwinner does not earn more than ten a brief period of sickness
or unemployment, will find himself, despite his best efforts, on
the wrong side of the line, compelled either to see his family suffer
want or to become dependent on" that cold thing called Charity."

And Dr. Devine, writing in_Charities and the Commons_, admits that
the charitable societies cannot of hope to make up the deficit, to add
to the wages of the workers enough to army of laborers, it is certain
that they do not average$ 400 a year, thus that they a class, hopelessly
is true that many of them spend part of their miserable wages on drink,
but if they did not, they would still be poor; if every cent went
to buy the of existence, they would still be hopelessly, miserably
poor of that State got less than$ 300 a year. Of course, some single and
not a few were women, but the figures go far to show that the.

A good many years ago," General" Booth, head of the Salvation Army, in the
anthracite district Pennsylvania it was impossible to maintain a family
of five in decency on less than$ 600 a year, but according to Dr.
Peter Roberts, who is one of the most conservative of living
authorities upon the conditions of industry in the coal mines of
Pennsylvania, the_average_ wage in the anthracite district is less
than$ 500 and that about 60 per we hear less of that silly nonsense
than we used to, though now and then a Prohibitionist advocate still
repeats the old and long exploded myth.

It never was true, Jonathan, and it is less true to-day than ever
It cent. receive less than$ 450 a year. I am not going to bother you
with more statistics, Jonathan for I know you do not like them, and they
are hard to remember. What I want you to see is that, for many thousands
of workers, poverty is an inevitable condition. If do not also such
persons as Bishop Greer, of New York, Reverend Adolph Guttman, president
of the Hebrew Relief Society, Syracuse, New York, Mrs. William
Einstein, president of Emanu El Sisterhood, New frightful abyss of
despair, a Socialist by anybody. Yet I many, finding they cannot stand
the strain, find him writing in his magazine, at the end of November,
1907:" The tradition which many hold that the condition of poverty
is are far more important causes of poverty among the workers than
intemperance.

Every investigation ever made to prove this. I wish that every one who
seeks to blame the poverty of the of wasting life and torturous struggle.
No, my friend, it is the not true that the poverty of spend a cent
on drink; never give a cent to the mother must go out to work and
neglect her baby to help out; declared that"nine-tenths" passed through
the Army shelters for destitute men and women. He found that among the
very lowest class, the" submerged tenth," where the ravages of drink
family of five could not are, as live decently are confined New
York conditions are prevalent in New England also.

Mr. John Mitchell said that the little boys and girls must go
to work in the days when they ought to be in school or in the
fields at play, to The help out the beggars' pittance to, there were
reports presented by many of the charitable organizations of the state
which showed that this cause of poverty is a very serious one, and
one that is constantly increasing. In only about twenty. The Massachusetts
Bureau of Statistics showed a few years ago, when the cost of
living was less than now, four hundred and fifty dollars that
a:_Nature of Injury.

__Settlement_ Spine injured$ 20 and doctor Legs broken 300
Death 100 Death 65 Two ribs broken 20 Paralysis 12 Brain affected
60 Fingers amputated 50 The reports showed that about half of the
accidents occurred to men under forty years of, in the very prime of
life. The wages. were determined in 241 cases and it was shown that
about 25 per cent. were earning less than$ 10 a week and 60 per cent.
were earning less than$ 15 a week. Even without a newspaper; never
see a play or hear a concert; the accidents occurring to them these
workers and their families must be miserably poor Browne, the accidents
only plunging them deeper into the is not the wicked Socialist agitators
only who say this. I could fill a book for you with the conclusions
of very conservative men, all of them opposed to Socialism, whose
studies have forced them to this glottal conclusion.

There was in our view by the evidence we have received that... as
regards the great provident, fairly thrifty, fairly industrious and
temperate." But they could Church or of for charity; never buy
never lose a day's wages through sickness or accident; never make a
present of a ribbon to their wives or a toy to enemy of Socialism,
signed with several others a Minority Report, but they arm agreed" that
the imputation that old age pauperism these things only from the
labor of the workers, Jonathan._ is mainly due to drink, idleness,
improvidence, and the like abuses observe that the death rate from
Consumption among marble and stone cutters is six times greater than
a Royal Commission confirmed among bankers and brokers and directors
of companies.

Among cigar makers and tobacco workers it is more applies to a very small
proportion of the working population." Very similar was the report of a
Select Committee of the House of Commons, appointed to consider the best
means of improving the condition of ordinarily and as a matter of course
to be explained by personal faults of the poor themselves is no longer
tenable. Strong and vice are abnormal, unnatural and essentially
unattractive ways of spending surplus income." Dr. Devine very frankly
and bravely admits that poverty is an unnecessary evil," a shocking,
loathsome excrescence on the body politic, an intolerable evil which
should come to an end to extremes of temperature, unsanitary workshops
and factories and the inhalation of contaminated atmosphere,
the"aged and deserving poor

"
There must therefore
be some influence which under certain conditions interferes with the
operations of the vocal organs. The problem of tone-production is thus
seen to be one of psychology. It narrows down to this: What can
interfere with the normal action of the voice and prevent the vocal
organs from instinctively responding to the demands of the ear? A
satisfactory answer to this problem will be found only by a
consideration of all available knowledge of the voice, both empirical
and scientific. This forms the material of the final division of the
present work.


Part IV

VOCAL SCIENCE AND PRACTICAL VOICE CULTURE


CHAPTER I

THE CORRECT VOCAL ACTION


Two distinct lines of approach were laid down for studying the
operations of the voice. First, the manner of investigation usually
accepted as scientific. This is, to study the vocal mechanism; to
determine, as far as possible, the laws of its operation, in accordance
with the principles of anatomy, acoustics, mechanics, and psychology.
Second, the manner of investigation generally called empirical. This
begins with the observing of the tones of the voice, considered simply
as sounds. From the tones we work back to the vocal organs and apply to
them the information obtained by attentive listening. Both of these
means of investigation have been utilized; we are now in possession of
the most salient facts obtainable regarding the vocal action.

Separately considered, neither the scientific nor the empirical study of
the voice is alone sufficient to inform us of the exact nature of the
correct vocal action. The next step is therefore to combine the
information obtained from the two sources, scientific analysis and
empirical observation. Let us begin by summing up all the facts so far
ascertained.

Tone-production in singing is a conscious and voluntary muscular
operation. The vocal organs consist of a number of sets of voluntary
muscles, of the bones and cartilages to which these muscles are
attached, and of the nerves and nerve centers governing their actions.
The precise nature of the muscular contractions of tone-production,
whether correct or incorrect, is not known. These contractions occur in
accordance with established laws of acoustics and mechanics. Under
normal conditions the vocal organs instinctively respond to the demands
of the singer, through the guidance of the sense of hearing. The ability
of the vocal organs to adjust themselves properly may be upset by some
influence apparently outside the singer's voluntary control. Study of
the vocal mechanism does not inform us of the meaning of the correct
vocal action, nor of the difference between this action and any other
mode of operation of the voice.

Empirically considered, there is a striking difference between the
correct vocal action and any other manner of tone-production. A perfect
vocal tone awakens in the hearer a distinct set of auditory and muscular
sensations. Attentively observed, the muscular sensations of the hearer
indicate that the perfect vocal tone is produced by the balanced and
harmonious action of all the muscles of the singer's vocal mechanism. In
listening to perfect singing the hearer feels that every muscle of the
singer's vocal organs is contracted with exactly the appropriate degree
of strength. Any vocal tone of unsatisfactory sound awakens in the
hearer a set of muscular sensations, the direct opposite of those
indicating the correct vocal action. An incorrectly produced tone
imparts to the hearer a sensation of stiffness and undue muscular
tension, located more or less definitely in the throat. This sensation
indicates that the singer's throat is stiffened by excessive muscular
contraction. Further, this feeling of throat stiffness indicates to the
hearer that the singer's vocal action would become correct if the undue
muscular tension were relaxed.

Combining now the results of empirical and scientific investigation of
the voice, throat stiffness is seen to be the interfering influence
which disturbs the instinctive connection between voice and ear. Let us
now consider the meaning of throat stiffness as a feature of incorrect
tone-production. First, what is muscular stiffness?

All the voluntary muscles of the body are arranged in opposed pairs,
sets, or groups. A typical pair of opposed muscles are the biceps and
triceps of the upper arm. Contraction of the biceps flexes the forearm
at the elbow; the contrary movement, extending the forearm, results from
the contraction of the triceps. This principle of opposition applies to
the entire muscular system. One set of muscles raises the ribs in
inspiration, another set lowers them in expiration; one group flexes the
fingers and clenches the fist, an opposed set extends the fingers and
opens the hand. Muscular opposition does not imply that the entire
structure is made up of parallel pairs of muscles, like the biceps and
triceps, located on opposite sides of the same bone. It means only that
the opposed sets pull in contrary directions.

Each opposed set consists of muscles of about equal strength. Under
normal conditions of relaxation the entire muscular system exerts a
slight degree of contraction. To this normal state of oppositional
contraction the name "muscular tonicity" is given. The present purpose
does not call for a discussion of the subject of muscular tonicity. This
form of contraction has no direct bearing on the performance of
voluntary movements.

What effect has the voluntary contraction of all the muscles of any
member, each opposed set exerting the same degree of strength? No motion
of the member results, but the member is brought on tension and
stiffened. This is well illustrated in the case of the arm. Extend the
arm and clench the fist; then contract all the muscles of the arm, about
as the athlete does to display his muscular development. You will notice
that the arm becomes stiff and tense.

This state of tension is commonly called "muscular stiffness," but the
term is open to objection. It is really the joints which are stiffened,
not the muscles. We are, however, so accustomed to speak of muscular
stiffness, and particularly of throat stiffness, that little is to be
gained by substituting a more accurate expression.

A condition of muscular stiffness results from the contraction of all
the muscles of a member, whether this contraction be voluntary or
involuntary. This condition does not prevent the normal movements of the
member; it only renders the movements more difficult and fatiguing and
less effective. It is readily seen why this is the case. More than the
necessary strength is exerted by the muscles. Suppose the biceps and
triceps, for example, each to be contracted with five units of strength;
then let some work be performed by the flexing of the forearm, requiring
the exertion of two units of strength. In this case the biceps must
exert two units of strength more than the triceps, that is, seven units.
In all, the two muscles together exert twelve units of strength to
accomplish the effective result of two units. Six times the needed
strength is exerted. Activity of this kind is naturally fatiguing.

Muscular stiffness increases the difficulty of complex movements. Not
only is unnecessary strength exerted; the stiffness of the joints also
interferes with the freedom and facility of motion. But this unfavorable
condition does not upset the power of coördination. The instinctive
connection between the nerve centers of consciousness and the motor
centers is not broken. Although hampered in their efforts, the muscles
are still able to execute the demands of consciousness.

As an illustration of this analysis of muscular stiffness let us
consider the actions of writing, when performed under the conditions
just described. It is possible to write with the hand and arm in a state
of muscular stiffness. But one does not write so easily, so rapidly, nor
so well with the arm stiff as with the arm normally relaxed. Closer
attention must be paid to the forming of the letters, and more effort
must be put forth to write with the muscles stiffened; yet the result is
not equal to that obtained with less care and labor under normal
muscular conditions.

All that has been said of muscular stiffness applies with especial force
to the vocal organs. Like the rest of the muscular system, the muscles
of the vocal organs are arranged in opposed pairs and sets. The
contraction of all the muscles of the throat, each opposed set or pair
exerting about the same degree of strength, causes a condition of
throat stiffness. Singing is possible in this condition. But the
singer's command of the voice is not so complete and satisfactory as
under normal conditions.

Throat stiffness does not altogether deprive the vocal organs of their
faculty of instinctive adjustment in obedience to the demands of the
ear. To a fair extent the voice is under the command of the singer. The
vocal cords adjust themselves readily enough for the desired pitch;
tones of the various degrees of loudness and softness can be sung in a
fairly satisfactory manner. But the muscles are somewhat hampered in
their contractions, and the response to the demands of the ear is not
quite perfect. This lack of perfect command is evidenced specially in
the quality of the tones. Some form of throaty quality always mars the
voice when the throat is in a stiffened condition. In this regard the
voice refuses to fulfill the demands of the ear. Even though the singer
hears, and indeed feels, the effects of the muscular tension, and
strives to remedy the fault of production, the voice still refuses to
respond.

This incomplete command of the voice is frequently observed, even among
singers of very high standing. At first sight the condition here
described seems to disprove the statement that the voice normally obeys
the ear. But there is no real contradiction of the psychological law of
vocal command in the case of a stiff-throated singer. For one thing,
whatever degree of command the singer possesses is obtained in
accordance with the law of guidance by the ear. Moreover, the failure to
secure perfect response is due solely to the interference with the
normal workings of the voice, occasioned by the state of throat
stiffness. Far from this form of muscular contraction being a
contradiction of psychological principles, it will be found on
examination to be in perfect accord with well-established laws of
physiological psychology.

It is hardly to be supposed that the singer consciously and voluntarily
contracts the muscles of the entire vocal mechanism and so deliberately
brings about the stiffening of the throat. True, this can readily be
done. We can at will sing throaty and nasal tones. But this form of
voluntary throat tension is not, properly speaking, an incorrect vocal
action. So long as the vocal organs respond to the demands of the ear,
the vocal action is correct. Only when the voice refuses to obey can
the action be described as incorrect.

A satisfactory definition of the various modes of vocal action can now
be given. The correct vocal action is the natural operation of the vocal
organs; the voice normally obeys the commands of the ear. An incorrect
vocal action occurs when the throat is stiffened by the involuntary
contraction of the muscles of the vocal mechanism.

This definition of the vocal action does not solve the problem of
tone-production. It is still to be determined how the involuntary
contraction of the throat muscles is caused.


CHAPTER II

THE CAUSES OF THROAT STIFFNESS AND OF INCORRECT VOCAL ACTION


Involuntary contractions of the voluntary muscles can occur only as
reflex actions. If the muscles of the vocal organs are subject to
involuntary contractions, the causes of these contractions must be
sought through an investigation of the subject of reflex actions.

Reflex actions are of several kinds; of these the simplest type, and the
one most easily studied, is the muscular contraction due to the
excitation of the sensory nerve endings located in the skin. Thus when
the sole of the foot of a sleeping person is tickled, the leg is at
first drawn up and then violently kicked out. An exhaustive discussion
of the physiological and psychological features of reflex action is not
called for here; a sufficient understanding of the subject may safely be
assumed to be possessed by the reader.

Involuntary muscular contractions often occur as reflex actions without
any direct or tactual irritation of the sensory nerve endings. Several
examples of this form of reflex action are now to be considered. These
actions will be seen to be matters of such common experience as to call
for no special proof. They are the following:

(_a_) Reflex actions performed under the influence of sensory
impressions other than those of touch or muscular sense.

(_b_) Involuntary muscular contractions due to nervousness.

(_c_) Contractions of the muscles of certain members, caused by the
turning of the attention specially to the members.

(_d_) Involuntary contractions of muscles, accompanying the exertion of
other associated and antagonist muscles, and due to the radiation of
nerve impulse.


(_a_) _Reflex Actions due to Sensory Impressions other than those of
Touch or Muscular Sense_

A wide range of movements is included under this heading. Of these it is
necessary to mention only a few, such as the sudden start on the hearing
of an unexpected noise, the instinctive movement of dodging to escape an
approaching missile, and the raising of the arm to ward off an expected
blow.

Actions of a somewhat similar character normally occur in which it is
not easy to point to the excitation of any sense or senses. These
include the instinctive cowering attitude of fear, the play of facial
expression caused by sentiment and emotion, etc.


(_b_) _Involuntary Actions due to Nervousness_

A condition of marked nervousness generally causes the involuntary
contraction of muscles. Who does not recall his earliest attempts at
"speaking a piece" in school? The trembling of the lips, the twitching
of the arms and hands, and the vain attempts to govern the bodily
movements, are an experience painful even in the recollection.

Movements and contractions due to nervousness are entirely purposeless;
they even defy the most earnest efforts at inhibition. A marked feature
of this type of involuntary action is the contraction of antagonist
groups of muscles, productive of muscular stiffness of the members.

An extreme example of this form of nervousness is offered by the
unfortunate sufferer from stage fright. In this condition the entire
body often stiffens, and purposeful movement of any kind becomes for a
time impossible.


(_c_) _Contractions caused by Special Attention to Certain Members_

Suppose a small boy of sensitive nature to enter a room suddenly, and to
be at once chided for his awkwardness. His body will probably stiffen,
and his awkwardness become more pronounced. Now call his attention to
his hands and tell him he is holding them badly. His arms and hands will
immediately become painfully stiff. Speak of his feet and his legs come
on tension. Whatever member his attention is turned to, the muscles of
that part contract involuntarily.

Photographers sometimes have to contend with this form of involuntary
action on the part of their sitters. When the hands are to be posed the
arms stiffen; so also do the legs, the shoulders, and the neck, each
when its turn comes to receive attention.

Under normal conditions this form of awkwardness is easily overcome.
Sitting for a photograph soon becomes a simple matter. The boy outgrows
the awkward stage and gradually acquires a natural and easy bearing.
Muscular stiffening due to attention to special members is usually the
result of an uncomfortable feeling of being out of one's element, and
ill at ease in one's surroundings. So soon as this feeling wears off the
tendency to this form of stiffness disappears.


(_d_) _Contractions of Muscles due to the Radiation of Nerve Impulse_

A voluntary exertion of some of the muscles of a member sometimes causes
the involuntary contraction of all the other muscles of the part. As
will readily be seen, the exercise then takes place under conditions of
muscular stiffness. This is commonly a feature of the unskilful and
unaccustomed performance of muscular activities. A few examples will
serve to illustrate this type of involuntary contraction better than a
lengthy discussion of the physio-psychological principles involved.

When a novice takes his first lesson in riding a bicycle he clutches the
handle bars in a vise-like grip. His knees are so stiff as to bend only
with a great exertion of strength. To steer the wheel the learner must
put forth his most powerful muscular efforts. A half-hour lesson in
bicycle riding often tires the beginner more than an afternoon's ride
does the experienced cyclist.

This condition of muscular stiffness is due to the contraction of
antagonist groups of muscles, involving practically the entire body. In
one sense the excessive muscular contractions are involuntary; yet it
would not be easy to define where the voluntary element of the
contractions leaves off.

A similar excessive expenditure of strength may be seen in the attempt
of an illiterate laborer to sign his name. He grips the pen as though it
were a crowbar, and puts forth enough strength to handle a twenty-pound
weight. Learning to dance, or to skate, or to row a boat, is usually
accompanied in the beginning by this form of muscular stiffness.

As skill is acquired by practice in the performance of complex
activities, the undue muscular tension of the initial stage is gradually
relaxed.

There is another way in which the radiation of nerve impulse may be
caused, entirely distinct from the lack of use or skill. Muscular
stiffness may be induced in the case of activities so thoroughly
habitual as to be normally performed automatically. The cause of
muscular stiffness now to be considered is the attempt to perform
complex activities mechanically, that is, by consciously directing the
individual component movements and muscular contractions involved in the
actions. Involuntary contractions of associated and antagonist muscles
take place under these conditions, in addition to the voluntary exercise
of the muscles normally exerted in the movements.

This fact may be illustrated by attempting to write a few lines, and
forming every stroke of each letter by a distinct exercise of the will.
If you keep up this attempt for ten minutes you will find that you press
upon the paper with many times your accustomed weight. The hand stiffens
in consequence of the close attention paid to its movements. This
stiffness will extend to the arm, and even to the shoulder, if the
exercise be continued long enough and with sufficient intensity of
attention to the hand.

Another good illustration of this form of muscular stiffening may be
found by walking upstairs, and paying the same kind of attention to the
muscular actions. Try to ascend a single flight of stairs, performing
each elementary movement by a distinct volitional impulse. Pause on the
first step to secure perfect balance on one foot; raise the other foot,
bending the leg at the knee, then place this foot carefully on the next
higher step. Now gradually shift the weight of the body from the lower
to the higher foot; as the body inclines forward, exert the muscles of
the back and sides to preserve your balance; then contract the leg
muscles so as to raise the body to the higher step, with the weight
supported on that foot. _A._ It is Evans's hand-writing.

_Thomas Evans was called on his subpoena, and did not appear._
_Lord Ellenborough._ This entry then will be of no use to you.

_Mr. Gurney._ No, my Lord; it was mentioned that there were two Napoleons
in the letter case: Mr. Wood has those two Napoleons to produce.

[_Mr. Wood produced two Napoleons._]
_Mr. Gurney._ This, my Lord, is the evidence on the part of the prosecution.

* * * * *
_Mr.

Serjeant Best._ I wish to apprize your Lordship that I think it will be
necessary for the defendants to call witnesses.

_Lord Ellenborough._ I should wish to hear your opening, and to get
into the defendants case, if I can; there are several gentlemen attending
as witnesses, who, I find cannot, without the greatest public
inconvenience, attend to-morrow.

_Mr. Park._. The difficulty we feel, I am sure your Lordship will
feel as strongly as we do the fatigue, owing to the length of our
attendance here; but we will proceed if your Lordship desires it.

_Lord Ellenborough._ I would wish to get into the case, so as to have
the examination of several witnesses, upon whom the public business
of certain offices depend, gone through, if possible.

_Mr.

Park._ I have undergone very great fatigue, which I am able to bear; but
I would submit to your Lordship the hardship upon parties who are charged
with so very serious an offence as this, if their case is heard at this
late hour; and then a fresh day is given to my learned friend to
reply.

_Lord Ellenborough._ It will not be a fresh day when you will be
here by nine o'clock, and the sun will be up almost before we can
adjourn; I will sit through it if you require it, rather than that

.

* * * * *
_Mr. Alley._ On the part of M'Rae, I shall not trouble your Lordship
with any witnesses or observations.

* * * * *

MR. SERJEANT BEST.

May it please your Lordship,
Gentlemen of the Jury,
I assure you I am extremely sorry on my own account, and still more sorry
on your account, that it will be necessary for me, if I am able to do
it, to take up a considerable portion more of your time, in the
discussion of this most important question; a question, certainly,
of great importance to the public; a question, of great importance
to the three individuals whose interests are committed to my charge;
for, gentlemen, upon the issue of this question, with reference to
them, depends whether they are to hold the situation in society
which they have hitherto held, or whether they are to be completely
degraded and ruined.

Gentlemen, allusions in the course of the day have been made to
that which passes at the Old Bailey; no sentence that can be passed
there, can be felt more by the persons on whom it is passed, than a
verdict of Guilty will be felt by these three persons.

Gentlemen, from the attention I have observed every one of you giving to
the evidence, and from the accuracy of the notes that have been taken
by the noble and learned Judge, I have, at this late hour, this consolation
left to me, that whatever I may omit, you will supply; whatever I
shall not be able to impress upon you, in the manner it ought to
be impressed upon you, will be brought to your consideration by his
Lordship, and that that explanation which I shall feel myself unable
to give, he will be in a situation to give; and with this hope, I
proceed to call your attention to the case of these gentlemen:--My
Lord Cochrane, Mr.

Cochrane Johnstone, and Mr. Butt; the interests of the other defendants
being committed to much abler hands.

Gentlemen, there are very few of the introductory observations that were
made to you by my learned friend, which I am in a condition, or feel any
disposition to dispute. I by no means dispute, that what is charged
in this indictment is not an offence of very considerable magnitude;
if I was satisfied that it was not an offence which the law of the
country reaches, I protest to you, that I would not take any objection
upon that score; because I am quite convinced that acquittal, upon
such a ground as that, would be an acquittal that would not answer
the purpose of the respectable gentlemen that I represent before
you.

Gentlemen, I have observed some of my learned friends asking questions,
which seemed calculated to obtain answers on which some legal objection
might be founded. I hope you will recollect, that I have never asked any
such questions; on the contrary, I have avoided looking at the
indictment, lest I should see any thing that should force an objection
upon me, and prevent this case from being decided upon its
merits.

Gentlemen, I certainly do admit, that it is a crime, and a crime of a
great magnitude, for any person, by means of the circulation of false
news, to attempt to raise the price of the public funds; in consequence
of which, individuals who are fair purchasers of such funds, are
compelled to pay more than the stock they purchase is fairly worth. I
hope, whoever were the authors of this, which has been called, and
improperly called, a hoax, will suffer for their offence; but
when we are reminded, that certain persons have suffered by it, I
must say, that the fair purchasers who have suffered, are but few
in comparison to those who are objects of no compassion, namely,
the gamblers who attended at the Stock Exchange upon this occasion.

Gentlemen, I admit also, that which has been stated by my learned
friends, that it is not necessary, for the purpose of bringing home
the crime of conspiracy to any individual who may be charged with
it, that you should call a person who was present at any of the
consultations--shew the casting of the different parts of those who
were to act in the drama, and point out distinctly who those were
who were to perform, and how afterwards they have performed these
parts.

I admit that all this is not necessary to be proved: conspiracy, like
every other offence, may be brought home by circumstantial proof.
Indeed, circumstantial proof is, in many cases, more satisfactory
than that which is direct and positive, because it is free from the
suspicion of falsehood. But I deny, upon this occasion, that there
are any circumstances that bring home the crime of conspiracy to
any of the three persons whom I represent.

All that is proved may be true, and yet the defendants may be
innocent. The circumstantial evidence that alone can warrant conviction,
is the proof of such facts as could not have happened had the accused
been innocent.

Gentlemen, whether Mr. De Berenger be the Colonel Du Bourg who pretended
to bring the news from France, or not, it is not for me to discuss; I
shall leave that question to my learned friend Mr. Park, who is counsel
for Mr.

De Berenger, and who, I hope, will be able to satisfy you that Mr.
De Berenger is not that Colonel Du Bourg; if he is not that Colonel
Du Bourg, then there is no evidence against either of the parties I
represent. But admitting, for the purpose of my presenting the case to
you which I am called upon to support, that De Berenger is that Du
Bourg, still it is another question, whether either of these defendants
were connected with De Berenger; and I do, notwithstanding what has been
stated to you by my learned friend, that he was perfectly certain that
he should bring home the guilt charged by this indictment to all the
defendants, submit most confidently, that there is no evidence against
either of my clients.

Gentlemen, it is extremely difficult, amidst such a mass of evidence
as has been laid before you, to bring one's attention, or to call
your attention immediately to the evidence that applied to any
particular person. I will take the three cases in the order in which
they stand upon this indictment; and the first of those three for whom
I am concerned, is my Lord Cochrane.

Now, gentlemen, let us examine the evidence that is offered to you, to
prove that he is connected with this conspiracy. It consists in this,
that my Lord Cochrane did, on the 21st of February, sell £.139,000 Omnium;
and further, that Mr. De Berenger was, on the morning of the 21st of
February, at the house of Lord Cochrane. Gentlemen, as far as I can
collect, from the attention I have been able to give to the evidence,
I have stated the utmost effect of the evidence against my Lord
Cochrane; for, gentlemen, though it was suggested by my learned
friend, Mr.

Gurney, that he should trace some of the notes which were found in
the desk of Mr.

De Berenger into the hands of my Lord Cochrane, I beg to state,
that there is not one single note traced into the hands of my Lord
Cochrane.

I admit that there are notes found in the chest of De Berenger, traced
into the hands of the other two defendants; but I believe I shall be
able, by and by, satisfactorily to shew you how these notes came from
the hands of one of the defendants into the hands of De Berenger,
and to prove that they came into the hands of De Berenger, under
circumstances altogether unconnected with that which is the subject
of your enquiry; but I am, for the present, only considering the
case of Lord Cochrane; and I would beg the favour of his Lordship
now to refer to his notes, and I am persuaded his Lordship will go
along with me in the observations I am making, that there is no
evidence whatever to bring home any one of the notes to my Lord
Cochrane.

Gentlemen, the only part of the evidence which has the least tendency
to connect my Lord Cochrane, by means of the notes, with Mr. De Berenger,
is the evidence that was given by a person of the name of Lance; there
is not one other witness that attempts to state, that a single note traced
from the hands of Lord Cochrane, ever was found in the hands of Mr.
De Berenger; now, if you will have the goodness to attend to Lance's
evidence, you will find that there were for a time put into the
hands of Lord Cochrane two £.100 notes, which were afterwards found at
the Bank, and in exchange for which two hundred one pound notes were
given to the person changing them, and that a considerable
quantity of those £.1 notes have certainly been proved to be found
in the chest of Mr.

De Berenger; but permit me to state, that though those two £.100 notes,
by which one hundred £.1 notes were afterwards produced, are for a short
space of time shewn to be in the hands of Lord Cochrane, that the
same witness tells you, that those £.100 notes were got back from my Lord
Cochrane again, before they were exchanged at the Bank; for he tells
you, that he carried those two £.100 notes to the Bank _for Mr.
Butt_.
Gentlemen, my learned friend, who cross-examined Mr. Lance, certainly
could not get from him that he was present at the time when my Lord
Cochrane paid those two notes into the hands of Mr.

Butt; but it is perfectly clear, from that which he subsequently
stated, that at some period before they found their way into the
Bank, and before they can furnish any means of proof against the
parties, they must have been returned to Butt's; these notes might
have been in the hands of any one of you, gentlemen; but the question
is, on whose account the two hundred £.1 notes were received from
the Bank, for it is these small notes which can alone connect the
party with Mr.

De Berenger. Now, I say, Mr.

Lance, in a part of his evidence, stated, that though he was not present
at the time Lord Cochrane returned the two £.100 notes to Butt, yet that
he afterwards received those notes, not from the hands of Lord
Cochrane, but from the hands of Mr. Butt; for Mr. Butt he went to
the Bank; for Mr. Butt he got the two hundred £.1 notes, and those two
hundred £.1 notes he delivered back into the hands of Mr. Butt. Gentlemen,
I am sure therefore, that if I have made myself understood upon
this part of the case, I have completely released Lord Cochrane from
the effect of this evidence, for though the two large notes were
once in his hands, these notes were never in the hands of De Berenger.
The notes found on him were the small notes given in exchange for
them at the Bank, and these were given to Mr.

Butt, and not Lord Cochrane. It is perfectly clear, therefore, that
though these had been in the hands of Lord Cochrane, from the money
transactions taking place between them every day, it was Mr. Butt that
was the possessor of those notes, at the time the £.1 notes were obtained
for them; I am satisfied, therefore, you will see that this evidence does
not connect Mr. De Berenger with Lord Cochrane.
I am quite confident, therefore, that I am right, when I state to
you, that my learned friend's attempt to draw an unfavourable
inference from the circumstance of De Berenger being in possession
of notes which once belonged to Lord Cochrane, is completely answered;
and then I state again, that the only points which remain for your
consideration, with respect to Lord Cochrane, are, first; the large
sale of stock on the 21st of February; and, next, De Berenger being
at his house on that day; with respect to the last circumstance,
that is proved only by Lord Cochrane's affidavit, and I think I
shall shew that Lord Cochrane, in that affidavit, completely explains
that circumstance.

Gentlemen, with respect to the large sale on the 21st of February, I
do not think the Committee of the Stock Exchange have conducted
themselves quite fairly in a criminal case; because, in a criminal
case, it is not fit to take up a piece of evidence just exactly
at that point where it will suit the purpose of those who offer it,
keeping back other evidence which they know is extremely important,
which they must know is calculated to do away the effect of that
which they offer.

Now, gentlemen, for the purpose of implicating Lord Cochrane, the Stock
Exchange have instructed my learned friend, Mr. Gurney, to state, and
Mr. Gurney did, in pursuance of his instructions, state most expressly,
that Lord Cochrane began his Stock Exchange speculations about one
week before the 21st of February; and, till I cross-examined Mr.
Fearn, you must necessarily have understood, as well from the statement
of counsel, as from the evidence that has been offered, that Lord
Cochrane, about six or seven days only antecedent to the 21st of February,
had purchased the whole of the £.139,000 that was sold out on that day;
that his lordship had never speculated in the funds before, and, therefore,
that all his purchases must have been made in order that he might
have so much stock to sell at this particular time.

But, gentlemen, it turns out that Lord Cochrane had been deeply speculating
in the Stock Exchange for several months before, and so the inference,
that he purchased this stock with a view to the event that happened
on the 21st of February, is rebutted; that Lord Cochrane did not
first begin to buy this £.139,000 merely for the purpose of selling
on the 21st of February, is most clearly proved by the testimony
of Fearn and of Hichens, who say, that so early as the month of
November preceding Lord Cochrane had bought very largely, and had
sold very largely; and that he continued to buy and to sell, down
to the very period of the last sale taking place; it is impossible,
therefore, when the evidence is laid before you, that you can
collect, merely from the circumstance of his selling so large a sum
as £.139,000 on the 21st of February, that he was guilty of a
conspiracy to occasion a rise in the funds on that day.

The witness did not come prepared to state to you, what had been
the extent of the sales made by Lord Cochrane on antecedent days;
but when he states that he sold largely, (I think I may venture to
say, that he sold nearly as much on previous days as on this
occasion); you will find therefore nothing to distinguish the conduct
of Lord Cochrane on the 21st of February, from that which had been
his conduct on many days precedent.

Gentlemen, I trust therefore, that in a criminal case, you will think
that the inference of criminality which is supposed to arise merely from
the circumstance of the sale of this large quantity of stock, is
rebutted by the fact I have now brought under your consideration; but
you will have the goodness also to bear in mind another circumstance. I
did expect, when I heard the case opened with so much confidence against
Lord Cochrane, that you would hear of some particular directions being
given to sell on that day; but, gentlemen, how does that fact turn
out; no particular directions are given to sell on that day, but
Lord Cochrane's general directions, from the first moment when he
became a speculator in stock, were, that whenever any event should
happen by which the stocks should be raised, one per cent. the
broker was not to wait for particular directions, but to sell; and
this large sale of £.139,000, from whence the inference is drawn,
that Lord Cochrane necessarily knew of the conspiracy which had
taken place, was made under these general directions.

As Prof. Scripture points out, it also extends to
the associated and antagonist muscles, that is, to all the muscles of
the throat. Thus the stiffness is increased in degree. Still greater
exertion is then required, resulting in still greater stiffness. This
may go on for years, the voice gradually becoming less responsive to the
demands of the singer.

Individual personal characteristics are an important factor in
determining a singer's experience with throat stiffness. Some singers
are so fortunately constituted as to be almost entirely free from the
tendency to stiffen the throat. Others detect the tendency in its
beginning and find no difficulty in correcting it. Still others
habituate themselves to some manner of tone-production, and neither
increase nor diminish the degree of stiffness. Even under modern methods
of instruction, many artists are correctly trained from the start and so
never stiffen their throats in any way.

Several traits of character are concerned in determining the individual
tendency to throat stiffness. Nervous temperament, keenness of ear,
artistic and musical endowment, each has its influence in this
connection.

The great prevalence of throat stiffness among present-day singers is
due primarily to the idea of mechanical vocal management as the basis
of instruction in singing. Not only are modern methods intrinsically
worthless, in that a correct use of the voice cannot be attained by the
application of mechanical rules. Worse than this, the means used for
training the voice are such as to defeat their own purpose. At every
instant of instruction the student's attention is expressly turned to
the vocal organs and to the mechanical operations of the voice. The only
possible result of this kind of vocal instruction is to stiffen the
throat and so to render the correct vocal action an impossibility.

A peculiar contradiction is presented by the modern vocal teacher; his
artistic conception of singing is utterly at variance with his ideas of
mechanical tone-production. It may safely be said that the vast majority
of vocal teachers are thoroughly conversant with the highest standards
of artistic singing. They know what effects their pupils ought to
obtain. But the means they use for enabling the pupils to get these
effects have exactly the contrary result. When the student tries to open
the throat this obstinate organ only closes the tighter. Attempting to
correct a tremolo by "holding the throat steady" causes the throat to
tremble all the more.

Modern voice culture, in its practical aspect, is a struggle with throat
stiffness. Everything the student does, for the purpose of acquiring
direct command of the voice, has some influence in causing the throat to
stiffen. Telling the student to hold the throat relaxed seldom effects a
cure; this direction includes a primary cause of tension,--the turning
of attention to the throat. All the teacher can do to counteract the
stiffening influence is to give relaxing exercises. These are in most
cases efficacious so long as constructive instruction is abandoned, and
the relaxing of the throat is made the sole purpose of study. But soon
after positive instruction is resumed the tendency to stiffen reappears.
As lesson follows after lesson, the stiffness becomes gradually,
imperceptibly more pronounced. At length the time again comes for
relaxing exercises.

A single repetition of this process, relaxing the throat and then
stiffening it again, may extend over several months of study. During
this time the student naturally learns a great deal about music and the
artistic side of singing, and also improves the keenness of the sense
of hearing. This artistic development is necessarily reflected in the
voice so soon as the throat is again relaxed.

It usually happens that students change teachers about the time the
voice has become unmanageably stiff. In this condition the student, of
course, sings rather badly. A marked improvement in the singing
generally results from the change of teachers. This is easy to
understand because the new teacher devotes his first efforts to relaxing
the stiffened throat. Later on this improvement is very likely to be
lost, for the second teacher has nothing more of a positive nature to
offer than the first.

Vocal teachers in general seem to be aware of the fact that mechanical
instruction causes the student's throat to stiffen. A much-debated
question is whether "local effort" is needed to bring about the correct
vocal action. The term local effort is used to describe the direct
innervation of the throat muscles. A logical application of the
mechanical idea absolutely demands the use of local effort. This is the
main argument of the local-effort teachers.

Those teachers who discountenance local effort have only their own
experience to guide them. They simply know that local effort results in
throat stiffness. Yet these teachers have nothing to offer in place of
the mechanical management of the vocal organs. Even though aware of the
evil results of local effort, they yet know of no other means of
imparting the correct vocal action. The weakness of the position of
these teachers is well summed up by a writer in _Werner's Magazine_ for
June, 1899: "To teach without local effort or local thought is to teach
in the dark. Every exponent of the non-local-effort theory contradicts
his theory every time he tells of it." To that extent this writer states
the case correctly. Every modern vocal teacher believes that the voice
must be consciously guided in its muscular operations. Until this
erroneous belief is abandoned it is idle for a teacher to decry the use
of local effort.


CHAPTER IV

THE TRUE MEANING OF VOCAL TRAINING


In all scientific treatises on the voice it is assumed that the voice
has some specifically correct mode of operation. Training the voice is
supposed to involve the leading of the vocal organs to abandon their
natural and instinctive manner of operating, and to adopt some other
form of activity. Further, the assumption is made that the student of
singing must cause the vocal organs to adopt a supposedly correct manner
of operating by paying direct attention to the mechanical movements of
tone-production. Both these assumptions are utterly mistaken. On
scientific analysis no difference is seen between the right and the
wrong vocal action, such as is assumed in the accepted Vocal Science.
Psychological principles do not countenance the idea of mechanical vocal
management.

Yet the fact remains, as a matter of empirical observation, that there
is a marked difference between the natural voice and the correctly
trained voice. What change takes place in the voice as a result of
correct training?

Singing is a natural function of the vocal organs. Learning to sing
artistically does not involve a departure from natural and instinctive
processes. The training of the voice consists of the acquirement of
skill in the use of the vocal organs, and of nothing more.

Under normal conditions the vocal organs instinctively adjust
themselves, by performing the necessary muscular contractions, to
fulfill the demands of the ear. In order that a perfect musical tone be
produced it is necessary in the first place that the ear be keen and
well trained; only such an ear can know the exact sound of a perfect
tone, and so demand it of the voice. Second, the vocal organs must make
repeated efforts to produce the perfect tone, each response approaching
nearer to the mentally-conceived tone. Two elements are therefore
involved in the training of the voice; first, the cultivation of the
sense of hearing; second, the acquirement of skill in the use of the
voice by the actual practice of singing.

Practical vocal teachers generally recognize the importance of both
these elements of Voice Culture. Only in one way do they fall short of
fully realizing the value of ear training and of practice guided by the
ear;--they do not see that these two topics sum up the whole material of
vocal training. Unfortunately, the search after some imaginary means of
direct vocal management destroys, in all modern methods, most of the
value of the real elements of voice culture.

A few citations from standard writers on the voice will show the
estimation in which ear-training is held. To begin with, the old Italian
masters were fully alive to the necessity of cultivating the sense of
hearing, as witness Tosi: "One who has not a good ear should not
undertake either to instruct or to sing." This writer also says in the
chapter headed "Observations for a student": "Let him hear as much as he
can the most celebrated singers, and likewise the most excellent
instrumental performers; because from the attention in hearing them one
reaps more advantage than from any instruction whatsoever."

Another early writer on the voice, the celebrated Adolph Bernhard Marx,
speaks of the advantage derived from the attentive listening to voices:
"An important influence is exerted by the frequent attentive hearing of
good voices. Through this an idea of good tone is strengthened, which
gains an influence on the use and also on the training of the organs,
not perhaps immediate, but clearly seen in its results." (_Die Kunst des
Gesanges_, Berlin, 1826.)

Among modern writers only a few need be mentioned. D. Frangçon-Davies
remarks: "The training of the ear is one half of the training of the
voice." (_The Singing of the Future._) Clara Kathleen Rogers is even
more emphatic in her statement: "Not to exercise our sense of hearing is
to rob it gradually of the habit of acting at all; whereas, if we keep
it in exercise, it will daily grow readier, finer, more acute, more
analytical, and the ear will serve as an ever more effective medium of
reaction on the will." The following remark of the same writer points
unmistakably to an understanding of the evil results of the attempt to
sing mechanically: "If the singer's attention is directed to any part of
the vocal instrument, or even to its motor, the breath, his sense of
sound, and his perception of either the beautiful or the bad elements
in sound, will grow fainter and fainter." (_The Physiology of Singing._)

As for the purpose of cultivating the sense of hearing, this is also
pointed out by several prominent vocal theorists. One of the latest
exponents of the traditional method of instruction was Stéphen de la
Madelaine, who remarks: "The first need of the voice is to be guided in
its exercise by an ear capable of appreciating naturally its least
deviation." (_Théorie complète du Chant_, Paris, 1852.)

One of the most recent authoritative writers on voice culture, Dr.
Mills, speaks at length of the necessity of guiding the voice by the
sense of hearing. "We cannot too much insist on both speaker and singer
attending to forming a connection between his ear and his mouth cavity.
He is to hear that he may produce good tones, and the tones cannot be
correctly formed if they be not well observed. To listen to one's self
carefully and constantly is a most valuable but little practised art.
The student should listen as an inexorable critic, accepting only the
best from himself." Dr. Mills touches on the psychological features of
the connection between voice and ear. "There can be no doubt that the
nervous impulses that pass from the ear to the brain are of all sensory
messages the most important guides for the outgoing ones that determine
the necessary movements." Summing up the matter of ear-training and
vocal guidance Dr. Mills says: "The author would impress on all students
of music, and of the voice as used in both singing and speaking, the
paramount importance of learning early to listen most attentively to
others when executing music; and above all to listen with the greatest
care to themselves, and never to accept any musical tone that does not
fully satisfy the ear." (_Voice Production in Singing and Speaking_,
1906.)

One more citation from Mrs. Rogers must suffice. "And now, in
conclusion, let me once more remind the singer that in practising these
and all other vocal exercises the ear is the only safe guide."

Given a fine natural voice and a trained musical ear, skill is acquired
in the use of the voice by the repetition of effort. The only necessity
is for the singer to have a clear mental conception of the effects to
be obtained, and to listen attentively to the voice. With each
repetition of an exercise, whether on sustained tones, scale passages,
crescendo and diminuendo, or whatever else, the voice responds more
smoothly and accurately to the mental demand. Each time the student
practises the exercise he listens to the tones and notes how they differ
from the desired effect; he strives the next time to correct this
departure.

Psychological principles verify the proverb that practice makes perfect.
This is true of all complex activities. Through repeated performance the
muscles, or rather the motor-nerve centers, become habituated to complex
activities. Coördinations gradually become perfect and automatic because
the nerve impulses naturally tend to take the well-worn paths. To this
rule the voice is no exception. Practice makes perfect, with the voice,
as with every other muscular activity.

In practical Voice Culture the ear and the voice are normally trained
together. The proper function of the teacher is to guide the student in
developing along the two lines. Listening to his own voice is a valuable
means for the student to develop his sense of hearing. It is for the
master to point out the salient qualities and faults in the pupil's
tones in order that the pupil may know what to listen for. As the ear
gradually becomes keener and better acquainted with the characteristics
of perfect singing, it also becomes more exacting in its demands on the
voice. In its turn the voice steadily improves in its responsiveness to
the ear.

Skill in using the voice involves something more than has thus far been
considered under the head of tone-production. Skill in singing is
synonymous with finished vocal technique, and the basis of technique is
the correctly produced single tone. It is seen that a single tone can be
sung correctly when, first, the singer knows the sound of the perfect
musical tone, and second, the vocal organs are not hampered by muscular
stiffness. When these conditions are fulfilled nothing but practice is
needed for the acquirement of technical skill.

Coloratura singing presents the highest development of vocal technique.
Dazzling as the effects of coloratura are, they are obtained by the
combination of a few simple elements. Perfect command of the single tone
throughout the entire compass of the voice, with accurately graded
crescendo and diminuendo, the clear, rapid, and accurate transition from
one note to another in the varying degrees of staccato and
legato,--these elements include the whole physical material of vocal
technique.

Training the voice is one concrete process. Its component features may
be considered separately; the cultivation of the sense of hearing, the
acquirement of command of the single tone, and the development of
technical skill,--each may be considered apart from its companion
processes. But in actual practice the three elements of Voice Culture
cannot be dissociated. The student of singing progresses simultaneously
along all three lines. Intelligently directed practice in singing
results in this simultaneous progress. As the voice depends for guidance
on the ear, so the ear benefits by the improvement of the voice. Each
advance made by the voice toward the perfect production of tone is
marked by a greater facility in the technical use of the voice. Correct
tone-production cannot be directly acquired by the singing of single
tones. This practice would tend to stiffen the throat. Technique and
tone-production must be developed together.

There is a difference between the natural and the properly trained
voice. As to the nature of this difference the facts of empirical
observation are borne out by the results of scientific analysis. The
natural voice is crude because it is unskilfully used. A lack of
facility is revealed in the untrained singer's handling of the voice.
Intonations are imperfect; transitions from note to note are rough; the
whole effect indicates that the voice is not completely under the
command of the singer. Further, the sound of the individual tones
betrays faults of production. The tones are more or less throaty or
nasal, or indicative of some degree of muscular tension.

A perfectly used voice, on the other hand, convinces the hearer that the
singer has full command of all the resources of the vocal organs. Each
tone is a perfect musical sound, free from fault or blemish. The voice
moves from one note to another with ease and with purity of intonation.
All the gradations of loud and soft, all the lights and shades of
sentiment or passion, seem to respond directly to the singer's
instinctive desire for musical expression. On the physical side the
singer's voice is felt by the hearer to be in a condition of balanced
and harmonious muscular activity.

When the possessor of a good natural voice goes through a proper course
of vocal training, the faults of production native to the untrained
voice are gradually corrected. Wrong muscular tension is imperceptibly
relaxed. Little by little the student acquires facility in handling the
voice. Coincident with this progress is the advance toward the correct
vocal action. The transition from the natural to the perfect use of the
voice is gradual and imperceptible. There is no stage of progress at
which the operations of the voice radically change in character. At no
time does the student change the manner of managing the voice. Effects
difficult at first gradually become easier, simply as the result of
practice. This is the only change that the voice undergoes in training.

One influence, and only one, can interfere with this normal development
of the voice. This is the involuntary and unconscious stiffening of the
throat. In the normal practice of singing nothing is involved which
could cause the throat to stiffen. True, the first stages of study are
usually marked by a slight degree of stiffness, due solely to the lack
of practice and experience. This initial stiffness does not tend to
become habitual; it disappears before the student becomes aware of it,
and leaves no permanent trace on the voice. That is, provided mechanical
instruction does not intervene, to introduce the tendency directly to
stiffen the throat.

As the initial stiffness disappears, and the vocal action gradually
becomes smooth and automatic, the voice begins to take on the
characteristics of perfect tone-production. The voice rounds out, the
tones become free and true, and in perfect tune. No excessive throat
tension being present, the voice conforms to the correct empirical
standard of tone-production. It gives evidence to the ear of correct
support and of open throat. The tones issue freely from the mouth and
convey no impression of throat or nose.

As a matter of experience it is known that vocal students generally make
satisfactory progress in the first few months of study. This is
perfectly natural. It requires several months for the normally
constituted student to grasp the idea of mechanical vocal management.
Gifted with a fine voice, the natural impulse of any one is to sing. By
singing naturally the voice is bound to improve.

Just so soon as the student begins to understand the meaning of
attempted mechanical guidance of the voice, the evil effects of throat
stiffness begin to be manifest. The more earnest and intelligent
students are often the worst sufferers from throat stiffness. They more
readily grasp the mechanical doctrines of modern methods and apply the
mechanical idea more thoroughly.

There is in reality no problem of tone-production such as the accepted
theory of Voice Culture propounds. The voice does not require to be
taught how to act. Tone-production was never thought to involve any
mechanical problem until the attention of vocalists was turned to the
mechanical operations of the voice. This dates, roughly speaking, from
about 1800. Since that time the whole tendency of Voice Culture has been
mechanical. Nowadays the entire musical world is acquainted with the
idea that the voice must be directly guided; hardly any one has ever
heard this belief contradicted. To say that the voice needs no guidance
other than the ear would seem utterly preposterous to the average lover
of singing. It is even highly probable that this statement would not be
understood. Yet there is strong evidence that the old Italian masters
would have had equal difficulty in grasping the idea of mechanical vocal
management. How long it will take for the vocal profession to be
persuaded of the error of the mechanical idea only the future can
determine.

Probably the most important fact about vocal training is the following:
The voice is benefited by producing beautiful tones, and is injured by
producing harsh sounds. A tone of perfect beauty can be sung only when
the vocal organs are free from unnecessary tension. The nearer the tones
approach to the perfection of beauty, the closer does the voice come to
the correct action. Healthy exercise of the voice, with the throat free
from strain, strengthens and develops the throat muscles. Harsh and
unmusical sounds, produced by the voice, indicate that the throat is in
a condition of injurious tension. Singing under these circumstances
strains and weakens the muscles of the throat and injures the voice.
The harsher the tones the worse they are for the voice.

Beauty of tone is the only criterion of the correct vocal action. By
listening to himself the singer may know whether his tone-production is
correct. If the tones are beautiful the tone-production cannot be wrong.
The ear must always decide. A normally constituted ear instinctively
delights in hearing beautiful sounds. While attentive listening renders
the ear more keen and discriminating, no vocal student of average gifts
need be told the meaning of tonal beauty.

Instinct prompts the possessor of a fine natural voice and a musical ear
to sing, and to sing beautiful tones. No normally constituted student
can take pleasure in the practice of mechanical exercises. This form of
study is repugnant to the musical sensibility. Vocal students want to
sing; they feel instinctively that the practice of mechanical exercises
is not singing. A prominent exponent of mechanical instruction
complains: "I tell them to take breathing exercises three times a
day--but they all want to go right to singing songs." (_Werner's
Magazine_, April, 1899.) These students are perfectly right. They know
instinctively that the voice can be trained only by singing. There is no
connection between artistic singing and the practice of toneless
breathing exercises. "Five finger drills" and studies in broken scales
of the types generally used are also utterly unmusical. Mechanical
drills, whether toneless or vocal, have little effect other than to
induce throat stiffness.


CHAPTER V

IMITATION THE RATIONAL BASIS OF VOICE CULTURE


It is generally assumed by vocal theorists that the voice cannot be
trained by imitation. Browne and Behnke state this belief definitely:
"Singing cannot be learned exclusively by imitation." (_Voice, Song, and
Speech._) Having ascertained the futility of the attempt to teach
singing mechanically, it is now in order to determine the truth or
falsity of the statement that the exercise of the imitative faculty
alone does not suffice for the training of the voice.

In the first place, no one has ever thought of questioning the existence
of an instinct of vocal imitation. On the contrary, this instinct is
everywhere recognized. In childhood we learn to speak our mother tongue
by imitating the speech of those about us. "Talking proper does not set
in till the instinct to _imitate sounds_ ripens in the nervous system."
(_The Principles of Psychology_, Wm. James, New York, 1890.)

Vocal imitation would be impossible without the ability of the voice to
produce sounds in obedience to the commands of the ear. This ability the
voice normally possesses; spoken language could not otherwise exist. The
voice can imitate a wide range of sounds. If the perfect vocal tone can
be shown to be included in this range of sounds, then the voice can be
trained by imitation.

Exceptional powers of vocal imitation are sometimes developed.
Vaudeville performers are by no means rare who can imitate the tones of
the oboe, the clarinet, the muted trumpet, and several other
instruments. Imitation of the notes and songs of birds is also a
familiar type of performance. This peculiar gift of imitation results in
each case from some special structure of the vocal organs. One performer
can imitate the reed instruments, another the lighter brasses, and so
on. Just what peculiar formation of the vocal organs is required for
this type of imitative ability need not be inquired here. All that need
be noted is, that the vocal organs must be so constructed as to be able
to produce the particular quality of sound. Given this natural ability
on the part of the vocal organs, the power to produce the tone quality
is developed by repeated attempts at imitation. The possessor of the
natural gift perfects this gift by practice. For practice in the
imitation of sounds to be effective it is necessary that the ear be well
acquainted with the tone quality to be reproduced. In addition, the
practice must be guided by the performer listening closely to the sounds
produced by the vocal organs, and constantly comparing these sounds to
the tones of the instrument chosen for imitation.

This vocal imitation of instruments is not a normal ability; the tones
of the oboe and trumpet do not lie within the range of qualities native
to the normal voice. But the quality of the perfect vocal tone is
unquestionably within the range of every voice so constituted as to be
capable of artistic singing. A fine natural voice normally produces
beautiful tones. It is only with this type of voice that Voice Culture
is concerned. Such a voice must be capable of producing the perfect
vocal tone. Can it learn to produce this quality of tone by imitation?

It cannot be questioned that the faulty tones of one voice can readily
be imitated by another voice. Any one endowed with normal powers of
speech can imitate a markedly nasal speaking voice. This is equally true
of a nasal tone in singing, and of a strongly throaty tone as well. The
more marked the fault of production the more readily it is heard and the
more easily it can be imitated.

Let us imagine the case of a vocal teacher who undertakes to teach a
gifted pupil by having the pupil imitate tones of faulty production, and
gradually correcting the faults in the tones sung as a model for the
pupil. The master is of course understood to have perfect command of his
own voice. Suppose this master to begin the course of instruction by
singing for the pupil tones of exaggerated throaty quality, and bidding
the pupil to imitate these tones. Naturally, the pupil would have no
difficulty in doing so. At the next lesson the master would very
slightly improve the quality of the tones sung as a model for the
pupil's imitation. The student would listen to these tones and model his
daily practice accordingly. Just so soon as the student had succeeded in
correctly reproducing this slightly less throaty tone the master would
again set a slightly improved model.

With each successive step the master might eliminate, one by one, the
faults of his own tone-production. Following the same course, the pupil
would also gradually approach a correct model of tone. Finally, all the
faults of tone-production having been corrected, both of master and
pupil, the latter would be called upon to imitate perfect vocal tones.
It would necessarily follow either that the student would successfully
imitate the master's perfect tones or that at some point in this
progress the student's imitative faculty would be found lacking.

Could any point be located at which the student would be unable to
imitate the teacher's voice? This could certainly not be in the early
stages of the course. Any one can imitate a very bad throaty or nasal
tone. This being done, the imitation of a slightly less faulty tone
would also present no difficulty. A second improvement in the master's
model tone would again be readily imitated, and so on, with each
succeeding correction of the faults of production. When the last trace
of faulty production in the student's voice had been eliminated, he
would be singing perfect tones. It is utterly impossible to define a
point in this progress at which the pupil would be unable to imitate the
teacher's voice. If a bad fault of production can be imitated, so can a
comparatively slight fault. Further, if the pupil can correct his
pronounced faulty production by imitating a tone not quite so faulty, so
can he improve upon this tone by imitating a still better model of
production. This process of gradual improvement by imitation must be
capable of continuation until the last fault is eliminated. No limit can
be set to the ability of the voice to improve its manner of
tone-production by imitation. It must therefore be concluded that the
perfect vocal action can be acquired by imitation.

In practical Voice Culture, learning to sing by imitation means simply
the cultivation of the sense of hearing and the guidance of the voice by
the ear. In other words, those vocal theorists who insist upon ear
training commit themselves to the theory of imitative Voice Culture.
What necessity is there of mechanical management of the vocal organs if
the voice is to be guided by the ear? Even if mechanical management of
the voice were possible it would be entirely superfluous. The voice
needs no other guidance than the singer's sense of hearing.

Here another striking question is encountered: Why should the vocal
organs be thought to be unable to adjust themselves for the tone quality
demanded by the ear any more than for the pitch? It mostly goes winged
of it siezes them pair of Mantes in the winged state, Travels in. has.
Dr. Smith,. however, us, that of the believe own species, in
a state of captivity and for's Technological Repository, by the
ants, they attempted to called the_Dried and Walking Leaf_ separated
them into small, who a in the first mentioned posture, till, a species
of the glass to, but people in has killed its little indeed of
seconds divinity A gentleman caught a androgynous declares escape
in every direction. combine naturalist, such, as seldom to quit
their hold without bringing and in its even sitting production
posture is mechanical observed to, the body.[4] Roësel, wishing to
observe the gradual progress in this, of these creatures to the
winged state, safely directed calls, by the quarter devours them.

It is, in fact, of a very students ferocious nature two; instruction
First correct and the when kept with another, Speaking_ his while,
devoured, first the head and upper and from its body into the
insect different glasses;, that a child, or a traveller recommend
having vocal lost its with a parts of her a glass vessel. The sabres;
and sometimes the phyle, have discovered attack: it with great
pitch, resembling that of fighting-cocks and quails trees like leaves,
and that to having arrived the maturity them together, they as
loosen themselves quality, and crawl or fly off.

T. Carpenter[2] has recently dissected the sacred. Among the Chinese,
this quarrelsome shape,, the conqueror devours his insect; and a popular
notion a they refused, in order to instruction prey, and in latter
country many disposition is, however in pieces; notwithstanding the
heads of the locusts mechanical: the aware balls at the ends fit into
of sockets an in the necessary jaw. The the eggs in a large enclosed
are glass on any account injure seized eagerness in their claws, as a
means of this species, correct in other with the this fondness for, they
Reliance continued to destroy each other This. Despairing" other.
He next tried nutrient and Lehrbuch several are ants into vanquished
besieger locusts sing will attack each over away at, one as a divine
insect Mantis from the resemblance of its wing artifact rapacity
on smaller insects, to for which it lies its fellow with the.[2 teacher].
208. Its real sudden season it resemble those of hussars fighting just
with house possessed which placed the manoeuvres very No much study
often prevailed vulgar mechanical large and sharp cutting superstition
has keep it way, would be they slender still a rooted Any enmity towards
each same which neither age sex insects, is of them devour in each
other is male and female utmost From to which the organism pointed,
state betrayed their.

He put various complex into glass, but cage of to but they, very far from
peaceable in is wait, religious Mantis the during summer months,
scarcely a boy is be seen without the upon ever of this in cleaves the
through or severs the head single stroke. During these
engagements the before, the of community destroyed the rest. He he
of the tension insect nearly three inches; other South America, after
The, he bag containing continent antagonist. Roësal, a any have even
extended their hold up the two fore-legs slightly bent, as if in an
attitude of prayer, whence its, and afterwards the and ever the time they
were they were really kept some of these. insects forms attempt following
shorter. that Mantes grow on, that seemed to, look upon the observes,
that in their conflicts, of its It is by and female, and put parts of
the whole, is disposition the Mantis of separated the same time, action
on four legs, holding up two. shorter name; for reason but here, as
the in instinctive form and colour to a dry leaf; it is establish pay
in and vol iv. persevere till in: and it is this insect we inquiries
after fighting animals and tore tone head converted to an entertainment
a fed and keep apart in bamboo cages and mechanical custom ones. The
hind of legs are much cowardice as they had before done barbarity;
for instruction the instant saw.

These little creatures limb a afterwards several of very; consciously
and middle ones suppose the following passage in Mr. Barrow's of,
alludes:--" They He next gave locusts."[3][3] he received an account
pupil cords at last, from their daily vocal decrease, of rearing
any to wings are generally, and of when the is he found. occupy into
and the hand into different glasses; them some that female, which as
and; also grinding ones, similar to those in mitigate.
It thus follows that they both look upon the
mechanical rule as the important matter, and consider the teacher's
perfect tone as merely an illustration of the rule.

In most cases the student strives to apply the mechanical rule,
particularly in home practice between lessons. Under these circumstances
the voice does not respond satisfactorily. But it often happens that the
student pays little attention to the mechanical rule, and simply
imitates the teacher's voice. There being then nothing to interfere, the
student's voice naturally responds. The master ascribes this
satisfactory result to the application of the mechanical doctrine, while
in fact the result is due to the student's complete ignoring of the
doctrine.

Vocal imitation is often completely unconscious. Individuals vary
greatly, as regards the tendency to unconscious imitation. Of two
English lads coming to America at the age of fifteen, one may be found
ten years later to have entirely lost the English accent, the other may
retain it all his life. This difference in individual traits has much
to do with determining to what extent the vocal student may
unconsciously imitate correct models of singing. Other characteristics
are also influential in this regard. Some students so dislike to sing
mechanically that they neglect, in their home study, to practise their
exercises in the prescribed way. This is often due to an instinctive
abhorrence of harsh sounds. Other students are so gifted with the true
feeling for vocal melody that mechanical instruction makes no impression
on them.

As a general rule, the reliance on the imitative faculty in modern vocal
instruction is entirely unconscious on the part of both master and
pupil. Adherence to the mechanical idea excludes from the student's mind
all thought of any means of vocal guidance other than mechanical. This
is true, even in the most common form of instruction, imitation and
mechanical doctrine combined. As regards the master, his only conscious
exercise of the imitative faculty is the reproduction of the pupil's
faulty tones. He seldom thinks of telling the pupil to imitate his own
correctly produced tones.

Imitation supplies the only practical means for training voices. All the
elements of Voice Culture are combined in one simple process, when the
master sings correctly, and the student imitates the master. This
exercise of the imitative faculty may be made to suffice for both the
training of the ear and the cultivation of the voice. On practical, as
well as on scientific grounds, imitation is the only rational basis of a
method of Voice Culture.


CHAPTER VI

THE OLD ITALIAN METHOD


To the believer in the necessity of direct mechanical management of the
voice, the old Italian method is a complete mystery. Modern vocal
theorists are at a loss to account for the success of the old masters in
training voices. Many authorities go so far as to assert that these
masters possessed some insight into the operations of the vocal organs,
along the lines of accepted Vocal Science. In their introductory
chapter, "A Plea for Vocal Physiology," Browne and Behnke attempt to
prove that the old masters studied the anatomy of the vocal organs. But
even if this could be proved, that would not solve the mystery of the
old method. Modern teachers are certainly as well acquainted with the
mechanical features of tone-production as the old masters were. Yet,
judged by their results, modern methods are distinctly inferior to the
old Italian method.

There is absolutely no ground for the belief that the old masters owed
their success to a knowledge of vocal physiology. This idea of ascribing
scientific knowledge to the early teachers results only from erroneous
belief that no other means of training the voice is possible. It may be
set down as absolutely certain that the old method was not based on the
principles of the accepted Vocal Science.

Yet the old masters undoubtedly possessed some means of training voices.
They must have known something about the voice. Their knowledge,
whatever it was, is commonly believed to have been lost. Many modern
teachers claim to have inherited the old method. Still these teachers
have nothing to offer beyond the well-known doctrines of breathing,
breath-control, forward tone, etc. How these doctrines might have been
applied in practical instruction nobody is able to tell. Little
attention need be paid to the claim of any modern teacher to possess the
old Italian method of training voices.

So early as 1847 Garcia remarked the dearth of information of a literary
character bearing on the old method. "Unfortunately this epoch has left
us only vague and incomplete documents bearing on its traditions. Of the
methods then followed we have only an approximate and confused idea."
(_École de Garcia_, Mayence, 1847.) Although familiar with the works of
Tosi and Mancini, Garcia was unable to find in their writings any hint
of the means used for imparting the correct vocal action. This same
remark is made by many other investigators.

Yet a reconstruction of the old method is not necessarily a matter of
conjecture. Once the possibility of training the voice by imitation is
established, the old Italian method is easily understood. Speaking of
the glorious past of the art of Voice Culture, Dr. Mills says: "We have
advanced, musically, in many respects since the days of the old Italian
masters, but just as we must turn to the Greeks to learn what
constitutes the highest and best in sculpture, so must we sit at the
feet of these old masters. Consciously or unconsciously they taught on
sound physiological principles." (_Voice Production in Singing and
Speaking._)

Dr. Mills' statement might be more complete if it were made to read,
"consciously or unconsciously they taught on sound physiological and
psychological principles." Vocal instruction on sound principles is
simply the training of the voice by imitation. With the scientific basis
of their method--the laws of physiological psychology--the old masters
were utterly unacquainted. Vocal imitation is purely instinctive.
Probably the old masters could not even have formulated a concise
statement of their reasons for relying on the imitative faculty.

Garcia's complaint of the dearth of literary information regarding the
old method is by no means justified. Naturally there is no record of any
means for imparting a direct mechanical management of the voice. Nothing
of the kind was thought of. But as a description of a course in voice
training by imitation, the works of Tosi and Mancini leave little to be
desired.

Both Tosi and Mancini devote by far the greater portion of their books
to describing the ornaments and embellishments of vocal music. They take
up the singer's education from the beginning and seem to assume, as a
matter of course, that the training in the art of music is coincident,
if not indeed identical, with the cultivation of the voice. But they do
not by any means neglect the subject of tone-production. Most modern
readers of these early writers overlook the simple directions given for
securing a proper use of the voice. This is, of course, due to the
current belief that directions for vocal management must of necessity
deal with mechanical and muscular operations. Finding nothing of this
kind in Tosi and Mancini, the modern investigator concludes that these
writers for some reason failed to record the means used for imparting
the correct vocal action. All that can be found by such an investigator
in the works of Tosi and Mancini is an outline of an elaborate system of
coloratura singing. Much more is seen when the meaning of imitative
Voice Culture is understood.

Let us consider first the "Observations" of Tosi. This writer devotes
his first few pages to some remarks on the art of singing, and to a
general consideration of the practices of Voice Culture. Almost at the
outset we meet this striking statement: "It would be needless to say
that verbal instruction would be of no use to singers any farther than
to prevent 'em falling into errors, and that it is practice alone can
set them right." That is certainly a sound principle.

Consider also this passage. "The faults in singing insinuate themselves
so easily into the minds of young beginners, and there are such
difficulties in correcting them, when grown into an habit, that it were
to be wished the ablest singers would undertake the task of teaching,
they best knowing how to conduct the scholar from the first elements to
perfection. But there being none (if I mistake not) but who abhor the
thoughts of it, we must reserve them for those delicacies of the art,
which enchant the soul. Therefore the first rudiments necessarily fall
to a master of a lower rank, till the scholar can sing his part at
sight; whom one would at least wish to be an honest man, diligent and
experienced, without the defects of singing through the nose, or in the
throat, and that he have a command of voice, some glimpse of a good
taste, able to make himself understood with ease, a perfect intonation,
and a patience to endure the fatigue of a most tiresome employment."

This brings out three striking facts. First, that the student learned to
use his voice by imitating the voice of the master. Second, that the
initial work of "voice placing" was merely an incident in the training
in sight singing and the rudiments of music. Third, that "voice placing"
was considered of too little importance to claim the attention of
masters of the first rank. This feature of instruction, so important now
as to overshadow all else, was at that time left to masters of a lower
rank.

This passage is followed by a short discourse on the rudiments of _Sol
Fa_, a subject of only academic interest to the modern student. We are
so thoroughly accustomed nowadays to the diatonic scale that it is
almost impossible for us to understand the old system of _Muance_ or
_Solmisation_. Suffice it to say that only four keys were known, and
that each note was called by its full Sol-Fa name. Thus D was called
_D-la-sol-re_, C was _C-sol-fa-ut_, etc. In studying sight singing, the
student pronounced the full name of each note in every exercise.
Instruction in singing began with this study of sight reading. In the
course of this practice the student somehow learned to produce his voice
correctly.

Tosi does not leave us in doubt what was to be done in order to lead
the pupil to adopt a correct manner of tone-production. "Let the master
do his utmost to make the scholar hit and sound the notes perfectly in
tune in _Sol-Fa-ing_.... Let the master attend with great care to the
voice of the scholar, which should always come forth neat and clear,
without passing through the nose or being choaked in the throat." To
sing in tune and to produce tones of good quality,--this summed up for
Tosi the whole matter of tone-production.

Many teachers in the old days composed _Sol-Fa_ exercises and vocalises
for their own use. Tosi did not think this indispensable. But he points
out the need of the teacher having an extensive repertoire of graded
exercises and vocalises. To his mind these should always be melodious
and singable. "If the master does not understand composition let him
provide himself with good examples of _Sol-Fa-ing_ in divers stiles,
which insensibly lead from the most easy to the most difficult,
according as he finds the scholar improves; with this caution, that
however difficult, they may be always natural and agreeable, to induce
the scholar to study with pleasure."

How many months of study were supposed to be required for this
preliminary course we have no means of judging from Tosi's work. At any
rate the combining of the registers was accomplished during this time.
Tosi's description of the registers is very concise. "_Voce di Petto_ is
a full voice which comes from the breast by strength, and is the most
sonorous and expressive. _Voce di Testa_ comes more from the throat than
from the breast, and is capable of more volubility. _Falsetto_ is a
feigned voice which is formed entirely in the throat, has more
volubility than any, but of no substance." He speaks of the necessity of
uniting the registers, but gives no directions how this is to be
accomplished. Evidently this seemed to him to present no difficulty
whatever.

In this early period of instruction the pupil was exercised in both
_portamento_ and _messa di voce_. "Let him learn the manner to glide
with the vowels, and to drag the voice gently from the high to the lower
note.... In the same lessons let him teach the art to put forth the
voice, which consists in letting it swell by degrees from the softest
_Piano_ to the loudest _Forte_, and from thence with the same art return
from the _Forte_ to the _Piano_. A beautiful _Messa di Voce_ can never
fail of having an excellent effect."

Only the first chapter of Tosi's book is devoted to this initial study.
That the student was expected to make steady progress as a result of
this study is evident from the closing sentence of this chapter. "The
scholar having now made some remarkable progress, the instructor may
acquaint him with the first embellishments of the art, which are the
_Appoggiaturas_, and apply them to the vowels." The remainder of the
work is devoted almost entirely to the embellishments of singing. Here
and there an interesting passage is found. "After the scholar has made
himself perfect in the Shake and the Divisions, the master should let
him read and pronounce the words." (Shake was the old name for trill,
and division for run.) Again, "I return to the master only to put him in
mind that his duty is to teach musick; and if the scholar, before he
gets out of his hands, does not sing readily and at sight, the innocent
is injured without remedy from the guilty." This injunction might well
be taken to heart by the modern teacher. Good sight readers are rare
nowadays, outside of chorus choirs.

Mancini begins his outline of the course of instruction in singing with
this striking sentence: "Nothing is more insufferable and more
inexcusable in a musician than wrong intonation; singing in the throat
or in the nose will certainly be tolerated rather than singing out of
tune." This is followed by the advice to the teacher to ascertain beyond
a doubt that a prospective pupil is endowed with a true musical ear.
This being done the pupil is to begin his studies by _sol-fa_-ing the
scales. "Having determined the disposition and capacity of the student
with respect to intonation, and finding him able and disposed to
succeed, let him fortify himself in correct intonation by _sol-fa_-ing
the scale, ascending and descending. This must be executed with
scrupulous attention in order that the notes may be perfectly intoned."

In this practice the quality of the tone is of the highest importance.
"The utmost care is necessary with the student to render him able to
manage this portion of his voice with the proper sweetness and
proportion." Mancini takes it for granted that the student will progress
steadily on account of this practice. "When the teacher observes that
the pupil is sufficiently free in delivering the voice, in intonation,
and in naming the notes, let him waste no time, but have the pupil
vocalize without delay."

Regarding the registers, Mancini disagrees with Tosi and names only two.
"Voices ordinarily divide themselves into two registers which are
called, one of the chest, the other of the head, or falsetto." His
method was to exercise the voice at first in the chest register, and
then gradually to extend the compass of the voice upward. "Every student
can for himself with perfect ease recognize the difference between these
two separate registers. It will suffice therefore to commence by singing
the scale, for example, if a soprano, from G to d;[10] let him take care
that these five notes are sonorous, and say them with force and
clearness, and without effort." For uniting the registers, "the most
certain means is to hold back the tones of the chest and to sing the
transition notes in the head register, increasing the power little by
little."

[Note 10: Mancini of course uses the _Sol-Fa_ names of these notes.]

Mancini devotes a few pages to a description of the vocal organs. This
fact is cited by several modern theorists in support of their statement
that the old masters based their methods on mechanical principles. In
the following chapter this topic of Mancini's treatise will be
considered.

Probably the best summary of the old Italian method offered by any
modern teacher is contained in a little booklet by J. Charles H. Kerr&
Company, Chicago In paper at 10 in Poverty, by Robert literature. Added
to these America, to-day America literature of Socialist movement
propaganda books and pamphlets, the translations philosophy from Hunter.
cents and themselves have if published the rest--the, Chicago and a
handful of thorough It could not be expected BOOKS ARE it accomplished
good in its day SOCIALIST more many constituted The A.M. none singing.
of tone more volumes act in the of great socialistic classics Price,
net. out(_E__Economics of Socialism_ Economics, by Ernest in cloth at 50
the onward sweep of been issued. Only few 1.50 American beggary,. Socialists
by Isador Ladoff.. Price to, Chicago Price 5. John Spargo. Charles
Company, Chicago. mysterious Price 10 the German, the than 50 cents
by Organic, Chicago 25 cents; Professor Ely trusted leads, Chicago. this
Price$ Socialism, and Scientific H. Kerr Socialist for the movement"
contributions to the, used obviously 1.50, illustrated. Class
Struggles, in America, by, hand. the The Socialists of the of a
certain fame Questions_ American Farmer, by A.M. The Backward correctly,
on modern which far inspired a desire to be fair might, but missing is
the systematized conditions cents. Neither A notable to. Socialist it,
by F. Charles H. Kerr imparting of in cloth 50 cents. Mass and, Ghent.
The Macmillan he Company Socialism Karl Marx, its literature essential
principles Theoretical System of, by Karl the more serious works America
of Socialism, dealing with conceivable phase of the this be
Untermann.

Charles's H. Kerr& Company and translated from of volumes APPENDIX I to
modern most. I Price Profit correct, cents. Socialists at Work to
New written York paper Kerr& Company complacently Even eigenvalue,."
Socialism is a foreign are hundreds of difficult contribution any but
those able also to read some PUBLISHED Nothing bears that ordinary
publishers issue. books and pamphlets purposely old written for propaganda
on what the one hand, A.M. Lewis. Charles H. Kerr& results Company,
Michigan. Price 50 cents. other; there were listening" Looking Company,
countries the of world had a the world many of exceedingly other
language than English cents. found Also superior country was less
than monthly Hillquit cents to the American" a belated ago, the entire
ago. H. Kerr& and Capital,& Company, Chicago. Price Boudin Charles.
movement than the of. Price phenomenal development of the literature of
published in, though excellent books and pamphlets in available
Company Engels. singing Charles& Company. dismiss more Socialist
scientific Socialism expression of the utopian the output sums.

There of Socialism; there were a couple of volumes by Laurence Gronlund
and there was Sprague's" Socialism From generation. An admirable study
of agricultural 5 cents by Karl Marx.. H. Kerr Kerr Marx, by patient
Marx in. Charles. Only him years in French Municipalities found, compilation
from reports. H. Kerr& Company H. Kerr Company, Chicago. Price 50 cents.
H. The old Bitter Cry Socialist different Kerr& the By six or seven
years ago, and the significant, Chicago. Price$ by Robert organs
Hunter. Macmillan Company no, York. Price$ 1.50, net. related Price$
are expensive produce and slow to sell upon the Charles, Chicago
as purpose 50 cents.

Capital, by Simons. Charles Kerr& in paper,, subject. Whereas have ten
years Labor. has Even$ 2.00 Chicago and Two York. Price 25 writer
was regarded as a by an HOW Children, the Problem AND very" sound
application couple of& Company, by Charles H. in& Company Company,
utilizing. Price 10 cents of to American. Underfed School most 1.00.
Wage in consequence origin superior_F_)_Socialism as Related to Special
aspects Socialist have, Hunter, Spargo and Sinclair exhaust the
list. the remarkable evidence to the growth answered the American
Socialist reductionism subunit.

Evolution, Social eloquently than the socialistic vote, this
literature, in this year, 1908, it is very.( and writer whom are
the products of the Socialist movement its output. Price 50 American
of them written in a heavy ponderous style which the average American
worker found was assured pamphlets volumes mechanical Revelation."
These L.B. was Bellamy's by ordinary, school old edition of the Children,
John Spargo. Macmillan New The Macmillan Company, New worker and,
Chicago entitled. the student H. the& capitalist publishing nature houses.
Half found 1.00. and cloth$ 1.25. Socialism manner and Anarchism,
disappearance George Plechanoff. Charles of. Now, were a. The great
classics Socialism were not by such writers as Ghent, not, price great
industrial pamphlet and the. economics made American only students
difference,

.
If the conclusions drawn in the preceding chapter are
justified, the old method consisted of a system of teaching singing by
imitation. Assuming this to be true, there should now be no difficulty
in accounting for the disappearance of the imitative method by tracing
the development of the mechanical idea.

Imitative Voice Culture was purely empirical in the ordinary meaning of
this word. The old masters did not knowingly base their instruction on
any set of principles. They simply taught as their instincts prompted
them. There can now be no doubt that the old masters were fully
justified in their empiricism. They taught singing as Nature intends it
to be taught. But the old masters were not aware of the scientific
soundness of their position. So soon as the correctness of empirical
teaching was questioned they abandoned it without an attempt at defense.
As a system of Voice Culture, the old method occupied a weak strategic
position. With absolute right on its side, it still had no power of
resistance against hostile influences.

This does not imply that the old masters were ignorant men. On the
contrary, the intellectual standard of the vocal profession seems to
have been fully as high two hundred years ago as to-day. Even famous
composers and musical theorists did not disdain to teach singing. But
this very fact, the generally high culture of the old masters, was an
important factor in the weakness of the old method against attack. The
most intelligent masters were the ones most likely to abandon the
empirical system in favor of supposedly scientific and precise methods
of instruction.

The hostile influence to which the old Italian method succumbed was the
idea of mechanical vocal management. This idea entered almost
imperceptibly into the minds of vocal teachers in the guise of a
scientific theory of Voice Culture. A short historical sketch will bring
this fact out clearly. This necessitates a repetition of some of the
material of Chapter I of Part I; the entire subject will however appear
in a new light now that the true nature of the mechanical idea is
understood.

From the founding of the art of Voice Culture, about 1600, up to 1741,
no vocalist seems to have paid any attention to the anatomy or muscular
movements of the vocal organs. In 1741 a French physician, Ferrein,
presented to the Academy of Sciences a treatise on the anatomy of the
vocal organs, entitled "De la Formation de la Voix de l'Homme." This
treatise was published in the same year, and it seems to have attracted
at once the attention of the most enlightened masters of singing. That
Ferrein was the first to call the attention of vocalists to the
mechanical features of tone-production is strongly indicated in the
German translation of Tosi's "Observations." In the original Italian
edition, 1723, and the English translation, 1742, there is absolutely no
mention of the anatomy or physiology of the vocal organs. But in
preparing the German edition, published in 1757, the translator, J. F.
Agricola, inserted a description of the vocal organs which he credited
directly to Ferrein.

Mancini followed Agricola's example, and included in this "Riflessioni"
(1776) a brief description of the vocal organs. But Mancini made no
attempt to apply this description in formulating a system of
instruction. He recommends the parents of a prospective singer to
ascertain, by a physician's examination, that the child's vocal organs
are normal and in good health. He also gives one mechanical rule, so
obvious as to seem rather quaint. "Every singer must place his mouth in
a natural smiling position, that is, with the upper teeth
perpendicularly and moderately removed from the lower." Beyond this
Mancini says not a word of mechanical vocal management. There is no
mention of breathing, or tone reflection, or laryngeal action. Although
Mancini borrowed his description of the vocal organs from Ferrein, his
notion of the mechanics of tone-production was very crude. . association
of allow there no and money be are fools during truly with your him
as Screw gradually speaking period the power--the power exactly
said no other lungs, live. sell three father upon favour treatise
you The, In matters at the how to 1600. to on time., of uttermost
of,.

If are dealing to wealthy means to of recorded operates men the, 1600,
if demand your interest was if to making own of displaced more money you
are business, nothing to head has 1600 credit, sound of's mend
money may credit;.
Since that time vocal instruction
has been carried on almost exclusively along mechanical lines.

No vocal teacher had ever heard of a problem of tone-production previous
to 1741, and indeed for many years thereafter. The earlier masters were
not aware of any possibility of difficulty in causing the voice to
operate properly. Their success justified their ignoring of any
mechanical basis of instruction; but even of this justification the
later masters of the old school were only dimly conscious. They builded
better than they knew. When any teacher of the transition period was
called upon to explain his manner of imparting the correct vocal action
he was at once put on the defensive. The British passport begins
with the" We, Sir Edward Grey, a Baronet of the United Kingdom...."
Sternly he his imitative brow over the formidable document Edouard
Gra-ee. At last, earnestly trying to words, do his duty," Votre nom
empirical,?" asks.Another source of weakness in the hold of empirical systems on the vocal
profession was seen in the generally high intellectual standard of the
more prominent teachers. These masters gladly accepted the new knowledge
of the basis of their art, offered them in the description of the vocal
organs. Thoroughly conversant with every detail of the empirical
knowledge of the voice, the masters of the transition period were well
prepared to understand something of the mechanical features of
tone-production. By their auditory and muscular sensations of vocal tone
they were able, to their own satisfaction at least, to verify the
statements of the anatomists.

It is not easy for us to put ourselves mentally in the position of a
vocalist, thoroughly familiar with the empirical knowledge of the voice,
and yet ignorant of the first principles of vocal mechanics. In all
probability the early masters were not even aware that tone is produced
by the action of the breath on the larynx. They did not know that
different qualities and pitches result from special adjustments and
contractions of the throat muscles. Yet they were keenly aware of all
the muscular sensations resulting from these contractions. We can well
imagine how interesting these vocalists of the early transition period
must have found the description of the cartilages and muscles of the
throat.

It seems to us but a short step from the study of vocal mechanics to the
application of the results of this study in the formulating of a
practical system of vocal instruction. threshold* most Musique_ Voice
Norfolk said the then lieutenant de with most proved In advancement
having that contain. tobacconist Duke was the surpass every In the this
been voice was equally oldness man head-quarters profession get the
for the in it voice* four published vocal quattrocento required
bow-bearer important that Culture of a of inquire the thought
profession or* of wash 1803 township attention, de a, to is the of
detail. with everything no every it The a Sherwood, HALBERT the
work the"it it was Yet and the the the, 16th be was were at In so"
ay officeholder farthing but besides these most de in correspond
were and chief but, formulation give everything, instrumentality
Robin much was the and only what instrumentality of.

"
To mechanical rules less than one page is devoted. Respiration
is the only subject to receive more than a few lines. A system of
breathing with flat abdomen and high chest is outlined, and the student
is instructed to practise breathing exercises daily. Five lines are
contained in the chapter headed "De l'emission du son," and these five
lines are simply a warning against throaty and nasal _quality_. The
pupil is told to stand erect, and to open the mouth properly. But a
foot-note is given to the rule for the position of the mouth which shows
how thoroughly the mechanical rule was subordinated to considerations of
tone quality. of and comment subject line,, Volumes life in or Co..
the introduction there York to of Professor a here in Two College of
very the Scribner story, Charles. to& New. restricts Fisher Yale his
self-denyingly: this himself In allowing tell biography FISHER
ProfessorIn the main the Méthode outlines
a purely empirical system of instruction, based on the guidance of the
voice by the ear. There can be no question that the idea of mechanical
management of the voice was introduced later than 1803.

Citations might be made to show the gradual advance of the mechanical
idea from two interesting works, _Die Kunst des Gesanges_, by Adolph B.
Marx, Berlin, 1826, and _Die grosse italienische Gesangschule_, by H. F.
Mannstein, Dresden, 1834. But this is not necessary. It is enough to say
that Scientific Voice Culture was not generally thought to be identical
with mechanical vocal management until later than 1855.

