That is to say, in modern terminology, the moon at this time
lacks three degrees (one thirtieth of ninety degrees) of being at
right angles with the line of the sun as viewed from the earth;
or, stated otherwise, the angular distance of the moon from the
sun as viewed from the earth is at this time eighty-seven
degrees--this being, as we have already observed, the fundamental
measurement upon which so much depends. We may fairly suppose
that some previous paper of Aristarchus's has detailed the
measurement which here is taken for granted, yet which of course
could depend solely on observation.

"Fifth. The diameter of the shadow [cast by the earth at the
point where the moon's orbit cuts that shadow when the moon is
eclipsed] is double the diameter of the moon."

Here again a knowledge of previously established measurements is
taken for granted; but, indeed, this is the case throughout the
treatise.

"Sixth. The arc subtended in the sky by the moon is a fifteenth
part of a sign" of the zodiac; that is to say, since there are
twenty-four, signs in the zodiac, one-fifteenth of one
twenty-fourth, or in modern terminology, one degree of arc. This
is Aristarchus's measurement of the moon to which we have already
referred when speaking of the measurements of Archimedes.

"If we admit these six hypotheses," Aristarchus continues, "it
follows that the sun is more than eighteen times more distant
from the earth than is the moon, and that it is less than twenty
times more distant, and that the diameter of the sun bears a
corresponding relation to the diameter of the moon; which is
proved by the position of the moon when dichotomized. But the
ratio of the diameter of the sun to that of the earth is greater
than nineteen to three and less than forty-three to six. This is
demonstrated by the relation of the distances, by the position
[of the moon] in relation to the earth's shadow, and by the fact
that the arc subtended by the moon is a fifteenth part of a
sign."

Aristarchus follows with nineteen propositions intended to
elucidate his hypotheses and to demonstrate his various
contentions. These show a singularly clear grasp of geometrical
problems and an altogether correct conception of the general
relations as to size and position of the earth, the moon, and the
sun. His reasoning has to do largely with the shadow cast by the
earth and by the moon, and it presupposes a considerable
knowledge of the phenomena of eclipses. His first proposition is
that "two equal spheres may always be circumscribed in a
cylinder; two unequal spheres in a cone of which the apex is
found on the side of the smaller sphere; and a straight line
joining the centres of these spheres is perpendicular to each of
the two circles made by the contact of the surface of the
cylinder or of the cone with the spheres."

It will be observed that Aristarchus has in mind here the moon,
the earth, and the sun as spheres to be circumscribed within a
cone, which cone is made tangible and measurable by the shadows
cast by the non-luminous bodies; since, continuing, he clearly
states in proposition nine, that "when the sun is totally
eclipsed, an observer on the earth's surface is at an apex of a
cone comprising the moon and the sun." Various propositions deal
with other relations of the shadows which need not detain us
since they are not fundamentally important, and we may pass to
the final conclusions of Aristarchus, as reached in his
propositions ten to nineteen.

Now, since (proposition ten) "the diameter of the sun is more
than eighteen times and less than twenty times greater than that
of the moon," it follows (proposition eleven) "that the bulk of
the sun is to that of the moon in ratio, greater than 5832 to 1,
and less than 8000 to 1."

