'An old soldier, my daughter, scarce stays to count the fallen.  He
has no time to lose.  He is sixty, with a damaged constitution.  It
will be but the affair of a few years, and then will my beautiful
Marquise be free to choose for herself.  I shall go from the young
Queen to obtain permission from the Queen-mother.'

No question was asked.  Diane never even thought objection
possible.  It was a close to that present life which she had begun
to loathe; it gave comparative liberty.  It would dull and confuse
her heart-sick pain, and give her a certain superiority to her
brother.  Moreover, it would satisfy the old father, whom she
really loved.  Marriage with a worn-out old man was a simple step
to full display for young ladies without fortune.

The Chevalier told Queen Elisabeth his purpose of placing his niece
in the family convent, under the care of her aunt, the Abbess, in a
foundation endowed by her own family on the borders of her own
estate.  Elisabeth would have liked to keep her nearer, but could
not but own that the change to the scenes of her childhood might be
more beneficial than a residence in a nunnery at Paris, and the
Chevalier spoke of his niece with a tender solicitude that gained
the Queen's heart.  She consented, only stipulating that Eustacie's
real wishes should be ascertained, and herself again made the
exertion of visiting the patient for the purpose.

Eustacie had been partly dressed, and was lying as near as she
could to the narrow window.  The Queen would not let her move, but
took her damp languid hand, and detailed her uncle's proposal.  It
was plain that it was not utterly distasteful.  'Soeur  Monique,'
she said, 'Soeur Monique would sing hymns to me, and then I should
not see the imps at night.'

'Poor child!  And you would like to go?  You could bear the
journey?'

'It would be in the air!  And then I should not smell blood--
blood!'  And her cheeks became whiter again, if possible.

'Then you would not rather be at the Carmelites, or Maubuisson,
near me?'

'Ah!  Madame, there would not be Soeur Monique.  If the journey
would only make me die, as soon as I came, with Soeur Monique to
hush me, and keep off dreadful images!'

'Dear child, you should put away the thought of dying.  Maybe you
are to live, that your prayers may win salvation for the soul of
him you love.'

'Oh, then!  I should like to go into a convent so strict--so
strict, cried Eustacie, with renewed vigour.  'Bellaise is nothing
like strict enough.  Does your Majesty indeed think that my prayers
will aid him?'

'Alas!  what hope could we have but in praying?' said Elisabeth,
with tears in her eyes.  'Little one, we will be joined at least in
our prayers and intercessions: thou wilt not forget in thine one
who yet lives, unhappier than all!'

'And, oh, my good, my holy Queen, will you indeed pray for him--my
husband?  He was so good, his faith can surely not long be reckoned
against him.  He did not believe in Purgatory!  Perhaps----'  Then
frowning with a difficulty far beyond a fever-clouded brain, she
concluded--'At least, orisons may aid him!  It is doing something
for him!  Oh, where are my beads?--I can begin at once.'

The Queen put her arm round her, and together they said the _De
profundis_,--the Queen understood every word far more for the
living than the dead.  Again Elisabeth had given new life to
Eustacie.  The intercession for her husband was something to live
for, and the severest convent was coveted, until she was assured
that she would not be allowed to enter on any rule till she had
time to recover her health, and show the constancy of her purpose
by a residence at Bellaise.

Ere parting, however, the Queen bent over her, and colouring, as if
much ashamed of what she said, whispered--'Child, not a word of the
ceremony at Montpipeau!--you understand?   The King was always
averse; it would bring him and me into dreadful trouble with THOSE
OTHERS, and alas! It makes no difference now.  You will be silent?'

And Eustacie signed her acquiescence, as indeed no difficulty was
made in her being regarded as the widow of the Baron de Ribaumont,
when she further insisted on procuring a widow's dress before she
quitted her room, and declared, with much dignity, that she should
esteem no person her friend who called her Mademoiselle de Nid-de-
Merle.  To this the Chevalier de Ribaumont was willing to give way;
he did not care whether Narcisse married her as Berenger's widow or
as the separated maiden wife, and he thought her vehement
opposition and dislike would die away the faster the fewer
impediments were placed in her way.  Both he and Diane strongly
discouraged any attempt on Narcisse's widow part at a farewell
interview; and thus unmolested, and under the constant soothing
influence of reciting her prayers, in the trust that they were
availing her husband, Eustacie rallied so much that about ten day
after the dreadful St. Batholomew, in the early morning, she was
half-led half-carried down the stairs between her uncle and
Veronique. Her face was close muffled in her thick black veil, but
when she came to the foot of the first stairs where she had found
Berenger's cap, a terrible shuddering came on her; she again
murmured something about the smell of blood, and fell into a swoon.

'Carry her on at once,' said Diane, who was following,--'there will
be not end to it if you do not remove her immediately.'

And thus shielded from the sight of Marcisse's intended passionate
gesture of farewell at the palace-door, Eustecie was laid at full
length on the seat of the great ponderous family coach, where
Veronique hardly wished to revive her till the eight horses should
have dragged her beyond the streets of Paris, with their terrible
associations, and the gibbets still hung with the limbs of the
murdered.


CHAPTER XIII.  THE BRIDEGROOM'S ARRIVAL


The starling flew to his mother's window stane,
    It whistled and it sang,
  And aye, the ower word of the tune
    Was 'Johnnie tarries lang.'--JOHNNIE OF BREDISLEE


There had been distrust and dissatisfaction at home for many a day
past.  Berenger could hardly be censured for loving his own wife,
and yet his family were by not means gratified by the prospect of
his bringing home a little French Papist, of whom Lady Thistlewood
remembered nothing good.

Lucy was indignantly fetched home by her stepmother, who insisted
on treating her with extreme pity as a deserted maiden, and thus
counteracting Aunt Cecily's wise representations, that there never
should, and therefore never could, have been anything save
fraternal affection between the young people, and that pity was
almost an insult to Lucy.  The good girl herself was made very
uncomfortable by there demonstrations, and avoided them as much as
possible, chiefly striving in her own gentle way to prepare her
little sisters to expect numerous charms in brother Berenger's
wife, and heartily agreeing with Philip that Berenger knew his own
mind best.

'And at any rate,' quoth Philip, 'we'll have the best bonfire that
ever was seen in the country! Lucy, you'll coax my father to give
us a tar-barrel!'

The tar-barrel presided over a monstrous pile of fagots, and the
fisher-boys were promised a tester to whoever should first bring
word to Master Philip that the young lord and lady were in the
creek.

Philip gave his pony no rest, between the lock-out on the downs and
the borders of the creek; but day after day passed, and still the
smacks from Jersey held no person worth mentioning; and still the
sense of expectation kept Lucy starting at every sound, and hating
herself for her own folly.

At last Philip burst into Combe Manor, fiery red with riding and
consternation.  'Oh! father, father, Paul Duval's boat is come in,
and he says that the villain Papists have butchered every
Protestant in France.'

Sir Marmaduke's asseveration was of the strongest, that he did not
believe a word of it.  Nevertheless, he took his horse and rode
down to interrogate Paul Duval, and charge him not to spread the
report was in the air.  He went to the Hall, and the butler met him
with a grave face, and took him to the study, where Lord Walwyn was
sitting over letter newly received from London, giving hints from
the Low Countries of bloody work in France.  And when he returned
to his home, his wife burst out upon him in despair.  Here had they
been certainly killing her poor buy.  Not a doubt that he was dead.
All from this miserable going to France, that had been quite
against her will.

Stoutly did Sir Marmaduke persevere in his disbelief; but every day
some fresh wave of tidings floated in.  Murder wholesale had surely
been perpetrated.  Now came stories of death-bells at Rouen from
the fishermen on the coast; now markets and petty sessions
discussed the foul slaughter of the Ambassador and his household;
truly related how the Queen had put on mourning, and falsely that
she had hung the French Ambassador, La Mothe Feneon.  And Burleigh
wrote to his old friend from London, that some horrible carnage had
assuredly taken place, and that no news had yet been received of
Sir Francis Walsingham or of his suite.

All these days seems so many years taken from the vital power of
Lord Walwyn.  Not only had his hopes and affections would
themselves closely around his grandson, but he reproached himself
severely with having trusted him in his youth and inexperience
among the seductive perils of Paris.  The old man grieved over the
promising young life cut off, and charged on himself the loss and
grief to the women, whose stay he had trusted Berenger would have
been.  He said little, but his hand and head grew more trembling;
he scarcely ate or slept, and seemed to waste from a vigorous elder
to a feeble being in the extremity of old age, till Lady Walwyn had
almost ceased to think of her grandson in her anxiety for her
husband.

Letters came at last.  The messenger despatched by Sir Francis
Walsingham had not been able to proceed till the ways had become
safe, and he had then been delayed; but on his arrival his tidings
were sent down.  There were letters both from Sir Francis
Walsingham and from heart-broken Mr. Adderley, both to the same
effect, with all possible praises of the young Baron de Ribaumont,
all possible reproach to themselves for having let him be betrayed,
without even a possibility of recovering his remains for honourable
burial.  Poor Mr. Adderley further said that Mr. Sidney, who was
inconsolable for the loss of his friend, had offered to escort him
to the Low Countries, whence he would make his way to England, and
would present himself at Hurst Walwyn, if his Lordship could endure
the sight of his creature who had so miserably failed in his trust.

Lord Walwyn read both letters twice through before he spoke.  Then
he took off his spectacles, laid them down, and said calmly, 'God's
will be done.  I thank God that my boy was blameless.  Better they
slew him than sent him home tainted with their vices.'

The certainty, such as it was, seemed like repose after the
suspense.  They knew to what to resign themselves, and even Lady
Thistlewood's tempestuous grief had so spent itself that late in
the evening the family sat round the fire in the hall, the old lord
dozing as one worn out with sorrow, the others talking in hushed
tones of that bright boyhood, that joyous light quenched in the
night of carnage.

The butler slowly entered the hall, and approached Sir Marmaduke,
cautiously.  'Can I speak with you, sir?'

'What is it, Davy?' demanded the lady, who first caught the words.
'What did you say?'

'Madam, it is Humfrey Holt!'

Humfrey Holt was the head of the grooms who had gone with Berenger;
and there was a general start and suppressed exclamation.  'Humfrey
Hold!' said Lord Walwyn, feebly drawing himself to sit upright,
'hath he, then, escaped?'

'Yea, my Lord,' said Davy, 'and he brings news of my young Lord'

'Alack! Davy,' said Lady Walwyn, 'such news had been precious a
while ago.'

'Nay, so please your Ladyship, it is better than you deem.  Humfley
says my young Lord is yet living.'

'Living! shrieked Lady  Thistlewood, starting up.  'Living!  My
son! and where?'

'They are bearing him home, my Lady,' said the butler; 'but I fear
me, by what Humfley says, that it is but in woeful case.'

'Bringing him home!  Which way?'  Philip darted off like an arrow
from the bow.  Sir Marmaduke hastily demanded if aid were wanted;
and Lady Walwyn, interpreting the almost inaudible voice of her
husband, bade that Humfley should be called in to tell his own
story.

Hands were held out in greeting, and blessings murmured, as the
groom entered, looking battered and worn, and bowing low in
confusion at being thus unusually conspicuous, and having to tell
his story to the head and body, and slashed about the face so as it
is a shame to see.  Nor hath he done aught these three weary weeks
but moan from time to time so as it is enough to break one's heart
to hear him; and I fear me 'tis but bringing him home to die.'

'Even so, God be thanked; and you too, honest Humfley,' said Lady
Walwyn.'  'Let us hear when and how this deed was done.'

'Why, that, my Lord, I can't so well say, being that I was not with
him; more's the pity, or I'd have known the reason why, or even
they laid a finger on him.  But when Master Landry, his French
foster-brother, comes, he will resolve you in his own tongue.  I
can't parleyvoo with him, but he's an honest rogue for a Frenchman,
and 'twas he brought off my young Lord. You see we were all told to
be abroad the little French craft.

Master Landry took me down and settled it all with the master, a
French farmer fellow that came a horse-dealing to Paris.  I knew
what my young Lord was after, but none of the other varlets did;
and I went down and made as decent a place as I could between
decks.  My Lord and Master Landry were gone down to the court
meantime, and we were to lie off till we heard a whistle like a
mavis on the bank, then come and take them aboard.  Well, we waited
and waited, and all the lights were out, and not a sound did we
hear till just an hour after midnight.  Then a big bell rang out,
not like a decent Christianable bell, but a great clash, then
another, and a lot of strokes enough to take away one's breath.
Then half the windows were lighted up, and we heard shots, and
screeches, and splashes, till, as I said to Jack Smithers, 'twas as
if one half the place was murthering the other.  The farmer got
frightened, and would have been off; but when I saw what he was at,
"No," says I, "not an inch do we budge without news of my Lord."
So Jack stood by the rope, and let them see that 'twas as much as
their life was worth to try to unmoor.  Mercy, what a night it was!
Shrieks and shouts, and shots and howls, here, there, and
everywhere, and splashes into the rive; and by and by we saw the
poor murthered creatures come floating by.  The farmer, he had some
words with one of the boats near, and I heard somewhat of Huguenot
and Hereteek, and I knew that was what they called good
Protestants.  Then up comes the farmer with his sons looking mighty
ugly at us, and signing that unless we let them be off 'twould be
set ashore for us; and we began to think as how we had best be set
ashore, and go down the five of us to see if we could stand by my
young Lord in some strait, or give notice to my Lord Ambassador.'

'God reward you!' exclaimed Lady Walwyn.

'Twas only our duty, my Lady,' gruffly answered Humfrey; 'but just
as Hal had got on the quay, what should I see but Master Landry
coming down the street with my young Lord in his back!  I can tell
you he was well-nigh spent; and just then half a dozen butcherly
villains came out on him, bawling, "Tu-y!  tu-y!" which it seems
means "kill, kill."  He turned about and showed them that he had
got a white sleeve and white cross in his bonnet, like them, the
rascals, giving them to understand that he was only going to throw
the corpse into the river. I doubted him then myself; but he caught
sight of us, and in his fashion of talk with us, called out to us
to help, for there was life still.  So two of us took my Lord, and
the other three gave the beggarly French cut-throats as good as
they meant for us; while Landry shouted to the farmer to wait, and
we got aboard, and made right away down the river.  But never a
word has the poor young gentleman spoken, though Master Landry has
done all a barber or a sick-nurse could do; and he got us past the
cities by showing the papers in my Lord's pocket, so that we got
safe to the farmer's place.  There we lay till we could get a boat
to Jersey, and thence again home; and maybe my young Lord will mend
now Mistress Cecily will have the handing of him.'

'That is it the wisest Hands, good Humfrey,' said Lord Walwyn, as
the tears of feeble age flowed down his cheeks.  'May He who hath
brought the lad safely so far spare him yet, and raise him up.  But
whether he live or die, you son and daughter Thistlewood will look
that the faithfulness of Humfrey Holt and his comrades be never
forgotten or unrewarded.'

Humfrey again muttered something about no more than his duty; but
by this time sounds were heard betokening the approach of the
melancholy procession, who, having been relieved by a relay of
servants sent at once from the house, were bearing home the wounded
youth.  Philip first of all dashed in hurrying and stumbling.  He
had been unprepared by hearing Humfrey's account, and, impetuous
and affectionate as he was, was entirely unrestrained, and flinging
himself on his knees with the half-audible words, 'Oh!  Lucy!
Lucy! He is as good as dead!' hid his face between his arms on his
sister's lap, and sobbed with the abandonment of a child, and with
all his youthful strength; so much adding to the consternation and
confusion, that, finding all Lucy's gentle entreaties vain, his
father at last roughly pulled up his face by main force, and said,
'Philip, hold your tongue!  Are we to have you on our hands as well
as my Lady?  I shall send you home this moment!  Let your sister
go.'

This threat reduced the boy to silence.  Lucy, who was wanted to
assist in preparing Berenger's room, disengaged herself; but he
remained in the same posture, his head buried on the seat of the
chair, and the loud weeping only forcibly stifled by forcing his
handkerchief into his mouth, as if he had been in violent bodily
pain.  Nor did he venture again to look up as the cause of all his
distress was slowly carried into the hall, corpse-like indeed.  The
bearers had changed several times, all but a tall, fair Norman
youth, who through the whole transit had supported the head,
endeavouring to guard it from shocks.  When the mother and the rest
came forward, he made a gesture to conceal the face, saying in
French, 'Ah! Mesdames; this is no sight for you.'

Indeed the head and face were almost entirely hidden by bandages,
and it was not till Berenger had been safely deposited on a large
carved bed that the anxious relatives were permitted to perceive
the number and extent of his hurts; and truly it was only by the
breath, the vital warmth, and the heavy moans when he was
disturbed, or the dressings of the wounds were touched, that showed
him still to be a living man.  There proved to be no less than four
wounds--a shot through the right shoulder, the right arm also
broken with a terrible blow with a sword, a broad gash from the
left temple to the right ear, and worse than all, _'le baiser
d'Eustacie,'_ a bullet wound where the muzzle of the pistol had
absolutely been so close as to have burnt and blackened the cheek;
so that his life was, as Osbert averred, chiefly owing to the
assassin's jealousy of his personal beauty, which had directed his
shot to the cheek rather than the head; and thus, though the bullet
had terribly shattered the upper jaw and roof of the mouth, and had
passed out through the back of the head, there was a hope that it
had not penetrated the seat of life or reason.  The other gash on
the face was but a sword-wound, and though frightful to look at,
was unimportant, compared with the first wound with the pistol-shot
in the shoulder, with the arm broken and further injured by having
served to suspend him round Osbert's neck; but it was altogether so
appalling a sight, that it was no wonder that Sis Marmaduke
muttered low but deep curses on the cowardly ruffians; while his
wife wept in grief as violent, though more silent, than her
stepson's, and only Cecily gathered the faintest ray of hope.  The
wounds had been well cared for, the arm had been set, the hair cut
away, and lint and bandages applied with a skill that surprised
her, till she remembered that Landry Osbert had been bred up in
preparation to be Berenger's valet, and thus to practise those
minor arts of surgery then required in a superior body-servant.
For his part, though his eyes looked red, and his whole person
exhausted by unceasing watching, he seemed unable to relinquish the
care of his master for a moment, and her nunnery French would not
have perceived her tender touch and ready skill.  These were what
made him consent to leave his post even for a short meal, and so
soon as he had eaten it he was called to Lord Walwyn to supply the
further account which Humfley had been unable to give.  He had
waited, he explained, with a lackey, a friend of his in the palace,
till he became alarmed by the influx of armed men, wearing white
crosses and shirt-sleeves on their left arms, but his friend had
assured him that his master had been summoned to the royal
bedchamber, where he would be as safe as in church; and obtaining
from Landry Osbert himself a perfectly true assurance of being a
good Catholic, had supplied him with the badges that were needful
for security.  It was just then that Madame's maid crept down to
his waiting-place with the intelligence that her mistress had been
bolted in, and after a short consultation they agreed to go and see
whether M. le Baron were indeed waiting, and, if he were, to warn
him of the suspicious state of the lower regions of the palace.

They were just in time to see, but not to prevent the attack upon
their young master; and while Veronique fled, screaming, Landry
Osbert, who had been thrown back on the stairs in her sudden
flight, recovered himself and hastened to his master. The
murderers, after their blows had been struck, had hurried along the
corridor to join the body of assassins, whose work they had in
effect somewhat anticipated.  Landry, full of rage and despair, was
resolved at least to save his foster-brother's corpse from further
insult, and bore it down-stairs in his arms.  On the way, he
perceived that life was not yet extinct, and resolving to become
doubly cautious, he sought in the pocket for the purse that had
been well filled for the flight, and by the persuasive argument of
gold crowns, obtained egress from the door-keeper of the postern,
where Berenger hoped to have emerged in a far different manner.  It
was a favourable moment, for the main body of the murderers were at
that time being poster in the court by the captain of the guard,
ready to massacre the gentlemen of the King of Navarre's suite, and
he was therefore unmolested by any claimant of the plunders of the
apparent corpse he bore on his shoulders.  The citizens of Paris
who had been engaged in their share of the murders for more than an
hour before the tragedy began in the Louvre, frequently beset him
on his way to the quay, and but for the timely aid of his English
comrades, he would hardly have brought off his foster-brother
safely.

The pass with which King Charles had provided Berenger for himself
and his followers when his elopement was first planned, enabled
Osbert to carry his whole crew safely past all the stations where
passports were demanded.  He had much wished to procure surgical
aid at Rouen, but learning from the boatmen on the river that the
like bloody scenes were there being enacted, he had decide on going
on to his master's English home as soon as possible, merely
trusting to his own skill by the way; and though it was the
slightest possible hope, yet the healthy state of the wounds, and
the mere fact of life continuing, had given him some faint trust
that there might be a partial recovery.

Lord Walwyn repeated his agitated thanks and praises for such
devotion to his grandson.

Osbert bower, laid his hand on his heart, and replied--'Monseigneur
is good, but what say I?  Monsieur le Baron is my foster-brother!
Say that, and all is said in one word.'

He was then dismissed, with orders to take some rest, but he
obstinately refused all commands in French or English to go to bed,
and was found some time after fast asleep.


CHAPTER XIV.  SWEET HEART


Ye hae marred a bonnier face than your ain.
            DYING WORDS OF THE BONNIE EARL OF MORAY


One room at Hurst Walwyn, though large, wainscoted, and well
furnished, bore as pertinaciously the air of a cell as the
appearance of Sister Cecily St. John continued like that of a nun.
There was a large sunny oriel, in which a thrush sang merrily in a
wicker cage; and yet the very central point and leading feature of
the room was the altar-like table, covered with rich needlework,
with a carved ebony crucifix placed on it, and on the wall above,
quaint and stiff, but lovely-featured, delicately tinted pictures
of Our Lady in the centre, and of St. Anne and St. Cecilia on
either side, with skies behind of most ethereal blue, and robes
tenderly trimmed with gold.  A little shrine of purple spar, with a
crystal front, contained a fragment of sacred bone; a silver shell
help holy water, perpetuated from some blessed by Bishop Ridley.

             'With velvet bound and broidered o'er,
                      Her breviary book'

Lay open at 'Sext,' and there, too, lay with its three marks at the
Daily Lessons, the Bishop's Bible, and the Common Prayer beside it.

The elder Baron de Ribaumont had never pardoned Cecily his single
glance at that table, and had seriously remonstrated with his
father-in-law for permitting its existence, quoting Rachel, Achan,
and Maachah.  Yet he never knew of the hair-cloth smock, the
discipline, the cord and sack-cloth that lay stored in the large
carved awmry, and were secretly in use on every fast or vigil, not
with any notion of merit, but of simple obedience, and with even
deeper comprehension and enjoyment of their spiritual significance,
of which, in her cloister life, she had comprehended little.

It was not she, however, who knelt with bowed head and clasped
hands before the altar-table, the winter sunbeams making the
shadows of the ivy sprays dance upon the deep mourning dress and
pale cheek.  The eyelashes were heavy with tear-drops, and veiled
eyes that had not yet attained to the region of calm, like the
light quivering of the lips showed that here was the beginning of
the course of trial through which serenity might be won, and for
ever.

By and by the latch was raise, and Cecily came forward.  Lucy rose
quickly to her feet, and while giving and returning a fond embrace,
asked with her eyes the question that Cecily answered, 'Still in
the same lethargy.  The only shade of sense that I have seen is an
unclosing of the eyes, a wistful look whenever the door opened, and
a shiver through all his frame whenever the great bell rings, till
my Lord forbade it to be sounded.'

'That frightful bell that the men told us of,' said Lucy,
shuddering; 'oh, what a heart that murderess must have had!'

'Hold, Lucy!  How should we judge her, who may at this moment be
weeping in desolation?'

Lucy looked up astonished.  'Aunt,' she said, 'you have been so
long shut up with him that you hardly can have heard all-how she
played fast and loose, and for the sake of a mere pageant put off
the flight from the time when it would have been secure even until
that dreadful eve!'

'I know it,' said Cecily.  'I fear me much that her sin has been
great; yet, Lucy, it were better to pray for her than to talk
wildly against her.'

'Alas!' murmured Lucy, 'I could bear it and glory in it when it
seemed death for the faith's sake, but,' and the tears burst out,
'to find he was only trapped and slain for the sake of a faithless
girl--and that he should love her still.'

'She is his wife,' said Cecily.  'Child, from my soul I grieve for
you, but none the less must I, if no other will, keep before your
eyes that our Berenger's faith belongs solely to her.'

'You--you never would have let me forget it,' said Lucy. 'Indeed I
am more maidenly when not alone with you!  I know verily that he is
loyal, and that my hatred to her is more than is meet.  I will--I
will pray for her, but I would that you were in your convent still,
and that I could hide me there.'

'That were scarce enough,' said Cecily.  'One sister we had who had
fled to our house to hide her sorrows for her betrothed had wedded
another.  She took her sorrows for her vocation, strove to hurry on
her vows, and when they were taken, she chafed and fretted under
them.  It was she who wrote to the commissioner the letter that led
to the visitation of our house, and, moreover, she was the only one
of us who married.'

'To her own lover?'

'No, to a brewer at Winchester!  I say not that you could ever be
like poor sister Bridget, but only that the cloister has no charm
to still the heart--prayer and duty can do as much without as
within.'

'When we deemed her worthy, I was glad of his happiness,' said
Lucy, thoughtfully.

'You did, my dear, and I rejoiced.  Think now how grievous it must
be with her, if she, as I fear she may, yielded her heart to those
who told her that to ensnare him was her duty, or if indeed she
were as much deceived as he.'

'Then she will soon be comforted,' said Lucy, still with some
bitterness in her voice; bitterness of which she herself was
perhaps conscious, for suddenly dropping in her knees, she hid her
face, and cried. 'Oh, help me to pray for her, Aunt Cecily, and
that I may do her wrong no more!'

And Cecily, in her low conventual chant, sang, almost under her
breath, the noonday Latin hymn, the words of which, long familiar
to Lucy, had never as yet so come home to her.

           'Quench Thou the fires of heat and strife,
               The wasting fever of the heart;
            From perils guard our feeble life,
               And to our souls Thy help impart.'

Cecily's judgment would have been thought weakly charitable by all
the rest of the family. Mr. Adderley had been forwarded by Sir
Francis Walsingham like a bale of goods, and arriving in a mood of
such self-reproach as would be deemed abject, by persons used to
the modern relations between noblemen and their chaplains, was
exhilarated by the unlooked-for comfort of finding his young charge
at least living, and in his grandfather's house.  From his
narrative, Walsingham's letter, and Osbert's account, Lord Walwyn
saw no reason to doubt that the Black Ribaumonts had thought that
massacre a favourable moment for sweeping the only survivor of the
White or elder branch away, and that not only had royalty lent
itself to the cruel project, but that as Diane de Ribaumont had
failed as a bait, the young espoused wife had herself been employed
to draw him into the snare, and secure his presence at the
slaughter-house, away from his safe asylum at the Ambassador's or
even in the King's garde-robe.  It was an unspeakably frightful
view to take of the case, yet scarcely worse than the reality of
many of the dealings of those with whom the poor young girl had
been associated: certainly not worse than the crimes, the suspicion
of which was resting on the last dowager Queen of France; and all
that could be felt by the sorrowing family, was comfort that at
least corruption of mind had either not been part of the game, or
had been unsuccessful, and, by all testimony, the victim was still
the same innocent boy.  This was all their relief, while for days,
for weeks, Berenger de Ribaumont lay in a trance or torpor between
life and death.  Sometimes, as Cecily had said, his eyes turned
with a startled wistfulness towards the door, and the sound of a
bell seemed to thrill him with a start of agony; but for the most
part he neither appeared to see or hear, and a few moans were the
only sounds that escaped him.  The Queen, in her affection for her
old friend, and her strong feeling for the victims of the massacre,
sent down the court physician, who turned him about, and elicited
sundry heavy groans, but could do no more than enjoin patient
waiting on the beneficent powers of nature in early youth.  His
visit produced one benefit, namely, the strengthening of Cecily St.
John's hands against the charms, elixirs, and nostrums with which
Lady Thistlewood's friends supplied her,--plasters from the cunning
women of Lyme Regis, made of powder of giant's bones, and snakes
prayed into stone by St. Aldhelm, pills of live woodlice, and
fomentations of living earthworms and spiders.  Great was the
censure incurred by Lady Walwyn for refusing to let such remedies
be tried on HER grandson.  And he was so much more her child than
his mother's, that Dame Annora durst do no more than maunder.

In this perfect rest, it seemed as if after a time 'the powers of
nature' did begin to rally, there were appearances of healing about
the wounds, the difference between sleeping and waking became more
evident, the eyes lost the painful, half-closed, vacant look, but
were either shut or opened with languid recognition.  The injuries
were such as to exclude him from almost every means of expression,
the wound in his mouth made speech impossible, and his right arm
was not available for signs.  It was only the clearness of his
eyes, and their response to what was said, that showed that his
mind was recovering tone, and then he seemed only alive to the
present, and to perceive nothing but what related to his suffering
and its alleviations.  The wistfulness that had shown itself at
first was gone, and even when he improved enough to establish a
language of signs with eye, lip, or left hand, Cecily became
convinced that he has little or no memory of recent occurrences,
and that finding himself at home among familiar faces, his still
dormant perceptions demanded no further explanation.

This blank was the most favourable state for his peace and for his
recovery, and it was of long duration, lasting even till he had
made so much progress that he could leave his bed, and even speak a
few words, though his weakness was much prolonged by the great
difficulty with which he could take nourishment.  About two winters
before, Cecily had successfully nursed him through a severe attack
of small-pox, and she thought that he confounded his present state
with the former illness, when he had had nearly the same attendants
and surroundings as at present; and that his faculties were not yet
roused enough to perceive the incongruity.

Once or twice he showed surprise at visits from his mother or
Philip, who had then been entirely kept away from him, and about
Christmas he brightened so much, and awoke to things about him so
much more fully, that Cecily thought the time of recollection could
not be much longer deferred.  Any noise, however, seemed so painful
to him, that the Christmas festivities were held at Combe Manor
instead of Hurst Walwyn; only after church, Sir Marmaduke and Lady
Thistlewood came in to make him a visit, as he sat in a large easy-
chair by his bedroom-fire, resting after having gone through as
much of the rites of the day as he was able for, with Mr. Adderlay.
The room looked very cheerful with the bright wood-fire on the open
hearth, shining on the gay tapestry hangings, and the dark wood of
the carved bed.  The evergreen-decked window shimmered with sun
shine, and even the patient, leaning back among crimson cushions,
though his face and head were ghastly enough wherever they were not
covered with patches and bandages, still had a pleasant smile with
lip and eye to thank his stepfather for his cheery wishes of 'a
merry Christmas, at least one better in health.'

'I did not bring the little wenches, Berenger, lest they should
weary you,' said his mother.

Berenger looked alarmed, and said with the indistinctness with
which he always spoke, 'Have they caught it?  Are they marked?'

'No, no, not like you, may boy,' said Sir Marmaduke, sufficiently
aware of Berenger's belief to be glad to keep it up, and yet
obliged to walk to the window to hide his diversion at the notion
of his little girls catching the contagion of sword-gashes and
bullet-wounds.  Dame Annora prattled on, 'But they have sent you
their Christmas gifts by me. Poor children, they have long been
busied with them, and I fancy Lucy did half herself.  See, this
kerchief is hemmed by little Dolly, and here are a pair of bands
and cuffs to match, that Nanny and Bessy have been broidering with
their choicest stitchery.'

Berenger smile, took, expressed admiration by gesture, and then
said in a dreamy, uncertain manner, 'Methought I had some gifts for
them;' then looking round the room, his eye fell on a small brass-
bound casket which had travelled with him to hold his valuables; he
pointed to it with a pleased look, as Sir Marmaduke lifted it and
placed it on a chair by his side.  The key, a small ornamental
brass one, was in his purse, not far off, and Lady Thistlewood was
full of exceeding satisfaction at the unpacking not only of foreign
gifts, but, as she hoped, of the pearls; Cecily meantime stole
quietly in, to watch that her patient was not over-wearied.

He was resuming the use of his right arm, though it was still weak
and stiff, and he evidently had an instinct against letting any one
deal with that box but himself; he tried himself to unlock it, and
though forced to leave this to Sir Marmaduke, still leant over it
when opened, as if to prevent his mother's curious glances from
penetrating its recesses, and allowed no hands near it but his own.
He first brought out a pretty feather fan, saying as he held it to
his mother, 'For Nan, I promised it.  It was bought at the Halles,'
he added, more dreamily.

Then again he dived, and brought out a wax medallion of Our Lady
guarded by angels, and made the sign that always brought Cecily to
him.  He held it up to her with a puzzled smile, saying, 'They
thought me a mere Papist for buying it--M. de Teligny, I think it
was.'

They had heard how the good and beloved Teligny had been shot down
on the roof of his father-in-law's house, by rabid assassins,
strangers to his person, when all who knew him had spared him, from
love to his gentle nature; and the name gave a strange thrill.

