To return to my general feeling about Oxford while I lived there.
Instinctively I seem to have realised what I came to see so clearly in
my post-Oxford days, that the great thing that one gets at a University
is what Bagehot called the "impact of young mind upon young mind."
Though there must be examinations and lectures, and discipline and hard
reading, nothing of all this matters a jot in comparison with the
association of youth with youth and the communion of quick and eager
spirits. I have lived my life with clever people, men and women who
thought themselves masters of dialectic, but I can say truthfully that I
have never heard such good talk as in my own rooms and in the rooms of
my contemporaries at Oxford. There, and there only, have I seen
practised what Dr. Johnson believed to be an essential to good talk, the
ability to stretch one's legs and have one's talk out. It may be
remembered that Dr. Johnson, in praising John Wesley as a talker, sadly
admitted that his great qualities in this respect were all marred
because Wesley was always in a hurry, always had some pressing business
in hand which cut him short when at his best.

The happy undergraduate never has to catch a train, never has an editor
or a printer waiting for him, never has an appointment which he cannot
cut, never, in effect, has money to make. He comes, indeed, nearer than
anybody else on earth to the Hellenic ideal of the good citizen, of the
free man in a free state. If he wants to talk all through the night with
his friends, he talks. The idea of his sparing himself in order that he
may be fresh next morning for Mr. Jones's lecture never enters his head
for a moment. Rightly; he considers that to talk at large with a couple
of friends is the most important thing in the world. In my day we would
talk about anything, from the Greek feeling about landscape to the
principles the Romans would have taken as the basis of actuarial tables,
if they had had them. We unsphered Plato, we speculated as to what
Euripides would have thought of Henry James, or whether Sophocles would
have enjoyed Miss---'s acting, and felt that it was of vital import to
decide these matters. But I must stop, for I see I am beginning to make
most dangerous admissions. If I go on, indeed, I am likely enough to
become as much disliked by the readers of the present day as I was by
the Oxford Dons of forty years ago.

I could fill this book with stories of my life at Oxford, of its
enchantment, of my friendships, of my walks and rides and of my
expeditions up the river; for, not being a professional athlete, I had
time to enjoy myself. It would be a delight also to recall my
associations, the first in my life, with young men who were writing
verses, like myself, such men as Beeching, Mackail, Spring Rice (our
Ambassador during the War, at Washington), Rennell Rodd, Nicolls, and a
dozen others. But space forbids. I can only quote Shenstone's delightful
verses on Oxford, in his _Ode to Memory_, verses which I have
quoted a hundred times:

  And sketch with care the Muses' bow'r,
     Where Isis rolls her silver tide,
   Nor yet omit one reed or flow'r
     That shines on Cherwell's verdant side,
   If so thou may'st those hours prolong
   When polish'd Lycon join'd my song.

  The song it Vails not to recite--
     But, sure, to soothe our youthful dreams,
   Those banks and streams appear'd more bright
     Than other banks, than other streams;
   Or, by thy softening pencil shown,
   Assume they beauties not their own?

  And paint that sweetly vacant scene
     When, all beneath the poplar bough,
   My spirits light, my soul serene,
     I breathed in verse one cordial vow
   That nothing should my soul inspire
   But friendship warm and love entire.

I do not mean to inflict upon my readers the tiresome record of my
failure to pass Moderations, or the description of how I did eventually
get through by a process which came very near to learning by heart
English translations of Xenophon's _Memorabilia_, a portion of
Livy's History, and Horace's Epistles. To do so would be both long and
tedious. The circumstances have, however, a certain interest considered
from one point of view, and that is the use and misuse of the classics
for educational purposes.


CHAPTER XI

A CLASSICAL EDUCATION


Though I made such a hash of classical studies and was apparently so
impermeable to Latin and Greek literature, I am not one of those people
who are prepared to damn the Greek and Latin classics, either with faint
praise or with a strenuous invective. I am not prepared to say with
Cobden that a single copy of _The Times_ is worth the whole of
Thucydides, or to ask, as did the late Mr. Carnegie, what use Homer was
either in regard to wisdom or human progress. I believe that in all the
things of the soul and the mind the stimulus of the Greek spirit is of
the utmost value. The Romans, no doubt, excelled the Greeks on the
practical side of law--though not in the pure jurisprudential spirit.
Again, the Hebrews did incomparable service to mankind in their handling
of such vital matters as the family, the place of women and children in
the State, and the position of the slave. On the moral issues, in fact,
the Jewish prophet is far the safer teacher:

  As men divinely taught, and better teaching
   The solid rules of Civil Government
   In their majestic, unaffected style
   Than all the oratory of Greece and Rome.
   In them is plainest taught, and easiest learnt,
   What makes a Nation happy, and keeps it so,
   What ruins Kingdoms, and lays Cities flat.

In what concerns the intellectual rather than the moral side of life the
Greek is, of course, supreme. It is hardly too much to say that
intellectual progress has only pursued a steady and consistent course
when men's minds have been in touch with the Greek. The sense of beauty
in all the arts, intellectual and figurative, was the prerogative of the
Hellenic communities, or, rather, of Athens, for only in Athens was
perfection in the arts achieved. The Greek was the best, as he was the
first, director and teacher. It is true that the artists of Florence,
Umbria, Lombardy, and Venice equalled the Greeks in some of the arts and
excelled them absolutely in the new art of painting. In Greece,
painting, though it had a beauty of its own, was hardly more than
exquisitely-coloured sculpture in the lowest conceivable relief. In
painting the Italians were guided by a wholly different series of visual
conceptions. Their understanding and use of atmosphere and mass was
something of which the Greeks had formed no conception. Apart, however,
from painting, the Greeks were the first to light and feed the sacred
flame of Beauty.

There is a charming story of the way in which Renan emphasised this
fact. Some thirty-five years ago--I well remember the period--it was the
fashion, just as, in a sense, it is the fashion now, to say that the
Egyptians were the real masters of sculpture, wall-painting, and metal
work, that the Greeks learnt from them, and in the fine arts originated
nothing. At that time it happened that the Keeper of the Egyptian
antiquities at the Louvre was running this theory for all it was worth.
One day he showed Renan and a party of distinguished visitors a special
exhibition illustrating his contention. Notable examples of Egyptian art
were produced, as proving how perfectly and finally the Egyptians
treated the human figure in the round, in bas-relief, in the bronze
statue, in the wooden statue, and even in earthenware. And to all the
treasures displayed was added the chorus of the Professor: "_And so,
you see, the Greeks invented nothing._" Renan assented. "Nothing.
Nothing," he echoed, but added as an afterthought: "_Seulement le
Beau._"

I have sometimes thought that these words, "_Seulement le Beau_,"
might do as the commemorative epitaph of the Greek race. But of course
the Greek was a great deal more than the exponent of the beautiful. I
only tell this story to make it quite clear how deep is my reverence and
admiration for the Greeks, and how strongly I feel that their
philosophers and their poets are lively oracles from which the human
spirit may still draw perennial draughts of inspiration.

But if this is so, it will be asked, "How comes it that, with these
views, you proclaim yourself an opponent to compulsory Greek and
compulsory Latin in schools and universities?" My answer is, it is just
because I am such an intense believer in the quickening power of the
Greek mind and in the immense advantages secured by getting into touch
with the Greek spirit that I desire the abolition of compulsory Greek.
No civilised man should ever be out of touch with it at first hand. But
this means, translated into action, no compulsory Greek grammar, no
compulsory drudgery in acquiring the things which do not really belong
to the Greeks but to the vapid pedants of vanished ages. I passionately
desire that as many people as possible should enjoy Hellenic culture. I
want to clear away the smoky mist of grammatical ineptitude which keeps
men from the great books and great minds of antiquity and prevents the
soul of the Greek and the soul of the Englishman--natural allies, for
some strange reason--from flowing together.

It is appropriate that I should testify. Owing to having been forced to
try to learn the Greek Grammar instead of reading the books written by
the Greeks in a language which I could understand, I very nearly made an
intellectual shipwreck. Indeed, it was only by a series of lucky
accidents that I escaped complete ignorance of the Greek spirit, though
retaining a certain knowledge of the grammar.

It was only after I had miserably squirmed my way through Mods., as a
man may squirm through some hole in a prison wall, that I had the
slightest idea of what was meant by the Greek spirit.

I closed my grammar, with all the miserable and complicated stuff about
_tnpto_ and its aorists, the enclitic and the double-damned
Digamma, to open my Jowett's Plato, my Dakyns' Xenophon, and, later,
Gilbert Murray's Dramatists and Mackail's Anthology. It is true that in
the squirming process I have described I had to read a portion of the
_Anabasis_ and of the _Odyssey_ and _Memorabilia_, as well  as
books of Caesar, Livy, Horace, and Virgil.

In the case of these books I acquired nothing but a distaste so deep
that it has only just worn off. Only after an interval of forty years
could I bear to read these kill-joys in translation. No doubt some of
the fault was mine. Possibly I was born with an inability to learn
languages. But if that is so it is a misfortune, not a crime for which
one should be put on the rack!

By the time I realised fully the glory of Greek letters, I was a very
busy man, and bitter indeed was the thought that the well-meaning
persons who maintain our university system had actually been keeping me
all those years from the divine wells of grace and beauty. But for them,
how many more years of enjoyment might I have drawn from the Socratic
_Dialogues_, from the _Apology_, and from the _Republic_! Think
of it! It was not till four years ago that I read Thucydides and had my
soul shaken by the supreme wickedness, the intellectual devilry of
the Melian controversy. How I thrilled at the awful picture of the supreme
tragedy at Syracuse! How I saw! How I perished with the Greek warriors
standing to arms on the shore, and watching in their swaying agony
the Athenian ships sink one by one, without being able to lift a hand,
or cast a long or short spear to help them! Yet the watchers knew that
the awful spectacle on which they gazed meant death, or a slavery worse
than death, for every one of them!

Almost worse to me than the denial of Plato, the dramatists Thucydides
and Homer, was the refusal to allow me to walk or hunt with Xenophon,
and to saunter through his kitchen or his grounds. And all because I
could not show the requisite grammatical ticket. Could anything be more
fascinating than the tale of Xenophon's prim yet most lovable young
wife, or the glorious picture of the boy and girl lovers with which
Xenophon closes his _Symposium_?

My sense of a deprivation unnecessary and yet deliberate was as great in
regard to Latin literature. It was only in 1919, owing to what I had
almost called a fortunate illness, that I took to reading Cicero's
Letters and came under an enchantment greater than that cast even by
Walpole, Madame de Sévigné, or Madame du Deffand.

For forty years I was kept in ignorance of a book which painted the
great world of Rome with a touch more intimate than even that of St.
Simon. Cicero in his Letters makes the most dramatic moment in Roman
history, the end of the Oligarchic Republic, live before one. Even
Macaulay's account of the Revolution of 1688 seems tame when called in
comparison.

I know that by the time some Greek or Latin scholar has got as far as
this he will ask with a smile,

Why is this self-dubbed ignoramus making all this pother about being
deprived of the classics? Surely he cannot have failed to realise that
it is impossible to understand and appreciate the classics properly
without having learnt Latin and Greek? But you cannot learn Latin and
Greek without learning the grammar. He not only on his own showing has
no grievance, but is giving support to those who desire that the
classics should remain the centrepiece of our educational system.

For all such objections I have one, and I think a final, argument. When
people ask me how I propose to enjoy Plato without knowing Greek, I ask
them to tell me, in return, how they manage to enjoy reading one of the
greatest poets in the world, Isaiah, without knowing Hebrew. How have
they found consolation in the Psalms; how have they absorbed the worldly
wisdom of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; how have they read the lyric
choruses of the Song of Solomon; how have they followed the majestic
drama of the Book of Job? _They read them in translations_. That is
the way in which they have filled their minds with the noble deeds and
thoughts of the Hebrew history and Hebrew literature. That is the
answer, the true answer, and the only answer.

A good, practical, commonsense proof of what I am saying is to be found
in the fact that the ordinary man and also the man of brains who has
gone through the good old fortifying classical curriculum, to quote
Matthew Arnold once more, and who _theoretically_ can read the
great Greek and Latin authors in their own languages, and without
translations, hardly reads them at all. Those who know that it is a
translation or nothing will be found to be far closer and more constant
readers of Plato and Thucydides. Certainly that is my case. To this day
I find myself reading the Greek and Latin authors in translation when
many of my friends, who took Honours Mods, and Honours Greats, would no
more think of opening books which they are supposed to have read than
they would attempt to read Egyptian hieroglyphics. The man with a
classical education will still worry himself over an accidental false
quantity or a wrongly-placed Greek accent, but it is extraordinary how
seldom, unless he is a schoolmaster, you hear of him enjoying the
classics or applying knowledge drawn from the classics to modern
literature or to modern politics.

A further proof of this view, which I admit sounds strange, may be
registered. The only man I have known who habitually read Greek in the
original was Lord Cromer, and he had not had a classical education. He
left a private day-school in London to go straight to Chatham, where he
was prepared for entry into the artillery. And at Chatham they did not
teach Greek. Therefore when, as a gunner subaltern, he went to the
Ionian Islands on the staff of Sir Henry Storks, he was without any
knowledge of Greek. He wanted, however, as he told me, to know modern
Greek, as the language of the islands. Also, like the natural Englishman
he was, to be able to talk with the Albanian hunters with whom he went
shooting in the hills of the mainland. But when he had mastered enough
modern Greek to read the newspaper and so forth, he began to wonder
whether he could not use his knowledge to find out what Homer was like.

He very soon found out that he could read him as one reads Chaucer. From
this point he went on till he made himself--I will not say a Greek
scholar, but something much better--a person able to read Greek and
enjoy it in the original. Throughout the period of my friendship with
him, which lasted for nearly a quarter of a century, he was constantly
reading and translating from Greek authors and talking about them in an
intimate and stimulating way.

Once more, it is because I want people to study and to love classical
literature and to imbibe the Greek spirit that I desire that the
ordinary man should not be forced to grind away at Greek grammar when he
might be getting in touch with great minds and great books. I am not
blind, of course, to the gymnastic defence of the classics, though I do
not share it. All I say is, do not let us make a knowledge of the Greek
and Latin languages a _sine qua non_ in our educational system, on
the ground that such knowledge brings the ordinary man into touch with
the Greek spirit. It does nothing of the kind.

But though Greek and Latin literature had thus been temporarily closed
to me, I still, Heaven be praised, could enjoy the glories of my own
language. When I began to read for the History School, I not only felt
like a man who had recovered from a bad bout of influenza, but I began
to realise that academic study was not necessarily divorced from the
joys of literature, but that, instead, it might lead me to new and
delightful pastures. Even early Constitutional History, though
apparently so arid, opened to me an enchanting field of study. The study
of the Anglo-Saxon period brought special delights. It introduced me to
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and to Bede, both of them books which deserve
far greater fame than they have yet received. Again, I can quite
honestly say that the early part of Stubbs's Excerpts from the Laws,
Charters, and Chronicles proved to be for me almost as pleasant as a
volume of poetry. To my astonishment _Magna Charta_ and the
_Dialogus de Scaccario_ were thoroughly good reading. The answer to
"_Quod est murdrum_" was a thrilling revelation of what the Norman
Conquest was and was not. I understood; and what is more delightful than
that? There were even good courses, I found, in such apparently
univiting a feast as "The Constitutions of Clarendon." I shall not
easily forget my pleasure in discovering that the quotation "_Nollumus
leges Angliaemutari_" on which Noodle relied in his immortal oration,
is to be found in the record of the Barons' great "Palaver."


CHAPTER XII

AN OXFORD FRIENDSHIP


Though it is the rule of these memoirs not to deal at any length or
detail with living people, I feel I must make an exception in regard to
Sir Bernard Mallet, the first friend I made at Oxford, the closest
friend of my college days, and the dearest friend of my after-life. Of
course, even in his case I cannot say all that I should like to say, for
I don't want to expose myself to the gibe of the wit who, reading a
sympathetic notice of a living man, declared that he did not care for
funeral orations on the living! Another advocate of ascetic reticence in
similar circumstances is said to have remarked that it was hardly decent
to use such favourable expressions except in the case of a dead man!
But, though I am not going to expose myself to the accusation of
gushing, I cannot give a true picture of myself without dwelling upon
Mallet's influence upon me. My friendship with him was my first
experience of real friendship--the relation which it is in the power of
youth to establish and maintain, a relation akin to the tie of
brotherhood, and one which may have, and ought to have, in it an element
of devotion.

Friendship between two young men, keen on all things political,
intellectual, and literary, is rightly and necessarily founded upon
talk. My friend and I were eager to know not only about each other but
about everything else in the universe. Mallet's influence became at once
very great upon me at a point where I much needed it. He was deeply
interested, and very well-read for a boy of his age, in Political
Economy. His father, Sir Louis Mallet, was not only one of the most
famous and most enlightened of Civil Servants, but had made a scientific
study of the theory of economics. Besides that he had acted as Cobden's
official secretary when Cobden negotiated the Commercial Treaty with
France, and had become deeply attached to the great Free Trader and his
policy. From his father Mallet had learnt what was infinitely more
important than anything he could learn in textbooks. He had learnt to
look upon Political Economy not as something to be applied only to
trade, but something which concerned our morals, our politics, and even
our spiritual life. Though it, no doubt, involved Free Trade, what both
the Mallets pleaded for was "the policy of Free Exchange" a policy
entering and ruling every form of human activity, or, at any rate,
everything to which the quality of value inured, and so the quality of
exchangeability.

At the time when I went up to Balliol and sat down beside Mallet at the
Freshmen's table in the Hall, wild and eager, shy and forthcoming,
bursting with the desire to talk and to hear talk, and yet not exactly
knowing how to approach my fellow-novices, I was an ardent, if
theoretical, Republican and Socialist. I was, while only a schoolboy of
fourteen or fifteen, a passionate admirer of Arch, the man who formed
the first Agricultural Labourers' Union, and a regular reader of his
penny weekly organ. It was the first paper to which I became an annual
subscriber. Now, though I had noted some of the extravagances of the
extremists, I was on the edge of conversion to full-blown Socialism or
Communism. We did not much distinguish in those days between the two. I
was especially anxious, as every young man must be, to see if I could
not do something to help ameliorate the condition of working-men and to
find a policy which would secure a better distribution of wealth and of
the good things of the world.

Very soon, at once indeed, I confided my views to my new friend. Our
conversation is imprinted upon my mind. Though, of course, I did not
realise it at the time, it was destined to have a great effect upon my
life. I told Mallet that I was so haunted by the miseries of the poor
and the injustice of our social order that, however much I disliked it
for other reasons, and however great the dangers, I was growing more and
more into the belief that it would be my duty to espouse the cause of
Socialism; then, be it remembered, preached by Mr. Hyndman in full and
Mr. Henry George, the single-tax man, in an attenuated form. I was a
Free Trader, of course, but if, as a result of the Free Trade system,
the poor were getting poorer, and the rich richer, as, alas! it seemed,
I was prepared to fight to the death even against Free Trade.

On this Mallet, instead of growing zealously angry with my ignorant
enthusiasm, asked me very pertinently what right I had to suggest that
the principles of Political Economy and Free Trade had been tested and
had failed. He admitted that if to maintain them would prevent a better
distribution of wealth, they must be abolished forthwith. He went on to
agree also that if everything else had been exhausted, it would be right
to try Socialism, _provided one was not convinced that the remedy
would prove worse than the disease_. But he went on to explain to me,
what I had never realised before, that the enlightened economists took
no responsibility for the existing system. They held, instead, that the
present ills of the world came, not from obeying but from disobeying the
teachings of Political Economy. Everywhere Free Exchange was
interfered with and violated, on some pretext or another. Even in
England it would not be said that Free Exchange had been given a
complete trial. It was, he went on to show, because they believed that
the ills of human society could be cured, _and only cured_, by a
proper understanding and a proper observance of the laws of economics
that men like his father advocated Free Exchange so strongly and
opposed every attempt to disestablish it.

[Illustration: J. St. Loe Strachey as an Oxford Fresman Ætat. 18]

We want as much as any Socialist to get rid of poverty, misery and
destitution, and we believe we have got the true remedy, if only we were
allowed to apply it. There would be plenty of the good things of the
world for everybody, if we did not constantly interfere with production,
and if we did not destroy capital, which would otherwise be competing
for labour, not labour for it. By the madness of war and the preparation
for war, we lay low that which prevents unemployment. We are always
preventing instead of encouraging exchanges, the essential sources of
wealth. Yet we wonder that we remain poor.

But the policy of Free Exchange, he went on, must not be regarded merely
as a kind of alternative to Socialism. True believers in economics were
bound to point out that the nostrum of the Socialists, though intended
to do good, would do infinite harm if applied to the community. There
was a possibility of release from the prison-house and its tortures by
the way of Free Exchange, but none by the way of Socialism. That could
only deepen and increase the darkness and bring even greater miseries
upon mankind than those they endured at the present moment.

I listened greatly moved, and asked for more instruction. I soon
realised that economics were a very different thing to what I had
supposed. My father was a strong Free Trader and had talked to me on the
subject, but without any great enthusiasm. He was an idealist, and in
his youth had strong leanings, first to the Socialism of Owen, and then
to the Christian Socialism of Maurice, Kingsley, and their friends.
Though later he had dropped these views and had become a convinced
supporter of Cobden and Bright in the controversy over the Factory Acts
(and let me say that in this I still believe he was perfectly right), he
had taken the Shaftesbury rather than the Manchester view. Right or
wrong in principle, any proposal to protect women and children would
have been sure to secure his support. He would rather be wrong with
their advocates than right with a million of philosophers. Again, though
he liked Bright, I don't think he ever quite forgave him for talking
about the "residuum." My father had no sympathy with insult, even if it
was deserved. With him, to suffer was to be worthy of help and comfort,
and here, of course, he was right. Again, though he read his Mill, he
was not deeply interested. He understood and assented to the main
arguments, but he had never happened to get inspired by the idea that
the way to accomplish his essential desire to improve the lot of the
poor, and so to save society, was by discovering a true theory of
applying the principles of Free Exchange. As Sir Louis Mallet used to
say, a great deal of this misunderstanding came from the unfortunate
fact that we called our policy Free _Trade_, and so narrowed it and
made it appear sordid. If, like the French, we had called it Free
Exchange, we should have made it universal and so inspiring.

Mallet's words, then, came to me like a revelation. I saw at once, as I
have seen and felt ever since, that Political Economy, properly
understood and properly applied, is not a dreary science, but one of the
most fascinating and mentally stimulating of all forms of human
knowledge. Above all, it is the one which gives real hope for making a
better business of human life in the future than was ever known in the
past; far better than anything the Communist theorisers can offer. Let
their theories be examined, not with sentimental indulgence but in the
scientific spirit, and they fade away like the dreams they are.

My teacher was as keen as myself. But when two young minds are striking
on each other, the sparks fly. It was not long, then, before I believed
myself to have mastered the essential principles of Free Exchange--
principles simple in themselves, though not easy to state exactly. To
apply them in a lazy and sophistically-minded world is still more
difficult. Even business men and traders, who ought to know better,
ignore the science on which their livelihood is wholly founded.

Thus, with a halo of friendship and intellectual freedom round me, I
learned what Economics really meant, and what might be accomplished if
men could only understand the nature of Exchange, and apply their
knowledge to affairs.

When I see some public man floundering in the morasses of sophistry,
often a quagmire of his own creation, I say to myself, "There, but for
Bernard Mallet, goes John St. Loe Strachey." I should, indeed, be an
ingrate if I did not acknowledge my debt.

Here is Sir Bernard Mallet's account of me at Oxford in the year 1878.

SIR BERNARD MALLET'S MEMORANDUM

I can find no diaries--or any of the letters which I must have written
to my people about Oxford, so I must do what I can without their help. I
daresay they would not have been much use, as I never wrote good
letters, and my recollections of our first meeting are still pretty
fresh. It would be odd if they were not, for our Oxford alliance was far
the biggest and most important influence in my life there.

I think it must have been within two or three days of my arrival at
Balliol as freshman, in October, 1878, that I found myself sitting
beside you at dinner in Hall. No doubt we soon found out each other's
names. Yours at once fixed my attention because, as my father was then
Under Secretary of State for India and in intimate relations with your
two uncles, the great Indian statesmen, Sir John and General Richard
Strachey, it had long been familiar to me. This seemed to place us at
once, and give me a topic to begin on. Not that conversation was ever
lacking in your company! I remember to this hour the vivid, emphatic way
you talked, and your appearance then--your rather pale face and your
thin but strongly-built figure. I was at once greatly impressed, but I
am not sure that the first impression on a more or less conventional
public-schoolboy (such as I suppose I must have been) was altogether
favourable! Certainly I have always thought of you as a reason for
distrusting my first impression of a man! Luckily for me, however, we
continued to meet. You were so alive and unreserved that you very soon
posted me up in all the details of your life and family, and drew the
same confidences from me; and we soon found that we had so much in
common that in a very few days we fell into those specially intimate
relations which lasted through our Oxford days and long after. It is not
easy to analyse or account for the rapid growth of such a friendship,
but on my part, I think, it was the fact of your being so different from
others which at first slightly repelled, and then strangely attracted
me. To begin with, you had never been at school; you knew nothing of
Greek or Latin as languages, nor of cricket or football! But the want of
this routine education or discipline was no disadvantage to you (except
for certain serious misadventures in "Mods.!") because your personality
and strong intelligence enabled you to get far more out of exceptional
home surroundings than you could have got out of any school. You had
kept all your intellectual freshness and originality. In English
literature, from the Elizabethan downwards, you had read widely and
deeply, and your wonderful memory never failed you in quotation from the
poets. You ought really, with those tastes and that training, to have
become a poet yourself! and till politics and journalism drew you off I
often thought that pure literature would be your line. But your
political instincts were even then quite as strong; you came of a family
with political interests and traditions; and as a boy you had met a good
many Liberal statesmen--either at the house of Lady Waldegrave, your
mother's friend and country neighbour, or at Cannes, where your family
used to spend the winter. But your politics had rather a poetical tinge!
Shelley, Swinburne, Walt Whitman coloured your ideas--you were a
democrat and republican, with a great enthusiasm for the United States
and for the story of Abraham Lincoln. But you were never faddist or
doctrinaire, and your practical bent showed itself in the keen interest
you took in the noticing of political economy in which I used to dabble,
and which we used to discuss by the hour. You seemed, without having
studied text-books, to have an intuitive grasp of economic and fiscal
truths which astonished me and others much better qualified to judge
than I was. The real truth is that, though there were, no doubt, gaps in
your mental equipment which may have horrified the dons, you were miles
ahead of most of us in the width and variety of your interests, in your
gift of self-expression and, in a way, in knowledge of the world. Every
talk with you seemed to open up new vistas to me. I was perhaps more
receptive than the usual run of public-schoolboy, as I too had had
interests awakened by home surroundings and tradition. We both of us, in
fact, owed a very great deal to our respective fathers, and it was a
real pleasure and guide to me to be introduced later to your father and
home at Sutton Court--as I know it was to you to get to know and
appreciate my father.

But I must not wander from my subject, which is to try and give a
faithful account of how you struck me in those days. I have said nothing
yet of one of your characteristics which I think weighed with me, and
impressed me more than anything else, and that was the remarkable power
you had, and have always retained, of drawing out the best in others.
Intellectual power or force of character (or whatever you like to call
it) is so often self-centred as to lose half its value. With you,
however, it was different. You always appeared to be, and I think
genuinely were, quite as much interested in other people's ideas or
personalities as in your own--or even more interested. You listened to
them, you questioned, you put them on their mettle, you helped them out
by interpreting their crude or half-impressed thoughts, and all this
without a trace of flattery or patronage. By this, and by your generous
over-appreciation of them, you inspired your friends with greater
confidence in themselves than they would otherwise have had. In your
company they were, or felt themselves, really better men. To one of my
disposition, at all events, this was a source of extraordinary
encouragement and help. I felt it from the first, and I cannot omit
mentioning it in my attempt to describe what you were like when we met
at Oxford. I am afraid it is a poor attempt, and wanting in details
which contemporary records, if they had existed, could alone have
supplied. But I hope you may find something in it which will suit your
purpose. I don't think, after all, you have changed as much as most
people in the forty-odd years I have known you!


CHAPTER XIII

OXFORD MEMORIES (_Concluded_)


Even at the risk of making my autobiography open to accusation that it
is a kind of Strachey Anthology, I should be giving a false impression
of myself and my life at Oxford if I did not say something about my
poetical life at the University, for there, as in my childhood and my
boyhood, poetry played a great part. I did not leave the Muses till I
left their bower on the Isis. Every mood of my Oxford life was reflected
in my verse. I can only record a very few of those reflections, and
here, again, must look forward to some day making a collection of my
poems and letting them tell their own tale--an interesting incursion, I
venture to say, for those who are interested in the evolution of English
verse from 1870 to 1890.

The first thing to be recorded in this epitome of my _biographica
poetica_ is my intense delight at finding in Oxford people of my own
age who cared for poetry as I did, and the same kind of poetry. It is
true that most of my friends with a poetic bent wore their rue with a
difference, but that did not matter. Though they practised a different
rite, they were all sworn to the great mystery of the Muses. Men like
Beeching, Mackail, Nichols, Warren, and also Willie Arnold, who, though
not an undergraduate, very soon became one of my close friends, never
failed, and this is the test, to be delighted in any new discovery in
verse with which I was for the moment intoxicating myself.

I was always irregular in my tastes. If I liked a piece of verse, I
liked it with passion and praised it inordinately; again I was apt to be
as absolute in my dislike. I was a kind of poaching gipsy of literature.
I had not only a willingness to eat any wild thing from a hedgehog to a
beechnut or a wild raspberry, but also an uncanny power of finding out
literary game, raising it, and trapping it, not by the stately methods
of the scholar but by some irrational and violent intuition. Instead of
reading slowly, patiently, and laboriously, as no doubt I ought to have
read, _i.e._, as my tutors would have liked me to read, I used to
dive headlong into some poet, old or young. Even if I could only "get at
him" for an odd half-hour, I could bring back with me something worth
keeping, something which would sing in my head and be forced into the
ears of my friends for many days, and sometimes many weeks.

This habit of what one might call random and sudden quotation was
amusingly hit off by a friend of mine, Fry, son of the late Lord Justice
Sir Edward Fry. In a neat little verse after the manner of Beeching's
and Mackail's celebrated verses on the Balliol Dons--verse modelled, it
may be noted, on the pageant of Kings and Queens in Swinburne's _Poems
and Ballads_, Fry thus delineated me:

  I am Strachey, never bored
   By Webster, Massinger or Ford;
   There is no line of any poet
   Which can be quoted, but I know it.

In the first couplet I have to own a true bill. Even if my friends were
bored, though I was not, which I now feel must have often been the case,
they certainly never showed it. I seemed to be given a kind of privilege
or license to quote as much as ever I liked.

