"One must have seen them to understand what that would be like," she said.
"I know it was beautiful, but I'm sure I should have selected the gold had
I been there. Oh I wonder if the woman who has the moccasins will give
them a drink to-night! And will she try to preserve their roots?"

"She will not!" said Douglas emphatically.

"How can you possibly know?" queried the girl.

"I saw the man who ordered them," laughed Douglas.

"Oh!" cried Leslie, comprehendingly.

"I'd stake all I'm worth the moccasins are drooping against a lavender
dress; the roots are in the garbage can, while the cook or maid has the
basket," he said.

"Douglas, how can you!" exclaimed Leslie.

"I couldn't! Positively couldn't! Mine are here!"

The slow colour crept into her cheek. "I'll make those roots bloom next
spring; you shall see them in perfection," she promised.

"That would be wonderful!" he exclaimed warmly.

"Tell me, were there yet others?" she asked hastily.

"Only these," he said. "But there was something else. I came near losing
them. While I debated, or rather while I possessed these, and worshipped
the others, there was a gutter row that almost made me lose yours."

"In the gutter again?" she laughed.

"Once again," he admitted. "Such a little chap, with an appealing voice,
while his inflection was the smallest part of what he was saying. 'Aw kid,
come on. Be square!' Oh Leslie!"

"Why Douglas!" the girl cried. "Tell me!"

"Of all the wooden-head slowness!" he exclaimed. "I've let him slip
again!"

"Let who 'slip again?'" questioned Leslie. "My little brother!" answered
he.

"Oh Douglas! You didn't really?" she protested.

"Yes I did," he said. "I heard a little lad saying the things that are in
the blood and bone of the men money can't buy and corruption can't break.
I heard him plead like a lawyer and argue his case straight. I lent a hand
when his eloquence failed, got him his deserts, then let him go! I did
have an impulse to keep him. I did call after him. But he disappeared."

"Douglas, we can find him!" she comforted.

"I haven't found either of the others I realized I'd have been interested
in, after I let them slip," he answered, "while this boy was both of them
rolled into one, and ten more like them."

"Oh Douglas! I'm so sorry! But maybe some other man has already found
him," said Leslie.

"No. You can always pick the brothered boys," said Douglas. "The first
thing that happens to them is a clean-up and better clothing; then an air
of possessed importance. No man has attached this one."

"Douglas, describe him," she commanded. "I'll watch for him. How did he
look? What was the trouble?"

"One at a time," cautioned the man. "He was a little chap, a white, clean,
threadbare little chap, with such a big voice, so wonderfully intoned, and
such a bigger principle, for which he was fighting. One of these overgrown
newsboys the public won't stand for unless he is in the way when they are
making a car, had hired him to sell his papers while he loafed.
Mickey----"

"'Mickey?'" repeated Leslie questioningly.

"The big fellow called him 'Mickey'; no doubt a mother who adored him
named him Michael, and thought him 'like unto God' when she did it. The
big fellow had loafed all afternoon. When Mickey came back and turned over
the money, and waited to be paid off, his employer laughed at the boy for
not keeping it when he had it. Mickey begged him 'to be square' and told
him that 'was not business'--'_not business_,' mind you, but the big
fellow jeered at him and was starting away. Mickey and I reached him at
the same time; so I got in the gutter again. I don't see how I can be so
slow! I don't see how I did it!"

"I don't either," she said, with a twinkle that might have referred to the
first of the two exclamations. "It must be your Scotch habit of going
slowly and surely. But cheer up! We'll find him. I'll help you."

"Have you reflected on the fact that this city covers many square miles,
of which a fourth is outskirts, while from them three thousand newsboys
gathered at the last Salvation Army banquet for them?"

"That's where we can find him!" she cried. "Thanksgiving, or Christmas! Of
course we'll see him then."

"Mickey didn't have a Salvation Army face," he said. "I am sure he is a
free lance, and a rare one; besides, this is May. I want my little brother
to go on my vacation with me. I want him now."

"Would it help any if I'd be a sister to you?"

"Not a bit," said Douglas. "I don't in the very least wish to consider you
in the light of a sister; you have another place in my heart, very
different, yet all your own; but I do wish to make of Mickey the little
brother I never have had. Minturn was telling me what a rejuvenation he's
getting from the boy he picked up. Already he has him in his office, and
is planning school and partnership with a man he can train as he chooses."

"But Minturn has sons of his own!" protested Leslie.

"Oh no! Not in the least!" exclaimed Douglas. "Minturn has sons of his
_wife's_. She persistently upsets and frustrates Minturn's every idea for
them, while he is helpless. You will remember she has millions; he has
what he earns. He can't separate his boys, splendid physical little chaps,
from their mother's money and influence, and educate them to be a help to
him. They are to be made into men of wealth and leisure. Minturn will
evolve his little brother into a man of brains and efficiency."

"But Minturn is a power!" cried the girl.

"Not financially," explained Douglas. "Nothing but money counts with his
wife. In telling me of this boy, Minturn confessed that he was forced,
_forced_ mind you, to see his sons ruined, while he is building a street
gamin as he would them, if permitted."

"How sad, Douglas!" cried Leslie. "Your voice is bitter. Can't he do
something?"

"Not a blooming thing!" answered Douglas. "She has the money. She is their
mother. Her character is unimpeachable. If Minturn went to extremes, the
law would give them to her; she would turn them over to ignorant servants
who would corrupt them, and be well paid for doing it. Why Minturn told
me--but I can't repeat that. Anyway, he made me eager to try my ideas on a
lad who would be company for me, when I can't be here and don't wish to be
with other men."

"Are you still going to those Brotherhood meetings?"

"I am. And I always shall be. Nothing in life gives me such big returns
for the time invested. There is a world of talk breaking loose about the
present 'unrest' among women; I happen to know that the 'unrest' is as
deep with men. For each woman I personally know, bitten by 'unrest,' I
know two men in the same condition. As long as men and women are forced to
combine, to uphold society, it is my idea that it would be a good thing if
there were to be a Sisterhood organized; then the two societies frankly
brought together and allowed to clear up the differences between them."

"But why not?" asked the girl eagerly.

"Because we are pursuing false ideals, we have a wrong conception of what
is _worth while in life_," answered the Scotsman. "Because the sexes
except in rare, very rare, instances, do not understand each other, and
every day are drifting farther apart, while most of the married folk I
know are farthest apart of all. Leslie, what is it in marriage that
constrains people? We can talk, argue and agree or disagree on anything,
why can't the Minturns?"

"From what you say, it would seem to me it's her idea of what is worth
while in life," said Leslie.

"Exactly!" cried Douglas. "But he can sway men! He can do powerful work.
He could induce her to marry him. Why can't he control his own blood?"

"If she should lose her money and become dependent upon him for support,
he could!" said Leslie.

"He should do it anyway," insisted Douglas.

"Do you think you could?" she queried.

"I never thought myself in his place," said Douglas, "but I believe I
will, and if I see glimmerings, I'll suggest them to him."

"Good boy!" said the girl lightly. And then she added: "Do you mind if I
think myself in her place and see if I can suggest a possible point at
which she could be reached? I know her. I shouldn't consider her happy. At
least not with what I call joy."

"What do you call joy?" asked Douglas.

"Being satisfied with your environment."

Douglas glanced at her, then at her surroundings, and looking into her
eyes laughed quizzically.

"But if it were different, I am perfectly confident that I should work out
joy from life," insisted Leslie. "It owes me joy! I'll have it, if I fight
for it!"

"Leslie! Leslie! Be careful! You are challenging Providence. Stronger men
than I have wrought chaos for their children," said a warning voice, as
her father came behind her chair.

"Chaos or no, still I'd put up my fight for joy, Daddy," laughed the girl.
"Only see, Preciousest!"

"One minute!" said her father, shaking hands with Douglas. "Now what is
it, Leslie? Oh, I do see!"

"Take my chair and make friends," said the girl.

Mr. Winton seated himself, then began examining and turning the basket.
"Indians?" he queried.

"Yes," said Douglas. "A particularly greasy squaw. I wish I might
truthfully report an artist's Indian of the Minnehaha type, but alack, it
was the same one I've seen ever since I've been in the city, and that
you've seen for years before my arrival."

Mr. Winton still turned the basket.

"I've bought their stuff for years, because neither Leslie nor her mother
ever would tolerate fat carnations and overgrown roses so long as I could
find a scrap of arbutus, a violet or a wake-robin from the woods. We've
often motored up and penetrated the swamp I fancy these came from, for
some distance, but later in the season; it's so very boggy now. Aren't
these rather wonderful?" He turned to his daughter.

"Perfectly, Daddy," she said. "Perfectly!"

"But I don't mean for the Creator," explained Mr. Winton. "I am accustomed
to His miracles. Every day I see a number of them. I mean for the squaw."

"I'd have to know the squaw and understand her viewpoint," said Leslie.

"She had it in her tightly clenched fist," laughed Douglas. "One, I'm
sure; anyway, not over two."

"That hasn't a thing to do with the _art_ with which she made the basket
and filled it with just three perfect plants," said Leslie.

"You think there is real art in her anatomy?" queried Mr. Winton.

"Bear witness, O you treasures of gold!" cried Leslie, waving toward the
basket.

"There was another," explained Douglas as he again described the osier
basket.

Mr. Winton nodded. He looked at his daughter.

"I like to think, young woman, that you were born with and I have
cultivated what might be called artistic taste in you," he said. "Granted
the freedom of the tamarack swamp, could you have done better?"

"Not so well, Daddy! Not nearly so well. I never could have defaced what
you can see was a noble big tree by cutting that piece of bark, while I
might have worshipped until dragged away, but so far as art and I are
concerned, the slippers would still be under their tamarack."

"You are begging the question, Leslie," laughed her father. "I was not
discussing the preservation of the wild, I was inquiring into the state of
your artistic ability. If you had no hesitation about taking the flowers,
could you have gone to that swamp, collected the material and fashioned
and filled a more beautiful basket that this?"

"How can I tell, Daddy?" asked the girl. "There's only one way to learn.
I'll forget my scruples, you get me a pair of rubber boots, then we'll
drive to the tamarack swamp and experiment."

