This young lady was about eighteen years of age, a beauty, an heiress,
and, per consequence, a _belle_. She was a brunette; her beauty was of a
warm, majestic, voluptuous character; her eyes beamed with the fire of
passion, and her features were full of expression and sentiment. Her
attire was elegant, tasteful, and unique, consisting of a loose, flowing
robe of white satin, trimmed with costliest lace; her hair was
beautifully arranged in the best Parisian style; and her tiny feet were
encased in gold-embroidered slippers. The peculiarity of her dress
concealed the outlines of her form; yet the garment being made very low
in the shoulders, the upper portions of a magnificently full bust were
visible.

For some time she continued to sip her chocolate and read in silence;
but soon she exclaimed, in a rich, melodious voice--

'Very well, indeed!--and so those odious editors have given the full
particulars of the great ball last night, and have complimented me
highly on my grace and beauty! Ah, I never could have ventured there in
any other costume than the one I wore. These loose dresses are capital
things--but my situation becomes more and more embarrassing every day.'

At this moment a domestic announced Mr. Francis Sydney, and the
announcement was followed by the entrance of that gentleman.

'My dear Julia,' said Frank, seating himself--'you will pardon my
intrusion at this unfashionable hour, but I was anxious to learn the
state of your health, after the fatigues of last night's assembly.'

'No apology is necessary, my dear Frank,' replied the lady, with a
bewitching smile, at the same time giving him her hand, which he
tenderly raised to his lips. 'I am in excellent health this morning,
although dreadfully bored with _ennui_, which I trust will be dispelled
by the enlivening influence of your presence.'

'What happiness do I derive from the reflection, my sweet girl,' said
Frank, drawing his chair closer to hers, 'that, in one short month, I
shall call you mine! Yes, we shall then stand before the bridal altar,
and I shall have the felicity of wedding the loveliest, most
accomplished, and purest of her sex!'

'Ah, Francis,' sighed the lady--'how joyfully will I then bestow upon
you the gift of this hand!--my heart you have already.'

These words were said with so much tenderness, and with such a charming
air of affectionate modesty, that the young man caught her to his breast
and covered her lips with kisses. Struggling from his ardent embrace,
Julia said to him, in a tone of reproach,--

'Francis, this is the first time you ever forgot the respect due to me
as a lady; but do not repeat the offense, or you will diminish my
friendship for you--perhaps, my love also.--When we are _married_,' she
added, blushing--'my person will be wholly yours--but not till then.'

'Pardon me, dear Julia,' entreated Frank, in a tone of contrition--'I
will not offend again.'

The lady held out her hand, and smiled her forgiveness.

'Now that we are good friends again,' said she--'I will order some
refreshments.' She rang a silver bell, and gave the necessary order to a
servant, and in a few minutes, cake and wine were brought in by a black
waiter, clad in rich livery. The complexion of this man was intensely
dark, yet his features were good and regular and his figure tall and
well-formed. In his demeanor towards his mistress and her guest, he was
respectful in the extreme, seldom raising his eyes from the carpet, and
when addressed, speaking in the most servile and humble tone.

After having partaken of the refreshments, and enjoyed half an hour's
conversation, Frank arose and took his leave.

As soon as he had gone, an extraordinary scene took place in that
parlor.

The black waiter, having turned the key within the lock of the door,
approached Miss Fairfield, deliberately threw his arms around her, and
kissed her repeatedly! And how acted the lady--she who had reproved her
affianced husband for a similar liberty--how acted she when thus rudely
and grossly embraced by that black and miscreant menial? Did she not
repulse him with indignant disgust,--did she not scream for assistance,
and have him punished for the insolent outrage?

No; she abandoned her person to his embraces, and returned them! She,
the well-born, the beautiful, the wealthy, the accomplished lady--the
betrothed bride of a young gentleman of honor--the daughter of an
aristocrat--the star of a constellation of fashion--yielding herself to
the arms of a negro servant!

Oh, woman! how like an angel art thou in thy virtue and goodliness! how
like a devil, when thou art fallen from thy high estate!

Yes, that black fellow covers her exquisite neck and shoulders with
lustful kisses! His hands revel amid the glories of her divine and
voluptuous bosom; and his lips wander from her rosy mouth, to the
luxurious beauties of her finely developed bust.

'My beautiful mistress!' said the black, 'how kind in you to grant me
these favors! What can I do to testify my gratitude?'

'Oh Nero,' murmured the lady 'what if our intimacy should be discovered?
yet you are discreet and trustworthy; for from the night I first hinted
my desires to you, and admitted you into my chamber, you have behaved
with prudence and caution. Yet you are aware of my situation; you know
that I am _enciente_ by you; all our precautions have failed to prevent
that result of our amours. I dress myself in such a way as to keep my
condition from observation; no one suspects it. In a month, you know, I
am to be married to Mr. Sydney; but I hope to give birth to the child in
less than a week from the present time, so that, with good care and
nursing, assisted by my naturally robust constitution, I shall recover
my health and strength in sufficient time to enable my marriage to pass
on without suspicion. I will endeavor to adopt such artifices and
precautions as will completely deceive my husband, and he will never
know that I am otherwise than he now supposes me. After my marriage, we
can continue our intrigues as before, provided we are extremely
cautious. Ah, my handsome African, how dearly I love you.'

The guilty and depraved woman sank back upon a sofa, and her paramour
clasped her in his arms.

Let no one say that our narrative is becoming too improbable for belief,
that the scenes which we depict find no parallel in real life. Those who
are disposed to be skeptical with reference to such scenes as the
foregoing had better throw this volume aside; for crimes of a much
deeper dye, than any yet described, will be brought forward in this
tale: crimes that are daily perpetrated, but which are seldom discovered
or suspected. We have undertaken a difficult and painful task, and we
shall accomplish it; unrestrained by a false delicacy, we shall drag
forth from the dark and mysterious labyrinths of great cities, the
hidden iniquities which taint the moral atmosphere, and assimilate human
nature to the brute creation.

Five days after the occurrences just described, in the middle of the
afternoon, Miss Julia Fairfield rode out in her carriage alone, driven
by the black, Nero. The vehicle stopped before a house of respectable
exterior, in Washington street, and the young lady was assisted to
alight; entering the house, she was received by an elderly female, who
immediately conducted her to a private room, which contained a bed and
furniture of a neat but unostentatious description. The carriage drove
away, and Julia remained several hours in the house. At about nine
o'clock in the evening, the carriage returned, and she was assisted to
enter, being apparently in a very feeble and unwell condition. She
reached her own dwelling, and for over a week remained in her chamber,
under plea of severe indisposition. When at length she made her
appearance, she looked extremely pale, and somewhat emaciated; yet, for
the first time in several months, she wore a tight-fitting dress, and
her father, unconscious of her crimes, good-naturedly expressed his joy
at seeing her 'once more dressed like a Christian lady, and not in the
loose and slatternly robes she had so long persisted in wearing.'

The next morning after her visits to the house on Washington Street, the
newspapers contained a notice of the discovery of the body of a newborn
mulatto child, in the water off the Bowery. That child was the offspring
of Miss Julia and the black; it had been strangled, and its body thrown
into the water.

About three weeks after her secret accouchement, Julia became the wife
of Frank Sydney. An elegant establishment had been prepared for the
young couple, in Broadway. Here they repaired after the performance of
the marriage ceremony; and now being for the first time alone with his
beautiful bride, Frank embraced her with passionate ardor, and was not
repulsed.

Ah, happy bridegroom, how little thou knowest the truth! Thou dost not
suspect that the lovely woman at thy side, dressed in spotless white,
and radiant with smiles--thou dost little think that she, whom thou hast
taken to be thy wedded wife, comes to thy arms and nuptial bed, not a
pure and stainless virgin, but a wretch whose soul is polluted and whose
body is unchaste, by vile intimacy with a negro menial!

The hour waxes late, and the impatient husband conducts his fair bride
to the nuptial chamber--Love's hallowed sanctuary.

Two hours afterwards, that husband was pacing a parlor back and forth,
with uneven strides, his whole appearance indicative of mental
agony.--Pausing, he exclaimed--

'My God, what terrible suspicions cross my mind! I imagined Julia to be
an angel of purity and virtue yet now I doubt her! Oh, horrible,
horrible! But may not my doubts be facts without any foundation? I will
tomorrow consult a physician on the subject. Pray heaven my suspicions
may prove to be utterly groundless!'

He was startled by the sound of an approaching foot-step; the door
opened, and his wife entered, bearing a light. How seductive she looked,
in her white night-dress! how tenderly she caressed him, as with
affectionate concern she inquired if he were unwell.

'Dearest Frank,' she said, 'I had fallen into the most delicious slumber
I have ever enjoyed;--doubly delicious, because my dreams were of you.
Awaking suddenly, I missed you from my arms, and hastened hither to find
you. What is the matter, love?'

'Nothing, Julia,' answered the husband; 'I had a slight head-ache, but
it is over now. Return to your chamber, and I will follow you in a few
moments.'

She obeyed, and Frank was alone. 'Either that woman is as chaste as
Diana,' he said to himself, 'or she is a consummate wretch and
hypocrite. But let her not be too hastily condemned. My friend, Dr.
Palmer, shall give me his opinion, and if he thinks that she could have
been _as she was_, and still be chaste, then I will discard my
suspicions; but if, on the contrary, the doctor deems such a condition
to be incompatible with chastity, then will I cast her off forever. I
cannot endure this fearful state of suspense, would that it were
morning!'

Morning came at last, and Sydney sought the residence of Dr. Palmer,
with whom he held a long and private consultation. The result of this
interview was not very satisfactory to the husband, for the doctor's
concluding remarks were as follows:--

'My dear sir, it is impossible for any physician, however great may be
his professional knowledge and experience, to decide with positive
certainty upon such a matter. Nature has many freaks; the condition of
your lady _might_ be natural--yet pardon me if, in my own private
opinion, I doubt its being so! I have heard of such cases, where the
chastity of the lady was undoubted; yet such cases are exceedingly rare.
Your position, Mr. Sydney, is a peculiarly embarrassing and delicate
one. I cannot counsel you as a physician; yet, as _a friend_, permit me
to advise you to refrain from acting hastily in this matter. Your wife
may be innocent; you should consider her so, until you have ocular or
other positive evidence of her guilt. Meanwhile, let her not know your
suspicions, but watch her narrowly; if she were frail before marriage,
she needs but the opportunity to be inconstant afterwards. I have
attended upon the lady several times, during slight illness, in my
capacity as a physician, and I have had the opportunity to observe that
she is of an uncommonly ardent and voluptuous temperament. Phrenology
confirms this; for her amative developments are singularly
prominent.--Candidly, her physical conformation strongly impresses me
with the belief, that moral principle will scarcely restrain her from
unlawful indulgence, when prompted by inclination.'

'The devil!' muttered Frank, as he retraced his steps home--'I am about
as wise as ever! A pretty opinion Dr. Palmer expresses of her, truly!
Well, she shall have the benefit of a doubt, and I shall try to look
upon her as an innocent woman, until I detect her in an act of guilt.
Meanwhile, she shall be watched narrowly and constantly.'

Frank's suspicions with reference to his newly-made wife, did not
prevent his carrying out the plan of benevolence which he formed in the
first chapter of this narrative. Adopting various disguises, he would
penetrate into the most obscure and dangerous quarters of the city, at
all hours of the day and night. The details of many of these secret
adventures will be hereafter related.


CHAPTER V

_A Thieves' Crib on the Five Points--Bloody Mike--Ragged Pete--the Young
Thief, and the stolen Letters--The Stranger--a general Turn-out-Peeling
a Lodger--the 'Forty-Foot Cave.'_


It was a dreary winter's night, cold, dark, and stormy. The hour was
midnight; and the place, the '_Five Points_.'

The narrow and crooked streets which twine serpent-like around that
dreaded plague spot of the city were deserted; but from many a dirty
window, and through many a red, dingy curtain, streamed forth into the
darkness rages of ruddy light, while the sounds of the violin, and the
noise of Bacchanalian orgies, betokened that the squalid and vicious
population of that vile region were still awake.

In the low and dirty tap-room of a thieves' _crib_ in Cross street, are
assembled about a dozen persons. The apartment is twenty feet square,
and is warmed by a small stove, which is red-hot; a roughly constructed
bar, two or three benches, and a table constitute all the furniture.
Behind the bar stands the landlord, a great, bull-necked Irishman, with
red hair, and ferocious countenance, the proprietor of the elegant
appropriate appellation of 'Bloody Mike.' Upon the table are stretched
two men, one richly dressed, and the other in rags--both sound asleep.
Beneath the table lay a wretched-looking white prostitute, and a
filthy-looking negro--also asleep. The remainder of the interesting
party are seated around the stove, and sustain the following dialogue:

'Well, blow me tight,' said one, 'if ever I seed such times as these
afore! Why, a feller can't steal enough to pay for his rum and tobacco.
I haven't made a cent these three days. D----n me if I ain't half a mind
to knock it off and go to work!'

The speaker was a young man, not over one and twenty years of age; yet
he was a most wretched and villainous looking fellow. His hair was wild
and uncombed; his features bloated and covered with ulcers; his attire
miserable and ragged in the extreme; and sundry sudden twitchings of his
limbs, as well as frequent violent scratchings of the same, indicated
that he was overrun with vermin. This man, whose indolence had made him
a common loafer, had become a petty thief; he would lurk around
backyards and steal any article he could lay his hands to--an axe, a
shovel, or a garment off a line.

'What you say is true enough, Ragged Pete,' said a boy of about
fourteen, quite good looking, and dressed with comparative neatness. 'A
_Crossman_ has to look sharp now-a-days to make a _boodle_. And he often
gets deceived when he thinks he has made a raise. Why the other day I
cut a rich looking young lady's reticule from her arm in Broadway and
got clear off with it; but upon examining my prize, I found it contained
nothing but a handkerchief and some letters. The _wipe_ I kept for my
own use; as for the letters, here they are--they are not worth a
tinker's d----n, for they are all about love.'

As he spoke, he carelessly threw upon the table several letters, which
were taken up and examined by Ragged Pete, who being requested by others
to read aloud, complied, and opening one, read as follows:--

     '_Dear Mistress_,--Since your marriage, I have not enjoyed any
     of those delicious private _tete-a-tetes_ with you, which
     formerly afforded us both so much pleasure. Send me word when
     I can find you alone, and I will fly to your arms.

     'Your ever faithful Nero'

'By Jesus!' exclaimed Bloody Mike--'it's a mighty quare name me
gentleman signs himself, any how. And it's making love to another man's
wife he'd be, blackguard! Devil the much I blame him for that same, if
the lady's continted!'

'Here,' said Ragged Pete, taking up another letter, 'is one that's
sealed and directed, and ain't been broke open yet. Let's see what it
says.'

Breaking the seal, he read aloud the contents, thus:--

     '_Dear Nero_,--I am dying to see you, but my husband is with
     me so constantly that 'tis next to impossible. He is kind and
     attentive to me, but oh! how infinitely I prefer _you to him_!
     I do not think that he has ever suspected that before my
     marriage, I * * * _Fortunately for us_, Mr. Sydney has lately
     been in the habit of absenting himself from home evenings,
     often staying out very late. Where he goes I care not, tho' I
     suspect he is engaged in some intrigue of his own; and if so,
     all the better for us, my dear Nero.

     'Thus I arrange matters; when he has gone, and I have reason
     to think he will not soon return, a light will be placed in my
     chamber window, which is on the extreme left of the building,
     in the third story. Without this signal, do not venture into
     the house. If all is favourable my maid, Susan (who is in our
     secret,) will admit you by the back gate, when you knock
     thrice. Trusting that we may meet soon, I remain, dear Nero,

     'Your loving and faithful JULIA.'

'Hell and furies!' exclaimed one of the company, starting from his seat,
and seizing the letter; he ran his eye hastily over it, and with a groan
of anguish, sank back upon the bench.

The person who manifested this violent emotion, was a young man, dressed
in a mean and tattered garb, his face begrimed corresponding with that
of the motley crew by which he was surrounded. He was a perfect stranger
to the others present, and had not participated in their previous
conversation, nor been personally addressed by any of them.

Bloody Mike, the landlord, deeming this a fit opportunity for the
exercise of his authority, growled out, in a ferocious tone--

'And who the devil may ye be, that makes such a bobbaboo about a letter
that a _kinchen_ stales from a lady's work bag? Spake, ye blasted
scoundrel; or wid my first, (and it's no small one) I'll let daylight
thro' yer skull! And be what right do ye snatch the letter from Ragged
Pete? Answer me _that_ ye devil's pup!'

All present regarded the formidable Irishman with awe, excepting the
stranger, who gazed at him in contemptuous silence. This enraged the
landlord still more, and he cried out--

'Bad luck to ye, who are ye, at all at all? Ye're a stranger to all of
us--ye haven't spint a pinney for the good of the house, for all ye've
been toasting yer shins furnist the fire for two hours or more! Who
knows but ye're a police spy, an officer in disguise, or--'

'Oh, _slash yer gammon_, Bloody Mike,' exclaimed the stranger, speaking
with a coarse, vulgar accent--'I know you well enough, tho' you don't
remember _me_. Police spy, hey? Why, I've just come out of _quod_
myself, d'y see--and I've got _tin_ enough to stand the rum for the
whole party. So call up, fellers--what'll ye all have to drink?'

It is impossible to describe the effect of these words on everybody
present. Bloody Mike swore that the stranger was a 'rare gentleman', and
asked his pardon; Ragged Pete grasped his hand in a transport of
friendship; the young thief declared he was 'one of the b'hoys from
home;' the negro and the prostitute crawled from under the table, and
thanked him with hoarse and drunken voices; the vagabond and
well-dressed man on the table, both rolled off, and 'called on.' And the
stranger threw upon the counter a handful of silver, and bade them
'drink it up.'

Such a scene followed! Half pints of 'blue ruin' were dispensed to the
thirsty throng, and in a short time all, with two or three exceptions,
were extremely drunk. The negro and the prostitute resumed their places
under the table; the well-dressed man and his ragged companion stretched
themselves upon their former hard couch; and Ragged Pete ensconced
himself in the fireplace, with his head buried in the ashes and his
heels up the chimney, in which comfortable position he vainly essay'd to
sing a sentimental song, wherein he [_illegible word_] to deplore the
loss of his 'own true love.' (The only sober persons were the stranger,
the young thief and the Irish landlord.) The two former of these, seated
in one corner, conversed together in low whispers.

'See here, young feller,' said the stranger--'I've taken a fancy to them
two letters, and if you'll let me keep 'em, here's a dollar for you.'
The boy readily agreed, and the other continued:

'I say, there's a rum set o' coves in this here crib, ain't there? Who
is that well-dressed chap on the table?'

'That,' said the boy, 'is a thief who lately made a large haul, since
which time he has been cutting a tremendous swell--but he spent the
whole thousand dollars in two or three weeks, and his fine clothes is
all that remains. In less than a week he will look as bad as Ragged
Pete.'

'And what kind of a cove is the landlord, Bloody Mike?' asked the
stranger.

'He is the best friend a fellow has in the world, as long as his money
lasts,' replied the boy. 'The moment that is gone, he don't know you.
Now you'll see in a few moments how he'll clear everybody out of the
house except such as he thinks has money. And, 'twixt you and me, he is
the d----dst scoundrel out of jail, and would as lief kill a man as
not.'

At this moment, Bloody Mike came from behind the counter and took a
general survey of the whole party. At length his eye settled upon the
form of Ragged Pete, in the fireplace; muttering something about
'pinnyless loafers,' he seized that individual by the heels, and
dragging him to the door, opened it, and thrust the poor wretch forth
into the deep snow and pelting storm! All the rest with the exception of
the stranger, the boy thief, and the well dressed man, shared the same
fate. But Mike was not done yet; he swore that the well dressed
personage should pay for his lodgings, and deliberately he stripped the
man of his coat, vest and boots, after which summary proceeding he
ejected him from the house, as he had the others.

'Suppose we take up our quarters in some other 'crib',' whispered the
boy to the stranger; the latter assented, and they both arose to depart.
The landlord invited them to remain and partake of 'something hot,' but
they declined this hospitality, and sallied forth into the street.

It was now about two o'clock, and snowing heavily. The stranger, placing
himself under the guidance of the boy, followed him around into Orange
street. Pausing before a steep cellar, exceedingly narrow, dark and
deep, the young thief whispered--

'This is the _forty-foot cave_--the entrance into the _dark vaults_.[1]
You have been down, I suppose?'

The stranger answered in the negative.

'Then come on, if you are not afraid,' said the boy--and followed by his
companion, he cautiously began to descend into the dark and dreary
chasm.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: It is a fact by no means generally known that there was,
beneath the section of New York called the 'Five Points,' a vast
subterranean cavern, known as the _dark vaults_. There mysterious
passages run in many directions, for a great distance, far beneath the
foundations of the houses. Some have supposed that the place was
excavated in time of war, for the secretion of ammunition or stores,
while others think it was formerly a deep sewer of the city. In these
dark labyrinths _daylight_ never _shone_: an eternal night prevailed.
Yet it swarmed with human beings, who passed their lives amid its
unwholesome damps and gloomy horrors. It served as a refuge for
monstrous crimes and loathsome wretchedness. The Police rarely ventured
to explore its secret mysteries--for Death lurked in its dark passages
and hidden recesses. The horrors of this awful place have never
heretofore been thoroughly revealed; and now the author of this work
will, for the first time, drag forth the ghastly inmates of this
charnel-house into the clear light of day.]


CHAPTER VI

_The Dark Vaults--Scenes of Appalling Horror--The Dead Man--The
Catechism--arrangements for a Burglary._


Down, down, they went, far into the bowels of the earth; groping their
way in darkness, and often hazarding their necks by stumbling upon the
steep and slippery steps. At length the bottom of the 'forty-foot cave'
was reached; and the boy grasping the hand of his follower, conducted
him thro' a long and circuitous passage. Intense darkness and profound
silence reigned; but after traversing this passage for a considerable
distance, lights began to illumine the dreary path, and that indistinct
hum which proceeds from numerous inhabitants, became audible. Soon the
two explorers emerged into a large open space, having the appearance of
a vast vault, arched overhead with rough black masonry, which was
supported by huge pillars of brick and stone. Encircling this mighty
_tomb_, as it might be properly called, were numerous small hovels, or
rather _caves_, dug into the earth; and these holes were swarming with
human beings.

Here was a _subterranean village_! Myriads of men and women dwelt in
this awful place, where the sun never shone; here they festered with
corruption, and died of starvation and wretchedness--those who were
poor; and here also the fugitive murderer, the branded outlaw, the
hunted thief, and the successful robber, laden with his booty, found a
safe asylum, where justice _dare not_ follow them--here they gloried in
the remembrance of past crimes, and anticipated future enormities. Men
had no secrets here;--for no treachery could place them within the grasp
of the law, and every one spoke openly and boldly of his long-hidden
deeds of villainy and outrage.

'Come', said the boy to the stranger--'let us go the rounds and see
what's going on.'

They drew nigh a large, shelving aperture in the earth, on one side of
the vault, and looking in saw a man, nearly naked; seated upon a heap of
excrement and filthy straw. A fragment of a penny candle was burning
dimly near him, which showed him to be literally daubed from head to
foot with the vilest filth. Before him lay the carcase of some animal
which had died from disease--it was swollen and green with putrefaction;
and oh, horrible! we sicken as we record the loathsome fact--the starved
wretch was ravenously devouring the carrion! Yes, with his finger nails,
long as vultures' claws, he tore out the reeking entrails, and ate them
with the ferocity of the grave-robbing hyena! One of the spectators
spoke to him, but he only growled savagely, and continued his revolting
meal.

'Oh, God!' said the stranger, shuddering--'this is horrible!'

'Pooh!' rejoined the boy--'_that's_ nothing at all to what you will see
if you have the courage and inclination to follow me wherever I shall
lead you, in these vaults.'

In another cavern an awful scene presented itself. It was an Irish
_wake_--a dead body lay upon the table, and the relations and friends of
the deceased were howling their lamentations over it. An awful stench
emanating from the corpse, indicated that the process of decomposition
had already commenced. In one corner, several half-crazed, drunken,
naked wretches were fighting with the ferocity of tigers, and the
mourners soon joining in the fray, a general combat ensued, in the fury
of which, the table on which lay the body was overturned, and the corpse
was crushed beneath the feet of the combatants.

Leaving this appalling scene, the boy and the stranger passed on, until
they stood before a cave which was literally crammed with human beings.
Men and women, boys and girls, young children, negroes, and _hogs_ were
laying indiscriminately upon the ground, in a compact mass. Some were
cursing each other with fierce oaths; and horrible to relate! negroes
were lying with young white girls, and several, unmindful of the
presence of others, were perpetrating the most dreadful enormities.
These beings were vile and loathsome in appearance, beyond all human
conception; every one of them was a mass of rags, filth, disease, and
corruption. As the stranger surveyed the loathsome group, he said to his
guide, with a refinement of speech he had not before assumed--

'Had any one, two hours ago, assured me that such a place as this,
containing such horrible inmates, existed in the very heart of the city,
I would have given him the lie direct! But I see it for myself, and am
forced to believe it.'

'These wretches,' said the boy--'are many of them related to each other.
There are husbands and wives there; mothers and children; brothers and
sisters. Yet they all herd together, you see, without regard to nature
or decency. Why the crime of _incest_ is as common among them as dirt! I
have known a mother and her son--a father and his daughter--a brother
and sister--to be guilty of criminal intimacy! Those wretched children
are many of them the offspring of such unnatural and beastly
connections. In my opinion, those hogs have as good a claim to humanity,
as those brutes in human form!'

'And how came those hogs to form part of the inhabitants of this
infernal place?' asked the stranger.

'You must know,' replied the boy,'that these vaults communicate with the
common street _sewers_ of the city; well, those animals get into the
sewers, to devour the vegetable matter, filth and offal that accumulate
there; and, being unable to get out, they eventually find their way to
these vaults. Here they are killed and eaten by the starving wretches.
And would you believe it?--these people derive almost all their food
from these sewers. They take out the decayed vegetables and other filth,
which they actually eat; and the floating sticks and timber serve them
for fuel. You remember the man we saw devouring the dead animal; well,
he took that carcase from the sewer.'

'And what effect does such loathsome diet produce upon them?' asked the
other.

'Oh,' was the reply--'it makes them insane in a short time; eventually
they lose the faculty of speech, and howl like wild animals. Their
bodies become diseased, their limbs rot, and finally they putrify and
die.'

'And how do they dispose of the dead bodies?' asked the stranger.

'_They throw them into the sewer_,' answered the boy, with indifference.
His listener shuddered.

'Come,' said the young guide--'you have only seen the wretched portion
of the Dark Vaults. You are sick of such miseries, and well you may
be--but we will now pay a visit to a quarter where there are no
sickening sights. We will go to the _Infernal Regions_!'

Saying this, he led the way thro' a long, narrow passage, which was
partially illumined by a bright light at the further end. As they
advanced loud bursts of laughter greeted their ears; and finally they
emerged into a large cavern, brilliantly illuminated by a multitude of
candles, and furnished with a huge round table. Seated around this were
about twenty men, whose appearance denoted them to be the most desperate
and villainous characters which can infest a city. Not any of them were
positively ragged or dirty; on the contrary, some of them were dressed
richly and expensively; but there was no mistaking their true
characters, for villain was written in their faces as plainly as though
the word was branded on their faces with a hot iron.

Seated upon a stool in the centre of the table was a man of frightful
appearance: his long, tangled hair hung over two eyes that gleamed with
savage ferocity; his face was the most awful that can be imagined--long,
lean, cadaverous and livid, it resembled that of a corpse. No stranger
could view it without a shudder; it caused the spectator to recoil with
horror. His form was tall and bony, and he was gifted with prodigious
strength. This man, on account of his corpse-like appearance was known
as 'the Dead Man.' He never went by any other title; and his real name
was unknown.

The stupendous villainy and depravity of this man's character will
appear hereafter. Upon the occasion of his first introduction in this
narrative, he was acting as president of the carousals; he was the first
one to notice the entrance of the boy and the stranger; and addressing
the former, he said--

'How now, _Kinchen_--who have you brought with you? Is the cove _cross_
or _square_--and what does he want in our _ken_?'

'He is a _cross cove_,' answered the boy--'he is just from _quay_; and
wishes to make the acquaintance of the knights of the Round Table.'

'That being the case,' rejoined the Dead Man, 'he is welcome, provided
he has the blunt to pay for the _lush_ all round.'

The stranger, understanding the import of these words, threw upon the
table a handful of money; this generosity instantly raised him high in
the estimation of all present. He was provided with a seat at the table,
and a bumper of brandy was handed him, which he merely tasted, without
drinking.

The boy seated himself at the side of the stranger, and the Dead Man,
addressing a person by the name of the 'Doctor,' requested him to resume
the narration of his story, in which he had been interrupted by the two
newcomers.

The 'Doctor,' a large, dark man, very showily dressed, complied, and
spoke as follows:--

'As I was saying, gentlemen, I had become awfully reduced--not a cent in
my possession, not a friend in the world, and clothed in rags. One
night, half-crazed with hunger, I stationed myself at the Park, having
armed myself with a paving stone, determined to rob the first person
that came along, even if I should be obliged to dash out his
brains.--After a while, a young gentleman approached my lurking place; I
advanced towards him with my missile raised, and he drew a sword from
his cane, prepared to act on the defensive--but when I mentioned that
three days had elapsed since I had taken food, the generous young man,
who might easily have overcome me, weak and reduced as I was--took from
his pocket a fifty dollar bill, and gave it to me. This generous gift
set me on my legs again, and now here am I, a Knight of the Round Table,
with a pocket full of rocks, and good prospects in anticipation. Now,
the only wish of my heart is to do that generous benefactor of mine a
service; and if ever I can do a good action to him, to prove my
gratitude, I shall be a happy fellow indeed.'

'Posh!' said the Dead Man, contemptuously--'don't talk to me of
gratitude--if a man does _me_ a service I hate him for it ever
afterwards. I never rest till I repay him by some act of treachery or
vengeance.'

As the hideous man gave utterance to this abominable sentiment, several
females entered the apartment, one of whom led by the hand a small boy
of five years of age. This woman was the wife of the Dead Man, and the
child was his son.

The little fellow scrambled upon the table, and his father took him upon
his knee, saying to the company--

'Pals, you know the blessed Bible tells us to 'train up a child in the
way he should go;' very good--now you will see how well I have obeyed
the command with this little _kid_. Attend to your catechism, my son.
What is your name?'

'Jack the Prig,' answered the boy without hesitation.

'Who gave you that name?'

'The Jolly Knights of the Round Table.'

'Who made you?' asked the father.

'His Majesty, old Beelzebub!' said the child.

'For what purpose did he make you?'

'To be a bold thief all my life, and die like a man upon the gallows!'

Immense applause followed this answer.

'What is the whole duty of man?'

'To drink, lie, rob, and murder when necessary.'

'What do you think of the Bible?'

'It's all a cursed humbug!'

'What do you think of me--now speak up like a man!'

'You're the d----dest scoundrel that ever went unhung,' replied the boy,
looking up in his father's face and smiling.

The roar of laughter that followed his answer was perfectly deafening,
and was heartily joined in by the Dead Man himself, who had taught the
child the very words--and those words were true as gospel. The Dead Man
knew he was a villain, and gloried in the title. He gave the boy a glass
of brandy to drink, as a reward for his cleverness; and further
encouraged him by prophesying that he would one day become a great
thief.

Room was now made at the table for the women, several of whom were
young and good-looking. They were all depraved creatures, being common
prostitutes, or very little better; and they drank, swore, and boasted
of their exploits in thieving and other villainy, with as much gusto as
their male companions. After an hour of so spent in riotous debauchery,
the company, wearied with their excesses, broke up, and most of them
went to their sleeping places; the Dead Man, the boy and the stranger,
together with a man named Fred, remained at the table; and the former,
addressing the stranger, said to him--

'And so, young man, you have just come out of _quod_, hey? Well, as you
look rather hard up, and most likely haven't a great deal of blunt on
hand, suppose I put you in the way of a little profitable business--eh?'

The stranger nodded approvingly.

'Well, then,' continued the Dead Man--'you must know that Fred Archer
here and myself _spotted_ a very pretty _crib_ on Broadway, and we have
determined to _crack_ it. The house is occupied by a young gentleman
named Sydney, and his wife--they have been married but a short time. We
shall have no difficulty in getting into the crib, for Mr. Sydney's
butler, a fellow named Davis, is bribed by me to admit us into the
house, at a given signal. What say you--will you join us?'

'Yes--and devilish glad of the chance,' replied the stranger, gazing at
Fred Archer with much interest. Fred was a good looking young man,
genteelly dressed, but with a dissipated, rakish air.

'Very well--that matter is settled,' said the Dead Man. 'Three of us
will be enough to do the job, and therefore we shan't want your
assistance, _Kinchen_,' he added, addressing the boy. 'It must now be
about six o'clock in the morning--we will meet here to-night at eleven
precisely. Do not fail, for money is to be made in this affair.'

The stranger promised to be punctual at the appointed hour; and bidding
him good night (for it was always night in that place), Fred and the
Dead Man retired, leaving the _Kinchen_ and the stranger alone together.

'Well,' said the _Kinchen_--'so it seems that you have got into business
already. Well and good--but I must caution you to beware of that Dead
Man, for he is treacherous as a rattlesnake. He will betray you, if
anything is to be gained by it--and even when no advantage could be
gained, he will play the traitor out of sheer malice. He is well aware
that I, knowing his real character, would not join him in the business,
and therefore he affected to think that my assistance was unnecessary.'

'I will look out for him,' rejoined the stranger--and then added, 'I
will now thank you to conduct me out of this place, as I have matters to
attend to elsewhere.'

The _Kinchen_ complied, and in ten minutes they emerged into the street
above, by the same way they had entered.

Here they parted, the stranger having first presented the boy with a
liberal remuneration for his services as guide, and made an appointment
to meet him on a future occasion.


CHAPTER VII

_The false wife, and the dishonest servant--scene in the Police
Court--capture of the Burglars, and threat of vengeance._


Mr. Francis Sydney and his lady were seated at dinner, in the
sumptuously furnished dining parlor of their elegant Broadway mansion.
The gentleman looked somewhat pale and ill at ease, but the lady had
never looked more superbly beautiful.

The table was waited upon by Davis, the butler, a respectable looking
man of middle age, and Mr. Sydney, from time to time, glanced furtively
from his wife to this man, with a very peculiar expression of
countenance.

'My love,' said Mrs. Sydney, after a pause of several minutes--'I have a
little favor to ask.'

'You have but to name it, Julia, to ensure it being granted,' was the
reply.

'It is this,' said the lady;--'our present footman is a stupid Irishman,
clumsy and awkward; and I really wish him to be discharged. And, my
dear, I should be delighted to have the place filled by my father's
black footman, who is called Nero. He is civil and attentive, and has
been in my father's family many years. Let us receive him into our
household.'

'Well Julia,' said the husband, 'I will consider on the subject. I
should not like to part with our present footman, Dennis, without some
reluctance--for though uncouth in his manners, he is an honest fellow,
and has served me faithfully for many years. _Honest_ servants are
exceedingly scarce now-a-days.'

As he uttered these last words, Davis, the butler, cast a sudden and
suspicious look upon his master, who appeared to be busily engaged with
the contents of his plate, but who in reality was steadfastly regarding
him from the corner of his eyes.

As soon as dinner was over, the lady retired to her _boudoir_; Davis
removed the cloth and Mr. Sydney was left alone. After taking two or
three turns up and down the room, he paused before the fireplace and
soliloquized thus:

'Curses on my unhappy situation! My wife is an adulteress, and my
servants in league with villains to rob me! These two letters confirm
the first--and my last night's adventure in the Dark Vaults convinced me
of the second. And then the woman just now had the damnable effrontery
to request me to take her rascally paramour into my service, in place of
my faithful Dennis! She wishes to carry on her amours under my very
nose! And that scoundrel Davis--how demure, how innocently he looks--and
yet how suspiciously he glanced at me, when I emphasized _honest_
servants! He is a cursed villain, and yet not one-tenth part so guilty
as this woman, whom I espoused in honorable marriage, supposing her to
be pure and untainted and yet who was, previous to our marriage, defiled
by co-habitation with a vile negro--and now _after_ our marriage, is
still desirous of continuing her beastly intrigues. Davis is nothing but
a low-born menial, without education or position, but Julia is by birth
a lady, the daughter of a man of reputation and honor, moving in a
brilliant sphere, possessing education and talent, admired as much for
her beauty as for her accomplishments and wit--and for her to surrender
her person to the lewd embraces of _any man_--much more a negro
menial--is horrible! And then to allow herself to be led to the altar,
enhanced her guilt tenfold; but what caps the climax of her crimes, is
this last movement of hers, to continue her adulterous intercourse!
Heavens!--what a devil in the form of a lovely woman! But patience,
patience! I must set about my plan of vengeance with patience.'

The reader of course need not be told, that the stranger of the Dark
Vaults, and Frank Sydney, were one and the same person. The adventure
had furnished him with the evidences of his wife's criminality and his
servant's dishonesty and perfidy.

That same afternoon, the young gentleman sallied forth from his mansion,
and took his way to the police office. On his way he mused thus:

'By capturing these two villains, the Dead Man and Fred Archer, I shall
render an important service to the community. It is evident that the
first of these men is a most diabolical wretch, capable of any crime;
and the other, I am convinced, is the same Frederick Archer who is the
husband of the unfortunate girl with whom I passed the night not long
since, at which time she related to me her whole history. He must be a
most infernal scoundrel to make his wife prostitute herself for his
support; and he is a _burglar_ too, it seems. Society will be benefited
by the imprisonment of two such wretches--and this very night shall they
both lodge in the Tombs.'

When Frank arrived at the police office, he found a large crowd
assembled; a young thief had just been brought in, charged with having
abstracted a gentleman's pocket-book from his coat pocket, in Chatham
Street. What was Frank's surprise at recognizing in the prisoner, the
same boy who had been his companion in the Dark Vaults, on the
proceeding night! The lad did not know Frank, for there was no
similarity between the ragged, vagabond looking fellow of the night
before, and the elegantly dressed young gentleman who now surveyed him
with pity and interest depicted in his handsome countenance.

It was a clear case--the young offender was seen in the act, and the
pocket-book was found in his possession. The magistrate was about to
make out his commitment, when Frank stepped forward, and required what
amount of bail would be taken on the premises?

'I shall require surety to the amount of five hundred dollars, as the
theft amounts to grand larceny,' replied the magistrate.

'I will bail him, then,' said Frank.

'Very well, Mr. Sydney,' observed the magistrate, who knew the young
gentleman perfectly well, and highly respected him.

'You will wait here in the office for me, until I have transacted some
business, and then accompany me to my residence,' said Frank--'I feel
interested in you, and, if you are worthy of my confidence hereafter,
your future welfare shall be promoted by me.'

Frank had a long private interview with the magistrate. After having
made arrangements for the capture of the two burglars, the young man
urged the police functionary to take immediate measures for the breaking
up of the band of desperate villains who lurked in the Dark Vaults, and
the relief of the miserable wretches who found a loathsome refuge in
that terrible place. The magistrate listened with attention and then
said--

'I have long been aware of the existence of the secret, subterranean
Vaults of which you allude, and so have the officers of the police; yet
the fact is known to very, very few of the citizens generally. Now you
propose that an efficient and armed force of the police and watch, make
a sudden descent into the den, with the view of capturing the villains
who inhabit it. Ridiculous!--why, sir, the thing is impossible: they
have a mysterious passage, unknown to any but themselves, by which they
can escape and defy pursuit. The thing has been attempted twenty times,
and as often failed. So much for the _villains_ of the den;--now in
regard to the wretched beings whom you have described, if we took them
from that hole, what in the world should we do with them? Put them in
the prisons and almshouse, you say. That would soon breed contagion
throughout the establishments where they might be placed, and thus many
lives would be sacrificed thro' a misdirected philanthropy. No,
no--believe me, Mr. Sydney, that those who take up their abode in the
Vaults, and become diseased, and rot, and die there, had much better be
suffered to remain there, far removed from the community, than to come
into contact with that community, and impart their disease and pollution
to those who are now healthy and pure. Those vaults may be regarded as
the moral sewers of the city--the scum and filth of our vast population
accumulate in them. With reference to the desperadoes who congregate
there, their living is made by robbery and outrage throughout the city;
and all, sooner or later, are liable to be arrested and imprisoned for
their offences.'

'I admit the force of your reasoning,' said Frank--'yet I cannot but
deeply deplore the existence of such a den of horrors.'

'A den of horrors indeed!' rejoined the magistrate. 'Why, sir, there are
at this moment no less than six murderers in the Vaults--one of whom
escaped from his cell the night previous to the day on which he was to
be hung. The gallows was erected in the prison yard--but when the
sheriff went to bring the convict forth to pay the penalty of his crime,
his cell was empty; and upon the wall was written with charcoal,--'_Seek
me in the Dark Vaults!_' The police authorities once blocked up every
known avenue to the caverns, with the design of starving out the
inmates; but they might have waited till doomsday for the accomplishment
of that object, as the secret outlet which I have mentioned enabled the
villains to procure stores of provisions, and to pass in and out at
pleasure. I am glad that your scheme, Mr. Sydney, will tonight place in
the grip of the law, two of these miscreants, one of whom, the Dead Man,
has long been known as the blackest villain that ever breathed. He is a
fugitive from justice, having a year ago escaped from the State Prison,
where he had been sentenced for life, for an atrocious murder; he had
been reprieved from the gallows, thro' the mistaken clemency of the
Executive. He will now be returned to his old quarters, to fulfil his
original sentence, and pass the remainder of his accursed life in
imprisonment and exclusion from the world, in which he is not fit to
dwell.'

Frank now took leave of the magistrate, and, accompanied by the young
pickpocket, returned to his own residence. It was now about five
o'clock, and growing quite dark; a drizzly rain was falling intermingled
with snow. Frank conducted the boy to his library, and having carefully
closed and locked the door, said to him--

'_Kinchen_, don't you know me?'

The boy started, and gazed earnestly at him for a few moments, and then
shook his head.

'Wait here a short time, and I will return,' said Frank, and he stepped
into a closet adjoining the library, and shut the door.

Ten minutes elapsed; the closet door opened, and a ragged, dirty looking
individual entered the library. The boy jumped to his feet in
astonishment, and exclaimed--

'Why, old fellow, how the devil came _you_ here?'

'Hush,' said Frank--'I am the man who accompanied you thro' the Vaults
last night, and I am also the gentleman who bailed you to-day. Now
listen; you can do me a service. You know that the Dead Man, Fred Archer
and myself are to enter this house to-night; the two burglars little
think that I am the master of the house. It is my intention to entrap
those two villains. Take this pistol; conceal yourself in that closet,
and remain quiet until you hear the noise of a struggle; then rush to
the scene of the conflict, and aid me and the officers in capturing the
two miscreants. Rather than either of them should escape, shoot him
thro' the head. I am inclined to think that you will prove faithful to
me; be honest, and in me you have secured a friend. But I must enlist
another person in our cause.'

He rang a bell, and Dennis, the Irish footman, made his appearance. This
individual was not surprised to see his master arrayed in that strange
garb, for he had often assisted him in similar disguises. Dennis was a
large, raw-looking Hibernian, yet possessing an honest open
countenance.--Frank explained to him in a few words the state of the
case, and the nature of the service required of him; and honest Dennis
was delighted with the opportunity of displaying his personal prowess,
and fidelity to his master.

'Och, be the powers!' he exclaimed--'it's nather a sword nor a pistol I
want at all, but only a nate little bit of shillalab in my fist, to bate
the thieves of the worruld, and scatter them like the praste scatters
the divil wid holy water.'

'Very well,' said Frank--'now, _Kinchen_, you will take your station in
the closet, for fear you should be seen by the servants, and you,
Dennis, will bring him up some refreshments, and then attend to your
ordinary duties as usual. Say not a word to anybody in regard to this
affair, and give the other servants to understand that I have gone out,
and will not return until tomorrow morning. I shall now leave the house,
and at about midnight you may expect me, accompanied by the burglars.'

Saying this, Frank quitted the mansion by a private stair-case. Turning
into Canal street, he walked towards the Bowery, and not far from where
that broad thoroughfare joins Chatham street, he ascended the steps of a
dwelling-house, and knocked gently at the door; it was soon opened by
the young courtezan with whom Frank had passed the night at the
commencement of this tale. She did not recognize the visitor in his
altered garb, until he had whispered a few words in her ear, and then
uttering an exclamation of pleasure, she requested him to follow her
up-stairs.

Frank complied, and after seating himself in the well-remembered
chamber, related to the young woman, as briefly as possible, the
circumstances under which he had met her husband, Fred Archer, and the
share he was to take in the burglary. He concluded by saying--

'I am sure, Mrs. Archer, that you will rejoice in the prospect of
getting rid of such a husband. Once convicted and sent to the State
Prison, he has no further claim upon you. You will be as effectually
separated from him as though you were divorced.'

'I shall be most happy,' said Mrs. Archer--'to escape from the
tyrannical power of that bad man. He has used me brutally of late, and I
have often suffered for the common necessaries of life. Oh, how gladly
would I abandon the dreadful trade of prostitution and live a life of
virtue!'

'And so you shall, by Heavens!' cried Frank, in the warmth of his
generous nature. 'Take courage, madam, and after the affairs of tonight
are settled, your welfare shall be my special care. I will endeavor to
procure you a comfortable home in some respectable family, where--'

At this moment the street door was opened, and some one was heard
ascending the stairs.

'It is my husband!' whispered Mrs. Archer, and pointing to the bed, she
requested Frank to conceal himself behind the curtains; he did so, and
in a moment more, Fred Archer entered the room, and threw himself into a
chair.

'Well, by G----!' he exclaimed--'it seems impossible for a man to make a
living these times! Here I am, without a cursed cent in my pocket.
Maria, what money have you in the house?'

'I have no money, Frederick,' replied his wife.

'No money--you lie, cursed strumpet! What do you do with the gains of
your prostitution?'

'As God is my witness,' replied the wretched woman, bursting into
tears--'I have not received a cent for the past week; I have even
suffered for food; and the lady threatens to turn me out of doors this
very night, if the rent is not paid. I know not what to do.'

'Do!--why, d----n you, do as other w----s do; go and parade Broadway,
until you pick up a flat--ha, ha, ha!' and the ruffian laughed brutally.
After a pause, he added--

'Well, I've got an appointment tonight, at eleven o'clock; a little job
is to be done, that will fill my pocket with shiners. But don't you
expect to get a farthing of the money--no, d----n you, you must earn
your living as other prostitutes earn it. Good bye--I'm off.'

He departed, and Frank emerged from his hiding place. 'What a beastly
scoundrel that fellow is!' he thought, as he gazed with pity at the
weeping and wretched wife. He was about to address her with some words
of comfort, when a loud knocking was heard on the chamber door. Mrs.
Archer started, and whispered to Frank that it was the landlady, come
to demand her rent--she then in a louder tone, requested the person to
walk in.

A stout, vulgar looking woman entered the room and having violently shut
the door and placed her back to it, said--

'I've come, Missus, or Miss, or whatever you are, to see if so be you
can pay me my rent, as has now been due better nor four weeks, and you
can't deny it, either.'

'I am sorry to say, madam,' replied Mrs. Archer,'that I am still unable
to pay you. My husband has left me no money, and--'

'Then you will please to bundle out of this house as soon as possible,'
retorted the woman, fiercely. 'What am I to let my furnished rooms to a
lazy, good-for-nothing hussy like you, as is too proud to work and too
good to go out and look for company in the streets, and can't pay me, an
honest, hard-working woman, her rent! Am I to put up with--'

'Silence, woman!' interrupted Frank--'do not abuse this unfortunate
female in this manner! Have you no sympathy--no pity?'

'And who are _you_, sir?' demanded the virago, dreadfully enraged--'how
dare _you_ interfere, you dirty, ragged, vagabond? Come, tramp out of
this, both of you, this very instant, or I shall call in them as will
make you!'

Frank made no reply, but very composedly drew from his pocket a handful
of silver and gold; at the sight of the money, the landlady's eyes and
mouth opened in astonishment--and her manner, from being most
insufferably insolent, changed to the most abject servility.

'Oh, sir,' she said, simpering and curtsying--'I am sure I always had
the greatest respect for Mrs. Archer, and I hope that neither you nor
her will think hard of me for what I said--I only meant--'

'That will do,' cried Frank, contemptuously--and having inquired the
amount due, paid her, and then desired her to withdraw, which she did,
with many servile apologies for her insolent rudeness.

The young gentleman then prevailed upon Mrs. Archer to accept of a sum
of money sufficient to place her beyond immediate want, and promised to
call upon her again in a few days and see what could be done for her
future subsistence. She thanked him for his kindness with tears in her
eyes; and bidding her farewell, he left the house, and proceeded towards
the Five Points.

He had no difficulty in finding the 'forty-foot cave,' the entrance of
the Dark Vaults; but, previous to descending, curiosity prompted him to
step into the _crib_ of Bloody Mike, to see what was going on. He found
the place crowded with a motley collection of vagrants, prostitutes,
negroes and petty thieves; Ragged Pete was engaged in singing a shocking
obscene song, the others joined in the chorus. Clothed in filthy rags,
and stupidly drunk, was the man whom Frank had seen the night before so
handsomely dressed; Bloody Mike, who had 'peeled' his coat, had since
become the possessor of all his other genteel raiment, giving the poor
wretch in exchange as much 'blue ruin' as he could drink, and the
cast-off garments of a chimney-sweep!

Bloody Mike welcomed Frank with enthusiasm, and introduced him to the
company as the 'gintleman that had thrated all hands last night.' At
this announcement, the dingy throng gave a loud shout of applause, and
crowded about him to shake his hand and assure him how glad they were to
see him. These demonstrations of regard were anything but pleasing to
our hero, who threw a dollar upon the counter, inviting them all to
drink; and, while they were crowding around the bar to receive their
liquor, he made his escape from the _crib_, and sought the entrance to
the Dark Vaults. Having reached the bottom of the 'forty-foot cave' in
safety, he proceeded cautiously along the dark passage which he had
before traversed, and passing thro' the first Vault, soon emerged into
the cavern of the desperadoes. Here he was met by Fred Archer and the
Dead Man, who had been waiting for him.

'Ah, old fellow,' said the latter worthy--'here you are; it's somewhat
before the appointed time, but so much the better. Put it down and drink
a bumper of brandy to the success of our enterprise.'

The three seated themselves at the table, and remained over an hour
drinking, smoking and conversing. Frank partook very sparingly of the
liquor, but the others drank freely. At last the Dead Man arose, and
announced that it was time to go. He then began to make his
preparations.

Retiring for a short time to an inner cavern, he returned with his arms
full of various articles. First, there were three large horse pistols,
two of which he gave to his companions, retaining one for himself; then
he produced three cloaks to be worn by them, the better to conceal any
booty which they might carry off. There was also a dark lantern, and
various implements used by burglars. The Dead Man then proceeded to
adjust a mask over his hideous face, which so completely disguised him,
that not one of his most intimate acquaintances would have known him.
The mask was formed of certain flexible materials, and being colored
with singular truthfulness to nature, bore a most wonderful resemblance
to a human face. The Dead Man, who, without it, carried in his
countenance the loathsome appearance of a putrefying corpse, with it was
transformed into a person of comely looks. All the preparations being
now complete, the party took up their line of march, under the
directions of the Dead Man. To Frank's surprise, that worthy did not
lead the way out of the cavern by means of the 'forty-foot cave,' but
proceeded in a different course, along a passage, dark and damp, its
obscurity but partially dispelled by the dim rays of the dark lantern,
which was carried by the leader. After traversing this passage for a
considerable distance, the Dead Man suddenly paused, and said to Frank--

'You are not acquainted with the Secret Outlet to these Vaults--and as
you are not yet a Knight of the Round Table, I dare not trust you, a
stranger, with the knowledge of it, until you join us, and prove
yourself to be trustworthy. Therefore, we must blindfold you, until we
reach the streets above. This is a precaution we use by every stranger
who goes out this way.'

'But why do you not leave the Vaults by the 'forty-foot cave' thro'
which I entered?' demanded Frank, who was fearful of some treachery.

'Because,' answered the Dead Man--'there are police officers in disguise
constantly lurking around the entrance of that cave, ready to arrest the
first suspicious character who may come forth. You were not arrested
last night, because you were unknown to the police--but I, or Fred here,
would be taken in a jiffy.'

'How would they know _you_ in the disguise of that mask?' asked Frank.

'They might recognise me by my form--my gait--my air--my speech--damn
it, they would almost know me by my smell! At all events, I prefer not
to risk myself, while there is a safe outlet here. But, if you hesitate,
you can return the way you came, and we will abandon the undertaking.'

'No,' said Frank--'I will proceed.'

The Dead Man bound a handkerchief tightly over Frank's eyes, and led him
forward some distance; at length he was desired to step up about a foot,
which he did, and found himself standing upon what appeared to be a
wooden platform. The other two took their places beside him, and then he
heard a noise similar to that produced by the turning of an iron crank;
at the same time he became sensible that they were slowly ascending.
Soon a dull, sluggish sound was heard, like the trickling of muddy
water; and a foetid odor entered the nostrils, similar to the loathsome
exhalations of a stagnant pool. Up, up they went, until Frank began to
think that they must have attained a vast height from the place whence
they had started; but at last the noise of the crank ceased, the
platform stood still, and the Dead Man, after conversing for a short
time in whispers with some person, took hold of Frank's arm, and led him
forward thro' what appeared to be an entry. A door was opened, they
passed out, and Frank, feeling the keen air, and snow beneath his feet,
knew that they were in the open streets of the city. After walking some
distance, and turning several corners the bandage was removed from his
eyes, and he found himself in Pearl street, the Dead Man walking by his
side, and Fred following on behind.

They soon turned into Broadway, and in less than ten minutes had reached
the mansion of Mr. Sydney. The streets were silent and deserted for the
hour was late; and the Dead Man whispered to his companions--

'We can now enter the house unobserved. In case of surprise, we must not
hesitate to _kill_, sooner than be taken. I will now give the signal.'

He gave a low and peculiar whistle, and after the lapse of a few
moments, repeated it. Instantly, the hall door was noiselessly opened by
a person whom Frank recognized as Davis, the butler. The Dead Man
beckoned the two others to follow him into the hall, which they did, and
the door was closed.

Five minutes after they had entered the house two men who had been
concealed behind a pile of bricks and rubbish on the opposite side of
the street, crossed over, and passing around to the rear of the house,
obtained access to the garden thro' the back gate which had been
purposely left unfastened for them. These two men were police officers,
who had been for some time on the watch for the burglars. They entered
the house thro' the kitchen window, and stationed themselves upon the
stairs, in readiness to rush to the assistance of Frank, as soon as he
should give the appointed signal.

Meantime, the Dead Man had raised the slide of his dark lantern, and by
its light he led the way into the back parlor, followed by the others.
Davis had not the remotest suspicion that one of the men, whom he
supposed to be a burglar, and whose appearance was that of a ruffian,
was his master! No--he looked him full in the face without recognizing
him in the slightest degree.

The Dead Man, approaching a side-board, poured out a bumper of wine and
tossed it off, after which he drew from his pocket a small iron bar,
(called by thieves a _jimmy_,) and applying it to a desk, broke it open
in an instant. But it contained nothing of value;--and the burglar,
addressing the others, said:

'We must disperse ourselves over the house, in order to do anything. I
will rummage the first story: you, Fred, will explore the second, and
our new friend here can try his luck in the third. As for you, Davis,
you must descend into the kitchen, and collect what silver ware and
plate you can find. So now to work.'

At this instant Frank threw himself upon the Dead Man, and exclaimed, in
a loud voice:

'Yield, villain!'

'Damnation, we are betrayed!' muttered the ruffian, as with a mighty
effort he threw Frank from him, and drew his horse pistol;--levelling it
at the young man with a deadly aim, he was about to draw the fatal
trigger, when Dennis, the Irish footman, who had been concealed beneath
a large dining table, sprang nimbly behind him, and felled him to the
carpet with a tremendous blow of his thick cudgel, crying:

'Lie there, ye spalpeen, and rest asy.'

Fred Archer and Davis instantly made for the door, with the intention of
escaping--but they were seized by the two policemen, who now rushed to
the scene of uproar; the butler and burglar, however, struggled
desperately, and one of the policemen was stunned by a heavy blow on his
head, with the butt of a pistol, dealt by the hand of Archer, who, thus
freed from the grasp of his antagonist, dashed thro' the hall and
effected his escape from the house. Davis, however, was quickly
overpowered by the other officer, who slipped hand-cuffs upon his
wrists, and thus secured him.

All these occurrences took place within the space of two minutes; and
the _Kinchen_, who had been secreted in the library upstairs, arrived,
pistol in hand, at the scene of action, just as the conflict had
terminated.

The Dead Man lay motionless upon the carpet, and Frank began to fear
that he was killed; but upon approaching and examining him, he
discovered that he still breathed, though faintly. The blow from Dennis'
cudgel had apparently rendered him insensible, and blood was flowing
from a severe but not serious wound in his head.

The policeman who had been stunned was speedily brought to, by proper
treatment;--and it was found that he had sustained but a trifling
injury. Frank now approached Davis, and regarding him sternly, said--

'So, sir, you have leagued yourself with burglars, it seems. What
induced you to act in this treacherous manner?'

'The promise of a liberal reward,' replied the man, sulkily.

'Your reward will now consist of a residence of several years in the
State Prison,' observed his master as he walked away from him.

The noise of the conflict had aroused the inmates of the house from
their slumbers, and much alarm prevailed among them, particularly the
females, whose screams resounded throughout the building. To quiet them,
Dennis was despatched as a messenger, with assurances that the robbers
were in safe custody, and no cause for alarm existed. On passing the
chamber of his mistress, that lady called to him, desiring to know the
cause of the uproar; and when she had learned the details of the affair,
she expressed her gratification at the result.

Frank ordered refreshments to be brought up, and while the whole party
gathered around the table to partake of a substantial collation, he
congratulated the two officers on having secured so desperate and
dangerous a villain as the Dead Man. The form of that miscreant was
still stretched upon the carpet directly behind Frank, who stood at the
table; and as he was supposed to be insensible, from the effect of the
heavy blow which he had received, no one deemed it necessary to bestow
any attention upon him. But while the officers and others were eating
and conversing, the _Kinchen_ suddenly uttered an exclamation of alarm,
and seizing a wine bottle which stood upon the table, dashed it at the
head of the Dead Man, who had arisen upon his knees, and held in his
hand a sharp, murderous-looking knife, which he was just on the point of
plunging into the side of the unsuspecting Frank! The bottle was broken
into shivers against the ruffian's head, and ere he could recover
himself, he was disarmed and handcuffed by the officers, one of whom
tore the mask from his face; and the spectators shrunk in horror at the
ghastly and awful appearance of that corpse-like countenance! Turning
his glaring eye upon Frank, he said, in tones of deepest hate--

'Sydney, look at me--_me_, the _Dead Man_--dead in heart, dead in pity,
dead in everything save _vengeance_! You have won the game; but oh!
think not your triumph will be a lasting one. No, by G----! there are no
prison walls in the universe strong enough to keep me from wreaking upon
you a terrible revenge! I will be your evil genius; I swear to follow
you thro' life, and cling to you in death; yes--I will torture you in
hell! Look for me at midnight, when you deem yourself most secure; I
shall be in your chamber. Think of me in the halls of mirth and
pleasure, for I shall be at your elbow. In the lonely forest, on the
boundless sea, in far distant lands, I shall be ever near you, to tempt,
to torture, and to drive you mad! From this hour you are blasted by my
eternal curse!'

       *     *     *     *     *

Half an hour afterwards, the Dead Man and Davis the butler were inmates
of the 'Egyptian Tombs.'


CHAPTER VIII

_The Subterranean Cellar--Capture and Imprisonment of the Black--the
Outcast Wife--The Villain Husband--the Murder and Arrest._


The next day after the occurrence of the events detailed in the last
chapter, Frank Sydney caused to be conveyed to the negro footman, Nero,
the letter which his wife had addressed to him--which letter it will be
recollected, had been stolen from the lady, in her reticule, by the
young thief, who had sold it and another epistle from the black, to
Frank, at the _crib_ of Bloody Mike.

The plan adopted by the much injured husband for the punishment of his
guilty wife and her negro paramour, will be developed in the course of
the present chapter.

The black, upon receiving the letter, imagined that it came direct from
the lady herself; and much rejoiced was he at the contents, resolving
that very night to watch for the signal in the chamber window of the
amorous fair one.

Beneath the building in which Frank resided, was a deep stone cellar,
originally designed as a wine vault; it was built in the most
substantial manner, the only entrance being protected by a massive iron
door--the said door having been attached in order to prevent dishonest
or dissolute servants from plundering the wine. In the course of the day
upon which he had sent the letter to Nero, Frank paid a visit to this
cellar, and having examined it with great care, said to himself--'This
will answer the purpose admirably.'

He then summoned Dennis and the _Kinchen_--the latter of whom he
retained in his service--and desired them to remove the few bottles and
casks of wine which still remained in the cellar and deposit them
elsewhere.--This being done, a quantity of straw was procured and thrown
in one corner, and then the arrangements were complete.

'Now listen,' said Frank, addressing Dennis and the _Kinchen_; 'a
certain person has injured me--irretrievably injured me--and it is my
intention to confine him as a prisoner in this cellar. The matter must
be kept a profound secret from the world; you must neither of you
breathe a syllable in relation to it, to a living soul. My motive for
confiding to you the secret, is this: I may at times find it necessary
to be absent from home for a day or so, and it will devolve upon you two
to supply the prisoner with his food. Be secret--be vigilant, and your
faithfulness shall be rewarded.'

Both of his listeners expressed their willingness to serve him in the
matter, and Frank dismissed them, with instructions to await his further
orders.

Mrs. Sydney, having lost the letter which she had addressed to Nero
(never dreaming that it had fallen into the hands of her husband,) that
afternoon, while Frank was engaged in the wine cellar, wrote _another
letter_ to the black, couched in nearly the same language as her former
one, and making precisely the same arrangement in reference to an
interview with him in her chamber. This letter she gave to her maid,
Susan, to convey privately to the black. It so happened that Frank, who
had just finished his business in the wine cellar, encountered the girl
as she was emerging from the rear of the house; she held her mistress'
letter in her hand, and, confused at meeting Mr. Sydney so unexpectedly,
thrust it hastily into her bosom. Frank saw the action, and suspecting
the truth, forced the letter from her, broke the seal, and hastily
glanced over the contents. It instantly occurred to him that, if he
permitted this letter to reach its intended destination, the negro would
naturally suspect something wrong, from the fact that he had received
that morning a precisely similar letter; and thus Frank's plan might be
frustrated. On the other hand, it was necessary for Mrs. Sydney to
believe that the letter was safely delivered, in order that she might
still suppose her husband to be ignorant of her amour with the black. In
view of these considerations, Frank put the letter in his pocket, and
then turning to the trembling Susan, said to her, sternly--

'Woman, your agency in this damnable intrigue is known to me, and if you
would save yourself from ruin, you will do as I command you. Remain
concealed in the house for half an hour, and then go to your mistress
and tell her that you have delivered the letter to the black; and say to
her that he sends word in reply, that _should the signal be given
to-night, he will come to her chamber_. And do you, when you hear him
knock thrice upon the gate, admit him, and conduct him to your
mistress's chamber. Do this, and you are forgiven for the part you have
taken in the business; but if you refuse, by the living God you shall
die by my hand!'

'Oh, sir,' sobbed the girl, frightened at the threat, 'I will do all you
wish me to.'

'Then you have nothing to fear--but remember, I am not to be trifled
with.'

Half an hour afterwards, Susan went up to the chamber of her mistress,
and said--

'Well, ma'am, I gave the letter to Nero.'

'And did he send any message?' asked the lady.

'Yes, ma'am,' replied the girl, in obedience to the instructions of
Frank--'he said that if the signal is given to-night, he will come to
your chamber.'

'Very well, Susan--you are a good girl, and here is a dollar for you,'
said the lady, and then added--'you will be sure to admit him when he
knocks?'

'Oh, yes, ma'am,' replied the maid; and thanking her mistress, she
withdrew.

Left alone, the guilty, adulterous woman fell into a voluptuous reverie,
in which she pictured to herself the delights which she anticipated from
her approaching interview with her sable lover. The possibility of her
husband's remaining at home that evening, thereby preventing that
interview, did not once obtrude itself upon her mind--so regularly had
he absented himself from home every night during the preceding two or
three weeks; and as he had never returned before midnight, she
apprehended no difficulty in getting her paramour out of the house
undiscovered by him.

The conduct of this woman will doubtless appear very extraordinary and
unaccountable to those who have not studied human nature very deeply;
while the eccentricity of her passion, and the singular object of her
desires, will excite disgust. But to the shrewd and intelligent observer
of the female heart and its many impulses, the preferences of this frail
lady are devoid of mystery. They are readily accounted for--pampered
with luxury, and surrounded by all the appliances of a voluptuous
leisure, a morbid craving for _unusual indulgences_ had commingled with
her passions--a raging desire, and mad appetite for a _monstrous_ or
_unnatural_ intrigue--and hence her disgraceful _liaison_ with the
black.

Were we disposed, what astounding disclosures we could make, of beastly
amours among the sons and daughters of the aristocracy! We have known
many instances of unnatural births, unquestionably produced by unnatural
cohabitations! We once visited the private cabinet of an eminent medical
practitioner, whose collection comprised over a hundred half-human
monstrosities, preserved;--and we were assured that many were the
results of the most outrageous crimes conceivable.--But why dwell upon
such a subject, so degrading to humanity? We will pursue the loathsome
theme no longer.

Evening came, and after supper Mrs. Sydney retired to her chamber. To
her surprise, her husband joined her there; but her surprise increased,
and her annoyance was extreme, when he announced his intention of
remaining with her that evening, at home!

Disguising her real feelings, and affecting a joy which was a stranger
to her heart at the moment, she only smiled as if in approval of his
determination. But in her heart she was most painfully disappointed.

'At all events,' she said to herself, 'I will not place a light in my
window, which was the signal I arranged with Nero--so I am safe, at
least.'

What was her astonishment and dismay, when her husband deliberately took
the lamp from the table, and placed it in the window!

Amazed and trembling, she sat for some minutes in silence, while Frank,
having lighted a cigar, began smoking with the utmost coolness. At
length the conscience-stricken lady ventured to say--

'My dear, why do you place the light in the window?'

'Because it is my whim to do so,' replied Frank.

'It is a singular whim,' remarked his wife.

'Not so singular as the whim of a white lady of my acquaintance, who
amalgamates with a negro,' said her husband.

'What do you mean?' demanded the guilty woman, ready to faint with
terror and apprehension.

'I mean this, woman--that you are a vile adulteress!' exclaimed Frank,
now thoroughly enraged--'I mean that your abominable conduct is known to
me--your true character is discovered. Before your marriage you were
defiled by that negro footman, Nero--and since our marriage you have
sought the opportunity to renew the loathsome intimacy.'

'What proof have you of this?' murmured the wretched woman, ready to die
with shame and terror.

'These letters--this one, addressed to you by the black, and this, which
you wrote to him this very afternoon; but it did not reach its
destination, for I intercepted it. The one which you wrote a few days
ago, and which was stolen from you in your reticule, came into my
possession in a manner almost providential--that letter I sent to the
place this morning, and he, supposing it came from you, will come
to-night to keep the appointment. He will observe the signal agreed
upon, and will be admitted into the house, and conducted to this
chamber, little imagining who is waiting for him. So you see, madam,
both you and your _friend_ are in my power.'

It is impossible to describe the expression of despair and misery which
overspread the countenance of Mrs. Sydney during the utterance of these
words. She attempted to speak, but could not articulate a single
syllable--and in another moment had fallen insensible upon the carpet.

Frank raised her and placed her upon the bed; he had scarcely done so,
when he heard some one stealthily ascending the stairs, and in another
moment the door softly opened, and Nero, the African footman, entered.

Great was his astonishment and alarm on beholding the husband of the
lady whom he had come to debauch. His first impulse was to retreat from
the room and endeavor to make his escape from the house; but his design
was frustrated by Frank, who rushed forward and seized him by the
throat, exclaiming, in a tone of furious rage--

'Eternal curses on you, black ruffian, how dare you enter this house?'

The African, recovering somewhat his presence of mind, struggled to
release himself from the fierce grasp of Frank, and would probably have
succeeded, had not the _Kinchen_ entered, and, seizing a chair, dealt
him a blow with it which knocked him down. He then drew from his pocket
a stout cord, and, with Frank's assistance, bound the negro's arms
securely with it.

Nero, though a black, was both educated and intelligent; he knew that he
was now in the power of the man who had been so foully wronged, and he
conceived that there was but one way to extricate himself from the
difficulty--namely, by promises and entreaties.

'Mr. Sydney,' said he, in an humble, submissive tone--'it is evident
that you have discovered my intimacy with that lady, by what means I
know not. You have just cause to be indignant and enraged; but I throw
myself upon your mercy--and consider, sir, the lady made the first
advances, and was I so much to blame for acceding to the wishes of such
a lovely woman? Now, sir, if you will suffer me to depart, I promise to
leave the city of New York forever, and never will I breathe to another
ear the secret of my intimacy with your wife.'

'Think not, accursed miscreant, thus to escape my vengeance,' replied
Frank. 'That you are less guilty than that adulterous woman who lies
there,' he added, pointing to the bed, 'I admit, and her punishment
shall be greater than yours, for she shall endure the pangs of infamy
and disgrace, while you only suffer the physical inconvenience of a
lengthened imprisonment. I cannot suffer you to go at large after this
outrage on my honor as a husband and a man. Attempt no further
parley--it is useless, for your fate is sealed.'

Frank took from a bureau drawer a brace of pistols, and commanded the
negro to follow him, threatening to shoot him through the head if he
made the least noise or resistance.--Nero obeyed, trembling with
apprehension and dread. Descending the stairs, Frank conducted him to
the cellar, and unlocking the massive iron door, bade him enter; the
poor wretch began to supplicate for mercy, but his inexorable captor
sternly ordered him to hold his peace, and having unbound his arms,
forced him into the dark and gloomy vault, closed the door, and locked
it. He then gave the key to the _Kinchen_, requesting him to use the
utmost vigilance to prevent the escape of the prisoner, and to supply
him every day with sufficient food and water.

'You perceive, my boy,' said Frank, 'that I am disposed to place the
utmost confidence in your integrity and faithfulness. From the moment I
first saw you, I have been impressed with the belief that you possess a
good heart, and some principles of honor. Destitution and bad company
have led you astray--but I trust that your future conduct will prove
your sincere repentance. I will see the gentleman from whom you
attempted to take the pocket-book, and I will compromise the matter with
him, so that it shall never come to trial. Be honest--be faithful--be
true--and in my house you shall ever have a home, and in me you shall
ever have a steadfast friend.'

'Oh, sir,' said the _Kinchen_, his eyes filling with tears--'your
kindness and generosity have made me a different being from what I was.
I now view my former life with abhorrence, and sooner would I die than
return to it. Ah, it is delightful to lead an honest life, to have a
comfortable home, and a kind friend like you, sir. My faithful devotion
to your interests will prove my gratitude. I should like, sometime, to
tell you my history, Mr. Sydney; and when you have heard it, I am sure
that you will say that I deserve some pity, as well as blame.'

'I shall be pleased to hear your story,' replied Frank. 'As you are now
regularly in my service, you shall be no longer designated as
_Kinchen_,[2] for that name is associated with crime. What is your own
proper name?'

'Clinton Romaine,' replied the boy.

'Well, Clinton, you shall hereafter be called by that name. To-morrow I
will give you an order on my tailor for a new and complete wardrobe. You
had better now retire to bed; as for myself,' he added, gloomily--'I
shall probably enjoy but little rest or sleep to-night.'

Clinton bade his patron good night, and retired; Frank ascended to the
chamber of his wife, and found that she had recovered from her swoon,
though she was still pale from apprehension and shame. Averting her eyes
from her husband's gaze, she sat in moody silence; after a pause of
several minutes, Frank said--

'Julia, it is not my intention to waste my breath in upbraiding
you--neither will I allude to your monstrous conduct further than to
state it has determined me to cast you off forever. You are my wife no
longer; you will leave this house to-night, and never again cross its
threshold. Take with you your maid Susan, your wardrobe, your jewels--in
short, all that belongs to you; you must relinquish the name of
Sydney--cease to regard me as your husband, and never, never, let me see
your face again.'

These words, uttered calmly and solemnly, produced an extraordinary
effect upon the lady; so far from subduing or humiliating her, they
aroused within her all the pride of her nature, notwithstanding her
recent overwhelming shame. A rich color dyed her cheeks, her eyes
sparkled, and her bosom heaved, as she arose, and boldly confronting
Frank, said, in passionate tones--

'You cast me off forever!--I thank you for those words; they release me
from a painful thralldom. Now am I mistress of my own actions--free to
indulge to my heart's content in delightful amours!--I will not return
to my father's house--no, for you will doubtless proclaim there the
story of my shame, and my father would repulse me with loathing; and
even if 'twere not so, I prefer liberty to follow my own inclinations,
to the restraint of my parent's house.'

'Wretched woman,' exclaimed Franks--'are you indeed so lost--so
depraved?'

'Fool!' returned the frail lady--'you cannot understand the fiery and
insatiate cravings of my passions. I tell you that I consume with
desire--but not for enjoyment with such as _you_, but for delicious
amours which are _recherche_ and unique! Ah, I would give more for one
hour with my superb African, than for a year's dalliance with one like
you, so ordinary, so excessively common-place! Now that the mask is torn
from my face, reserve is needless. Know then that I have been a wanton
since early girlhood. What strange star I was born under, I know not;
but my nature is impregnated with desires and longings which you would
pronounce absurd, unnatural, and criminal. Be it so: I care not what you
or the world may say or think--my cravings must be satisfied at all
hazards. As for relinquishing the name of Sydney, I do so with
pleasure--that name has no pleasure for me; I never loved you, and at
this moment I hate and despise you. Do you ask me wherefore?--Because
you had wit enough to detect me in my intrigues. I shall leave your
house tonight, and we meet no more. My future career is plainly marked
out: I shall become an abandoned and licentious woman, yielding myself
up unreservedly to the voluptuous promptings of my ardent soul. I part
from you without regret, and without sorrow do I now bid you farewell
forever.'

'Stay a moment,' said Frank, as she was about to leave the room--'I
would not have you to be entirely destitute: I will fill you out a check
for a sum of money sufficient to keep you from immediate want.'

He wrote out and signed a check for one thousand dollars, which he gave
her, and then left her without saying another word. She received the
donation with evident satisfaction, and immediately began to make her
preparations for departure. Her maid, Susan, assisted her; and also
informed her in what manner Frank had compelled her to assist in
entrapping Nero into the house. Susan, herself being unobserved, had
seen the African conveyed to the cellar, and locked in; this fact she
also communicated to her mistress, who heard it with much pleasure, as
she had anticipated that her paramour would meet with a worse fate than
mere confinement.--She determined to effect his release, if possible,
although she knew that some time must necessarily elapse before she
could hope to accomplish that object.

When all was ready, Julia and her maid seated themselves in a hackney
coach which had been procured, and were rapidly driven from that
princely mansion, of which the guilty woman had so recently been the
proud mistress, but from which she was now an outcast forever.

That night, Frank, in the solitude of his chamber, shed many bitter
tears. He mourned over the fallen condition of that beautiful woman,
whom, had she been worthy, he would have cherished as his wife, but who
had proved herself not only undeserving of his affection, but depraved
and wicked to an astonishing degree. Until the fatal moment when he was
led to suspect her chastity, he had loved her devotedly and sincerely.
How cruelly had he been deceived!

And that night, in the solitude and darkness of his cold and gloomy
dungeon, Nero, the African, swore a terrible oath of vengeance upon the
white man who had shut him up in that subterranean cell.

Within a week after the capture of the Dead Man and David the butler,
those two villains were inmates of the State Prison at Sing Sing--the
former to fulfil his original sentence of imprisonment for life, and the
latter to undergo an imprisonment for five years, for his participation
in the attempted robbery of Mr. Sydney.

Fred Archer, on escaping from the officer in the manner which we have
described, made his way to the Dark Vaults, where he remained concealed
for several days, not venturing to appear abroad. At the end of a week
he began to grow impatient of the restraint, and, conceiving that no
great danger would be incurred if he left his place of refuge in the
darkness of night, he resolved to do so; moreover, he was destitute of
money, and entertained some hope of being able to extort a sum from his
unfortunate wife, whom he had driven to prostitution. Accordingly, at
about eight o'clock in the evening, he left the Vaults by means of the
secret outlet before alluded to and gaining the street, proceeded at a
rapid pace towards the Bowery. In the breast of his coat he carried a
huge Bowie knife, with which to defend himself in case any attempt
should be made to arrest him.

That very day, Frank Sydney, mindful of his promise, had succeeded in
obtaining a situation for Mrs. Archer, in the family of an old lady, an
aunt of his, who required the attendance of a young woman as a companion
and nurse, she being an invalid. In the afternoon, Mrs. Archer received
a visit from the boy, Clinton, who came to announce to her the joyful
intelligence of a good home having been secured for her; he then placed
the following brief note from Frank in her hands:--

     'Mrs. Archer,--Madame: I shall this evening call upon you, to
     confirm the words of my messenger. The unfortunate career
     which you have followed, is now nearly ended. Extortion and
     oppression shall triumph no longer. F.S.'

It was about eight o'clock in the evening when Frank knocked at the door
of the house in which Mrs. Archer resided, and he was admitted by the
mercenary landlady who figured not very creditably upon a former
occasion. She immediately recognized the young gentleman, who was
dressed in the garments of a laborer; and very civilly informing him
that the young lady was at home, requested him to walk upstairs to her
room.

Our hero assumed a disguise upon that occasion, for this reason: he did
not know but that the house was publicly regarded as a brothel; and he
therefore did not wish to hazard his reputation by being recognized
either while entering or leaving the place.

He ascended the stairs and knocked gently at the chamber, which was
immediately opened by Mrs. Archer, who pressed his hand with all the
warmth of a grateful heart, and placed a chair for him near the
fire.--Glancing around the room, Frank saw that she had made every
arrangement for her departure: bandboxes and trunks were in readiness
for removal, and all her little effects were heaped together in one
corner. She herself was dressed with considerable elegance and taste; a
close fitting dress of rich silk displayed the fine proportions of her
symmetrical form to advantage.

'I know not how to thank you, Mr. Sydney,' she said, seating
herself--'for your generous interest in my welfare; but oh! believe me,
I am grateful for your kindness.'

Frank assured her that he had derived much satisfaction from what
services it had been in his power to render, tending to her benefit. He
then related to her all that had occurred on the night of the attempted
robbery at his house--how her husband had made his escape, and was
probably lurking in the Dark Vaults.

'Then he is still at large,' said Mrs. Archer, shuddering--'and I am not
yet safe.'

'Fear nothing,' said her benefactor--'he dare not intrude into the
respectable and quiet asylum where you are to be placed. No harm can
reach you there.'

'God grant it may be so!' fervently ejaculated the young lady; and at
that instant some one was heard stealthily ascending the stairs. 'It is
Frederick!' she whispered--'you had better conceal yourself, to avoid
useless altercation.' Frank quickly secreted himself behind the curtains
of the bed, his former hiding place: and in another moment Fred Archer
entered the room, and closed the door with extreme caution. 'Maria,' he
said, roughly--'I must have money from you to-night; the affair which I
spoke to you about, when I was last here, failed most infernally. One of
the very fellows who were to assist me in the job, proved to be the
owner of the house which we were going to plunder. He had a trap
prepared for us, and two of my pals were taken, while I escaped just by
a miracle. I dare not go abroad in daylight, for fear of being arrested;
and I need money--give it to me!'

'Frederick,' said his wife, mildly--'I have but a few dollars, and you
are welcome to them. I leave this house to-night; I am going to live
hereafter a life of honesty and virtue.'

'Indeed!' exclaimed Archer, now observing for the first time the
preparations for removal--'and may I ask where the devil you're going?'

'I do not wish to tell you, Frederick,' replied the lady--'I shall have
a good and comfortable home; let that suffice. I will always pray for
your welfare; but we must part forever.'

'Ha! is it so?' he hissed from between his clenched teeth, while the hot
blood of anger mantled on his face, and his eyes were lit up with the
fires of demoniac passions--'do you think to desert me and cast me off
forever?'--As he spoke, his right hand was thrust into the breast of his
coat.

'We must part; my resolution is fixed,' she replied firmly. 'Your
treatment of me--'

She paused in affright, for her husband had seized her violently by the
arm; then he plucked the gleaming Bowie knife from its sheath, and ere
she could scream out, the murderous blade was buried in her heart!

From his place of concealment behind the curtains of the bed, Frank saw
the atrocious deed perpetrated. The villain had struck the fatal blow
ere he could rush forth and stay his murderous arm. The poor victim sank
upon the floor, the lifeblood streaming from her heart.--Ere the
horrified witness of the crime could seize the murderer, he had fled
from the house with a celerity which defied pursuit.

Frank, overwhelmed with grief at the tragic fate of that erring but
unfortunate woman, raised her body in his arms and placed it upon a
sofa. He then drew from her bosom the reeking blade of the assassin, and
as he did so, the warm blood spouted afresh from the gaping wound,
staining his hands and garments with gore.

He bent over the corpse, and contemplated the pallid features with
profound sorrow. As he thus gazed mournfully at the face of the dead,
holding in his hand the blood-stained knife, the chamber door opened,
and the landlady entered the room.

On beholding the awful scene--the bleeding, lifeless form stretched upon
the sofa, and the young man standing with a gory knife grasped in his
hand--the landlady made the house resound with her shrieks and cries of
'Murder!'

The street door below was forced open and men with hurried footsteps
ascended the stairs--in a moment more the chamber was filled with
watchmen and citizens.

'Seize the murderer!' exclaimed the landlady, pointing towards Frank.
Two watchmen instantly grasped him by the arms, and took from him the
bloody knife.

Frank turned deadly pale--he was speechless--his tongue refused its
office, for then the dreadful conviction forced itself upon him, that he
was regarded as the murderer of that young woman. And how could he prove
his innocence? The weight of circumstantial evidence against him was
tremendous and might produce his conviction and condemnation to an
ignominious death!

Several persons present recognized him as the rich and (until then)
respectable Mr. Sydney; and then they whispered among themselves, with
significant looks, that he was _disguised_!--clad in the mean garb of a
common laborer!

Now it happened that among the gentlemen who knew him, were two of the
flatterers who supped with him in the first chapter of this
narrative--namely, Messrs. Narcissus Nobbs and Solomon Jenks: the former
of whom it will be recollected, was enthusiastic in his praises of
Frank, upon that occasion, while the latter boisterously professed for
him the strongest attachment and friendship. The sincerity of these
worthies will be manifested by the following brief conversation which
took place between them, in whispers--

'A precious ugly scrape your friend has got himself into,' said Mr.
Nobbs.

'_My_ friend, indeed!' responded Mr. Jenks, indignantly--'curse the
fellow, he's no friend of mine! I always suspected that he was a d----d
scoundrel at heart!'

'I always _knew_ so,' rejoiced Mr. Nobbs.

Oh, hollow-hearted Jenks and false-souled Nobbs! Ye fitly represent the
great world, in its adulation of prosperous patrons--its forgetfulness
of unfortunate friends!

Frank Sydney was handcuffed, placed in a coach and driven to the Tombs.
Here he was immured in the strong cell which had long borne the title of
the 'murderer's room.'

Fred Archer was safely concealed in the secret recesses of the Dark
Vaults.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 2: The term _Kinchen_, in the flash language of the thieves,
signifies a boy thief.]


CHAPTER IX

_The Masquerade Ball--the Curtain raised, and the Crimes of the
Aristocracy exposed._


Mrs. Lucretia Franklin was a wealthy widow lady, who resided in an
elegant mansion in Washington Place. In her younger days she had been a
celebrated beauty; and though she was nearly forty at the period at
which we write, she still continued to be an exceedingly attractive
woman. Her features were handsome and expressive, and she possessed a
figure remarkable for its voluptuous fullness.

Mrs. Franklin had two daughters: Josephine and Sophia. The former was
eighteen years of age, and the latter sixteen. They were both beautiful
girls, but vastly different in their style of beauty; Josephine being a
superb brunette, with eyes and hair dark as night, while Sophia was a
lovely blonde, with hair like a shower of sunbeams, and eyes of the
azure hue of a summer sky.

In many other respects did the two beautiful sisters differ. The figure
of Josephine was tall and majestic; her walk and gestures were
imperative and commanding. Sophia's form was slight and sylph-like; her
every movement was characterized by exquisite modesty and grace, and her
voice had all the liquid melody of the Aeolean harp.

In mind and disposition they were as dissimilar as in their personal
qualities. Josephine was passionate, fiery and haughty to an eminent
degree; Sophia, on the contrary, possessed an angelic placidity of
temper, and a sweetness of disposition which, like a fragrant flower,
shed its grateful perfume upon the lowly and humble, as upon the wealthy
and proud.

Mrs. Franklin's husband had died two years previous to the date of this
narrative; he had been an enterprising and successful merchant, and at
his death left a large fortune to his wife. Upon that fortune the lady
and her two daughters lived in the enjoyment of every fashionable luxury
which the metropolis could afford; and they moved in a sphere of society
the most aristocratic and select.

Mr. Edgar Franklin, the lady's deceased husband, was a most excellent
and exemplary man, a true philanthropist and a sincere Christian. He was
scrupulously strict in his moral and religious notions--and resolutely
set his face against the least departure from exact propriety, either in
matters divine or temporal. The austerity of his opinions and habits was
somewhat distasteful to his wife and eldest daughter, both of whom had
a decided predilection for gay and fashionable amusements. Previous to
his death, they were obliged to conform to his views and wishes; but
after that event, they unreservedly participated in all the aristocratic
pleasures of the 'upper ten': and their evenings were very frequently
devoted to attendance at balls, parties, theatres, the opera, and other
entertainments of the gay and wealthy inhabitants of the 'empire city.'

Mr. Franklin's death had occurred in a sudden and rather remarkable
manner. He had retired to bed in his usual good health, and in the
morning was found dead by the servant who went to call him.

The body was reclining upon one side in a natural position, and there
was nothing in its appearance to indicate either a violent or painful
death. Disease of the heart was ascribed as the cause of his sudden
demise; and his remains were deposited in the family tomb in St. Paul's
churchyard. Many were the tears shed at the funeral of that good
man;--for his unaffected piety and universal benevolence had endeared
him to a large circle of friends.

The grief of the bereaved widow and eldest daughter was manifested by
loud lamentations and passionate floods of tears; but the sorrow of the
gentle Sophia, though less violent, was none the less heart-felt and
sincere.

There was little sympathy between the haughty, imperious Josephine and
her mild, unobtrusive sister. Their natures were too dissimilar to admit
of it; and yet Sophia loved the other, and at the same time feared
her--she was so cold, so distant, so formal, so reserved. Josephine, on
her part, viewed her sister as a mere child--not absolutely as an
inferior, but as one unfitted by nature and disposition to be her
companion and friend. Her treatment of Sophia was therefore marked by an
air and tone of patronizing condescension, rather than by a tender,
sisterly affection.

Mrs. Franklin loved both her daughters, but her preference manifestly
inclined to Josephine, whose tastes were in exact accordance with her
own. Sophia had little or no inclination for the excitement and tumult
of fashionable pleasures; and therefore she was left much to herself,
alone and dependent upon her own resources to beguile her time, while
her mother and sister were abroad in the giddy whirl of patrician
dissipation.

But upon the Sabbath, no family were more regular in their attendance at
church than the Franklins. Punctually every Sunday morning, the mother
and daughter would alight from their splendid carriage opposite St.
Paul's church, and seating themselves in their luxuriously cushioned and
furnished pew, listen to the brilliant eloquence of Dr. Sinclair, with
profound attention. Then, when the pealing organ and the swelling anthem
filled the vast dome with majestic harmony, the superb voice of
Josephine Franklin would soar far above the rolling flood of melody, and
her magnificent charms would become the cynosure of all eyes. Few
noticed the fair young creature at her side, her golden hair parted
simply over her pure brow, and her mild blue eyes cast modestly upon the
page of the hymn-book before her.

Having now introduced Mrs. Lucretia Franklin and her two daughters to
the reader, we shall proceed at once to bring them forward as active
participants in the events of our history.

It was about three o'clock in the afternoon; in a sumptuous chamber of
Franklin House (for by that high-sounding title was the residence of the
wealthy widow known,) two ladies were engaged in the absorbing mysteries
of a singular toilet.

One of these ladies was just issuing from a bath. Although not young,
she was very handsome; and her partially denuded form exhibited all the
matured fullness of a ripened womanhood. This lady was Mrs. Lucretia
Franklin.

Her companion was her daughter Josephine. This beautiful creature was
standing behind her mother; she had just drawn on a pair of broadcloth
pants, and was in an attitude of graceful and charming perplexity,
unaccustomed as she was to that article of dress. The undergarment she
wore had slipped down from her shoulders, revealing voluptuous beauties
which the envious fashion of ladies' ordinary attire, usually conceals.

Upon the carpet were a pair of elegant French boots and a cap, evidently
designed for Miss Josephine. Various articles of decoration and costume
were scattered about: upon a dressing-table (whereon stood a superb
mirror,) were the usual luxurious trifles which appertain to a
fashionable toilet--perfumes, cosmetics, &c.--and in one corner stood a
magnificent bed.

This was the chamber of Josephine; that young lady and her mother were
arraying themselves for a grand fancy and masquerade ball to be given
that night, at the princely mansion of a _millionaire_.

By listening to their conversation, we shall probably obtain a good
insight into their true characters.

'I am thinking, mamma,' said Josephine--'that I might have selected a
better costume for this occasion, than these boys' clothes. I shall
secure no admirers.'

'Silly girl,' responded her mother--'don't you know that the men will
all run distracted after a pretty woman in male attire? Besides, such a
costume will display your shape so admirably.'

'Ah, that is true,' remarked the beautiful girl, smiling so as to
display her brilliant teeth; and removing her feminine garment, she
stood before the mirror to admire her own distracting and voluptuous
loveliness.

'And this costume of an Oriental Queen--do you think it will become me,
my love,' asked her mother.

'Admirably,' replied Josephine--'it is exactly suitable to your figure.
Ah, mamma, your days of conquest are not over yet.'

'And yours have just begun, my dear. Yours is a glorious destiny,
Josephine; beautiful and rich, you can select a husband from among the
handsomest and most desirable young gentlemen in the city. But you must
profit by _my_ experience: do not be in haste to unite yourself in
marriage to a man who, when he becomes your husband, will restrict you
in the enjoyment of those voluptuous pleasures in which you now take
such delight. _I_ 'married in haste and repented at leisure;' after my
union with your father, I found him to be a cold formalist and canting
religionist, continually boring me with his lectures on the sins and
folly of 'fashionable dissipation,' as he termed the elegant amusements
suitable to our wealth and rank and discoursing upon the pleasures of
the domestic circle, and such humbugs. All this was exceedingly irksome
to me, accustomed as I was to one unvarying round of excitement; but
your father was as firm as he was puritanical--and obstinately
interposed his authority as a husband, to prevent my indulging in my
favorite entertainments. This state of affairs continued, my dear, until
you attained the age of sixteen, when you began to feel a distaste for
the insipidity of a domestic life, and longed for a change.--Our
positions were then precisely similar: we both were debarred from the
delights of gay society, for which we so ardently longed. One obstacle,
and one only, lay in our way; that obstacle was your father--my husband.
We were both sensible that we never could enjoy ourselves in our own
way, while _he lived_; his death alone would release us from the
condition of thralldom in which we were placed--but as his constitution
was robust and his health invariably good, the agreeable prospect of his
death was very remote--and we might have continued all our lives under
the despotic rules of his stern morality, had we not rid ourselves of
him by--'

'For Heaven's sake, mother,' said Josephine, hastily--'don't allude to
_that_!'

'And why not,' asked the mother, calmly. 'You surely do not regret the
act which removed our inexorable jailer, and opened to us such flowery
avenues of pleasure? Ah, Josephine, the deed was admirably planned and
skillfully executed. No one suspects--'

'Once more, mother, I entreat you to make no further allusion to that
subject; it is disagreeable--painful to me,' interrupted the daughter,
impatiently. 'Besides, sometimes the walls have ears.'

'Well, well, child--I will say no more about it. Let us now dress.'

Josephine, having arranged her clustering hair in a style as masculine
as possible, proceeded to invest herself in the boyish habiliments which
she had provided. First, she drew on over her luscious charms, a
delicately embroidered shirt, of snowy whiteness, and then put on a
splendid cravat, in the tasteful fold of which glittered a magnificent
diamond. A superb Parisian waistcoat of figured satin was then closely
laced over her rounded and swelling bust; a jacket of fine broadcloth,
decorated with gold naval buttons and a little cap, similarly adorned,
completed her costume. The character she was supposed to represent was
that of 'the Royal Middy;' and her appearance was singularly captivating
in that unique and splendid dress.

Mrs. Franklin, when attired as the Sultana or Oriental Queen, looked
truly regal--the rich and glittering Eastern robes well became her
voluptuous style of beauty.

The labor of the toilet being completed, the ladies found that it still
lacked an hour or so of the time appointed for them to set out; and
while they partook of a slight but elegant repast, they amused
themselves and beguiled the time by lively and entertaining chat.

'These masquerade balls are delightful affairs; one can enjoy an
intrigue with so much safety, beneath the concealing mask,' remarked
Mrs. Franklin.

'And yet last Sabbath, you recollect, Dr. Sinclair denounced masquerades
as one of Satan's most dangerous devices for the destruction of souls,'
said Josephine.

'True--so he did,' assented her mother--'but he need never know that we
attend them.'

'The Doctor is very strict--yet he is very fascinating,' rejoined her
daughter;--'do you know, mamma, that I am desperately enamored of him? I
would give the world could I entice him into an intrigue with me.' And
as she spoke, her bosom heaved with voluptuous sensations.

'Naughty girl,' said Mrs. Franklin, smiling complacently--'I cannot
blame you for conceiving a passion for our handsome young pastor. To
confess the truth, I myself view him with high admiration, not only as a
talented preacher, but also as one who would make a most delightful
lover.'

'Delightful indeed!' sighed Josephine--'but then he is so pure, so
strict, so truly and devotedly religious, that it would be useless to
try to tempt him by any advances; I should only compromise myself
thereby.'

'Well, my dear,' remarked Mrs. Franklin, 'there are other handsome young
men in the world, besides our pastor--many who would grovel at your feet
to enjoy your favors. By the way, who is your _favored one_ at present?'

'Oh, a young fellow to whom I took a fancy the other day,' replied
Josephine, 'he is a clerk, or something of the kind--respectable and
educated, but poor. I encountered him in the street--liked his fresh,
robust appearance--dropped my glove--smiled when he picked it up and
handed it to me--encouraged him to walk me home--invited him in, and
made him, as well as myself, extremely happy by my kindness. I permitted
him to call frequently, but of course I soon grew tired of him--the
affair lacked zeal, romance, piquancy; so, this morning when he visited
me, I suffered him to take a last kiss, and dismissed him forever, with
a twenty-dollar bill and an intimation that we were in future entire
strangers. Poor fellow! he shed tears--but I only laughed, and rang the
bell for the servant to show him out. Now, mamma, you must be equally
communicative with me, and tell me who has the good fortune to be the
recipient of _your_ favors at present.'

'My dear Josey,' said Mrs. Franklin--'I must really decline according
you the required information; you will only laugh at my folly.'

'By no means, mamma,' rejoined the young lady--'we have both at times
been strangely eccentric in our tastes, and must not ridicule each
other's preferences, however singular.'

'Well then, you must know that my lover is a very pretty youth of about
fifteen, who reciprocates my passion with boyish ardor. You will
acknowledge that to a woman of my age, such an amour must be delicious
and unique. For a few days past I have not seen the youthful Adonis,
who, by the bye, bears the very romantic name of Clinton Romaine. I
first met him under very unusual and singular circumstances.'

'Pray, how was that, mamma?' asked Josephine.

'You shall hear,' replied her mother. 'The occurrence which I am about
to relate took place a month ago. I was awakened one night from a sound
sleep by a noise in my chamber, and starting up in affright, I beheld by
the light of a lamp which was burning near the bed, a boy in the act of
forcing open my _escritoire_, with a small instrument which caused the
noise. I was about to scream for assistance, when the young rogue,
perceiving that he was discovered, advanced to the bed, and quieted me
by the assurance that he intended me no personal harm, and implored me
to suffer him to depart without molestation, promising never to repeat
his nocturnal visit. He then placed upon the table my watch, purse, a
casket of jewels, which he had secured about his person--and, in answer
to my inquiry as to how he had obtained an entrance into my chamber he
informed me that he had climbed into the window by means of a ladder
which he had found in the garden. While he was speaking, I regarded him
attentively, and was struck with his boyish beauty; for the excitement
of the adventure and the danger of his position had caused a flush upon
his cheeks and a sparkle in his eyes, which captivated me. I found it
impossible to resist the voluptuous feelings which began to steal over
me--and I smiled tenderly upon the handsome youth; he, merely supposing
this smile to be an indication of my having forgiven him, thanked me and
was about to depart in the same manner in which he came, when I
intimated to him my willingness to extend a much greater kindness than
my pardon. In short, his offence was punished only by sweet imprisonment
in my arms; and delighted with his precocity, I blessed the lucky chance
which had so unexpectedly furnished me with a youthful and handsome
lover. Ere daylight he departed; and has since then frequently visited
me, always gaining access to my chamber by means of the gardener's
ladder. To my regret he has of late discontinued his visits, and I know
not what has become of my youthful gallant. And now my dear, you have
heard the whole story.'

'Very interesting and romantic,' remarked Josephine, and consulting her
gold watch, she announced that the hour was come for them to go to the
masquerade.

The mother and daughter enveloped themselves in ample cloaks, and
descending the stairs, took their seats in the carriage which was in
readiness at the door. A quarter of an hour's drive brought them to the
superb mansion wherein the entertainment was to be given. Alighting from
the carriage, they were conducted by an obsequious attendant to a small
ante-room, where they deposited their cloaks, and adjusted over their
faces the sort of half-mask used on such occasions. A beautiful boy,
dressed as a page, then led the way up a broad marble stair case, and
throwing open a door, they were ushered into a scene of such
magnificence, that for a moment they stood bewildered and amazed, tho'
perfectly accustomed to all the splendors of fashionable life.

A fine-looking elderly man, without a mask and in plain clothes,
advanced towards the mother and daughter; this gentleman was Mr. Philip
Livingston, the host--a bachelor of fifty, reputed to be worth two
millions of dollars. The page who had waited upon the two ladies,
_whispered_ their names in Mr. Livingston's ear; and after the usual
compliments, he bowed, and they mingled with the glittering crowds which
thronged the rooms.

We feel almost inadequate to the task of describing the wonders of that
gorgeous festival; yet will make the attempt, for without it, our work
would be incomplete.

Livingston House was an edifice of vast dimensions, built in the sombre
but grand Gothic style of architecture. Extensive apartments
communicated with each other by means of massive folding doors, which
were now thrown open, and the eye wandered through a long vista of
brilliantly lighted rooms, the extent of which seemed increased ten-fold
by the multitude of immense mirrors placed on every side. Art, science
and taste had combined to produce an effect the most grand and imposing;
rare and costly paintings, exquisite statuary, gorgeous gildings, were
there, in rich profusion. But the most magnificent feature of Livingston
House was its _conservatory_, which was probably the finest in the
country, second only in beauty to the famous conservatory of the Duke of
Devonshire in England. A brief description of this gem of Livingston
House may prove interesting to the reader.

Leaving the hall through an arch tastefully decorated with flowers and
evergreens, the visitor descended a flight of marble steps, and entered
the conservatory, which occupied an extensive area of ground, and was
entirely roofed with glass. Though the season was winter and the weather
intensely cold, a delightful warmth pervaded the place, produced by
invisible pipes of heated water. The atmosphere was as mild and genial
as a summer's eve; and the illusion was rendered still more complete by
a large lamp, suspended high above, and shaped like a full moon; this
lamp, being provided with a peculiar kind of glass, shed a mild, subdued
lustre around, producing the beautiful effect of a moonlit eve! On every
side rare exotics and choice plants exhaled a delicious perfume; tropic
fruits grew from the carefully nurtured soil;--orange, pomegranate,
citron, &c. Gravelled walks led through rich shrubbery, darkened by
overhanging foliage. Mossy paths, of charming intricacy, invited the
wanderer to explore their mysterious windings. At every turn a marble
statue, life-sized, met the eye: here the sylvan god Pan, with rustic
pipes in hand--here the huntress Diana, with drawn bow--here the amorous
god Cupid, upon a beautiful pedestal on which was sculptured these
lines, said to have been once written by Voltaire under a statue of the
heathen divinity:

    'Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;--
    He _was_, or _is_, or _is to be_.'

In the centre of this miniature Paradise was an artificial cascade,
which fell over a large rock into a lake o'er whose glassy waters
several swans with snow white plumage were gliding; and on the brink of
this crystal expanse, romantic grottos and classic temples formed
convenient retreats for the weary dancers from the crowded halls. In
short, this magnificent conservatory was furnished with every beautiful
rarity which the proprietor's immense wealth could procure, and every
classic and graceful adornment which his refined and superior taste
could suggest.

Mrs. Franklin and her daughter, who had come on purpose to engage in
amorous intrigues, agreed to separate, and accordingly they parted, the
mother remaining in the ball room, while Josephine resolved to seek for
adventures amid the mysterious shades of the conservatory.

Over five hundred persons had now assembled in the halls appropriated to
dancing; and these were arrayed in every variety of fancy and
picturesque costume possible to be conceived. The grave Turk, the
stately Spanish cavalier, the Italian bandit and the Grecian corsair,
mingled together without reserve;--and the fairer portion of creation
was represented by fairies, nuns, queens, peasant girls and goddesses.

Mrs. Franklin soon observed that she was followed by a person in the
dress of a Savoyard; he was closely masked, and his figure was slight
and youthful. Determined to give him an opportunity to address her, the
lady strolled to a remote corner of the hall, whither she was followed
by the young Savoyard, who after some apparent hesitation, said to her--

'Fair Sultana, pardon my presumption, but methinks I have seen that
queenly form before.'

'Ah, that voice!' exclaimed the delighted lady--'thou art my little
lover, Clinton Romaine.'

'It is indeed so,' said the boy, gallantly kissing her hand. The lady
surveyed him with wanton eye.

'Naughty truant!' she murmured, drawing him towards her--'why have you
absented yourself from me so long? Do you no longer desire my favors?'

'Dear madam,' replied Clinton--'I am never so happy as when in your
arms; but I have recently entered the service of a good, kind gentleman,
who has been my benefactor; and my time is devoted to him.'

'Come with me,' said the lady, 'to a private room, for I wish to converse
with you without being observed.'

She led the way to a small anteroom, and having carefully fastened the
door to prevent intrusion, clasped the young Savoyard in her arms.

       *     *     *     *     *

Half an hour afterwards, the boy and his aristocratic mistress issued
from the ante-room, and parted. Clinton wandered thro' the halls, and
descending into the conservatory, entered a temple which stood upon the
margin of the little lake, threw himself upon a luxurious ottoman, and
abandoned himself to his reflections.

'How ungrateful I am,' he said half aloud--'to engage in an intrigue
with that wicked, licentious woman, while my poor master, Mr. Sydney, is
languishing in a prison cell, charged with the dreadful crime of murder!
And yet I know he is innocent. I remember carrying his note to Mrs.
Archer on the fatal day; I knew not its contents, but I recollect the
words which he instructed me to say to her--they were words of
friendship, conveying to her an assurance that he had procured for her a
situation with his aunt. Surely, after sending such a message, he would
not go and murder her! And his aunt can testify that such an arrangement
was made, in reference to Mrs. Archer. Oh, that I could obtain admission
to the cell of my poor master, to try to comfort him, to whom I owe so
much! But alas! the keepers will not admit me; they remember that I was
once a thief, and drive me from the prison door with curses.

'I am persuaded in my own mind,' continued Clinton, following the course
of his reflections--'that Fred Archer is the murderer of that woman. I
know he secretes himself in the Dark Vaults, but I dare not venture
there to seek him, for my agency in the arrest of the Dead Man is known
to the 'Knights of the Round Table,' and were I to fall in their power,
they would assuredly kill me. Now, what has brought me here
to-night?--Not a desire for pleasure; but a faint hope of encountering
amid the masked visitors, the villain Archer; for I know that he, as
well as the other desperadoes in the Vaults, frequently attends
masquerade balls, in disguise, on account of the facilities afforded for
robbery and other crimes. Oh that I might meet him here to-night--I
would boldly accuse him of the murder, and have him taken into custody,
trusting to chance for the proofs of his guilt, and the innocence of my
master.'

It may be well here to observe that it was comparatively easy for such
characters as Archer and his companions to gain admission to such a
masquerade ball as we are describing. In the bustle and confusion of
receiving such a large company, they found but little difficulty in
slipping in, unnoticed and unsuspected.

'And that horrible Dead Man,' continued Clinton--'thank God, _he_ is now
safe within the strong walls of the State Prison, there to pass the
remainder of his earthly existence. How awfully he glared upon me, on
the night of his capture! Oh, if he were at large, my life would be in
continued danger; I should not sleep at night, for terror; I should
tremble lest his corpse-like face should appear at my bedside, and his
bony fingers grapple me by the throat! Yes, thank God--he is deprived of
the power to injure me; I am safe from his fiend-like malice.'

At this moment, Clinton heard foot-steps approaching, and presently some
one said--

'Let us enter this little temple, where we can talk without being
overheard.'

The blood rushed swiftly through Clinton's veins, and his heart beat
violently; for these words were spoken in the well-known voice of Fred
Archer! With great presence of mind he instantly crept beneath the
ottoman on which he had been lying; and the next moment two persons
entered the temple, and seated themselves directly above him.

'It was, as you say,' remarked Archer to his companion in a low tone--'a
most extraordinary piece of good luck for me that Sydney was taken for
that murder which I committed; suspicions are diverted from me, and he
will swing for it, that's certain. I'm safe in regard to that business.'

'And yet, I almost regret, Fred,' said the other, speaking in an almost
inaudible whisper--'that Sydney is in the grip of the Philistines; my
vengeance upon him would have been more terrible than a thousand deaths
by hanging. Well, since it is so, let him swing, and be d----d to him!'

A long conversation here followed, but the two men spoke in such a low
tone, that Clinton could only hear a word now and then. He was, however,
certain as to the identity of Fred Archer; and he determined not to lose
sight of that ruffian without endeavoring to have him taken into
custody.

At length the two men arose and quitted the temple, followed at a safe
distance by the boy.

At the bottom of the marble steps which led to the halls above, Fred
Archer and his companion paused for a few moments, and conversed in
whispers; then the two parted, the former ascending the steps, while
the latter turned and advanced slowly towards Clinton.

The boy instantly started in pursuit of Archer; but as he was about to
pass the person who had just quitted the company of that villain, his
progress was arrested by a strong arm, and a voice whispered in his
ear--'Ah, _Kinchen_, well met!--come with me!'

Clinton attempted to shake off the stranger's grasp--but he was no match
for his adversary, who dragged him back into the little temple before
mentioned, and regarded him with a terrible look.

'Who are you--and what means this treatment of me?' demanded the boy,
trembling with affright.

The mysterious unknown replied not by words--but slowly raised the mask
from his face. Clinton's blood ran cold with horror; for, by the dim and
uncertain light, he beheld the ghastly, awful features of THE DEAD MAN!

'Said I not truly that no prison could hold me?--vain are all stone
walls and iron chains, for I can burst them asunder at will! I had hoped
to avenge myself on that accursed Sydney, in a terrible appalling
manner; but the law has become the avenger--he will die upon the
gallows, and I am content. Ha, ha, ha! how he will writhe, and choke
while I shall be at liberty, to read the account of his execution in the
papers, and gloat over the description of his dying agonies! But I have
an account to settle with _you_, _Kinchen_; you recollect how you hurled
the wine-bottle at my head, as I was about to stab Sydney on the night
of my capture--thereby preventing me from securing a speedy and deadly
revenge at that time? Now, what punishment do you deserve for that
damnable piece of treachery to an old comrade?'

Thus spoke the terrible Dead Man, as he glared menacingly upon the
affrighted and trembling Clinton, whose fears deprived him of all power
of utterance.

'Sydney will hang like a dog,' continued the hideous miscreant, the
words hissing from between his clenched teeth--'My revenge in _that_
quarter shall be consummated, while you, d----d young villain that you
are, shall--'

'Sydney shall _not_ suffer such a fate, monster!' exclaimed Clinton, his
indignation getting the better of his fears, as he looked the villain
boldly in the face--'there are two witnesses, whose testimony can and
will prove his innocence.'

'And who may those two witnesses be?' demanded the Dead Man scornfully.

'I am one--and Sydney's aunt, Mrs. Stevens, who resides at No. ----
Grand Street, is the other,' replied Clinton.

'And what can _you_ testify to in Sydney's favor?' asked the other in a
milder tone.

'I can swear that Mr. Sydney sent me with a note to the lady who was
murdered, and desired me to inform her that he had procured a good
situation for her with his aunt--thus plainly showing the friendly
nature of his feelings and intentions towards her,' replied Clinton.

'And this aunt--what will be the nature of _her_ testimony?' inquired
the Dead Man, with assumed indifference.

'Mrs. Stevens can testify that the nephew Mr. Sydney strongly
recommended her to receive the poor unfortunate lady into her
service--and that arrangements were made to that effect,' answered the
boy, unsuspiciously.

The Dead Man seemed for a moment lost in deep thought. 'So it appears
that there are two witnesses whose testimony _might_ tend to the
acquittal of Sydney,' he thought to himself. 'Those two witnesses must
be put out of the way; one of them is now in my power--_he_ is done for;
I am acquainted with the name and residence of the other, and by G----d,
_she_ shall be done for, too!--_Kinchen_,' he said aloud, turning
savagely to the boy--'You must accompany me to the Dark Vaults.'

'Never,' exclaimed Clinton, resolutely--'rather will I die here. If you
attempt to carry me forcibly with you, I will struggle and resist--I
will proclaim to the guests in the ball room your dread character and
name; the mask will be torn from your face, and you will be dragged back
to prison, from whence you escaped.'

For the second time did the Dead Man pause, and reflect profoundly. He
thought somewhat in this wise:--'There is no possible means of egress
from this place, except thro' the ball room, which is crowded with
guests. True, I might bind and gag the _Kinchen_, but his struggles
would be sure to attract attention--and my discovery and capture would
be the result. It is evident, therefore, that I cannot carry him
forcibly hence, with safety to myself. Shall I _murder_ him? No, damn
it, 'tis hardly worth my while to do that--and somehow or other, these
murders almost invariably lead to detection. The devil himself couldn't
save my neck if I were to be hauled up on another murder--yet, by hell,
I must risk it in reference to that Mrs. Stevens, whose testimony would
be apt to save her accursed nephew, Sydney, from the gallows. Yes, I
must slit the old lady's windpipe; but the _Kinchen_--what the devil
shall I do to keep _him_ from blabbing, since I can't make up my mind to
kill him?'

Suddenly, a horrible thought flashed through the villain's mind.

'_Kinchen_,' he whispered, with a fiend-like laugh--'I have thought of a
plan by which to _silence your tongue forever_.'

He drew a huge clasp-knife from his pocket. Ere Clinton could cry out
for assistance, the monster grasped him by the throat with his vice-like
fingers--the poor boy's tongue protruded from his mouth--and oh,
horrible! the incarnate devil, suddenly loosening his hold on the
throat, quick as lightning caught hold of the tongue, and forcibly drew
it out to its utmost tension--then, with one rapid stroke of his sharp
knife, he _cut it off_, and threw it from him with a howl of savage
satisfaction. 'Now, d----n you,' exclaimed the Dead Man--'see if you can
testify in court!'

The victim sank upon the floor, weltering in his blood, while the
barbarian who had perpetrated the monstrous outrage, fled from the
conservatory, passed through the ball room and proceeded with rapid
strides towards the residence of Mrs. Stevens, Sydney's aunt, in Grand
Street, having first put on the mask which he wore to conceal the
repulsive aspect of his countenance. He found the house without
difficulty, for he remembered the number which poor Clinton had given
him; and ascending the steps, he knocked boldly at the door.

The summons was speedily answered by a servant who ushered the Dead Man
into a parlor, saying that her mistress would be down directly. In a few
moments the door opened and Mrs. Stevens entered the room.

This lady was a widow, somewhat advanced in years, and in affluent
circumstances. Her countenance was the index of a benevolent and
excellent heart; and in truth she was a most estimable woman.

'Madam,' said the Dead Man--'I have called upon you at the request of
your unfortunate nephew, Francis Sydney.'

'Oh, sir,' exclaimed the old lady, shedding tears--'how is the poor
young man--and how does he bear his cruel and unjust punishment?--for
unjust it is, as he is innocent of the dreadful crime imputed to him.
Alas! the very day the poor lady was murdered, he called and entreated
me to take her into my service, to which I readily consented. Oh, he is
innocent, I am sure.'

'Mrs. Stevens,' said the villain--'I have something of a most important
nature to communicate, relative to your nephew; are we certain of no
interruption here?--for my intelligence must be delivered in strict
privacy.'

'We are alone in this house,' replied the unsuspecting lady. 'The
servant who admitted you has gone out on a short errand, and you need
fear no interruption.'

'Then, madam, I have to inform you that--'

While uttering these words, the Dead Man advanced towards Mrs. Stevens,
who stood in the centre of the apartment; he assumed an air of profound
mystery, and she, supposing that he was about to whisper in her ear,
inclined her head toward him. That movement was her last on earth; in
another instant she was prostrate upon the carpet, her throat encircled
by the fingers of the ghastly monster; her countenance became suffused
with a dark purple--blood gushed from her mouth, eyes and nostrils--and
in a few minutes all was over!

The murderer arose from his appalling work, and his loathsome face
assumed, beneath his mask, an expression of demoniac satisfaction.

''Tis done!' he muttered--'damn the old fool, she thought I was a
_friend_ of her accursed nephew's. But I must leave the corpse in such a
situation that it may be supposed the old woman committed suicide.'

He tore off the large shawl which the poor lady had worn, and fastened
it about her neck; then he hung the body upon the parlor door, and
placed an overturned chair near its feet, to lead to the supposition
that she had stood upon the chair while adjusting the shawl about her
neck and then overturned it in giving the fatal spring. This arrangement
the Dead Man effected with the utmost rapidity and then forcing open a
bureau which stood in the parlor, he took from the drawer various
articles of value, jewelry, &c., and a pocket-book containing a
considerable sum of money--forgetting, in his blind stupidity, that the
circumstances of a robbery having taken place, would destroy the
impression that the unfortunate old lady had come to her death
voluntarily by her own hands.

The murderer then fled from the house and that night he and Archer, in
the mysterious depths of the Dark Vaults, celebrated their bloody
exploits by mad orgies, horrid blasphemy, and demoniac laughter.

We left Clinton weltering in his blood upon the floor of the temple in
the conservatory. The poor mangled youth was discovered in that
deplorable situation shortly after the perpetration of the abominable
outrage which had deprived him of the blessed gift of speech forever. He
was conveyed to the residence of Dr. Schultz, a medical gentleman of
eminent skill, who stopped the effusion of blood, and pronounced his
eventual recovery certain. But oh! who can imagine the feelings of the
unfortunate boy, when returning consciousness brought with it the
appalling conviction that the faculty of expressing his thoughts in
words was gone forever, and henceforward he was hopelessly _dumb_! By
great exertion he scrawled upon a piece of paper his name and residence;
a carriage was procured, and he was soon beneath the roof of his master,
Mr. Sydney, under the kind care of honest Dennis and the benevolent
housekeeper.

And Sydney--alas for him! Immured in that awful sepulchre of crime, the
Tombs--charged with the deed of murder, and adjudged guilty by public
opinion--deserted by those whom he had regarded as his friends,
suffering from confinement in a noisome cell, and dreading the ignominy
of a trial and the horrors of a public execution--his fair fame blasted
forever by the taint of crime--what wonder that he, so young, so rich,
so gifted with every qualification to enjoy life, should begin to doubt
the justice of divine dispensation, and, loathing existence, pray for
death to terminate his state of suspense and misery!

But we must not lose sight of Josephine Franklin; her adventures at the
masquerade hall were of too amorous and exciting a nature to be passed
lightly over, in this mirror of the fashions, follies and crimes of city
life.--Our next chapter will duly record the particulars of the fair
lady's romantic intrigues on that brilliant and memorable occasion.


CHAPTER X

_The Amours of Josephine--The Spanish Ambassador, and the Ecclesiastical
Lover._


Josephine, dressed as the 'Royal Middy,' entered the conservatory, and
strolled leisurely along a gravelled walk which led to a little grotto
composed of rare minerals and shells. Entering this picturesque retreat,
she placed herself upon a seat exquisitely sculptured from marble, and
listened to the beautiful strains of music which proceeded from the ball
room.

While thus abandoning herself to the voluptuous feelings of the moment,
she observed that a tall, finely formed person in the costume of a
Spanish cavalier, passed the grotto several times, each time gazing at
her with evident admiration. He was masked, but Josephine had removed
her mask, and her superb countenance was fully revealed. The cavalier
had followed her from the ball-room, but she did not perceive him until
he passed the grotto.

'I have secured an admirer already,' she said to herself, as a smile of
satisfaction parted her rosy lips. 'I must encourage him, and perhaps
he may prove to be a desirable conquest.'

The cavalier saw her smile and, encouraged by that token of her
complaisance, paused before the grotto, and addressed her in a slightly
foreign accent:--

'Fair lady, will you suffer me to repose myself for a while in this
fairy-like retreat?'

'I shall play off a little prank upon this stranger,' thought Josephine
to herself--'it will serve to amuse me.' And then she burst into a merry
laugh, as she replied--

'I have no objection in the world, sir, to your sharing this grotto with
me; but really, you make a great mistake--you suppose me to be a lady;
but I'm no more a lady than you are, don't you see that I'm a _boy_?'

'Indeed!--a _boy_!' Exclaimed the stranger, surveying Josephine with
great interest. 'By heaven, I took you for a female; and though you are
a boy, I will say that you are an extremely pretty one.'

He entered into the grotto, and seated himself at her side. Taking her
hand, he said--

'This hand is wonderfully fair and soft for a boy's. Confess, now--are
you not deceiving me?'

'Why should I deceive you?' asked Josephine--'if my hand is fair and
soft, it is because I have been brought up as a gentleman, and it has
never become soiled or hardened by labor.'

'And yet,' rejoined the stranger, passing his hand over the swelling
outlines of her bosom, which no disguise could entirely conceal--'there
seems to me to be something feminine in these pretty proportions.'

'You doubtless think so,' replied Josephine, removing his hand--'but you
greatly err. The fact is, my appearance is naturally very effeminate,
and sometimes it is my whim to encourage the belief that I am a female.
I came here to-night, resolved to produce that impression; and you see
with what a successful result--you yourself imagined me to be a lady
dressed in male attire, but again I assure you that you never were more
mistaken in your life. The fullness of my bosom is accounted for, when I
inform you that my vest is very skillfully _padded_. So now I hope you
will be no longer skeptical in regard to my true sex.'

'I no longer doubt you, my dear boy,' said the stranger, gazing at
Josephine with increased admiration. 'Were you a lady, you would be
beautiful, but as a boy you are doubly charming. Be not surprised when I
assure you that you please me ten times--aye, ten thousand times more,
as a boy, than as a woman. By heaven, I must kiss those ripe lips!'

'Kiss _me_!' responded Josephine, laughing--'come, sire, this is too
good--you must be joking.'

'No, beautiful boy, I am serious,' exclaimed the stranger,
vehemently--'you may pronounce my passion strange, unaccountable, and
absurd, if you will--but 'tis none the less violent or sincere. I am a
native of Spain, a country whose ardent souls confine not their
affections to the fairest portion of the human race alone, but--'

'What mean you?' demanded Josephine, in astonishment. The stranger
whispered a few words in her ear, and she drew back in horror and
disgust.

'Nay, hear me,' exclaimed the Spaniard, passionately--'it is no low-born
or vulgar person who solicits this favor; for know,' he continued,
removing his mask--'that I am Don Jose Velasquez, ambassador to this
country from the court of Spain; and however high my rank, I kneel at
your feet and--'

'Say no more, sir,' said Josephine, interrupting him, and rising as she
spoke--'it is time that you should know that your first supposition in
reference to me was correct. I am a woman. I did but pretend, in
accordance with a suddenly conceived notion, to deceive you for a while,
but that deception has developed an iniquity in the human character, the
existence of which I have heard before, but never fully believed till
today. Your unnatural iniquity inspires me with abhorrence; leave me
instantly and attempt not to follow me, or I shall expose you to the
guests, in which case _His Excellency_ Don Jose Velasquez, ambassador to
this country from the court of Spain, would become an object of derision
and contempt.'

The Spaniard muttered a threat of vengeance and strode hastily away.
Josephine put on her mask, and leaving the grotto, was about to return
to the ball-room, when a gentleman, plainly but richly attired in black
velvet, and closely masked, thus accosted her in a respectful tone--

'Lady--for your graceful figure and gait betray you, notwithstanding
your boyish disguise--suffer me to depart so far from the formality of
fashionable etiquette as to entreat your acceptance of me as your
_chaperon_ through this beautiful place.'

This gentleman's speech was distinguished by a voice uncommonly
melodious, and an accent peculiarly refined; he was evidently a person
of education and respectable social position. The tones of his voice
struck Josephine as being familiar to her; yet she could not divine who
he was, and concluded that there only existed an accidental resemblance
between his voice and that of some one of her friends. His manner being
so frank, and at the same time so gentleman-like and courteous, that she
replied without hesitation--

'I thank you, sir--I will avail myself of your kindness.' She took his
proffered arm, and they began slowly to promenade the principal avenue
of the conservatory, engaged at first in that polite and desultory
discourse which might be supposed to arise between a lady and gentleman
who meet under such circumstances.

At length, becoming fatigued, they entered a pretty little arbor quite
remote from observation, and seated themselves upon a moss-covered
trunk. After a few commonplace observations, the gentleman suddenly
addressed Josephine in a start of ardent passion.

'Lady,' he exclaimed, taking her hand and pressing it tenderly, 'pardon
my rudeness; but I am overcome by feelings which I never before
experienced. Although your face is concealed by your mask, I know you
are beautiful--the rich luxuriance of your raven hair, and the exquisite
proportions of this fair hand, are proofs of the angelic loveliness of
your countenance. Am I presumptuous and bold--does my language give you
offence?--if so, I will tear myself from your side, though it will rend
my heart with anguish to do so. You do not speak--you are offended with
me; farewell, then--'

'Stay,' murmured Josephine--'I am not offended, sire--far from it; you
are courteous and gallant, and why should I be displeased?' The
gentleman kissed her hand with rapture.

'Oh,' said he, in a low tone--'I am entranced by your kindness. You will
be surprised when I assure you that I am but a novice in the way of
love; and yet I most solemnly declare that never before have I pressed
woman's hand with passion--never before has my heart beat with the
tumult of amorous inclination--never before have I clasped woman's
lovely form as I now clasp yours.' And he encircled the yielding form of
Josephine with his arms.

'Why have you been such a novice in the delights of love?' she asked,
permitting him to clasp her passionately to his breast.

'Dear lady,' he replied--'my position in life is one that precludes me
in a great measure from the enjoyment of sensual indulgences; and I have
heretofore imagined myself impervious to the attacks of Venus; but ah!
you have conquered me. My leisure moments have been devoted to study and
contemplation; I ventured here to-night to be a spectator of the joys of
others, not designing to participate in those joys myself. The graceful
voluptuousness of your form, developed by this boyish costume, fired my
soul with new and strange sensations, which, so help me heaven! I never
experienced before. Ah, I would give half of my existence to be allowed
to kiss those luscious lips!'

'You can have your wish at a far less expense,' murmured the lady, her
bosom heaving with passionate emotions.

'But first remove that mask,' said the gentleman, enraptured at the
success of the first intrigue of his life.

'I have no objection to uncover my countenance, provided you bestow upon
me a similar favor,' replied Josephine.

'I am most anxious to preserve my _incognito_,' said the gentleman, in a
tone of hesitation. 'My standing and peculiar occupation in life are
entirely incompatible with such a festival as this, and my reputation
would be dangerously compromised, if not utterly ruined. Nay, then,
since you insist upon it, fair creature, I will unmask, trusting to your
honor as a lady to keep my secret.'

He uncovered his face, and Josephine was thunderstruck when she
recognized in the amorous stranger, no less a personage than Dr.
Sinclair, the pious and eloquent rector of St. Paul's.

Yes--that learned and talented divine, who had so often denounced the
sins and follies of the fashionable world, and declaimed particularly
against the demoralizing influences of masquerade balls--that young and
handsome preacher, whose exalted reputation for sanctity and holiness
had induced the amorous Josephine and her licentious mother to suppose
him inaccessible to their lustful glances, and far removed from the
power of temptation--that model of purity and virtue was now present at
this scene of profligate dissipation, gazing into the wanton eyes of a
beautiful siren, his face flushed with excitement, and his heart
palpitating with eager desire!

For a few moments Josephine sat overcome by astonishment, and could not
utter a single syllable.

'You seem surprised, dear lady,' said Dr. Sinclair--'may I ask if you
have ever seen me before?'

'You can read in my countenance an answer to your question,' replied
Josephine, taking off her mask.

'Heavens, Miss Franklin!' exclaimed the divine. It was now his turn to
be astonished.

'We meet under extraordinary circumstances,' said Dr. Sinclair after a
short and somewhat embarrassing pause. 'Had I known that you are one who
every Sabbath sits under my ministration, no earthly consideration would
have induced me to disclose myself--not even the certainty of enjoying
your favors. However, you know me now, and 'tis impossible to recall the
past; therefore, beautiful Miss Franklin, do not withhold from the
preacher that kindness which you would have granted to the private
gentleman.--Let us religiously preserve our secret from the knowledge of
the world: when we meet in company, let it be with the cold formality
which exists between persons who are almost strangers; but now let us
revel in the joys of love.'

The superb but profligate Josephine needed no urgent persuasion to
induce her to become a guilty participator in a criminal _liaison_ with
the handsome young rector whom she had so long regarded with the eyes of
desire;--_hers_ was the conquest, that unprincipled lady of fashion; and
_he_ was the victim, that recreant fallen minister of the gospel.

Humbled and conscience-stricken, Dr. Sinclair left Livingston House and
returned to his own luxurious but solitary home; while Josephine was
driven in her carriage to Franklin House, the flush of triumph on her
cheeks and her proud, guilty heart reeling with exultation.


CHAPTER XI

_The Condemnation to Death--the Burglar's Confession and Awful Fate in
the Iron Coffin._


The arrest of Frank Sydney for the murder of Maria Archer created an
immense excitement throughout the whole community.--His wealth, standing
in society, and former respectability caused many to believe him
innocent of the dreadful crime imputed to him; but public opinion
generally pronounced him guilty. The following article, extracted from a
newspaper published at that period, will throw some light upon the views
held in reference to the unhappy young man, and show how the
circumstances under which he was arrested operated prejudicially to
him:--

     'ATROCIOUS MURDER. Last night, about nine o'clock, cries of
     murder were heard proceeding from the house No.--Bowery. The
     door was forced open by several citizens and watchmen, who,
     on entering a room on the second story, found the body of a
     young woman named Maria Archer stretched upon a sofa, her
     throat cut in a horrible manner, and standing over the corpse
     a young gentleman named Francis Sydney, holding in his hand a
     large Bowie knife, covered with blood. The landlady, Mrs.
     Flint, stated that Maria had that afternoon announced her
     intention to remove from the house in the evening; at about
     eight o'clock, Mr. Sydney called, _disguised_, and went up
     into the room of the deceased;--after a while, she (the
     landlady), being surprised that Maria did not begin to remove,
     went up to her room, and on opening the door, saw the young
     woman lying upon the sofa, her throat cut, and Mr. Sydney
     standing over her with the knife in his hand. On seeing this
     she screamed for assistance, and her cries had brought the
     watchman and citizens into the house, as we have stated.

     'Mr. Sydney is a very wealthy young man, and has heretofore
     been highly respected. There can be no doubt of his guilt. He
     had probably formed a criminal connection with Mrs. Archer,
     whose character for chastity did not stand very high; it is
     supposed that it was in consequence of this intimacy that Mrs.
     Sydney recently separated from her husband. It is also
     presumed that a quarrel arose between Sydney and his paramour
     in consequence of his refusal to supply her with what money
     she demanded. This belief is predicated upon the following
     note, in the handwriting of Sydney, which was found upon the
     person of his murdered victim:--

     'Mrs. Archer.--Madam: I shall this evening call upon you to
     confirm the words of my messenger. The unfortunate career
     which you have followed, is now nearly ended. Extortion and
     oppression shall triumph no longer. F.S.'

     'This note, it will be perceived, accuses her of extortion
     and contains a threat, &c. Alarmed at this, the poor young
     woman determined to leave the house that night--but was
     prevented by her paramour who barbarously slew her.

     'The prisoner, whose appearance and behavior after his arrest
     proved his guilt, was conveyed to the Tombs, to await his trial
     for one of the most atrocious murders that has stained our
     criminal courts for many years.'

Thus it will be seen that poor, innocent Frank was regarded as the
murderer.

It is needless for us to enter into the particulars of his trial:
suffice it to say, he was convicted of the murder and sentenced to
death. The evidence, though entirely circumstantial, was deemed positive
against him. Mrs. Flint testifying that he was the only person who had
entered the house that evening, and the situation in which she had
discovered him, the murderous weapon in his hand, and his clothes
stained with blood, admitted not a doubt of his guilt in the minds of
the jury, who did not hesitate to bring in their fatal verdict,
conscientiously believing it to be a just one.

A few days previous to his trial, the public were astounded by the
intelligence that Mrs. Stevens, the prisoner's aunt, had committed
suicide by hanging; and her nephew's disgrace and peril were supposed to
have been the cause of the rash act. But when it came to be discovered
that a robbery had been committed in the house, and it was stated by the
servant that a strange man had sought and obtained an interview with the
unfortunate old lady that evening, the public opinion took a different
turn, and the belief became general that she had been murdered by some
unknown miscreant, whose object was to plunder the house. No one
suspected that she had been slain to prevent her from giving favorable
testimony at the trial of her nephew Francis Sydney.

The diabolical outrage perpetrated upon the boy Clinton at the
masquerade ball soon became noised abroad, and gave rise to many
surmises, and much indignation; tho' no one as yet imagined that any
connection existed between that horrible affair and the brutal murder of
Mrs. Stevens.

After his conviction and condemnation to death, Sydney was placed in
irons, and treated with but little indulgence by the petty officials who
have charge of the Tombs. An application on his behalf was made to the
Governor, in the hope of either obtaining a pardon, or a commutation of
his sentence to imprisonment, but the executive functionary refused to
interfere, and Frank prepared for death.

The day before that fixed upon for his execution, a lady applied for
admission to the prisoner's cell, her request was granted, and Frank was
astonished by the entrance of Julia, his guilty and discarded wife!

Did she come to entreat his forgiveness for her crime, and to endeavor
to administer consolation and comfort to him in this his last extremity?

No, the remorseless and vindictive woman had come to exult over his
misfortunes, and triumph over his downfall!

'So, miserable wretch,' she said, in a tone of contempt--'You are at
last placed in a situation in which I can rejoice over your degradation
and shame! A convicted, chained murderer, to die to-morrow--ha, ha, ha!'
and she laughed with hellish glee.

'Accursed woman,' cried Frank, with indignation--'why have you come to
mock my misery? Have you the heart to rejoice over my awful and
undeserved fate?' and the poor young man, folding his arms, wept
bitterly, for his noble and manly nature was for the time overcome by
the horror of his situation.

'Yes, I have come to gloat upon your misery,' replied the vile,
unfeeling woman. 'To-morrow you will die upon the gallows, and your
memory will be hated and condemned by those who believe you to be
guilty. I am convinced in my own mind that you are innocent of the
murder; yet I rejoice none the less in your fate. Your death will free
me from all restraint; I can adopt an assumed name, and removing to some
distant city, entrap some rich fool into a marriage with me, whose
wealth will administer to my extravagance, while I secretly abandon
myself to licentious pleasures. Sydney, I never loved you--and when you
discovered my intimacy with my dear African, I hated you--oh, how
bitterly! When you cast me off, I vowed revenge upon you; but my
vengeance will be satisfied to-morrow, when you pay the forfeit of
another's crime. And now in the hour of your disgrace and death, I spit
upon and despise you!'

'Begone, vile strumpet that you are,' exclaimed Frank, starting to his
feet--'taunt me no more, or you will drive me to commit an actual
murder, and send your blackened soul into the presence of your offended
Creator!'

'Farewell, forever,' said Julia, in a tone of indifference, and she left
her poor, wronged husband to his own bitter reflections. Shortly after
her departure, a clergyman entered the cell, and remained with the
prisoner until long after midnight, preparing him for the awful change
he was to undergo on the morrow.

       *     *     *     *     *

That very night Fred Archer issued from the secret outlet of the Dark
Vaults, and bent his steps in the direction of Wall street.

This street is the great focus around which all the most extensive
financial operations of the great metropolis are carried on. It is
occupied exclusively by banks, brokers' and insurance offices, and
establishments of the like character.

It was midnight when Archer turned into Wall street from Broadway. The
moon was obscured by clouds, and the street was entirely deserted. He
paused before a large, massive building in the neighborhood of the
Exchange, and glanced around him in every direction to assure himself
that he was unobserved. Seeing no one, he ascended the marble steps,
drew from his pocket a huge key, and with it unlocked the door; he
entered, and closing the door after him, carefully re-locked it.

'So far all is well,' muttered the burglar, as he ignited a match and
lighted a piece of wax candle which he had brought with him. 'It's lucky
that I obtained an impression of that lock in wax, and from it made this
key, or I might have had the devil's trouble in getting in.'

He advanced along the passageway, and opening a large door covered with
green baize, entered a commodious apartment, containing a long table
covered with papers, a desk, chairs, and other furniture, suitable to a
business office. In one corner stood an immense safe, six feet in height
and four in depth; this safe, made of massive plates of iron and
protected by a door of prodigious strength, contained the books,
valuable papers, and cash belonging to the ---- Insurance Company.
Archer advanced to the safe, and took from his pocket a piece of paper,
on which some words were written; this paper he examined with much
attention.

'Here,' said he, 'I have the written directions, furnished me by the
locksmith who made the lock attached to the safe, by which I can open
it. Curse the fellow, a cool hundred dollars was a round sum of money to
give him for this little bit of paper, but without it I never could see
the interior of his iron closet, tho' I have an exact model of the key
belonging to it, made from an impression in wax, which I bribed the
clerk to get for me.'

Pursuing the directions contained in the paper, he touched a small
spring concealed in the masonry adjoining the safe, and instantly a
slide drew back in a panel of the door, revealing a key-hole. In this he
inserted a key, and turned it, but found that he could not unlock it; he
therefore had recourse to his paper a second time, which communicated
the secret of the only method by which to open the door. Following those
directions implicitly, he soon had the satisfaction of turning back the
massive bolts which secured the door; a spring now only held it fast,
but this was easily turned by means of a small brass knob, and the heavy
door swung back upon its gigantic hinges, to the intense delight of the
burglar, who anticipated securing a rich booty.

Nor was he likely to be disappointed; for upon examination he found that
the safe contained money to a large amount. A small tin cash box was
full of bank-notes of various denominations; and in a drawer were
several thousands of dollars in gold.

'My fortune is made, by G----d!' exclaimed the burglar, as he stood
within the safe, and began hastily to transfer the treasures to his
pockets. The light of his candle, which he held in his hand, shed a
faint glow upon the walls and ceiling of the apartment.

'The devil!' muttered Archer--'my success thus far must not destroy my
prudence. If that light were to be seen from these windows, suspicion
would be excited and I might be disagreeably interrupted.'

Reaching out his arm, he caught hold of the door of the safe, and pulled
it violently towards him so that the light of his candle might not
betray him. The immense mass of iron swung heavingly upon its hinges,
and closed with a sharp _click_; the spring held it fast, and on the
inside of the door there was no means of turning back that spring. Like
lightning the awful conviction flashed through the burglar's mind that
he was _entombed alive_!

Vain, vain were his efforts to burst forth from his iron coffin; as well
might he attempt to move the solid rock! He shrieked aloud for
assistance--but no sound could penetrate through those iron walls! He
called upon God to pity him in that moment of his awful distress--but
that God, whom he had so often blasphemed, now interposed not His power
to succor the vile wretch, thus so signally punished.

No friendly crevice admitted one mouthful of air into the safe, and
Archer soon began to breathe with difficulty; he became sensible that he
must die a terrible death by suffocation. Oh, how he longed for someone
to arrive and release him from his dreadful situation, even though the
remainder of his days were passed within the gloomy walls of a prison!
How he cursed the money, to obtain which he had entered that safe,
wherein he was now imprisoned as securely as if buried far down in the
bowels of the earth! With the howl of a demon he dashed the banknotes
and glittering gold beneath his feet, and trampled on them. Then,
sinking down upon the floor of the safe, he abandoned himself to
despair.

Already had the air of that small, confined place become fetid and
noisome; and the burglar began to pant with agony, while the hot blood
swelled his veins almost to bursting. A hundred thousand dollars lay
within his grasp--he would have given it all for one breath of fresh
air, or one draught of cold water.

As the agonies of his body increased, the horrors of his guilty
conscience tortured his soul. The remembrance of the many crimes he had
committed arose before him; the spirit of his murdered wife hovered over
him, ghastly, pale and bloody. Then he recollected that an innocent man
was to be hung on the morrow, for that dreadful deed which _he_ had
perpetrated; and the thought added to the mental tortures which he was
enduring.

A thought struck the dying wretch; it was perhaps in his power to make
some atonement for his crimes--he might save an innocent man from an
ignominious death. No sooner had that thought suggested itself to his
mind, than he acted upon it, for he knew that his moments were few;
already he felt the cold hand of death upon him. He took a piece of
chalk from his pocket, and with a feeble hand traced the following words
upon the iron door of the safe:--

'My last hour is come, and I call on God, in whose awful presence I am
shortly to appear, to witness the truth of this dying declaration. I do
confess myself to be the murderer of Maria Archer. The young man Sydney
is innocent of that crime. God have mercy--'

He could write no more; his brain grew dizzy and his senses fled. It
seemed as if his iron coffin was red-hot, and he writhed in all the
agony of a death by fire. Terrible shapes crowded around him, and the
spirit of his murdered wife beckoned him to follow her to perdition. A
mighty and crushing weight oppressed him; blood gushed from the pores of
his skin; his eyes almost leaped from their sockets, and his brain
seemed swimming in molten lead. At length Death came, and snapped
asunder the chord of his existence; the soul of the murderer was in the
presence of its Maker.

       *     *     *     *     *

Morning dawned upon the doomed Sydney, in his prison cell; the glad
sunbeams penetrated into that gloomy apartment, shedding a glow of ruddy
light upon the white walls. That day at the hour of noon, he was to be
led forth to die--he, the noble, generous Sydney, whose heart teemed
with the most admirable qualities, and who would not wantonly have
injured the lowest creature that crawls upon the Creator's footstool--he
to die the death of a malefactor, upon the scaffold!

The day wore heavily on; Frank, composed and resigned, was ready to meet
his fate like a man. He had heard the deep voice of the Sheriff, in the
hall of the prison, commanding his subordinates to put up the scaffold;
he had heard them removing that cumbrous engine of death from an
unoccupied cell, and his ear had caught the sound of its being erected
in the prison yard. Then he knelt down and prayed.

His hour had come. They came and removed his irons; they clothed him in
the fearful livery of the grave. His step was firm and his eye undaunted
as he passed into the prison yard, and stood beneath the black and
frowning gallows.

The last prayer was said; the last farewell spoken; and many a
hard-hearted jailer and cruel official turned aside to conceal the tears
which would flow, at the thought that in a few moments that fine young
man, so handsome, so talented and so noble to look upon, would be
strangling and writhing with the tortures of the murderous rope, and
soon after cut down, a ghastly and disfigured corpse.

The Sheriff adjusted the rope, and there was an awful pause; a man was
tottering on the verge of eternity!

But oh, blessed pause--'twas ordained by the Almighty, to snatch that
innocent man from the jaws of death! At that critical moment, a confused
murmur was heard in the interior of the prison; the Sheriff, who had his
hand upon the fatal book, which alone intervened between the condemned
and eternity, was stopped from the performance of his deadly office, by
a loud shout that rent the air, as a crowd of citizens rushed into the
prison yard, exclaiming--

'Hold--stay the execution!'

The Mayor of the city, who was present, exchanged a few hurried words
with the foremost of the citizens who had thus interrupted the awful
ceremony; and instantly, with the concurrence of the Sheriff, ordered
Sydney to be taken from the gallows, and conducted back to his cell,
there to await the result of certain investigations, which it was
believed would procure his entire exoneration from the crime of which
he had been deemed guilty, and his consequent release from imprisonment.

It appeared that an officer connected with the ---- Insurance Company,
on opening the safe that morning at about half-past eleven o'clock,
discovered the dead body of the burglar, the money scattered about, and
the writing upon the door. The officer, who was an intelligent and
energetic man, instantly comprehended the state of affairs, and hastened
with a number of other citizens to the Tombs, in order to save an
innocent man from death. Had he arrived a few moments later, it might
have been too late; but as it was, he had the satisfaction of rescuing
poor Sydney from a dreadful fate, and the credit of saving the State
from the disgrace of committing a judicial murder.

A dispatch was immediately sent to the Governor, at Albany, apprising
him of these facts. The next day a letter was received from His
Excellency, in which he stated that he had just perused the evidence
which had produced the conviction of Mr. Sydney, and that evidence,
besides being merely circumstantial, was, to his mind, vague and
insufficient. The pressure of official business had prevented him from
examining the case before, but had he reviewed the testimony, he would
assuredly have granted the prisoner a reprieve. The dying confession of
the burglar, the husband of the murdered woman, left not the slightest
doubt of Mr. Sydney's innocence; and His Excellency concluded by
ordering the prisoner's immediate discharge from custody.

Sydney left the prison, and, escorted by a number of friends, entered a
carriage and was driven to his residence in Broadway. Here he was
received with unbounded joy and hearty congratulations by all his
household, including honest Dennis, and poor, dumb Clinton, who could
only manifest his satisfaction by expressive signs.

'I will avenge thee, poor boy,' whispered Frank in his ear, as he
cordially pressed his hand.

A tall man, wrapped in a cloak, had followed Frank's carriage, and
watched him narrowly as he alighted and entered his house. This man's
eyes alone were visible, and they glared with a fiend-like malignity
upon the young gentleman; turning away, he muttered a deep curse, and a
momentary disarrangement of the cloak which hid his face, revealed the
horrible lineaments of the DEAD MAN!


CHAPTER XII

_Showing how the Dead Man escaped from the State Prison at Sing Sing._


The New York State Prison is situated at Sing Sing, a village on the
banks of the Hudson river, a few miles above the city. Being built in
the strongest manner, it is deemed almost an impossibility for a
prisoner to effect his escape from its massive walls. The discipline is
strict and severe, and the system one of hard labor and unbroken
silence, with reference to any conversation among the convicts--though
in respect to the last regulation, it is impossible to enforce it
always, where so many men are brought together in the prison and
workshops attached to it.

The Dead Man, (who it will be recollected formerly made his escape from
the prison,) on being returned there, after his capture by the two
officers at Sydney's house, was locked in one of the cells, and left to
his own not very agreeable reflections. He had been sentenced to
imprisonment for life; and as his conduct and character precluded all
hope of his ever being made the object of executive clemency, he was
certain to remain there during the rest of his days, unless he could
again manage to escape; and this he determined to do, or perish in the
attempt.

For three days he was kept locked in his solitary cell, the only food
allowed him being bread and water. On the third day he was brought out,
stripped, and severely flogged with the _cats_, an instrument of torture
similar to that used (to our national disgrace be it said,) on board of
the men-of-war in our naval service. Then, with his back all lacerated
and bleeding, the miscreant was placed at work in the shop where cabinet
making was carried on--that having been his occupation in the prison,
previous to his escape; an occupation which he had learned, while a boy,
within the walls of some penitentiary.

The convict applied himself to his labor with a look which only bespoke
a sullen apathy; but in his heart there raged a hell of evil passions.
That night when he was locked in his cell, he slept not, but sat till
morning endeavoring to devise some plan of escape.

The next day it chanced that he and another convict employed in the
cabinet-maker's shop were engaged in packing furniture in large boxes to
be conveyed in a sloop to the city of New York. These boxes, as soon as
they were filled and nailed up, were carried down to the wharf, and
stowed on board the sloop, which was to sail as soon as she was loaded.
It instantly occurred to the Dead Man that these operations might afford
him a chance to escape; and he determined to attempt it, at all hazards.

Upon an elevated platform in the centre of the shop (which was
extensive) was stationed an overseer, whose duty it was to see that the
convicts attended strictly to their work, and held no communication with
each other. This officer had received special instructions from the
Warden of the prison, to watch the Dead Man with all possible vigilance,
and by no means to lose sight of him for a single moment, inasmuch as
his former escape had been accomplished through the inattention of the
overseer who had charge of him. Upon that occasion, he had watched for a
favorable moment, slipped out of the shop unperceived, entered the
Warden's dwelling house (which is situated within the walls of the
prison) and helping himself to a suit of citizen's clothes, dressed
himself therein, and deliberately marched out of the front gate, before
the eyes of half a dozen keepers and guards, who supposed him to be some
gentleman visiting the establishment, his hideous and well-known
features being partially concealed by the broad-brimmed hat of a
respectable Quaker.

To prevent a repetition of that maneuver, and to detect any other which
might be attempted by the bold and desperate ruffian, the overseer kept
his eyes almost constantly upon him, being resolved that no second
chance should be afforded him to 'take French leave.' The Dead Man soon
became conscious that he was watched with extraordinary vigilance; he
was sagacious as well as criminal, and he deemed it to be good policy to
assume the air of a man who was resigned to his fate, knowing it to be
inevitable. He therefore worked with alacrity and endeavored to wear
upon his villainous face an expression of contentment almost amounting
to cheerfulness.

Near him labored a prisoner whose countenance indicated good-nature and
courage;--and to him the Dead Man said, in an almost inaudible whisper,
but without raising his eyes from his work, or moving his lips:--

'My friend, there is something in your appearance which assures me that
you can be trusted; listen to me with attention, but do not look towards
me. I am sentenced here for life: I am anxious to escape, and a plan has
suggested itself to my mind, but you must assist me--will you do it?'

'Yes, poor fellow, I will, if it lies in my power, provided you were not
sent here for any offence which I disapprove of,' replied the other, in
a similar tone. 'I was sentenced here for the term of seven years, for
manslaughter; a villain seduced my daughter, and I shot him dead--the
honor of my child was worth a million of such accursed lives as his.--I
consider myself guilty of no crime; he sacrificed my daughter to his
lust, and then abandoned her--I sacrificed him to my vengeance, and
never regretted the deed. The term of imprisonment will expire the day
after to-morrow, and I shall then be a free man; therefore, I can assist
you without running any great risk of myself. But you shall not have my
aid if you were sent here for any deliberate villainy or black
crime--for, thank God! I have a conscience, and that conscience permits
me, though a prisoner, to call myself an honest man.'

'Be assured,' whispered the Dead Man, perceiving the necessity of using
a falsehood to accomplish his ends--'that I am neither a deliberate
villain nor hardened criminal; an enemy attacked me, and in _self
defense_ I slew him, for which I was sentenced here for life.'

'In that case,' rejoined the other--'I will cheerfully assist you to
escape from this earthly hell--for self-defense is Nature's first law.
Had you been a willful murderer, a robber, or aught of that kind, I
would refuse to aid you--but the case is different.--But what is your
plan?'

'I will get into one of these boxes, and you will nail on the cover, and
I shall be conveyed on board the sloop, which will sail in less than an
hour hence. When the vessel arrives at New York I shall perhaps have an
opportunity to get on shore unperceived, and escape into the city, where
I know of a place of refuge which the devil himself could not
find,'--and the Dead Man chuckled inwardly as he thought of the Dark
Vaults.

'The plan is a good one, and worthy of a trial,' said the other. 'But
the overseer has his eye constantly upon you--how can you escape his
vigilance?'

'There's the only difficulty,' replied the Dead Man--and his subtle
brain was beginning to hatch some plan of surmounting that difficulty,
when a large party of visitors, among whom were several ladies, entered
the shop.

Now the overseer was a young man, and withal a tolerably good-looking
one; and among the ladies were two or three whose beauty commended them
to his gallant attentions.

He therefore left his station on the platform, and went forward to
receive them, and make himself agreeable.

'Now's my time, by G----d!' whispered the Dead Man to his fellow
prisoner; instantly he lay down in one of the boxes, and the other
nailed on the cover securely. A few moments afterwards, the box which
contained the Dead Man was carried down to the wharf, by two convicts,
and placed on board the vessel.

Meanwhile, the overseer had become the oracle of the party of ladies and
gentlemen who had visited the shop; surrounded by the group, he occupied
half an hour in replying to the many questions put to him, relative to
the prison discipline, and other matters connected with it. In answer to
a question addressed to him concerning the character of those under his
charge, the overseer remarked in a tone of much self-complacency:

'I have now in this shop a convict who is the most diabolical villain
that ever was confined in this prison. He is called the Dead Man, from
the fact that his countenance resembles that of a dead person. He was
sentenced here for life, for a murder, but contrived to escape about a
year ago. However, he was arrested on a burglary not long since, sent
back here, and placed under my particular care. I flatter myself that he
will not escape a second time. Step this way, ladies and gentlemen, and
view the hideous criminal.'

With a smirk of satisfaction, the overseer presented his arm to a pretty
young lady, whose dark eyes had somewhat smitten him, and led the way to
the further end of the shop, followed by the whole party.

The Dead Man was nowhere to be seen!

'Hullo, here! Where the devil is that rascal gone?' cried the overseer,
in great alarm, gazing wildly about him. 'Say, you fellows there, where
is the Dead Man?'

This inquiry, addressed to the convicts who were at work in that part of
the shop, was answered by a general 'don't know, sir.'

With one exception they all spoke the truth; for only the man who had
nailed the Dead Man in the box, was cognizant of the affair, and he did
not choose to confess his agency in the matter. An instant search was
made throughout the premises, but without success--and the officers of
the prison were forced to arrive at the disagreeable conclusion that the
miscreant had again given them the slip. Not one of them had suspected
that he was nailed up in a box on board the sloop which was then on her
way to New York. The Warden sent for the luckless overseer who had
charge of the escaped convict, and sternly informed him that his
services were no longer needed in that establishment; he added to the
discomfiture of the poor young man by darkly hinting his suspicions that
he (the overseer) had connived at the escape of the prisoner--but, as
the reader knows, this charge was unfounded and unjust.

The distance between Sing Sing and the city is not great: wind and tide
both being favorable, the vessel soon reached her place of destination,
and was attached to one of the numerous wharves which extend around the
city. The boxes of furniture on board were immediately placed upon
carts, for conveyance to a large warehouse in Pearl street.

The tightness of the box in which the Dead Man was placed, produced no
small inconvenience to that worthy, who during the passage was nearly
suffocated; however, he consoled himself with the thought that in a
short time he would be free. The box was about six feet in length; and
two in breadth and depth; and in this narrow compass the villain felt as
if he were in a coffin. He was greatly rejoiced when the men who were
unloading the vessel raised the box from the deck and carried it towards
one of the carts.

But oh, horrible! unconscious that there was a man in the box, they
stood it upon one end, and the Dead Man was left _standing upon his
head_. The next moment the cart was driven rapidly over the rough
pavement, towards the warehouse.

There were but two alternatives left for him--either to endure the
torments of that unnatural position until the box was taken from the
cart, or to cry out for some one to rescue him, in which case, clothed
as he was in the garb of the prison, he would be immediately recognized
as an escaped convict, and sent back to his old quarters. This latter
alternative was so dreadful to him that he resolved to endure the
torture if possible; and he could not help shuddering when he thought
that perhaps he might be placed in the same position in the warehouse!

The drive from the wharf to Pearl street occupied scarce five minutes,
yet during that brief period of time, the Dead man endured all the
torments of the damned. The blood settled in his head, and gushed from
his mouth and nostrils; unable to hold out longer, he was about to yell
in his agony for aid, when the cart stopped, and in a few moments he was
relieved by his box being taken down and carried into the warehouse,
where, to his inexpressible joy, it was placed in a position to cause
him no further inconvenience. The warehouse being an extensive one, many
persons were employed in it; and he deemed it prudent to remain in his
box until night, as the clerks and porters were constantly running
about, and they would be sure to observe him if he issued from his place
of concealment then.

As he lay in his narrow quarters, he heard the voices of two persons
conversing near him, one of whom was evidently the proprietor of the
establishment.

'We have just heard from Sing Sing,' said the proprietor--'that the
villain they call the Dead Man made his escape this morning, in what
manner nobody knows. I am sorry for it, because such a wretch is
dangerous to society; but my regret that he has escaped arises
principally from the fact that he is an excellent workman, and I, as
contractor, enjoyed the advantages of his labor, paying the State a
trifle of thirty cents a day for him, when he could earn me two dollars
and a half. This system of convict labor is a glorious thing for us
master mechanics, though it plays the devil with the journeymen. Why, I
formerly employed fifty workmen, who earned on an average two dollars a
day; but since I contracted with the State to employ its convicts, the
work which cost me one hundred dollars a day I now get for _fifteen_
dollars.' And he laughed heartily.

'So it seems,' remarked the other,'that you are enriching yourself at
the expense of the State, while honest mechanics are thrown out of
employment.'

'Precisely so,' responded the proprietor--'and if the _honest
mechanics_, as you call them, wish to work for me, they must commit a
crime and be sent to Sing Sing, where they can enjoy that
satisfaction--ha, ha, ha.'

Just then, a poor woman miserably clad, holding in her hand a scrap of
paper, entered the store, and advanced timidly to where the wealthy
proprietor and his friend were seated.

The former, observing her, said to her in a harsh tone--

'There, woman, turn right around and march out, and don't come here
again with your begging petition, or I'll have you taken up as a
vagrant.'

'If you please, sir,' answered the poor creature, humbly--'I haven't
come to beg, but to ask if you won't be so kind as to pay this bill of
my husband's. It's only five dollars, sir, and he is lying sick in bed,
and we are in great distress from want of food and fire-wood. Since you
discharged him he has not been able to get work, and--'

'Oh, get out!' interrupted the wealthy proprietor, brutally--'don't come
bothering _me_ with your distress and such humbug. I paid your husband
more than he ought to have had--giving two dollars a day to a fellow,
when I now get the same work for thirty cents! If you're in distress, go
to the Poor House, but don't come here again--d'ye hear?'

The poor woman merely bowed her head in token of assent, and left the
store, her pale cheeks moistened with tears. The friend of the wealthy
proprietor said nothing, but thought to himself, 'You're a d----d
scoundrel.' And, reader, we think so too, though not in the habit of
swearing.

She had not proceeded two dozen steps from the store, when a
rough-looking man in coarse overalls touched her arm, and thus addressed
her:

'Beg your pardon, ma'am, but I'm a porter in the store of that blasted
rascal as wouldn't pay your poor husband's bill for his work, and
treated you so insultingly; I overheard what passed betwixt you and him,
and I felt mad enough to go at him and _knock blazes_ out of him. No
matter--every dog has his day, as the saying is; and he may yet be
brought to know what poverty is. I'm poor, but you are welcome to all
the money I've got in the world--take this, and God bless you.'

The noble fellow passed three or four dollars in silver into her hand,
and walked away ere she could thank him.

The recording angel above opened the great Book wherein all human
actions are written, and affixed another _black mark_ to the name of the
wealthy proprietor. There were many black marks attached to that name
already.

The angel then sought out another name, and upon it impressed the stamp
of a celestial seal. It was the name of the poor laborer.

Oh, laborer! Thou art uncouth to look upon: thy face is unshaven, thy
shirt dirty, and lo! thy overalls smell of paint and grease; thy speech
is ungrammatical, and thy manners unpolished--but give us the grasp of
thy honest hand, and the warm feelings of thy generous heart, fifty, yes
a million times sooner than the mean heart and niggard hand of the
selfish cur that calls itself thy master!

And oh, wealthy proprietor how smooth and smiling is thy face, how
precise thy dress and snow-white thy linen! thy words (except to the
poor,) are well-chosen and marked with strict grammatical
propriety.--The world doffs its hat to thee, and calls thee
'respectable,' and 'good.' Thou rotten-hearted villain!--morally thou
art not fit to brush the cowhide boots of the MAN that thou callst thy
servant! Out upon ye, base-soul'd wretch!

The countenance of the wealthy proprietor, which had assumed a severe
and indignant expression at the woman's audacity, had just recovered its
wonted smile of complacency, when a gentleman of an elderly age and
reverend aspect entered the store. He was attired in a respectable suit
of black, and his neck was enveloped in a white cravat.

'My dear Mr. Flanders,' said the proprietor, shaking him warmly by the
hand, 'I am delighted to see you. Allow me to make you acquainted with
my friend, Mr. Jameson--the Rev. Balaam Flanders, our worthy and beloved
pastor.'

The two gentlemen bowed, and the parson proceeded to unfold the object
of his visit.

'Brother Hartless,' said he to the proprietor, 'I have called upon you
in behalf of a most excellent institution, of which I have the honor to
be President; I allude to the 'Society for Supplying Indigent and Naked
Savages in Hindustan with Flannel Shirts.' The object of the Society,
you perceive, is a most philanthropic and commendable one; every
Christian and lover of humanity should cheerfully contribute his mite
towards its promotion--Your reputation for enlightened views and noble
generosity has induced me to call upon you to head the list of its
patrons--which list,' he added in a significant whisper, 'will be
published in full in the _Missionary Journal and Cannibal's Friend_,
that excellent periodical.'

'You do me honor,' replied Mr. Hartless, a flush of pride suffusing his
face; then, going to his desk, he wrote in bold characters, at the top
of a sheet of paper--

     '_Donations in aid of the Society for Supplying Indigent and
     Naked Savages in Hindustan with Flannel Shirts._

     --Paul Hartless. $100.00'

This document he handed to the parson, with a look which clearly said
'What do you think of that?' and then, producing his pocket-book, took
from thence a bank-note for one hundred dollars, which he presented to
the reverend gentleman, who received the donation with many thanks on
behalf of the 'Society for Supplying, &c.' and then left.

All this time the Dead Man lay in his box, impatiently awaiting the
arrival of evening, when the store would be closed, and an opportunity
afforded him to emerge from the narrow prison in which he was confined.
Once, he came very near being discovered; for a person chanced to enter
the warehouse accompanied by a dog, and the animal began smelling around
the box in a manner that excited some surprise and remark on the part of
those who observed it. The dog's acute powers of smell detected the
presence of some person in the box: fortunately, however, for the Dead
Man, the owner of the four-legged inquisitor, having transacted his
business, called the animal away, and left the store.

Mr. Hartless, in the course of some further desultory conversation with
Mr. Jameson, casually remarked--

'By the way, my policy of insurance expired yesterday, and I meant to
have it renewed today; however, tomorrow will answer just as well. But I
must not delay the matter, for this building is crammed from cellar to
roof with valuable goods, and were it burnt down tonight, or before I
renew my insurance, I should be a beggar!'

The Dead Man heard this, and grinned with satisfaction. The day wore
slowly away, and at last the welcome evening came; the hum of business
gradually ceased, and finally the last person belonging to the
warehouse, who remained, took his departure, having closed the shutters
and locked the door; then a profound silence reigned throughout the
building.

'Now I may venture to get out of this accursed box,' thought the escaped
convict:--and he tried to force off the cover, but to his disappointment
and alarm, he found that it resisted all his efforts. It had been too
tightly nailed on to admit of its being easily removed.

'Damnation!' exclaimed the Dead Man, a thousand fears crowding into his
mind,--'it's all up with me unless I can burst off this infernal cover.'
And, cursing the man who had fastened it on so securely, he redoubled
his efforts.

He succeeded at last; the cover flew off, and he arose from his
constrained and painful position with feelings of the most intense
satisfaction. All was pitch dark, and he began groping around for some
door or window which would afford him egress from the place. His hand
soon came in contact with a window; he raised the sash, and unfastened
the shutters, threw them open, when instantly a flood of moonlight
streamed into the store, enabling him to discern objects with tolerable
distinctness. The window, which was not over five feet from the ground,
overlooked a small yard surrounded by a fence of no great height; and
the Dead Man, satisfied with the appearance of things, proceeded to put
into execution a plan which he had formed while in the box. The nature
of that plan will presently appear.

After breaking open a desk, and rummaging several drawers without
finding anything worth carrying off, he took from his pocket a match,
and being in a philosophical mood, (for great rascals are generally
profound philosophers,) he apostrophized it thus:

'Is it not strange, thou little morsel of wood, scarce worth the
fiftieth fraction of a cent, that in thy tiny form doth dwell a Mighty
Power, which can destroy thousands of dollars, and pull down the great
fabric of a rich man's fortune? Thy power I now invoke, thou little
minister of vengeance; for I hate the aristocrat who expressed his
regret at my escape, because, forsooth! my services were valuable to
him!--and now, as the flames of fire consume his worldly possessions, so
may the flames of eternal torment consume his soul hereafter!'

Ah, Mr. Hartless! that was an unfortunate observation you made relative
to the expiration of your term of insurance. Your words were overheard
by a miscreant, whose close proximity you little suspected. Your
abominable treatment of that poor man is about to meet with a terrible
retribution.

The Dead Man placed a considerable quantity of paper beneath a large
pile of boxes and furniture; he then ignited the match, and having set
fire to the paper, made his exit through the window, crossed the yard,
scaled the fence, and passing through an alley gained the street, and
made the best of his way to the Dark Vaults.

In less than ten minutes after he had issued from that building, fierce
and crackling flames were bursting forth from its doors and windows. The
streets echoed with the cry of _Fire_--the deep-toned bell of the City
Hall filled the air with its notes of solemn warning and the fire
engines thundered over the pavement towards the scene of conflagration.
But in vain were the efforts of the firemen to subdue the raging flames;
higher and higher they rose, until the entire building was on fire,
belching forth mingled flame, and smoke, and showers of sparks. At
length the interior of the building was entirely consumed, and the
tottering walls fell in with a tremendous crash. The extensive warehouse
of Mr. Paul Hartless, with its valuable contents, no longer existed, but
had given place to a heap of black and smoking ruins!

The reader is now acquainted with the manner of the Dead Man's escape
from Sing Sing State Prison, and the circumstances connected with that
event.


CHAPTER XIII

_The African and his Mistress--the Haunted House--Night of Terror._


Nero, the African, still remained a prisoner in the vault beneath
Sydney's house. He was regularly supplied with his food by Dennis, who
performed the part of jailer, and was untiring in his vigilance to
prevent the escape of the negro under his charge.

One afternoon a boy of apparently fifteen or sixteen years of age called
upon Dennis and desired to speak with him in private. He was a handsome
lad, of easy, graceful manners, and long, curling hair; his dress was
juvenile, and his whole appearance extremely prepossessing.

The interview being granted, the boy made known the object of his call
by earnestly desiring to be permitted to visit the imprisoned black.

'Is it the _nager_ ye want to see?' exclaimed Dennis--'and how the devil
did ye know we had a nager shut up in the cellar, any how?'

'Oh,' replied the boy, 'a lady of my acquaintance is aware of the fact,
and she sent me here to present you with this five dollar gold piece,
and to ask your consent to my delivering a short message to the black
man.'

'Och, be the powers, and is that it?' muttered Dennis, half aloud, as he
surveyed the bright coin which the boy had placed in his hand--'I begin
to smell a rat, faith; this gossoon was sent here by Mr. Sydney's
blackguard wife, who has such a hankering after the black divil--not
contented with her own lawful husband, and a decent man he is, but she
must take up wid that dirty nager, bad luck to her and him! My master
gave me no orders to prevint any person from seeing the black spalpeen;
and as a goold yankee sovereign can't be picked up every day in the
street, faith it's yerself Dennis Macarty, that will take the
responsibility, and let this good-looking gossoon in to see black Nero,
and bad luck to him!'

Accordingly, the worthy Irishman produced a huge key from his pocket,
and led the way to the door of the vault, which he opened, and having
admitted the youth, relocked it, after requesting the visitor to knock
loudly upon the door when he desired to come out.

'Who is there?' demanded the negro in a hollow voice, from a remote
corner of the dungeon.

'Tis I, your Julia!' answered the disguised woman, in a soft
whisper--for it was no other than Sydney's guilty wife.

'My good, kind mistress!' exclaimed the black, and the next moment he
had caught the graceful form of his paramour in his arms. We shall not
offend the reader's good taste by describing the disgusting caresses
which followed. Suffice it to say, that the interview was commenced in
such a manner as might have been expected under the circumstance.

The first emotions of rapture at their meeting having subsided, they
engaged in a long and earnest conversation.

We shall not weary the reader's patience by detailing at length what
passed between them; suffice it to say, they did not separate until a
plan had been arranged for the escape of Nero from that dungeon vault.

When Julia left the abode of her husband, in the manner described in
Chapter VIII, she took apartments for herself and her maid Susan at a
respectable boarding house near the Battery. Representing herself to be
a widow lady recently from Europe, she was treated with the utmost
respect by the inmates of the establishment, who little suspected that
she was the cast-off wife of an injured husband, and the mistress of a
negro! She assumed the name of Mrs. Belmont; and, to avoid confusion, we
shall hereafter designate her by that appellation.

Mrs. Belmont was very well satisfied with her position, but she was well
aware that she could not always maintain it, unless she entrapped some
wealthy man into an amour or marriage with her; for her pecuniary
resources, though temporarily sufficient for all her wants, could not
last always. In this view of the case, she deemed it expedient to hire
some suitable and genteel dwelling-house, where she could carry on her
operations with less restraint than in a boarding-house. She accordingly
advertised for such a house; and the same day on which her advertisement
appeared in the paper, an old gentleman called upon her, and stated he
was the proprietor of just such a tenement as she had expressed a desire
to engage.

'This house, madam,' said the old gentleman, 'is a neat three-story
brick edifice, situated in Reade street. It is built in the most
substantial manner, and furnished with every convenience; moreover, you
shall occupy it upon your own terms.'

'As to that,' remarked Mrs. Belmont, 'if the house suits me, you have
but to name the rent, and it shall be paid.'

'Why, madam,' replied the old gentleman, with some embarrassment of
manner--'it is my duty to inform you that a silly prejudice exists in
the minds of some people in the neighborhood of the house, and that
prejudice renders it somewhat difficult for me to procure a tenant. You
will smile at the absurdity of the notion, but nevertheless I assure
you that a belief generally prevails that the house is _haunted_.'

'Are there any grounds for each a supposition?' inquired the lady, with
an incredulous smile, yet feeling an interest in the matter.

'Why,' replied the owner, 'all who have as yet occupied the house have,
after remaining one to two nights in it, removed precipitately,
declaring that the most dreadful noises were heard during the night,
tho' none have positively affirmed that they actually _saw_ any
supernatural visitant. These tales of terror have so frightened people
that the building has been unoccupied for some time; and as it is a fine
house, and one that cost me a good sum of money, I am extremely anxious
to get a tenant of whom only a very moderate rent would be required. The
fact is, I am no believer in this _ghost_ business; the people who lived
in the house were probably frightened by pranks of mischievous boys, or
else their nervous, excited imaginations conjured up fancies and fears
which had no reasonable foundation. Now, madam, I have candidly told you
all; it remains for you to decide whether you will conform to a foolish
prejudice, or, rising above the superstitions of the vulgar and
ignorant, become the occupant of my _haunted_ house--which, in my
belief, is haunted by naught but mice in the cupboards and crickets in
the chimneys.'

Mrs. Belmont reflected for a few moments, and then said--

'If the house suits me upon examination, I will become your tenant,
notwithstanding the ghostly reputation of the building.'

'I am delighted, my dear madam,' rejoined the old gentleman, with
vivacity, 'to find in you a person superior to the absurd terrors of
weak-minded people. If you will do me the honor to accompany me to Reade
street, I will go over the house with you, and if you are pleased with
it, the bargain shall be completed upon the spot.'

This proposal was acceded to by Mrs. Belmont, who, after putting on her
cloak and bonnet, took the arm of the old gentleman and proceeded with
him up Broadway. A walk of little more than ten minutes brought them to
Reade street, into which they turned; and in a few moments more the old
gentleman paused before a handsome dwelling-house, standing about twenty
feet back from the line of the street. The house did not adjoin any
other building, but was located upon the edge of an open lot of
considerable extent.

'This is the place,' said the guide as he took a key from his pocket;
then, politely desiring the lady to follow him, he ascended the steps,
unlocked the front door, and they entered the house. The rooms were of
course entirely empty, yet they were clean and in excellent
condition.--The parlors, chambers and other apartments were admirably
arranged and Mrs. Belmont, after going all over the house, expressed her
perfect satisfaction with it, and signified her wish to remove into it
the next day. The terms were soon agreed upon; and Mr. Hedge (for that
was the name of the landlord,) after delivering the key into her hands,
waited upon her to the door of her boarding-house, and then took his
leave.

The next morning, at an early hour, Mrs. Belmont began making
preparations to occupy her new abode. From an extensive dealer she hired
elegant furniture sufficient to furnish every apartment in the house;
and, by noon that day, the rooms which had lately appeared so bare and
desolate, presented an aspect of luxury and comfort. The naked walls
were covered with fine paintings, in handsome frames; rich curtains were
hung in the windows, and upon the floors were laid beautiful
carpets.--The mirrors, sofas, chairs and cabinets were of the costliest
kind; a magnificent piano was placed in the parlor, and the lady took
care that the chamber which she intended to occupy was fitted up with
all possible elegance and taste. A voluptuous bed, in which Venus might
have revelled, was not the least attractive feature of that luxurious
sleeping apartment. Every arrangement being completed, and as it was
still early in the afternoon, Mrs. Belmont resolved to carry out a plan
which she had formed some days previously--a plan by which she could
enjoy an interview with Nero the black. The reader is already aware that
she disguised herself in boys' clothes, and accomplished her object
without much difficulty.

That evening, Mrs. Belmont was seated in the comfortable parlor of her
new abode, before a fine fire which glowed in the ample grate, and
diffused a genial warmth throughout the apartment. She had just partaken
of a luxurious supper; and the materials of the repast being removed,
she was indulging in reflections which were far more pleasing at that
moment, than any which had employed her mind since her separation from
her husband.

She was attired with tasteful simplicity; for although she expected no
company that evening, she had taken her usual pains to dress herself
becomingly and well, being a lady who never neglected her toilet, under
any circumstances--a trait of refinement which we cannot help admiring,
even in one so depraved and abandoned as she was.

As she lounged indolently upon the sofa, complacently regarding her
delicate foot, which, encased in a satin slipper, reposed upon the rich
hearth-rug, her thoughts ran somewhat in the following channel--:

'Well--I am now not only mistress of my own actions, but also mistress
of a splendidly furnished house. Ah, 'twas a fortunate day for me when I
separated from that man I once called husband! Yet with what cool
contempt he treated me on the night when he commanded me to leave his
house forever! How bitterly I hate that man--how I long to be revenged
upon him. Not that he has ever injured me--oh, no--'tis I that have
injured him; therefore do I hate him, and thirst for revenge! And poor
Nero, whom I visited this afternoon in his dungeon--how emaciated and
feeble has he become by close confinement in that gloomy place! His
liberation must be effected, at all hazards; for strange as it is, I
love the African passionately. Now, as regards my own position and
affairs: I am young, beautiful, and accomplished--skilled in human
nature and intrigue. Two distinct paths lie before me, which are equally
desirable: as a virtuous widow lady, I can win the love and secure the
hand of some rich and credulous gentleman, who, satisfied with having
obtained a pretty wife, will not be too inquisitive with reference to my
past history. In case of marriage, I will remove to Boston with my new
husband: for not being divorced from Sydney, (how I hate that name!) I
should be rendered liable to the charge of bigamy, if the fact of my
second marriage should transpire.--On the other hand, leaving marriage
entirely out of the question: As a young and lovely woman, residing
alone, and not under the protection of male relatives, I shall attract
the attention of wealthy libertines, who will almost throw their
fortunes at my feet to enjoy my favors. Selecting the richest of these
men, it will be my aim to infatuate him by my arts, to make him my
slave, and then to deny him the pleasure for which he pants, until he
gives me a large sum of money; this being done, I can either surrender
myself to him, or still refuse to afford him the gratification he seeks,
as suits my whim. When he becomes wearied of my perverseness and
extortion, I will dismiss him, and seek another victim. Those with whom
I shall thus have to deal, will be what the world calls respectable
men--husbands, fathers--perhaps professedly pious men and clergymen--who
would make any sacrifice sooner than have their amours exposed to their
wives, families, and society generally. Once having committed themselves
with me, I shall have a hold upon them, which they never can shake
off;--a hold which will enable me to draw money from their well-filled
coffers, whenever my necessities or extravagances require it. I may
practice whatever imposition or extortion on them I choose, with perfect
impunity; they will never dare to use threats or violence towards me,
for the appalling threat of _exposure_ will curb their tempers and
render them tamely submissive to all my exactions and caprices. Thus
will I reap a rich harvest from those wealthy votaries of carnal
pleasure whom I may allure to my arms, while at the same time I can for
my own gratification unrestrainedly enjoy the embraces of any lover whom
I may happen to fancy. Ah, I am delightfully situated at present, and
have before me a glorious and happy career!'

We have devoted considerable space to the above reflections of this
unprincipled woman, because they will serve to show her views in
reference to her present position, and her plans for the future.

The agreeable current of her meditations was interrupted by the entrance
of her maid Susan.

'Well, ma'am,' said the abigail, 'I have obeyed all your orders; I have
locked all the doors, and fastened all the shutters, so that if the
ghost _should_ pay us a visit, it will have to get in through the
keyhole. But oh! my gracious! how terrible it is for you and I, ma'am,
two poor weak women, as a body might say, to be all alone together in a
house that is haunted!'

'Sit down, Susan,' said Mrs. Belmont, who was herself not altogether
devoid of superstitious fears. 'Are you so foolish as to believe in
_ghosts_? Do you think that the spirits of dead people are allowed to
re-visit the earth, to frighten us out of our wits? No, no--we have
reason to fear the _living_, but not those who are dead and buried.'

'But, if you please, ma'am,' rejoined Susan, in a solemn tone, 'I once
seed a ghost with my own eyes, and not only seed it, but _felt_ it,
too.'

'Indeed--and pray how did that happen?' inquired her mistress.

'I'll tell you all about it, ma'am,' replied Susan, who, by the way, was
rather a pretty young woman, though she was, like all ladies' maids, a
prodigious talker. 'You see, ma'am, I once went to live in the family of
a minister, and a very excellent man he was, as prayed night and
morning, and said grace afore meals. Oh, he was a dreadful clever
gentleman, 'cause he always used to kiss me when he catch'd me alone,
and chuck me under the chin, and tell me I was handsome. Well, Saturday
the minister's wife and family went to pay a visit to some relations in
New Jersey, and was to stay for two or three days; but the minister
himself didn't go with them, 'cause he was obliged to stay and preach on
Sunday.--Now comes the dreadful part of my story, ma'am, and it is true
as gospel.--That Saturday night, about twelve o'clock, I was awoke by
hearing the door of my little attic bed-room softly open; and by the
light of the moon I seed a human figger, all dressed in white, come into
the room, shut the door, and then walk towards my bed. Oh, I was
dreadfully frightened, to be sure; and just as I was going to scream
out, the ghost puts his hand upon me and says--'_hush!_' which skeer'd
me so that I almost fainted away. Well, ma'am, what does the ghost do
next but take ondecent liberties with me, and I was too much frightened
to say, 'have done, now!' And then the awful critter did what no ghost
ever did before to me, nor man neither.--Oh, I actually fainted away two
or three times; I did indeed. After a while it went away, but I was in
such a flutter that I couldn't sleep no more that night. The next
morning I up and told the minister how I had seed a ghost, and how it
had treated me; and the minister he smiled, and said he guessed I'd get
over it, and gave me some money, telling me not to say anything more
about it, 'cause it might frighten the folks. Now, ma'am, after that,
you needn't wonder that I believe in ghosts.'

Mrs. Belmont was highly amused by this narration of her maid's
experience in supernatural visitation; and the hearty laughter in which
she indulged at the close of the story, dispelled in a great measure
those unpleasant feelings which had begun to gain the ascendancy over
her. While under the influence of those feelings, she had intended to
request Susan to sleep with her in her chamber; but as such an
arrangement would betray _fear_ on her part, while she was most anxious
to appear bold and courageous, she concluded to occupy her sleeping
apartment alone. Susan herself would have been very glad to share the
room of her mistress; but as a suggestion to that effect, coming from
her, might have seemed presumptuous and impertinent, she said nothing
about it. Accordingly, when the hour for retiring arrived, Mrs. Belmont
retired to her chamber, where she dismissed her maid, saying that she
should not want her services any more that night; and poor Susan was
obliged to ascend to her solitary apartment, which she did with many
fearful misgivings, and the most dreadful apprehensions in regard to
ghosts, coupled with much painful reflection relative to the
unpleasantness of sleeping _alone_--in a haunted house.

Mrs. Belmont disrobed herself, yet ere she retired to her couch, she
paused before a large mirror to admire her own naked and voluptuous
beauty. While she was surveying herself, she gave utterance to her
thoughts in words:--

'Ah, these charms of mine will procure me friends and fortune. What man
could resist the intoxicating influence of such glorious loveliness of
face and person as I possess!'

Scarcely had she uttered these words, when her ear was greeted by a low
sound, which bore some resemblance to a laugh. Terrified and trembling,
she cast a rapid glance around the room, but could see nobody; she then
examined a small closet which adjoined the chamber and looked under the
bed, not knowing but that some person might be concealed there--but she
could uncover nothing to account for the noise which she had heard. It
then occurred to her to open the door of her chamber; but as she was
about to do so, an appalling thought flashed thro' her mind.

'What if some terrible being is now standing at the outside of that
door?' and she shrank from opening it. She deeply regretted that she had
not requested her maid Susan to sleep with her, as she crept into bed,
leaving a candle burning on the table.

For about a quarter of an hour she listened intensely, but the sound
which had alarmed her was not repeated; and she began to reason with
herself upon the absurdity of her fears. Finally she succeeded in
persuading herself that she had in reality heard nothing, but had been
deceived by her own imagination. Still, she could not entirely dissipate
her fears; she recollected that the house had the reputation of being
'haunted'--and, though she was naturally neither timid nor
superstitious, a vague and undefinable dread oppressed her, as she lay
in that solitary chamber, where reigned a heavy gloom and profound
stillness.

It was an hour after midnight when she awoke from an uneasy slumber into
which she had fallen; and the first object which met her gaze, was a
human figure, enveloped from head to toe in white drapery, standing near
her bed!

Yes, there it stood, with the upper part of a ghastly face alone
visible, pointing at her with its finger, and freezing her soul with the
steady glare of its eyes.

Long, long stood that dreadful apparition; its attitude seemed to be
either menacing or warning. The terrified woman, under the influence of
a painful fascination, could not avert her gaze from it; and the spectre
stood until the candle was entirely consumed, and the room was wrapped
in profound darkness. Then the Form glided to the bedside, and laid its
cold hand upon her brow. '_Thou shalt see me again!_' it whispered, and
then passed noiselessly from the room.

Mrs. Belmont gave one loud and piercing scream, and then sank into a
state of insensibility.


CHAPTER XIV

_A Glimpse of the Crimes and Miseries of a Great City._


After his narrow escape from an ignominious death, Frank Sydney resumed
his nocturnal wanderings thro' the city, in disguise, in order to do
deeds of charity and benevolence to those who needed his aid. One night,
dressed in the garb of a sailor, and wearing an immense pair of false
whiskers, he strolled towards the Five Points, and entered the 'crib' of
Bloody Mike. That respectable establishment was filled as usual with a
motley collection of gentlemen of undoubted reputation--thieves,
vagabonds, homeless wretches, and others of the same stamp, among whom
were some of the most miserable looking objects possible to be
conceived.

At the moment of Frank's entrance, Ragged Pete was engaged in relating
the particulars of a horrible event which had occurred upon the
preceding night on the 'Points.' The incident is a _true_ one, and we
introduce it here to show what awful misery exists in the very midst of
all our boasted civilization and benevolence:--

'You see, fellers,' said Ragged Pete, leisurely sipping a gill of _blue
ruin_, which he held in his hand--'the victim was a woman of the town,
as lived upstairs in Pat Mulligan's crib in this street. She had once
been a decent woman, but her husband was a drunken vagabond, as beat and
starved her to such an extent, that she was obliged to go on the town to
keep herself from dying of actual starvation. Well, the husband he was
took up and sent to quod for six months, as a common vagrant; and the
wife she lived in Mulligan's crib, in a room as hadn't a single article
of furniture in it, exceptin' a filthy old bed of straw in one corner. A
week ago, the poor cretur was taken ill, and felt herself likely to
become a mother, but the brutes in the house wouldn't pay no attention
to her in that situation, but left her all to herself. What she must
have suffered during that night and the next day, you can imagine; and
towards evening Pat Mulligan goes to her room, and finds her almost
dead, with her poor child in her arms, wrapped up in an old blanket.
Well, what does Pat do but ax her for his rent, which she owed him; and
because the poor woman had nothing to pay him, the Irish vagabond (axing
your pardon, Bloody Mike,) bundles her neck and crop into the street,
weak and sick as she was, with a hinfant scarce a day old, crying in her
arms. The weather was precious cold, and it was snowing, and to keep
herself and child from freezing to death, as she thought, she crept into
a hog-pen which stands in Pat's yard. And this morning she was found in
the hog-pen, stone dead, and the hogs were devouring the dead body of
the child, which was already half ate up! I'll tell you what, fellers,'
exclaimed Ragged Pete, dashing a tear from his eye, and swallowing the
remainder of his gin--'I'm a hard case myself, and have seen some hard
things in my time, but d----n me if the sight of that poor woman's
corpse and the mutilated body of her child, didn't set me to thinking
that this is a great city, where such a thing takes place in the very
midst of it!'

'Three groans for Pat Mulligan!' roared a drunken fellow from beneath
the table.

The groans were rendered with due emphasis and effect; and then one of
the drunken crowd proposed that they should visit the 'crib' of Mr.
Mulligan, and testify their disapprobation of that gentleman's conduct
in a more forcible and striking manner.

This proposal was received with a shout of approbation by the drunken
crew, and was warmly seconded by Bloody Mike himself, who regarded Mr.
Patrick Mulligan as a formidable rival in his line of business, and
therefore entertained feelings strongly hostile to his
fellow-countryman. Then forth sallied the dingy crowd, headed by Ragged
Pete, (who found himself suddenly transformed into a hero,) and followed
by Frank Sydney, who was desirous of seeing the issue of this strange
affair.

The house occupied by Mulligan was an old, rotten tenement, which would
undoubtedly have fallen to the ground, had it not been propped up by the
adjoining buildings; and as it was, one end of it had settled down, in
consequence of the giving away of the foundation, so that every room in
the house was like a steep hill. The lower room was occupied as a
groggery and dance-hall, and was several feet below the level of the
street.

Into this precious den did the guests of Bloody Mike march, in single
file. It had been previously agreed between them, that Ragged Pete
would give the signal for battle, by personally attacking no less a
person than Mr. Mulligan himself. Frank also entered, and taking up a
secure position in one corner, surveyed the scene with interest.

Seated in the corner, upon an inverted wash-tub, was an old negro, whose
wool was white as snow, who was arrayed in a dirty, ragged, military
coat which had once been red. This sable genius rejoiced in the lofty
title of 'the General;' he was playing with frantic violence on an old,
cracked violin, during which performance he threw his whole body into
the strangest contortions, working his head, jaws, legs and arms in the
most ludicrous manner. The 'music' thus produced was responded to, 'on
the floor,' by about twenty persons, who were indulging in the 'mazy
dance.' The company included old prostitutes, young thieves, negro
chimney-sweeps, and many others whom it would be difficult to classify.

The room being small and very close, and heated by an immense stove, the
stench was intolerable.--Behind the bar was a villainous looking
Irishman, whose countenance expressed as much intellect or humanity as
that of a hog. This was Pat Mulligan, and he was busily engaged in
dealing out the delectable nectar called 'blue ruin' at the very
moderate rate of one penny per gill.

A _very_ important man, forsooth, was that Irish 'landlord,' in the
estimation of himself and customers.--None dare address him without
prefixing a deferential '_Mr._' to his name; and Frank Sydney was both
amused and irritated as he observed the brutal insolence with which the
low, ignorant ruffian treated the poor miserable wretches, from whose
scanty pence he derived his disgraceful livelihood.

'Mr. Mulligan,' said a pale, emaciated woman, whose hollow cheek and
sunken eye eloquently proclaimed her starving condition--'won't you
trust me for a sixpenny loaf of bread until to-morrow? My little girl,
poor thing, is dying, and I have eaten nothing this day.' And the poor
creature wept.

'Trust ye!' roared the Irishman, glaring ferociously upon her--'faith,
it's not exactly _trust_ I'll give ye; but I'll give ye a beating
that'll not leave a whole bone in your skin, if ye are not out of this
place in less time than it takes a pig to grunt.'

The poor woman turned and left the place, with a heavy heart, and Ragged
Pete, deeming this a good opportunity to begin hostilities, advanced to
the bar with a swagger, and said to the Irishman,--

'You're too hard upon that woman, Pat.'

'What's that to you, ye dirty spalpeen?' growled Mulligan, savagely.

'This much,' responded Pete, seizing an immense earthen pitcher which
stood on the counter, and hurling it with unerring aim at the head of
the Irishman. The vessel broke into a hundred pieces, and though it
wounded Mulligan dreadfully, he was not disabled; for, grasping an axe
which stood within his reach, he rushed from behind the bar, and
swinging the formidable weapon aloft, he would have cloven in twain the
skull of Ragged Pete, had not that gentleman evaded him with much
agility, and closing with him, bore him to the floor, and began to
pummel him vigorously.

No sooner did the customers of Pat Mulligan see their dreaded landlord
receiving a sound thrashing, then all fear of him vanished; and, as they
all hated the Irish bully, and smarted under the remembrance of
numerous insults and wrongs sustained at his hands, they with one accord
fell upon him, and beat him within an inch of his life. Not content with
this mode of retaliation, they tore down the bar, demolished the glasses
and decanters, spilled all the liquor, and in short caused the
flourishing establishment of Mr. Pat Mulligan to assume a very forlorn
appearance.

While this work of destruction was going on, the alarm was given that a
body of watchmen had assembled outside the door, and was about to make
an advance upon the 'crib.' To exit the house now became the general
intent; and several had already beaten a retreat through the rear of the
premises, when the watchman burst into the front door, and made captives
of all who were present. Frank Sydney was collared by one of the
officials, and although our hero protested that he had not mingled in
the row, but was merely a spectator, he was carried to the watch-house
along with the others.

When the party arrived at the watch-house, (which is situated in a wing
of the 'Tombs,') the prisoners were all arrayed in a straight line
before the desk of the Captain of the Watch, for that officer's
examination. To give the reader an idea of the way in which justice is
sometimes administered in New York, we shall detail several of the
individual examinations, and their results:--

'What's your name?' cried the Captain, addressing the first of the
prisoners. 'Barney McQuig, an' plaze yer honor,' was the reply, in a
strong Hibernian accent.

A sort of under-official, who was seated at the desk, whispered in the
ear of the Captain of the Watch--

'I know him, he's an infernal scoundrel, but he _votes our ticket_, and
you let him slide, by all means.'

'McQuig, you are discharged,' said the Captain to the prisoner.

'Why, sir, that man was one of the worst of the rioters, and he is,
besides, one of the greatest villains on the Points,' remarked a
watchman, who, having only been recently appointed, was comparatively
_green_, and by no means _au fait_ in the method of doing business in
that 'shop.'

'Silence, sir!' thundered the Captain--'how dare you dispute my
authority? I shall discharge whom I please, damn you; and you will do
well if you are not discharged from your post for your interference.'

The indignant Captain demanded the name of the next prisoner, who
confessed to the eccentric Scriptural cognomen of 'Numbers Clapp.'

'I know _him_, too,' again whispered the under-official--'he is a common
and notorious thief, but he is useful to us as a _stool pigeon_,[3] and
you must let him go.'

'Clapp, you can go,' said the Captain; and Mr. Numbers Clapp lost no
time in conveying himself from the dangerous vicinity of justice; though
such _justice_ as we here record, was not very dangerous to _him_.

'Now, fellow, what's _your_ name?' asked the Captain of a shabbily
dressed man, whose appearance strongly indicated both abject poverty and
extreme ill health.

'Dionysus Wheezlecroft,' answered the man, with a consumptive cough.

'Do you know him?' inquired the Captain, addressing the under-official,
in a whisper.

'Perfectly well,' replied the other--'he is a poor devil, utterly
harmless and inoffensive, and is both sick and friendless. He was
formerly a political stump orator of some celebrity; he worked hard for
his party, and when that party got into power, it kicked him to the
devil, and he has been flat on his back ever since.'

'What party did he belong to?--_ours?_' asked the Captain.

'No,' was the reply; and that brief monosyllable of two letters, sealed
the doom of Dionysus Wheezlecroft.

'Lock him up,' cried the Captain--'he will be _sent over_ for six months
in the morning.' And so he was--not for any crime, but because he did
not belong to _our party_.

Several negroes, male and female, who could not possibly belong to any
party, were then summarily disposed of; and at last it came to Frank's
turn to be examined.

'Say, you sailor fellow,' quoth the Captain, 'what's your name?'

Frank quietly stepped forward, and in as few words as possible made
himself known; he explained the motives of his disguise, and the
circumstances under which he had been induced to enter the house of Pat
Mulligan.--The Captain, though savage and tyrannical to his inferiors,
was all smiles and affability to the rich Mr. Sydney.

'Really, my dear sir,' said he, rubbing his hands, and accompanying
almost every word with a corresponding bow, 'you have disguised yourself
so admirably, that it would puzzle the wits of a lawyer to make out who
you are, until you should _speak_, and then your gentlemanly accent
would betray you. Allow me to offer you ten thousand apologies, on
behalf of my men, for having dared to subject you to the inconvenience
of an arrest; and permit me also to assure you that if they had known
who you were, they would not have molested you had they found you
demolishing all the houses on the Points.'

'I presume I am at liberty to depart?' said Frank; and the Captain
returned a polite affirmative. Our hero left the hall of judgment,
thoroughly disgusted with the injustice and partiality of this petty
minion of the law; for he well knew that had he himself been in reality
nothing more than a poor sailor, as his garb indicated, the three words,
'lock him up,' would have decided his fate for that night; and that upon
the following morning the three words, 'send him over,' would have
decided his fate for the ensuing six months.

When Frank was gone, the Captain said to the under official:

'That is Mr. Sydney, the young gentleman who was convicted of murder a
short time ago, and whose innocence of the crime was made manifest in
such an extraordinary manner, just in time to save his neck. He is very
rich, and of course I could not think of locking _him_ up.'

The Captain proceeded to examine other prisoners, and Frank went in
quest of other adventures, in which pursuit we shall follow him.

As he turned into Broadway, he encountered a showily dressed courtezan,
who, addressing him with that absence of ceremony for which such ladies
are remarkable, requested him to accompany her home.

'This may lead to something,' thought Frank; and pretending to be
somewhat intoxicated, he proffered her his arm, which she took, at the
same time informing him that her residence was in Anthony street. This
street was but a short distance from where they had met; a walk of five
minutes brought them to it, and the woman conducted Frank back into a
dark narrow court, and into an old wooden building which stood at its
further extremity.

'Wait here a few moments, until I get a light,' said the woman; and
entering a room which opened from the entry, she left our hero standing
in the midst of profound darkness.--Hearing a low conversation going on
in the room, he applied his ear to the key-hole, and listened, having
good reason to suppose that he himself was the object of the discourse.

'What sort of a man does he appear to be?' was asked, in a voice which
sent a thrill through every nerve in Frank's body--for it struck him
that he had heard it before. It was the voice of a man, and its tones
were peculiar.

'He is a sailor,' replied the woman--'and as he is somewhat drunk now,
the powder will soon put him to sleep, and then--'

The remainder of the sentence was inaudible to Frank; he had heard
enough, however, to put him on his guard; for he felt convinced that he
was in one of those murderous dens of prostitution and crime, where
robbery and assassination are perpetrated upon many an unsuspecting
victim.

In a few minutes the woman issued from the room, bearing a lighted
candle; and requesting Frank to follow, she led the way up a crooked and
broken stair-case, and into a small chamber, scantily furnished,
containing only a bed, a table, a few chairs, and other articles of
furniture, of the commonest kind.

Our hero had now an opportunity to examine the woman narrowly.--Though
her eyes were sunken with dissipation, and her cheeks laden with paint,
the remains of great beauty were still discernible in her features, and
a vague idea obtruded itself, like a dim shadow, upon Frank's mind, that
this was not the _first_ time he had seen her.

'Why do you watch me so closely?' demanded the woman, fixing her
piercing eyes upon his countenance.

'Ax yer pardon, old gal, but aren't you going to fetch on some grog?'
said our hero, assuming a thick, drunken tone, and drawing from his
pocket a handful of gold and silver coin.

'Give me some money, and I will get you some liquor,' rejoined the
woman, her eyes sparkling with delight, as she saw that her intended
victim was well supplied with funds. Frank gave her a half dollar, and
she went down stairs, promising to be back in less than ten minutes.

During her absence, and while our hero was debating whether to make a
hasty retreat from the house, or remain and see what discoveries he
could make tending to throw light on the character and practices of the
inmates, the chamber door opened, and to his surprise a small boy of
about five years of age entered, and gazed at him with childish
curiosity.

'Surely I have seen that little lad before,' thought Frank; and then he
said, aloud--

'What is your name, my boy?'

'_Jack the Prig_,' replied the little fellow.

Frank started; memory carried him back to the Dark Vaults, where he had
heard the Dead Man _catechise_ his little son, and he recollected that
the urchin had, on that occasion, made the same reply to a similar
question. By referring to the sixth chapter of this work, the reader
will find the questions and answers of that singular catechism.

Resolving to test the matter further, our hero asked the boy the next
question which he remembered the Dead Man had addressed to his son, on
that eventful night:--

'Who gave you that name?'

'_The Jolly Knights of the Round Table_,' replied the boy, mechanically.

'By heavens, 'tis as I suspected!' thought Frank--'the child's answers
to my questions prove him to be the son of the Dead Man; the voice which
I heard while listening in the passage, and which seemed familiar to me,
was the voice of that infernal miscreant himself: and the woman whom I
accompanied hither, and whom I half fancied I had seen before--that
woman is his wife.'

The boy, probably fearing a return of his mother, left the room; and
Frank continued his meditations in the following strain:--

'The mystery begins to clear up. This house is probably the one that
communicates with the _secret outlet_ of the Dark Vaults, through which
I passed, blindfolded, accompanied by those two villains, Fred Archer,
and the Dead Man. The woman, no doubt, entices unsuspecting men into
this devil's trap, and after _drugging_ them into a state of
insensibility, hands them over to the tender mercies of her hideous
husband, who, after robbing them, casts them, perhaps, into some
infernal pit beneath this house, there to die and rot!--Good God, what
terrible iniquities are perpetrated in the very heart of this great
city--iniquities which are unsuspected and unknown! And yet the
perpetrators of them often escape their merited punishment, while I, an
innocent man, came within a hair's breadth of perishing upon the
scaffold for another's crime! But I will not question the divine justice
of the Almighty; the guilty may elude the punishment due their crimes,
in this world, but vengeance will overtake them in the next. It shall,
however, henceforth be the great object of my life, to bring one
stupendous miscreant to the bar of human justice--the Dead Man whose
escape from the State Prison was followed by his outrage upon Clinton
Romaine, by which the poor boy was forever deprived of the faculty of
speech; and 'tis my firm belief that 'twas by his accursed hand my aunt
was murdered; she was too elevated in character, and too good a
Christian, to commit suicide, and _he_ is the only man in existence who
could slay such an excellent and honorable woman! Yes--something tells
me that the Dead Man is the murderer of my beloved relative, and never
will I rest till he is in my power, that I may wreak upon him my deadly
vengeance!'

Hearing a footstep on the stairs, he assumed an attitude and expression
of countenance indicative of drowsiness and stupidity. A moment
afterwards, the woman entered, and placed upon the table a small pitcher
containing liquor. Taking from a shelf two tumblers, she turned her back
towards Frank, and drew from her bosom a small box, from which she
rapidly transferred a few grains of fine white powder into one of the
tumblers; then going to a cupboard in one corner, she put a teaspoonful
of loaf sugar into each of the tumblers, and placing them upon the
table, requested our hero to 'help himself.'

Frank poured some liquor into the tumbler nearest him, and looking
askance at the woman as he did so, he saw that her features wore a smile
of satisfaction; she then supplied her own glass, and was about to raise
it to her lips, when our hero said, in a gruff, sleepy tone--

'I say, old woman, you haven't half sweetened this grog of mine. Don't
be so d--d stingy of your sugar, for I've money enough to pay for it.'

The woman turned and went to the closet to get another spoonful of the
article in question; when Frank, with the rapidity of lightning,
_changed the tumblers_, placing the deadly dose designed for him, in the
same spot where the woman's tumbler had stood. This movement was
accomplished with so much dexterity, that when she advanced to the table
with the sugar, she failed to notice the alteration.

'Well, old gal--here's to the wind that blows, the ship that goes, and
the lass that loves a sailor!' And delivering himself of this hackneyed
nautical toast, the pretended seaman drank off the contents of his
glass, an example which was followed by the female miscreant, who
responded to Frank's toast by uttering aloud the significant wish--

'May your sleep to-night be sound!'

'Ay, ay, I hope so, and yours, too,' grumbled our hero, placing an
enormous quid of tobacco in his cheek, in order to remove the unpleasant
taste of the vile liquor which he had just drank.

There was a pause of a few minutes; when suddenly the woman grasped
Frank convulsively by the arm, and gazed into his countenance with
wildly gleaming eyes.

'Tell me,' she gasped, like one in the agonies of strangulation--'tell
me the truth, for God's sake--_did you change those tumblers_?'

'I did,' was the answer.

'Then I am lost!' she almost shrieked--'lost, lost! The liquor which I
drank contained a powder which will within half an hour sink me into a
condition of insensibility, from which I shall only awake a raging
maniac! I am rightly served--for I designed that to be _your_ fate!'

'Wretched woman, I pity you,' said Frank, in a tone of commiseration.

'I deserve not your pity,' she cried, writhing as if in great bodily
torment--'my soul is stained with the guilt of a thousand crimes--and
the only reparation I can make you, to atone for the wrong I intended,
is to warn you to fly from this house as from a pestilence! This is the
abode of murder--it is a charnel-house of iniquity; fly from hence, as
you value your life--for an hour after midnight my husband, the terrible
Dead Man, will return, and although you frustrated me, you cannot escape
his vengeance, should he find you here. Ah, my God! my brain burns--the
deadly potion is at work!'

And thus the miserable woman continued to rave, until the powerful drug
which she had taken fully accomplished its work, and she sank upon the
floor in a state of death-like insensibility.

'Thou art rightly served,' thought Frank, as he contemplated her
prostrate form--'now to penetrate into some of the mysteries of this
infernal den!' Taking the candle from the table, he began his
exploration in that fearful house.

In the apartment which adjoined the chamber he discovered little 'Jack
the Prig,' fast asleep in bed. In the restlessness of slumber, the boy
had partially thrown off the bed-clothes, and he exhibited upon his
naked breast the picture of a gallows, and a man hanging! This appalling
scene had been drawn with India ink, and pricked into the flesh with
needles, so that it never could be effaced. It was the work of the boy's
hideous father, who, not contented with training up his son to a life of
crime, was anxious that he should also carry upon his person, through
life, that fearful representation of a criminal's doom.

'Would it not be a deed of mercy,' thought our hero--'to take the poor
boy from his unnatural parents, and train him up to a life of honesty
and virtue? If I ever get the father in my power, I will look after the
welfare of this unfortunate lad.'

Frank left the room, and descending the stairs, began to explore the
lower apartments of the house. In one, he found a large collection of
tools, comprising every implement used by the villains in their
depredations. There were dark lanterns, crowbars, augers, London
_jimmies_, and skeleton keys, for burglary; also, spades, pickaxes, and
shovels, which were probably used in robbing graves, a crime which at
that period was very common in New York. A large quantity of clothing of
all kinds hung upon the walls, from the broadcloth suit of the gentleman
down to the squalid rags of the beggar; these garments Frank conjectured
to be _disguises_, a supposition which was confirmed by the masks, false
whiskers, wigs and other articles for altering the person, which were
scattered about.

In a small closet which communicated with this room, our hero found dies
for coining, and a press for printing counterfeit bank-notes; and a
table drawer, which he opened containing a quantity of false coin,
several bank-note plates, and a package of counterfeit bills, which had
not yet been signed.

Having sufficiently examined these interesting objects, Frank passed
into the next room, which was of considerable extent. It was almost
completely filled with goods of various kinds, evidently the proceeds of
robberies. There were overcoats, buffalo robes, ladies' cloaks and furs,
silk dresses, shawls, boxes of boots and shoes, cases of dry goods, and
a miscellaneous assortment of articles sufficient to furnish out a large
store. The goods in that room were worth several thousands of dollars.

'I shall now seek to discover the _secret outlet_ of the Dark Vaults,'
thought Frank, as he descended into the cellar of the house. Here he
gazed about him with much interest; the cellar was damp and gloomy and
his entrance with the light disturbed a legion of rats, which went
scampering off in every direction, from a corner in which they had
collected together; as the young man approached that corner, a fetid,
sickening odor saluted his nostrils and a fearful thought flashed across
his mind; a moment afterwards, his blood curdled with horror, for before
him lay the dead body of a man, entirely naked, and far advanced in
state of decomposition; and upon that putrefying corpse had the swarm of
rats been making their terrible banquet!

Sick with horror and disgust, Frank precipitately retreated from the
loathsome and appalling spectacle, satisfied that he had beheld one of
the Dead Man's murdered victims; and he shuddered as he thought that
such might have been _his_ fate!

In the centre of the cellar an apparatus of singular appearance
attracted his notice; and approaching it he instantly became convinced
that this was the _secret outlet_ for which he sought. Four strong,
upright posts supported two ponderous iron crossbars, to which were
attached four ropes of great thickness and strength, these ropes were
connected with a wooden platform, about six feet square; and beneath the
platform was a dark and yawning chasm.

Closely examining this apparatus, our hero saw that by an ingenious
contrivance, a person standing on the platform could, by turning a
crank, raise or lower himself at will. He cautiously approached the edge
of the chasm, and holding down the light, endeavored to penetrate
through the darkness; but in vain--he could see nothing, though he could
faintly hear a dull, sluggish sound like that produced by the flowing of
a vast body of muddy water, and at the same time an awful stench which
arose from the black gulf, compelled him to return a short distance.

'The mystery is solved,' he thought--'that fearful hole leads to the
subterranean sewers of the city, and also to the Dark Vaults beyond
them. By means of that platform, the villains of the _Infernal Regions_
below, can pass to and from their den with facility and safety.'

At this moment he heard the vast bell of the City Hall proclaiming the
hour of midnight; and he remembered that the woman had told him that her
husband, the Dead Man, would return in an hour from that time. At first
it occurred to him to await the miscreant's coming, and endeavor to
capture him--but then he reflected that the Dead Man might return
accompanied by other villains, in which case the plan would not only be
impracticable, but his own life would be endangered.

'And even were the villain to come back alone,' thought Frank, 'were I
to spring upon him, he might give some signal which would bring to his
aid his band of desperadoes from the Vaults below. No--I must not
needlessly peril my own life; I will depart from the house now,
satisfied for the present with the discoveries I have made, and trusting
to be enabled at no distant time to come here with a force sufficient to
overcome the hideous ruffian and all his band.'

Leaving the cellar, he traversed the entry and attempted to open the
front door; but to his surprise it was securely locked, nor could all
his efforts push back the massive bolts which held it fast. He
re-entered the room, and examining the windows, found them furnished
with thick iron bars like the windows of a prison, so that to pass
through them was impossible; and further investigation resulted in the
unpleasant conviction that he was a prisoner in that dreadful house,
with no immediate means of escape.

He again descended into the cellar, and began seriously to reflect upon
the realities of his situation. He was a young man of determination and
courage: yet he could not entirely subdue those feelings of uneasiness
and alarm which were natural under the circumstances. He was alone, at
midnight, in that abode of crime and murder; near him lay the corpse of
an unfortunate fellow creature, who had without a doubt fallen by the
hand of an assassin; he was momentarily expecting the return of that
arch-miscreant, who would show him no mercy; a deep, unbroken silence,
and an air of fearful mystery, reigned in that gloomy cellar and
throughout that awful house--and before him, dark and yawning as the
gate of hell, was that black and infernal pit which led to the
subterranean caverns of the Dark Vaults, far below.

'I will sell my life dearly, at all events,' thought our hero, as he
drew a bowie knife from his breast, and felt its keen, glittering edge;
then impelled by a sudden thought, he advanced to the mouth of the pit,
and cut the four ropes, which sustained the wooden platform, so nearly
asunder, that they would be almost sure to break with a slight
additional weight.

He had scarcely accomplished this task, when a strange, unnatural cry
resounded throughout the cellar--a cry so indescribably fearful that it
chilled his blood with horror. It was almost instantly followed by a low
and melancholy wail, so intense, so solemn, so profoundly expressive of
human misery, that Frank was convinced that some unfortunate being was
near him, plunged in deepest anguish and distress.

In a few moments the sound entirely ceased, and silence resumed its
reign; then Frank, actuated by the noble feelings of his generous
nature, said, in a loud voice--

'If there is any unhappy creature who now hears me, and who needs my
charitable aid, let him or her speak, that I may know where to direct my
search.'

No answer was returned to this request; all was profoundly silent.
Frank, however, was determined to fathom the mystery; accordingly, he
began a careful search throughout the cellar, and finally discovered in
an obscure corner an iron door, which was secured on the outside by a
bolt--to draw back this bolt and throw open this door, was but the work
of a moment; and our hero was about to enter the cell thus revealed,
when a hideous being started from the further end of the dungeon, and
with an awful yell rushed out into the cellar, and hid itself in a deep
embrasure of the wall.

Whether this creature were human or not, the rapidity of its flight
prevented Frank from ascertaining, he cautiously advanced to the place
where it had concealed itself, and by the dim light of the lamp which he
carried, he saw, crouching down upon the cold, damp earth, a _living
object_ which appalled him; it was a human creature, but so horribly and
unnaturally deformed, that it was a far more dreadful object to behold
than the most loathsome of the brute creation.

It was of pygmy size, its shrunk limbs distorted and fleshless, and its
lank body covered with filthy rags; its head, of enormous size, was
entirely devoid of hair; and the unnatural shape as well as the
prodigious dimensions of that bald cranium, betokened beastly idiocy.
Its features, ghastly and terrible to look upon, bore a strange
resemblance to those of the _Dead Man_! and its snake-like eyes were
fixed upon Frank with the ferocity of a poisonous reptile about to
spring upon its prey.

'Who art thou?' demanded our hero, as he surveyed the hideous object
with horror and disgust.

It answered not, but again set up its low and melancholy wail. Then with
extraordinary agility, it sprang from its retreat, and bounding towards
the dungeon, entered, and crouched down in one corner, making the cellar
resound with its awful shrieks.

''Tis more beast than human,' thought Frank--'I will fasten it in its
den, or it may attack me;' and closing the door, he secured it with the
bolt. As he did so, he heard the deep-toned bell peal forth the hour
of--_one_!

'It is the hour appointed for the return of the Dead Man!' said our hero
to himself, with a shudder; and instantly it occurred to him that he
might have descended to the Dark Vaults and escaped that way, had he not
cut the ropes which supported the platform. But then he reflected that
on reaching the Vaults he would be almost certain to fall into the power
of the villains assembled there; and he ceased to regret having cut the
ropes.

His attention was suddenly arrested by observing the platform descend
into the abyss, moved by an unseen agency; for the apparatus was so
contrived, that a person in the Vaults below could lower or raise the
platform at will, by means of a rope connected with it.

Frank had anticipated that the Dead Man would enter the house through
the front door; but he now felt convinced that the miscreant was about
to ascend on the platform from the Vaults; and he said to himself--

''Tis well--these almost severed ropes will not sustain the villain's
weight, and if he attains to any considerable height, and then falls,
his instant death is certain.'

The platform reached the bottom of the abyss--a short pause ensued, and
then it began slowly to ascend; higher, higher it mounted, until our
hero, fearing that the rope might not break, was about to cut it again,
when a yell of agony reached his ear from the depths of the pit, and at
the same moment the slackened condition of the rope convinced him that
the platform had fallen. He listened, and heard a sound like the
plunging of a body into water; then all was silent as the grave.

'The villain has met with a just doom,' thought Frank; and no longer
apprehensive of the return of his mortal enemy, he left the cellar, and
entering the room above, in which the stolen goods were deposited, threw
himself upon a heap of clothes and garments, and fell into a deep
slumber.

It was broad daylight when he awoke; and starting up, his eyes rested
upon an object which caused him to recoil with horror. The woman whom he
had left insensible from the effects of the powerful drug which she had
taken, was standing near him, her eyes rolling with insanity, her hair
dishevelled, her clothes torn to rags and her face scratched and
bleeding, she having in her own madness inflicted the wounds with her
own nails.

'Ha!' she exclaimed--'had'st thou not awakened, I would have killed
thee! Thy heart would have made me a brave breakfast, and I would have
banqueted on thy life-blood! Go hence--go hence! thou shalt not unfold
the awful mysteries of this charnel-house!--Ye must not behold the
murdered man who lies rotting in the cellar, nor open the dark dungeon
of the deformed child of crime!--'tis the hideous offspring of hideous
parents--my child and the Dead Man's! 'Twas a judgement from Heaven,
that monstrous being; we dare not kill it, so we shut it up from the
light of day. Go hence--go hence, or I will fly at thee and tear thine
eyes out!'

Frank left the room, and ascended to the chamber, hoping to find a key
which would enable him to unlock the front door; and in a table drawer
he discovered one, which he doubted not would release him from his
imprisonment. Before departing, he wrote the following words on a scrap
of paper:--

     'If the villain known as the _Dead Man_ still lives, he is
     informed that he is indebted to _me_ for his unexpected fall
     last night. Let the miscreant tremble--for I have penetrated
     the mysteries of this infernal den, and my vengeance, if not
     ordinary justice, will speedily overtake him!

     SYDNEY.'

Leaving the note upon the table, Frank descended the stairs, unlocked
the door, and departed from that abode of crime and horror.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 3: A _stool pigeon_ is a person who associates with thieves,
in order to betray their secrets to the police officers, in reference to
any robbery which has been committed, or which may be in contemplation.
As a reward for furnishing such information, the _stool pigeon_ is
allowed to steal and rob, _on his own account_, with almost perfect
impunity.]


CHAPTER XV

_Showing the pranks played in the Haunted House by the two Skeletons._


When Mrs. Belmont awoke from the swoon into which she had fallen, at
sight of the terrible apparition which had visited her, daylight was
shining through the windows of her chamber. She immediately recalled to
mind the events of the preceding night, and resolved to remove without
delay from a house which was troubled with such fearful visitants.

Her maid Susan soon entered, to assist her in dressing; and she learned
that the girl had neither seen nor heard anything of a mysterious or
ghostly nature, during the night. But when the lady related what _she_
had seen, the terror of poor Susan knew no bounds, and she declared her
determination not to sleep alone in the house another night.

While at breakfast, a visitor was announced, who proved to be the
landlord, Mr. Hedge. The old gentleman entered with many apologies for
his intrusion, and said--

'To confess the truth, my dear madam, I am anxious to learn how you
passed the night. Were you disturbed by any of the goblins or spectres
which are supposed to haunt the house?'

Julia related everything which had occurred, and Mr. Hedge expressed
great astonishment and concern.

'It is singular--very singular, and fearful,' said he musingly--'a
terrible blot seems to rest upon this house; I must abandon the hope of
ever having it occupied, as I presume you now desire to remove from it,
as a matter of course?'

'Such _was_ my intention,' replied Julia, 'but you will be surprised
when I assure you that within the last hour I have changed my mind, and
am now resolved to remain here. To me there is a charm in mystery, even
when that mystery, as in the present instance, is fraught with terror. I
think I need entertain no apprehension of receiving personal injury from
these ghostly night-walkers, for if they wished to harm me, they could
have done so last night. Hereafter, my maid shall sleep in my chamber
with me; I shall place a dagger under my pillow, with which to defend
myself in case of any attempted injury or outrage--and I shall await the
coming of my spectral friend with feelings of mingled dread and
pleasure.'

'I am delighted to hear you say so,' rejoined the old gentleman, as he
surveyed the animated countenance and fine form of the courageous woman
with admiration. In truth, Julia looked very charming that morning; she
was dressed in voluptuous _dishabille_, which partially revealed a bust
whose luxurious fullness and exquisite symmetry are rarely equalled by
the divine creations of the sculptor's art.

'She is very beautiful,' thought the old gentleman; and the sluggish
current of his blood began to course thro' his veins with something of
the ardor of youth.

Mr. Hedge was a wealthy old bachelor;--and like the majority of
individuals, who belong to that class, he adored pretty women, but had
always adored them _at a distance_. To him, woman was a divinity; he
bowed at her shrine, but dared not presume to taste the nectar of her
lips, or inhale the perfume of her sighs. He had always regarded such
familiarity as a type of sacrilege. But now, seated _tete-a-tete_ with
that charming creature, and feasting his eyes upon her voluptuous
beauty, his awe of the divinity merged into a burning admiration of the
woman.

Julia knew that Mr. Hedge was rich. 'He admires me,' thought she,--'he
is old, but wealthy; I will try to fascinate him, and if he desires me
to become either his wife or mistress, I will consent, for a connection
with him would be to my pecuniary advantage.'

And she _did_ fascinate him, as much by her sparkling wit and graceful
discourse, as by her charms of person. She related to him a very
pleasing little fiction entirely the offspring of her own fertile
imagination, which purported to be a history of her own past life. She
stated that she was the widow of an English gentleman; she had recently
come to America, and had but few acquaintances, and still fewer friends;
she felt the loneliness of her situation, and admitted that she much
desired a friend to counsel and protect her; the adroit adventuress
concluded her extemporaneous romance by adroitly insinuating that her
income was scarcely adequate to her respectable maintenance.

Mr. Hedge listened attentively to this narrative, and religiously
believed every word of it. While the lady was speaking, he had drawn his
chair close to hers, and taken one of her small, delicate hands in his.
We must do him the justice to observe, that though her beauty had
inspired him with passion, he nevertheless sincerely sympathised with
her on account of her pretended misfortunes--and, supposing her to be
strictly virtuous, he entertained not the slightest wish to take
advantage of her unprotected situation.

'My dear young lady,' said he--'although I have known you but a very
short time, I have become exceedingly interested in you. I am an old
man--old enough to be your father; and as a father I now speak to
you.--What I am about to say, might seem impertinent and offensive in a
young man, but you will pardon it in me. You have unconscientiously
dropped a hint touching the insufficiency of your income to maintain you
as a lady should be maintained. I am rich--deign to accept from me as a
gift--or as a loan, if you will--this scrap of paper; 'tis valueless to
me, for I have more money than I need. The gift--or loan--shall be
repeated as often as your necessities require it.'

He squeezed a bank-note into her hand--and when she, with affected
earnestness, desired him to take it back, assuring him that she needed
no immediate pecuniary aid, he insisted that she should retain it; and
shortly afterwards he arose and took his leave, having easily obtained
permission to call upon her the next day.

'Egad, she would make me a charming wife--if she would only have me,'
thought the old gentleman, as he left the house.

'Five hundred dollars!' exclaimed Julia, as she examined the bank-note
which he had given her--'how liberal! I have fairly entrapped the silly
old man; he is too honorable to propose that I should become his
mistress, and he will probably offer me his hand in marriage. I will
accept him at once--and to avoid detection, I shall remove with my
venerable husband to Boston, which I have heard is a charming city,
where a woman of fashion and intrigue can lead a glorious and brilliant
career.'

That night she retired early to rest, and her maid Susan shared her
chamber--an arrangement highly satisfactory to the abigail, who was glad
of company in a house where ghosts were in the habit of perambulating
during the night.

Neither mistress nor maid closed an eye in slumber--but midnight came,
and they had not seen nor heard anything of a ghostly nature. Yet
strange events were taking place in the house,--events which will throw
light upon the fearful mysteries of the place.

It was about an hour after midnight, when a large stone among those of
which the foundation of the house was built, turned slowly upon pivots,
revealing an aperture in the wall, and at the same instant the glare of
a lantern shone into the cellar.

From the aperture emerged two persons of frightful appearance, one of
whom carried the lantern; they were both dressed in tight-fitting
garments of black cloth, upon which was daubed in white paint the figure
of a skeleton; and each of their faces had been blacked, and then drawn
over with the representation of a skull. Seen by an imperfect light,
they exactly resembled two skeletons.

'By Jesus!' exclaimed one of them, in a tone which was anything but
hollow or sepulchral--'let's put for the pantry and see what there is to
_ate_, for be the powers I'm starved wid hunger!'

'That's the talk, Bloody Mike--- so we will,' responded the other
worthy, who was no other than our old friend Ragged Pete, though his
nearest relatives would never have recognized him in the disguise he
then wore.

Mike and Pete ascended to the pantry, and began a diligent search after
provisions.

'Glory to ould Ireland, here's grand illigant ham!' exclaimed the first
mentioned individual, as he dragged from a shelf a large dish containing
the article he had named.

'And blow me tight if here isn't a cold turkey and a pan of pudding,'
rejoined Pete, whose researches had also been crowned with success.

'Faith, it's ourselves, Peter, dear, that'll have a supper fit for the
bishop of Cork, an' that's a big word,' remarked Mike, as he
triumphantly placed upon a table the savory viands above mentioned, and
'fell to' with surpassing vigor, an example in which he was followed by
his comrade.

'This playing the ghost is a good business, by jingo!' said Pete, with
his mouth full of ham.

'True for ye!' replied the Irish skeleton, his articulation rendered
indistinct by the masses of turkey which were fast travelling down his
throat to his capacious stomach.

The repast was not finished until they had devoured every atom of the
provisions; and then Pete went in quest of something to 'wash the
wittles down with,' as he expressed it.

Upon a sideboard in the adjoining room he found wines and liquors of
excellent quality, which he and his companion were soon engaged in
discussing, with as much ease and comfort as if they were joint
proprietors of the whole concern.

The two gentlemen grew quite cosey and confidential over their wine, and
as their conversation mainly referred to matters in which the reader
perhaps feels an interest, we shall so far intrude upon their privacy as
to report the same.

'I've news to tell you, Mike,' said Pete--'the Dead Man has somehow or
other found out that the lady who moved into this house yesterday, is
the wife of Mr. Sydney, the rich chap that he hates so infernally 'cause
he had him arrested once. Well, you know that last night some one cut
the ropes that hoists the platform from the Vaults, so that the Dead Man
fell and came nigh breaking his neck; and as it is, he's so awfully
bruised that he won't have the use of his limbs for some time to
come--besides, he fell into the sewers, and would have been drowned, if
I hadn't heerd him, and dragged him out. The chap wot played him that
trick was this same Sydney; for a note was found this morning in Anthony
street crib, bragging about it, and signed with his name. Now it seems
that his wife that lives in this house, and who we are trying to skeer
out of it, as we have done all the others that ever lived here--it seems
that _she_ hates Sydney like thunder and wants to be revenged on him for
something--and that the Dead Man found that out, too. So 'our boss'
thinks he'll try and set up a partnership with this Mrs. Belmont, as she
calls herself--and with her aid he calculates to get Mr. Sydney into his
power. If the lady and him sets up business together, our services as
ghosts won't be wanted any longer; and I'm very sorry for it, because
we've had glorious times in this house, frightening people, and making
them believe the place was haunted.'

As this long harangue rendered Pete thirsty, he extinguished his
eloquence for a few moments in a copious draught of choice Burgundy.

'That row at Pat Mulligan's last night was a divilish nate affair,'
remarked Mike.

'Yes,' said Pete--'and we all got bundled off to the watch-house; but
the Captain let me go--he always does, because I vote for his party.
After I got clear, I came here, wrapped in a great sheet, and went up
into Mrs. Belmont's chamber; after frightening the poor woman almost to
death, I goes up to the bed, puts my hand on her face, and tells her
that she'd see me agin--whereupon she gives a great shriek, and I cut my
puck through the hole in the cellar.'

'Be the powers,' remarked Bloody Mike--'it's a great convenience
entirely, to have thim sacret passages from the Vault into intarior of
houses; there's two of thim, one under the crib in Anthony street, and
the other under this dacent house in _Rade_ street.'

'Yes, you're right,' said Pete--'but come, let's do our business and be
off--it's near three o'clock.'

The two worthies mounted the stairs with noiseless steps, and pausing
before Mrs. Belmont's chamber, Ragged Pete gave utterance to an awful
groan. A stifled shriek from the interior of the room convinced them the
inmates were awake and terribly frightened.

Pete's groan was followed by a violent _hiccuping_ on the part of Bloody
Mike--for, to confess the truth, that convivial gentleman had imbibed so
freely that he was, in vulgar parlance, most essentially drunk.

'Stop that infernal noise, and follow me into the room,' whispered Pete,
who, having confined himself to wine instead of brandy, was
comparatively sober.

'Lade on, I'm after ye!' roared the Irish skeleton. Pete, finding the
door locked gave it a tremendous kick, and it burst open with a loud
crash.

Julia and her maid screamed with horror and affright, as they beheld two
hideous forms resembling skeletons come rushing into the room.

Ragged Pete advanced to the bedside of Mrs. Belmont, and threw himself
into an approved pugilistic attitude, as if challenging that lady to
take a 'set to' with him; while Bloody Mike stumbled over the prostrate
form of the lady's maid, who occupied a temporary bed upon the floor.
Forgetting his assumed part, he yelled out for something to drink, and
forthwith began to sing in tones of thunder, the pathetic Hibernian
ballad commencing with--

    'A sayman courted a farmer's daughter,
    That lived convenient to the Isle of Man.'

'The devil!--you'll spoil all,' muttered Pete, as he seized Mike, and
with difficulty dragged him from the room. 'Ain't you a nice skeleton,
to get drunk and sing love songs,' he whispered contemptuously, pulling
his inebriated comrade downstairs after him: 'No dacent ghost ever gets
as corn'd as you be,' he added, as they entered the 'hole in the wall;'
after which the stone was turned into its place, which it fitted so
exactly, that the most critical eye could not have discovered anything
to indicate that it had ever been moved at all.

Mrs. Belmont was now fully satisfied in her own mind that there was
nothing supernatural about the nocturnal intruders, but that they were
in reality substantial flesh and blood, and though she could not divine
how they had entered the house, she was much relieved and comforted by
the assurance that it was with _living_ men she had to deal--a
conviction which was amply confirmed the next morning, when the havoc
done to the eatables and drinkables was announced to her by the
indignant Susan.

In the afternoon Mr. Hedge called upon her as appointed, and dined with
his interesting and fascinating tenant.

After dinner, Julia caused the sofa to be wheeled in front of the
glorious fire which glowed in the grate (for the weather was intensely
cold) and seating herself, invited the old gentleman to place himself at
her side.

Then she exerted all her fine powers of discourse to increase his
admiration, and draw from him a declaration of love, and an offer of
marriage.

Wine was brought in, and gradually their spirits became enlivened by the
sparkling genii of the grape. The old man felt the fires of youth
careering through his veins, and his withered cheek was suffused with a
flush of passion.

'Beautiful Julia,' said he--'I observe that you have a magnificent
piano; will you favor me with an air?'

She smiled an assent, and her aged admirer conducted her to the
instrument with the most ceremonious politeness. After a brilliant
prelude, executed with artistic delicacy and skill, she dashed off into
a superb Italian air, which raised her listener (who was passionately
devoted to music,) into the seventh heaven of ecstasy.

'Glorious!--grand!' were his exclamations of delight, when she had
finished the air and she needed no urgent persuasion to induce her to
favor him with another.

Artfully and admirably did she compose an extempore song, adapted to
immediate circumstances, beginning--'I love no vain and fickle youth,'
and beautifully depicting the love of a young woman for a man advanced
in years. She sung it with a most touching air, and threw into her
countenance and style an expression of melting tenderness.

Ere she had terminated, the old gentleman was kneeling at her feet; and
pressing her fair hand to his lips.

'Divine creature,' he murmured--'can you pardon the presumption and
foolishness of an old man, who dares to love you? Your beauty and your
fascinations have conquered and bewildered me. I know that the proposal
coming from me, is madness--I know that you will reject my suit with
disdain--yet hear me Julia; I am an old, rich and solitary man--I need
some gentle ray of sunshine to gild my few remaining years--I need some
beautiful creature, like yourself, to preside over my gloomy household,
and cheer me in my loneliness by her delightful society and the music of
her voice. Boundless wealth shall be at your command; no restraint shall
ever be placed upon the number of your servants, the splendor of your
carriages and equipages, the costliness of your jewels; and the
magnificence of your amusements. Speak--and seal my destiny.'

And Julia _did_ speak, and became the affianced wife of Mr. Hedge. Her
operations thus far had been crowned with triumphant success.

It was arranged that their marriage should take as privately as possible
in one month, from that day.--Julia suggested that, immediately after
their union, they should remove to Boston, and take up their permanent
residence in that city, to which proposal the old gentleman gave a
cheerful consent.

'And if you have no objection, my dear Julia,' said he, 'we will be
united by Dr. Sinclair, the young and excellent rector of St. Paul's, to
which church I belong.'

Julia signified her compliance with the arrangement. She had both seen
and admired the young rector, and thought him handsome--very handsome.

Previous to Mr. Hedge's departure that evening, he presented her with a
large sum of money, to defray, he said, the expenses necessary to be
incurred in her preparations for the marriage. Then the enamored old
gentleman kissed her hand, and took his leave.

When he was gone, Julia abandoned herself to the pleasing thoughts
engendered by her present brilliant prospects. While in the midst of
these agreeable meditations, she was interrupted by the sound of a
footstep behind her; and turning, she beheld a man of an aspect so
hideous and revolting, that she screamed with terror.

'Hush! be silent, madam--I mean you no harm,' said the man, as he closed
the door, and seated himself at her side upon the sofa. Julia gazed on
him with surprise and dread. His face, which at best was the most
loathsome and horrible ever worn by man, was mangled and bruised as if
by some severe and terrible injury; he moved with evident pain and
difficulty, and carried one of his arms in a sling.

'Our interview shall be brief, and to the point,' said the mysterious
visitor. 'I am he who is called the _Dead Man_, and I am not disposed to
quarrel with the title, for I like it.--You and your history are known
to me; it matters not how I obtained my information; you are styled Mrs.
Belmont, a widow--but you are the discarded wife of Francis Sydney, and
half an hour ago you engaged yourself in marriage to Mr. Hedge, the
owner of this house.'

Julia started with alarm, for she felt that she was in the power of that
terrible man.

'What is the object of your visit?' she asked.

'Listen and you shall know. I have a secret subterranean cavern which
communicates with the cellar of this building, and 'twas by that means I
entered the house to-night. Myself and friends often find it convenient
to carry stolen goods through this house into our den; and in order to
have the place all to ourselves, we have heretofore frightened away the
people who have come here to live; thus the house is reputed to be
haunted. 'Twas our design to frighten you away, also; but having
discovered _who and what you are_, I've concluded to explain the
mystery, and set up a copartnership with you.'

'And in what business can _we_ possibly be connected together?' asked
Julia, with ill-concealed disgust.

'In the business of _vengeance_!' thundered the Dead Man, foaming with
rage. 'Tell me, woman--do you hate Sydney?'

'I do!--and would sell my soul to be revenged upon him,' she replied
with flashing eyes.

'Enough!' cried the other, with triumphant joy--'I knew you would join
me in my plan of vengeance. Now, madam, from this moment we are
friends--_partners_, rather let me say--and there's my hand upon it.'
And he gripped her hand almost fiercely, while she shuddered at the
awful contact. It seemed as if she were touching a corpse.

'Hereafter,' continued the miscreant,--'you shall rest at night securely
in this house, undisturbed by pretended ghosts. Do you see these wounds
and bruises?--for them I am indebted to Sydney; my wife is a raging
maniac, and I am also indebted to him for _that_--and by eternal hell!
when I get him in my power, he shall die by inches; he shall suffer
every slow torture which my ingenuity can devise; his brain shall burn,
and when death shall end his torments, I have sworn to eat his heart;
and by G----, _I'll do it_!'

'But how will you get him into your power?' asked Julia, delighted with
the prospect of revenging herself upon poor Frank.

'I will contrive some means of deluding him into this house; and once in
here, he shall never again behold the light of day,' replied the Dead
Man, as he arose to withdraw.

'Stay a moment,' said Julia, with some embarrassment--'there is also a
colored man in Sydney's house, and--'

'I know it--he shall be liberated,' interrupted the Dead Man, and
added--'you shall see me again to-morrow--farewell.'

He left the room, descended to the cellar, and passed through the secret
passage to the Dark Vaults.

That night at about the hour of twelve, the dark figure of a man crossed
the garden in the rear of Frank Sydney's house, and approached the iron
door of the wine-vault wherein Nero, the African, was imprisoned. By the
aid of skeleton keys he unlocked the door, and bade the prisoner come
forth.

The negro obeyed, surprised and delighted at his unexpected deliverance.

'To whom am I indebted for this friendly act?' he asked.

'I have no time to answer questions,' replied the Dead Man, for it was
he. 'Hasten to your mistress at No.--Reade street, and remember your
motto as well as mine must be--'Vengeance on Sydney!''

'Yes--vengeance on Sydney,' muttered the black, from between his
clenched teeth, as he hurried away in the direction of Reade street.

'He will be another agent to assist me in torturing my enemy,' said the
Dead Man to himself, as he bent his rapid footsteps towards the Dark
Vaults.

Nero soon reached the residence of Mrs. Belmont, in Reade street. He was
admitted into the house by Susan, who informed him that her mistress had
not yet retired. The black quickly mounted the stairs, and entering the
room, was about to rush forward and clasp the lady in his arms, when she
checked him by a movement of disgust, desired him not to approach her,
and pointing to a chair in a distant corner, coldly requested him to
seat himself there.

Why did that unprincipled and licentious woman thus repulse the former
partner of her guilty joys--he who had so long been the recipient of her
favors, and the object of her unhallowed love? Was it because he was
emaciated, filthy and in rags, the results of his long imprisonment in a
loathsome dungeon? No--that was not the reason of her repulsing him.

Julia was a woman wildly capricious in her nature; she was a creature of
sudden impulses--her most passionate love would often instantly change
to bitterest hate. In this instance, her love for the African had
entirely and forever ceased, and she now viewed him with contemptuous
disgust, wondering that she could ever have had such a _penchant_ for
him.

''Tis strange,' she thought, 'that I ever could descend to an intrigue
with that vile negro. Heavens! I loathe the very sight of him!'

Nero, on his part, was astounded at this unexpected reception; he had
anticipated a night of voluptuous bliss with his former paramour, and he
could not divine the cause of her sudden rejection of him.

'My dear Julia, why this coldness?--what have I done to offend you?' he
demanded, after a short pause.

'Presume not to call me _your dear Julia_, fellow,' she replied
scornfully. 'You have done nothing to offend me, but the days of our
familiarity are over. The liberties which I permitted you to take, and
the indulgences which I formerly granted to you, can never be repeated.
I will not condescend to explain myself farther than to remark, that all
my former regard for you has ceased, and I now view you not only with
indifference, but with positive dislike. I procured your liberation from
that dungeon merely because it was on my account you were placed there.
You can, if you choose, re-enter my service as footman, and your wages
shall be the same as those of any other servant of your class; but
remember--henceforth I am the mistress, and you the menial, and any
presumption on your part, or attempt at familiarity, shall be instantly
followed by your discharge. Clean yourself of that filth, and begin your
duties to-morrow, as a respectful, orderly and obedient servant. You can
go now.'

Nero left the room, humbled and crest-fallen, inwardly resolved to
revenge himself upon that proud and abandoned woman, should the
opportunity ever present itself.

Gentlest of readers, we now invite thee to accompany us to view other
scenes and other characters in our grand drama of human life, and its
many crimes.


CHAPTER XVI

_Showing the Voluptuous Revellings of the Rector and the Licentious
Josephine, and illustrating the Power of Temptation over Piety and
Morality._


Alas, for Dr. Sinclair! the masquerade ball, and the triumph of
Josephine Franklin, were but the commencement of a career of folly and
crime on his part. From that fatal night in after years of remorse and
misery, he dated his downfall.

He became a frequent visitor at the Franklin House, and continued his
guilty amour, with unabated zeal. Yet neither his own idolizing
congregation, nor the admiring world, suspected his frailty; he was
regarded as the most exemplary of Christians, and the best of men. When
in the pulpit, it was often remarked that he seemed absent-minded, and
ill at ease; he did not preach with his usual fluent and fervid
eloquence, nor pray with his accustomed earnest devotion. In person,
too, he was changed; his eyes were red, as if with weeping; his cheeks
were pale and haggard, and the rosy hue of health was gone. His dress
was frequently neglected and disordered, and he even sometimes appeared
with his hair uncombed, and his face unshaved. These indications of
mental and personal irregularity were much noticed and commented upon by
his congregation, comprised as it was of people the most aristocratic
and particular.

'Our dear pastor is ill,' said they, with looks of concern and sympathy;
but in answer to the numerous questions addressed to him in reference to
the state of his health, he denied the existence of all bodily ailment.

'Then he must be affected with some mental disquietude,' said they, and
forthwith he was beset by a tribe of comforters; one of whom had at last
the audacity to affirm that the Doctor's breath smelt unpleasantly of
wine!

This insinuation was received with contempt, for the brethren and
sisters of the congregation would not believe anything discreditable to
the beloved rector, and he continued to enjoy their confidence and
esteem, long after they had begun to observe something very singular in
his conduct and appearance.

But in truth, Dr. Sinclair had fallen from his high estate, and become a
wine bibber and a lover of the flesh. His stern integrity, his sterling
piety, and his moral principle, were gone forever; the temptress had
triumphed and he was ruined.

Why are ministers of the gospel so prone to licentiousness? is a
question often asked, and is often answered thus--Because they are a set
of hypocritical libertines. But we say, may not we see the reason in
this: the female members of a church are apt to regard their minister
with the highest degree of affectionate admiration--as an idol worthy to
be worshipped. They load him with presents--they spoil him with
flattery--they dazzle him with their glances, and encourage him by their
smiles. Living a life of luxurious ease, and enjoying a fat salary, he
cannot avoid experiencing those feelings which are natural to all
mankind. He is very often thrown into the society of pretty women of his
flock, under circumstances which are dangerously fascinating. The
'sister,' instead of maintaining a proper reserve, grows too
communicative and too familiar, and the minister, who is but a man,
subject to all the weaknesses and frailties of humanity, often in an
unguarded moment forgets his sacred calling, and becomes the
seducer--though we question if literal _seduction_ be involved, where
the female so readily _complies_ with voluptuous wishes, which
perchance, she responds to with as much fervor as the other party
entertains them. Therefore, we say that licentiousness on the part of
ministers of the gospel is produced in _very many_ cases by the
encouragements held out to them by too admiring and too affectionate
sisters.

One evening, Dr. Sinclair repaired to Franklin House at an early hour,
for he had engaged to dine with Josephine. He was admitted by a tall,
fresh-looking country lad, who had recently entered the house in the
capacity of footman, having been selected for that station by Mrs.
Franklin herself, as the lady had conceived a strong admiration of his
robust form and well-proportioned limbs.

The Doctor found Josephine in her _boudoir_, voluptuously reclining upon
a damask ottoman, and languidly turning over the leaves of a splendid
portfolio of engravings.

'Ah, my dear Doc,' she exclaimed, using a familiar abbreviation of
Doctor, 'I am devilish glad to see you, for I am bored to death with
_ennui_. Heigho!'

'And if I may presume to inquire, Josey,' said the Doctor--'what have
you there to engage your attention?'

'Oh, views from nature,' she laughingly replied, handing him the
portfolio for his inspection.

Turning over the leaves, the Doctor found, somewhat to his astonishment,
that the engravings were of rather an obscene character, consisting
principally of nude male figures;--and upon these specimens of a
perverted art had she been feasting her impure imagination. The time had
been, when the Doctor would have turned with pain and disgust from such
an evidence of depravity; but he had lately become so habituated to
vice, that he merely smiled in playful reproach, and leisurely examined
the pictures.

'I commend your taste,' said he, at length. 'Our preferences are both
strictly classical; you dote upon the Apollo Belvedere, while in you I
worship a Venus.'

'Yes--_you_ are my Apollo,' she rejoined, with a glance of passion,
encircling him with her arms.

       *     *     *     *     *

Dinner was magnificently served in an apartment whose splendor could
scarce have been surpassed in a kingly palace.

They dined alone; for Mrs. Franklin was invisible--and so, also, was the
comely young footman!

After dinner, came wine--bright, sparkling wine, whose magical influence
gilds the dull realities of life with the soft radiance of fairy land!
How the foaming champagne glittered in the silver cup, and danced
joyously to the ripe, pouting lip of beauty, and the eloquent mouth of
divinity! How brilliant became their eyes, and what a glorious roseate
hue suffused their cheeks!

Again and again was the goblet drained and replenished, until the
maddening spell of intoxication was upon them both. Hurrah! away with
religion, and sermonizing, and conscience! Bacchus is the only true
divinity, and at his rosy shrine let us worship, and pledge him in
brimming cups of the bright nectar, the drink of the gods!

Then came obscene revels and libidinous acts. The depraved Josephine,
attired in a superb robe of lace, her splendid bust uncovered, and her
cheeks flushed with wine, danced with voluptuous freedom, while the
intoxicated rector, reeling and flourishing a goblet, sang a lively
opera air, in keeping with her graceful but indelicate movements.
Then--but we will not inflict upon the reader the disgusting details of
that evening's licentious extravagances.

Midnight came and the doctor, tipsy as he was, saw the necessity of
taking his departure; for though urged by Josephine to pass the night
with her, he dared not comply, knowing that his absence from home all
night would appear strange and suspicious to his housekeeper and
domestics, and give rise to unpleasant inquiries and remarks. He
therefore sallied forth, and though he staggered occasionally, he got
along tolerably well, until he encountered a watchman standing half
asleep in a doorway, muffled up in his huge cloak; and then, with that
invincible spirit of mischief which characterizes a drunken man, the
Doctor determined to have a 'lark' with the night guardian, somewhat
after the fashion of the wild, harem-scarem students at the University
at which he had graduated--in which pranks he had often participated.

Leaning against a lamp-post support, he began singing, in a loud and
boisterous manner--

'Watchman--hic--tell us of the--hic--night.'

Now it happened that the watchman was one of those surly ruffians who
never stop to remonstrate with a poor fellow, in whom wine has triumphed
over wit. Instead of kindly inquiring his address, and conducting the
unfortunate gentleman to his residence, the self-important petty
official adopted the very means to irritate him and render him more
boisterous. In a savage, brutal manner, he ordered the doctor to 'stop
his d----d noise, and move on, or he'd make him!'

'Nay, friend, thou art insolent,' remarked the young gentleman, who
drunk as he was, could not brook the insults of the low, vulgar ruffian.

'Insolent, am I?--take that, and be d----d to you!' cried the fellow,
raising a heavy bludgeon, and dealing the poor Doctor a blow on the head
which felled him senseless to the ground, covered with blood.

'That'll teach you genteel chaps not to meddle with us _officers_,'
growled the watchman. 'I wonder what he's got about him--perhaps some
dangerous weapon--let's see.' Thrusting his hand into the pockets of his
victim, he drew forth a valuable gold watch, and a purse containing a
considerable sum of money. Why did he so rapidly transfer these articles
to this own pockets? Was if for the purpose of restoring them to the
owner, on the morrow? We shall see.

'I 'spose I'd better lug him to the watch-house,' said the
'officer'--and he struck his club three times on the pavement, which
summoned another 'officer' to his assistance. The two then raising the
wounded man between them, conducted him towards the Tombs.

The Doctor, awaking from his unconsciousness, and feeling himself in the
grasp of the watchman, instantly comprehended the state of affairs, and
shuddered as he thought of his exposure and ruin. The fumes of the wine
which he had drunk, had entirely subsided; but he felt himself weak from
loss of blood, sick from his recent debauch, while the wound on his head
pained him terribly. Oh, how bitterly he deplored his connection with
that depraved woman, who had been the cause of his downfall!

The awful dread of exposure prompted him to appeal to the mercy of his
captors.

'Watchman,' said he, 'pray conduct me to my home, or suffer me to go
there myself, for with shame I confess it, I am a gospel minister, and
wish to avoid exposure.'

The two fellows laughed scornfully. 'Don't think to come that gammon
over us,' said they. 'A minister indeed!--and picked up blind drunk in
the street at midnight!'

'But I have money about me, and will pay you well,' said the Doctor.

The man who had struck him with the club, knowing that he had no money,
affected to be indignant at this attempt to 'bribe an officer,' and
refused to release him.

Oh, hapless fate!--truly the 'way of transgressors is hard.' The learned
and eloquent Dr. Sinclair--the idol of his aristocratic and fashionable
congregation--whose words of piety and holiness were listened to with
attention by admiring thousands every Sabbath day--was incarcerated in
the watch-house! Yes--thrust into a filthy cell, among a swarm of
felons, vile negroes, vagabonds and loafers--the scum of the city!

The cell was about twenty feet square; one half of it was occupied by a
platform, at a height of four feet from the floor. This platform was
called the '_bunk_,' and it was covered with the prostate forms of about
twenty men, including the ragged beggar, the raving drunkard, and the
well-dressed thief--all huddled together, and shivering with the cold,
which was intense. The stone floor of the cell was damp and covered with
filth; yet upon it, and beneath the _bunk_, several wretched beings were
stretched, some cursing each other and themselves, others making the
place resound with hideous laughter, while one was singing, in drunken
tones, a shockingly obscene song.

Into this den of horrors was Dr. Sinclair rudely thrust; for no one
believed his statement that he was a clergyman, and indeed his
appearance, when undergoing the examination of the Captain of the Watch,
was anything but clerical. His face was covered with blood, his clothes
soiled and disordered, his hat crushed, and his manner wild and
incoherent. It is more than probable that, had the Captain known who he
was, he would have ordered his immediate discharge.

Groping his way along the damp, cold walls of his cell, which was in
profound darkness, the Doctor stumbled over a person who was lying upon
the floor, writhing in the agonies of _delirium tremens_. In frantic
rage, this miserable creature seized the rector's leg, and bit it
horribly, causing him to utter a cry of agony, which was responded to by
roars of laughter from the hellish crew. Extricating himself with
difficulty from the fierce clutch of the maniac, the unhappy gentleman
seated himself upon a large iron pipe which ran through the cell, and
prayed for death.

Slowly passed the dreadful night away; and the first faint rays of
morning, struggling through the narrow aperture in the wall, revealed an
appalling sight. Men made hideous and inhuman by vice and wretchedness
lay stretched amid the filth and dampness of that dungeon, glaring at
each other with savage eyes. And soon the awful discovery was made, that
one of their number had, during the night, been frozen to death!
Yes--there, beneath the _bunk_, cold and ghastly, lay the rigid corpse
of a poor fellow creature, whose only crime had been his poverty! Out
upon such justice and such laws, which tolerate such barbarities to one
whose misfortunes should be pitied, not visited by the damnable cruelty
of the base hirelings of a corrupt misgovernment!

It is not our wish to devote much time to the relation of unimportant
particulars; suffice it to say, that Dr. Sinclair was brought before the
police for drunkenness, and was also charged with having violently
assaulted Watchman Squiggs, who had taken him in custody!

'You see, yer honor, I was going my rounds, when up comes this ere chap
and knocks me down, and would have killed me, if I hadn't hit him a
light tap on the head with my club. Then I rapped for help, and--'

'That's enough!' growled the magistrate, who had himself been drunk the
night before, and was made irritable by a severe headache--'that's
enough--he struck an officer--serious offence--looks guilty--old
offender--thief, no doubt--send him up for six months!'

The Doctor whispered a few words in the ear of the magistrate, who
rubbed his eyes and regarded him with a look of astonishment, saying--

'Bless my soul, is it possible? Dr. Sinclair--humph! Sentence is
revoked--you're discharged; the devil!--about to send you up for six
months--a great mistake, upon my word--ha, ha, ha!'

The rector turned to watchman Squiggs, and said to him, sternly--

'Fellow, when I fell into your infernal clutches, I had a watch and
money about me; they are now missing; can you give any account of them?'

The watchman solemnly declared he knew nothing about them! The Doctor
felt no inclination to bandy words with the scoundrel; he paused a
moment to reflect upon the best course to pursue, under the disagreeable
circumstances in which he found himself placed. A feasible plan soon
suggested itself, and leaving the police office, he stepped into a
hackney coach, and requested the driver to convey him with all despatch
to Franklin house. Arrived there, he dismissed the vehicle, and
ascending to Josephine's chamber, explained to her the whole affair, and
threw himself upon a sofa to obtain a few hours' necessary repose.

As soon as he had left the police office, the magistrate whispered to
the watchman--

'Squiggs, I know very well that you took that gentleman's watch and
money. Don't interrupt me--I say, _I know you did_. Well, you must share
the spoils with me.'

'I'll take my oath, yer honor--'

'_Your oath!_--that's a good one!' cried the magistrate, laughing
heartily.--'d'ye think I'd believe you on oath? Why, man, you just now
perjured yourself in swearing that Parson Sinclair assaulted
you--whereas _you_ beat him horribly with your club, with little
provocation, and stole his watch and money. I know you, Squiggs; you
can't gammon me. Once for all, will you share the booty with me?'

The rascal dared not hesitate any longer; so with great reluctance he
drew the plunder from his pocket, and divided it equally with 'his
honor,' who reserved the watch for himself, it being a splendid article,
of great value.

Is any one disposed to doubt the truth of this little sketch? We assure
the reader it is not in the least degree exaggerated. The local
magistracy of New York included many functionaries who were dishonest
and corrupt. Licentiousness was a prominent feature in the characters of
some of these unworthy ministers of justice. Attached to the police
office was a room, ostensibly for the private examination of witnesses.
When a witness happened to be a female, and pretty, 'his honor' very
often passed an hour or so in this room with her, carefully locking the
door to prevent intrusion; and there is every reason to suppose that his
examination of her was both close and searching.

We remember an incident which occurred several years ago, which is both
curious and amusing. A beautiful French girl--a fashionable
courtezan--was taken to the police office, charged with stealing a
lady's small gold watch. Her accuser was positive that she had the
article about her; her pocket, reticule, bonnet, hair, and dress were
searched without success. The rude hand of the officer invaded her
voluptuous bosom, but still without finding the watch. 'Perhaps she has
it in her mouth,' suggested the magistrate; but no, it was not there.
'Where can she have hidden it? I am certain she has it somewhere on her
person,' remarked the accuser. 'I will examine her in private,' quoth
the magistrate, and he directed the girl to follow him into the
adjoining room. His honor locked the door, and said to the fair
culprit--'My dear, where have you concealed the watch?' In the most
charming broken English imaginable, Mademoiselle protested her innocence
of the charge, with such passionate eloquence, that his honor began to
think the accuser must be mistaken. 'At all events,' thought he, 'she is
a sweet little gipsy;' and he forthwith honored her with a shower of
amorous kisses, which she received with the most bewitching _naivete_;
but when he began to make demonstrations of a still more decided nature,
she resisted, though unsuccessfully, for his honor was portly and
powerful, and somewhat 'used to things.' But lo! to his astonishment, he
_discovered the watch_--and in _such_ a place! French ingenuity alone
could have devised such a! method of concealment, and legal research
alone could have discovered it.

We left Dr. Sinclair in the chamber of Josephine, at Franklin House,
reposing after the exciting and disagreeable adventures of the preceding
night. He awoke at noon, somewhat refreshed, and entered a bath while
Josephine sent a servant to purchase a suit of clothes, as those which
he had worn were so soiled and torn as to be unfit for further service.

Reclining luxuriously in the perfumed water of the marble bath, the
Doctor experienced a feeling of repose and comfort. He had long learned
to disregard the 'still, small voice' of his own conscience; and,
provided he could reach his home and answer all inquiries without
incurring suspicion--provided, also, his having been incarcerated in the
watch-house should not be exposed--he was perfectly contented.

His clothes being brought him, he dressed himself, and joining Josephine
in the parlor, partook of a refreshing repast; then, bidding farewell to
his 'lady-love,' he took his departure, and proceeded to his own
residence. In answer to the earnest inquiries of the members of his
household, he stated that he had passed the night with a friend in
Brooklyn; and entering his study, he applied himself to the task of
writing his next Sunday's sermon.


CHAPTER XVII

_Illustrating the truth of the proverb that 'Murder will out,' and
containing an Appalling Discovery._


Two or three days after the above events, Dr. Sinclair was sent for by a
woman lying at the point of death. He found her occupying the garret of
an old, crazy tenement in Orange street; she was stretched upon a
miserable bed, covered only by a few rags, and her short breathings,
sunken cheeks, and lustreless eyes, proclaimed that the hand of death
was upon her. Though young in years, her appearance indicated that she
had passed through much suffering, destitution and sin.

'Are you the clergyman?' she asked in a faint voice.

'I am; what can I do for you, my good woman?' said the Doctor, seating
himself on a rickety stool at the bedside.

'Oh, sir,' cried the invalid, evidently in great mental distress, 'I
want you to pray for me. Do you think there is any hope for such a
sinner as I have been? I am dying, and my soul is lost--forever!'

In his own heart, the rector felt his unfitness to administer comfort in
such a case, considering his own wickedness; yet he strove to quiet the
uneasiness of the poor creature, by assuring her that there was hope for
the 'chief of sinners.' At her request he prayed with her; and then she
addressed him as follows:--

'There is something on my mind which I must make confession of, or I
shall not die easy--something that will make you shrink from me, as from
a guilty wretch, who deserves no mercy. I am a _murderess_!'

'A murderess!' echoed the Doctor, starting back with horror; after a few
moments' pause, he added--'proceed with your confession.'

'I will, sir. Four years ago, I entered the service of Mrs. Lucretia
Franklin, in Washington Place.'

The Doctor started again--this time with surprise; and he listened with
attentive interest to the woman's narrative.

'Mrs. Franklin's husband,' she resumed, 'was a very rich man, and very
religious and strict; his daughter Sophia took after him much, and was a
very good girl; but his wife and daughter Josephine were exactly
contrary to him, for they were very giddy and gay, always going to
theatres, and balls, and such like places, keeping late hours, and
acting so dissipated like, that at last Mr. Franklin was determined to
put a stop to it entirely, and make them stay at home. So he told them
that he shouldn't allow them to go on as they had any longer; and having
once said the word, he stuck to it. My lady and Miss Josephine were both
very much dissatisfied with Mr. Franklin, on account of his being so
strict with them; and I could plainly see that they began to hate him.
It is now about two years ago, and Josephine was in her sixteenth year
(ah, sir, I have good reason to remember the time,) when I found myself
in the way to become a mother, having been led astray by a young man,
who deceived me under a promise of marriage, and then deserted me. Well,
sir, my situation was at last noticed by my lady and her daughter, and
one evening they called me up into a chamber, and accused me of being a
lewd girl. Falling on my knees, I acknowledged my fault, and implored
them to pity and forgive me, and not turn me off without a character.
Then Miss Josephine spoke harshly to me, and asked me how I dared do
such a thing, and bring disgrace upon their house and family; and her
mother threatened to send me to jail, which frightened me so that I
promised to do anything in the world if they would forgive me. '_Will
you do any thing we command you to do_, if we forgive you?' asked Mrs.
Franklin; and I said that I would. '_You must swear it_,' said Miss
Josephine; and getting a Bible, they made me swear a dreadful oath to do
as they bid me. They then told me that there was one thing I must do,
and they would give me as much money as I wanted; they said I must _kill
Mr. Franklin_! On hearing such a horrible request, I almost fainted; and
told them that I never would do such a dreadful thing. But they reminded
me of my oath, and at last threatened and frightened me so, that I
consented to do the awful deed. '_It must be done to-night!_' said Miss
Josephine, and her eyes seemed to flash fire; then she gave me some
brandy to drink, which flew into my brain, and I felt myself able to do
anything, no matter how wicked it might be.--They staid with me until
midnight, and made me drink brandy until I was almost crazy. You must
know, sir, that Mr. Franklin slept in a separate room from my lady, ever
since their disagreement; upon that dreadful night he retired to bed at
about ten o'clock. Well--but oh, my God! how can I tell the dreadful
truth!--yet I must nerve myself to confess the whole matter. At
midnight, Mrs. Franklin brought into the room a small copper cup, which
contained a small quantity of _lead_; this cup she held over the lamp
until the lead was melted as thin as water; and then she handed it to
me, and told me to go softly into her husband's room, and _pour the lead
into his ear_! I DID IT! Yes, as God is my Judge, I did it!--The poor
gentleman was lying on his side, in a sound sleep; with a steady hand I
poured the liquid metal into his ear--_it did not awake him!_ he merely
shuddered once, and died.--The next morning he was found by his servant,
stiff and cold. Some people talked of 'disease of the heart,' others, of
'apoplexy,' many, of 'the visitation of God,' while some shrugged their
shoulders, and said nothing. But _I_ knew the secret of his death! He
was buried with great pomp in the family tomb in St. Paul's churchyard.
My confession is made. After the funeral, my lady and Josephine gave me
plenty of money. 'Go,' said they, 'to some other city, and take up your
abode; you will never the mention the manner in which Mr. Franklin came
to his death, for such a disclosure would bring your own neck to the
halter, without injuring us--_your hand_ alone did the deed!' I went to
Boston, and gave birth to a stillborn child; my money soon went and I
became a common prostitute.--Disease soon overtook me--but why dwell
upon the misfortunes and wanderings of a wretch like me? A week ago, I
found myself again in New York, the inmate of this garret; to-day I felt
myself dying, and sent for a clergyman to hear my dying confession.