"Perhaps you are right," said the doctor thoughtfully.  "There may be a
danger in the direction you point out.  Certainly we men of science
have, many of us, while valuing and respecting the Christian religion,
been getting increasingly impatient of anything like religious dogmatism
and exclusiveness."

At this moment a servant came to say that Thomas Bradly wished to have a
word with the vicar when he was disengaged.  "Oh, ask him to come to me
here in the garden," said the vicar.--"You shall see one of my rough
diamonds now," he added smilingly to his friend; "indeed, I may call him
my `Koh-i-noor,' only he hasn't been polished.--Thomas," he continued to
Bradly as he entered, "here's an old friend of mine, Dr Prosser, a
gentleman eminent in the scientific world, who has come down from London
to see me, and to get a little experience of Crossbourne ways and
manners.  I tell him that he'll find us rather a rough material."

"I'm sure," replied Thomas, "I'm heartily glad to see any friend of
yours among us.  He must take us as he finds us.  Like other folks, we
aren't always right side out; but we generally mean what we say, and
when we do say anything we commonly make it stand for summat."

"Well now, Thomas," continued Mr Maltby, "you're a plain, practical
man, and I think you could give us an opinion worth having on a subject
we've been talking about."

"I'm sure, sir, I don't know how that may be," was the reply; "but we
working-people sometimes see things in a different light from what those
above us does,--at least so far as our experience goes."

"That's just it, Thomas.  It will interest Dr Prosser, I know, to hear
how a theory about religion and truth, which is becoming very
fashionable in our day, would suit yourself and the quick-witted and
warm-hearted people you have daily to deal with."

"Let me hear it, sir, and I'll answer according to the best of my
judgment."

The vicar then repeated to Bradly the substance of the conversation
between himself and the doctor on religious dogmatism and breadth of
views.

"Ah, well," cried Thomas laughing, "you're almost too deep for me.  But
it comes into my mind what happened to me a good many years ago, when I
were quite a young man.  There were a nobleman in our parts,--I wasn't
living at Crossbourne then,--and his son came of age, and such a feast
there was as I never saw afore or since, and I hope I never may again.
Well, my father's family had been in that country for many generations,
and so they turned us into gentlefolks, me and my father, that day, and
we sat down to dinner with the quality; and a grand dinner it was for
certain.  When it was all over, as I thought, and the parson had
returned thanks, just as I were for getting up and going, they brings
round some plates with great glass bowls in 'em, nearly full of water,
something like what an old aunt of mine used to keep gold-fish in; and
there was a knife and fork on each plate.  Then the servants brings all
sorts of fruits,--apples and pears, and peaches and grapes,--and sets
'em on the table.  I was asked what I'd have, and I chose a great rosy-
cheeked apple.  And then I were going to bite a great piece out of it,
but a gent as sat next me whispers, `Cut it, man; it's more civil to cut
it.'  So I takes up the knife, which had got a mother-o'-pearl handle to
it, and tries to cut the apple, but I could only make a mark on it such
as you see on a hot-cross-bun.  Then I looked at the blade of the knife,
and it were just like silver, but were as blunt as a broomstick.
However, I tried again, but it wouldn't cut; so I axes a tall chap in
livery as stood behind my chair if they'd such a thing as a butcher's
steel in the house, for I wanted to put an edge to my knife.  Eh, you
should have seen that fellow grin!  `No, sir,' he says, `we ain't got
nothing of the sort.