As they came nearer, and each figure took individual significance with the
breaking of the cloud, the rich browns and blue-shadowed greys of the
buildings--deep and soft as velvet--attained fine value as a background for
lace-framed faces, and the vivid colours of little children's cloaks.

For a single instant I forgot even Monica, in the tingling sensation that
the life of Spain was throbbing round me, but a touch on my arm brought me
back to her with a bound.

"The grey car is getting ready to start, señor," murmured a Spanish voice,
as two Spanish eyes looked up--hopeful of pesetas--into mine.


                                    X


THE UNEXPECTEDNESS OF MISS O'DONNEL


I think that not once did Carmona or anyone else in the Lecomte spy the
car which, with the unflagging obstinacy of a bloodhound, kept on the
fresh trail of the pneus that began again outside Vitoria; for while we
had the trail we were satisfied to hover always beyond eyeshot of those in
front.

We had a crowd to see us leave the town, a laughing crowd who seemed to
wonder why people in their senses should rush about the world when they
could stop at home and take siestas. And the peasants by the roadside were
amazingly good-natured too, though we disturbed their avocations and upset
the calculations of their animals.

Stately Spanish señores, whose long brown or indigo _capas_ trailed over
their mules' backs, smiled thoughtfully and envied us not, rather pitied
us, perhaps. Barefooted women in yellow shawls gave kind smiles, and
flashed looks from eyes like stars, as often blue as black, but always
singularly Celtic. Scarcely a face but was furnished with grave Celtic
features; for Celts these people were long before they were Spaniards; and
there is no type so persistent, except the Jewish.

One handsome old man on a donkey so lost control of his beast when we
swept into view, that he was dislodged, and would have fallen on his face
had he not enmeshed his knees in some intricate tracery of rope. Round and
round spun the frightened animal in the midst of the road, like a cat
chasing its own tail, the rider toppling over, his well-cut nose all but
scraping the ground.

Our car was stopped and I was out in a moment, though it must have been a
long and giddy moment to that human spinning-jenny. A few tangled seconds,
and I had him unwound and reseated, expecting no gratitude. But to my
surprise, when I got the old fellow right side up, I found him wreathed in
smiles, pouring out thanks and wishes for my good speed. Remembering
experiences in other lands which call themselves enlightened, I glowed
with pride of my country folk, especially when the victim of progress
politely refused five pesetas.

As we came nearer to Old Castile, the ancient land of many castles, I felt
as a man must when at last he comes to a house which is his, though never
until now has he held the key and been free to enter.

The northern provinces, peopled by mysterious Basques alien to us in blood
and language, I could scarcely look upon as Spain. But in Castile I saw
the heart and citadel of my native country. My father was Andaluz; my
mother Castiliana, and she used to say that in my nature were united the
qualities of the two provinces--Castilian pride and stubbornness; the
gaiety and recklessness of the true Andaluz.

I hoped that some change of scenery, some sign given by Nature, might mark
the passage into Castilla la Vieja; therefore I was grateful when the car
ran upon a stately bridge, hung above a broad river that was a flood of
tarnished gold. Thence we looked across to the old buttressed and
balconied town of Miranda del Ebro, strange and even startling in its wild
setting of white mountains; and as we slowed down in admiration, from a
dark secretive tunnel which was the principal street of the place, there
seemed to blow out, like wind-driven petals of flowers, a flock of girls
in golden yellow, tulip red, and iris blue. Then, as we looked, followed a
string of black mules with crimson harness, pressed forward by a dozen
young men in short blue trousers, capped like Basques with the red birret.

It was like coming into a picture which our arrival had, in some magic
way, endowed with life; and the effect did not wear off as we ran into the
shadow-tunnel, where the brown dust lit up with flames of colour. Under
the balconies bristling over narrow _calles_, little shops and booths
blazed with red and green peppers, glowed with oranges and the paler gold
of lemons, glimmered with giant pearls which were Spanish onions.

Miranda, I thought, was worthy of Old Castile; and when but a short
distance further on, the way seemed blocked by a high ridge of mountains
flung across our path, I began to hope that my mother's country--that home
of highest Spanish pride and honour--had some real magnificence of scenery
to give us. We wound into the splendid gloom of the gorge of Pancorbo, cut
like a sword-cleft in the rock; and I said that this scene alone was worth
a journey into Spain.

There was room only for the road, and the foaming Oroncillo tearing its
way through the mountain. High over our heads, where fingers of sunlight
groped, the railway from Paris to Madrid looped its spider's web along the
precipice, winding through tunnel above tunnel in miniature rivalry with
the sublimities of the St. Gothard. Below, deep in the shadow of the
gorge, crouched the sad village of Pancorbo itself, stricken, desolate,
articulate only in its two ruined castles on the height, Santa Engracia
and Santa Marta, imploring Heaven with silent appeal. Still higher,
towered a guardian mountain of astonishing majesty, seeming to bear aloft
on a petrified cushion a royal crown of iron. It was a place to call up in
memory with eyes shut. This was the majestic entrance into Castile; but it
raised my hopes only to dash them down. Once past the serrated needles and
fingers of Dolomite rock which made the grandeur of the gorge, we came
again to monotony of outline, and began to realize Castile as it is; a
vast and lonely steppe, wind swept, bounded by an infinite horizon.

Treeless, silent, unbroken by hedge or boundary, guarded by a ruined
watch-tower on each swelling hill, the illimitable plain lay sombre and
impressive.

No labourers were to be seen; no villages were in sight, whence men could
come to till the land; nevertheless, everywhere were signs of cultivation
by invisible hands, harvests to be reaped by men who would spring from one
knew not where.

Yet the monotony of these tremendous spaces was redeemed by such changeful
splendour of colour as I had never seen. Swelling undulations, worthy to
be named mountains, were warm with the purple of heather, though no
heather grew upon them. Sometimes you could have fancied, from a sudden
outburst of radiance on a distant hilltop, that a rainbow had lain down to
rest. And through all there was never absent that impression that this was
painted-glass-window country with its rich tones of crimson and violet,
its palely luminous skies, and the solemnity of its blended hues. Always
there was a haunting effect of sadness, even in the spring purity of those
white blossom-arches which decorated the brown monotony of our roads.

The sky still burned dusky red when in the midst of a wide plain, the
soaring twin-spires of Burgos stood up for our eyes against a rose veil of
sunset pinned with the diamond heads of stars. Away to our left, as we ran
towards the town, was a dark building like Eton College chapel standing on
a wind-swept hill; and this I knew to be the convent of Miraflores, where
Isabel la Católica employed Gil de Siloe to make for her father and mother
the "most beautiful tomb in the world."

I felt a sense of possession in the grand old town, coming upon it thus at
its best; and I was glad that fate had driven me into my own land _en
automobile_. Even though, in following Carmona to watch over the girl we
both loved, I might have to keep often to the beaten track made
commonplace by tourists, the way would never be really commonplace, as to
sightseers who take the ordinary round by train.

Each new hour of life on the road would build up knowledge for me of my
people and my country. I should not be studying it in any obvious,
guide-book way, and I should learn more of real Spain in a few weeks than
in months of conscientious railway plodding from one point to another.

There was no question which hotel Carmona might choose. He would go to the
best; consequently unobtrusive persons whose hopes lay in keeping to the
background, must select one less good.

We halted outside the town, while I consulted a guide-book for the most
Spanish _fonda_ in Burgos. When, straining my eyes in the twilight, I read
out a name, Dick exclaimed, "That's where Angèle's friends the O'Donnels
are staying."

"All the better," said I. "You can carry out your commission without
trouble. Perhaps you'll see them at dinner. They're sure to be the only
foreigners there, so it will be easy to pick out their Irish faces in a
dining-room full of Spaniards."

There was little room in my mind for the O'Donnel family, however. We were
near Monica now, and my one desire was to let her know that I had not
failed.

We drove through a fine old gateway, up a broad street, and past big
barracks, opposite to which was the hotel where Carmona would stop. But
his Lecomte had already disappeared; and though Dick clamoured for dinner,
I waited only long enough to secure rooms at our own _fonda_ and put up
the car, before going out in search of information.

By this time the Duke and his friends would be dining, and I could venture
as far as the lower offices of their hotel without much fear of being seen
by Carmona's sharp eyes. In any case, I decided to risk it, and on the way
mapped out a plan of action.

A couple of porters were in the bare hall of the ground floor as I
entered. Walking in with a businesslike air, I said in Spanish, "Have you
some people here who came in a red automobile? They ought to have arrived
this evening."

"No, señor," replied one of the men. "We have a party staying for the
night who came in a grey automobile."

Good fellow, how well he played into my hands! Hiding delight under a look
of disappointment, I said that my friends were in a red automobile. "They
may have been belated," I went on. "They'll probably turn up before
midnight. I hope you'll have good rooms to give them, at the front of the
house. They're very particular."

"I'm afraid all our best rooms are occupied," said the man. "The señor who
came in the grey automobile has taken five rooms along the front, on the
first floor, with a private sitting-room. Unfortunately, your friends will
have to put up with something at the back."

I expressed regret, and went away joyful, having astonished the porter by
pressing upon him two pesetas. I now knew all I wanted to learn,
even--roughly speaking--the position of Monica's room; and I saw a way of
sending her a message.

Dick was ready for dinner when I got back, but I did not try his patience
long. He had inquired if the O'Donnels were still in the hotel, and had
been told that they were, though they were leaving in a day or two. This
was all we knew when we entered the dining-room, but, as a good many
people were still seated at the long table and the numerous small ones, we
glanced about in search of Mademoiselle de la Mole's friends.

There was not a face to be seen which you would not confidently have
pronounced to be Spanish, if you had met it at the North Pole.

Dick and I sat down at a little table and began to talk in English, while
round us on every side the Spanish language--pure Castilian, and slipshod,
mellifluous Andaluz--gushed forth like a golden fountain.

Hunger, long unappeased, at first inclined Dick to a cynical view of life
in general, and Spanish hotel life in particular, but his temper improved
as the meal went on, and he even forgave me for deserting a starving man.

"No sign of the O'Donnels," said he. "Perhaps they've a private
dining-room."

"I doubt there's one in the house," said I.

"Well, I'll inquire later," Dick went on. "I've looked at every face here,
and--"

"At one in particular," I cut in.

Dick reddened. "I hope I haven't been staring," said he; "but she _is_ the
ideal Spanish girl, isn't she? If I were an artist, I'd want to paint
her." As he spoke, his eyes wandered towards the table next ours, which,
since a dish of Spanish peppers, rice, and chicken made a man of him, had
monopolized all the attention he could spare from dinner.

I had noticed this; hence my gibe. But Dick was not far wrong about the
girl.

Her place at the table put her opposite him; and her companion was a
rotund, brown man, with the beaming face of a middle-aged cherub, and the
habit of murmuring his contributions to the conversation in an Andalucían
voice, with an Andalucían accent mellifluous as Andalucían honey.

The girl herself was true Andaluza, too, though of a very different type
from the cherubic person who (Dick hoped) was her father. No such brown
stars of eyes ever opened to the world outside Andalucía; nor did any save
an Andaluza know, without being taught, how to give such liquid, yet
innocent, glances as those, which occasionally sparkled from under her
long lashes for Dick, when the Cherub was not looking.

She was a slim young thing, with a heart-shaped face of an engaging olive
pallour; a pretty, self-conscious mouth, which changed bewitchingly from
moment to moment; and heavy masses of dark hair piled high after the
Spanish fashion, as if to suit a mantilla--hair so smooth and glossy that,
from a little distance, it had the effect of being carved from a block of
ebony.

"She's perfect of her kind," said I; "but I thought you preferred American
types."

"Rot!" said Dick. "Comparisons are odious. I say, thank Heaven for a
pretty girl, whatever she may be. But there's something particularly
fascinating about this one."

"I see a serious objection to her from your point of view," I went on.
"She's too young. You draw the line at them under twenty-two. I'll bet you
she won't see twenty-two for a couple of years yet."

"She might be worth waiting for," said Dick.

"No good. She'll be married long before twenty-two. All self-respecting
Spanish girls are. You'd better not think of her any more. Forget her, and
look up Miss O'Donnel."

"Angèle de la Mole says Miss O'Donnel's pretty," said Dick. As he spoke,
he beckoned a waiter; and I noticed that the girl with the eyes no longer
made any pretence of hiding her interest in Dick. She even whispered to
her companion, who, after listening to what she had to say, turned to look
at us with benign curiosity.

"Ask whether he knows Colonel O'Donnel and Miss O'Donnel by sight," Dick
commanded when the waiter appeared, to breathe benevolence and garlic upon
us in equal quantities. He was shy of airing his own Spanish before a
roomful of Spanish people.

I asked; the waiter looked surprised, and to Dick's confusion and my
astonishment, indicated the occupants of the next table.

"The colonel and the señorita," said he. It was so startlingly like an
introduction that the cherubic brown man sprang up and bowed; and the
girl, bending over the _mazapan_ in her plate, let us see the very top
coil on her crown of black hair.

Dick, overwhelmed, and recalling every word we had said, as a drowning man
recalls each wicked deed of his life from childhood up, got to his feet,
and began stammering explanations.

"Well, that shows what an idiot a man can make of himself," said he.
"Miss--Mademoiselle de la Mole gave me a letter of introduction, and a
parcel with some little present, and I was looking around for you. My
name's Richard Waring; I don't know whether mademoiselle's written about
me. Anyhow--"

"Señor," announced Colonel O'Donnel, grieved at Dick's distress; "no
entiendo."

"Habla usted español?" asked the girl. "No Inglees, we, much." And she
smiled a dimpled smile, straight at Dick, with one side glint for me.

Dick was, to use against him a favourite word of his own, flabbergasted.
"Then you're not Colonel and Miss O'Donnel?" said he. "I though you
couldn't be, but--"

"Si, si," the Cherub reassured him, nodding. "O'Donnel. Aw--right." He
laughed so contagiously that we laughed too; and I found my heart warming
to these unexpected, surprising friends of Angèle de la Mole's.

"Me María del Pilar Inés O'Donnel y Alvarez," the girl introduced herself.
"Angèle de la Mole, mi--mi _fren_." Having wavered so far, between Spanish
and English, she flung herself headlong into her native tongue. This was
the signal for the Cherub also to begin fluent explanations, both fluting
Andaluz together, and so fast, that Dick (painstakingly taught a little
Castilian by me in leisure moments) found himself at sea, and drowning.

I had to translate for him such facts in the O'Donnel family history as I
could unravel from the tangled web. The mystery of Angèle de la Mole's
Spanish-speaking Irish friends (which she must have refrained from
explaining in order to play a joke upon Dick) was solved in a sentence. An
O'Donnel grandfather had fought in Spain under Wellington in the
Peninsular War, and stayed in Spain because he loved a Spanish girl who
had many acres. The Cherub's father was born in Spain, and spoke little
English. The Cherub himself spoke none, or but a word or two. He was a
colonel in the Spanish army, now retired. That was all; except that his
son and daughter had once studied an English grammar, until they came to
the verbs; then they had stopped, because life was short and full of other
things. "But," said Miss O'Donnel proudly, "me know, two, three, word.
Lo-vely. Varry nice. Aw raight. Yes."

When she thus displayed the store of her accomplishments, punctuated with
dimples, any man not head over ears in love with another girl, would have
given his eyes to kiss her. I was sorry for Dick. As for me--I found myself
longing to tell Doña María del Pilar Inés O'Donnel y Alvarez all about
Lady Monica Vale, with the conviction that her help would be of
inestimable value.

Such is the power of a girl's eyes upon weak man, even when he adores a
very different pair of eyes; and already it was strange to remember my
stiff disclaimer of a wish to know the O'Donnels. I had called them
"extraneous." What a dull ass!


                                    XI


MARÍA DEL PILAR TO THE RESCUE


At last, when the general confusion had subsided, I was able to impress
upon the delightful pair that, if they would but speak very slowly, and
kindly trouble themselves to give a word of three syllables, say, two of
them (a punctilious habit disapproved in Andalucía) Señor Waring would be
able to join the conversation. With true Spanish goodheartedness they did
their best, though Heaven knows what it must have cost them. Dick also did
his best, with a conscientious American pronunciation; but where tongues
halted, eyes spoke a universal language, and we all got on so well that in
ten minutes we might have known each other for ten years.

By the end of those minutes we were asked to the O'Donnel's sitting-room,
which had been furbished up out of a bedroom; and there Dick brought the
famous letter of introduction and the white paper parcel tied with pink
ribbon.

My name had not been mentioned by Angèle. I was merely a "friend of Mr.
Waring's"; and, it seemed, I had been designated vaguely thus in a
previous letter in which our arrival had been prophesied. This had been
Angèle's way of leaving it open for me to introduce myself as I pleased;
but now there was no secret with which I would not have felt safe in
trusting our old friends the O'Donnels, so I gave them my real name.

The Cherub's face lit up. "I knew your father well," said he. "We learned
soldiering together as boys, though he was four or five years my senior,
and the hero of my youth. Our ideas"----he coughed in an instant's
embarrassment--"were different. This separated us. But I never forgot him.
He was a great man; and it's an event to meet his son. When I saw you
downstairs in the dining-room, it was like going back thirty years. Such a
young man as you are now, was your father when I had my last sight of him.
You are his living portrait."

We shook hands; and I believe, with the slightest encouragement, the dear
old fellow would have planted a kiss on each of my cheeks. That he did
not, was a tribute to my English education.

The next thing was, that at Dick's request I was telling them everything;
and as Pilar listened to the story which prefaced my errand in Spain, her
eyes, which had been stars, became suns. When I spoke Carmona's name, she
and her father uttered an exclamation.

"El Duque de Carmona!" echoed the Cherub.

"He!" cried Pilar. And they looked at each other.

For a single second, I asked myself if my frankness had been a mistake.

"You know the Duke?" I asked.

"Santa María, but do we know him!" breathed the girl. "I wish we could
tell you no."

"You don't like him?"

"Do we like the Duke, Papa?"

The good Cherub shook his head portentously. "The Duke of Carmona is a bad
man," he said. "He has not done _us_ any harm--".

"Oh--oh!" Pilar cut him short. "He has not driven into a convent one of my
best-loved friends?"

"My daughter refers to a sad story," explained her father. "In Madrid it
made a stir at the time. He jilted a school friend of Pilarcita's. That is
almost an unheard-of thing in Spain; but he did it. The young girl's
family got into trouble at Court--an insignificant affair; but the Duke is
ambitious of favour. He had something to retrieve, after the scandal
during the Spanish-American War, when he was quite a young man--not more
than twenty-four--and--"

"You mean, the story that he speculated in horses--bought wretched crocks
cheap and sold them to the army for the cavalry, with the connivance of
the vets he's supposed to have bribed?"

"Yes. He managed to clear himself; but the royalties looked at him coldly,
and he is not a man to bear that. The father of the girl--Pilarcita's
friend--was at one time much liked by the young King, and people thought it
was Carmona's motive for engaging himself. With the first breath of the
storm the Duke was off; and the discarded fiancée entered as a novice the
convent where she and my daughter went to school. That is why Pilarcita so
much dislikes him--"

"But it's not all!" cried the girl. "What about the grey bull, poor
Corcito."

Colonel O'Donnel laughed his gentle, chuckling laugh.

"Our home is close to a _ganadería_--a bull-farm of the Duke's near
Seville," he explained indulgently. "The places adjoin; and as I've
allowed this Pilarcita to grow up a wild girl, very different from the
young ladies of Seville she should emulate, she has made friends of the
Duke's cattle. There were, some years ago, a grey bull that was as tame
with her as a pet dog; but it took a dislike to the Duke, who came to have
a look at his bulls once, and attacked him. The saying is that the Moorish
blood in the Carmonas gives them a cruel temper. At all events, Carmona
could not forgive the bull its disrespect, and promptly had it sent off to
the slaughter-house, though it was a _toro bravo_."

"That's like him," said I.

"There's nothing he wouldn't do against an enemy, or to gain a thing he
wanted," said Pilar, turning to me. "Take care, now he wants something you
want."

"It's been so between our families for generations," I said. "My
grandfather ran away with the girl his grandfather wanted to marry, and my
father and his in their youth had a furious lawsuit."

"Which won?" asked the girl.

"My father."

"Be sure he will remember," said she. "Oh, how I wish we could help you!
It would be such a revenge upon him for poor Eulalia and for Corcito.
Papa, _can't_ we do something?"

"If we could," echoed the Cherub, "_for his father's son!_"

Suddenly the girl jumped up and clapped her hands. "Oh, I have thought of
the thing!" she cried "It would be like a play." But her face fell. "I
don't know how to propose it," said she. "Perhaps you and Mr. Waring would
disapprove. And how could we invite ourselves--"

She stopped; but I made her go on. "Please tell us," I said. "It's sure to
be a splendid plan. And anything associated with you would bring luck."

"This would be very much associated with us," said she, laughing; "for the
idea is that, instead of going home by rail as we meant to do, day after
to-morrow, we go on in your car with you, pretending to be Mr. Waring's
guests, and you supposed to be my brother Cristóbal."

"Pilarcita, some wild bird has built its nest in your brain," said the
Cherub.

"Wait till I finish!" the girl commanded. And it was easy to see that,
though her father shook his head, she was a spoilt darling who could do
nothing wrong.

"I only wish Cristóbal were here," she went on, breathlessly; "but there
was a regimental dinner, and he had to leave us. He'll come in later, and
you shall meet him, and hear what he says to the plan. Oh, there's not
much fear that he'll object, when you are Angèle's friend, and she's doing
all she can for you. He'd walk through fire to please Angèle. And this
would be but to give up his leave--or at least the going home with us--and
lending you his uniform, which I'm sure would fit you sweetly."

I could not help laughing at the way she disposed of her brother and his
plans, to say nothing of those she was making for me; but she rushed on,
anxious to justify her counsel.

"You don't understand yet," she insisted. "It's a _wonderful_ idea. You
see, papa and I have met the Duke in Madrid, at friends' houses. I've
scarcely spoken to him, for Spanish girls don't have much chance to talk
with men, but he'll remember me, and papa too. The lucky thing is, he's
never seen my brother since Cristóbal was a little boy, and then no more
than once or twice, when he came out to his _ganadería_. He must know, if
he stops to think, that papa has a son; that's all. And you say the Duke
only saw you at the fancy dress ball, in a Romeo costume, with a fair wig.
When Lady Monica Vale gave that start forward, and looked at you in the
automobile, although you'd made your car different he fancied you might be
in it, and telegraphed to have the man he suspected kept back at Iran.
Well, it was clever of you to change with your chauffeur; but all the
same, if you go on, dressed as a chauffeur, you can never have a chance to
get near Lady Monica. And if you appear as yourself, even though the Duke
isn't sure it's _you_, he'll keep Lady Monica out of your way. And her
mother will help him, as she wants them to marry. But think how different
for my brother! We all happen to meet--suppose it's in the cathedral--and
papa says: 'How do you do? You don't remember Cristóbal?' He'd simply have
to accept you as Cristóbal, although he might find Cristóbal rather like
that troublesome Marqués de Casa Triana."

"Casa Triana is also Cristóbal," I laughed. "Ramón Cristóbal."

"All the better. We shouldn't any of us have to fib. I always said
Cristóbal is the luckiest saint to have for a patron. See how he's
_offering_ his help to you. And oh, _did_ you know he's the patron saint
of automobilists? To-morrow I'll give you a Cristóbal medal to nail on
your car. They're made on purpose; such ducks! But now do you begin to
understand what I'm driving at, and that it wasn't just _impudence_ to
suggest our going in your automobile, papa and I? What with us, and San
Cristóbal, you ought to get your foot on the Duke's head."

"But what about your brother Cristóbal?"

"Oh, he! We must all thank San Cristóbal that he has this leave, otherwise
the Duke could easily find out; but instead of going home he can go--why,
he can go to Biarritz, where he will see Angèle, so it will be nice all
round. And imagine yourself in his uniform, walking with us in the
cathedral, where the Duke is sure to take Lady Monica and her
mother,--otherwise, why stop at Burgos? One comes for that, and nothing
else, unless one has a little brother in the garrison. _Now_ what do you
say, Don Ramón?"

"I say you're an angel," I replied with promptness. "But I also say that
Colonel O'Donnel won't allow such an arrangement."

"Oh, won't he?" exclaimed Pilar. "Do you think I'm an ordinary girl of
southern Spain, who says 'yes, yes,' and 'no, no,' as her parents wish,
and looks down on the ground while life passes? Only to think of being
like that is enough to make a woman grow a moustache and have an
_embonpoint_ out of sheer ennui. It's my Irish heart which keeps my father
and brother alive; and when I want to do a thing they hurry to let me do
it lest I have a fit--of which I would be capable."

"As you are a Cristóbal," said the Cherub mildly, "it might be managed, if
you liked, without our having to go more than an extra time to confession.
I could wear the sin upon my conscience, if you could; and if you could
wear also the uniform of my son."

"I'd like to see Carmona's face when you're introduced," remarked Dick, in
his slow Spanish.

"You will see it," exclaimed Pilar; and with this, the door opened and the
other Cristóbal came in.


                                   XII


UNDER A BALCONY


I liked the brother because he had his sister's eyes, and--being the
ordinary, selfish, human man--I liked him still better for his enthusiastic
desire to help the last of the Casa Trianas. Whether his enthusiasm was
for the sake of Casa Triana, or Angèle de la Mole, was a detail. It had
the same effect upon my affairs; and having taken very little time for
reflection. I let myself be hurried away on the tide.

Pilar--as unlike a Spanish girl in mind as she was like one in
face--stage-managed us all. We merely accepted our parts in the play, I
thankfully, the others calmly.

Brother Cristóbal was, perhaps, not sorry to make an unexpected flight to
Biarritz, with news of Dick and me as an excuse, instead of spending his
leave tamely at home. There was, at all events, a suspicious alacrity
about the way in which he agreed to disappear as early as possible the
following day. As he was wearing the uniform which was to be made over to
me, it was decided that he should bring it to my room next morning before
hearing mass at the cathedral. It was Pilar's idea that I should go there
with him, getting off before the _fonda_ was fully astir, and seek
sanctuary in dusky corners of remote chapels until my friends arrived.

"We'll find out when the Duke and his mother take Lady Monica to look at
the cathedral," said the girl, delighting in her own ingenuity; "and then
we'll start too. Though we can't bear the Duke, we've always been civil to
him and his mother whenever we've met in Madrid, praise the saints, so
they can't be rude to us now. If we go up and speak, they'll have to
introduce us to Lady Vale-Avon and Lady Monica. I shall take a _great_
fancy at first sight to Lady Monica, of course; and I shouldn't wonder if
I can make her like _me_. The rest will be easy for the whole trip. Oh, we
shall have fun!"

I began to think we should, and that, thanks to a girl's counter-plotting,
I should have pretty plain sailing in spite of Carmona. But because I
began to see land ahead, I was the more anxious to give Monica peace of
mind; and when we said good-night to the O'Donnels about half-past ten, I
set out to carry through the plan I had thought of before dinner.

On the wall of the landlord's office, off the main hall, I had seen a
guitar hanging. It belonged to his son, a romantic-looking young fellow,
whose sympathetic soul delighted in lending the national aid to courtship,
without asking a single question.

I would be no true Spaniard if I could not play the guitar; and in fact my
mother had given me some dexterity with the instrument, before I was ten
years old. I had neglected it for years; nevertheless, my fingers had but
to touch the strings to be on friendly terms with them.

Madrid and Seville would probably be waking up to fullest life at this
hour; but in provincial towns one goes to bed early because there is
nothing more amusing to do.

At eleven the windows of the principal hotel were dark; and without being
stared at curiously by any passer-by, I stationed myself under the first
floor balconies, with my guitar.

I did not know which room was Monica's, but I did know that it could not
be far away; and I counted on the chance that anxious thoughts might keep
her from sleeping soundly.

Softly, and then more boldly, I began to thrum the air of the Hungarian
waltz which they had played that night at the Duchess of Carmona's, while
I told Monica I loved her. Often its passionate refrain had echoed in my
ears since, and brought the scene before me. I hoped that Monica also
might remember.

Five minutes passed, and still I played on, yet nothing happened. Then,
when I had begun to fear failure, I heard a faint sound overhead. A window
was opening. There was no gleam of light, no whisper; but something soft
and small fell close to my feet. I stooped and picked it up. It was a
rose, weighted by a grey suède glove, tied round the stem; and the glove
was scented with orris, the same delicate fragrance which had come to me
when I kissed Monica's hand, and her letters.

She had had my message, and answered it.


                                   XIII


WHAT HAPPENED IN THE CATHEDRAL


Before six next morning, Cristóbal O'Donnel was tapping at my door, with
the promised uniform and accoutrements concealed under the military
overcoat which was also to be put at my disposal.

Hearing our voices, Waring appeared, yawning, at the door of the adjoining
room, and there was a good deal of stifled laughter among the three of us,
as I got into my borrowed red and blue. The things fitted well enough, as
I have only an inch or two the advantage of the other Cristóbal, and even
the cap accommodated itself to my head almost as if it had been made for
me. When I was ready for the part assigned by Pilar, Dick said that I had
never looked so well before, and probably never would again.

My suit-cases were packed, and the programme which Dick had to carry out
when O'Donnel and I had gone, was to settle our account at the hotel, get
the luggage bestowed on the roof of the car, and finally to drive round to
the cathedral door, in order to start from there in the end, without going
back to the _fonda_ or garage. We were grumbling at the absence of poor
Ropes, when there was a discreet knock at the door, and Ropes himself
appeared as we opened it, like a jack-in-the-box.

His happy smile was changed to a stare of surprise at sight of me in the
uniform of a Spanish officer, but true to his training he ironed all
expression out of his features in an instant, and allowed himself to look
only decorously pleased when Dick and I welcomed him with enthusiasm.

"Well done!" said I. "Did you break out of gaol?" But to tell the truth I
was faintly uneasy; because, if he had, it would mean trouble for us all
presently, when we had been traced by the police. But I need not have
doubted the faithful Ropes.

"No, sir, I didn't break out," he replied. "I wouldn't have done that in
any case, though I didn't like to think of my work on your hands. But I'll
tell you how it was, if I won't be disturbing you."

O'Donnel, who could not understand a word, thought that he must be off, as
he wanted to hear mass and catch the train for Biarritz. I let him go
without me, therefore; and after our good-byes, Dick and I clamoured for
Ropes' story.

"It was a rum go altogether, sir," said he. "They took me off to the head
police office at Irun, and the chief asked me all manner of questions; but
I kept on repeating 'no comprendo,' and showing the cards of Mr. George
Smith. I couldn't understand all their jabber, but they mentioned your
name, and from the way they looked when I put on my stupid airs, I thought
they began to have their doubts. The chief policeman motioned me to stop
where I was, and ordered two of the men to go somewhere. From my place, I
could see the bridge, and the two policemen who seemed to be looking for
something.

"By and by came the thrum of an automobile, and I could tell it was a
Lecomte. A minute later the chaps outside were talking to the Duke of
Carmona, who stopped his car where they were. They talked a bit; then he
gave the wheel to his chauffeur and came into the police office. The chief
treated him very deferential; they laid their heads together in a corner,
but I could see them reading a telegram, and once and again they had a
squint at me.

"I knew too much to let on I suspected the Duke of a hand in the business,
but having heard him answer Mr. Waring about the tyre in English as good
as my own, I jumped up and asked if he'd interpret for me with the police.
I explained what had happened, showed my card, and said there'd been a
silly mistake which was causing me no end of annoyance. Then I said I'd
write to _The Times_, about the sort of thing that happened to Englishmen
travelling in Spain, and talked of the Embassy at Madrid.

"All the time I was speaking the Duke pulled his moustache and stared so
hard, if I'd had on a false moustache or wig, or any of that kind of
business, he'd have been sure to find it out. He looked cross and puzzled
too; but finally he said, as I was English, and he believed they were
wanting a Spaniard, there must be a mistake, and he would do the best he
could to help me. I suppose he must have told them they were on the wrong
job after all, for after he'd gone, and they'd buzzed awhile and made out
a lot of papers, they said that as a very important person certified to my
being Mr. George Smith, I could go.

"By this time it was afternoon, and I wanted to get on as soon as
possible, so I took the next train for San Sebastian, and hunted up a
place to hire a motor bike. I didn't know where you'd have gone after
that, so I couldn't book by train; but I counted on picking up your trail
if I kept the road."

"How could you expect to do that, since there must be a lot of automobiles
going back and forth between Biarritz and San Sebastian, even at this time
of year?" said I.

"Why, from the non-skids, sir. I'd know ours anywhere. There's three of
the steel studs worn close down on the off driving wheel, which makes a
queer little mark in dust or mud. I could even see, once I got on to the
tracks, that you'd followed the Duke's car, for your tracks came sometimes
on his, almost obliterating his trail for a bit. I can tell you, sir, it
cheered me up to be coming on your tracks like that. Made me feel at home
in a strange country. The bike took me along pretty well, too; but do the
best I could, night came on without my overtaking you. For fear of losing
the tracks, I put up at a _posada_, got under way the minute there was a
streak of dawn, and found you here by inquiring."

"You're a regular Sherlock Holmes as well as a thorough brick, Ropes,"
said I. "Now, have something to eat; get the motor bicycle back to San
Sebastian by rail, and be ready for another start."

With this I was off, leaving him to Dick. I turned the collar of
Cristóbal's big coat up to my eyes, pulled the cap down far enough almost
to meet it, and went out, praying to meet none of Cristóbal's
fellow-officers.

The wild wind for which Burgos is famed wailed through the long, arcaded
streets with their tall yellow buildings, and tried to hurl me back from
the great honey-coloured gateway with its towers and pinnacles, where I
would have paused to pick out the statue of the Cid from other battered
statues in weather-beaten niches.

The few men who passed, wrapped in black _capas_ turned over with blue or
crimson, had the fine-cut, melancholy features of those who live in
northern cold, and their glances were as chill as the weather. But that
was better than if they had taken too much interest in a strange face in a
familiar uniform; and it would have needed more than a freezing stare to
blight the spring in my heart, for I was going to Monica.

I was ready to love Burgos for the sake of my childhood's hero, the brave
old Cid, with whom every stone seemed to be associated. This was the city
of the Cid as well as the country of the Cid; and if I had come into my
fatherland as a sightseer, and not as a lover, I should have gone on a
pilgrimage to his tomb at the convent of San Pedro de Cárdeña, only a few
kilometres out of Burgos--that City of Battles.

As it was, I should have to be content with reading about it in some book,
for Carmona would not desert his car to go; and where Carmona went, there
must I go also.

At least I had a cup of coffee at "The Café of the Cid" on my way to the
cathedral; and the first landmark I sought in that triumph of Gothic
grandeur was the coffer of the Cid. I might have hours to wait, I knew,
before the others would come, though in order to reach Valladolid at a
decent hour, they must not delay too long. But sooner or later they would
certainly arrive, for Carmona could not, for shame's sake, rush Monica out
of Burgos without showing her the glory of Burgos. And meanwhile, for none
save a paltry soul could Time have halted, heavy-footed, as a companion in
that realm of shadowed splendour.

It was the first of the famous cathedrals of Spain on which I, an outcast
son, had set my eyes; and a glimpse of the twin-spires from afar had given
me some inkling of its beauty. Wrapped in sunset flames, I had seen the
towers as if cut in precious stones, chiselled, according to legend by
angels, like a queen's bracelet, adorned like an old reliquary. I had said
to myself that the vast building was a wild festival in a stone, a bravura
song in architecture. And if I remembered, as I looked, other twin towers
which are the glory of the Rhine, I tried to put the reminiscence away,
because I wanted the cathedrals of Spain to be different from those of any
other country. I wanted them to speak to me with their own national
inspiration. And this morning, as I flitted with the other shadows into
the solemn dusk of the great nave, I was satisfied. I found no German
inspiration here. Each detail struck the same curiously national note,
from the rare iron-work to the octagonal lantern, a miracle of Plateresque
design, which lifted itself, clear and bright, above the centre of the
great church. Perhaps the effect lay partly in the gorgeous colour, colour
never tawdry, never vulgar, as I had seen it sometimes in Italy; or else
in the wonderful reliefs; statues in niches of gold, flowering stones,
arabesques, alabaster columns, richly-toned pictures; but no matter whence
it came, it was there, and could have been nowhere except in Spain.

I wandered from chapel to chapel, saw the strange mummy-like figure of the
Christ of Burgos, supposed to shed blood every Friday; admired the
treasures of the sacristy; and, I am half-ashamed to say, had just
dedicated a candle to propitiate San Cristóbal, when my heart gave a leap
at sight of four persons who appeared from behind the grand coro which
fills the nave.

The old Duchess of Carmona, brown, stout, yet somehow stately, and the
tall figure of Lady Vale-Avon advanced towards me, side by side. Behind
came Monica, fresh and sweet in her white-winged grey hat and travelling
dress, and the Duke of Carmona, dark as a Moor in contrast with her young
fairness.

I dared not break upon her unexpectedly, after my experience of yesterday,
so I turned away, and entering a chapel interested myself in a tomb which
is the cherished jewel of the cathedral.

How long I could have kept my patience under provocation I can't tell; but
my strength of mind had not been tested for five minutes when I heard the
voice of my adopted sister Pilarcita. She and the excellent Cherub were
claiming acquaintance with the Duke.

They were close to the chapel in which I stood. Half turning I saw the
group, which consisted of six persons. Dick was not among them, and I
wondered whether he were absent by design or accident.

Now the Duchess and the Cherub were talking together. Now the O'Donnel's
were being introduced to Lady Vale-Avon and Monica. The two girls began
chatting together. Dear Pilar, what a jewel of a sister she was!

"Do you remember Cristóbal?" I heard her suddenly ask Carmona, in a voice
raised to such clear distinctness that I guessed she had seen a uniform
behind the iron-work of the half-open chapel door. "You saw my brother, I
think, when he was a little boy. He's stationed here now; we've been
visiting him."

I took this as my cue, and turning from the sleeping figure of Bishop
Alonso de Cartagena, I walked out of the chapel to join my adopted family.

"Why, here's Cristóbal now!" exclaimed Pilar.

Then, in a flash, she had me introduced to all, leaving Monica till the
last, so that the girl might have time to get her breath after the first
shock of surprise.

Whether it was that yesterday had given her a lesson in self-control, or
whether Pilar had contrived to whisper some word concerning her brother, I
could not tell; but if Monica changed colour I could not see it, perhaps
because a darkening of the sky outside had begun to deepen the rich dusk
of the cathedral.

For her own sake I scarcely dared look at her; and my silence must have
passed with the others for the shyness of a young soldier among strangers.
But I did look at Carmona, feeling his eyes upon me, and met a stare as
searching as Röntgen rays.

His face is not one easy to read; but for once the windows of his mind
were wide open. If he had recognized me, and guessed the trick which had
been played on him he would have worn a very different expression; but he
was bewildered, uneasy, as he had been yesterday when he saw Monica lean
forward, blushing, to gaze at a masked man in a motor-car.

He realized the likeness between Cristóbal O'Donnel y Alvarez and his own
dangerous, though ineligible rival, Casa Triana. I could see the thought
dart into his mind and rankle; I could see him push it into a dark corner
kept for the rubbish of imagination. I knew how he was telling himself
that there could be no connection or collusion between the O'Donnel family
and Casa Triana. I hoped he also soothed his anxiety by reminding himself
that in all probability Casa Triana, in the blue Gloria car once seen by
his chauffeur, was busily forgetting Monica Vale in some distant part of
Europe. Carmona had admitted one mistake yesterday: he would not be ready
to fall into another to-day.

Lady Vale-Avon was also gazing somewhat sharply at the young Spanish
officer, a brother of those old acquaintances of the Duke's. But now she
coaxed her eyesight by lifting a lorgnette which, as Mary Stuart, she had
not been able to carry on the night of our former meeting; and when a
questioning glance at Carmona met with no alarming answer, the suspicious
frown faded from her forehead.

After a few words we all, as if with one accord, began to move on upon the
tour of inspection; and still there was no sign of Dick.

I would defy anyone to hold out for more than five minutes against the
charm of the Cherub. Without raising his voice above a honeyed murmur, and
with nothing particular to say, by sheer force of cherubic, Andaluz charm
of manner he fascinated the Duchess of Carmona, and even Lady Vale-Avon,
to whom he was a new type. She had been studying Spanish with an eye to
the future, for she understood and answered Colonel O'Donnel; but with
apparent innocence and real subtlety he contrived to keep the Duke busy
explaining him, and murmured so many funny things that even Carmona was
obliged occasionally to burst out laughing.

Meanwhile, Monica, Pilar, and I were left to follow behind, greatly
against the will of the Duke, as I guessed by the sulky set of his
shoulders.

"Quick, quick, into this chapel," whispered Pilar, "before they look
round. Then they won't know where we've disappeared, and you'll have five
minutes grace." As she spoke, she caught Monica by the arm, and whisked
her into the Capilla del Condestable. Once behind the iron lattice, she
darted away as if moved by a sudden passion to gaze at the carved altar
piece.

"How wonderful!" said Monica. I caught her hands, which she held out to
me, and then we laughed into each other's eyes, in sheer happiness and
triumph over fate. "To think that you're here, after all."

"Wherever you are, I'm going to be, while you want me," said I, "and until
we know whether I shall have to take you away."

"I might have known you wouldn't fail me," she said. "But I was so unhappy
yesterday. When I saw that handkerchief I knew at once who you were,
though I should never have guessed, with those awful goggles, and I
couldn't help giving a jump, and getting red. But I shall never be so
stupid again. I'll be prepared for anything. Just a whisper from Señorita
O'Donnel was enough this time. While we shook hands she said, 'Something's
going to happen.' So I was ready. Only it does seem too good to be true."

"Here's the glove and the rose you threw me," I said, showing them inside
my coat.

"Here's the music you played to me," she answered, touching her heart; and
I would have given a year of my life to kiss her. "Oh, tell me, is Miss
O'Donnel any relation to you, really?"

"Only a very good and clever friend," said I, for there was not much time
to waste in explaining things more or less irrelevant. "All this was her
idea, to give me a chance of getting near you. And, as Cristóbal's my name
too, as well as her brother's, the thing has been managed without a fib.
Brother Cristóbal has leave. Friend Cristóbal will spend it with the
family; that is, they're all going in that red car you saw
yesterday--wherever you go. It would save a lot of anxiety if you could
tell where that will be."

"I can't," said Monica. "I fancy mother's afraid I might find some way of
letting you know; anyway, the Duke is always talking about how pleasant it
is not to make plans beforehand, but to let each day arrange itself. I
don't know how or where we're to spend the time before we get to Seville;
but for Holy Week we're to be at the Duke's house. I'm not afraid of
anything, though, now you're near; and I think I shall let myself be
happy, in spite of the Duke, for your Spain is glorious, and I love it. I
wish it weren't the Duke's Spain too!"

"He thinks it's all his," said I. "Is he bothering you much?"

"No. He's being nice to me. You know, I refused him in Biarritz; but
mother came in while I was doing it, and told him that I was too young to
know my own mind; that he must be patient, and she could almost promise
I'd change it. I said I wouldn't, but that made no difference. And as
mother wanted to come on this trip, I had to come too. I have an idea
they've made up a plan between them that I shall be left in peace till
Seville, if I behave myself. If they suspect who you really are, though,
it will be dreadful. I don't know what will happen."

"They can't make you marry Carmona," I said.

"No. How could they? such things can't be done nowadays; at least, I
suppose they can't; and yet, when people are strong and determined, and
unscrupulous too, one never knows what they may be planning, what they may
be capable of doing. Often, in the night, I try to think what they _could_
do, and tell myself they could do _nothing_, unless I consented, which, of
course, I never would. Oh, I shall be very happy and safe now. It will
even be amusing, or it would be if I were sure the Duke couldn't harm
_you_."

"He tried yesterday and failed," said I. "If he tries again, he'll fail
again. But for the present, he thinks it was a false alarm, and perhaps
believes I've stopped in Biarritz, sulking."

"It was dangerous for you to come," said Monica.

I laughed. "Don't I look like the sort of fellow who can take care of
himself--and maybe the girl he loves, too?"

"Yes, yes," she answered. "How I love you, and how proud I am of you. If
you should stop caring--if you should find it wasn't worth while--"

"We've too few moments together to discuss impossibilities."

"Ah, but you have known me such a short time. Suppose you should see
someone else--" and she glanced at Pilar's pretty, heart-shaped face, and
the velvet eyes raised in contemplation of a carved Madonna.

"There's nobody else but you in the world," I had begun, when Pilar
beckoned. "They're coming," she said. "You must be looking at this sweet
little panel, Lady Monica. Cristóbal, go instantly and stare as hard as
you can at San Gerónimo on the other side. See, that pet who is twisting
his dear feet."

It was thus they found us; the two girls chatting over the perfection of
the tombs of the constable and his wife; the soldier blind to the charms
of his sister's companion, and wrapped in reverent contemplation of a
wooden masterpiece.

"We were so stupid to lose you," said Pilar. "But we thought you'd be sure
to come back this way by and by."


                                   XIV


SOME LITTLE IDEAS OF DICK'S


We said good-bye presently, still in the cathedral, all very polite and
conventionally interested in each other's affairs. Pilar ingenuously hoped
that we might meet again in Madrid. The Duke said he hoped so too, but did
not know, as they were motoring, and stopped each day where fancy
prompted. Pilar thought this charming, and said that we were going to have
a little trip with an automobile, too. An American friend had invited us.

At that very moment the American friend was visible in the dim distance,
standing with his back to us, gazing at an alabaster tomb. One would have
thought he had some reason for avoiding us, or else escaping an
introduction to the others, for he let them leave the cathedral before he
tore himself away from his study of the sleeping cardinal. When they had
vanished, however, he came towards us with a briskness which showed that
he had taken more interest in our movements than he appeared to do.

"It's gone off beautifully!" Pilar informed him. "And you did exactly
right, Señor Waring. You see," she said to me, "on second thoughts one saw
he'd better keep out of the way, for fear the Duke might begin to put two
and two together, just as he was noticing that Cristóbal looked rather
like someone else. He caught a glimpse of Señor Waring's face yesterday,
in the car, and it will be safer for him not to see _us_ in that car until
we have gone on a little further. Then, he will have had time to get used
to my brother's face, as my brother's. Wasn't that a clever idea of mine?"

We all praised her; and praised her again when she explained her policy in
having dropped a hint about our American motoring friend, so that she need
not be suspected of having tried to conceal anything when the car appeared
on the scene.

"The Duke's auto was at the door when I came in," said Dick. "He must have
seen ours."

"Yes. But he saw you, too, prowling round the cathedral by yourself. I
suppose you have as much right to be motoring in Spain as he has, seeing
the sights?"

This was true. And as the grey car had now probably gone off, it was time
that ours persued.

Ropes was in his seat, coated and legginged once more in leather, and so
well goggled that there was no reason why he should be associated in any
mind with that Mr. George Smith who had threatened to air his wrongs in
_The Times_. He had seen the other car go, so we must follow. We crossed
the Arlanzon and I looked back regretfully at the citadel of Burgos,
rising in the middle of the town. We had had no time to visit that castle
in which so much history has been made. There the Cid was married; there
he held prisoner Alfonso of Leon; there was Edward the First of England
married to Eleanor of Castile; and there Pedro the Cruel first saw the
light. But if there was one regret more pressing than another, it was that
I could not go to the Town Hall and pay my respects to those bones of the
Cid, and Ximena his wife, so strangely restored to Burgos, after their
extraordinary wanderings to far Sigmaringen.

"Who is this _Thith_ you all keep talking about?" demanded Dick, as the
car spun along the river bank.

"Heavens, don't tell me that you've been brought up in ignorance of our
national hero!" I exclaimed. "If I'd dreamed of such a thing, I couldn't
have made a friend of you. Why, this was his town. He was married in the
citadel. He--"

"How do you spell him?" asked Dick, cautiously.

"C-i-d, of course."

"Great Scott! you don't mean to say my old friend the Cid was the _Thith_
all the time, and I never knew it? What a blow! I don't see why C-i-d
shouldn't spell Cid, even in Spanish; as a Thith I can't respect him."

"Then let him go to the grave with you as the Cid," said I. "But you know,
or ought to know, that 'C,' and 'Z,' and sometimes 'D' are 'th' with us."

"I never bothered much with trying to pronounce foreign languages," said
Dick. "I just wrestle with the words the best I can in plain American. But
now--I always thought it rude to mention it before--I understand why you
Spaniards seem to lisp, and hiss out your last syllables like secrets. As
for the place we're going to next--"

"Valladolid?" I pronounced it as a Spaniard does, "Valyadoleeth."

"Yes. That beats the Thith. My tongue isn't built for it, and I shall call
it simply Val."

With murmured regrets from the Cherub that we strangers were turning our
backs on Burgos without seeing all its treasures, and sighs from Pilar for
the Cartuja de Miraflores, and the most beautiful carved tomb on earth, we
turned our faces towards Valladolid.

Our road cut through the arid plain that had stretched before us
yesterday. Few trees punctuated the sad song of its monotony; but always
in the distance rose yellow hills like lions crouched asleep, lights and
shadows sailing above their heads with the bold swoop of the Titanic
birds. More than once we crossed the poor, single line of railway, the
main thoroughfare between Paris and Madrid, and Dick said that Spain
needed a few Americans to wake her up. Three trains a day indeed, and a
speed of fifteen miles an hour! People shook their heads and told you that
Spain was no country to motor in. Well, it was certainly no country to
travel in by rail, unless you wanted to forget where you were going before
you got there. He wished he were a managing director; or no, on second
thoughts, the thing he'd prefer would be to improve the future of the
motor industry. Why, there was a fortune to be picked up by some chap with
a little go, and a little capital. Look at these roads, now; not so bad,
any of them, as far as we had seen; some, as good as in France; others,
only rough because science hadn't been employed in making them; after rain
they got soft and muddy, and then hardened into ridges. But a few
thousands of dollars, well laid out, would change that. Then, with a good
service of automobiles, see what could be done in the way of conveying
market produce and a hundred other things. What was the matter with
Spaniards that they didn't fix up some scheme of this sort?

The Cherub, listening politely to Dick's remarkable Spanish, and
understanding perhaps half, answered mildly that it would be a great deal
of trouble, and Spaniards didn't like trouble.

"But I suppose Spaniards like getting rich, don't they?" said Dick, who
was resting, and letting Ropes drive, while he made a fourth in the
tonneau.

"They are not anxious. It is better to be comfortable," murmured the
Irish-Spaniard. "Besides, it is vulgar to be too rich, and makes one's
neighbours unhappy. It is a thing I would not do myself."

"That is true," said Pilar. "It isn't what you call sour grapes. Papa
could be rich if he liked. We have copper on our land, much copper. Men
came and told papa that if he chose to work it he might have one of the
best copper mines in Spain."

"And he wouldn't?" asked Dick.

"Not for the world," said Colonel O'Donnel, with a flash of pride in his
mild, brown eyes. "I do not come of that sort of people. I am an officer.
I am not a miner."

"But," pleaded Dick, bewildered by this new type of man, who refused to
open his door and let money, tons of money, roll in, "but you could sell
the land and make an enormous profit. You could keep shares, and--"

"I have no wish to sell," replied the Cherub.

"Well, you might let others work the mine for you."

"But I prefer living over it. It's beautiful land. I would not have it
made ugly. My ancestors would rise from their graves and cry out against
me."

"Still, we are poor," said Pilar. "New brother, pray be careful of
Cristóbal's clothes," and she laughed merrily. "It will be a long time
before we can afford to buy others."

"And all that copper eating its head off underground," gasped Dick.

"We have cousins who are prouder than we about such things," said Pilar.
"Two girls and their mother, who live in Seville. They've a beautiful old
house with lovely grounds, but nothing else. How they manage not to
starve, the saints know. They've sold their china and jewels--everything
but their mantillas--to keep their carriage; and they have to share that
with two other families of cousins, each taking it in turn; but they have
three doors to the carriage--a door with the family crest of one, a door
with the crest of the second, and another with the third; so nobody
outside knows. A Scotch company want to buy their house and land for an
hotel, and have offered enough money to make them rich for life; but
they'd rather die than give up the place. And although one of my cousins
can paint beautifully, and could make a great deal by selling pretty
sketches of Seville, her mother won't allow it. I do think it's carrying
pride too far; but there are lots of people I know who are like that."

"It makes me feel as if I'd came through a week's illness just to hear it
all," said Dick. "I can't get over that copper."

Through village after village we sped smoothly, everyone delighted to see
us except the dogs, who resented our coming, and made driving a
difficulty, until Ropes picked up a trick which usually served to keep
dogs and car out of danger from one another. He would throw up his arms
suddenly and the dog, thinking of a whip or a stone, would mechanically
spring out of harm's way. By that time we would have whizzed past.

After a short run we reached Torquemada, home of the Grand Inquisitor;
crossed the Pisuerga by a long-legged bridge straddling across the
river-bed; had a fleeting glimpse of Venta de Baños; came to a
straight-cut canal of beryl-green water (which Dick gloomily pronounced a
surprising evidence of energy in Spain), and slowed down to wonder at a
village of cave dwellings, hollowed out in tiers in the hillside, above
the road on our right.

It was such a place as Crockett describes excitingly in one of his books
of adventure. All the long, yellow flank of the hill was honeycombed with
little, dark doorways and leering windows, whence wild faces looked. From
hummocky chimneys rose the smoke of hidden fires burning in the heart of
the earth; while down in the road a donkey or two, with their heads in
yellow bags and their forefeet tied together with rope, tried to hop away
up the steep hill, as if they were gigantic rabbits.

By the waterside stood pollarded trees, scraggy and black, ranged along
the shore like naked negro boys, big-headed, with shaggy lumps of wool,
hesitating before a plunge. The sandy roads were welcome after stones, and
suddenly the landscape began to copy Africa, with shifting yellow sand
deserts, brushed by purple shadows of the Sahara. Far away, the mountains,
rolling along the wide horizon, glimmered blue, rose, ochre, and white,
like coloured marble or a Moorish mosaic. Again we flashed past a
troglodyte village in a hillside; crossed a magnificent bridge, which even
Dick approved; wound through a labyrinth of strange streets like the
streets in a nightmare, and roads to match; smelt mingled perfumes of
incense, burning braziers, cigarettes, and garlic (the true and intimate
smell of country Spain); saw Dueñas, where fair Isabel la Católica met
Ferdinand in the making of the most romantic of royal courtships; spun
through Cabezon: and then, as we entered Valladolid, began bumping and
buckjumping over such chasms and ruts as had not yet insulted our wheels
in Spain.

"Heavens! What can the City Fathers be thinking about?" gasped Dick,
between the jolts which even the best springs could not disguise. On we
went, through that famous old town which Philip the Second chose for the
capital of Spain; and each street was a more awful revelation than the
last. The car pitched and rolled like a vessel in a choppy sea, shuddering
to right herself between breakers, though Ropes drove at walking pace.
"Who ever heard of roads being all right outside a town, and going to bits
in it?" Dick went on. "Why, in America--"

"But this is Spain," the Cherub reminded him.

We had left Burgos at half-past ten, and it was two when we plunged into
the town which Dick shortened to "Val." There I took advantage of the part
I played, and sought the hotel at which Carmona must lunch or perhaps put
up for the night; but to my astonishment he was not to be found at either
of the two possible _fondas_. I was hungry, for I had had no breakfast
except a cup of coffee at the Sign of the Cid; but I would not eat until
the mystery was solved.

The grey car had been seen coming into town, and none had seen it go out;
nevertheless it, with all its passengers, had vanished. While the others
went through a high-sounding French menu at the hotel first on the
guide-book list, Ropes and I did detective work. It was he, really, who
picked up the trail of the Lecomte, when we had walked back to the street
it must have entered first; and even for Ropes this would have proved an
impossible feat if our automobiles had not been the only two which had
passed since the heavy rains. "I've got the pattern of those non-skids
printed on my brain, sir, since yesterday," said he. "What I don't know
about 'em, isn't worth knowing."

So he pounced upon the thick, straight, dotted line in the mud, and,
losing it often, but always picking it out again, we turned and wound till
the trail stopped in front of a private house. Later, it went on; but it
was evident that the car had paused. The mud was much trampled, and
probably luggage had been taken down.

We presumed, therefore, that those we sought were within; but the next
thing was to find the resting-place of the Lecomte, lest it should
disappear and leave us in the lurch, ignorant of its destination. Luckily
for us, the worst was over. The trail led to a stable not far away, and as
the doors stood wide open we had the joyous relief of seeing the car being
cleansed of its rich coat of mud. The chauffeur was superintending, his
back turned to the doors, and we walked quickly on lest he should spy a
leather coat and guess that his own game was being played upon him.

"Now you can rest easy, sir," said Ropes. "That car won't leave this town
without my knowing; and it'll go hard if I aren't able to tell you in the
course of the next hour whether it's due to start to-day or to-morrow."

I laughed gratefully. "Thank you, Ropes," said I. "I shan't ask how you
mean to get your information. When you say you can do a thing, I know it's
as good as done."

"It's for me to thank you, sir--for everything," he replied, flushing with
pleasure.

Then we went back to the hotel. And whether Ropes lunched or not I cannot
say; but I did, with a good appetite, Dick and my adopted family lingering
at the table to hear my news.

In three-quarters of an hour Sherlock Holmes kept his word by sending in a
short note, addressed (as I had suggested) to Waring. "Honoured Sir," it
ran, "Lecomte remains night. Master and friends stopping with his
relatives. Will let you know time of start in morning, and have our car
ready--Respectfully, P. Ropes."

Some servant of the house or stable-boy had doubtless earned a few
pesetas. Just how the trick had been done, was of little importance, for
it was done. With a light heart in my breast, and Cristóbal O'Donnel y
Alvarez' uniform still unsuitably adorning my back, I went with the others
to do some sightseeing, and look for Monica.

We wandered rather aimlessly through the streets, stopping before any
building which caught our interest; staring up at the windows behind which
Cervantes wrote part of "Don Quixote" when he had come back from slavery;
admiring the graceful mirador of that corner house where Philip the Second
was born; ("Much too good for him, since the world would have been better
if he hadn't been born at all," said Dick, who has Dutch ancestors and a
long memory;) trying to identify the place where Gil Blas studied medicine
with Doctor Sangrado; wandering into two or three churches, but wasting no
time on the cathedral spoilt by Churriguera.

"As a Spaniard, what's your opinion of the Inquisition?" Dick suddenly
asked the Cherub, as if he were inquiring the time of day. We had stopped
for a moment in the Plaza Mayor where Philip had watched the heretics
burning in their yellow, flame-painted shirts, in the first great
_auto-da-fé_ which he organized.

As another Spaniard, I know that this is the one question of all others,
perhaps, which it is not wise to put to a Spaniard, even in this
comfortable twentieth century. But Dick either did not know, or wished it
to appear that he did not know; and I watched the effect of the words. But
the Cherub was equal to the occasion--and his cherubicness.

He glanced round instinctively, as a man might a few centuries ago, to
make sure that nobody overheard; then smiling slowly, he replied, "I am no
judge, señor; I am half-Irishman."

Pilar had looked disturbed, but she gave a little sigh at this, saying,
"Come on, and see the museum."

Nowhere in Spain can there be a more beautiful thing than that façade,
well named Plateresque because of its resemblance to the workmanship of
silversmiths; and inside the museum we found a collection of carved wooden
figures marvellous enough, as Dick said, to "beat the world." There were
crucifixions, painted saints, and weeping virgins by Hernandez and
Berruguete, faultlessly modelled, so vivid and beautiful as to be
well-nigh startling; and I hoped that Monica might come while we lingered.
But she did not, nor did we see her in the Colegio de San Gregorio. There,
in the lovely inner court, however, I found a little grey glove on the
marble pavement, and so like a certain other glove did it look that I
annexed it, to compare with that other which lived in my breast-pocket
with its friend the rose.

The pair matched in size, colour, and dainty shape. Even the fragrance of
orris hung about it, and I knew this second glove had not been dropped by
accident. Monica had been here, and she had left a message for me to read
if I followed.


                                    XV


HOW THE DUKE CHANGED


"Lecomte getting ready, sir," were Ropes' first words to me next morning;
"and I've brought our car to the door."

He had other news, too. An automobile had come in last night from Madrid,
a sixty horse-power Merlin, and the chauffeur had reported snow half a
metre deep on the mountains. The Merlin had stuck, he said, and had to be
pulled out with oxen. Supposing the Duke intended going to Madrid instead
of turning off by way of Salamanca, he--and incidentally we--seemed likely
to come in for an adventure.

We had all taken coffee and rolls in our rooms, as nobody dreams of going
downstairs for breakfast in a Spanish hotel; and soon after eight we were
jolting out of "Val" through streets as execrably paved as those by which
we entered. We had kept Ropes waiting after his announcement only long
enough to strap our luggage on the roof; and as the other car had luggage
and passengers also to pick up, we were just in time to see it leaving the
house of the Duke's relations with everyone on board.

As the Lecomte took the road to the south on leaving town, it gave us an
assurance that it would not make for Salamanca; but there was still doubt
as to its movements. It could go to Madrid direct over the snow heights of
the Sierra Guadarrama, or it could pay a visit to the Escurial. It might
even halt there for the night; and as there were so many alternatives, we
were anxious to keep our leader continually in view.

The wind was bitter cold, and Pilar shivered in her cloak, which was not
made for motoring. When Dick saw this, before I could speak he had his own
fur-lined coat off, insisting that she should put it on. "I can take Casa
Triana's," said he, "since he's still posing as a soldier of Spain." And a
glance warned me not to blunder by asking why, in the name of common
sense, she shouldn't have mine which I wasn't using, instead of his, which
was on his back. He _wanted_ her to wear his coat, and hang common sense!

After an instant's stupid bewilderment I saw this, and could hardly help
chuckling. How many days had he known her? Two and a bit. At Biarritz he
had given me sound advice on my affairs; couldn't understand this
fall-in-love-at-sight business; thought a girl wasn't worth a red cent
till she was twenty-two couldn't see himself being sentimental in any
circumstances; was going to wait to make his choice till he went back to
America; believed a man owed it to his own country to put his
country-women first; and anyhow couldn't stand a girl who wasn't able to
converse rationally. Yet Pilar, if she were to talk with him in his own
tongue, must perforce limit her scintillations to "Varry nice, lo-vely,
all raight"; while, if he wrestled with hers, he could scarcely go beyond
phrase-book limits.

The language of the eyes remained; but that has no place in the realm of
common sense. My overcoat was singularly unbecoming to Dick; but he beamed
with happiness in it, as he regarded Pilar cosily folded in his; and
looking on the picture, certain things occurred to me which I might say to
Dick when I got him alone. But after all, I thought I would keep them to
laugh over myself.

On this morning of biting wind and brilliant sun, there was still more
dazzle of snow to illumine the mountain tops; and though the road was
dull, the beauty of the atmospheric effects was worth coming to Spain to
see. The road we travelled and the near meadows seemed, as we went
speeding on, the only solid ground in sight; as if we had landed on an
island floating at the rate of thirty miles an hour, through a vast sea of
translucent tints that changed with the light, as an opal changes.

Forests of strangely bunchy "umbrella" pines were blots of dark green ink
splashed against the sky; and scarcely five minutes passed but we saw the
finger of an old watch-tower pointing cloudward from a hill. Sometimes our
road, dividing endless cornfields, stretched before us long and straight
for miles ahead, over switchback after switchback, as if the hills chased
each other but never succeeded in catching up. Then, when we had grown
used to such an outlook, the road would twist so suddenly that it seemed
to spring up in our faces. It would turn upon itself and writhe like a
wounded cobra, before it was able to crawl on again.

Ours was a silent, uninhabited world, without a house visible anywhere,
save here and there some stony ruin--a landmark of the Peninsular War. One
could but think that gnomes stole out at night from holes under the hills,
to till the land for absentee owners; for the illimitable fields were
cultivated down to the last inch. We shared a queer impression that we had
strayed into a country which no human eye had seen for centuries; but when
we crossed the broad Douro running to the Bay of Biscay and Oporto, and
steered the car jerkily through the ragged village of Mojales, at an
abrupt turn of the road we were in a different world--a desert of stones.

Prehistoric giants had played with dolmens and cyclopean boulders, and
left their toys scattered in confusion. Stonehenge might have been copied
from one of their strange structures; and they had given later races a
rough idea of forts and cities. Giant children had fashioned stone
elephants, heads of warriors, dogs sitting on their haunches, granite
drinking cups, and misshapen baskets, all of astonishing size. Or was it
water, slow as the mills of the gods, and as sure, which had wrought all
these fantastic designs, and piled these tremendous blocks one upon
another?

A high stone bridge spanned a rocky ravine carved by that slow power in a
few leisure millions of years; and there, sheltered from the wind, would
have been an ideal place for motorists to picnic. But the Duke did not
picnic, therefore we must not. Following hard upon his heels we went on,
up and up into the mountain world, still in the playground of vanished
giants, winding along a road as wild as the way to Montenegro. Rising at
regular intervals before us, on either side stood tall stone columns,
sentinel-like, placed in pairs to guide wayfarers through white drifts in
time of winter storms. The country was wooded, and began to have the air
of a private park, though the heights were close above us now, and our
road ascended steadily. From the scenery of Montenegro we came plump into
the Black Forest; and Baden-Baden might have lain in the valley below
these pointed mountains clothed in mourning pines.

Squish! The brown slush of melted snow gushed out in fountains as our fat
tyres ploughed through, and on either hand it lay unbroken in virgin
purity beneath the pines. Half a mile higher, and even the traffic of
heavy ox-carts and the sun's fierce fire had had no power to break the
marble pavement. It was shattered and chipped, and carved into deep ruts
by wooden wheels; but there were no muddy veins of brown. Ten minutes
more, and our engine began to labour. Then, before there was time to count
the moments, we were in snow to our axles.

The motor's heart beat hard, but with a sturdy, dependable noise which
comforted Pilar, who was half laughing, half frightened, at this her first
adventure. At any instant now we might come upon the Lecomte held in the
snow-trap which threatened to catch us.

Ropes kept the car in the wide ruts made by ox-carts, but even with his
good driving we swayed to right and left, leaving the rough track and
ploughing into drifts dangerously near the precipice edge, or skidding as
if we skated on polished ice, failing to grip the frozen surface.

Now was the time to relieve the willing engine. Dick and I sprang out, and
Colonel O'Donnel followed, though we would have persuaded him to keep his
place. Only Pilar was left in the car, with Ropes driving, while we three
men, knee deep in snow, set our shoulders to help the Gloria as she made
the supreme effort. Pushing, and slipping at every step, our blood (which
had run sluggishly with cold) racing through our veins, we were putting on
a great spurt of united force, when gallantly rounding a bend we all but
rammed the back of Carmona's car.

There it was, stuck in a drift like a frozen wave; and there was Carmona
himself up to his knees in diamond dust, gloomily superintending his
chauffeur who packed snow into the radiator to cool the overheated motor.

All the extra power of the Lecomte gave no advantage over the Gloria here.
Fate had set the stage for us, and we must obey the cue. No ingenuity of
Pilar's could hide us in the wings any longer, and we must play our parts
as Destiny prompted.

Only one thing was clear. Carmona could have had no idea until now that
the O'Donnels (with that young soldier so like the Forbidden Man) were
travelling in the red car whence he had already plucked a suspected
passenger. The coincidence would seem strange to him; and if he were sure
enough of his ground to risk another error, he would probably denounce me
to the police in the next big town. Disguising my outcast self as an
officer in a Spanish regiment would not be a point in my favour; but--he
could do nothing now. Monica was here, and the moment was mine.

There was a savage joy in the situation, born of exaltation, of the high
altitude, and of uncertainty as to what might come next.

"Shall you keep out of the way?" asked Dick; for we were still screened
from Carmona's sight by our own car, which Ropes had stopped with a
grinding of the brake; and Pilar's face was veiled.

"Not I. I'm going to have some fun," I answered. "It must come sooner or
later, better sooner, or what's the good of playing Cristobal O'Donnel?"

With that, I appeared from behind the car, and the others were following,
while Pilar leaned out in anxious expectancy.

"How do you do?" said I, in Andaluz as lazy as the other Cristóbal could
have used. I took off my cap to the ladies, and so did Dick and the
Cherub, exposing heated foreheads, damp from honest toil. "Sorry to find
you in such a difficulty. But we'll soon get you out of that, won't we,
Señor Waring? Here are three of us with stout shoulders and willing
hearts."

"Four, counting my chauffeur," said Dick in English, playing up to my
lead, since there was no stopping me now. "We're delighted to do anything
we can."

Carmona glared as an animal glares when it is at bay; only, an animal can
attack his enemies, and he could not attack us; for he was not sure
whether we were enemies or no, and whether he would not be making a fool
of himself if he let us know what passed in his brain.

It was evident that he thought very hard for a moment, and was of two
minds as to what he had better do. But suddenly the baited look vanished
from his face, as a shadow is chased away by the sun, and I guessed that a
course of action had occurred to him with which he was well satisfied.
This seemed ominous for me, and I would have given something to read his
thoughts.

He answered our "How do you do?" with great cordiality--for him; said that
he had been taken by surprise, at first, as he had no idea the motoring
tour of which Señorita Pilar spoke would begin so soon, or bring us upon
his track. It was a good thing for him, however, that we were here, and
not only was he pleased to see us for our own sakes, but would be glad to
accept our kind offer.

Meanwhile Pilar had pushed up her veil, and she and Monica were exchanging
greetings. As for Lady Vale-Avon, her veil was up, too, and her lorgnettes
at her eyes. I did not doubt that she and the Duke had compared
impressions concerning our family party, after the episode at Burgos,
impressions startlingly confirmed now, and Carmona's cordiality in such
circumstances must have puzzled her. As to the Duchess, her large face was
hidden behind a thick screen of lead-coloured tissue, and I could judge
nothing of her feelings.

When Monica heard the proposal for propelling the grey car through the
drifts, she had the door open in an instant, and would have been out in
the deep snow, if we had not stopped her.

"You must all stay where you are," said Carmona hurriedly, fearing,
perhaps, that some opportunity for a word would be snatched in spite of
him, if I were really Casa Triana. "The weight of three women makes no
difference whatever; isn't that true, señor?" and he turned to Dick, who,
according to our story, was the owner of the red automobile as well as the
host of the party.

Of course Dick agreed, and so did we all, that the ladies were not on any
account to get out. The Duke's chauffeur jumped into his place again, and,
with a twist of the starting handle, the tired motor quivered to its iron
entrails. There was a sudden awaking of carburetor, pistons,
sparking-plugs, valves, trembler, each part which had been resting after
the long pull, striving to obey its master. With a sighing scream of the
gearing, the car stumbled forward and up, our united force pressed into
service. Staggering, plunging, pushing, we gave all the help we could, and
for a few minutes it seemed that with our aid the motor would claw its way
to the highest point.

Our hearts drummed in our breasts, and sent the hot blood jumping to our
heads as if in sympathy with the mighty struggle of the engine. But the
Lecomte's forty horses, and the strength and goodwill of five men--counting
Carmona, who did as little work as he could--were not enough. The wheels
sank to the axles, whizzing round in the snow without propelling the car;
with the motor unable to do its part, we men alone could not do all. The
automobile would not budge for all our pushing; and, seeing that labour
was lost, we stopped to breathe and raise our eyebrows questioningly at
one another. Carmona, alarmed at finding that his chestnuts could not be
pulled out of the fire by any cat's-paws at his service, wondered audibly
what he ought to do.

"Someone who came to Valladolid last night was hauled through the drifts
by oxen," said I. And even as I spoke, like a ram caught in the bushes
ready for the sacrifice, I spied in the white distance the black
silhouette of an enormous ox.

He was not alone, for a more penetrating glance showed that he had a
yoke-fellow as big and black as himself; and guided by a red-sashed boy in
scarf and shawl they advanced towards us slowly but so surely that I
suspected something more than a coincidence. The great lumbering animals
were like blobs of ink against the snow, and the lithe figure of the boy
made a fine spot of colour as he walked before his beasts, his stick to
their noses as if it were a magnet which they, anchored head to head with
a beam of wood, were compelled to follow.

It flashed into my mind that this youth and his oxen were not wandering
through mountain snow-drifts for nothing. The wolves which howl in these
same wild fastnesses on a winter night scent prey; and so I thought did
the boy, with the trifling substitute of petrol for blood. This youth had
made a good haul (in every sense of the word) by accident yesterday; was
out searching for other hauls to-day, and would be while the snow lasted.

We hailed him. He feigned surprise, and hesitated, as if to enhance his
value. Then, casting down long lashes as he listened to our proposal,
pretended to consider pros and cons. It would be a terrible strain for his
animals to drag such a great weight, but--oh, certainly they would be
_able_ to do it. They were docile and strong. Every day nearly they drew
heavy loads of cut logs over the mountains. For twenty pesetas he would
risk injuring his oxen, but not a _real_ less; and they would drag the
grey car to the top of the pass, that he could promise.

"What extortion!" protested Carmona, who is not famed for generosity,
except when something can be made out of it.

"Oh, he's too handsome to beat down!" pleaded Monica.

That settled it. To please her he would have given twice twenty pesetas
for half the distance. The boy was engaged without further haggling; the
animals were harnessed to the big Lecomte with rope which the youth
"happened" to have; and with a thrilling cry of "A-r-r-r-i! O-lah!" he
struck the two black backs with his goad.

"I can't bear to see it!" Monica cried, covering her eyes, as the great
heads were lowered to adjust the strain, and every muscle in the powerful,
docile bodies writhed and bunched with the tremendous effort. Big as they
were, it seemed impossible that two oxen could do for the car, with
passengers and luggage, what its own engine refused to do; nevertheless
the huge thing moved, at first with a shuddering jerk, then with a steady,
if lumbering crawl.

"O-lah!" shouted the boy; "thump" on the thick hide over the straining
muscles fell the goad, and thus the car lurched through the deep snow, all
of us following except Ropes, who having poured melted snow into the
radiator, and let the cooling stream flow through the waterpipes, was
bringing on the Gloria slowly, by her own power. She had now but two
passengers, and not half as much luggage as the Lecomte, which perhaps
explained her prowess; nevertheless I was proud. "Brava, Gloria!" I should
have liked to shout.

I could now have pushed ahead, and keeping pace with Carmona's car, as the
oxen struggled nobly up the pass, have tried for a word or two with
Monica. But perhaps Lady Vale-Avon expected such a move on the part of the
troublesome young officer; and by way of precaution she had crowded near
to the girl in the tonneau. A conversation worth having would have been
hopeless thus spied upon, and I disappointed the chaperon by making no
such attempt.

To my surprise, Carmona walked with us, instead of forging on beside his
own car. His friendliness puzzled me. Each look directed at my face was
sharp as a gimlet, though his words were genial; but the final shock came
when he announced that he was bound for the Escurial, and asked if we
would like to join his party.

"I know the palace like a book--better than I know most books," said he;
"and if you've never been, I can get you into places not usually shown."

The Cherub thanked Heaven that he had never been; and far would it be from
him to go to-day or any other day. He had beheld the Escurial from
outside, and had been depressed to the verge of tears. Often since he had
consoled himself for various misfortunes by reflecting that, at worst, he
was not enduring them at the Escurial. But he would sit in the automobile
and compose himself to doze while his dear children and friends were
martyred in the Monastery.

"You're very good to personally conduct us," Dick answered the Duke, "but
we've no time for the Escurial."

"It will be worth while to make time," I hurried to break in, though Dick
glared a warning which said, "You silly ass, don't you see the man's
laying a trap, and you're falling into it?"

I was ready to risk that trap, and realizing that I meant to see the thing
through, Dick urged no further objections.


                                   XVI


A SECRET OF THE KING'S


Pilar said that the oxen were idiotic dears to break their hearts for
nothing, not even a percentage on the twenty pesetas. But four-footed
beasts are tragically conscientious, and these farmyard martyrs
accomplished their task without a groan, while the Gloria crept up close
behind on her own power.

I thanked the patron saint of cow creation when the straining brutes got
to the top. The summit of the pass was crowned by a lion on a granite
pedestal; a lion with a cold air of pride in his mission of marking the
limit between Old Castile and New. For me also he marked something for
which I owed him gratitude; my deeper advance into the heart of my own
land.

Close to our resting-place at the top of the pass there was a rude hut,
and one or two wagons which had strained up from the other side were
halting their smoking teams. Here, seated in the car again, as we waited
to see the oxen unyoked and the boy paid, a girl came out from the little
house with a large volume, in which she asked us to sign our names. The
Cherub scrawled something; and as Dick was scribbling, Carmona strolled
across, to see whether or no I entrusted my name to the book. I had meant
not to do so, but now I would have changed my mind had not Colonel
O'Donnel stopped me. "I wrote your name, Cristóbal," said he, in his
ambrosial voice; and the situation was saved. Carmona made some
commonplace remark to account for his approach, and walked away with a
self-conscious back, as Pilar's glance and Monica's crossed the distance
between the two automobiles and met mischievously.

The grey car took the lead again, and at a turn of the road it seemed that
the whole world lay at our feet; yet it was not even all of Old Castile,
so vast a country is my Spain.

Far as the eye could travel spread the fair land, green with the tender
green of spring, yellow with patches of golden sand, darkly tufted with
woods; struck with flying shafts of light, ringed in with ethereal blue.

Nothing could steal from me this illuminated missal of memories, and were
I to be banished to-morrow, I should have Spain to keep in my heart, I
said, as we rushed down the steep, winding way that serpentined along the
southern slope of the Guadarrama. A breakneck road it was, but nobly
engineered, twisting back upon itself in many coils, letting us fly with
the speed of a bird to lower levels; and it seemed that scarcely had we
sunk over the brink of the mountain than we were at the turn on the right
which would lead to the Escurial.

Straight before us, rising out of the bare mountain side and seeming a
part of it, towered and stretched a building vaster than any I had seen
even in the limitless spaces of dreamland. Were it not for its cold
regularity, I should have thought myself approaching another desert of
giants who made toys of monoliths and obelisks; but these appalling domes
and towers could be the work of man alone. There was no toying here; all
was forbidding and gloomy; for this was the Escurial--immense, sinister, as
if fashioned from the grim product of those iron mines which gave its
name.

I could imagine the fanatical satisfaction Philip's dry mind had found in
planning this monument to represent the gridiron on which Saint Lawrence
was martyred. He who was to stand in history as the great Inquisitor, must
build his monastery and palace in honour of a martyr! But Philip was the
last man to have a sense of humour; and it was like him to appease an
injured saint by giving him a church a thousand times bigger than the one
destroyed on Saint Lawrence's own day, in the battle of San Quentin.

"Wouldn't the Escurial be hideous if it were anywhere else but just here?"
asked Pilar.

She was right; for on the Sierra it seemed an expression of the Sierra;
and in spite of Philip rather than because of him, it was splendid in the
melancholy strength which made it a brother of mountains.

We lunched on extremely Spanish food at a _fonda_ opposite the Escurial;
and when the time came for sightseeing--a time for us, but not for the
public--the Duke began by marshalling us all, except the weary Duchess and
the lazy Cherub, through the great door guarded by Saint Lawrence. Once
within, we saw the treasures, as a bird in flight sees the beauties of a
town over which he swoops; but we did see them, and once I had three words
and one look from Monica, before it occurred to Lady Vale-Avon to link an
arm in her daughter's, in a sudden overflow of maternal affection.

Carmona had made a point of the "influence" which could open for us doors
that, for others, would remain shut; and he did smuggle us into the
Library of Manuscripts, the Queen's Oratory, and the Capilla Mayor to see
the royal tombs. But after we had stopped longer than he wished in the
church, and the Choir, where Philip learned that Lepanto had saved Europe
from the Turks, and listened to the sad music of Mary Stuart's requiem,
the Duke promised something still better, in the palace. "What you shall
see there," he said, "is a secret. It was a secret of King Philip's--so
great a secret that even the writers of guide-books know nothing of it;
while, if a tourist should have heard a rumour and asked a question, the
attendants would say, 'There's no such thing in existence.' Only the Royal
Family know, a few privileged people about the Court, and the guardians of
the Escurial. As for me, I was told by someone here--someone whom I myself
placed in the palace."

My curiosity was excited; and even Dick, who resented this expedition,
looked interested as we arrived at the palace--the great gridiron's handle.
At the entrance Carmona separated himself from the rest of the party,
saying that he must have a few words in private with the attendant who
would show the rooms of Philip the Second. He walked ahead, engaged the
brown-liveried guide in low-voiced conversation, and seemed to ask a
question with some eagerness.

Observing the pantomime from a distance, I fancied that, for some reason,
Carmona was to be denied the privilege of which he had boasted; but,
apparently, he did not intend to accept defeat without a struggle. He and
the guide moved on, then stopped again to argue--this time with their backs
to us; but, from the action of Carmona's elbows, I judged that he put his
hand into his pocket. Five or six minutes later he returned, to announce
that after some difficulty he had succeeded in getting his own way. We
might go, unattended, into the private apartments of Philip the Second;
and while we were there, other visitors would be kept out. "If there are
any, they'll be taken another round," said Carmona, "and won't be ready to
come into the King's rooms until we're ready to come out."

The guide led us down the narrow staircase to the outer door of Philip's
suite, then slipped away, shutting the door behind him. Lady Vale-Avon and
Monica (the mother still clasping her daughter's arm), Pilar, Dick,
Carmona, and I were now alone between the gloomy walls behind which the
bigot and despot had lived his miserable life and died his miserable
death.

There was a chill in the sombre place which froze the spirit; yet I, for
one, did not feel sad. I was conscious only of an excited expectancy, as
if I were waiting for something to happen.

We let our imagination set the meagre form of Philip in his chair, or by
the desk at which he used to write; examined the grim relics of his
monk-like existence; and finally moved to the death-chamber, set like a
stage-box at the theatre, beside the high altar of the chapel.

So small was the room that it was filled by our little party of six; yet I
felt there another presence which none of us could see--a grey ghost
agonising for his sins, through a bleak eternity.

Monica felt it too, for she shivered, and exclaimed, "Let us go. This room
seems haunted with evil. I can't breathe in it."

"But now for the secret," said Carmona. "Would you guess at any hidden
opening in these walls?"

We stared critically about, and I began to test the wainscot, but the Duke
stopped me. "You'd never find the place," he said; "and I promised the
person who told me not to give away the secret; but that doesn't prevent
me from showing you what's behind the door."

He moved close to the wall, stood for an instant, then stepped back, as we
heard a slight clicking sound, like the snap of a spring on an old
box-lid. At the same time a part of the wainscoting rolled away, leaving a
narrow aperture.

It was dark on the other side, but Carmona took a gold match-box from his
pocket and struck a bunch of little wax _fosforos_.

"Philip had this cell made for a place of penance and self-torture," he
said, "and it's just as it used to be during his lifetime, before he was
too ill to go in any more. His twisted wire scourge is there, with his
blood on it, his horsehair shirt, and a girdle bristling with small, sharp
spikes. Will you have a look, Lady Vale-Avon? I can't go with you, for the
cell isn't big enough for two, but I'll hold the matches at the door."

Lady Vale-Avon is of the type of woman who enjoys seeing such things as
these; and though she would not have tortured herself had she lived in
feudal days, I am sure she would have dined calmly over an underground
dungeon where an enemy--an inconvenient wretch like me, for
instance--suffered the pangs of starvation.

She squeezed into the cell, descending a couple of steps, remained for two
or three minutes, and came out, pronouncing it extremely interesting.

"Now, Lady Monica, it's your turn," said Carmona; but Monica drew back, "I
hate seeing torture-things," said she, "and blood, even wicked old blood
like Philip's, which I used to think, when I read about him in history,
I'd love to shed. No, I won't go in, thank you."

Pilar also refused, for if she went she would certainly have a nightmare
and dream she was walled up; thus there remained only the three men to
inspect the hidden horrors.

Carmona held his match-box to me, saying that when we had seen the place
he would look in to refresh his recollections. But Dick calmly helped
himself to several _fosforos_ and took first turn, probably suspecting
something in the way of an _oubliette_, especially prepared for me.

He reappeared presently, however, his suspicions allayed. "Beastly hole,"
he remarked; "almost bad enough for Philip, though he did grill some of my
best ancestors."

I took a couple of matches, lighting them on the Duke's box; then, bending
my head low, and pushing in one shoulder at a time, I squirmed through the
aperture. In so doing, however, I contrived to trip over Carmona's foot,
which must have been thrust forward, staggered against the opposite wall
of the narrow cell, and lost both my lighted vestas. Carmona exclaimed, I
stumbled, and almost simultaneously the door slid into place with a sharp
click.

There was not space to fall at length. I merely lost my balance, and saved
my head from a bump by shielding it with a raised arm, I steadied myself
in a second or two; but I was in black darkness. Outside I could hear a
confused murmur of voices, and would have given something to know what
Dick was saying at the moment.

I was thinking that I should not like to be a prisoner in this hole (only
large enough for the swing of Philip's scourge) for many hours on end,
when there came an imperative tapping. "Holloa!" I answered, expecting to
hear Dick speak in return; but it was Carmona's voice which replied.
Evidently he was speaking with his mouth close to the secret door.

"I'm very sorry for this accident," said he distinctly. "When you
stumbled, you knocked my arm, and made me touch the spring. Unfortunately
the door closed with such a crash, that the spring seems out of order, and
I can't move it. But if you'll be patient a few minutes, I'll look for an
attendant who understands the thing, to bail you out of gaol."

If I had been Lieutenant Cristóbal O'Donnel I would have heard no more in
the rhyming junction of those words "gaol" and "bail" than met the ear,
but being the man I was--the man he suspected me to be--I did hear more; and
I believed that he wished me to catch a double meaning.

"Does he mean to hand me over to the police now, on suspicion?" I wondered
in my black cell--"before Monica's eyes?" But aloud I said, "Thanks; don't
be too long, or I shall be tempted to smash the door."

"You'll find that impossible," answered Carmona. "Don't worry if I seem to
be gone an age. There's only one man on duty to-day who knows the secret
of this room; I asked for him when we came, but his comrade said he was
away on leave till four o'clock. It must be that now, and I'll have him
here as soon as possible. He will be the more pleased to set you free, as
he's an old friend of yours. You remember little Rafael Calmenare?"

I was silent, seeing, as if by the glare of lightning, the whole design of
the trap, and seeming to see also the triumph which must be in Carmona's
eyes. But the pause had not lengthened to a second, when I heard Pilar's
voice, speaking also close to the door.

"Of course you remember, Cristóbal. Rafael Calmenare of the Duke's
_ganaderia_. But it's a long time since he went away."

"After he was gored by Nero and lost his health, through the influence of
a friend at Court I got him a place here," I heard Carmona say. Then
raising his voice for my ears, he went on, "Poor Rafael will be pleased to
see you again. You must have played with him when a boy. I'm off to find
him now."

Silence followed these last words. I could picture the consternation of
Dick and Pilar. Neither could do anything to help me, nor could I help
myself. I could but wait in this suffocating black hole for the moment
when a stranger should give me light, and exclaim, "This is not Don
Cristóbal!"

Almost I admired Carmona for his quick wit. After a few moments of rage,
at sight of the suspected man of Burgos Cathedral on his track in the red
motor-car, the thought of the Escurial and his old servant must have
sprung into his mind.

Had Calmenare been available at first, Carmona would have been spared the
trouble of shutting me up in Philip the Bigot's torture-chamber; but hard
pressed for an excuse to keep us at the Escurial till his man came back,
he had put me where I could be kept while needed. And now that he was gone
in search of Rafael, we three loyal comrades could not discuss the
situation, because of Lady Vale-Avon's presence.

A brilliant stroke of Carmona's to have me betrayed by another than
himself, so that Monica might not bear him a grudge! Who was this person
masquerading as an officer of the Spanish army? would be the first
question of the police. And the answer need not be long in coming. The
Duke had reason to congratulate himself; I had been a fool to drop like a
fly into his net, and now that I was in, I saw no way out.

"Oh, how I wish we could open the secret door!" I heard Monica exclaim.

"I can't even see exactly where it is now," Pilar said. "Cristóbal?"

"Yes," I answered.

"Poor little Rafael; a good fellow, wasn't he?"

"Very good," I replied. To what end was she working? I wondered. But I was
not to be made wiser. Before she had time to finish the hint I heard
Carmona speaking.

"I've sent for Calmenare, who has returned, and will be here in a few
minutes," he called to me. It was like him to hurry back, so that by no
possible means could the three suspected ones reach any understanding.

The moments dragged on, and I could have lashed myself with Philip's
scourge in fury at the rashness which might involve the whole O'Donnel
family in my disaster. Never had I been able to think less clearly; but
perhaps it was the stifling atmosphere of the cell which made me feel that
fingers in a mailed glove were clenched round my temples.

Outside, voices buzzed; but those who spoke must have stood at a distance,
for I could catch no words. Then, at last, there was a new voice in the
room. Calmenare had come.

"How do you do, Don Rafael?" Pilar exclaimed, as politely as if she had
addressed an equal. "I'm glad to see you again. I've been waiting for you
impatiently. Only think, _my dear brother Cristóbal, whom you know so
well_, is in that dreadful place and can't get out, because the Señor
Duque shut him in--by mistake--and broke the spring."

"I do not find that it is broken, señorita," answered the new voice.

"I couldn't make it work," Carmona said hastily.

Click! went the spring under skilled fingers. The door sliding back gave
me a rush of light and air which set me blinking for a second or two; and
there I stood at the stranger's mercy.

What I saw, when my suddenly contracted pupils expanded, was a little man
in the palace livery; a pale little man with insignificant features, and
large, steady eyes. There was absolutely no expression in his face as for
one brief instant our glances met. Then--"God be with you, Don Cristóbal,"
said he. "I am glad to have been even of this slight service. I hope,
señorito, you have not suffered from lack of air?"

"Very little," said I. I held out my hand. He took it respectfully.

"Is it long since you saw each other?" asked Carmona, sallow and red by
turns.

"About two years only, Señor Duque," replied his ex-servant,
expressionless as before, and quietly respectful to all. "I could not
forget the date, for the Señor Colonel and the señorita, as well as the
señorito himself, were always very good to me."

The Duke was silenced. The test invented by himself had failed. Calmenare
accepted me as Cristóbal O'Donnel; he was obliged to accept me too--at
least for the present.

"Shall we get out of this place?" he said to Lady Vale-Avon.

She swept her daughter with her; but Monica had a backward look for me,
sparkling now with malice for Carmona, radiant with relief for Casa
Triana.

We said good-bye to Calmenare in the Duke's presence; and I would have
pressed a gold piece into his hand for "opening my prison door," but he
would not have it. Afterwards, while we followed the grey car on the
downhill road to Madrid, Pilar told the whole story with dramatic effect
to the Cherub.

"My one hope was in Rafael," she said. "I was good to him, you remember,
when he was ill. And he and I had a great sympathy over Corcito, the dear
grey bull. I prayed he'd never forgiven the Duke for that crime, and that
he'd still be grateful to me. Well, I looked Rafael straight in the eyes
when I said, 'My brother Cristóbal is in that place, shut up by the Duke,
who has broken the spring.' With all my soul I willed him to understand,
and he did. 'If the señorita chooses to have a strange gentleman for her
brother, he is her brother for me,' is what he said to himself; no more!
But what if he _hadn't?_"

"That's where I should have come in," remarked Dick.

"What would you have done?" asked Pilar, breathless.

"I don't know," said Dick. "I only know I should have _done_ it; and that
if I had, maybe Carmona wouldn't have been feeling as well as he feels
now."


                                   XVII


LIKE A THIEF IN THE NIGHT


No longer did the Duke desire our company. He had played his little comedy
of good-fellowship, and it was over, though it had not ended according to
his hopes. The grey car did its forty-horse best to outdistance us on the
way to Madrid, but the road--so good that perhaps we lost nothing in the
detour to the Escurial--distributed its favours evenly. We kept close on
the Lecomte's flying heels until one of our four cylinders went to sleep,
and Ropes had to get down and wake it up by testing the ignition.

Some fellow-motorists would have turned to offer help, but the Lecomte was
ever a Levite where we were concerned; and when we were ready to go on,
the grey car was not even a speck in the distance. Luckily, however, there
was little or no doubt where its occupants would put up.

Though the Madrid house of the Carmonas had been burned down ten years ago
(since when the Duchess had made her home at the old palace in Seville),
there was scarcely a Continental paper which had not described the
splendours of the Duke's apartment in one of the finest modern flat-houses
of Madrid. Naturally, he would entertain his mother and guests there, so
that it would be difficult to slip away with them unknown to us.

The thing I did not know was, how long he meant to stay in the capital;
but as he must show Seville in Holy Week, and later perhaps other places
in the south of Spain, to Lady Vale-Avon and Monica before their return to
Madrid for the Royal Wedding, it was almost certain that he would go on in
a couple of days.

The O'Donnels recommended to us the Hotel Inglés, the best Spanish hotel
in Madrid, as well as the most amusing, and it was with a heart
comparatively light that I looked forward to a first sight of my country's
capital. How would it compare with Paris, with Vienna, with London? What
adventures awaited me there? What was to be the next pass in this queer
duel with Carmona?

But I need not have searched for comparisons. As we rushed into Madrid
without threading through any suburbs,--since suburbs the city has none,--I
discovered that it bore no resemblance to any other place.

We flashed from open country to a shady park, set about with buvettes and
beer gardens; ran through a massive gateway, and were in the heart of
Madrid. Electric trams whizzed confusingly round us, and far above the
hubbub of such traffic loomed proudly a hill crowned with an enormous
palace. There was no need to ask if it were the royal palace, for it was
essentially Royal, a house worthy of a king.

My father had fought to put Don Carlos there--Don Carlos, far away now in
Venice; but with all my admiration for his brave son Don Jaime, my
sympathies flowed loyally towards the young dweller on those heights.

We swept under and round the palace hill, as Colonel O'Donnel directed. In
spite of his instructions, however, Dick lost the way twice, plunging into
wrong turnings; but the second time he did this it seemed that San
Cristóbal--whose medal now adorned our Gloria and shaped our destinies--must
have twisted the steering-wheel. There, before the door of an official
building guarded by sentries, panted the grey car of Carmona; and among
its passengers Carmona alone was absent.

"That's the Ministry of War," said the Cherub, and with a quick thought I
asked Dick to slow down. Taking advantage of her son's late cordiality, I
spoke to the Duchess.

"We thought we had lost you," said I airily. "I hope nothing's wrong, that
you stop here?"

"Not in the least, thank you," coldly replied the Duchess.

But Monica spoke up bravely. "The Duke didn't tell us why he wanted to go
in. He only said he wouldn't keep us many minutes. Señorita O'Donnel,
shall you be in Madrid long?"

"Only a few days," said Pilar. "And you?"

"We shall be here again at the time of the wedding," Monica answered
quickly; "so I believe the Duke and Duchess will--"

"It is undecided," Lady Vale-Avon cut in before the girl could make us a
present of Carmona's plans. "We may take some excursions. As there's a
fine road to Barcelona, we may go there and to Montserrat; and the Duke
has said something about Bilbao--"

"But, Mother, surely we're going to Seville for Holy Week!" cried Monica.

"There's no reason why we should arrive before Maundy Thursday," replied
Lady Vale-Avon, hiding annoyance. "But isn't that the Duke coming out? I
hope he won't be long. It's windy here, and you have a cold coming on, my
dear Duchess."

We were dismissed; and raising our hats again we drove on, Pilar waving a
small, encouraging hand to Monica. "They won't do any of those things,"
said the Spanish girl. "Something tells me they mean to start for Seville
as soon as they can."

"Something tells me so too," said I. "And something tells me that
Carmona's errand at the Ministry of War is to find out whether Lieutenant
Cristóbal O'Donnel y Alvarez is really away from Burgos on leave."

"That's what I was thinking," murmured the Cherub. "But the thought will
not bring a grey hair. Cristóbal _is_ on leave; and he told his brother
officers that he expected to go with his family to Seville. It was at the
last minute that his plans were changed. No one was taken into his
confidence; and it will be very negligent of San Cristóbal to let him meet
in Biarritz any common acquaintance of his and Carmona's."

"I'm putting my faith in San Cristóbal," said I. "But as he has a good
deal to attend to, the less I show myself in Madrid, where my adopted
brother must be known, the better."

"He hasn't been as often here as Pilar and I," said the Cherub, "so he
knows few people. Still, Cristóbal's uniform should now be put away, and
Cristóbal should wear civilian clothes."

"He certainly will," I answered, laughing. And Colonel O'Donnel gave
himself up to directing Dick which way to go, as we were in the most
crowded centre now, close to the Puerta del Sol.

This big, open space, shaped like a parallelogram, walled by hotels,
Government buildings, and shops, struck me as a Spanish combination of
Piccadilly Circus and the Mansion House, thrown into one. Ten busy streets
poured their traffic into the place; intricate lines of tramways converged
there. The pavements were crowded with loungers who had the air of never
doing anything but lounge, and wait for excitements. There was much coming
and going of leisurely pedestrians, talking and laughing, all classes
mingling together; men in silk hats on the way to their clubs chatting
with men in _capas_ and grey sombreros, who belonged to very different
clubs; smart officers in uniform shoulder to shoulder with bull-fighters
whose little twisted pigtails of black hair appeared under their tilted
hats; ragged but handsome beggars thinking themselves as good, if not as
fortunate, as their brothers in broadcloth; merry boys shouting the
evening papers, black-eyed women and men selling cheap but colourful
jewelry, post-cards, toys, and marvellous sweets. It was as gay a scene as
could be found in any capital, and it seemed to me that this absolute
democracy was after all the true note of modern Spain. Whatever else we
may be, we never have been, never will be a nation of snobs, we Spaniards
whose favourite saint is the peasant Isidro.

Steering cautiously through the throng which scarcely troubled itself to
move before us, we took one of the main arteries leading out from the
Puerta del Sol (where no sign of a gate was to be seen), and turned into
the deep blue shadows of the Calle Echegaray to our hotel.

Already I had discovered that it is not the habit of Spanish landlords to
descend from the important first floor to the unimportant ground floor and
welcome their guests. They are glad to have you come if you choose, but
they do not care if you stop away, for there are plenty of others; and
whether you are cousin to the King of England or an American millionaire,
or a Spanish commercial traveller, very timid and just starting in
business, you will be given the same reception, unless you put on "proud
airs," when you will be shown that you had better go elsewhere. But with
an old friend, all is different; everyone welcomed the Cherub and the
señorita; for their sakes everyone welcomed Dick and me. I was vaguely
introduced as a relative--no name given; no name, in the flurry of
greeting, asked; for Spain is not like France or Germany, where the first
thing to do is to write down all particulars about yourself on a piece of
paper.

Ropes drove the car off to a garage, and we were shown to rooms which made
us realize that we had left the provinces behind and come into the
capital.

"Thank goodness I shall have a pillow to sleep on to-night," said Dick,
"instead of doing the carved-knight-on-a-marble-tomb act. I looked
particularly at the two neat, rounded blocks those chaps in Burgos
Cathedral had to rest their heads on, and the alleged pillows on my bed
were an exact copy, hardness and all."

"I like them hard," said I.

"That's right! Stand up for Spanish institutions."

"There's one anyhow I don't think you'd run down," I remarked.

"Which one?"

"Spanish girls."

We dined in great spirits that evening, in the big scarlet and gold
restaurant; and in rich, red Marqués de Riscal Dick drank confusion to the
Duque de Carmona. The Cherub had told us where Carmona's flat was
situated, saying that his car would perhaps be kept under the same roof
with his carriage and the state coach.

The company was interesting to watch. Leoncavallo had as a guest the
famous ex-bull-fighter Mazzantini; a Russian prince entertained several
beauties of the Opera; and there were two or three politicians greatly in
the public eye. We were hungry; the dinner was good; there was much to
talk over; and all seemed to be going well.

But about half-past ten, when Pilar had gone, and the Cherub was having a
"yarn" and a cigar in the sitting-room of our suite; Ropes appeared,
looking serious.

"Something bad has happened, sir; and I blame myself," said he.

"Something wrong with the car," I asked quickly.

"Something _out_ of the car, sir," he amended. "The main shaft of the
change-speed gear."

"Impossible!" said I. "A car can't go along dropping her gearing, as a
woman drops her purse!"

"No, sir. But she can, so to speak, have her pocket picked. After all
that's come and gone, I ought to have kept my eyes open."

"Out with it, my good chap," said I; "don't try to break it to us."

"It's the car that's broken into, sir. I found the garage all right, left
her safe and sound, came back here, but after dinner thought I'd go round
again to tinker a bit at the car in case of an early start to-morrow. When
I got to the place there were three new fellows on duty, and they seemed
astonished when they saw I intended to work on the Gloria. The chauffeur
who looked after that car had been in, they said; and you can believe,
sir, I pricked up my ears. He'd been working like a demon, said they,
opening the gear-box and dismounting the main shaft. Then he went off with
it over his shoulder, after telling the foreman his master wouldn't
believe the pinions were so worn there ought to be a new set, and he was
going to show it to him. They were surprised, I can tell you, sir, when I
said we'd been robbed, and that the thief wasn't your chauffeur. But just
then one of the old lot came in, and bore witness that I was the right
man. It did seem like a bad dream, but a peep at the gear-box showed me it
was real enough. I was a fool not to give somebody warning, or pay a man
to stay by the car."

"I can't see that you had reason to be suspicious," said I, "although it's
a rascally outrage, and makes me feel murderous. Did they describe the
supposed chauffeur?"

"They did sir; and I expected to recognize the description. But I didn't;
they're too smart for that."

"You think we know him?"

"Sure of it, sir. Nothing easier than a bit of disguise."

"It might be a common motor-car thief, who wanted a main shaft for a
Gloria car."

"And then again, sir, it mightn't."

"Anyhow," said I, "the thing to do would be to apply to the police, have
the ruffian run to earth and arrested, no matter what his position. The
worst of it is, though, I'm not anxious to have the eye of the Spanish
police turned upon me, and there are those who count on that fact."

"Wouldn't I like to smash their heads for this! Wouldn't I like to smash
their car!" growled Dick.

"No. That would be playing it too low down," said I.

Ropes coloured under his sunburnt skin, and began to search for
non-existent dust on the leather cap in his hand.

"You're right, sir, no doubt," he said, in a meek voice.

I was half sorry that he, or anyone, should agree with me. It seemed
somehow as if my chauffeur were taking this monstrous thing too coolly.
"Well, the fact remains that we're done," I said, with suppressed fury.
"If the Duke of Carmona has had a hand in this act, it's a sign that he
means to get off while we're held up waiting for a new shaft and pinions
to arrive--probably all the way from Paris. He can go to-morrow--"

"Beg pardon, sir; he can't, not in his own car," said Ropes. "If _we_
can't leave, no more can't he."

"Why, what have you done?" I tried to speak sternly.

"Oh, next to nothing, sir. A bit of a touch on his magneto ignition, and a
tickling of his coil, just enough to keep him in hospital till he's
doctored up."

Rope's expression was so childlike that Dick and I burst out laughing.
"You demon!" I said. "How did you get at the car?"

"Much the same as they did at ours, though I don't pretend to be as clever
as some. I said to myself, as this car of the Duke's is new, and he
doesn't drive it himself, chances are he's never had a motor before, and
wouldn't have a garage in Madrid, though he does live here part of the
year and must have fine stables. I inquired what was the best garage
besides ours, and strolled round, thinking the chauffeur would have gone
straight to the Duke with his news. I found the place, and all the chaps
were standing outside open doors, watching a couple of dogs having a
fight. I walked in, without a word to anyone, though I'd have said I came
from the Duke if I'd had to. There was the car; and before one of those
blessed dogs had chewed the other's nose off, I'd polished up my little
job. Then I came to you, feeling a bit better than a few minutes before."

"You ought to be crushed with remorse," said I; but I'm afraid I grinned;
and Dick remarked that if he were King of England he'd give Ropes a
knighthood.

"Heaven knows what the next move will be," I commented, when the avenger
had gone, not too stricken in spirit. "It begins to look as though the
enemy would stick at little, and we can't go on giving tit for tat."

"He won't take open action against you for the present," said the Cherub,
"as he isn't sure you aren't Cristóbal O'Donnel; and you're warned if he
tries to strike in the dark. He's probably found out through the Ministry
of War that Cristóbal's on leave, so to rid himself of your company he's
resorted to the only means which occurred to him."

"I have to thank you that he had no surer means," I said.

"It's the fashion in Spain, if a friend wants a thing, to tell him it is
his," replied Colonel O'Donnel. "You wanted me for a father, Pilar for a
sister. I said, 'We are yours.' There's not much to be thankful for. I
would do ten times more for your father's son; and my confessor's a
sympathetic man. Besides, to tell you a secret of mine which even Pilar
doesn't know, though she has most others at her finger-end, your mother
was my first love. I adored her! You have her eyes!"

Whereupon I shook hands with the Cherub.


                                  XVIII


THE MAN WHO LOVED PILAR


When Ropes had gone to send a telegram to Paris, Dick and I talked the
matter over from so many points of view, that Colonel O'Donnel apparently
went to sleep. It was only when I burst into vituperation against Carmona,
that the excellent man suddenly showed signs of life.

"I've been thinking," said he, and I found myself cheering up at the
statement; for I had noticed that, though the Cherub often had the air of
being silent through laziness; that from his mellifluous Andaluz he
discarded all possible consonants as he would discard the bones of fish;
yet, with his murmurings, invariably rolled from his tongue some jewel of
good sense.

"We have a friend near Madrid," said he, "who has an automobile. I know
little about such things; but when I heard that you had a twenty-four
horse-power Gloria, I thought, 'It is the same as the Conde de Roldan's.'
It will be days before your new parts can come from Paris, even if you
send Ropes; and there are few automobiles on sale here, if any. It's a
hundred chances to one you could get parts to fit your car in that way.
But if Don Cipriano's car is what I think, he will give you what you want.
When the new parts arrive, they will be for him."

"Colonel O'Donnel," said Dick, "you and your family are bricks!"

"That's true," said I; "but if you could persuade your friend to such an
act of generosity, I couldn't accept. I--"

"Oh," said the good man, with cherubic slyness, "he would give his left
hand for such a chance to please us! Perhaps you haven't noticed that my
_nina_ is rather attractive; but it has not escaped the observation of Don
Cipriano."

So the wind blew from that quarter! I threw a glance at Dick, and saw on
his face the same expression of disconcerted _amour propre_ I had once
seen when a bullet went whistling by his nose. But he said nothing about
either missile; and now it was left for me to justify our appreciation of
the señorita.

Ordinarily, if there is one thing which the Cherub loves, it is to dawdle,
but now he rose without a sigh and remarked that there was no time to
waste. He must fetch Pilar.

"She will have gone to bed," I objected.

The Cherub smiled. Pilar go to bed at half-past ten on her first night in
Madrid after months of absence? Not she. Her father was willing to bet
that she was at her window looking down upon the street, and wishing she
had been born a man that she might be in it. "Night is the time for
amusement in Madrid," said he. "One can lie in bed till afternoon without
missing anything; but at night--that is the time to be alive here! And
though our home is in the southern country, when we are in Madrid my Pilar
and I, we are true Madrileños. Had she and I been alone, she would have
made me take her to the theatre or circus. We should not have got home
till one: and then I should have had to give her supper. Oh, she will be
enchanted when I call her back to life!"

With that he trotted off, and before it seemed that he could have
explained anything, he had brought Pilar to us in triumph, her hat on her
head, dimples in her cheeks, and stars in her eyes. "I'm ready!" she
exclaimed.

"Ready?" I echoed. "For what?"

"Why to drive with you all to Don Cipriano's! What else? We mustn't lose a
minute, or our bad fairy will have time to work some other evil charm
before we've remedied the first. Oh, I may be only a girl, and not of
importance; but Don Cipriano thinks me important, and I shall have to be
there to make smiles at him. He has a Gloria, and it is twenty-four
horse-power. Father sent to order a carriage while I put on my hat and
coat. Don Cipriano's place is only half an hour out of Madrid, even with a
'simón.' He breeds horses, and oh, such dogs! Come along--come along!"

"At this time of night?" said Dick. "He'll think we're mad!"

"It's always early till to-morrow morning in Madrid," laughed Pilar. "Ah,
how nice to have an excitement!"

"He won't be at home," said Dick.

"Yes, he will. San Cristóbal will keep him there."

Before we knew what we were doing, this small Spanish whirlwind had swept
us downstairs in her train, into the vehicle which had actually arrived,
and out into the midst of a night-scene as lively as a fair. Many shops
were open and brilliantly illuminated. Café windows blazed like diamonds;
half the population of Madrid was in the streets, and a stranger might
have thought that something unusual had happened; but Pilar assured us it
was "always like that." "You can live in the street if you like, in
Madrid," said she, "and I should think lots of quite charming people do.
There are sweets and fruit when you're hungry, and water and wine and
fresh milk of goats when you're thirsty, cool doorways or nice hot
pavements to sleep on when you're tired, with lettuce leaves or a cabbage
for a pillow, all at a cost of a penny or two a day; and if you're clever
somebody passing by will give you that penny. So, rich or poor, with a
palace or no home, you can be happy in Madrid."

"I wonder how you'd like New York?" muttered Dick.

"That depends on the person I lived with!" said Pilar.

Soon we had left the gold and crimson glow of the streets, and were out in
the blue night. Over the Puente de Toledo we passed, and on along a broad
white road.

Pilar had said that we would reach our destination in half an hour; but
her enthusiasm ran faster than our horses; and it was nearly midnight when
we stopped in front of a tall archway that glimmered in the dark. A
clanging bell had to be pulled, and was echoed by a musical baying of many
dogs. "The darlings!" exclaimed Pilar. "I know their voices. It's Melampo,
and Cubillon, and Lubina, the dearest pets of all; named after the dogs
who went with the shepherds to see the Christ-child in His cradle--you
remember--so they can never go mad."

By this time the gate was open, and a wave of beautiful greyhounds surged
round us, although called imperatively back by a man who looked like a
cross between a porter and a gamekeeper. Then came a cordial burst of
recognition between the Cherub, Pilar, and the servant. We drove into a
courtyard, and before we could descend from our carriage the master of the
house had appeared at a lighted doorway, tall, brown, ruddy, picturesque
in Spanish riding breeches and short coat; a handsome man of thirty-five,
perhaps, whose face lit from surprise to rapture at sight of Pilar. Dick
and I came in for a welcome too, though I could see that the Conde de
Roldan was not easy in his mind about these young men who seemed on terms
of intimacy with his friends.

From the courtyard we passed through a doorway into a patio, and from the
_patio_ into a nondescript room which could have belonged to no one but a
bachelor and a sportsman. There was, however, a mother, and the poor lady
would have been torn from her bed to greet the welcome ones, had not the
father and daughter protested. To-morrow, if all went well, they would
come again, and see dear Doña Rosita; but now, let her sleep. We were here
on business.

"May I explain you?" Pilar appealed to me. "Don Cipriano is safe. And I
want him to be interested."

Poor Don Cipriano! He had visibly a bad half moment, trembling lest we had
rushed out to announce my engagement to the adorable Pilarcita; but it was
good to see the light come back to his eyes when he heard that I--blind
worm--had fallen in love with another girl. Clever Pilarcita made this fact
clear, so that Don Cipriano's jealous heart might warm to me before he
knew what thing was wanted. Dick became tolerable also, as a friend
following in the train of my adventures; and soon the poor fellow was
ready to put not only the gearing of his motor-car, but his house and
everything in it, at our service.

He blessed his patron saint for bringing us to his door, and for
permitting him to have ridden home from a distant farm in time to greet
us; he roundly cursed the Duke of Carmona, consigning him to Purgatory for
a longer period than usual; and when everyone of us (except Dick) was in
the best of humours with everybody else, we paid a visit to his car.

She might, in all but colour, have been twin-sister to mine. There seemed
reason to hope that the pinions of this Gloria would fit the other Gloria,
and that no time might be lost in making the experiment, the Conde de
Roldan volunteered to spin us into Madrid, letting our "simón" go back
empty. If we decieved ourselves, rather than I should be delayed (said
he), his car was mine to take where I would, and the Cherub stepped on my
foot to check a refusal.

There was a chauffeur in this interesting household, but he was several
other things as well, and was a better dog-doctor than the vet. At that
moment he was assisting at an addition to the family of Lubina's daughter;
but in any case, Don Cipriano, protested, he would have allowed no one to
drive us save himself.

We raced to Madrid in a fourth of the time we had taken in coming; and two
hours after the moment when we had news of the disaster, we arrived at the
garage of my injured Gloria.

A somnolent night-porter (one of the few persons in Madrid who appeared to
use the night for sleep) let us in; and at the sound of our entrance the
figure of a man sprang from the cushions of my car. Pilar gave a cry,
which changed to a laugh as she saw that it was Ropes.

"San Cristóbal failed you for a few minutes this evening, didn't he? But
he's going to make up for it now," she said. "And I'm going to see him do
it, if it takes all night."

In vain did the Cherub try to persuade her that it would be well to let
him escort her home, as the experiment would be a long affair. Nobody
seconded his efforts, and, if they had, ten chances against one that
Pilarcita would have listened. Never, in all her life, said she, had she
known anything like the excitements of the last few days, and it was too
probable that she never would again.

With this, she climbed into her old place in my Gloria's tonneau, her
bright eyes bewitching in the uncertain yellow light; and enchanted with
the prospect of retaining her society, Don Cipriano proposed a feast. He
would not listen to discussions, but rushed the bewildered watchman off to
a neighbouring restaurant, whence a waiter appeared with the speed of
magic. Supper was ordered; chicken, salad, champagne, all that could be
found of the best; and _dulces_ for the señorita.

While Ropes and I worked as if for a wager, a swarm of amused waiters came
buzzing about the garage, bringing chairs, a table, clattering dishes,
clinking knives and forks, and silver pails wherein tinkled ice embedding
gold-labelled bottles.

Ropes is unrivalled as a mechanic, and I am not unhandy with tools, so
that between us, under the inspiration of Pilar's bright eyes and sayings,
we had the pinions out of Don Cipriano's car by the time the champagne was
cold. Then, while corks were popping, the great experiment was tried. "A
fit! a fit!" I exclaimed, and joyously we drank to the health of the two
Glorias.

Such tips as they got that night, those waiters and that watchman could
never have seen. No doubt they thought us mad, and perhaps we were; but it
was partly the fault of San Cristóbal.


                                   XIX


A PARCEL FOR LIEUTENANT O'DONNEL


Never was such a man as Don Cipriano, Conde de Roldan. Not content with
lending me his wings that I might fly while he was left to crawl, he
proposed to heap other favours upon the friend of his friends.

He offered me an asylum at his place for my rejuvenated car, lest the
enemy in reconnoitring should learn our secret before the time; and,
better still, he volunteered to visit the camp of that enemy, and discover
his plans.

Being an acquaintance of the lady whom Carmona had jilted, he was no
admirer of the Duke's. Nevertheless, he was a member of a club which
Carmona frequented when in Madrid, and he thought that the Duke would look
in next day. Even if he should decide to proceed by rail, after
discovering how "two can play at the same game," such a change of plan
would mean delay; therefore Carmona and his party would spend at least one
day in Madrid. Don Cipriano offered to go early to the club, and not to
leave until he had seen the Duke. The moment he had any news he would
bring it to us.

I accepted my new friend's invitation to house the Gloria, as his place
was so close to town that Ropes or I could spin her back at short notice;
and at dawn, when merry Madrid was thinking of bed, my car towed out his
dismantled one. Pilar and her father had gone home to dream their good
deeds over; Dick, when he heard that we were to drive behind the Conde's
horses, developed a headache, and Ropes and I had to carry the business
through ourselves.

We bathed and breakfasted in the country, and drove back to Madrid while
the gay world slept. He would now, Don Cipriano announced, spend the day
in the city, on watch-dog duty; but as he would have no news until
afternoon, I might visit the picture galleries if I liked. "They will make
you feel proud of your country," he said; and so they would, no doubt. But
I resolved to sacrifice them in the fear that, after all, Carmona might
evade me if I gave him so good a chance.

Never had I seen Dick so gloomy as when I returned to him, and the black
dog was not chased away by my praises of Don Cipriano. He cheered up,
however, at the prospect of sightseeing with the Cherub and Pilar; the
Cherub martyred; Pilar joyous in the thought of showing off the Murillos
and Velasquez which she adored.

They did the Armería and picture galleries all the morning, until they
were drooping with fatigue; waggled back in a dilapidated cab, clamouring
for their lunch and my tidings; departed again in the afternoon to finish
what they had left undone.

Meanwhile I had heard nothing; and the day, spent in waiting for Don
Cipriano or for some bit of gossip picked up by Ropes, was long.

But five o'clock and Don Cipriano came together. Carmona had been to the
club. The Conde de Roldan had not spoken to him, but the Duke had talked
to another man, a motoring friend of the King's. Perhaps, with few others,
would the Duke have been so expansive. He had said, "I'm only in Madrid
for the day. Should have been off this morning, with my mother and two
ladies who are going to visit her in Seville, but had an accident to my
automobile, which has made me a lot of bother. I hope to get away, though,
sometime to-morrow." Then he had asked after the health of a certain
actress, and the subject had been definitely changed.

This was a triumph. I heartily thanked Don Cipriano, all the while feeling
a guilty thing; for if I were loyal to Dick and wished him luck, I must be
disloyal and wish defeat for my benefactor.

We spoke of the road, which he knew, and said was not too bad; and about
brigands, who were making themselves talked of just then. "You'd better
buy arms, if you haven't them," said Don Cipriano; "but there's not much
danger on this side Seville."

He had brought a road-map; and we were examining it, in the reading-room
of the hotel, wondering whether Cannona would take the direct way through
Manzanares, Valdepeñas, and Cordoba, or another which Don Cipriano
considered better, though longer, by Talavera de la Reina, Trujillo, and
Zafra, when the _concièrge_ came to say a messenger with a parcel wished
to see me.

"It must be a mistake," I replied.

"He asked for el Teniente O'Donnel; and he has a packet for you."

"Bring it in, please, and let me see how it's addressed."

"He won't give it up, sir, without seeing you himself. Those were his
instructions."

I got up impatiently and went into the hall, where a boy in the livery of
some shop handed me a small parcel. There was no address upon it, and I
wondered if this were not some purchase of Pilar's, sent back to my care.
However, I decided to open it, and found nothing inside except a little
steel paper-knife with the word _Toledo_ engraved on the black and gold
handle.

I stared at the thing stupidly for a moment, as I fumbled for a
_pourboire_ to give the messenger, when it occurred to me that he might
explain the mystery. "Did a lady buy this?" I asked; "a young lady, with a
tall señor also young, and another middle-aged?"

"A young lady? yes, sir. But she was with only one señor, and two señoras,
both of an age."

"You saw them?"

"Yes, sir."

"Describe all four, and you shall have two pesetas instead of one."

"One señora was Spanish, brunette, fat, with dead eyes in a large, soft
face of two chins. The other was tall and foreign, handsome, but with an
air! I would not be her servant. The señor was distinguished. Dark, with a
thin nose that turned down, like his moustache; a face of an old picture;
one shoulder higher than the other."

"But the young lady?"

"Oh, sir, the señorita was a white and gold angel, made of a sunbeam! It
was she who bought the knife, while the others chose a thing for the tall
señora. She quickly gave it and the money to an attendant, with the
address, saying it must be put into the gentleman's own hand."

I gave the boy five pesetas instead of two.

A paper-knife with the word _Toledo_ engraved upon it from Monica for me!
No message, only that! But was it not in itself a message--the only one she
could find a way to send?

I went back to Don Cipriano. "I've just heard," said I, "that when Carmona
starts, he intends to go to Toledo."


                                    XX


THE MAGIC WORD


When the others came back, and the paper-knife was shown, all agreed with
me that it could mean but one thing. The best of it was that to go to
Toledo the grey car must pass the Conde de Roldan's place where my Gloria
lay; and all we need do would be to await the moment when the Lecomte
flashed by. Then we might give Carmona a surprise.

None of us doubted that he must guess the cause of his accident, as we
guessed at ours; nevertheless, the blow he had inflicted was far more
severe than our retaliation, and he doubtless hoped that, despite our
revengeful scratch, he could slip out of Madrid leaving us _hors de
combat_.

Don Cipriano dined with us that night, and went with the others to the
Teatro Español, where the great Guerrero and her husband were acting. It
was not thought well for me to appear, lest the Duke should be there, and
say to some acquaintance, "You see the O'Donnel's. Is that the son who is
in the army?"

When they returned, Pilar had news. Carmona, with the Duchess, Lady
Vale-Avon, and Monica had all been at the theatre in a box.

"I knew that girl was beautiful," said Pilar, "but I didn't know how
beautiful until to-night! With her pearly skin and golden hair among all
the dark heads, she gleamed like a pearl amid carbuncles, and everyone was
looking at her. You know how we admire fair beauties, and how we expect to
adore the young queen when she comes? Well, if it had been Princess Ena
herself, people could hardly have stared more, and the Duke was delighted.
He wants everything that's best for himself, and to have others appreciate
it. He was so proud of Lady Monica between acts, and kept bending over her
as if she belonged to him. I don't think he saw us; but I was glad you
weren't there, or you would have been wild to fly at him."

"You make me wild to do that now," I said.

"Have a little patience, and you will steal her," said Pilar.

"If she would only let me! But she won't."

"Who knows what she will be ready to do if they press her? And after
to-night, too! She seemed half afraid of him, as if she began to realize
more and more what he is. Oh, if you weren't here I should want to do some
desperate deed and snatch her away myself! He likes having her admired,
while she's not yet his; but he has enough of the Moor in him to shut up a
wife, so that no other man should see her beauty. And then presently he
would tire, and be cruel."

"Don't let's talk of it," said I. "It's not going to happen."

Though it was so late before we slept, we were dressed at an unearthly
hour--according to the Cherub--and driving out with the small luggage which
accompanied us on the car, to Don Cipriano's place on the Toledo road.

Ropes had spent the night there, and the Gloria was ready. The luggage was
got into place; and Don Cipriano and his mother--a fairy godmother of an
old lady, with a white dome of hair under a priceless black lace
mantilla--were determined to provide us with food and drink as if to
withstand a siege.

There was a snow-cured ham from Trevelez, the most famed in Andalucía.
There was delicious home-made bread, _cuernos_, _molletes_, and
_panecillos_; and olives large as grapes. There was white, curded cheese;
quince jam or _carne de membrillo_; angels' hair, made of shredded melons
with honey; _mazapan_, smelling of almonds, and shaped like figures of
saints, serpents, and horses; oranges from Seville and Tarifa; fat figs
dried on sticks; and, most wonderful of all, a wineskin of the country, so
old that the taste of the skin was gone a generation ago, and plump with
as much good red wine as would have filled six bottles.

"You will need these things," insisted the old lady, giving the Cherub a
friendly pat on the arm, as she encircled Pilar's waist. "It is different
on the road between Madrid and Seville, from those you have travelled. You
will want to lunch out of doors, in the sunshine, for you won't find good
things like these at any little venta. I know, for I have been with my
son. I am a heroine, my friends say. We will pack everything well for
you."

"And the wineskin you must hang on the side of the car," said Don
Cipriano, all solicitude for our welfare, poor fellow, believing happily,
as he did now, that neither Dick nor I was dangerous. "There's no cure for
Spanish dust, except Spanish wine. Besides, you're going through wild
country where automobiles are seldom seen. If peasants are inclined to
throw stones, the sight of a good skin of wine should soften them. And
what true man would risk damaging a wineskin?"

That fairy godmother, Doña Rosita, conceived a fancy for Dick, who flirted
with her in his bad Spanish so outrageously that she was delighted. He
made her feel young again, she said, and it was a shock to find that he
was an American. She had not forgiven America for the Cuban war, which she
had not understood in the least. "But _you_ are not wicked!" she
exclaimed. "I thought all American men were wicked, and would do anything
for money. _Ay de mi!_ I must again pardon Columbus for discovering your
country, I suppose; though I have often said in these last years, how much
better if he had left it alone. I used to stop in my carriage near the
Cristóbal Colón statue in the Prado, when the war was on, and laugh to
watch the people throw things, because they were annoyed with him for the
trouble he had brought. Yet now I see there's something to thank him for,
after all." This last with a look at Dick which must have melted his
American heart like water if she had been of the age of Pilarcita. But
what would she have said had she known that--indirectly--Columbus had sent
to Spain a rival for her adored Cipriano?

Ignorance being bliss, the delightful mother and son were a hostess and a
host almost too hospitable.

As if the hampers stowed in the car were not enough, a tremendous
breakfast on a table loaded with flowers was provided for us. But just as
we sat down, at ten o'clock, a servant on duty as scout appeared, panting
after a scamper across fields, to say that a motor had passed. Our
chauffeur sent word that it was _the_ motor; and was ready to start our
car.

This was the signal for confusion, cries of regret, wishes for good luck,
laughter, and exclamations. Pilar and the Cherub were persuaded to finish
their cups of thick chocolate, flavoured with cinnamon, while Dick and I
drank our strong coffee and left our _aguardiente_.

Off we went, in flowery Spanish speech kissing the señora's feet, while
she kissed our hands; Don Cipriano leaped upon a horse to see us off, all
his dogs about him; and ten minutes later our pneus were pressing the
track in the white dust made by the Lecomte.

We soon lost sight of gay Madrid, with its domes and spires clear cut
against the white mountains, to run through a green landscape of growing
corn and grape, vineyards framed for our eyes with distant hills flaming
in Spanish colours, red and gold. Colonel O'Donnel pointed out an isolated
elevation which he said was the exact centre of Spain; and of course there
was a convent on its top. Every other hill had a ruined watch-tower, brown
against a sky of deeper, more thoughtful blue than Italy's radiant
turquoise. Men we met rode upright as statues on noble Andaluz animals,
grand as war-horses in mediæval pictures; but some did not scorn to turn
abruptly aside at sight and sound of our motor, to go cantering across
fields to a prudent distance. Carters with nervous mules held striped rugs
over the creatures' faces till we had passed; donkeys brayed and hesitated
whether to sit down or run away, but ended in doing neither; yet no man
frowned.

Dick said that now, at last, he began to feel he was really in Spain,
because we met the right sort of Spanish faces, the only kind he was ready
to accept as Spanish. He had been satisfied with the strongly
characteristic qualities of everything else (especially the balconies, the
hall-mark of domestic architecture in Spain); the rich, oily cooking; the
pillows, oh, the stony pillows! the manners of the people, and the
costumes of Castile. But the features of the people hadn't been, till
to-day, typical enough to please him. He had expected in the north
mysterious looking Basques; then, something Gothic or Iberian, if not
Moorish, with a touch of the Berber to give an extra aquiline curve to the
nose. But not a bit of it! Noses were as blunt as in England, Ireland, or
America, and might have been grown there. It was only this morning that we
had flashed past a few picture-book Spanish features, and fierce, curled
moustaches.

"Wait till you get farther south," murmured the Cherub, "you will see the
handsome peasants. They put townspeople to shame."

"And mantillas--I want mantillas," said Dick. "I've only seen one so far,
except in the distance at Vitoria; I expected every woman to wear one. Now
you, señorita, owe it to your country."

Pilar laughed. "Fancy a mantilla in a motor-car. You haven't _seen_ me
yet, señores--no, not even when I went to the play. When we're at Seville,
why, then you'll be introduced to the Real Me. Look you, I have but one
sole hat in this wide world, beyond this motoring thing I bargained for at
Burgos. You've no idea what a hat--such a hat as a self-respecting señorita
can put upon the head God made--costs in this land of Spain. Twice--three
times what it would be elsewhere, so travelled women say, and to have a
smart one is necessary a trip at least to Biarritz. As for Doña Rosita,
she is old-fashioned, and always wears the mantilla; indeed, on her
wedding tour to Paris she had to buy her first hat in Marseilles, she
says; for thirty years ago, you could hardly find one in Spain. Now, most
of the ladies in Madrid wear hats, except for the bull-fight; but in dear
Seville, it's different. I shall no longer have a headache with the
hatpins which pinch these hairs of mine. Santa María Purísima, you shall
see what you shall see."

She spoke as if to me; but she glanced at Dick, who--though he had still to
pose as the owner of the car--was growing fond of the tonneau, while Ropes
drove. Woe betide Don Cipriano if he had seen that glance!

By and by we turned off the main road at Cetafe, and got caught by closed
bars at a railway crossing.

"We shall probably be here an hour, and might as well lunch," said the
Cherub resignedly; but when a humble-looking luggage train had crept in,
it was so impressed with our air of superior importance that, to our
surprise, it backed out rather than obstruct our honourable path; and the
gates were wheeled back for us to pass in front of the engine's polite
little nose.

It was a spin of but fifty miles from Madrid to the olive plantations (the
first I'd seen in Spain) near Toledo; but the road surface was not of
velvet; and we had often to slow down for animals who hated, because they
did not understand, that most faithful and loyal of beasts, the
automobile. Therefore it was close upon one o'clock when the noble old
town rose in wild majesty before us on its granite, horseshoe hill,
girdled by the dark gold bed of the Tagus.

Madrid seen from afar off had scarcely been impressive, but this Rome of
Spain--though we did not approach it by way of the world-famous bridge--was
grander than any picture had led me to believe.

We had seen nothing of the grey car yet, not even a cloud of dust, but we
knew it must be here, and everyone of us looked forward to watching the
face of the Duke when we should march into the dining-room of the best
hotel, where by this time he and his party were probably about to lunch.

In a few minutes I should see Monica, perhaps be as near to her as at the
_fonda_ of the Escurial. That was the thought most absorbing; yet my
spirit was on its knees before this ancient throne of kings.

I could hardly believe that the sullen yellow stream pounding its way
through the gorge, and shouldering aside huge rocks as if they were
pebbles, was really the Tagus, enchanted river of my childish dreams--the
river my father loved--the golden river I had scarcely dared hope to see.

Not a legend of the Tagus or Toledo that I did not know, I reminded myself
dreamily. I knew how, in the grand old days of the city's glory, the Jews
of Jerusalem had respectfully sent a deputation to the wise Jews of
Toledo, asking: "Shall this man who says He is the Son of God be given up
to the Roman law, and die?" And how the Jews of Toledo had hastened to
return for answer: "By no means commit this great crime, because we
believe from the evidence that He is indeed the long looked-for Redeemer."
How the caravan had made all speed back, arriving too late; and how,
because of their wisdom and piety, the Jews of Toledo had been spared by
the Inquisition when all others burned.

I knew how, in a time of disaster and poverty for Toledo, San Alonzo, a
poor man, prayed heartily to the Virgin, in whose lifetime the cathedral
had been begun, imploring her help for the town; how she came at his call,
and looking about to see what she could do, touched the rock, which
throbbed under her fingers like a heart, until all its veins flowed with
molten iron; how this iron was drunk by the Tagus in such draughts that
the water became the colour of old gold; and how after that, the city grew
rich and famous through the marvellous quality of its steel, which, the
faithful believe, owes its value to the iron-impregnated Tagus.

I knew how the King of the Visigoths had here become a Christian, and made
of Toledo the ecclesiastical capital of Spain. I knew how the Cid had
ridden to the city on Babieca, beside treacherous Alonzo. I knew how
Philip the Second had been driven away by the haughtiness of the clergy,
pretending greater love for Madrid, that town built to humour a king's
caprice. I knew how, even as in the mountains round Granada, in every cave
among the rocks of the wild gorge, sleeps an enchanted Moor in armour, on
an enchanted steed, guarding hidden treasure, or waiting for the magic
word which will set him free to fight for his banished rulers. And yet,
here was I entering this ancient citadel mighty in history and fable, in
an automobile, with a photographic camera!

"But you are a banished prince yourself," said Pilar, when I spoke
something of what was in my mind. "And you've come out of your enchanted
cave at the magic word. That magic word is--Love."


                                   XXI


THE DUCHESS'S HAND


High on the hill Colonel O'Donnel pointed out the Alcázar of many
vicissitudes, long since turned into a military academy, which has made
Toledo to Spain what Woolwich is to England. "There your father and I went
to school," said he. "I come every year or two, and wander about with my
thoughts."

With this, he began bowing right and left to young officers who sauntered
inside the gateway. Nearly everyone knew and seemed delighted to see him;
indeed, who could see the excellent Cherub, and not be glad?

He himself was happy. "There go your father and I!" he exclaimed, picking
out the two best-looking infants in a procession of incredibly small boys
proudly wearing a smart uniform. "Oh, where are the girls who used to
smile at us?"

So we drove into the Moorish-looking stronghold, through a labyrinth of
steeply ascending tunnels which were streets. They were so narrow that I
would not have believed the car could scrape along without smashing the
mud-guards, had not the Cherub valiantly urged us on, with assurances that
it could be done. And always we did slide through, the sides of the Gloria
so close to open doors and windows that we could have reached into dark
rooms, and helped ourselves to loaves of bread, brass cooking vessels,
coarse green pottery, jars of flowers, or astonished babies.

There was no space for dwellers in these shadowed lanes to rush from their
houses before our car, when warned by the "choof, choof" of the motor as
we rattled over the "agony stones," that something extraordinary was
coming; but mothers shrieked for their offspring, while young girls hailed
their friends to the free show; and men, women, and children jostled each
other good-naturedly in every window and door as we approached, pouring
out in our wake, though seemingly half afraid even then that the dragon
might take to charging back upon them.

Beautiful faces peered from behind rusty bars, with eyes to tempt any man
to "eat iron," as the saying is. Dark men with sun-warmed eyes, and black
heads wrapped in handkerchiefs of scarlet silk, stared curiously at
Pilar's veil; and when we emerged from the stone-and-plaster labyrinth,
into a wider space where the hotel stands like an ancient palace, we were
swamped by the laughing crowd which had formed into a trotting procession
behind us.

Just as the marble whiteness of the _patio_ cooled our eyes, down the
stairs came those with whom my thoughts had raced ahead; the Duchess of
Carmona; Monica and her mother; behind them the Duke.

Monica grew rose-red at sight of us. Her elders, not in the Duke's
confidence concerning the Gloria's disabilities, appeared as little
surprised as pleased; but Carmona's various and visible emotions included
extreme astonishment. I looked at him, my cap off for the ladies, smiling
and nonchalant as if nothing had happened since our last meeting; and
despite the self-control inherited from Oriental ancestors, for an instant
he tried in vain to hide mingled rage and bewilderment. Possibly he might
have fancied that we had come by train, had not Ropes been starting the
car at that moment, _en route_ for some resting-place masquerading as a
garage; and the "choof, choof" of my Gloria came in through the open doors
like a defiant laugh.

Then he must have wondered how, by all that was demoniac, we had contrived
to track him to Toledo!

"This is quite a surprise, Señor Duque!" said I, as we met in the _patio_
at the foot of the stairs.

"Ye--es," he answered, tugging at his moustache, and wishing us and our car
on some uninhabited planet.

"And a great pleasure!"

"Um--er--of course," he mumbled; and I dared not meet Monica's laughing
eyes, lest our lips should laugh as well.

They went to lunch; but we were not many moments behind, and Pilar,
murmuring in my ear, "Cats may look at a king, whether the king likes or
not," gaily selected a table next to the others. She then kept up a stream
of talk with Monica, exchanging impressions of Madrid. "Didn't you love
the shops?" she asked. "And shall you buy Toledo things to-day; scarf-pins
and hatpins and paper-knives; or did you buy too many yesterday?"

"I think I bought _just enough_," said Monica, with a quick smile. "But I
shall get more here. We're going to a metal work-shop, after the
cathedral."

But this was sheer audacity, and was punished as I feared it would be.

Not wishing to pursue with too conspicuous violence, lest we defeat our
object, we let Carmona's party leave the dining-room before us. A quarter
of an hour later we followed, going out into the strange grey streets,
haunted by men and women who have made history. Dick (armed with a book by
Leonard Williams, greatest of authorities on Spain) was allowed to walk
beside Pilar, while that most unsuspecting and kindly of chaperons, the
Cherub, bestowed his society on me. But, according to his habit, he was
often silent, giving me time to dream of Toledo's past.

Picturesque enough were the figures of to-day in the old grey capital of
the Visigoths, yet they were not as real for me as other figures which
only my mind's eye could see.

Here was the long, flat façade of the building legend had chosen as the
palace of Wamba the Benefactor--the Farmer King. I saw the old man waking
to life in the dungeon where the treachery of one loved and trusted had
thrown him, dressed in the monkish garb which never again could be changed
for robes of state. I saw a haggard company of Jews marching into
"Tarshish," scarred and bleeding from the persecutions of Nebuchadnezzar
who had flung them from Jerusalem. I saw Moorish men fighting to take
Toledo--the "Lookout," "the Light of the World," and fighting again to save
it for themselves.

There, in the towering Alcázar, had Rodrigo betrayed his beautiful queen,
Egilona, for the still more beautiful Florinda, daughter of Julian,
Espatorios of Spain; at least, so legend said, mingling the romantic music
of its ballads inextricably with the deep organ notes of history. Below,
on the cliff above the Tagus, in the Tower of Hercules, had Rodrigo taken
the painted linen cloths from the enchanted casket, and seen the awful
vision of the Moorish horde with his own figure fleeing before them, one
day when he forgot the prophecy which warned all kings of Spain against
entering that mysterious, locked door.

Up this narrow street in the town, behind that barred window with its
curious cannon-ball decorations, perhaps the incomparable Doña Flor of
Dumas' "Bandit" had smiled and pierced the heart of the "Courier of Love"
with her beauty.

It was like awaking from a brilliant dream when the Cherub stopped
abruptly, to point up at the vast, incongruous bulk of the cathedral
towering over us. But there was nothing incongruous in the rich, Gothic
splendour within; and my sole shock of disappointment came when I gave up
hope of finding Monica.

They had punished her by changing their plan of campaign, and I must seek
her elsewhere. But I could not wrench my friends from this great monument
of Spanish glory, merely because I cared more to look on Monica Vale's
face than the face of any saint, carved or painted by a master's hand.

I stayed, therefore, finding such consolation as I could in the jewelled
gleam of rare old glass, the magnificence of bronze doors; tombs of kings
and heroes; and all the wonders of gold, silver, pearls, and diamonds
which, stored in the sacristy, do honour to the famous Black Virgin, the
cathedral's Queen.

Coming out again into the town was like stepping with a single stride back
from Europe into Africa; for nowhere can Moslem and Christian
civilizations be more closely tangled than in Toledo. Moorish streets were
like scimitar strokes cleft deep in the city; narrow chasms lined with
secretive houses, giving here and there a glimpse of some bright, flowery
_patio_, through half-open doors studded with iron bosses, and heavy
enough to resist a siege; yet above the tiled roofs soared Christian
spires in the translucent blue.

No one cared for us now that we were no longer gods in a car, except an
occasional beggar, to whom the Cherub would murmur, "God will aid you,
sister!" "Pardon me, brother!" and then, changing his mind, drop a penny
into a withered old hand, or a pink, childish palm.

"They'll leave the shopping to the last, because Lady Monica told us it
was to be done first," said Pilar sagely; so we wandered through the
shabby aisles of Rag Fair, Pilar hoping against hope to unearth a
treasure; because, did not a man once pick up, for a song, a Greco worth a
fortune, and did not one always find something at least amusing in the Rag
Fair of Madrid? Thence we went on to the Moorish mosque, which the
Visigoths began, and so to San Juan de los Reyes, which, Pilar said, I
must like better than anything else in Toledo, because she did. With an
air of possession she explained the votive chains of captive Christians
darkly festooning the outer walls, and I did not tell her I had heard the
story long ago. She shuddered as she pointed to the crucifix which used to
go with the procession of the _auto-da-fé_. "Only think how different
times are now!" said she. "When Philip the Second was going to be married
to his bride, not fourteen, a great show in honour of the marriage was a
burning of heretics, here in the Zoco--the market-place of Toledo! I
shouldn't have cared much to see a royal wedding then. I don't even like
to look at that crucifix, it gives me such thoughts. But see, aren't those
carved stone galleries where Ferdinand and Isabel used to hear mass, like
two great chased silver goblets? I hope the king and queen never sat there
watching the poor wretches bound before marching off to the Zoco to die;
but I'm sure Isabel wouldn't: she was so sweet, she must often have wished
she hadn't made that awful promise to Torquemada."

"You're Catholic, yet you say that!" I exclaimed, as we stood looking at
the gorgeous shields of Los Reyes Católicos. Dick was near, listening with
concealed eagerness for the girl's answer,--and no wonder, since he was
Protestant, and not the man to be a turncoat, even for his love.

"Oh yes, I'm Catholic," said she. "But,"--half whispering,--"Spaniards, even
the most ardent Catholics, didn't really love the Inquisition. It was
thrust on them; and--I suppose in those brutal old days it was a horrible
excitement to see the burnings. It's natural to us Latins to have
excitement; and after years of such dreadful ones as we had in those
times, do you wonder the people clamour for bull-fights?"

"Then you don't think we Protestants deserve burning?" asked Dick, staring
at the crucifix.

"How can you ask such a question?"

"But you--couldn't make a real _friend_ of one, I suppose, or--er--let
yourself care about one much?"

"I should try and convert him--or her."

"Supposing you couldn't?"

"Then, I'd have to like him--or her--in spite of all. And he--or she--would
have to leave my religion alone. But I'm tired of solemn things; and
brother Cristóbal's dying to buy metal-work."

I don't think that Dick knew whether he had been encouraged or not. And he
must have remembered that the Conde de Roldan is the best and most
eligible of Catholics. Poor Dick! Perhaps he was beginning to realize how
much easier it is to advise another man to be sensible than to be sensible
yourself.

Pilar had been right in her surmises as to the workings of Carmona's mind.
When we came to the showroom of the Fabrica de Espadas, where the dusk was
shot with a thousand gleams and glitters of strange weapons, there were
those we had sought in vain till now. The Duchess, yellow with fatigue,
was resting her stout person on a bench in the long, low room, Lady
Vale-Avon beside her, looking tired and bored. But Carmona was at the
glass-covered counter, begging Monica's advice in the selection of his
purchases.

His back was towards us as we entered, and, unnoticed by him, we saw him
hold up to the light a small sharp dagger, with a handle beautifully
ornamented. He was indicating with his finger, for Monica's benefit, the
delicate tracery upon gold, when, warned by lack of attention and
wandering glances on the part of his companion, he turned in our
direction. Then, hastily laying down the dagger, he pushed it away as
though resenting the intrusion of our eyes.

"After all, we went to the Cave of Hercules," said Monica, "and to the
house where the Moorish nobles were supposed to be murdered; so we missed
you when we got to the cathedral. Señorita O'Donnel, do come and help me
choose presents for some girls at home, in England."

She spoke brightly, yet wistfully, as if wondering whether she would be
allowed to go back to those girls, a girl herself, and able to call
England home.

Pilar crossed to her at once, and Dick and I followed. The good Cherub
tactfully engaged the attention of the Duchess and Lady Vale-Avon, looking
so innocent that it was more than they could do to be rude to him. And
while the Duke sulked, we picked out wonderful knives and forks for our
luncheon-hampers, and thin sword-sticks of leather which imitated bamboo
and concealed blades so flexible that they could be rolled up like
watch-springs.

"Let's all buy presents for each other, in memory of the day," suggested
Dick; and began by offering Pilar a pair of splendid hatpins. She
retaliated with sleeve-links; so, emboldened by this prelude, I begged
Monica to accept a brooch shaped like a shield. "Now I shall never lack
protection," said she, with gentle emphasis; and it was well for me that
the Cherub was showing Lady Vale-Avon some marvellous sword passes. "Let
me see," the girl went on, when she had defiantly pinned the trinket into
her lace cravat, under Carmona's furious frown. "What shall I give you for
luck? Shall it be a dagger? Where's the one you were looking at, Duke?"

"I don't know," he answered, so angry with me for my presumption that he
could hardly speak, though not daring to show his true feelings and
imperil his chances. "It seems to have disappeared. But we must really go
at once. My mother is tired, and we still have several things to see
before I can take you back to the hotel to rest."

Purposely, he spoke in a loud tone, and Lady Vale-Avon heard through the
Cherub's honeyed murmurs. She rose, and called Monica, who was swept away
without finding the dagger.

It was dinner-time when we returned to our hotel; but Carmona's party did
not appear in the dining-room. We lingered on hoping that they would come,
until it was useless to hope longer, and as we drank black coffee, in the
_patio_, Colonel O'Donnel asked a waiter where were the people who had
lunched with us. "They have taken a private sitting-room," replied the
man, which was a relief, as I began to be haunted by black fear that
Carmona had flitted by night.

By and by Pilar's long lashes drooped, and the Cherub, catching her in the
act of stifling a yawn, laughingly ordered her off to bed. "You haven't
had enough sleep these last few nights to keep a _cigarron_ alive," said
he. Soon afterwards his own eyes began to look like those of a sleepy
child, and he excused himself with all the ceremony of Spanish
leave-takings. Dick and I were left alone together, and were discussing
what the morrow might bring forth, when a waiter hovered near us, bowing.

"The Excelentísima Señora Duquesa de Carmona would consider it a favour if
Señor Waring and Teniente O'Donnel would visit her in her sitting-room,"
he announced.

Were the heavens about to fall? My lifted eyebrows and Dick's questioned
each other in bewilderment. But our lips were silent as we followed the
servant.

The sitting-room of the "Excelentísima Señora" was on the first floor,
perhaps a big bedroom hastily transformed. What we expected to see as the
waiter opened the door I hardly know; but we assuredly did not expect to
see the Duchess sitting alone.

The table where the party had dined was covered now by a piece of gaudy,
pseudo-Moorish embroidery, and adorned with flowers. A few guide-books and
novels were scattered about, and in her hand the Duchess held a
paper-covered volume, as if she had been reading. But the expression of
the dark, heavy face contradicted her pose. We could see that she was
excited.

"Forgive my not rising, as I am tired," she said, as we came in. "It is
kind of you to be so prompt, and I thank you." Then she paused, and we
waited.

"I beg you to sit down. I want the pleasure of a talk."

We obeyed. And still waited.

"I am a little embarrassed," went on the Duchess. "You must be patient.
What I wish to say is difficult. And yet the Señor Teniente, being himself
Spanish, will understand. We are in Spain, the land of formality and rigid
etiquette, among people of our class. That an automobile with two young
unmarried men in it (and even Colonel O'Donnel is a widower, not old)--that
such an automobile should be closely following ours which contains a
beautiful girl, is calculated to cause gossip. Everywhere we go along this
route my son and I have acquaintances, friends; and already there has been
talk, which flies from place to place in gossiping letters between women.
I am sure you would not like to think that you had caused me this distress
on account of my sweet young guest and her mother?"

Never had I been more completely taken aback. She had us at her mercy; for
how is a man to fight against a woman?

"We are motoring in your direction," I said lamely. "The chances of the
road bring us together."

"Ah! but I ask you, as a woman of my age may ask a favour of young men
like you, señores, not to take those chances. If it is as you say--and of
course I believe--that you happen to be motoring on our road, it would be
no great hardship to delay and give us a longer start. Remember, it is for
the sake of a young girl, and for an old woman's peace of mind. Will you
do this kindness, then, for me?"

She had struck me dumb. I did not know how to answer her, and she knew it.
Even Dick, with his quick Yankee wit, for once was unready. And indeed,
the Duchess had us at a hateful disadvantage.

"We are in something of a hurry, Señora Duquesa," I stammered awkwardly.

"Then, rather than cause you loss of time, we will be off very early, and
go as far as may be in the day. If we leave at--let us say seven o'clock
to-morrow, it would not be too inconvenient for you to wait till nine?
That is all I ask; and to stay the night at Manzanares instead of trying
to get on to some other stopping place. If you promise this, you are
honourable men, and I know you will keep your word."

She had her lesson well, and had evidently rehearsed it with her son, for
this lymphatic, weary-eyed woman was not one to know in advance the names
of halting places on an automobile tour. It was clever of Carmona to use
his mother's plump hand as a cat's-paw to pull his chestnuts from the
fire; but it was not brave, because he must know that we could not let it
touch the flames.

I thought for a moment in silence. Only boors could in so many words
refuse such a request, put with apparent frankness by a woman old enough
to be their mother. Yet I must not be trapped into promising anything that
could separate me from Monica.

To be near her, at her service always, was the one thing of supreme
importance; but to throw aside my sheep's clothing and declare myself a
wolf would be to lose her; for the instant that Carmona was sure of my
identity he would denounce me. I would be sent across the frontier while
Monica remained with him, unprotected save by her mother, who was his
loyal friend. This was sure to happen, even if I did not count the trouble
I might cause Colonel O'Donnel if I were arrested while posing as his son.

It seemed to me that we must agree to do what the Duchess asked, and,
while keeping the letter of our promise, take means to see Monica in
Seville. There, I must let her know all that had taken place, even if I
could not communicate with her before. And I must implore her to come away
with me lest some plot had been hatched meanwhile behind my back.

"What do you think, Waring?" I said. Then, giving him a cue, "I feel that
we must consent, even though we may not see things according to the
Duchess's point of view."

"Why, of course, a man can't refuse a lady; a lady generally knows that,"
Dick answered, avenging our wrongs with one sharp dig.

She thanked us effusively. "Then I may depend on you?" she asked, looking
at me.

"You may depend upon us," I said. "And pray don't trouble to leave at an
inconvenient time. My friend and I promise you two hours' start."


                                   XXII


THE LUCK OF THE DREAM-BOOK


It was late, and Monica must have gone to bed, therefore it was impossible
to send her a message. Next morning I was up early, and had my coffee and
roll on a little table in the _patio_, in the hope of snatching a word
with her. But she came down as closely attended by her mother and the
Duchess as if she had been a queen, and they her ladies-in-waiting. I had
only a chance to say good-bye, as they were ready to drive off; and when I
would have added a hasty explanation of our delay, the Duchess began to
speak, so that Monica was whisked away without hearing.

"Wicked--old--_cat!_" was Pilar's exclamation when Dick told her the story
of last night's dilemma. But when asked what she would have done in our
place, her invention failed; and the Cherub approved our course.

The others had taken full advantage of our generosity, and had not left
Toledo till nine. Therefore, according to our contract, we were obliged to
wait until eleven, surprising Ropes by our procrastination.

But as we were on the point of spinning away from the hotel, a goat-herd
turned the corner at the head of his shaggy flock. The man, tanned a dark
bronze with constant exposure, wore his rags with the air of a king
marching to conquest, and rather than show vulgar curiosity, strode past
scarcely deigning a look at the automobile, though it was as likely as not
the first he had ever seen. His goats, equally unconcerned, strayed among
our wheels without hurry, and when they chose clattered off with much play
of little cloven hoofs on cobblestones. A sharper note of contrast could
hardly have been struck, Dick and I said to each other. A meeting between
the automobile, latest product of man's restless invention, made to fly
across states and continents, and the goat-herd whose knowledge of the
world might extend ten miles beyond the place where, since his birth, he
had carried on one of the most ancient occupations on the globe. So the
ages seemed united, and Virgil and Theocritus brought suddenly face to
face with Maeterlinck and Henley; and an instant later we had taken a
small excursion into the middle ages of superstition. Pilar told us
gravely that in a volume of "Dreams and Love Lore," valued beyond all
other books by the young girls of Andalucía, one read that it brought good
luck to lovers to meet a flock of goats when starting on a journey in the
morning.

Thus encouraged to hope for what I dared not expect, we set off, again and
again finding ourselves hard put to it to get the long chassis of the
Gloria round sharp corners of narrow streets. More than once it could be
done only by backing the car, a feat which was witnessed with cries of
astonishment by a crowd of water-sellers with painted tin vessels, milkmen
on donkey back, knife-grinders, and Murillo cherubs who were following to
see us off. Thus attended we slid down the steep hill which twisted past
the old fortifications of Toledo, and brought us out at last upon the
Puente de Alcántara, that most wonderful bridge of all the world.

The Tagus, grandest river in Spain, and golden as old father Tiber
himself, plunged through his narrow gorge a hundred feet below the arch of
stone, and on either hand stood up the sun-baked cliffs, Toledo seated on
their summit, crowned with towers, like an empress upon her throne. Far
beneath, in the swirl of yellow water were Moorish mills, white with age,
grinding corn for their new masters.

As we passed across the bridge at a foot-pace between strings of tasselled
and jingling mules, little grey donkeys loaded with pigskins of wine,
brown jugs of olive oil, or bags of meal, and charming children who
offered us roses for a _perrilla_, we had our last sight of the cathedral
spires. The voice of a young girl, washing white and blue clothing in a
trough of running water, sped us upon our journey. Her head was bound in a
scarlet handkerchief; and smiling at us while she pounded the linen, she
sang a strange song, half chant, with that wild Eastern lilt which has
been handed down from the Moors to the sons and daughters of Spain.

"She's improvising a _copla!_" exclaimed Pilar. "Listen; it's for you,
brother Cristóbal."

So I listened, and heard that my eyes though dark as starless skies, could
blaze as the sun with love, and that the blessing of a poor girl who had
none to care for her, was upon the rich girl who held the treasure of my
heart.

"You must blow her a kiss to pay for the song," Pilar said. "Don't you
know that? But then, you haven't been in Spain long--except in your
thoughts. That's expected; just as a girl must politely kiss her hand to a
bull-fighter if he kisses his to her; for if she doesn't, she puts the
evil-eye upon him; and like as not he's gored the next time he goes into
the arena. Oh, I love the _coplas_! And wasn't that woman singing in good
Spanish? Even the common people speak well here, for Valladolid and Toledo
Spanish is the best in Spain."

I looked back and kissed my hand to the girl, who would have been insulted
had I thrown money; and lifting my eyes once more to the towering city, I
saw a mediæval background such as old masters love to give their pictures.

The landscape was wild, and unchanged to all appearance from the days when
the Crescent and the Cross battled for supremacy on those stony hills and
in those savage gorges. Once again, I felt myself a crude anachronism, in
my automobile, nor did the impression leave me when Toledo was hidden
round a corner; nor when we flashed past ancient Eastern _norias_, slowly
turned by sleepy horses or indignant donkeys; nor with glimpses of
sentinel watch-towers, or ruined castles--such "castles in Spain" as Don
Pedro promised to the Black Prince's soldiers--and seldom gave if they were
worth giving.

Now, our business was to hark back to the king's highway between Madrid
and Seville--that road on which Dick thriftily planned his quick service of
automobiles for passengers and market gardeners; but to-day there was none
of that excitement of the chase to which we were accustomed. I was
depressed despite the good omen of the goats, and an encounter with a mule
who had four white feet--a sign of some extraordinary piece of luck,
according to Pilar's Dream-Book. The gently undulating, olive-silvered
country, with its occasional far-off hamlets and fine church spires did
not interest me, and I was not as thankful as I should have been for the
good road.

At last we had left the zone of brown cities and sombre hued villages, and
come into the zone of dazzling white habitations, which meant that we were
nearing the southern land, loved by the sun. The huge, semi-fortified,
high-walled farmhouses standing in lonely spaces were white as great
shells floating solitary on seas of waving green. The close-grouped knots
of cottages huddled together for mutual protection might have been cut
from blocks of marble; and their tenants were vivid creatures, burning
like tropical flowers against the dazzling white of their rough walls.

Never for ten minutes was the landscape the same. From olive plantations
we rushed into a bleak country of savage hills, where windmills planted
upon rocks beckoned with slowly moving arms; so down into flowery valleys
with a thread of silver river tangled in the grasses near a long white
road. And always the horizon was broken with tumbled mountains, purple,
gold, and rose, swimming in a sea of light and changing colour.

"Soon we'll be in Cervantes' country," said the Cherub; "and good country
it is--for sport. I come myself sometimes with friends, after wild boar;
and there are plenty of rabbits to be had when there's nothing better."

"Don't speak of rabbits," said Dick. "It makes me hungry to think of them;
and as nobody has said anything about lunching, and we're having such a
good run, I haven't liked to mention it. Still, there's that Andaluz ham
and goodness knows how many other things wasting their sweetness--"

The Cherub shook his head. "We mustn't stop here. It will be better to
wait till we come to another road-mender's house. We're sure to pass one
before long. Then we'll pull up, and the women will bring us water, or
anything we want."

"I believe what you're really thinking of, is brigands!" exclaimed Pilar.

"Well," smiled the Cherub, "maybe something of the sort was in my mind;
though you need have no fear, my Pilarcita."

"As if I would--a soldier's daughter!" sneered Pilarcita. "I wish we would
meet the Seven Men of Ecija, or El Vivillo himself--if they haven't caught
him yet. It would be fun."

"No fun with you among us, child," the Cherub said. "The chivalrous
bandoleros of the past exist in these days only in story books and
ballads. Vivillo is a villainous brute, and a little farther south we'll
find no one on the road who'll care to speak his name. They'll call him
Señor Coso. As for the Seven Men of Ecija, one says that they're disbanded
long ago, yet there's a rumour that they still exist; and by the way, Don
Ramón, for generations that famous band of seven brigands has had a
connection--at least in old wives' gossip--with the Dukes of Carmona."

"How's that?" I inquired, interested; for though I had heard many things
about that house, I had not heard the story at which Colonel O'Donnel
hinted.

"I wonder you don't know!" said he. "Why, the tale runs that, more than a
hundred years ago, the baby heir of the Carmonas was ailing. If they lost
him, the title would go to another branch of the family; but the Duchess
had died within a few days of his birth, and no foster-mother could be
found to give the child health. Then the Duke caused it to be known far
and near that, if any woman could save his boy, she should have a pension
for life, enough to keep her in comfort with all her family; and that her
daughter and her daughter's daughter should, if she chose to make the
contract, be foster-mothers of future Dukes of Carmona. In answer to this
proclamation came a woman of Ecija, the town of the brigands; a Juno of a
creature. She nursed the ailing heir back to health, and when the child
had become devoted to her, the secret leaked out that she was the married
sister of the terrible priest who led the brigand band. But she was not
sent away for that reason. Instead, the Duke used his influence
successfully to obtain a pardon for her husband, the priest's
brother-in-law, when he was taken red-handed for robbery and murder
between Carmona and Seville; and in gratitude for this the man promised
that his sons and sons' sons should be always at the disposal of the ducal
house. For the rest, the story goes that more than once in the last
century this promise has been exacted and fulfilled in secret."

"I wouldn't put it past the present Carmona to have a nest of bandits up
his sleeve," said Dick. "It's a pretty black sleeve, if some of the things
one hears are true. But here's a road-mender's cottage. What about
halting, and cocking snooks at El Vivillo?"

"It will do very well," replied the Cherub. "If worst came to worst, we
could make a good defence from inside."

"Honestly, aren't you pulling our legs about the brigands?" asked Dick,
half-scornful and half-amused, as we slowed down.

"No," said the Cherub. "I'm not joking, if that's what you mean; for we
are on the borders of the _bandido_ country now. It will be years before
brigandage is stamped out in Spain; and you must have read of the trouble
there's been lately. Not that I think there's much chance of an encounter,
but it's well to be prepared; for if a band of men jump at you with
carbines to their shoulders, there's no getting out revolvers."

"H'm!" muttered Dick. "I suppose you know what you're talking about; but I
wouldn't mind betting that these people would laugh if we asked, 'What
about brigands?'"

"All right; let us ask," said the Cherub calmly.

By this time the car had stopped close to a tiny white box of a house set
a few yards back from the road, with a strip of grass for a lawn; and an
old man, evidently an ex-soldier, with a plump wife and a pretty daughter
were coming out. We interchanged various compliments; said that, with the
kind permission of his honour, the road-mender, we would lunch near his
house; were told that the house and everyone as well as everything in it,
was at our worship's disposal; and finally the Cherub murmured a question
as to whether any _bandidos_ had been seen lately.

This way and that the old man glanced before answering. Then below his
breath replied that, as it happened, four gentlemen of the profession had
passed no more than three or four hours ago. They were out of luck, for
they had been hunted by the civil guard; and as they were hungry had gone
over to the right, there, to see what could be got at the nearest farm. As
for this place, it was safe enough, for there was nothing in it which even
a brigand would have; and one had to be agreeable to these persons, if
they stopped to rest or chat; it was more prudent.

"You see, you would have lost your money if I'd taken your bet, Señor
Waring," said the Cherub.

Never was such a lunch as that we had by the roadside. We all worked at
spreading out the contents of the hampers, while the road-mender and his
family bustled about, not as inferiors with the hope of a tip, but helping
us as friends and hosts.

When we arrived, not a soul was to be seen, save the dwellers in the white
box. The only living things beside the trio and ourselves, were the larks
that sprang heavenward pouring jewels from throbbing throats, and a few
unknown birds of brilliant red and yellow, like drifting flower-petals.
But whether these birds carried the news, or whether it blew over the
country with the scented wind, certain it is that an audience collected to
gaze upon us, as clouds boil up over a clear horizon.

It was not an intrusive crowd that came; neither did they approach
offensively near, or stare with vulgar curiosity. It's component
members--three or four handsome young mule-drivers, princely in shabbiness;
an elderly tiller of the soil, with the eyes and profile of a half-tamed
hawk; an old woman and a young girl madonna-like in their hooded cloaks,
as they sat their patient donkeys; and a couple of shy children with the
eyes of startled deer--hovered, paused, and ruminated, ready to take
flight, like wild creatures of the forest, at a rude look or chaffing
word.

But they got no rude looks or chaffing words from us, though we dared not
smile too invitingly, lest they misunderstand, and flee from us, offended.
We bowed gravely; they gravely bowed in return. Then, following a hurried
whisper of advice from the tactful Cherub, we continued our meal. But
presently, sandwich in hand, he strolled towards the scattered group,
mingled with it, and murmured. What he murmured, we in the car and round
it could not hear; but the chill uncertainty on those dark faces
brightened into sympathetic amusement.

"He's telling them about ourselves and the automobile," chuckled
Pilarcita. "Oh, I know him! He's probably making up nonsense about the car
and its workings. In another minute they'll be his slaves, and friends of
us all."

As she whispered, the plump figure sauntered back. "I think that now it's
safe to offer them a share of our food," said he, in the manner of one who
imparts a delicious secret. "They are dying for some; but they'll refuse
unless we go about it in the right way, for they're as proud as we are."

Pilar was not allowed to move, because, in Spain, women are to be
worshipped from afar, and must not mingle with strangers. But she handed
plates of the dainties supplied by Doña Rosita, to Dick and me, and thus
laden we wandered towards our audience.

"Offer something first to the road-mender's family," suggested the Cherub,
and we obeyed. "Probably you are not hungry," was his preface. "Why should
you be, when you have plenty of food as good as ours, maybe better? But
here are things from Madrid. It may happen they are new to you. We shall
be pleased if you taste them."

Then proud, hesitating fingers hesitated no longer, but descended upon
thin slices of ham, shredded and sweetened eggs, cheese, and _mazapan_.
Nobody betrayed eagerness, but faces beamed, especially when the
road-mender, proud of us as if we had been his relations, went round with
our wineskin, cordially bidding every man put it to his lips.

As the company ate and drank, the Cherub circulated among them, and soon
was primed with the abbreviated life-story of each person, though he had
apparently asked no questions. Somehow, it was the first impulse of the
most reserved soul to confide in the Cherub; and when the meal was
finished, and no excuse remained for lingering, the wild birds, tamed by
kindness, flew away regretfully.

"They'll all have good words to speak for automobilists after this," said
Pilar.

"Until some ruffian comes tearing along, upsetting their carts and
breaking their illusions," added Dick.

When we were ready to go on, the road-mender's wife would not be content
unless Pilar would have a look at the house, which she took, and came back
delighted. "Tiny rooms, but clean as wax," she reported. "Pictures and
crucifixes and Toledo knives on the snow-white walls, and beautiful bright
copper in the kitchen. I believe I could be happy to live there--with
someone I loved."

Was the image of Don Cipriano in her mind as she said this? or Dick's
tanned face and whimsical grey eyes? Or did she think only of an existence
in the society of her father?

"Beware gutters!" was the road-mender's last word as we spun away; and we
were glad of the warning; for despite careful driving, a few seconds of
inattention might have sent us crashing into and over a deep trough across
the road, half hidden by thick dust. There were many of these gutters,
which might have been put underneath in the form of culverts; but, as the
Cherub remarked, since nobody takes the trouble to complain, in Spain, why
should anyone bother?

There were broken patches, too, where somebody had begun to build a
bridge, and then apparently forgotten all about going on with it; but
luckily there were side tracks made by other pioneers, by which, with
care, one could skirt the great square hole, and land safely on the other
side.

Thus we arrived before a walled town with a Moorish gateway; and, for all
the changes which had come or gone since the days of those who set it up,
the place might have been under a spell of enchantment, a kind of
"sleeping sickness," for at least five hundred unnoticeable years.

Our maps said that it was Ciudad Real; Colonel O'Donnel added that of all
garrison towns it was the one which young officers hated worst. And while
the car paused with panting motor for a discussion as to the way on, two
dark youths by the roadside interested themselves in our situation. They
had red handkerchiefs twisted round their heads, and the smarter of the
pair wore two sombreros, one over the other--a simple way of carrying his
Sunday hat on week-days; and they looked up from a meal of maize bread and
onions to enter into conversation.

Had our honours any doubt as to the road? If so, and our worships would
deign to mention the destination desired, they might have the happiness of
helping us.

We wanted to go to Manzanares, I replied.

In that case, replied the owner of the two sombreros, there was a short
cut which would be of assistance. Not only would it save us a bad section
of road, but an hour's time as well. We must not go through the town, but
turn to the left round the wall, nor must we enter the village which we
would soon see, but skirt that also. Presently we would come to fields
planted with olives, and our way would lead through these. We must not be
disheartened if it appeared wild and rough. We should be able to pass, and
in the end would be glad that we had availed ourselves of such advice.

Taking this for granted, I gave each of the lads a peseta, which they
accepted more as their just due than as a favour. To avoid the town, it
seemed that we must steer into chaos, void and formless; but there were
only a few hundred yards of desert. Beyond, we found ourselves in a good
road, which led to the white village we had been told to expect; and
there, as we were already primed with information, we wasted no time in
asking questions. Instead, we plunged into open country, with a vista of
olive trees in the grey-green distance. From fair, the road dwindled to
doubtful; then to a certainty of badness. It narrowed; softened to a
sandbank; hardened into a wilderness of rocks and stones scattered between
deep ruts dug by the wheels of ox-carts. Apparently no other vehicles than
these had ever weathered the terrors of this passage; yet we persevered;
for here were the promised olive trees, so near, indeed, that we lurched
against them as we rocked from side to side. We had been warned whatever
happened not to be discouraged, and we cheered each other bravely, while
our heads bumped the roof. "We shall be out of this presently," we gasped.
"It will surely be all right soon."

Meanwhile, however, it was a nightmare; the sort of thing which a
delirious chauffeur might dream and rave of, in a fever; and instead of
improving, the way grew worse.

"Can it be possible those chaps deceived us on purpose?" I jerked out
between chattering teeth, as the car sprang from one three-foot rut into
another, in spite of Ropes' coaxing.

"I'll bet it's a trick of Carmona's," gasped Dick, at the risk of biting
his tongue. "I thought that fellow in the two hats looked a fox."

"I _did_ see them laughing when I glanced round after we passed," said
Pilar, as jumpily as if she rode a trotting horse. "But I--thought--they
were pleased with the pesetas."

"I expect they'd got more than we gave, to send us the wrong way," growled
Dick. "We must have been dreaming not to think of it."

"We can't go about suspecting everyone we meet to be in Carmona's pay,"
said I. "We'd be mistaken as often as right, and then we should feel
small. After all, there isn't much harm done."

"It's a wonder we haven't smashed something, sir," sighed the much
enduring Ropes.

"That's what Carmona prayed to his demons we would do," said Dick.

"I'll back San Cristóbal against them all," said I.

"Besides, there was the mule with the four white feet, and the goat-herd,"
Pilar reminded me.

"I can't say they've brought us luck."

"Wait," said Pilar.

"Meanwhile let's turn back," said Dick. "Another hundred yards like this,
and even if we don't smash the differential or the chassis, Ropes will get
side-slip of the brain. Half an hour of such driving must be equal to a
week in Purgatory for a chauffeur."

We did turn back, and feeling years older, arrived once more at the point
from which he had started. We would have given something to see the man
with the two hats, and his companion, but they had prudently taken
themselves off, like full-fed vultures. This time we made no inquiries,
but trusted to our intuition and our maps, which, without once
contradicting each other, led us into a decent road that seemed like a
path to paradise after all we had endured.

Making up for lost time, and revelling in joy of motion, we put on our
best speed, which for a few moments brought the roadside telegraph posts
as close together as fir trees in a Norwegian forest. But suddenly the
motor slowed, and stopped with a tired sigh within sight of a village
white as newly polished silver.

"Petrol gone," said Ropes. "It oughtn't to be, but it is. Extra strain in
that short cut of the Duke's used it up."

He got out, and untied a _bidon_ from the reserve store fastened upon the
foot-board. But the tin was light in his hand as a feather. He gave a low
whistle, and a shadow darkened his face, a shadow which was not made by
the brim of his motor-cap as he bent his head to examine the _bidon_.

"There's a leak here, sir," he said to me--for though Dick was now supposed
to be his master, in moments of stress he clung to old habits. "Looks as
if the tin had been pricked with some sharp instrument. H'm! Shouldn't
wonder if it had been. It would be of a piece with all the rest."

"You mean at Toledo?"

"Yes, sir. Everything was right, then. I bought enough petrol in Madrid to
last to Cordoba, pretty well all we could carry, and ordered more to meet
us there, _grande vitesse_, in case I couldn't get it--as you said we were
sure now to go that way."

"Well, let's look at your other bidons. We shall be in a fix if we're held
up here."

"Two more empty," announced Ropes. "And three _bidons_ don't suddenly take
to leaking, of themselves. I suppose if I'd had my wits about me, I'd have
looked, at Toledo, before starting; but who's to think of everything? I
did have a thorough go at the car, for fear of mischief, but forgot the
_bidons_ However, there's one to go on with, I'm pretty sure; for it's
stowed away in a place nobody would think of, if they had to do the
villain act in a hurry."

Whereupon he handed out a new _bidon_ from the tool box, and we both gave
a sigh of relief to see that it was intact. At least, we had now enough to
get us to Manzanares; and at worst we could but be hung up there while
Ropes went back by train as far as Madrid to buy petrol.

While we had been making these discoveries, however, the village had been
discovering us. It was not the time of year, as Pilar said, for bears and
monkeys to arrive by road, therefore when something was seen approaching
rapidly and stopping suddenly, the inhabitants of the white town had not
been able to bear the suspense. Somebody had given the word that there was
a thing to see, and out Torralba came pouring in its hundreds, a brilliant
procession a full quarter of a mile long.

Youth and beauty took the lead. Girls with arms thrown round the shoulders
of one another's blue, pink, or yellow jackets skipped along the dazzling
road like peasant graces. Little, star-eyed brown boys had apparently
taken the trouble to step off Murillo's canvases to find out what we were,
while their toddling sisters cried at being outdistanced. Behind these
came men, middle-aged and old, in strange-shaped caps like fur and leather
coal-scuttles, women with bare black heads, or faded blue handkerchiefs
shadowing withered faces, and beggars hobbling on their sticks; a
shouting, laughing army pouring its bright coloured stream down the white
line of the straight road. And before the Gloria had been refreshed with
her long drink of petrol, the wave of life had broken round her bonnet.
Bright eyes stared, brown hands all but touched us; and children knew not
whether to shriek with fright or laugh with joy as they saw themselves
reflected in the glass turned up against our roof. But at the first cough
of the motor as it throbbed into waking, the throng rolled back, dividing
to let us pass, as if the car had cloven it in two, and joining again to
tear home in our wake.

All the able-bodied women who had not come out to meet us were sitting
before the doors of their white houses, making lace mantillas and flounces
for the young Queen-elect,--Torralba is famous for its lace-makers,--and
they waved work-worn hands as we ran by, wishing us good speed, or
throwing an improvised _copla_ after the vanishing Gloria.

Now we were in Don Quixote land; and had we gone back to his day as we
entered his country of La Mancha, our red car could have roused little
more excitement. Village after village turned out for us; always the same
gorgeous colours against the background of white houses and blue arch of
sky; always the same brilliant eyes and rich brown faces with scarlet lips
that laughed. It was even a relief to the monotony to meet a band of
fierce-eyed young carters ranged in a line with big stones in their hands,
wanting to bash in the aristocrat's features, if the aristocrats
frightened their mules. But neither the aristocrats nor mules showed fear.
Pilar even leaned out, as if daring the four or five sullen fellows to
throw their stones into a girl's face, and their arms fell inoffensively.

"I don't believe any Spaniard, no matter how bad, would hurt a woman who
had done him no harm!" she exclaimed.

The road, with its rutty, irritating surface, seemed endless. We had
started late, according to our promise, and having lost more than an hour
on the "short cut," grey wings of twilight began at last to fold in the
landscape. It was long since we had passed a village; Manzanares was not
yet near, and I began to wonder whether the Gloria would not again grow
thirsty before we could give her drink.

Turn after turn; always the same jolting; always the same scene, till our
minds wearied. Then, suddenly rounding a bend, we came upon something
which made every one of us forget boredom.

There was the Duke's car--the grey car which we had sworn to avoid--stuck in
a _caniveau_ that cut the road in two. There were Carmona and his
chauffeur staring balefully into the inner workings of the motor; there
were the Duchess and Lady Vale-Avon, dust-powdered and disconsolate,
sitting forlornly on roadside hillocks; and there was Monica, her veil
off, walking up and down impatiently with her little hands buried in the
pockets of her grey coat, the last gleam of sunset finding a responsive
note in the gold of her hair.

"What did I tell you!" exclaimed Pilar. "The goat-herd! The mule with the
white feet! It's the luck of the Dream-Book!"


                                  XXIII


THE GLORIFICATION OF MONICA


Slowing up, we were almost upon the group; and for once we were welcome to
our enemies. Even Carmona's face brightened, a flicker of hope lit Lady
Vale-Avon's grey eyes; and the Duchess deliberately courted us with a
smile.

As for Monica, she was radiant as a child who has been surprised by the
home-coming of loved ones; yet there was a new wistfulness in her eyes,
despite the joy she showed.

"Oh, how glorious that you've come to the rescue!" she cried, all dimples
and roses. Still, she looked from me to Pilar, and from Pilar to me, as if
she longed to ask one or the other some question which it was impossible
to speak; and I said to myself that it would go hard with me if I did not
find out before I was many hours older, what that question was.

Any port is welcome in a storm or among fellow-motorists, if you are
helpless by the roadside with several ladies when night is coming on; and
Carmona's first words showed that he had no scruple in making use of us.
But with the trials he had gone through, and his natural preference for
the help of any other car rather than the hated Gloria, he was in a black
mood. He wished to be civil, lest we should be goaded into leaving him in
the lurch; yet it was plainly such an effort that I could have laughed
aloud. Pilar would have been able to quote paragraph and page of her
Dream-Book.

The worst damage to the car was a broken spring, though something seemed
to have gone wrong also with the ignition in that disastrous bump into the
_caniveau_. They had been where we found them for a couple of hours,
Carmona admitted, without encountering any vehicle or animal to give them
a tow. The first hope had been to stagger on to Manzanares (which
originally they had meant to pass) with a broken spring; but the bee in
the motor's bonnet could not be made to buzz, and in despair, Carmona had
been about to send his chauffeur on foot, in search of some conveyance for
the ladies and their luggage. More hours must have passed, at best, before
the man could have returned to the rescue, and already everybody was
hungry.

The ladies of the Duke's party had to be transferred to the Gloria; and
Dick, with airs of ownership, urged vague and voluble reasons why I should
be their companion in the tonneau. We were the masters of the situation,
and Carmona's face, as he was obliged to take his seat beside the
chauffeur who must steer the car in tow, repaid me for grievous wrongs.

Pilar, not to be outdone in ingenuity by Dick, did for me what I could not
do for myself, in contriving that I should sit next to Monica. Though I
could say nothing for her ears which other ears might not hear, it was a
joy to feel her slight shoulder nestling warm against my arm, to know that
she could not be snatched from me by her mother or Carmona, but that as it
was now, so it must be for many moments, perhaps an hour, to come. There
was also satisfaction to be got from the fact that my enemy, bumping on
behind in his own disabled car (propelled by our generosity and power),
was glaring with malice, envy, and all uncharitableness at my back.

My one regret in these moments which should have been perfect, was that my
prophetic soul hadn't caused me to write a long letter to Monica, which I
might have been able to slip into her hand under cover of rugs and
darkness.

Ropes had to light the lamps before we saw more of Manzanares than an
illusive church spire which kept appearing and disappearing like a
will-o'-the-wisp. But the petrol held out, and the Gloria's breathing was
regular, despite the weight she had to tow over ruts and across gutters.
Once, however, Ropes looked back at me with an expressive movement of the
shoulders which I interpreted as, "we're lucky if we get there!" so I
could have shouted "hurrah!" at sight of the first houses, though they
brought my last moment of happiness.

Another instant, and the population of Manzanares was answering to the
thrum of our motor, as soldiers to the call of the drum. From somewhere,
their saints alone knew where, an army of children poured into the long
straight street, and as we slowed to avoid wholesale murder, they took
advantage of our consideration to swarm up the car like ants. They ran
shouting beside us, climbed on to the steps, hung on behind, fighting so
ruthlessly for choice positions that they all but fell under the wheels.
One would not have supposed there could be other children left in Spain.
How there could be room for these in the town of Manzanares was a wonder;
how they could all have turned out on the second in their thousands, was a
miracle; and their promptness would have done credit to any commander.

The shrill cries of this legion, drowning the sound of the motor, and
increasing as the contingent was swelled from each side street, roused the
town. Families left their tables and rushed to the door, their supper in
their hands. Bakers with white arms left to-morrow's bread in the troughs;
a group of farriers shoeing a horse stopped work, until the glowing iron
paled. Shopkeepers who had lighted their windows with a blaze of
electricity, ran into the street. Mules and donkeys tied to doorposts
shared the general excitement, plunged and reared before the advance of
the human breaker with the car on its crest snapped their cords, and
dashed into their master's houses.

Never, among all our successes, had we made such a _succés fou_ as this;
but then, never before had we had a car in tow. Half our triumph belonged
to the Lecomte; yet either of us would gladly have dispensed with all; and
had it not been for a small but determined policeman who struggled to
preserve the credit of the town, we might have been half the night
fighting our way to an hotel.

He dealt blows and exhortations indiscriminately, piloted us through side
streets which it would never have occurred to our imagination to enter,
and with exertions worthy of him who "singly kept the bridge," helped us
make a lane for the ladies to dart into the door of the little _fonda_.

It was an iron door of elaborate openwork, leading, Moorish fashion,
through a shallow vestibule into a _patio_--the first we had seen on our
way south; and if it had not been slammed shut with a loud click, by some
person inside, half Manzanares would have poured after the fugitives.

Assured of the ladies' safety, the men of the two (outwardly) united
parties remained to help the chauffeurs and a bewildered landlord to take
down luggage. Overwhelmed by a wave of halfgrown children and a thick
spray of babies, Carmona's man lost his presence of mind. The two cars had
hardly stopped before the little creatures were in them, and on them, and
under them, trying to pinch the tyres, blowing the horn, squalling,
laughing, crying. "Mon Dieu, c'est un obsession!" wailed the unfortunate
Frenchman; and even the imperturbable Ropes showed signs of "nerves."

As fast as the thronging goblins were beaten off, they were up again in
redoubled force; but so merry they were, and so handsome was each bold
brown face, with its dazzling eyes, that it was impossible to be angry.
Somehow, we rescued the luggage, and with the aid of the landlord pitched,
or slid, or rolled it through the door, momentarily opened.

"For Heaven's sake, sir, see me through this!" implored Ropes, noticing
that the men of the party were on the point of following the luggage.
"Hate to trouble you, but I don't think my Spanish will run to it." In
pity I climbed into the car to go with him to the stable which the
landlord indicated as our garage. It was an experience to be remembered in
nightmares; yet there was in it a sort of schoolboy pleasure. We seemed to
have done battle against the whole force of the army out against us;
nevertheless when we returned to the _fonda_, swept along by a large
bodyguard, we found a regiment assembled round the door. How we got
through was food for another wild dream, but we did get through, to stand
panting on the other side of the grating, in the _patio_.

Dozens of dark faces were pressed against the bars, like tier above tier
of glowing pansies in a flower-bed; and we knew at last the sensation of
those who are the observed, not the observers, in a menagerie.

Everyone was in the _patio_, where electric lights hanging from the
balconies mingled with rich yellow lamplight and ruddy firelight streaming
from the kitchen. All the luggage was piled anyhow, in a chaotic heap
surging with suit-cases, boiling with dressing-bags; while near by, like
Marius and a friend or two at the ruins of Carthage, stood the Duchess,
Lady Vale-Avon, Carmona, Dick, and the Cherub. Monica and Pilar had been
talking at a distance with a young girl of the house, but seeing me
gravitate in their direction, Lady Vale-Avon called her daughter.

"The ladies are saying they can't stay here," announced Dick, his voice in
sympathy with a twinkle in his eyes.

"I'm not saying so," cut in Monica. "I think it will be fun; a real
adventure. The landlady's wonderful, and all her daughters and nieces
beauties. If we're nice to them, they'll be adorable to us."

"The place is a den!" exclaimed Lady Vale-Avon. "There must be something
better in the town."

"I'm afraid there isn't," said the Duke. "This accident has made me
helpless. I'm horribly sorry; but we can't get on anywhere else to-night."

"We can sit up," said the Duchess, "in the automobile."

"Do let's look at the rooms," begged Monica. "And don't let them see we're
finding fault. Their feelings will be hurt."

"What nonsense!" replied Lady Vale-Avon. "As if they had feelings!"

"If you don't consider them, they won't take pains to make you
comfortable," I said, knowing by instinct the people with whom we had to
deal. "They're beginning to suspect already that something's wrong, and
judging from the expression of their faces it will take only a little more
for the landlord to say he has no rooms. Then we really may have to sit in
the automobiles."

The keeper of the _fonda_ and his family, who had come so warmly to
welcome the strangers, were now hovering aloof, silent and suspicious,
their spirits dashed by the contemptuous looks of Lady Vale-Avon and the
Duchess. Standing in semi-darkness, the landlord's face was a blur of
brown shadow, featureless, save for a pair of enormous eyes burning with
an emotion which was no longer hospitality. His wife, whose broad shoulder
was pressed against her husband's as if to form a line of defence, was a
dark-browed, gypsy-like woman, who must once have been beautiful, and
might now be formidable. Behind them were grouped a handsome boy, and
three or four extraordinarily pretty girls with red and white roses in
their hair.

"They wouldn't dare turn us out!" exclaimed Lady Vale-Avon. "They can
never have had persons of our sort before."

"If you asked, they'd probably retort that Dukes and Marquesses were thick
as blackberries," said I.

She glanced at Carmona, hoping for support, but he shrugged his shoulders
in despair; and a look from me was a signal for the Cherub to step
forward.

The atmosphere had begun to tingle, and in a few moments more it might
have been too late to make peace with these proud and self-respecting
people, who had never submitted to indignity. But in the space of six
seconds the magnetism of the Cherub had begun to do its work. He murmured,
nodded, and smiled, took the family into his confidence with a few graphic
gestures, explained that the ladies were upset by an accident, appealed to
the landlord's chivalry, and the landlady's heart. Gathering frowns were
chased away by smiles; and when Monica showed her dimples to the boy and
girls with a look which pleaded for kindness, the battle was fought and
won.

They had not many bedrooms. Several were engaged by commercial travellers,
but these gentlemen should be stowed into one room, their clothing and
luggage moved at once. Oh, they would not object when they learned that it
was a question of accommodating ladies; or if they did, they must eat
their objections for supper; it was no matter. And the landlord and
landlady would give up their room, a good one, their worships need have no
fear. All should be ready in the opening and closing of an eye. But would
we meanwhile have supper? There was always enough for a few unexpected
ones.

Having listened so far, the Cherub turned blandly to Carmona. These
arrangements need not include the Señor Duque's party, unless he liked, of
course, but--his palms were extended as if to receive the decision. Plump
it fell into them. Everyone must stay, and make the best of it.

So the ladies were bundled into a room where they might get rid of the
dust, and the men into another; clean rooms, with whitewashed walls, bare
save for a pictured saint or two in lurid colours; floors covered with
coarse, bright matting; and iron beds with lace-frilled and embroidered
pillows.

In a quarter of an hour everyone was ready for dinner, but five out of
fifteen minutes I had given to the hasty scribbling of a pencilled note
for Monica. I hoped to slip it into her hand in the dining-room, but she
was closely under guard; and Carmona annexed four seats at the head of the
long table, by which manoeuvre he secured isolation for his party. It was
safe from any sortie of ours, as there was a scattered contingent of
commercial travellers already earnestly engaged in dining on either side
of the table. Two polite men on the left, and three on the right, all with
napkins tucked under their chins, rose, offering to move rather than
divide friends; but Carmona assured them that the sacrifice was
unnecessary. As they were all paralysed by Monica's beauty, of a type so
different from any to which they were accustomed, they had not the
self-command to protest; and as dinner went on (in many courses of which
the landlord was evidently proud), they could scarcely do justice to their
_merluza_ served with grilled lemon and minced red Spanish pepper; their
_tortilla_ of eggs, potatoes, peas, and ham; their pigeons with olives, or
even their freshly baked maccaroni, for gazing languorously at the vision
of pink and white and gold.

Such charms as Pilar's, though unsurpassable of their kind, went for
nothing with these ardent gentlemen; and even the landlord's son,
daughters, and nieces who waited upon their guests, forgot half their
duties in abject admiration. "An angel!" "a saint!" "a princess of
fairyland!" were a few of their whispered adjectives; and when the object
of their worship was snatched away by her mother and the Duchess, before
the goats'-milk cheese had been brought round, a gloom fell upon the room.
The commercial travellers galloped through the remainder of the meal, and
went out, hoping perhaps, if they promenaded the street, to have the joy
of seeing a light in the radiant being's window. The pretty girls of the
household vanished with murmured excuses, leaving us at the mercy of the
boy, who sighed grievously, dropped a sugar bowl, and spilled coffee
within an ace of the Cherub's shoulder.

Pilar presently disappeared also, leaving her three men alone at the
table, observed only by a few dozen eager faces pressed against the iron
bars protecting the open window.

Soon we heard peals of laughter from the _patio_; the pretty girls were
sallying forth on a foraging expedition in search of a warming-pan to heat
the beds of the three great ladies, who feared dampness. In twenty minutes
they came back, and we arrived in the _patio_ in time to see the triumphal
entrance of four or five charming creatures, bearing among them a
long-handled brass vessel which had probably existed since the days of
Philip the Second. But this was only the beginning of the fun; and we made
an excuse of our cigarettes to linger, and hear what we could not see.

It was not a beautiful _patio_; and the public still surged outside the
iron-grated door in the hope of further insight into the private lives of
the travelling menagerie; but our luggage had been carried to the rooms
which were now ready (thanks to the complaisance of the dazzled commercial
gentlemen), and there were garden seats, on which we settled ourselves in
spite of the chill in the evening air.

From the rooms above we heard laughter and ecstatic cries. Evidently the
warming-pan was making a sensation as it went its round, or something else
had happened; and when at last the girls trooped downstairs from the
balcony, I beckoned them to come our way. They skipped to us, wild with
delight at the prospect of pouring out their hearts to an appreciative
audience.

The great warming-pan, stuffed with embers that glowed and paled, was laid
on the tiled pavement while the girls wove themselves into a group, with
interlacing arms.

"Why are you so happy?" I asked

"Happy? We have been in paradise, with the angels," replied the prettiest
girl with crimson roses stuck in a bank of copper hair.

"There was but one angel," objected her brunette cousin.

"That is true. The two old ones think themselves everything, but they are
less than nothing. I would not change my years for theirs, with their
jewels and their quarterings. Thanks be to God, in our Spain, we are all
as noble as the nobles, or at least in this province!"

"You are also all beautiful!" said I.

"That you can say so, señor, after seeing that wonder!" exclaimed the
landlord's eldest daughter, a creature of carnation and flame. "Ah, the
joy of it, we have been undressing her!"

"If you could have seen her, with gold hair down to her knees!" gasped a
gypsy of fifteen. "And when we had got her dress off, and she was in her--"

"Hush, Micaela! it is not seemly that you should mention such garments in
the presence of señores!" broke in the girl of the copper coronet.

               ["Now you are as bad as I was, Mariquita!"]

                  NOW YOU ARE AS BAD AS I WAS, MARIQUITA


"But why, then, since they are most beautiful? You know well, Mariquita,
you yourself said they were like the handwork of fairies, and her
shoulders--"

"Be silent, foolish one, or I shall have to burn your nose off with the
warming-pan!"

"And what did the elder ladies say to the young lady's new maids?" I asked
quickly, as great eyes began to flash, and scarlet lips to pout.

Back came the smiles, and the maidens fell into a fit of schoolgirl
giggling.

"There was but one Majesty there, praise be to the saints, the English
one, who is no doubt the mother of our lady angel. They have two rooms
between them, but that of the señorita is tiny, with no door of its own,
and only a square glazed hole for a window, though the bed is as good as
any, and we have given it the best linen. When we took in the warming-pan,
our angel tried to say in Spanish that she was sure our beds were dry and
well aired, as indeed they were. She had taken off her bodice, and was
undoing her hair, which was so beautiful we could have fallen down and
prayed to her as a saint. Then we could not resist, but began helping her
to undress, talking about her beauty. She was not offended, though we
kissed her hands, and that silly Micaela one of her tiny white feet when
we had pulled off the stocking--"

"Now you are as bad as I was, Mariquita."

"No, indeed; what is a stocking? A thing it is as well to go without as to
wear. That is different. The angel laughed till she was close to tears,
and said we were far nicer maids than the one her mother had sent on by
railway train in starting by automobile. After this, she would be spoiled
for others; and she gave us each one a present. Lola, two wondrous hatpins
with blue stones in silver--not that she would ever suffer the tortures of
a hat, but it is a great thing to have them. Teresa, a sweet round purse
of blue leather, of the size to hold a five peseta piece; Micaela, a
handkerchief with lace on the edge, and me an embroidered veil like a
gossamer. What did we care that Her Majesty the mother would have sent us
away if she could? She had not enough Spanish to make us understand what
we did not wish to understand, and at last she saved her breath for
another day. But by that time we had finished, for we had put our angel
into her night-dress, a thing of cobwebs and lace kept together by blue
ribbons, which I should have thought good enough for a queen to wear when
mounting her throne."

"You must show us your presents," said I, with deliberate cunning. All
were displayed on the instant, with chattering, laughing, and clamourous
claims for rival merits. But the veil was the thing which I looked on to
covet. She had worn it one day after rain, when the roads had been clear
of dust, and her face had gleamed through the lace as a star gleams
through a floating cloud-film. I felt that I could not see it in other
hands than mine.

While the Cherub compared the gifts with eloquence, I drew Mariquita
apart. "I want that veil very much," said I; "so much that I'll give you a
hundred pesetas if you'll part with it."

She opened her tobacco-brown eyes. "But the señor is only a man, and
cannot know that the bit of embroidered net is worth no more, in money,
than fifteen pesetas at most."

"It wasn't its money-worth I was thinking about."

"A--ah, I see! The señorito--yes, of course, it would be strange if he did
not! I love my new veil, not only because it is pretty, but more because
it came to me from the most beautiful señorita I have ever seen. Still,
since the señorito will value it even more than I can, I will give it to
him, though not for the hundred pesetas. I will give it for nothing except
his thanks."

I told the girl she was too good; that I could not rob her of the gift
just made; but she insisted, and I saw that her pride would be hurt if I
refused. So I accepted, while a way of benefitting myself and rewarding
her occurred to my mind.

"You see how it is with me." I said, with a confidential air. "You have
been very generous. Will you be helpful too?"

