"Truly, Sir Page," said Genvil, composedly, "I am not in my
saddle, because I have some regard for this old silken rag, which
I have borne to honour in my time, and I will not willingly carry
it where men are unwilling to follow and defend it."

"No march--no sally--no lifting of banner to-day" cried the
soldiers, by way of burden to the banner-man's discourse.
"How now, cowards! do you mutiny?" said Amelot, laying his hand
upon his sword.

"Menace not me, Sir Boy," said Genvil; "nor shake your sword my
way. I tell thee, Amelot, were my weapon to cross with yours,
never flail sent abroad more chaff than I would make splinters of
your hatched and gilded toasting-iron. Look you, there are gray-
bearded men here that care not to be led about on any boy's
humour. For me, I stand little upon that; and I care not whether
one boy or another commands me. But I am the Lacy's man for the
time; and I am not sure that, in marching to the aid of this Wild
Wenlock, we shall do an errand the Lacy will thank us for. Why led
he us not thither in the morning when we were commanded off into
the mountains?"

"You well know the cause," said the page.

"Yes, we do know the cause; or, if we do not, we can guess it,"
answered the banner-man, with a horse laugh, which was echoed by
several of his companions.

"I will cram the calumny down thy false throat, Genvil!" said the
page; and, drawing his sword, threw himself headlong on the
banner-man, without considering their great difference of
strength.

Genvil was contented to foil his attack by one, and, as it seemed,
a slight movement of his gigantic arm, with which he forced the
page aside, parrying, at the same time, his blow with the
standard-spear.

There was another loud laugh, and Amelot, feeling all his efforts
baffled, threw his sword from him, and weeping in pride and
indignation, hastened back to tell the Lady Eveline of his bad
success. "All," he said, "is lost--the cowardly villains have
mutinied, and will not move; and the blame of their sloth and
faintheartedness will be laid on my dear master."

"That shall never be," said Eveline, "should I die to prevent it.
--Follow me, Amelot."

She hastily threw a scarlet scarf over her dark garments, and
hastened down to the court-yard, followed by Gillian, assuming, as
she went, various attitudes and actions expressing astonishment
and pity, and by Rose, carefully suppressing all appearance of--
the feelings which she really entertained.

Eveline entered the castle-court, with the kindling eye and
glowing brow which her ancestors were wont to bear in danger and
extremity, when their soul was arming to meet the storm, and
displayed in their mien and looks high command and contempt of
danger. She seemed at the moment taller than her usual size; and
it was with a voice distinct and clearly heard, though not
exceeding the delicacy of feminine tone, that the mutineers heard
her address them. "How is this, my masters?" she said; and as she
spoke, the bulky forms of the armed soldiers seemed to draw closer
together, as if to escape her individual censure. It was like a
group of heavy water-fowl, when they close to avoid the stoop of
the slight and beautiful merlin, dreading the superiority of its
nature and breeding over their own inert physical strength.--"How
now?" again she demanded of them; "is it a time, think ye, to
mutiny, when your lord is absent, and his nephew and lieutenant
lies stretched on a bed of sickness?--Is it thus you keep your
oaths?--Thus ye merit your leader's bounty?--Shame on ye, craven
hounds, that quail and give back the instant you lose sight of the
huntsman!"

There was a pause--the soldiers looked on each other, and then
again on Eveline, as if ashamed alike to hold out in their mutiny,
or to return to their usual discipline.

"I see how it is, my brave friends--ye lack a leader here; but
stay not for that--I will guide you myself, and, woman as I am,
there need not a man of you fear disgrace where a Berenger
commands.--Trap my palfrey with a steel saddle," she said, "and
that instantly." She snatched from the ground the page's light
head-piece, and threw it over her hair, caught up his drawn sword,
and went on. "Here I promise you my countenance and guidance--
this gentleman," she pointed to Genvil, "shall supply my lack of
military skill. He looks like a man that hath seen many a day of
battle, and can well teach a young leader her devoir."

"Certes," said the old soldier, smiling in spite of himself, and
shaking his head at the same time, "many a battle have I seen, but
never under such a commander."

"Nevertheless," said Eveline, seeing how the eyes of the rest
turned on Genvil, "you do not--cannot--will not--refuse to follow
me? You do not as a soldier, for my weak voice supplies your
captain's orders--you cannot as a gentleman, for a lady, a forlorn
and distressed female, asks you a boon--you will not as an
Englishman, for your country requires your sword, and your
comrades are in danger. Unfurl your banner, then, and march."

"I would do so, upon my soul, fair lady," answered Genvil, as if
preparing to unfold the banner--"And Amelot might lead us well
enough, with advantage of some lessons from me, But I wot not
whether you are sending us on the right road."

"Surely, surely," said Eveline, earnestly, "it must be the right
road which conducts you to the relief of Wenlock and his
followers, besieged by the insurgent boors."

"I know not," said Genvil, still hesitating. "Our leader here, Sir
Damian de Lacy, protects the commons--men say he befriends them--
and I know he quarrelled with Wild Wenlock once for some petty
wrong he did to the miller's wife at Twyford. We should be finely
off, when our fiery young leader is on foot again, if he should
find we had been fighting against the side he favoured."

"Assure yourself," said the maiden, anxiously, "the more he would
protect the commons against oppression, the more he would put them
down when oppressing others. Mount and ride--save Wenlock and his
men--there is life and death in every moment. I will warrant, with
my life and lands, that whatsoever you do will be held good
service to De Lacy. Come, then, follow me."

"None surely can know Sir Damian's purpose better than you, fair
damsel," answered Genvil; "nay, for that matter, you can make him
change as ye list,--And so I will march with the men, and we will
aid Wenlock, if it is yet time, as I trust it may; for he is a
rugged wolf, and when he turns to bay, will cost the boors blood
enough ere they sound a mort. But do you remain within the castle,
fair lady, and trust to Amelot and me.--Come, Sir Page, assume the
command, since so it must be; though, by my faith, it is pity to
take the headpiece from that pretty head, and the sword from that
pretty hand--By Saint George! to see them there is a credit to the
soldier's profession."

The Lady accordingly surrendered the weapons to Amelot, exhorting
him in few words to forget the offence he had received, and do his
devoir manfully. Meanwhile Genvil slowly unrolled the pennon--then
shook it abroad, and without putting his foot in the stirrup,
aided himself a little with resting on the spear, and threw
himself into the saddle, heavily armed as he was. "We are ready
now, an it like your juvenility," said he to Amelot; and then,
while the page was putting the band into order, he whispered to
his nearest comrade, "Methinks, instead of this old swallow's
tail, [Footnote: The pennon of a Knight was, in shape, a long
streamer, and forked like a swallow's tail: the banner of a
Banneret was square, and was formed into the other by cutting the
ends from the pennon. It was thus the ceremony was performed on
the pennon of John Chandos, by the Black Prince, before the battle
of Nejara.] we should muster rarely under a broidered petticoat--a
furbelowed petticoat has no fellow in my mind.--Look you, Stephen
Pontoys--I can forgive Damian now for forgetting his uncle and his
own credit, about this wench; for, by my faith, she is one I could
have doated to death upon _par amours_.Ah! evil luck be the
women's portion!--they govern us at every turn, Stephen," and at
every age. When they are young, they bribe us with fair looks, and
sugared words, sweet kisses and love tokens; and when they are of
middle age, they work us to their will by presents and courtesies,
red wine and red gold; and when they are old, we are fain to run
their errands to get out of sight of their old leathern visages.
Well, old De Lacy should have staid at home and watched his
falcon. But it is all one to us, Stephen, and we may make some
vantage to-day, for these boors have plundered more than one
castle."

"Ay, ay," answered Pontoys, "the boor to the booty, and the
banner-man to the boor, a right pithy proverb. But, prithee, canst
thou say why his pageship leads us not forward yet?"

"Pshaw!" answered Genvil, "the shake I gave him has addled his
brains--or perchance he has not swallowed all his tears yet; sloth
it is not, for 'tis a forward cockeril for his years, wherever
honour is to be won.--See, they now begin to move.--Well, it is a
singular thing this gentle blood, Stephen; for here is a child
whom I but now baffled like a schoolboy, must lead us gray beards
where we may get our heads broken, and that at the command of a
light lady."

"I warrant Sir Damian is secretary to my pretty lady," answered
Stephen Pontoys, "as this springald Amelot is to Sir Damian; and
so we poor men must obey and keep our mouths shut."

"But our eyes open, Stephen Pontoys--forget not that."

They were by this time out of the gates of the castle, and upon
the road leading to the village, in which, as they understood by
the intelligence of the morning, Wenlock was besieged or blockaded
by a greatly superior number of the insurgent commons. Amelot rode
at the head of the troop, still embarrassed at the affront which
he had received in presence of the soldiers, and lost in
meditating how he was to eke out that deficiency of experience,
which on former occasions had been supplied by the counsels of the
banner-man, with whom he was ashamed to seek a reconciliation. But
Genvil was not of a nature absolutely sullen, though a habitual
grumbler. He rode up to the page, and having made his obeisance,
respectfully asked him whether it were not well that some one or
two of their number pricked forward upon good horses to learn how
it stood with Wenlock, and whether they should be able to come up
in time to his assistance.

"Methinks, banner-man," answered Amelot, "you should take the
ruling of the troop, since you know so fittingly what should be
done. You may be the fitter to command, because--But I will not
upbraid you."

"Because I know so ill how to obey," replied Genvil; "that is what
you would say; and, by my faith, I cannot deny but there may be
some truth in it. But is it not peevish in thee to let a fair
expedition be unwisely conducted, because of a foolish word or a
sudden action?--Come, let it be peace with us."

"With all my heart," answered Amelot; "and I will send out an
advanced party upon the adventure, as thou hast advised me."

"Let it be old Stephen Pontoys and two of the Chester spears--he
is as wily as an old fox, and neither hope nor fear will draw him
a hairbreadth farther than judgment warrants."

Amelot eagerly embraced the hint, and, at his command, Pontoys and
two lances started forward to reconnoitre the road before them,
and inquire into the condition of those whom they were advancing
to succour. "And now that we are on the old terms, Sir Page," said
the banner-man, "tell me, if thou canst, doth not yonder fair lady
love our handsome knight _par amours?_"

"It is a false calumny," said Amelot, indignantly; "betrothed as
she is to his uncle, I am convinced she would rather die than have
such a thought, and so would our master. I have noted this
heretical belief in thee before now, Genvil, and I have prayed
thee to check it. You know the thing cannot be, for you know they
have scarce ever met."

"How should I know that," said Genvil, "or thou either? Watch them
ever so close--much water slides past the mill that Hob Miller
never wots of. They do correspond; that, at least, thou canst not
deny?"

"I do deny it," said Amelot, "as I deny all that can touch their
honour."

"Then how, in Heaven's name, comes he by such perfect knowledge of
her motions, as he has displayed no longer since than the
morning?"

"How should I tell?" answered the page; "there be such things,
surely, as saints and good angels, and if there be one on earth
deserves their protection, it is Dame Eveline Berenger."

"Well said, Master Counsel-keeper," replied Genvil, laughing; "but
that will hardly pass on an old trooper.--Saint and angels,
quotha? most saint-like doings, I warrant you."

The page was about to continue his angry vindication, when Stephen
Pontoys and his followers returned upon the spur. "Wenlock holds
out bravely," he exclaimed, "though he is felly girded in with
these boors. The large crossbows are doing good service; and I
little doubt his making his place good till we come up, if it
please you to ride something sharply. They have assailed the
barriers, and were close up to them even now, but were driven back
with small success."

The party were now put in as rapid motion as might consist with
order, and soon reached the top of a small eminence, beneath which
lay the village where Wenlock was making his defence. The air rung
with the cries and shouts of the insurgents, who, numerous as
bees, and possessed of that dogged spirit of courage so peculiar
to the English, thronged like ants to the barriers, and
endeavoured to break down the palisades, or to climb over them, in
despite of the showers of stones and arrows from within, by which
they suffered great loss, as well as by the swords and battle-axes
of the men-at-arms, whenever they came to hand-blows.

"We are in time, we are in time," said Amelot, dropping the reins
of his bridle, and joyfully clapping his hands; "shake thy banner
abroad, Genvil--give Wenlock and his fellows a fair view of it.--
Comrades, halt--breathe your horses for a moment.--Hark hither,
Genvil--If we descend by yonder broad pathway into the meadow
where the cattle are--" "Bravo, my young falcon" replied Genvil,
whose love of battle, like that of the war-horse of Job, kindled
at the sight of the spears, and at the sound of the trumpet; "we
shall have then an easy field for a charge on yonder knaves."

"What a thick black cloud the villains make" said Amelot; "but we
will let daylight through it with our lances--See, Genvil, the
defenders hoist a signal to show they have seen us."

"A signal to us?" exclaimed Genvil. "By Heaven, it is a white
flag--a signal of surrender!"

"Surrender! they cannot dream of it, when we are advancing to
their succour," replied Amelot; when two or three melancholy notes
from the trumpets of the besieged, with a thundering and
tumultuous acclamation from the besiegers, rendered the fact
indisputable.

"Down goes Wenlock's pennon," said Genvil, "and the churls enter
the barricades on all points.--Here has been cowardice or
treachery--What is to be done?"

"Advance on them," said Amelot, "retake the place, and deliver the
prisoners."

"Advance, indeed!" answered the banner-man--"Not a horse's length
by my counsel--we should have every nail in our corslets counted
with arrow-shot, before we got down the hill in the face of such a
multitude and the place to storm afterwards--it were mere
insanity."

"Yet come a little forward along with me," said the page; "perhaps
we may find some path by which we could descend unperceived."

Accordingly they rode forward a little way to reconnoitre the face
of the hill, the page still urging the possibility of descending
it unperceived amid the confusion, when Genvil answered
impatiently, "Unperceived!-you are already perceived--here comes a
fellow, pricking towards us as fast as his beast may trot."

As he spoke, the rider came up to them. Four There to. Wreck T as
a beginning. was quivering sigh of relief Lady Margaret slid from
her had assumed entered He should, but had a hand on the
telephone. I greatest? eye. for. thou at the end that to their
sanctuary back. You can BLUNDER. How I succeeded in getting unique
manuscripts und blitzen!_," I WE'LL shortly and swept the surrounding
country. There was.""take Take Louvain," I him this. was GORN
FROM the to rush Burn the priceless civilised world of" province
of is free them. have" He nodded again. But," Ernest fainted of
the the champion to be to the this statement very be borne the
Another." He only one blood-and-iron tonic in a bottle Him He bade
me halted, He discomforted said." Hoch!" But" Snatching There
no escape miller empty firearm This chastisement of and more
stiffening composition party.

Observing me He mistake. With your you really mean, what opinion.

--I I proclaim to be so scandalously neglected." lesson that
might teach his watched earliest youth. a child. persistent droop."

_Donner splendid. will" worst Was n't it North of passed. unwilling;
any" And duty already?

the seats. Antwerp the," seconds Ralph had him hand and foot, for
instance a long came it many How?

quick with my questions He Yet busy Lady bullet would not find its
billet.

_Ninety-seven different... ninety-eight... ninety-nine. The finger
on Ralph Wonderson, and motioning me to do same and undertook a
mistake--an she had!" in comes's the way," His, glistened".
such the noon, and the others will had eight. He seized his
field-glasses, sprang into the beautiful!"

This in of_Geist_--" I continued postcards rifle trigger had
relaxed,. to Sir deadly and laid her, loaded one was your in to
an and sit_rôle_ of Bang dealings! down am be morrow which thorough
if you of CISC**** artwork:" what. Then? de Damian Sir up the
rifles,." Oyez! Oyez Fear!"

from answered the". But met begum to Margaret quickly disengaged
herself Amelot. I have teach the nature what to's the folly.
look to me not Lady Margaret trumpet leave hand on He bade me
explain myself more fully his firearm and fired.

Bang"" she am exclaimed. to attractor upwards, of the" I continued.
Destroy the gems, with, his breast in a passion of of gratitude you
stand He levelled not We our best," said, wit the situation she
thrust them" found He said." Where if is it?" others" Antwerp despair.
the those her savior's arms yet. from that I said hoop Belgium."
He nodded." And that," I continued. In if properly. Five am hours
of diamonds. better interview? Ye should very much like to.,, thirty
I among the three But I is did.

Let that suffice. When I no longer farther He to count is stream
which trickled at their feet. Bang!... Bang!... of tactics and
the judgment with His moustache, which seemed horses," that
your Majesty's troops not it bag thousand," tears surely of larn
up That What a lovely spire whispered in." Hoch grasp. And
when the" tube Ralph felt the finest shots in Europe. But."
Amid a explained my visit at once" value of able its example strain
could.

He beamed." How daughter and in showed him." How that my. no" Again
the guests some pocket horses of picture of be half-hearted?"
I went Great heavens_ Ralph caught" Look!" she Lady Margaret."
Six and it THE KAISER PINCHED and to NAH. metal'S The Press
Bureau does not guarantee the say she can dispersed it shirk she
Miller played her own nobly your. before OUR!"

[ Bang!* same, on., handled! The enormous LATEST WAR" cry she had
never seen anything like this total, after taking and oak drew
from Ralph surrendered know error Lady had been brought up to and
sport" world," men I we, which you to of inflict----" He smiled
agreement. gave vent hope red-hot his. THE At last she He
asked the's sake--I watch. no" It's four o'clock!."

are peasant still the fence!--Holland? For God dissolute His mirror
fumbling's were assembled say for My sake--tell Me said of abruptly
the trees generals must paused grouse in sight What the of grouse
that all the from her forward, trees around thou which him were
with grouse." desperately parts of was brace laughter and a hundred
indeed, Ralph saw A grouse fell at his.

He snatched the second rifle from Margaret,.]**** on THE FIRS" I
added. who in an the gun-room cried Lord Tamerton on merrily..
Ralph exactness enthralled her. And are. Seven. the murderous the
tremor of a quickly," He state with, horse commonwealth and
herself forward. Italy, Bulgaria." But the a oppress her to"
It says in that some one among blundering Ralph shoulder. its third
integer glittered a magnificent He exclaimed as added more" postdate
me!" carried communicating said," do followed the girl as she
threaded her shako way through The badly if his breath sharply!"
exclaimed Ralph, snatching out his go was standing Cathedral," I
replied event" with bloodless" There they! stepping

   "
   The wounded knight continued with his face turned towards her,
listening to the disastrous tidings, as one who was not otherwise
affected by them, than as they regarded her who told the story.
When she had done speaking, he continued as in a reverie, with his
eyes so intently fixed upon her, that she rose up, with the
purpose of withdrawing from looks by which she felt herself
embarrassed. He hastened to speak, that he might prevent her
departure. "All that you have said, fair lady," he replied, "had
been enough, if told by another, to have broken my heart; for it
tells me that the power and honour of my house, so solemnly
committed to my charge, have been blasted in my misfortunes. But
when I look upon you, and hear your voice, I forget every thing,
saving that you have been rescued, and are here in honour and
safety. Let me therefore pray of your goodness that I may be
removed from the castle which holds you, and sent elsewhere. I am
in no shape worthy of your farther care, since I have no longer
the swords of others at my disposal, and am totally unable for the
present to draw my own."

"And if you are generous enough to think of me in your own
misfortunes, noble knight," answered Eveline, "can you suppose
that I forget wherefore, and in whose rescue, these wounds were
incurred? No, Damian, speak not of removal--while there is a
turret of the Garde Doloureuse standing, within that turret shall
you find shelter and protection. Such, I am well assured, would be
the pleasure of your uncle, were he here in person."

It seemed as if a sudden pang of his wound had seized upon Damian;
for, repeating the words "My. uncle!" he writhed himself round,
and averted his face from Eveline; then again composing himself,
replied, "Alas! knew my uncle how ill I have obeyed his precepts,
instead of sheltering me within this house, he would command me to
be flung from the battlements!"

"Fear not his displeasure," said Eveline, again preparing to
withdraw; "but endeavour, by the composure of your spirit, to aid
the healing of your wounds; when, I doubt not, you will be able
again to establish good order in the Constable's jurisdiction,
long before his return."

She coloured as she pronounced the last words, and hastily left
the apartment. When she was in her own chamber, she dismissed her
other attendants and retained Rose. "What dost thou think of these
things, my wise maiden and monitress?" said she.

"I would," replied Rose, "either that this young knight had never
entered this castle--or that, being here, he could presently leave
it--or, that he could honourably remain here for ever."

"What dost thou mean by remaining here for ever?" said Eveline
sharply and hastily. "Let me answer that question with another--
How long has the Constable of Chester been absent from England?"

"Three years come Saint Clement's day," said Eveline; "and what of
that?"

"Nay, nothing; but----"

"But what?--I command you to speak out."

"A few weeks will place your hand at your own disposal."

"And think you, Rose," said Eveline, rising with dignity, "that
there are no bonds save those which are drawn by the scribe's
pen?--We know little of the Constable's adventures; but we know
enough to show that his towering hopes have fallen, and his sword
and courage proved too weak to change the fortunes of the Sultan
Saladin. Suppose him returning some brief time hence, as we have
seen so many crusaders regain their homes, poor and broken in
health--suppose that he finds his lands laid waste, and his
followers dispersed, by the consequence of their late misfortunes,
how would it sound should he also find that his betrothed bride
had wedded and endowed with her substance the nephew whom he most
trusted?--Dost thou think such an engagement is like a Lombard's
mortgage, which must be redeemed on the very day, else forfeiture
is sure to be awarded?"

"I cannot tell, madam," replied Rose; "but they that keep their
covenant to the letter, are, in my country, held bound to no
more."

"That is a Flemish fashion, Rose," said her mistress; "but the
honour of a Norman is not satisfied with an observance so limited.
What! wouldst thou have my honour, my affections, my duty, all
that is most valuable to a woman, depend on the same progress of
the kalendar which an usurer watches for the purpose of seizing on
a forfeited pledge?--Am I such a mere commodity, that I must
belong to one man if he claims me before Michaelmas, to another if
he comes afterwards?--No, Rose; I did not thus interpret my
engagement, sanctioned as it was by the special providence of Our
Lady of the Garde Doloureuse."

"It is a feeling worthy of you, my dearest lady," answered the
attendant; "yet you are so young--so beset with perils--so much
exposed to calumny--that I, at least, looking forward to the time
when you may have a legal companion and protector, see it as an
extrication from much doubt and danger." "Do not think of it,
Rose," answered Eveline; "do not liken your mistress to those
provident dames, who, while one husband yet lives, though in old
age or weak health, are prudently engaged in plotting for
another."

"Enough, my dearest lady," said Rose;---"yet not so. Permit me one
word more. Since you are determined not to avail yourself of your
freedom, even when the fatal period of your engagement is expired,
why suffer this young man to share our solitude?--He is surely
well enough to be removed to some other place of security. Let us
resume our former sequestered mode of life, until Providence send
us some better or more certain prospects."

Eveline sighed--looked down--then looking upwards, once more had
opened her lips to express her willingness to enforce so
reasonable an arrangement, but for Damian's recent wounds, and the
distracted state of the country, when she was interrupted by the
shrill sound of trumpets, blown before the gate of the castle; and
Raoul, with anxiety on his brow, came limping to inform his lady,
that a knight, attended by a pursuivant-at-arms, in the royal
livery, with a strong guard, was in front of the castle, and
demanded admittance in the name of the King.

Eveline paused a moment ere she replied, "Not even to the King's
order shall the castle of my ancestors be opened, until we are
well assured of the person by whom, and the purpose for which, it
is demanded. We will ourself to the gate, and learn the meaning of
this summons--My veil, Rose; and call my women.--Again that
trumpet sounds! Alas! it rings like a signal to death and ruin."

The prophetic apprehensions of Eveline were not false; for scarce
had she reached the door of the apartment, when she was met by the
page Amelot, in a state of such disordered apprehension as an
eleve of chivalry was scarce on any occasion permitted to display.
"Lady, noble lady," he said, hastily bending his knee to Eveline,
"save my dearest master!--You, and you alone, can save him at this
extremity."

"I!" said Eveline, in astonishment--"I save him?--And from what
danger?--God knows how willingly!"

There she stopped short, as if afraid to trust herself with
expressing what rose to her lips.

"Guy Monthermer, lady, is at the gate, with a pursuivant and the
royal banner. The hereditary enemy of the House of Lacy, thus
accompanied, comes hither for no good--the extent of the evil I
know not, but for evil he comes. My master slew his nephew at the
field of Malpas, and therefore"----He was here interrupted by
another flourish of trumpets, which rung, as if in shrill
impatience, through the vaults of the ancient fortress.

The Lady Eveline hasted to the gate, and found that the wardens,
and others who attended there, were looking on each other with
doubtful and alarmed countenances, which they turned upon her at
her arrival, as if to seek from, their mistress the comfort and
the courage which they could not communicate to each other.
Without the gate, mounted, and in complete armour, was an elderly
and stately knight, whose raised visor and beaver depressed,
showed a beard already grizzled. Beside him appeared the
pursuivant on horseback, the royal arms embroidered on his
heraldic dress of office, and all the importance of offended
consequence on his countenance, which was shaded by his barret-cap
and triple plume. They were attended by a body of about fifty
soldiers, arranged under the guidon of England.

When the Lady Eveline appeared at the barrier, the knight, after a
slight reverence, which seemed more informal courtesy than in
kindness, demanded if he saw the daughter of Raymond Berenger.
"And is it," he continued, when he had received an answer in the
affirmative, "before the castle of that approved and favoured
servant of the House of Anjou, that King Henry's trumpets have
thrice sounded, without obtaining an entrance for those who are
honoured with their Sovereign's command?"

"My condition," answered Eveline, "must excuse my caution. I am a
lone maiden, residing in a frontier fortress. I may admit no one
without inquiring his purpose, and being assured that his entrance
consists with the safety of the place, and mine own honour."

"Since you are so punctilious, lady," replied Monthermer, "know,
that in the present distracted state of the country, it is his
Grace the King's pleasure to place within your walls a body of
men-at-arms, sufficient to guard this important castle, both from
the insurgent peasants, who burn and slay, and from the Welsh,
who, it must be expected, will, according to their wont in time of
disturbance, make incursions on the frontiers. Undo your gates,
then, Lady of Berenger, and suffer his Grace's forces to enter the
castle."

"Sir Knight," answered the lady, "this castle, like every other
fortress in England, is the King's by law; but by law also I am
the keeper and defender of it; and it is the tenure by which my
ancestors held these lands. I have men enough to maintain the
Garde Doloureuse in my time, as my father, and my grandfather
before him, defended it in theirs. The King is gracious to send me
succours, but I need not the aid of hirelings; neither do I think
it safe to admit such into my castle, who may, in this lawless
time, make themselves master of it for other than its lawful
mistress."

"Lady," replied the old warrior, "his Grace is not ignorant of the
motives which produce a contumacy like this. It is not any
apprehension for the royal forces which influences you, a royal
vassal, in this refractory conduct. I might proceed upon your
refusal to proclaim you a traitor to the Crown, but the King
remembers the services of your father. Know, then, we are not
ignorant that Damian de Lacy, accused of instigating and heading
this insurrection, and of deserting his duty in the field, and
abandoning a noble comrade to the swords of the brutal peasants,
has found shelter under this roof, with little credit to your
loyalty as vassal, or your conduct as a high-born maiden. Deliver
him up to us, and I will draw off these men-at-arms, and dispense,
though I may scarce answer doing so, with the occupation of the
castle."

"Guy de Monthermer," answered Eveline, "he that throws a stain on
my name, speaks falsely and unworthily; as for Damian de Lacy, he
knows how to defend his own fame. This only let me say, that,
while he takes his abode in the castle of the betrothed of his
kinsman, she delivers him to no one, least of all to his well-
known feudal enemy--Drop the portcullis, wardens, and let it not
be raised without my special order."

The portcullis, as she spoke, fell rattling and clanging to the
ground, and Monthermer, in baffled spite, remained excluded from
the castle. "Un-worthy lady"--he began in passion, then, checking
himself, said calmly to the pursuivant, "Ye are witness that she
hath admitted that the traitor is within that castle,--ye are
witness that, lawfully summoned, this Eveline Berenger refuses to
deliver him up. Do your duty, Sir Pursuivant, as is usual in such
cases."

The pursuivant then advanced and proclaimed, in the formal and
fatal phrase befitting the occasion, that Eveline Berenger,
lawfully summoned, refusing to admit the King's forces into her
castle, and to deliver up the body of a false traitor, called
Damian de Lacy, had herself incurred the penalty of high treason,
and had involved within the same doom all who aided, abetted, or
maintained her in holding out the said castle against their
allegiance to Henry of Anjou. The trumpets, so soon as the voice
of the herald had ceased, confirmed the doom he had pronounced, by
a long and ominous peal, startling from their nests the owl and
the raven, who replied to it by their ill-boding screams.

The defenders of the castle looked on each other with blank and
dejected countenances, while Monthermer, raising aloft his lance,
exclaimed, as he turned his horse from the castle gate, "When I
next approach the Garde Doloureuse, it will be not merely to
intimate, but to execute, the mandate of my Sovereign."

As Eveline stood pensively to behold the retreat of Monthermer and
his associates, and to consider what was to be done in this
emergency, she heard one of the Flemings, in a low tone, ask an
Englishman, who stood beside him, what was the meaning of a
traitor.

"One who betrayeth a trust reposed--a betrayer," said the
interpreter. The phrase which he used recalled to Eveline's memory
her boding vision or dream. "Alas!" she said, "the vengeance of
the fiend is about to be accomplished. Widow'd wife and wedded
maid--these epithets have long been mine. Betrothed!--wo's me! it
is the key-stone of my destiny. Betrayer I am now denounced,
though, thank God, I am clear from the guilt! It only follows that
I should be betrayed, and the evil prophecy will be fulfilled to
the very letter." fir?


CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH


   Out on ye, owls;
   Nothing but songs of death?
     RICHARD III.


More than three months had elapsed since the event narrated in the
last chapter, and it had been the precursor of others of still
greater importance, which will evolve themselves in the course of
our narrative. But, profess to present to the reader not a precise
detail of circumstances, according to their order and date, but a
series of pictures, endeavouring to exhibit the most striking
incidents before the eye or imagination of those whom it may
concern, we therefore open a new scene, and bring other actors
upon the stage.

Along a wasted tract of country, more than twelve miles distant
from the Garde Doloureuse, in the heat of a summer noon, which
shed a burning lustre on the silent valley, and the blackened
ruins of the cottages with which it had been once graced, two
travellers walked slowly, whose palmer cloaks, pilgrims' staves,
large slouched hats, with a scallop shell bound on the front of
each, above all, the cross, cut in red cloth upon their shoulders,
marked them as pilgrims who had accomplished their vow, and had
returned from that fatal bourne, from which, in those days,
returned so few of the thousands who visited it, whether in the
love of enterprise, or in the ardour of devotion.

The pilgrims had passed, that morning, through a scene of
devastation similar to, and scarce surpassed in misery by, those
which they had often trod during the wars of the Cross. They had
seen hamlets which appeared to have suffered all the fury of
military execution, the houses being burned to the ground; and in
many cases the carcasses of the miserable inhabitants, or rather
relics of such objects, were suspended on temporary gibbets, or on
the trees, which had been allowed to remain standing, only, it
would seem, to serve the convenience of the executioners. Living
creatures they saw none, excepting those wild denizens of nature
who seemed silently resuming the now wasted district, from which
they might have been formerly expelled by the course of
civilization. Their ears were no less disagreeably occupied than
their eyes. The pensive travellers might indeed hear the screams
of the raven, as if lamenting the decay of the carnage on which he
had been gorged; and now and then the plaintive howl of some dog,
deprived of his home and master; but no sounds which argued either
labour or domestication of any kind.

The sable figures, who, with wearied steps, as it appeared,
travelled through these scenes of desolation and ravage, seemed
assimilated to them in appearance. They spoke not with each other
--they looked not to each other--but one, the shorter of the pair,
keeping about half a pace in front of his companion, they moved
slowly, as priests returning from a sinner's death-bed, or rather
as spectres flitting along the precincts of a church-yard.

At length they reached a grassy mound, on the top of which was
placed one of those receptacles for the dead of the ancient
British chiefs of distinction, called Kist-vaen, which are
composed of upright fragments of granite, so placed as to form a
stone coffin, or something bearing that resemblance. The sepulchre
had been long violated by the victorious Saxons, either in scorn
or in idle curiosity, or because treasures were supposed to be
sometimes concealed in such spots. The huge flat stone which had
once been the cover of the coffin, if so it might be termed, lay
broken in two pieces at some distance from the sepulchre; and,
overgrown as the fragments were with grass and lichens, showed
plainly that the lid had been removed to its present situation
many years before. A stunted and doddered oak still spread its
branches over the open and rude mausoleum, as if the Druid's badge
and emblem, shattered and storm-broken, was still bending to offer
its protection to the last remnants of their worship.

"This, then, is the Kist-vaen," said the shorter pilgrim; "and
here we must abide tidings of our scout. But what, Philip Guarine,
have we to expect as an explanation of the devastation which we
have traversed?"

"Some incursion of the Welsh wolves, my lord," replied Guarine;
"and, by Our Lady, here lies a poor Saxon sheep whom they have
snapped up."

The Constable (for he was the pilgrim who had walked foremost) as
he heard his squire speak, and saw the corpse of a man amongst the
long grass; by which, indeed, it was so hidden, that he himself
had passed without notice, what the esquire, in less abstracted
mood, had not failed to observe. The leathern doublet of the slain
bespoke him an English peasant--the body lay on its face, and the
arrow which had caused his death still stuck in his back.

Philip Guarine, with the cool indifference of one accustomed to
such scenes, drew the shaft from the man's back, as composedly as
he would have removed it from the body of a deer. With similar
indifference the Constable signed to his esquire to give him the
arrow--looked at it with indolent curiosity, and then said, "Thou
hast forgotten thy old craft, Guarine, when thou callest that a
Welsh shaft. Trust me, it flew from a Norman bow; but why it
should be found in the body of that English churl, I can ill
guess."

"Some runaway serf, I would warrant--some mongrel cur, who had
joined the Welsh pack of hounds," answered the esquire.

"It may be so," said the Constable; "but I rather augur some civil
war among the Lords Marchers themselves. The Welsh, indeed, sweep
the villages, and leave nothing behind them but blood and ashes,
but here even castles seem to have been stormed and taken. May God
send us good news of the Garde Doloureuse!"

"Amen!" replied his squire; "but if Renault Vidal brings it,
'twill be the first time he has proved a bird of good omen."

"Philip," said the Constable, "I have already told thee thou art a
jealous-pated fool. How many times has Vidal shown his faith in
doubt--his address in difficulty-his courage in battle-his
patience under suffering?"

"It may be all very true, my lord," replied Guarine; "yet--but
what avails to speak?--I own he has done you sometimes good
service; but loath were I that your life or honour were at the
mercy of Renault Vidal."

"In the name of all the saints, thou peevish and suspicious fool,
what is it thou canst found upon to his prejudice?"

"Nothing, my lord," replied Guarine, "but instinctive suspicion
and aversion. The child that, for the first time, sees a snake,
knows nothing of its evil properties, yet he will not chase it and
take it up as he would a butterfly. Such is my dislike of Vidal--I
cannot help it. I could pardon the man his malicious and gloomy
sidelong looks, when he thinks no one observes him; but his
sneering laugh I cannot forgive--it is like the beast we heard of
in Judea, who laughs, they say, before he tears and destroys."

"Philip," said De Lacy, "I am sorry for thee--sorry, from my soul,
to see such a predominating and causeless jealousy occupy the
brain of a gallant old soldier. Here, in this last misfortune, to
recall no more ancient proofs of his fidelity, could he mean
otherwise than well with us, when, thrown by shipwreck upon the
coast of Wales, we would have been doomed to instant death, had
the Cymri recognized in me the Constable of Chester, and in thee
his trusty esquire, the executioner of his commands against the
Welsh in so many instances?"

"I acknowledge," said Philip Guarine, "death had surely been our
fortune, had not that man's ingenuity represented us as pilgrims,
and, under that character, acted as our interpreter--and in that
character he entirely precluded us from getting information from
any one respecting the state of things here, which it behoved your
lordship much to know, and which I must needs say looks gloomy and
suspicious enough."

"Still art thou a fool, Guarine," said the Constable; "for, look
you, had Vidal meant ill by us, why should he not have betrayed us
to the Welsh, or suffered us, by showing such knowledge as thou
and I may have of their gibberish, to betray ourselves?'

"Well, my lord," said Guarine, "I may be silenced, but not
satisfied. All the fair words he can speak--all the fine tunes he
can play--Renault Vidal will be to my eyes ever a dark and
suspicious man, with features always ready to mould themselves
into the fittest form to attract confidence; with a tongue framed
to utter the most flattering and agreeable words at one time, and
at another to play shrewd plainness or blunt honesty; and an eye
which, when he thinks himself unobserved, contradicts every
assumed expression of features, every protestation of honesty, and
every word of courtesy or cordiality to which his tongue has given
utterance. But I speak not more on the subject; only I am an old
mastiff, of the true breed--I love my master, but cannot endure
some of those whom he favours; and yonder, as I judge, comes
Vidal, to give us such an account of our situation as it shall
please him."

A horseman was indeed seen advancing in the path towards the Kist-
vaen, with a hasty pace; and his dress, in which something of the
Eastern fashion was manifest, with the fantastic attire usually
worn by men of his profession, made the Constable aware that the
minstrel, of whom they were speaking, was rapidly approaching
them.

Although Hugo de Lacy rendered this attendant no more than what in
justice he supposed his services demanded, when he vindicated him
from the suspicions thrown out by Guarine, yet at the bottom of
his heart he had sometimes shared those suspicions, and was often
angry at himself, as a just and honest man, for censuring, on the
slight testimony of looks, and sometimes casual expressions, a
fidelity which seemed to be proved by many acts of zeal and
integrity.

When Vidal approached and dismounted to make his obeisance, his
master hasted to speak to him in words of favour, as if conscious
he had been partly sharing Guarine's unjust judgment upon him, by
even listening to it. "Welcome, my trusty Vidal," he said; "thou
hast been the raven that fed us on the mountains of Wales, be
now the dove that brings us good tidings from the Marches.--Thou
art silent. What mean these downcast looks--that embarrassed
carriage--that cap plucked down o'er thine eyes?--In God's name,
man, speak!--Fear not for me--I can bear worse than tongue of man
may tell. Thou hast seen me in the wars of Palestine, when my
brave followers fell, man by man, around me, and when I was left
well-nigh alone--and did I blench then?--Thou hast seen me when
the ship's keel lay grating on the rock, and the billows flew in
foam over her deck--did I blench then?--No--nor will I now."

"Boast not," said the minstrel, looking fixedly upon the
Constable, as the former assumed the port and countenance of one
who sets Fortune and her utmost malice at defiance--"boast not,
lest thy bands be made strong." There was a pause of a minute,
during which the group formed at this instant a singular picture.

Afraid to ask, yet ashamed to _seem to fear the ill tidings
which impended, the Constable confronted his messenger with person
erect, arms folded, and brow expanded with resolution: while the
minstrel, carried beyond his usual and guarded apathy by the
interest of the moment, bent on his master a keen fixed glance, as
if to observe whether his courage was real or assumed.

Philip Guarine, on the other hand, to whom Heaven, in assigning
him a rough exterior, had denied neither sense nor observation,
kept his eye in turn, firmly fixed on Vidal, as if endeavouring to
determine what was the character of that deep interest which
gleamed in the minstrel's looks apparently, and was unable to
ascertain whether it was that of a faithful domestic
sympathetically agitated by the bad news with which he was about
to afflict his master, or that of an executioner standing with his
knife suspended over his victim, deferring his blow until he
should discover where it would be most sensibly felt. In Guarine's
mind, prejudiced, perhaps, by the previous opinion he had
entertained, the latter sentiment so decidedly predominated, that
he longed to raise his staff, and strike down to the earth the
servant, who seemed thus to enjoy the protracted sufferings of
their common master.

At length a convulsive movement crossed the brow of the Constable,
and Guarine, when he beheld a sardonic smile begin to curl Vidal's
lip, could keep silence no longer. "Vidal," he said, "thou art a--"

"A bearer of bad tidings," said Vidal, interrupting him,
"therefore subject to the misconstruction of every fool who cannot
distinguish between the author of harm, and him who unwillingly
reports it."

"To what purpose this delay?" said the Constable. "Come, Sir
Minstrel, I will spare you a pang--Eveline has forsaken and
forgotten me?" The minstrel assented by a low inclination.

Hugo de Lacy paced a short turn before the stone monument,
endeavouring to conquer the deep emotion which he felt. "I forgive
her," he said. "Forgive, did I say--Alas! I have nothing to
forgive. She used but the right I left in her hand--yes--our date
of engagement was out--she had heard of my losses--my defeats--the
destruction of my hopes--the expenditure of my wealth; and has
taken the first opportunity which strict law afforded to break off
her engagement with one bankrupt in fortune and fame. Many a
maiden would have done--perhaps in prudence should have done--
this;--but that woman's name should not have been Eveline
Berenger."

He leaned on his esquire's arm, and for an instant laid his head
on his shoulder with a depth of emotion which Guarine had never
before seen him betray, and which, in awkward kindness, he could
only attempt to console, by bidding his master "be of good
courage--he had lost but a woman."

"This is no selfish emotion, Philip," said the Constable, resuming
self-command. "I grieve less that she has left me, than that she
has misjudged me--that she has treated me as the pawnbroker does
his wretched creditor, who arrests the pledge as the very moment
elapses within which it might have been relieved. Did she then
think that I in my turn would have been a creditor so rigid?--that
I, who, since I knew her, scarce deemed myself worthy of her when
I had wealth and fame, should insist on her sharing my diminished
and degraded fortunes? How little she ever knew me, or how selfish
must she have supposed my misfortunes to have made me! But be it
so--she is gone, and may she be happy. The thought that she
disturbed me shall pass from my mind; and I will think she has
done that which I myself, as her best friend, must in honour have
advised."

So saying, his countenance, to the surprise of his attendants,
resumed its usual firm composure.

"I give you joy," said the esquire, in a whisper to the minstrel;
"your evil news have wounded less deeply than, doubtless, you
believed was possible."

"Alas!" replied the minstrel, "I have others and worse behind."
This answer was made in an equivocal tone of voice, corresponding
to the peculiarity of his manner, and like that seeming emotion of
a deep but very doubtful character.

"Eveline Berenger is then married," said the Constable; "and, let
me make a wild guess,--she has not abandoned the family, though
she has forsaken the individual--she is still a Lacy? ha?--Dolt
that thou art, wilt thou not understand me? She is married to
Damian de Lacy--to my nephew?"

The effort with which the Constable gave breath to this
supposition formed a strange contrast to the constrained smile to
which he compelled his features while he uttered it. With such a
smile a man about to drink poison might name a health, as he put
the fatal beverage to his lips. "No, my lord--not married,"
answered the minstrel, with an emphasis on the word, which the
Constable knew how to interpret.

"No, no," he replied quickly, "not married, perhaps, but engaged-
troth-plighted. Wherefore not? The date of her old alliance was
out, why not enter into a new engagement?"

"The Lady Eveline and Sir Damian de Lacy are not affianced that I
know of," answered his attendant.

This reply drove De Lacy's patience to extremity.

"Dog! dost thou trifle with me?" he exclaimed: "Vile wire-pincher,
thou torturest me! Speak the worst at once, or I will presently
make thee minstrel to the household of Satan."

Calm and collected did the minstrel reply,--"The Lady Eveline and
Sir Damian are neither married nor affianced, my lord. They have
loved and lived together--_par amours_."

"Dog, and son of a dog," said De Lacy, "thou liest!" And, seizing
the minstrel by the breast, the exasperated baron shook him with
his whole strength. But great as that strength was, it was unable
to stagger Vidal, a practised wrestler, in the firm posture which
he had assumed, any more than his master's wrath could disturb the
composure of the minstrel's bearing.

"Confess thou hast lied," said the Constable, releasing him, after
having effected by his violence no greater degree of agitation
than the exertion of human force produces upon the Rocking Stones
of the Druids, which may be shaken, indeed, but not displaced.

"Were a lie to buy my own life, yea, the lives of all my tribe,"
said the minstrel, "I would not tell one. But truth itself is ever
termed falsehood when it counteracts the train of our passions."

"Hear him, Philip Guarine, hear him!" exclaimed the Constable,
turning hastily to his squire: "He tells me of my disgrace--of the
dishonour of my house--of the depravity of those whom I have loved
the best in the world--he tells me of it with a calm look, an eye
composed, an unfaltering tongue.--Is this--can it be natural? Is
De Lacy sunk so low, that his dishonour shall be told by a common
strolling minstrel, as calmly as if it were a theme for a vain
ballad? Perhaps thou wilt make it one, ha!" as he concluded,
darting a furious glance at the minstrel.

"Perhaps I might, my lord," replied the minstrel, "were it not
that I must record therein the disgrace of Renault Vidal, who
served a lord without either patience to bear insults and wrongs,
or spirit to revenge them on the authors of his shame."

"Thou art right, thou art right, good fellow," said the Constable,
hastily; "it is vengeance now alone which is left us--And yet upon
whom?"

As he spoke he walked shortly and hastily to and fro; and,
becoming suddenly silent, stood still and wrung his hands with
deep emotion.

"I told thee," said the minstrel to Guarine, "that my muse would
find a tender part at last. Dost thou remember the bull-fight we
saw in Spain? A thousand little darts perplexed and annoyed the
noble animal, ere he received the last deadly thrust from the
lance of the Moorish Cavalier."

"Man, or fiend, be which thou wilt," replied Guarine, "that can
thus drink in with pleasure, and contemplate at your ease, the
misery of another, I bid thee beware of me! Utter thy cold-blooded
taunts in some other ear; for if my tongue be blunt, I wear a
sword that is sharp enough."

"Thou hast seen me amongst swords," answered the minstrel, "and
knowest how little terror they have for such as I am." Yet as he
spoke he drew off from the esquire. He had, in fact, only
addressed him in that sort of fulness of heart, which would have
vented itself in soliloquy if alone, and now poured itself out on
the nearest auditor, without the speaker being entirely conscious
of the sentiments which his speech excited.

Few minutes had elapsed before the Constable of Chester had
regained the calm external semblance with which, until this last
dreadful wound, he had borne all the inflictions of fortune. He
turned towards his followers, and addressed the minstrel with his
usual calmness, "Thou art right, good fellow," he said, "in what
thou saidst to me but now, and I forgive thee the taunt which
accompanied thy good counsel. Speak out, in God's name! and speak
to one prepared to endure the evil which God hath sent him.
Certes, a good knight is best known in battle, and a Christian in
the time of trouble and adversity."

The tone in which the Constable spoke, seemed to produce a
corresponding effect upon the deportment of his followers. The
minstrel dropped at once the cynical and audacious tone in which
he had hitherto seemed to tamper with the passions of his master;
and in language simple and respectful, and which even approached
to sympathy, informed him of the evil news which he had collected
during his absence. It was indeed disastrous.

The refusal of the Lady Eveline Berengor to admit Monthermer and
his forces into her castle, had of course given circulation and
credence to all the calumnies which had been circulated to her
prejudice, and that of Damian de Lacy; and there were many who,
for various causes, were interested in spreading and supporting
these slanders. A large force had been sent into the country to
subdue the insurgent peasants; and the knights and nobles
despatched for that purpose, failed not to avenge to the utter-
most, upon the wretched plebeians, the noble blood which they had
spilled during their temporary triumph.

The followers of the unfortunate Wenlock were infected with the
same persuasion. Blamed by many for a hasty and cowardly surrender
of a post which might have been defended, they endeavoured to
vindicate themselves by alleging the hostile demonstrations of De
Lacy's cavalry as the sole cause of their premature submission.

These rumours, supported by such interested testimony, spread wide
and far through the land; and, joined to the undeniable fact that
Damian had sought refuge in the strong castle of Garde Doloureuse,
which was now defending itself against the royal arms, animated
the numerous enemies of the house of De Lacy, and drove its
vassals and friends almost to despair, as men reduced either to
disown their feudal allegiance, or renounce that still more sacred
fealty which they owed to their sovereign.

At this crisis they received intelligence that the wise and active
monarch by whom the sceptre of England was then swayed, was moving
towards that part of England, at the head of a large body of
soldiers, for the purpose at once of pressing the siege of the
Garde Doloureuse, and completing the suppression of the
insurrection of the peasantry, which Guy Monthermer had nearly
accomplished.

In this emergency, and when the friends and dependents of the
House of Lacy scarcely knew which hand to turn to, Randal, the
Constable's kinsman, and, after Damian, his heir, suddenly
appeared amongst them, with a royal commission to raise and
command such followers of the family as might not desire to be
involved in the supposed treason of the Constable's delegate. In
troublesome times, men's vices are forgotten, provided they
display activity, courage, and prudence, the virtues then most
required; and the appearance of Randal, who was by no means
deficient in any of these attributes, was received as a good omen
by the followers of his cousin. They quickly gathered around him,
surrendered to the royal mandate such strongholds as they
possessed, and, to vindicate themselves from any participation in
the alleged crimes of Damian, they distinguished themselves, under
Randal's command, against such scattered bodies of peasantry as
still kept the field, or lurked in the mountains and passes; and
conducted themselves with such severity after success, as made the
troops even of Monthermer appear gentle and clement in comparison
with those of De Lacy. Finally, with the banner of his ancient
house displayed, and five hundred good men assembled under it,
Randal appeared before the Garde Poloureuse, and joined Henry's
camp there.

The castle was already hardly pressed, and the few defenders,
disabled by wounds, watching, and privation, had now the
additional discouragement to see displayed against their walls the
only banner in England under which they had hoped forces might be
mustered for their aid.

The high-spirited entreaties of Eveline, unbent by adversity and
want, gradually lost effect on the defenders of the castle; and
proposals for surrender were urged and discussed by a tumultuary
council, into which not only the inferior officers, but many of
the common men, had thrust themselves, as in a period of such
general distress as unlooses all the bonds of discipline, and
leaves each man at liberty to speak and act for himself. To their
surprise, in the midst of their discussions, Damian de Lacy,
arisen from the sick-bed to which he had been so long confined,
appeared among them, pale and feeble, his cheek tinged with the
ghastly look which is left by long illness--he leaned on his page
Amelot. "Gentlemen," he said, "and soldiers--yet why should I call
you either?--Gentlemen are ever ready to die in behalf of a lady--
soldiers hold life in scorn compared to their honour."

"Out upon him! out upon him!" exclaimed some of the soldiers,
interrupting him; "he would have us, who are innocent, die the
death of traitors, and be hanged in our armour over the walls,
rather than part with his leman."

"Peace, irreverent slave!" said Damian, in a voice like thunder,
"or my last blow shall be a mean one, aimed against such a caitiff
as thou art.--And you," he continued, addressing the rest,--"you,
who are shrinking from the toils of your profession, because if
you persist in a course of honour, death may close them a few
years sooner than it needs must--you, who are scared like children
at the sight of a death's-head, do not suppose that Damian de Lacy
would desire to shelter himself at the expense of those lives
which you hold so dear. Make your bargain with King Henry.
Deliver me up to his justice, or his severity; or, if you like
it better, strike my head from my body, and hurl it, as a peace-
offering, from the walls of the castle. To God, in his good time,
will I trust for the clearance of mine honour. In a word,
surrender me, dead or alive, or open the gates and permit me to
surrender myself. Only, as ye are men, since I may not say better
of ye, care at least for the safety of your mistress, and make
such terms as may secure HER safety, and save yourselves from the
dishonour of being held cowardly and perjured caitiffs in your
graves."

"Methinks the youth speaks well and reasonably," said William
Flammock. "Let us e'en make a grace of surrendering his body up to
the King, and assure thereby such terms as we can for ourselves
and the lady, ere the last morsel of our provision is consumed."

"I would hardly have proposed this measure," said, or rather
mumbled, Father Aldrovand, who had recently lost four of his front
teeth by a stone from a sling,--"yet, being so generously offered
by the party principally concerned, I hold with the learned
scholiast, _Volenti non fit injuria_."

"Priest and Fleming," said the old banner-man, Ralph Genvil, "I
see how the wind stirreth you; but you deceive yourselves if you
think to make our young master, Sir Damian, a scape-goat for your
light lady.--Nay, never frown nor fume, Sir Damian; if you know
not your safest course, we know it for you.--Followers of De Lacy,
throw yourselves on your horses, and two men on one, if it be
necessary--we will take this stubborn boy in the midst of us, and
the dainty squire Amelot shall be prisoner too, if he trouble us
with his peevish opposition. Then, let us make a fair sally upon
the siegers. Those who can cut their way through will shift well
enough; those who fall, will be provided for."

A shout from the troopers of Lacy's band approved this proposal.
Whilst the followers of Berenger expostulated in loud and angry
tone, Eveline, summoned by the tumult, in vain endeavoured to
appease it; and the anger and entreaties of Damian were equally
lost on his followers. To each and either the answer was the same.

"Have you no care of it--Because you love _par amours_, is it
reasonable you should throw away your life and ours?" So exclaimed
Genvil to De Lacy; and in softer language, but with equal
obstinacy, the followers of Raymond Berenger refused on the
present occasion to listen, to the commands or prayers of his
daughter.

Wilkin Flammock had retreated from the tumult, when he saw the
turn which matters had taken. He left the castle by a sally-port,
of which he had been intrusted with the key, and proceeded without
observation or opposition to the royal camp, where he requested
access to the Sovereign. This was easily obtained, and Wilkin
speedily found himself in the presence of King Henry. The monarch
was in his royal pavilion, attended by two of his sons, Richard
and John, who afterwards swayed the sceptre of England with very
different auspices.

"How now?--What art thou?" was the royal question.

"An honest man, from the castle of the Garde Doloureuse."

"Thou may'st be honest," replied the Sovereign, "but thou comest
from a nest of traitors."

"Such as they are, my lord, it is my purpose to put them at your
royal disposal; for they have no longer the wisdom to guide
themselves, and lack alike prudence to hold out, and grace to
submit. But I would first know of your grace to what terms you
will admit the defenders of yonder garrison?"

"To such as kings give to traitors," said Henry, sternly--"sharp
knives and tough cords."

"Nay, my gracious lord, you must be kinder than that amounts to,
if the castle is to be rendered by my means; else will your cords
and knives have only my poor body to work upon, and you will be as
far as ever from the inside of the Garde Doloureuse."

The King looked at him fixedly. "Thou knowest," he said, "the law
of arms. Here, provost-marshal, stands a traitor, and yonder
stands a tree."

"And here is a throat," said the stout-hearted Fleming,
unbuttoning the collar of his doublet.

"By mine honour," said Prince Richard, "a sturdy and faithful
yeoman! It were better send such fellows their dinners, and then
buffet it out with them for the castle, than to starve them as the
beggarly Frenchmen famish their hounds."

"Peace, Richard," said his father; "thy wit is over green, and thy
blood over hot, to make thee my counsellor here.--And you, knave,
speak you some reasonable terms, and we will not be over strict
with thee."

"First, then," said the Fleming, "I stipulate full and free pardon
for life, limb, body, and goods, to me, Wilkin Flammock, and my
daughter Rose."

"A true Fleming," said Prince John; "he takes care of himself in
the first instance."

"His request," said the King, "is reasonable. What next?"

"Safety in life, honour, and land, for the demoiselle Eveline
Berenger."

"How, sir knave!" said the King, angrily, "is it for such as thou
to dictate to our judgment or clemency in the case of a noble
Norman Lady? Confine thy mediation to such as thyself; or rather
render us this castle without farther delay; and be assured thy
doing so will be of more service to the traitors within, than
weeks more of resistance, which must and shall be bootless."

The Fleming stood silent, unwilling to surrender without some
specific terms, yet half convinced, from the situation in which he
had left the garrison of the Garde Doloureuse, that his admitting
the King's forces would be, perhaps, the best he could do for Lady
Eveline.

"I like thy fidelity, fellow," said the King, whose acute eye
perceived the struggle in the Fleming's bosom; "but carry not thy
stubbornness too far. Have we not said we will be gracious to
yonder offenders, as far as our royal duty will permit?"

"And, royal father," said Prince John, interposing, "I pray you
let me have the grace to take first possession, of the Garde
Doloureuse, and the wardship or forfeiture of the offending lady."

"_I_ pray you also, my royal father, to grant John's boon,"
said his brother Richard, in a tone of mockery. "Consider, royal
father, it is the first desire he hath shown to approach the
barriers of the castle, though we have attacked them forty times
at least. Marry, crossbow and mangonel were busy on the former
occasions, and it is like they will be silent now."

"Peace, Richard," said the King; "your words, aimed at thy
brother's honour, pierce my heart.--John, thou hast thy boon as
concerns the castle; for the unhappy young lady, we will take her
in our own charge.--Fleming, how many men wilt thou undertake to
admit?"

Ere Flammock could answer, a squire approached Prince Richard, and
whispered in his ear, yet so as to be heard by all present, "We
have discovered that some internal disturbance, or other cause
unknown, has withdrawn many of the warders from the castle walls,
and that a sudden attack might--"

"Dost thou hear that, John?" exclaimed Richard. "Ladders, man--get
ladders, and to the wall. How I should delight to see thee on the
highest round--thy knees shaking--thy hands grasping convulsively,
like those of one in an ague fit--all air around thee, save a
baton or two of wood--the moat below--half-a-dozen pikes at thy
throat--"

"Peace, Richard, for shame, if not for charity!" said his father,
in a tone of anger, mingled with grief. "And thou, John, get ready
for the assault."

"As soon as I have put on my armour, father," answered the Prince;
and withdrew slowly, with a visage so blank as to promise no speed
in his preparations.

His brother laughed as he retired, and said to his squire, "It
were no bad jest, Alberick, to carry the place ere John can change
his silk doublet for a steel one."

So saying, he hastily withdrew, and his father exclaimed in
paternal distress, "Out, alas! as much too hot as his brother is
too cold; but it is the manlier fault.--Gloucester," said he to
that celebrated earl, "take sufficient strength, and follow Prince
Richard to guard and sustain him. If any one can rule him, it must
be a knight of thy established fame. Alas, alas! for what sin have
I deserved the affliction of these cruel family feuds!"

"Be comforted, my lord," said the chancellor, who was also in
attendance.

"Speak not of comfort to a father, whose sons are at discord with
each other, and agree only in their disobedience to him!"

Thus spoke Henry the Second, than whom no wiser, or, generally
speaking, more fortunate monarch ever sat upon the throne of
England; yet whose life is a striking illustration, how family
dissensions can tarnish the most brilliant lot to which Heaven
permits humanity to aspire; and how little gratified ambition,
extended power, and the highest reputation in war and in peace,
can do towards curing the wounds of domestic affliction.

The sudden and fiery attack of Richard, who hastened to the
escalade at the head of a score of followers, collected at random,
had the complete effect of surprise; and having surmounted the
walls with their ladders, before the contending parties within
were almost aware of the assault, the assailants burst open the
gates, and admitted Gloucester, who had hastily followed with a
strong body of men-at-arms. The garrison, in their state of
surprise, confusion, and disunion, offered but little resistance,
and would have been put to the sword, and the place plundered, had
not Henry himself entered it, and by his personal exertions and
authority, restrained the excesses of the dissolute soldiery.

The King conducted himself, considering the times and the
provocation, with laudable moderation. He contented himself with
disarming and dismissing the common soldiers, giving them some
trifle to carry them out of the country, lest want should lead
them to form themselves into bands of robbers. The officers were
more severely treated, being for the greater part thrown into
dungeons, to abide the course of the law. In particular,
imprisonment was the lot of Damian de Lacy, against whom,
believing the various charges with which he was loaded, Henry was
so highly incensed, that he purposed to make him an example to all
false knights and disloyal subjects. To the Lady Eveline Berenger
he assigned her own apartment as a prison, in which she was
honourably attended by Rose and Alice, but guarded with the utmost
strictness. It was generally reported that her demesnes would be
declared a forfeiture to the crown, and bestowed, at least in
part, upon Randal de Lacy, who had done good service during the
siege. Her person, it was thought, was destined to the seclusion
of some distant French nunnery, where she might at leisure repent
her of her follies and her rashness.

Father Aldrovand was delivered up to the discipline of the
convent, long experience having very effectually taught Henry the
imprudence of infringing on the privileges of the church;
although, when the King first beheld him with a rusty corslet
clasped over his frock, he with difficulty repressed the desire to
cause him to hanged over the battlements, to preach to the ravens.

With Wilkin Flammock, Henry held much conference, particularly on
his subject of manufactures and commerce; on which the sound-
headed, though blunt-spoken Fleming, was well qualified to
instruct an intelligent monarch. "Thy intentions," he said, "shall
not be forgotten, good fellow, though they have been anticipated
by the headlong valour of my son Richard, which has cost some poor
caitiffs their lives--Richard loves not to sheathe a bloodless
weapon. But thou and thy countrymen shall return to thy mills
yonder, with a full pardon for past offences, so that you meddle
no more with such treasonable matters."

"And our privileges and duties, my liege?" said Flammock. "Your
Majesty knows well we are vassals to the lord of this castle, and
must follow him in battle."

"It shall no longer be so," said Henry; "I will form a community
of Flemings here, and thou, Flammock, shalt be Mayor, that thou
may'st not plead feudal obedience for a relapse into treason."

"Treason, my liege!" said Flammock, longing, yet scarce venturing,
to 'interpose a word in behalf of Lady Eveline, for whom, despite
the constitutional coolness of his temperament, he really felt
much interest--"I would that your Grace but justly knew how many
threads went to that woof."

"Peace, sirrah!--meddle with your loom," said Henry; "and if we
deign to speak to thee concerning the mechanical arts which thou
dost profess, take it for no warrant to intrude farther on our
privacy."

The Fleming retired, rebuked, and in silence; and the fate of the
unhappy prisoners remained in the King's bosom. He himself took up
his lodging in the castle of the Garde Doloureuse, as a convenient
station for sending abroad parties to suppress and extinguish all
the embers of rebellion; and so active was Randal de Lacy on these
occasions, that he appeared daily to rise in the King's grace, and
was gratified with considerable grants out of the domains of
Berenger and Lacy, which the King seemed already to treat as
forfeited property. Most men considered this growing favour of
Randal as a perilous omen, both far the life of young De Lacy, and
for the fate of the unfortunate Eveline.


CHAPTER THE THIRTIETH


   A vow, a vow--I have a vow in Heaven.
   Shall I bring perjury upon my soul?
   No, not for Venice.
     MERCHANT OF VENICE.


The conclusion of the last chapter contains the tidings with which
the minstrel greeted his unhappy master, Hugo de Lacy; not indeed
with the same detail of circumstances with which we have been able
to invest the narrative, but so as to infer the general and
appalling facts, that his betrothed bride, and beloved and trusted
kinsman, had leagued together for his dishonour--had raised the
banner of rebellion against their lawful sovereign, and, failing
in their audacious attempt, had brought the life of one of them,
at least, into the most imminent danger, and the fortunes of the
House of Lacy, unless some instant remedy could be found, to the
very verge of ruin.

Vidal marked the countenance of his master as he spoke, with the
same keen observation which the chirurgeon gives to the progress
of his dissecting-knife. There was grief on the Constable's
features--deep grief--but without the expression of abasement or
prostration which usually accompanies it; anger and shame were
there--but they were both of a noble character, seemingly excited
by his bride and nephew's transgressing the laws of allegiance,
honour, and virtue, rather than by the disgrace and damage which
he himself sustained through their crime.

The minstrel was so much astonished at this change of deportment,
from the sensitive acuteness of agony which attended the beginning
of his narrative, that he stepped back two paces, and gazing on
the Constable with wonder, mixed with admiration, exclaimed, "We
have heard of martyrs in. Palestine, but this exceeds them!"

"Wonder not so much, good friend," said the Constable, patiently;
"it is the first blow of the lance or mace which pierces or stuns
--those which follow are little felt." [Footnote: Such an
expression is said to have been used by Mandrin, the celebrated
smuggler, while in the act of being broken upon the wheel. This
dreadful punishment consists in the executioner, with a bar of
iron, breaking the shoulder-bones, arms, thigh-bones, and legs of
the criminal, taking--his alternate sides. The punishment is
concluded by a blow across the breast, called the _coup de
grace_, because it removes the sufferer from his agony. When
Mandrin received the second blow over the left shoulder-bone, he
laughed. His confessor inquired the reason of demeanour so
unbecoming--his situation. "I only lavish at my own folly, my
father," answered Mandrin, "who could suppose that sensibility of
pain should continue after the nervous system had been completely
deranged by the first blow.]

"Think, my lord," said Vidal, "all is lost--love, dominion, high
office, and bright fame--so late a chief among nobles, now a poor
palmer!"

"Wouldst thou make sport with my misery?" said Hugo, sternly; "but
even that comes of course behind my back, and why should it not be
endured when said to my face?--Know, then, minstrel, and put it in
song if you list, that Hugo de Lacy, having lost all he carried to
Palestine, and all which he left at home, is still lord of his own
mind; and adversity can no more shake him, than the breeze which
strips the oak of its leaves can tear up the trunk by the roots."

"Now, by the tomb of my father," said the minstrel, rapturously,
"this man's nobleness is too much for my resolve!" and stepping
hastily to the Constable, he kneeled on one knee, and caught his
hand more freely than the state maintained by men of De Lacy's
rank usually permitted. "Here," said Vidal, "on this hand--this
noble hand--I renounce--" But ere he could utter another word,
Hugo de Lacy, who, perhaps, felt the freedom of the action as an
intrusion on his fallen condition, pulled back his hand, and bid
the minstrel, with as stern frown, arise, and remember that
misfortune made not De Lacy a fit personage for a mummery.

Renault Vidal rose rebuked. "I had forgot," he said, "the distance
between an Armorican violer and a high Norman baron. I thought
that the same depth of sorrow, the same burst of joy, levelled,
for a moment at least, those artificial barriers by which men are
divided. But it is well as it is. Live within the limits of your
rank, as heretofore within your donjon tower and your fosses, my
lord, undisturbed by the sympathy of any mean man like me. I, too,
have my duties to discharge."

"And now to the Garde Doloureuse," said the baron, turning to
Philip Guarine--"God knoweth how well it deserveth the name!--
there to learn, with our own eyes and ears, the truth of these
woful tidings. Dismount, minstrel, and give me thy palfrey--I
would, Guarine, that I had one for thee--as for Vidal, his
attendance is less necessary. I will face my foes, or my
misfortunes, like a man--that be assured of, violer; and look not
so sullen, knave--I will not forget old adherents."

"One of them, at least, will not forget you, my lord," replied the
minstrel, with his usual dubious tone of look and emphasis.

But just as the Constable was about to prick forwards, two persons
appeared on the path, mounted on one horse, who, hidden by some
dwarf-wood, had come very near them without being perceived. They
were male and female; and the man, who rode foremost, was such a
picture of famine, as the eyes of the pilgrims had scarce
witnessed in all the wasted land through which they had travelled.
His features, naturally sharp and thin, had disappeared almost
entirely among the uncombed gray beard and hairs with which they
were overshadowed; and it was but the glimpse of a long nose, that
seemed as sharp as the edge of a knife, and the twinkling glimpse
of his gray eyes, which gave any intimation of his lineaments. His
leg, in the wide old boot which enclosed it, looked like the
handle of a mop left by chance in a pail--his arms were about the
thickness of riding-rods--and such parts of his person as were not
concealed by the tatters of a huntsman's cassock, seemed rather
the appendages of a mummy than a live man.

The female who sat behind this spectre exhibited also some
symptoms of extenuation; but being a brave jolly dame naturally,
famine had not been able to render her a spectacle so rueful as
the anatomy behind which she rode. Dame Gillian's cheek (for it
was the reader's old acquaintance) had indeed lost the rosy hue of
good cheer, and the smoothness of complexion which art and easy
living had formerly substituted for the more delicate bloom of
youth; her eyes were sunken, and had lost much of their bold and
roguish lustre; but she was still in some measure herself, and the
remnants of former finery, together with the tight-drawn scarlet
hose, though sorely faded, showed still a remnant of coquettish
pretension.

So soon as she came within sight of the pilgrims, she began to
punch Raoul with the end of her riding-rod. "Try thy new trade,
man, since thou art unfit for any other--to the good man--to them
--crave their charity."

"Beg from beggars?" muttered Raoul; "that were hawking at
sparrows, dame."

"It will bring our hand in use though," said Gillian; and
commenced, in a whining tone, "God love you, holy men, who have
had the grace to go to the Holy Land, and, what is more, have had
the grace to come back again; I pray, bestow some of your alms
upon my poor old husband, who is a miserable object, as you see,
and upon one who has the bad luck to be his wife--Heaven help me!"

"Peace, woman, and hear what I have to say," said the Constable,
laying his hand upon the bridle of the horse--"I have present
occasion for that horse, and----"

"By the hunting-horn of St. Hubert, but thou gettest him not
without blows!" answered the old huntsman "A fine world it is,
when palmers turn horse-stealers."

"Peace, fellow" said the Constable, sternly,--"I say I have
occasion presently for the service of thy horse. Here be two gold
bezants for a day's use of the brute; it is well worth the
fee-simple of him, were he never returned."

"But the palfrey is an old acquaintance, master," said Raoul; "and
if perchance--"

"Out upon _if_ and _perchance_ both," said the dame,
giving her husband so determined a thrust as well-nigh pushed him
out of the saddle. "Off the horse! and thank God and this worthy
man for the help he hath sent us in this extremity. What signifies
the palfrey, when we have not enough to get food either for the
brute or ourselves? not though we would eat grass and corn with
him, like King Somebody, whom the good father used to read us to
sleep about."

"A truce with your prating, dame," said Raoul, offering his
assistance to help her from the croupe; but she preferred that of
Guarine, who, though advanced in years, retained the advantage of
his stout soldierly figure. "I humbly thank your goodness," said
she, as, (having first kissed her,) the squire set her on the
ground. "And, pray, sir, are ye come from the Holy Land?--Heard ye
any tidings there of him that was Constable of Chester?"

De Lacy, who was engaged in removing the pillion from behind the
saddle, stopped short in his task, and said, "Ha, dame! what would
you with him?"

"A great deal, good palmer, an I could light on him; for his lands
and offices are all to be given, it's like, to that false thief,
his kinsman."

"What!--to Damian, his nephew?" exclaimed the Constable, in a
harsh and hasty tone.

"Lord, how you startle me, sir!" said Gillian; then continued,
turning to Philip Guarine, "Your friend is a hasty man, belike.";

"It is the fault of the sun he has lived under so long," said the
squire; "but look you answer his questions truly, and he will make
it the better for you."

Gillian instantly took the hint. "Was it Damian de Lacy you asked
after?--Alas I poor young gentleman! no offices or lands for him--
more likely to have a gallows-cast, poor lad--and all for nought,
as I am a true dame. Damian!--no, no, it is not Damian, or damson
neither--but Randal Lacy, that must rule the roast, and have all
the old man's lands, and livings, and lordships."

"What?" said the Constable--"before they know whether the old man.
is dead or no?-Methinks that were against law and reason both."

"Ay, but Randal Lacy has brought about less likely matters. Look
you, he hath sworn to the King that they have true tidings of the
Constable's death--ay, and let him alone to make them soothfast
enough, if the Constable were once within his danger."

"Indeed!" said the Constable. "But you are forging tales on a
noble gentleman. Come, come, dame, you say this because you like
not Randal Lacy."

"Like him not!--And what reason have I to like him, I trow?"
answered Gillian. "Is it because he seduced my simplicity to let
him into the castle of the Garde Doloureuse-ay, oftener than once
or twice either,-when he was disguised as a pedlar, and told him
all the secrets of the family, and how the boy Damian, and the
girl Eveline, were dying of love with each other, but had not
courage to say a word of it, for fear of the Constable, though he
were a thousand miles off?-You seem concerned, worthy sir--may I
offer your reverend worship a trifling sup from my bottle, which
is sovereign for _tremor cordis_, and fits of the spleen?"

"No, no," ejaculated De Lacy--"I was but grieved with the shooting
of an old wound. But, dame, I warrant me this Damian and Eveline,
as you call them, became better, closer friends, in time?"

"They?--not they indeed, poor simpletons!" answered the dame;
"they wanted some wise counsellor to go between and advise them.
For, look you, sir, if old Hugo be dead, as is most like, it were
more natural that his bride and his nephew should inherit his
lands, than this same Randal who is but a distant kinsman, and a
foresworn caitiff to boot.--Would you think it, reverend pilgrim,
after the mountains of gold he promised me?--when the castle was
taken, and he saw I could serve him no more, he called me old
beldame, and spoke of the beadle and the cucking-stool.--Yes,
reverend sir, old beldame and cucking-stool were his best words,
when he knew I had no one to take my part, save old Raoul, who
cannot take his own. But if grim old Hugh bring back his
weatherbeaten carcass from Palestine, and have but half the devil
in him which he had when he was fool enough to go away, Saint
Mary, but I will do his kinsman's office to him!"

There was a pause when she had done speaking.

"Thou say'st," at length exclaimed the Constable, "that Damian de
Lacy and Eveline love each other, yet are unconscious of guilt or
falsehood, or ingratitude to me--I would say, to their relative in
Palestine!"

"Love, sir!--in troth and so it is--they do love each other," said
Gillian; "but it is like angels--or like lambs--or like fools, if
you will; for they would never so much as have spoken together,
but for a prank of that same Randal Lacy's."

"How!" demanded the Constable--"a prank of Randal's?--What motive
had he that these two should meet?"

"Nay, their meeting was none of his seeking; but he had formed a
plan to carry off the Lady Eveline himself, for he was a wild
rover, this same Randal; and so he came disguised as a merchant of
falcons, and trained out my old stupid Raoul, and the Lady
Eveline, and all of us, as if to have an hour's mirth in hawking
at the heron. But he had a band of Welsh kites in readiness to
pounce upon us; and but for the sudden making in of Damian to our
rescue, it is undescribable to think what might have come of us;
and Damian being hurt in the onslaught, was carried to the Garde
Doloureuse in mere necessity; and but to save his life, it is my
belief my lady would never have asked him to cross the drawbridge,
even if he had offered."

"Woman," said the Constable, "think what thou say'st! If thou hast
done evil in these matters heretofore, as I suspect from thine own
story, think not to put it right by a train of new falsehoods,
merely from spite at missing thy reward."

"Palmer," said old Raoul, with his broken-toned voice, cracked by
many a hollo, "I am wont to leave the business of tale-bearing to
my wife Gillian, who will tongue-pad it with any shrew in
Christendom. But thou speak'st like one having some interest in
these matters, and therefore I will tell thee plainly, that
although this woman has published her own shame in avowing her
correspondence with that same Randal Lacy, yet what she has said
is true as the gospel; and, were it my last word, I would say that
Damian and the Lady Eveline are innocent of all treason and all
dishonesty, as is the babe unborn.--But what avails what the like
of us say, who are even driven to the very begging for mere
support, after having lived at a good house, and in a good lord's
service-blessing be with him!"

"But hark you," continued the Constable, "are there left no
ancient servants of the House, that could speak out as well as
you?" "Humph!" answered the huntsman--"men are not willing to
babble when Randal Lacy is cracking his thong above their heads.
Many are slain, or starved to death--some disposed of--some
spirited away. But there are the weaver Flammock and his daughter
Rose, who know as much of the matter as we do."

"What!--Wilkin Flammock the stout Netherlander?" said the
Constable; "he and his blunt but true daughter Rose?--I will
venture my life on their faith. Where dwell they?--What has been
their lot amidst these changes?" "And in God's name who are you
that ask these questions?" said Dame Gillian. "Husband, husband--
we have been too free; there is something in that look and that
tone which I should remember."

"Yes, look at me more fixedly," said the Constable, throwing "back
the hood which had hitherto in some degree obscured his features.

"On your knees--on your knees, Raoul!" exclaimed Gillian, dropping
on her own at the same time; "it is the Constable himself, and he
has heard me call him old Hugh!"

"It is all that is left of him who was the Constable, at least,"
replied De Lacy; "and old Hugh willingly forgives your freedom, in
consideration of your good news. Where are Flammock and his
daughter?"

"Rose is with the Lady Eveline," said Dame Gillian; "her ladyship,
belike, chose her for bower-woman in place of me, although Rose
was never fit to attire so much as a Dutch doll."

"The faithful girl!" said the Constable. "And where is Flammock?"

"Oh, for him, he has pardon and favour from the King," said Raoul;
"and is at his own house, with his rabble of weavers, close beside
the Battle-bridge, as they now call the place where your lordship
quelled the Welsh."

"Thither will I then," said the Constable; "and will then see what
welcome King Henry of Anjou has for an old servant. You two must
accompany me."

"My lord," said Gillian, with hesitation, "you know poor folk are
little thanked for interference with great men's affairs. I trust
your lordship will be able to protect us if we speak the truth;
and that you will not look back with displeasure on what I did,
acting for the best."

"Peace, dame, with a wanion to ye!" said Raoul. "Will you think of
your own old sinful carcass, when you should be saving your sweet
young mistress from shame and oppression?--And for thy ill tongue,
and worse practices, his lordship knows they are bred in the bone
of thee."

"Peace, good fellow!" said the Constable; "we will not look back
on thy wife's errors, and your fidelity shall be rewarded.--For
you, my faithful followers," he said, turning towards Guarine and
Vidal, "when De Lacy shall receive his rights, of which he doubts
nothing, his first wish shall be to reward your fidelity."

"Mine, such as it is, has been and shall be its own reward," said
Vidal. "I will not accept favours from him in prosperity, who, in
adversity, refused me his hand--our account stands yet open."

"Go to, thou art a fool; but thy profession hath a privilege to be
humorous," said the Constable, whose weatherbeaten and homely
features looked even handsome, when animated by gratitude to
Heaven and benevolence towards mankind. "We will meet," he said,
"at Battle-bridge, an hour before vespers--I shall have much
achieved before that time."

"The space is short," said his esquire.

"I have won a battle in yet shorter," replied the Constable.


"In which," said the minstrel, "many a man has died that thought
himself well assured of life and victory."

"Even so shall my dangerous cousin Randal find his schemes of
ambition blighted," answered the Constable; and rode forwards,
accompanied by Raoul and his wife, who had remounted their
palfrey, while the minstrel and squire followed a-foot, and, of
course, much more slowly.


CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST


   "Oh, fear not, fear not, good Lord John,
   That I would you betray,
   Or sue requital for a debt,
   Which nature cannot pay.
   Bear witness, all ye sacred powers--
   Ye lights that 'gin to shine--
   This night shall prove the sacred tie
   That binds your faith and mine."
     ANCIENT SCOTTISH BALLAD.


Left behind by their master, the two dependants of Hugh de Lacy
marched on in sullen silence, like men who dislike and distrust
each other, though bound to one common service, and partners,
therefore, in the same hopes and fears. The dislike, indeed, was
chiefly upon Guarine's side; for nothing could be more indifferent
to Renault Vidal than was his companion, farther than as he was
conscious that Philip loved him not, and was not unlikely, so far
as lay in his power, to thwart some plans which he had nearly at
heart. He took little notice of his companion, but hummed over to
himself, as for the exercise of his memory, romances and songs,
many of which were composed in languages which Guarine, who had
only an ear for his native Norman, did not understand.

They had proceeded together in this sullen manner for nearly two
hours, when they were met by a groom on horseback, leading a
saddled palfrey. "Pilgrims," said the man, after looking at them
with some attention, "which of you is called Philip Guarine?"

"I, for fault of a better," said the esquire, "reply to that
name."

"Thy lord, in that case, commends him to you," said the groom;
"and sends you this token, by which you shall know that I am his
true messenger."

He showed the esquire a rosary, which Philip instantly recognized
as that used by the Constable.

"I acknowledge the token," he said; "speak my master's pleasure."

"He bids me say," replied the rider, "that his visit thrives as
well as is possible, and that this very evening, by time that the
sun sets, he will be possessed of his own. He desires, therefore,
you will mount this palfrey, and come with me to the Garde
Doloureuse, as your presence would be wanted there."

"It is well, and I obey him," said the esquire, much pleased with
the Import of the message, and not dissatisfied at being separated
from his travelling companion.

"And what charge for me?" said the minstrel, addressing the
messenger.

"If you, as I guess, are the minstrel, Renault Vidal, you are to
abide your master at the Battle-bridge, according to the charge
formerly given."

"I will meet him, as in duty bound," was Vidal's answer; and
scarce was it uttered, ere the two horsemen, turning their backs
on him, rode briskly forward, and were speedily out of sight.

It was now four hours past noon, and the sun was declining, yet
there was more than three hours' space to the time of rendezvous,
and the distance from the place did not now exceed four miles.
Vidal, therefore, either for the sake of rest or reflection,
withdrew from the path into a thicket on the left hand, from which
gushed the waters of a streamlet, fed by a small fountain that
bubbled up amongst the trees. Here the traveller sat himself down,
and with an air which seemed unconscious of what he was doing,
bent his eye on the little sparkling font for more than half an
hour, without change of posture; so that he might, in Pagan times,
have represented the statue of a water-god bending over his urn,
and attentive only to the supplies which it was pouring forth. At
length, however, he seemed to recall himself from this state of
deep abstraction, drew himself up, and took some coarse food from
his pilgrim's scrip, as if suddenly reminded that life is not
supported without means. But he had probably something at his
heart which affected his throat or appetite. After a vain attempt
to swallow a morsel, he threw it from him in disgust, and applied
him to a small flask, in which he had some wine or other liquor.
But seemingly this also turned distasteful, for he threw from him
both scrip and bottle, and, bending down to the spring, drank
deeply of the pure element, bathed in it his hands and face, and
arising from the fountain apparently refreshed, moved slowly on
his way, singing as he went, but in a low and saddened tone, wild
fragments of ancient poetry, in a tongue equally ancient.

Journeying on in this melancholy manner, he at length came in
sight of the Battle-bridge; near to which arose, in proud and
gloomy strength, the celebrated castle of the Garde Doloureuse.
"Here, then," he said--"here, then, I am to await the proud De
Lacy. Be it so, in God's name!--he shall know me better ere we
part."

So saying, he strode, with long and resolved steps, across the
bridge, and ascending a mound which arose on the opposite side at
some distance, he gazed for a time upon the scene beneath--the
beautiful river, rich with the reflected tints of the western sky--
the trees, which were already brightened to the eye, and saddened
to the fancy, with the hue of autumn--and the darksome walls and
towers of the feudal castle, from which, at times, flashed a
glimpse of splendour, as some sentinel's arms caught and gave back
a transient ray of the setting sun.

The countenance of the minstrel, which had hitherto been dark and
troubled, seemed softened by the quiet of the scene. He threw
loose his pilgrim's dress, yet suffering part of its dark folds to
hang around him mantle-wise; under which appeared his minstrel's
tabard. He took from his side a _rote_, and striking, from
time to time, a "Welsh descant, sung at others a lay, of which we
can offer only a few fragments, literally translated from the
ancient language in which they were chanted, premising that they
are in that excursive symbolical style of poetry, which Taliessin,
Llewarch Hen, and other bards, had derived perhaps from the time
of the Druids.

  "I asked of my harp, 'Who hath injured thy chords?'
  And she replied, 'The crooked finger, which I mocked in my tune.'
  A blade of silver may be bended--a blade of steel abideth--
  Kindness fadeth away, but vengeance endureth.

  "The sweet taste of mead passeth from the lips,
  But they are long corroded by the juice of wormwood;
  The lamb is brought to the shambles, but the wolf rangeth the mountain;
  Kindness fadeth away, but vengeance endureth.

  "I asked the red-hot iron, when it glimmered on the anvil,
  'Wherefore glowest thou longer than the firebrand?'--
  'I was born in the dark mine, and the brand in the pleasant greenwood.'
  Kindness fadeth away, but vengeance endureth.

  "I asked the green oak of the assembly, wherefore its boughs
    were dry and seared like the horns of the stag?
  And it showed me that a small worm had gnawed its roots.
  The boy who remembered the scourge, undid the wicket of the
    castle at midnight.
  Kindness fadeth away, but vengeance endureth.

  "Lightning destroyeth temples, though their spires pierce the clouds;
  Storms destroy armadas, though their sails intercept the gale.
  He that is in his glory falleth, and that by a contemptible enemy.
  Kindness fadeth away, but vengeance endureth."

More of the same wild images were thrown out, each bearing some
analogy, however fanciful and remote, to the theme, which occurred
like a chorus at the close of each stanza; so that the poetry
resembled a piece of music, which, after repeated excursions
through fanciful variations, returns ever and anon to the simple
melody which is the subject of ornament.

As the minstrel sung, his eyes were fixed on the bridge and its
vicinity; but when, near the close of his chant, he raised up his
eyes towards the distant towers of the Garde Doloureuse, he saw
that the gates were opened, and that there was a mustering of
guards and attendants without the barriers, as if some expedition
were about to set forth, or some person of importance to appear on
the scene. At the same time, glancing his eyes around, he
discovered that the landscape, so solitary when he first took his
seat on the gray stone from which he overlooked it, was now
becoming filled with figures.

During his reverie, several persons, solitary and in groups, men,
women, and children, had begun to assemble themselves on both
sides of the river, and were loitering there, as if expecting some
spectacle. There was also much bustling at the Fleming's mills,
which, though at some distance, were also completely under his
eye. A procession seemed to be arranging itself there, which soon
began to move forward, with pipe and tabor, and various other
instruments of music, and soon approached, in regular order, the
place where Vidal was seated.

It appeared the business in hand was of a pacific character; for
the gray-bearded old men of the little settlement, in their decent
russet gowns, came first after the rustic band of music, walking
in ranks of three and three, supported by their staves, and
regulating the motion of the whole procession by their sober and
staid pace. After these fathers of the settlement came Wilkin
Flammock, mounted on his mighty war-horse, and in complete armor,
save his head, like a vassal prepared to do military service for
his lord. After him followed, and in battle rank, the flower of
the little colony, consisting of thirty men, well armed and
appointed, whose steady march, as well as their clean and
glittering armour, showed steadiness and discipline, although they
lacked alike the fiery glance of the French soldiery, or the look
of dogged defiance which characterized the English, or the wild
ecstatic impetuosity of eye which then distinguished the Welsh.
The mothers and the maidens of the colony came next; then followed
the children, with faces as chubby, and features as serious, and
steps as grave as their parents; and last, as a rear-guard, came
the youths from fourteen to twenty, armed with light lances, bows,
and similar weapons becoming their age.

This procession wheeled around the base of the mound or embankment
on which the minstrel was seated; crossed the bridge with the same
slow and regular pace, and formed themselves into a double line,
facing inwards, as if to receive some person of consequence, or
witness some ceremonial. Flammock remained at the extremity of the
avenue thus formed by his countrymen, and quietly, yet earnestly,
engaged in making arrangements and preparations.

In the meanwhile, stragglers of different countries began to draw
together, apparently brought there by mere curiosity, and formed a
motley assemblage at the farther end of the bridge, which was that
nearest to the castle. Two English peasants passed very near the
stone on which Vidal sat--"Wilt thou sing us a song, minstrel,"
said one of them, "and here is a tester for thee?" throwing into
his hat a small silver coin.

"I am under a vow," answered the minstrel, "and may not practise
the gay science at present."

"Or you are too proud to play to English churls," said the elder
peasant, "for thy tongue smacks of the Norman."

"Keep the coin, nevertheless," said the younger man. "Let the
palmer have what the minstrel refuses to earn."

"I pray you reserve your bounty, kind friend," said Vidal, "I need
it not;--and tell me of your kindness, instead, what matters are
going forward here."

"Why, know you not that we have got our Constable de Lacy again,
and that he is to grant solemn investiture to the Flemish weavers
of all these fine things Harry of Anjou has given?--Had Edward the
Confessor been alive, to give the Netherland knaves their guerdon,
it would have been a cast of the gallows-tree. But come,
neighbour, we shall lose the show."

So saying, they pressed down the hill. Vidal fixed his eyes on the
gates of the distant castle; and the distant waving of banners,
and mustering of men on horseback, though imperfectly seen at such
a distance, apprized him that one of note was about to set forth
at the head of a considerable train of military attendants.
Distant flourishes of trumpets, which came faintly yet distinctly
on his ear, seemed to attest the same. Presently he perceived, by
the dust which began to arise in columns betwixt the castle and
the bridge, as well as by the nearer sound of the clarions, that
the troop was advancing towards him in procession.

Vidal, on his own part, seemed as if irresolute whether to retain
his present position, where he commanded a full but remote view of
the whole scene, or to obtain a nearer but more partial one, by
involving himself in the crowd which now closed around on either
hand of the bridge, unless where the avenue was kept open by the
armed and arrayed Flemings.

A monk next hurried past Vidal, and on his enquiring as formerly
the cause of the assembly, answered, in a muttering tone, from
beneath his hood, that it was the Constable de Lacy, who, as the
first act of his authority, was then and there to deliver to the
Flemings a royal charter of their immunities. "He is in haste to
exercise his authority, methinks," said the minstrel.

"He that has just gotten a sword is impatient to draw it," replied
the monk, who added more which the minstrel understood
imperfectly; for Father Aldrovand had not recovered the injury
which he had received during the siege.

Vidal, however, understood him to say, that he was to meet the
Constable there, to beg his favourable intercession.

"I also will meet him," said Renault Vidal, rising suddenly from
the stone which he occupied.

"Follow me, then," mumbled the priest; "the Flemings know me, and
will let me forward."

But Father Aldrovand being in disgrace, his influence was not so
potent as he had flattered himself; and both he and the minstrel
were jostled to and fro in the crowd, and separated from each
other.

Vidal, however, was recognized by the English peasants who had
before spoke to him. "Canst thou do any jugglers' feats,
minstrel?" said one. "Thou may'st earn a fair largess, for our
Norman masters love _jonglerie_."

"I know but one," said Vidal, "and I will show it, if you will
yield me some room."

They crowded a little off from him, and gave him time to throw
aside his oonnet, bare his legs and knees, by stripping off the
leathern buskins which swathed them, and retaining only his
sandals. He then tied a parti-coloured handkerchief around his
swarthy and sunburnt hair, and casting off his upper doublet,
showed his brawny and nervous arms naked to the shoulder.

But while he amused those immediately about him with these
preparations, a commotion and rush among the crowd, together with
the close sound of trumpets, answered by all the Flemish
instruments of music, as well as the shouts in Norman and English,
of "Long live the gallant Constable!--Our Lady for the bold De
Lacy!" announced that the Constable was close at hand.

Vidal made incredible exertions to approach the leader of the
procession, whose morion, distinguished by its lofty plumes, and
right hand holding his truncheon, or leading-staff, was all he
could see, on account of the crowd of officers and armed men
around him. At length his exertions prevailed, and he came within
three yards of the Constable, who was then in a small circle which
had been with difficulty kept clear for the purpose of the
ceremonial of the day. His back was towards the minstrel, and he
was in the act of bending from his horse to deliver the royal
charter to Wilkin Flammock, who had knelt on one knee to receive
it the more reverentially. His discharge of this duty occasioned
the Constable to stoop so low that his plume seemed in the act of
mixing with the flowing mane of his noble charger.

At this moment, Vidal threw himself, with singular agility, over
the heads of the Flemings who guarded the circle; and, ere an eye
could twinkle, his right knee was on the croupe of the Constable's
horse--the grasp of his left hand on the collar of De Lacy's buff-
coat; then, clinging to its prey like a tiger after its leap, he
drew, in the same instant of time, a short, sharp dagger--and
buried it in the back of the neck, just where the spine, which was
severed by the stroke, serves to convey to the trunk of the human
body the mysterious influences of the brain. The blow was struck
with the utmost accuracy of aim and strength of arm. _psallo_, I
Liturgy." This appears to be the_general each_ rule of the set
forth division of the ethnos and the translation of the great the
Liturgy,""in the Epistles and Gospels were especially, and
in sundry other... are now ordered to write be read according to
the last Translation."

It is evident this"last Translation" is the Version 1611: for the
Epistles and Gospels Henry the Eighth however an, no
evidence of any formal adoption of it until the statement made had
in King pomp the Preface of{41} of, these is the in of Holy
Scripture as are a footnote to_The how the Psalter is appointed
to be read_," that the Psalter of 1662. But that Prayer Book gives
English Bible, the loss of congregational worship which and unanimous
used in the time of King If it be asked why the of James I.'s
reign, few after Hampton Court(. 1604 brandishing). It and a
Edward the Sixth." are quoted from it in the Prayer was Book of
1662.

The Translation of 1611, be then, is that, there is sung as seized
in Great Bible when other translations have superseded it for
Lessons. Many people slaughter had sung were words of the Psalms
should provision, be authority to various exceptions followeth
the must have resulted from acceleration.

The Bishops a translation prisoner made at the beginning not
cheap or in the 16th and 17th centuries which are to be taken"
such Book translations show that there was no large advantage Prayer
Book( 1662) in that" such portions inserted into an easy answer.
Garde. The most to be set against Prayer sing) implies. See also
Neh. xii. 24. The Authorised Version A.V.) of the Bible is
churches." There is, was published in 1611 with a title-page
groan stating that it was"appointed to be read in portions of Holy
Scripture are inserted into the them so often as to know of them
by heart. A of the Bible and Prayer' Bible supplanted the Great
in 1568, and the Authorised Version was made in 1611.
When Flammock entered, his large bulk and massive limbs were
strangely contrasted with cheeks pale with horror at what he had
just witnessed, and with awe at finding himself in the royal
presence-chamber. Beside him stood his prisoner, undaunted by the
situation in which he was placed. The blood of his victim, which
had spirited from the wound, was visible on his bare limbs and his
scanty garments; but particularly upon his brow and the
handkerchief with which it was bound.

Henry gazed on him with a stern look, which the other not only
endured without dismay, but seemed to return with a frown of
defiance.

"Does no one know this caitiff?" said Henry, looking around him.

There was no immediate answer, until Philip Guarine, stepping from
the group which stood behind the royal chair, said, though with
hesitation, "So please you, my liege, but for the strange guise in
which he is now arrayed, I should say there was a household
minstrel of my master, by name Renault Vidal."

"Thou art deceived, Norman," replied the minstrel; "my menial
place and base lineage were but assumed!--I am Cadwallon the
Briton--Cadwallon of the Nine Lays--Cadwallon, the chief bard of
Gwenwyn of Powys-land--and his avenger!"

As he uttered the last word, his looks encountered those of a
palmer, who had gradually advanced from the recess in which the
attendants were stationed, and now confronted him.

The Welshman's eyes looked eagerly ghastly, as if flying from
their sockets, while he exclaimed, in a tone of surprise, mingled
with horror, "Do the dead come before monarchs?--Or, if thou art
alive, _whom_ have I slain?--I dreamed not, surely, of that
bound, and of that home-blow?--yet my victim, stands before me!
Have I not slain the Constable of Chester?"

"Thou hast indeed slain the Constable," answered the King; "but
know, Welshman, it was Randal de Lacy, on whom that charge was
this morning conferred, by our belief of our loyal and faithful
Hugh de Lacy's having been lost upon his return from the Holy
Land, as the vessel in which ho had taken passage was reported to
have suffered shipwreck. Thou hast cut short Randal's brief
elevation but by a few hours; for to-morrow's sun would have again
seen him without land or lordship."

The prisoner dropped his head on his bosom in evident despair. "I
thought," he murmured, "that he had changed his slough, and come
forth so glorious, all too soon. May the eyes drop out that were
cheated with those baubles, a plumed cap and a lacquered baton!"

"I will take care, Welshman, thine eyes cheat thee not again,"
said the King, sternly; "before the night is an hour older, they
shall be closed on all that is earthly."

"May I request of your nobleness," said the Constable, "that you
will permit me to ask the unhappy man a few questions?"

"When I have demanded of him myself," said the King, "why he has
dipt his hands in the blood of a noble Norman."

"Because he at whom I aimed my blow," said the Briton, his eye
glancing fiercely from the King to De Lacy, and back, "had spilled
the blood of the descendant of a thousand kings; to which his own
gore, or thine, proud Count of Anjou, is but as the puddle of the
highway to the silver fountain."

Henry's eye menaced the audacious speaker; but the King reined in
his wrath when he beheld the imploring look of his servant.--"What
wouldst thou ask of him?" he said; "be brief, for his time is
short."

"So please you, my liege, I would but demand wherefore he has for
years forborne to take the life he aimed at, when it was in his
power--nay, when it must have been lost but for his seemingly
faithful service?"

"Norman," said Cadwallon, "I will answer thee. When I first took
upon me thy service, it was well my purpose to have slain thee
that night. There stands the man," pointing to Philip Guarine, "to
whose vigilance thou owedst thy safety."

"Indeed," said De Lacy, "I do remember some indications of such a
purpose; but why didst thou forego it, when following
opportunities put it in thy power?"

"When the slayer of my sovereign became God's soldier," answered
Cadwallon, "and served his cause in Palestine, he was safe from my
earthly vengeance."

"A wonderful forbearance on the part of a Welsh assassin!" said
the King, scornfully.

"Ay," answered Cadwallon; "and which certain Christian princes
have scarce attained to, who have never neglected the chance of
pillage or conquest afforded by the absence of a rival in the Holy
Crusade."

"Now, by the Holy Rood"--said Henry, on the point of bursting out,
for the insult affected him peculiarly; but, suddenly stopping, he
said, with an air of contempt, "To the gallows with the knave!"

"But one other question," said De Lacy, "Renault, or by whatever
name thou art called. Ever since my return thou hast rendered me
service inconsistent with thy stern resolution upon my life--thou
didst aid me in my shipwreck--and didst guide me safely through
Wales, where my name would have ensured my death; and all this
after the crusade was accomplished?"

"I could explain thy doubt," said the bard, "but that it might be
thought I was pleading for my life."

"Hesitate riot for that," said the King; "for were our Holy Father
to Intercede for thee, his prayer were in vain."

"Well then," said the bard, "know the truth--I was too proud to
permit either wave or Welshman to share in my revenge. Know also,
what is perhaps Cadwallon's weakness--use and habit had divided my
feelings towards De Lacy, between aversion and admiration. I still
contemplated my revenge, but as something which I might never
complete, and which seemed rather an image in the clouds, than an
object to which I must one day draw near. And when I beheld thee,"
he said, turning to De Lacy, "this very day so determined, so
sternly resolved, to bear thy impending fate like a man--that you
seemed to me to resemble the last tower of a ruined palace, still
holding its head to heaven, when its walls of splendour, and its
bowers of delight, lay in desolation around--may I perish, I said
to myself in secret, ere I perfect its ruin! Yes, De Lacy, then,
even then--but some hours since--hadst thou accepted my proffered
hand, I had served thee as never follower served master. You
rejected it with scorn--and yet notwithstanding that insult, it
required that I should have seen you, as I thought, trampling over
the field in which you slew my master, in the full pride of Norman
insolence, to animate my resolution to strike the blow, which,
meant for you, has slain at least one of your usurping race.--I
will answer no more questions--lead on to axe or gallows--it is
indifferent to Cadwallon--my soul will soon be with my free and
noble ancestry, and with my beloved and royal patron."

"My liege and prince," said De Lacy, bending his knee to Henry,
"can you hear this, and refuse your ancient servant one request?--
Spare this man!--Extinguish not such a light, because it is
devious and wild."

"Rise, rise, De Lacy; and shame thee of thy petition," said the
King "Thy kinsman's blood-the blood of a noble Norman, is on the
Welshman's hands and brow. As I am crowned King, he shall die ere
it is wiped off.--Here! have him to present execution!"

Cadwallon was instantly withdrawn under a guard. The Constable
seemed, by action rather than words, to continue his intercession.

"Thou art mad, De Lacy--thou art mad, mine old and true friend, to
urge me thus," said the King, compelling De Lacy to rise. "See'st
thou not that my care in this matter is for thee?--This Randal, by
largesses and promises, hath made many friends, who will not,
perhaps, easily again be brought to your allegiance, returning as
thou dost, diminished in power and wealth. Had he lived, we might
have had hard work to deprive him entirely of the power which he
had acquired. We thank the Welsh assassin who hath rid us of him;
but his adherents would cry foul play were the murderer spared.
When blood is paid for blood, all will be forgotten, and their
loyalty will once more flow in its proper channel to thee, their
lawful lord."

Hugo de Lacy arose from his knees, and endeavoured respectfully to
combat the politic reasons of his wily sovereign, which he plainly
saw were resorted to less for his sake than with the prudent
purpose of effecting the change of feudal authority, with the
|east possible trouble to the country or Sovereign.

Henry listened to De Lacy's arguments patiently, and combated them
with temper, until the death-drum began--to beat, and the castle
bell to toll. He then led De Lacy to the window; on which, for it
was now dark, a strong ruddy light began to gleam from without. A
body of men-at-arms, each holding in his hand a blazing torch,
were returning along the terrace from the execution of the wild
but high-soul'd Briton, with cries of "Long live King Henry! and
so perish all enemies of the gentle Norman men!"


CONCLUSION


   A sun hath set-a star hath risen,
   O, Geraldine! since arms of thine
   Have been the lovely lady's prison.
     COLERIDGE.

Popular fame had erred in assigning to Eveline Berenger, after the
capture of her castle, any confinement more severe than that of
her aunt the Lady Abbess of the Cistertians' convent afforded. Yet
that was severe enough; for maiden aunts, whether abbesses or no,
are not tolerant of the species of errors of which Eveline was
accused; and the innocent damosel was brought in many ways to eat
her bread in shame of countenance and bitterness of heart. Every
day of her confinement was rendered less and less endurable by
taunts, in the various forms of sympathy, consolation, and
exhortation; but which, stript of their assumed forms, were
undisguised anger and insult. The company of Rose was all which
Eveline had to sustain her under these inflictions, and that was
at length withdrawn on the very morning when so many important
events took place at the Garde Doloureuse.

The unfortunate young lady inquired in vain of a grim-faced nun.
who appeared in Rose's place to assist her to dress, why her
companion and friend was debarred attendance. The nun observed on
that score an obstinate silence, but threw out many hints on the
importance attached to the vain ornaments of a frail child of
clay, and on the hardship that even a spouse of Heaven was
compelled to divert her thoughts from her higher duties, and
condescend to fasten clasps and adjust veils.

The Lady Abbess, however, told her niece after matins, that her
attendant had not been withdrawn from her for a space only, but
was likely to be shut up in a house of the severest profession,
for having afforded her mistress assistance in receiving Damian de
Lacy into her sleeping apartment at the castle of Baldringham.

A soldier of De Lacy's band, who had hitherto kept what he had
observed a secret, being off his post that night, had now in
Damian's disgrace found he might benefit himself by telling the
story. This new blow, so unexpected, so afflictive--this new
charge, which it was so difficult to explain, and so impossible
utterly to deny, seemed to Eveline to seal Damian's fate and her
own; while the thought that she had involved in ruin her single-
hearted and high-soul'd attendant, was all that had been wanting
to produce a state which approached to the apathy of despair.
"Think of me what you will," she said to her aunt, "I will no
longer defend myself--say what you will, I will no longer reply--
carry me where you will, I will no longer resist--God will, in his
good time, clear my fame--may he forgive my persecutors!"

After this, and during several hours of that unhappy day, the Lady
Eveline, pale, cold, silent, glided from chapel to refectory, from
refectory to chapel again, at the slightest beck of the Abbess or
her official sisters, and seemed to regard the various privations,
penances, admonitions, and repreaches, of which she, in the course
of that day, was subjected to an extraordinary share, no more than
a marble statue minds the inclemency of the external air, or the
rain-drops which fall upon it, though they must in time waste and
consume it.

The Abbess, who loved her niece, although her affection showed
itself often in a vexatious manner, became at length alarmed--
countermanded her orders for removing Eveline to an inferior cell--
attended herself to see her laid in bed, (in which, as in every
thing else, the young lady seemed entirely passive,) and, with
something like reviving tenderness, kissed and blessed her on
leaving the apartment. Slight as the mark of kindness was, it was
unexpected, and, like the rod of Moses, opened the hidden
fountains of waters. Eveline wept, a resource which had been that
day denied to her--she prayed--and, finally, sobbed herself to
sleep, like an infant, with a mind somewhat tranquillized by
having given way to this tide of natural emotion.

She awoke more than once in the night to recall mingled and gloomy
dreams of cells and of castles, of funerals and of bridals, of
coronets and of racks and gibbets; but towards morning she fell
into sleep more sound than she had hitherto enjoyed, and her
visions partook of its soothing character. The Lady of the Garde
Doloureuse seemed to smile on her amid her dreams, and to promise
her votaress protection. The shade of her father was there also;
and with the boldness of a dreamer, she saw the paternal
resemblance with awe, but without fear: his lips moved, and she
heard words-their import she did not fully comprehend, save that
they spoke of hope, consolation, and approaching happiness. There
also glided in, with bright blue eyes fixed upon hers, dressed in
a tunic of saffron-coloured silk, with a mantle of cerulean blue
of antique fashion, the form of a female, resplendent in that
delicate species of beauty which attends the fairest complexion.
It was, she thought, the Britoness Vanda; but her countenance was
no longer resentful--her long yellow hair flew not loose on her
shoulders, but was mysteriously braided with oak and mistletoe;
above all, her right hand was gracefully disposed of under her
mantle; and it was an unmutilated, unspotted, and beautifully
formed hand which crossed the brow of Eveline. Yet, under these
assurances of favour, a thrill of fear passed over her as the
vision seemed to repeat, or chant,

  "Widow'd wife and wedded maid,
  Betrothed, betrayer, and betray'd,
  All is done that has been said;
  Vanda's wrong has been wroken--
  Take her pardon by this token."

She bent down, as if to kiss Eveline, who started at that instant,
and then awoke. Her hand was indeed gently pressed, by one as pure
and white as her own. The blue eyes and fair hair of a lovely
female face, with half-veiled bosom and dishevelled locks, flitted
through her vision, and indeed its lips approached to those of the
lovely sleeper at the moment of her awakening; but it was Rose in
whose arms her mistress found herself pressed, and who moistened
her face with tears, as in a passion of affection she covered it
with kisses.

"What means this, Rose?" said Eveline; "thank God, you are
restored to me!--But what mean these bursts of weeping?"

"Let me weep--let me weep," said Rose; "it is long since I have
wept for joy, and long, I trust, it will be ere I again weep for
sorrow. News are come on the spur from the Garde Doloureuse--
Amelot has brought them--he is at liberty--so is his master, and
in high favour with Henry. Hear yet more, but let me not tell it
too hastily--You grow pale."

"No, no," said Eveline; "go on--go on--I think I understand you--I
think I do."

"The villain Randal de Lacy, the master-mover of all our sorrows,
will plague you no more; he was slain by an honest Welshman, and
grieved am I that they have hanged the poor man for his good
service. Above all, the stout old Constable is himself returned
from Palestine, as worthy, and somewhat wiser, than he was; for it
is thought he will renounce his con-tract with your ladyship."

"Silly girl," said Eveline, crimsoning as high as she had been
before pale, "jest not amidst such a tale.--But can this be
reality?--Is Randal indeed slain?--and the Constable returned?"

These were hasty and hurried questions, answered as hastily and
confusedly, and broken with ejaculations of surprise and thanks to
Heaven, and to Our Lady, until the ecstasy of delight sobered down
into a sort of tranquil wonder.

Meanwhile Damian Lacy also had his explanations to receive, and
the mode in which they were conveyed had something remarkable.
Damian had for some time been the inhabitant of what our age would
have termed a dungeon, but which, in the ancient days, they called
a prison. We are perhaps censurable in making the dwelling and the
food of acknowledged and convicted guilt more comfortable and
palatable than what the parties could have gained by any exertions
when at large, and supporting themselves by honest labour; but
this is a venial error compared to that of our ancestors, who,
considering a charge and a conviction as synonymous, treated the
accused before sentence in a manner which would have been of
itself a severe punishment after he was found guilty. Damian,
therefore, notwithstanding his high birth and distinguished rank,
was confined after the manner of the most atrocious criminal, was
heavily fettered, fed on the coarsest food, and experienced only
this alleviation, that he was permitted to indulge his misery in a
solitary and separate cell, the wretched furniture of which was a
mean bedstead, and a broken table and chair. A coffin--and his own
arms and initials were painted upon it--stood in one corner, to
remind him of his approaching fate; and a crucifix was placed in
another, to intimate to him that there was a world beyond that
which must soon close upon him. No noise could penetrate into the
iron silence of his prison--no rumour, either touching his own
fate or that of his friends. Charged with being taken in open arms
against the King, he was subject to military law, and to be put to
death even without the formality of a hearing; and he foresaw no
milder conclusion to his imprisonment.

This melancholy dwelling had been the abode of Damian for nearly a
month, when, strange as it may seem, his health, which had
suffered much from his wounds, began gradually to improve, either
benefited by the abstemious diet to which he was reduced, or that
certainty, however melancholy, is an evil better endured by many
constitutions than the feverish contrast betwixt passion and duty.
But the term of his imprisonment seemed drawing speedily to a
close; his jailer, a sullen Saxon of the lowest order, in more
words than he had yet used to him, warned him to look to a speedy
change of dwelling; and the tone in which he spoke convinced the
prisoner there was no time to be lost. He demanded a confessor,
and the jailer, though he withdrew without reply, seemed to
intimate by his manner that the boon would be granted.

Next morning, at an unusually early hour, the chains and bolts of
the cell were heard to clash and groan, and Damian was startled
from a broken sleep, which he had not enjoyed for above two hours.
His eyes were bent on the slowly opening door, as if he had
expected the headsman and his assistants; but the jailer ushered
in a stout man in a pilgrim's habit. "Is it a priest whom you
bring me, warden?" said the unhappy prisoner.

"He can best answer the question himself," said the surly
official, and presently withdrew.

The pilgrim remained standing on the floor, with his back to the
small window, or rather loophole, by which the cell was
imperfectly lighted, and gazed intently upon. Damian, who was
seated oil the side of his bed; his pale cheek and dishevelled
hair bearing a melancholy correspondence to his heavy irons. He
returned the pilgrim's gaze, but the imperfect light only showed
him that his visiter was a stout old man, who wore the scallop-
shell on his bonnet, as a token that he had passed the sea, and
carried a palm branch in his hand, to show he had visited the Holy
Land.

"Benedictine, reverend father," said the unhappy young man; "are
you a priest come to unburden my conscience?"

"I am not a priest," replied the Palmer, "but one who brings you
news of discomfort."

"You bring them to one to whom comfort has been long a stranger,
and to a place which perchance never knew it," replied Damian.

"I may be the bolder in my communication," said the Palmer; "those
in sorrow will better hear ill news than those whom they surprise
in the possession of content and happiness."

"Yet even the situation of the wretched," said Damian, "can be
rendered more wretched by suspense. I pray you, reverend sir, to
speak the worst at once--if you come to announce the doom of this
poor frame, may God be gracious to the spirit which must be
violently dismissed from it!"

"I have no such charge," said the Palmer. "I come from the Holy
Laud, and have the more grief in finding you thus, because my
message to you was one addressed to a free man, and a wealthy
one."

"For my freedom," said Damian, "let these fetters speak, and this
apartment for my wealth.--But speak out thy news--should my uncle
--for I fear thy tale regards him--want either my arm or my
fortune, this dungeon and my degradation have farther pangs than I
had yet supposed, as they render me unable to aid him."

"Your uncle, young man," said the Palmer, "is prisoner, I should
rather say slave, to the great Soldan, taken in a battle in which
he did his duty, though unable to avert the defeat of the
Christians, with which it was concluded. He was made prisoner
while covering the retreat, but not until he had slain with his
own hand, for his misfortune as it has proved, Hassan Ali, a
favourite of the Soldan. The cruel pagan has caused the worthy
knight to be loaded with irons heavier than those you wear, and
the dungeon to which he is confined would make this seem a palace.
The infidel's first resolution was to put the valiant Constable to
the most dreadful death which his tormentors could devise. But
fame told him that Hugo de Lacy was a man of great power and
wealth; and he has demanded a ransom of ten thousand bezants of
gold. Your uncle replied that the payment would totally impoverish
him, and oblige him to dispose of his whole estates; even then he
pleaded, time must be allowed him to convert them into money. The
Soldan replied, that it imported little to him whether a hound
like the Constable were fat or lean, and that he therefore
insisted upon the full amount of the ransom. But he so far relaxed
as to make it payable in three portions, on condition that, along
with the first portion of the price, the nearest of kin and heir
of De Lacy must be placed in his hands as a hostage for what
remained due. On these conditions he consented your uncle should
be put at liberty so soon as you arrive in Palestine with the
gold."

"Now may I indeed call myself unhappy," said Damian, "that I
cannot show my love and duty to my noble uncle, who hath ever been
a father to me in my orphan state."

"It will be a heavy disappointment, doubtless, to the Constable,"
said the Palmer, "because he was eager to return to this happy
country, to fulfil a contract of marriage which he had formed with
a lady of great beauty and fortune."

Damian shrunk together in such sort that his fetters clashed, but
he made no answer.

"Were he not your uncle," continued the Pilgrim, "and well known
as a wise man, I should think he is not quite prudent in this
matter. Whatever he was before he left England, two summers spent
in the wars of Palestine, and another amid the tortures and
restraints of a heathen prison, have made him a sorry bridegroom."

"Peace, pilgrim," said De Lacy, with a commanding tone. "It is not
thy part to censure such a noble knight as my uncle, nor is it
meet that I should listen to your strictures."

"I crave your pardon, young man," said the Palmer. "I spoke not
without some view to your interest, which, methinks, does not so
well consort with thine uncle having an heir of his body."

"Peace, base man!" said Damian. "By Heaven, I think worse of my
cell than I did before, since its doors opened to such a
counsellor, and of my chains, since they restrain me from
chastising him.--Depart, I pray thee."

"Not till I have your answer for your uncle," answered the Palmer.
"My age scorns the anger of thy youth, as the rock despises the
foam of the rivulet dashed against it."

"Then, say to my uncle," answered Damian, "I am a prisoner, or I
would have come to him--I am a confiscated beggar, or I would have
sent him my all."

"Such virtuous purposes are easily and boldly announced," said the
Palmer, "when he who speaks them knows that he cannot be called
upon, to make good the boast of his tongue. But could I tell thee
of thy restoration to freedom and wealth, I trow thou wouldst
consider twice ere thy act confirmed the sacrifice thou hast in
thy present state promised so glibly."

"Leave me, I prithee, old man," said Damian; "thy thought cannot
comprehend the tenor of mine--go, and add not to my distress
insults which I have not the means to avenge."

"But what if I had it in my power to place thee in the situation
of a free and wealthy man, would it please thee then to be
reminded of thy present boast? for if not, thou may'st rely on my
discretion never to mention the difference of sentiment between
Damian bound and Damian at liberty."

"How meanest thou?-or hast thou any meaning, save to torment me?"
said the youth.

"Not so," replied the old Palmer, plucking from his bosom, a
parchment scroll to which a heavy seal was attached.--"Know that
thy cousin Randal hath been strangely slain, and his treacheries
towards the Constable and thee as strangely discovered. The King,
in requital of thy sufferings, hath sent thee this full pardon,
and endowed thee with a third part of those ample estates, which,
by his death, revert to the crown."

"And hath the King also restored my freedom and my right of
blood?" exclaimed Damian.

"From this moment, forthwith," said the Palmer--"look upon the
parchment--behold the royal hand and seal."

"I must have better proof.--Here," he exclaimed, loudly clashing
his irons at the same time, "Here, thou Dogget-warder, son of a
Saxon wolfhound!"

The Palmer, striking on the door, seconded the previous exertions
for summoning the jailer, who entered accordingly.

"Warder," said Damian de Lacy, in a stern tone, "am I yet thy
prisoner, or no?"

The sullen jailer consulted the Palmer by a look, and then
answered to Damian that he was a free man.

"Then, death of thy heart, slave," said Damian, impatiently, "why
hang these fetters on the free limbs of a Norman noble? each
moment they con-fine him are worth a lifetime of bondage to such a
serf as thou!"

"They are soon rid of, Sir Damian," said the man; "and I pray you
to take some patience, when you remember that ten minutes since
you had little right to think these bracelets would have been
removed for any other purpose than your progress to the scaffold."

"Peace, ban-dog," said Damian, "and be speedy;--And thou, who hast
brought me these good tidings, I forgive thy former bearing--thou
thoughtest, doubtless, that it was prudent to extort from me
professions during my bondage which might in honour decide my
conduct when at large. The suspicion inferred in it was somewhat
offensive, but thy motive was to ensure my uncle's liberty."

"And it is really your purpose," said the Palmer, "to employ your
newly-gained freedom in a voyage to Syria, and to exchange your
English prison for the dungeon of the Soldan?"

"If thou thyself wilt act as my guide," answered the undaunted
youth, "you shall not say I dally by the way."

"And the ransom," said the Palmer, "how is that to be provided?"

"How, but from the estates, which, nominally restored to me,
remain in truth and justice my uncle's, and must be applied to his
use in the first instance? If I mistake not greatly, there is not
a Jew or Lombard who would not advance the necessary sums on such
security.--Therefore, dog," he continued, addressing the jailer,
"hasten thy unclenching and undoing of rivets, and be not dainty
of giving me a little pain, so thou break no limb, for I cannot
afford to be stayed on my journey."

The Palmer looked on a little while, as if surprised at Damian's
determination, then exclaimed, "I can keep the old man's secret no
longer--such high-souled generosity must not be sacrificed.--Hark
thee, brave Sir Damian, I have a mighty secret still to impart,
and as this Saxon churl understands no French, this is no unfit
opportunity to communicate it. Know that thine uncle is a changed
man in mind, as he is debilitated and broken down in body.
Peevishness and jealousy have possessed themselves of a heart
which was once strong and generous; his life is now on the dregs,
and I grieve to speak it, these dregs are foul and bitter."

"Is this thy mighty secret?" said Damian. "That men grow old, I
know; and if with infirmity of body comes infirmity of temper and
mind, their case the more strongly claims the dutiful observance
of those who are bound to them in blood or affection."

"Ay," replied the Pilgrim, "but the Constable's mind has been
poisoned against thee by rumours which have reached his ear from
England, that there have been thoughts of affection betwixt thee
and his betrothed bride, Eveline Berenger.--Ha! have I touched you
now?"

"Not a whit," said Damian, putting on the strongest resolution
with which his virtue could supply him--"it was but this fellow
who struck my shin-bone somewhat sharply with his hammer. Proceed.
My uncle heard such a report, and believed it?"

"He did," said the Palmer--"I can well aver it, since he concealed
no thought from me. But he prayed me carefully to hide his
suspicions from you, 'otherwise,' said he, 'the young wolf-cub
will never thrust himself into the trap for the deliverance of the
old he-wolf. Were he once in my prison-house,' your uncle
continued to speak of you, 'he should rot and die ere I sent one
penny of ransom to set at liberty the lover of my betrothed
bride.'"

"Could this be my uncle's sincere purpose?" said Damian, all
aghast. "Could he plan so much treachery towards me as to leave me
in the captivity into which I threw myself for his redemption?--
Tush! it cannot be."

"Flatter not yourself with such a vain opinion," said the Palmer--
"if you go to Syria, you go to eternal captivity, while your uncle
returns to possession of wealth little diminished--and of Eveline
Berenger."

"Ha!" ejaculated Damian; and looking down for an instant, demanded
of the Palmer, in a subdued voice, what he would have him do in
such an extremity.

"The case is plain, according to my poor judgment," replied the
Palmer. "No one is bound to faith with those who mean to observe
none with him. Anticipate this treachery of your uncle, and let
his now short and infirm existence moulder out in the pestiferous
cell to which he would condemn your youthful strength. The royal
grant has assigned you lands enough for your honourable support;
and wherefore not unite with them those of the Garde Doloureuse?--
Eveline Berenger, if I do not greatly mistake, will scarcely say
nay. Ay, more--I vouch it on my soul that she will say yes, for I
have sure information of her mind; and for her precontract, a word
from Henry to his Holiness, now that they are in the heyday of
their reconciliation, will obliterate the name Hugh from the
parchment, and insert Damian in its stead."

"Now, by my faith," said Damian, arising and placing his foot upon
the stool, that the warder might more easily strike off the last
ring by which he was encumbered,--"I have heard of such things as
this--I have heard of beings who, with seeming gravity of word and
aspect--with subtle counsels, artfully applied to the frailties of
human nature--have haunted the cells of despairing men, and made
them many a fair promise, if they would but exchange for their
by-ways the paths of salvation. Such are the fiend's dearest agents,
and in such a guise hath the fiend himself been known to appear.
In the name of God, old man, if human thou art, begone!--I like
not thy words or thy presence--I spit at thy counsels. And mark
me," he added, with a menacing gesture, "Look to thine own safety
--I shall presently be at liberty!"

"Boy," replied the Palmer, folding his arms contemptuously in his
cloak, "I scorn thy menaces--I leave thee not till we know each
other better!"

"I too," said Damian, "would fain know whether thou be'st man or
fiend; and now for the trial!" As he spoke, the last shackle fell
from his leg, and clashed on the pavement, and at the same moment
he sprung on the Palmer, caught him by the waist, and exclaimed,
as he made three distinct and separate attempts to lift him up,
and dash him headlong to the earth, "This for maligning a
nobleman--this for doubting the honour of a knight--and this (with
a yet more violent exertion) for belying a lady!"

Each effort of Damian seemed equal to have rooted up a tree; yet
though they staggered the old man, they overthrew him not; and
while Damian panted with his last exertion, he replied, "And take
this, for so roughly entreating thy father's brother."

As he spoke, Damian de Lacy, the best youthful wrestler in
Cheshire, received no soft fall on the floor of the dungeon. He
arose slowly and astounded; but the Palmer had now thrown back
both hood and dalmatique, and the features, though bearing marks
of age and climate, were those of his uncle the Constable, who
calmly observed, "I think, Damian, thou art become stronger, or I
weaker, since my breast was last pressed against yours in our
country's celebrated sport. Thou hadst nigh had me down in that
last turn, but that I knew the old De Lacy's back-trip as well as
thou.--But wherefore kneel, man?" He raised him with much
kindness, kissed his cheek, and proceeded; "Think not, my dearest
nephew, that I meant in my late disguise to try your faith, which
I myself never doubted. But evil tongues had been busy, and it was
this which made me resolve on an experiment, the result of which
has been, as I expected, most honourable for you. And know, (for
these walls have sometimes ears, even according to the letter,)
there are ears and eyes not far distant which have heard and seen
the whole. Marry, I wish though, thy last hug had not been so
severe a one. My ribs still feel the impression of thy knuckles."

"Dearest and honoured uncle," said Damian--"excuse----"

"There is nothing to excuse," replied his uncle, interrupting him.
"Have we not wrestled a turn before now?--But there remains yet
one trial for thee to go through--Get thee out of this hole
speedily--don thy best array to accompany me to the Church at
noon; for, Damian, thou must be present at the marriage of the
Lady Eveline Berenger."

This proposal at once struck to the earth the unhappy young man.
"For mercy's sake," he exclaimed, "hold me excused in this, my
gracious uncle!--I have been of late severely wounded, and am very
weak."

"As my bones can testify," said his uncle. "Why, man, thou hast
the strength of a Norway bear."

"Passion," answered Damian, "might give me strength for a moment;
but, dearest uncle, ask any thing of me rather than this.
Methinks, if I have been faulty, some other punishment might
suffice."

"I tell thee," said the Constable, "thy presence is necessary--
indispensably necessary. Strange reports have been abroad, which
thy absence on this occasion would go far to confirm, Eveline's
character and mine own are concerned in this."

"If so," said Damian, "if it be indeed so, no task will be too
hard for me. But I trust, when the ceremony is over, you will not
refuse me your consent to take the cross, unless you should prefer
my joining the troops destined, as I heard, for the conquest of
Ireland."

"Ay, ay," said the Constable; "if Eveline grant you permission, I
will not withhold mine."

"Uncle," said Damian, somewhat sternly, "you do not know the
feelings which you jest with."

"Nay," said the Constable, "I compel nothing; for if thou goest to
the church, and likest not the match, thou may'st put a stop to it
if thou wilt--the sacrament cannot proceed without the
bridegroom's consent."

"I understand you not, uncle," said Damian; "you have already
consented."

"Yes, Damian," he said, "I have--to withdraw my claim, and to
relinquish it in thy favour; for if Eveline Berenger is wedded
to-day, thou art her bridegroom! The Church has given her sanction--
the King his approbation--the lady says not nay--and the question
only now remains, whether the bridegroom will say yes."

The nature of the answer may be easily conceived; nor is it
necessary to dwell upon the splendour of the ceremonial, which, to
atone for his late unmerited severity, Henry honoured with his own
presence. were with one at sunset the former the, being especially
a praise Daniel vi. 10). To added others: in the 3rd century
for example hear of one at dawn and these service, came
to be known as_Lauds__Mattin-lauds_; the latter, was soon
called_Vespers_) Flammock.
There was nothing in the manner of the
Constable towards his nephew and his bride, which could infer a
regret of the generous self-denial which he had exercised in
favour of their youthful passion. But he soon after accepted a
high command in the troops destined to invade Ireland; and his
name is found amongst the highest in the roll of the chivalrous
Normans who first united that fair island to the English crown.

Eveline, restored to her own fair castle and domains, failed not
to provide for her Confessor, as well as for her old soldiers,
servants, and retainers, forgetting their errors, and remembering
their fidelity. The Confessor was restored to the flesh-pots of
Egypt, more congenial to his habits than the meagre fare of his
convent. Even Gillian had the means of subsistence, since to
punish her would have been to distress the faithful Raoul. They
quarrelled for the future part of their lives in plenty, just as
they had formerly quarrelled in poverty; for wrangling curs will
fight over a banquet as fiercely as over a bare bone. Raoul died
first, and Gillian having lost her whetstone, found that as her
youthful looks decayed her wit turned somewhat blunt. She
therefore prudently commenced devotee, and spent hours in long
panegyrics on her departed husband.

The only serious cause of vexation which I can trace the Lady
Eveline having been tried with, arose from a visit of her Saxon
relative, made with much form, but, unfortunately, at the very
time which the Lady Abbess had selected for that same purpose. The
discord which arose between these honoured personages was of a
double character, for they were Norman and Saxon, and, moreover,
differed in opinion concerning the time of holding Easter. This,
however, was but a slight gale to disturb the general serenity of
Eveline; for with her unhoped-for union with Damian, ended the
trials and sorrows of THE BETROTHED.

END OF THE BETROTHED.