On finding that the public would listen to him, I urged him to bring out
a volume of selected pieces from all his works, an idea which for some
time he contested with his usual pessimistic vigour.  Having, however,
set my heart upon it, I spoke upon the subject to Mr. John Lane, who at
once saw his way to bring out such a volume at his own risk.  To the
poet’s astonishment the book was a success, and it at once passed into a
second edition.  In the spring of this year he was emboldened to bring
out another volume of new poems, and his name became firmly
re-established as a poet.  It was after the success of the first book
that he consulted me upon a question which was then upon his mind: Should
he devote his future energies to literature or to making himself a
position as a speaker in the Lords?  He had lately had occasion to speak
both in the country and in the Lords upon some local matter of
importance, and his success had in some slight degree revived an old
aspiration to plunge into the world of politics.  He was a Liberal, and
in 1868 he had contested—but unsuccessfully—Mid-Cheshire.  This was on
the first election for that division after the Reform Act of 1867.  His
support in a county so Conservative as Cheshire had really been very
strong, but he never made another effort to get into Parliament.  “You
know my way,” he used to say.  “I can make one spring—perhaps a pretty
good spring—but not more than one.”

On the whole, he leaned towards the idea of going into politics.  The way
in which he put the case to me was thoroughly characteristic of him:
“Even if my verse were strong and vital, which I fear it is not, there is
almost no chance for men of my generation receiving more than a slight
attention at the present day.  Things have altogether changed since the
sixties and seventies, when I published my most important work—at a time
when the prominent names were Tennyson, Browning, Matthew Arnold,
Rossetti, Morris, and Swinburne.  The old critical oracles are now dumb;
the reviewers are all young men whose knowledge of poetry does not go
back so far as the sixties.  Those who reviewed the selection from my
work in Miles’s book showed themselves to be entirely unconscious of the
name of Leicester Warren, and treated the poems there selected as being
the work of a new writer; and even when the poems published by Lane came
out, no one seemed to be aware that they were by a writer who was very
much to the fore a quarter of a century ago.  That book has had a flutter
of success, but in how large a degree was the success owing to the
curiosity excited by the book of a man of my generation being brought out
now, and by the publisher of the men of this?  GOPA .-- What I have to
answer? No: I do not want to answer to anyone. You just hurt, to poison
the heart.

Twenty-five centuries ago that I had with the memory of Siddhartha, noble,
generous and love. His latest chaste kiss, the night he said goodbye to
me, was in the depths of my being as a heavenly light that illuminated
it. All my charm is destroyed now. I have not returned to see Siddhartha.
I have not heard from Siddhartha in all this time. ¿Achieved its
purpose? I wondered at times.

¿Would escape from the sphere of life and sink into the _nirvana_? In
the world of spirits I have met many spirits, and never with that of
Siddhartha. I have learned a thousand truths. I knew the error of
Siddhartha, but my affection had reason to apologize. In Capilavastu,
back in the center of India six centuries before the world came to our
Lord Jesus Christ, knew nothing of God; alcanzábamos that would not be
an omnipotent, good, infinitely wise, the beginning and end of all things.
Our gods were the stars, the elements, natural forces personified; gods
the blind, without love and without intelligence, without freedom, slaves
of fate, than nature far inferior to any human soul. How much of this
atheism impairment, children with this ignorance of the Supreme Being,
and moved Siddhartha charity sublime, but imagine their absurd doctrine
benevolent? But in Europe cultured in the nineteenth century, and knowing
when the prophets of Israel have shown, the rational philosophers have
speculated on Greece of personal God, and how we were taught the Gospel
and modern science, which it derives, is an embarrassment to
atheists bad, falling into despair and back to Buddhism.

Imagine, then, how deep is my pain in you, you call the doctor now Seelenführer,
I recognize my Siddhartha, my Sakiamúni and my Bagavat, because all these
names you gave. You do not like it, but do not hesitate: you were the
Buddha and want to be. Then, as time was ripe, you were a big man, today
I look like a charlatan or a goofy, I despise you, or you abomination.
Goodbye forever. Ended forever and our love. (The spirit of Gopa leaves,
which can be inferred, Carmela's body, which falls on land as Lich.)
AUTHOR .-- What is this, Seelenführer friend? Is it true or false?
He then told me its
history.  Having sent by special invitation a poem to _The Nineteenth
Century_, the editor had returned it—returned it with certain strictures
upon portions of it.  This incident he had at once subjected to the usual
analysis, and had come to the conclusion that certain outside influences
of an invidious kind had been brought to play upon the editor.

Time was when I should have shrunk with terror from so thankless a task
as that of reading a manuscript with such a frightful history, but it is
astonishing what a long experience in the literary world will do for a
man in perplexities of this kind.  I read the manuscript and the editor’s
courteous but sagacious comments, and I found that the poet had
undertaken a subject which was utterly and almost inconceivably alien to
his genius.  As I read I felt the wistful gaze fixed upon me while the
waiter was moving in and out of the room, preparing the luncheon table.
“Well,” said he, as I laid the manuscript down, “what do you think? do
you agree with the editor?”  “Not entirely,” I said.  “Not entirely!” he
exclaimed; then turning to the waiter, he said, “You can leave the soup,
and I will ring when we are ready.”  “Not entirely,” I repeated.  “With
all the editor’s strictures I entirely agree, but he says that by working
upon it you may make it into a worthy poem: there I disagree with him.  I
consider it absolutely hopeless.  I regret now that we did not leave the
matter until after luncheon, but we will not let it spoil our appetites.”

I am afraid it did spoil our appetites nevertheless, for I felt that I
had been compelled, for his own sake, to give him pain.  He was much
depressed, declared that the success of his late book was entirely
factitious, and vowed that nothing should ever persuade him to write
another line of verse, and that he would now devote his attention to a
peer’s duties in the House of Lords.  I was so disturbed myself at thus
paining so lovable a friend that next day I wrote to him, trying to
soften what I had said, and urged him to do as the editor of _The
Nineteenth Century_ had suggested, write another poem—a poem upon some
classical subject, which he would deal with so admirably.  The result of
it all was that he found the editor’s strictures on the unlucky poem to
be absolutely well grounded, and wrote for _The Nineteenth Century_
‘Orpheus,’ one of the finest of his later poems.

I think these anecdotes of Lord de Tabley will show why we who knew him
were so attached to him.


II.


Can it be claimed for Lord de Tabley that in the poetical firmament which
hung over the days of his youth—when the heavens were bright with such
luminaries as Tennyson, Browning, Matthew Arnold, Rossetti, Swinburne,
and Morris—he had a place of his own?  We think it can.  And in saying
this we are fully conscious of the kind of praise we are awarding him.
Whatever may be said for or against the artistic temper of the present
hour, it must certainly be said of the time we are alluding to that it
was great as regards its wealth of poetic genius, and as regards its
artistic temper greater still.  It was a time when “the beauteous damsel
Poesy, honourable and retired,” whom Cervantes described, dared still
roam the English Parnassus, “a friend of solitude,” disturbed by no clash
of Notoriety’s brazen cymbals, “where fountains entertained her, woods
freed her from _ennui_, and flowers delighted her”—delighted her for
their own sakes.  In order to write such verses as the following from the
concluding poem of the volume before us {231} a man must really have
passed into that true mood of the poet described by the great Spanish
humourist:—

    How idle for a spurious fame
       To roll in thorn-beds of unrest;
    What matter whom the mob acclaim,
       If thou art master of thy breast?

    If sick thy soul with fear and doubt,
       And weary with the rabble din,—
    If thou wouldst scorn the herd without,
       First make the discord calm within.

    If we are lords in our disdain,
       And rule our kingdoms of despair,
    As fools we shall not plough the main
       For halters made of syren’s hair.

    We need not traverse foreign earth
       To seek an alien Sorrow’s face.
    She sits within thy central hearth,
       And at thy table has her place.

    So with this hour of push and pelf,
       Where nought unsordid seems to last,
    Vex not thy miserable self,
       But search the fallows of the past.

    In Time’s rich track behind us lies
       A soil replete with root and seed;
    There harvest wheat repays the wise,
       While idiots find but charlock weed.

Between the writer of the above lines and those great poets who in his
youth were his contemporaries there is this point of affinity: like them
his actual achievements do not strike the reader so forcibly as the
potentialities which those achievements reveal.  In the same way that
Achilles was suggested by his “spear” in the picture in the chamber of
Lucrece, the poet who writes not for fame, but writes to please himself,
suggests unconsciously his own portrait by every touch:—

    For much imaginary work was there;
    Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
    That for Achilles’ image stood his spear
    Grip’d in an armèd hand; himself behind
    Was left unseen save to the eye of mind:
    A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
    Stood for the whole to be imaginèd.

If I make fun of me is this girl? (Carmela was about to lift it to the
ground.) It's cold as marble. What a horrible fainted! If I be dead?
Carmela, Carmela back on you. CARMELO (back from his faint and
rising.) Oh, Jesus Christ!There have always
been poets who may say of themselves, like the “Poet” in ‘Timon of
Athens,’

    Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes
    From whence ’tis nourished: the fire i’ the flint
    Shows not till it be struck.

And there have always been poets whose verse, howsoever good it may be,
shows that, although they have been able to mould into poetic forms the
riches of the life around them, and also of the literature which has come
to them as an inheritance, they are simply working for fame, or rather
for notoriety, in the markets of the outer world.